MOSES HIS PRAYER. OR, An Exposition of the Nintieth PSALM.

In which is set forth, the Frailty and Misery of Mankind; most needful for
these Times.

Wherein 1. The Sum and Scope. 2. The Doctrines. 3. The Reasons. 4. The uses of
most Texts are observed.


By Samuel Smith, Minister of the Gospel, Author of David's Repentance and the
Great-Assize, and yet Living.

Esaias 40 6. The voice said cry. And he said, what shall I cry? All flesh is
grass, etc. London, Printed by W. Wilson, and are to be sold at his House in
Well yard, near West-Smithfield. 1656.

TO THE TRVLY RELIGIOUS, And his much honored Friend Mr SAMUEL FREBORNE, and
his Religious Consort in Prittlewell in Essex; The Author wishes the increase
of all Happiness, Temporal and Eternal.
SIR,
THE very Heathen could say, That Ingratitude was plagued of their gods. How
unbeseeming it is then for a Christian, that has tasted of so much kindness
and Christian respect as I have done from you, (unless I should prove
ungrateful) in the time of Jacobs troubles, when it was not my case alone, but
the condition of many hundreds of the Ministry in this Nation to fly to London
as that City of Resuge, to the which they fled, when it was not safe for them
to live at their Pastoral Charges. Whose bounty and kindness toward them at
that time (as I can speak by experience) was such, as does assure me that God
has yet mercy in store for that City. Was not your bowels likewise enlarged
to me sometimes your unworthy Pastor? Did not you when you heard of my condition
in London, send up to have me and my aged Wise come down to you? Did you not
most chearefully supply our wants, and were as Ebed Melech to Jeremy: And as
Onesiphorus to Paul, 2 Timothy 1.16. to supply our wants with Food and Raiment,
and Money at our departure. I cannot forget the goodness of your nature; but
acknowledge especially the power of Gods grace in you, and tell the world of
it, whether you will or no: Though I know you look not after the praise of
men. And now since providence has (since these times of more happy peace)
Separated us so far asunder, let this Fruit of my Ministry in my old age, be
the messenger of my unfeigned Thankfulness unto you, with the rest of my
Ancient and Christian Friends with you, for their undeserved kindness toward
us. And if this small piece may but add to the increase of your knowledge, the
growth of your Faith, the fitting of your account at last; And prove profitable
to the Church, I have my desire: And shall remain

Your Remembrancer to the throne of grace. SAMUEL SMITH.

To the Christian Reader.
Reader,
THe kind acceptance of those first fruits of my Ministry many years since
published, viz. David's Repentance, The Great Assize, with some others; which
were the fruits of the Spring time of my Ministry; Has been no small
encouragement unto me, to present thee with some fruits of the Autumn of my
days, which should be more ripe: The Lord having lengthened out my pilgrimage
that I have passed the first age of man, which Moses says according to the
ordinary course of nature is Threescore years and ten. And have now for some
years entered upon that other age, wherein I find that true by experience of
Moses in this Psalm, that that part of man's life is but labor and sorrow.
Besides, old age is enough to render my life a burden unto me: the manifold
infirmities creeping daily upon me, and which seek to make a breach for Death
to enter in at, with those spectacles of mortality we have daily before our
eyes; put me at first upon the Exposition of this Psalm in my own Cure: Not
knowing but that God might afford me that honor to preach my own Funeral
Sermon. I am sure whilst I handled it, it proved so to others that heard it.
Now what subject could be more necessary for such times of common mottality
then this? It was the wisdom and care of Joseph of Arimathea, Joh. 19.41. To
have his Tomb in a Readiness in his Garden. And why in his Garden? But that in
the midst of all his delights and pleasures, he might be put in mind of his
Death, and might prepare for it And indeed That man may truly be said to live,
that is always prepared to dye. It was Gods Ordinance at the Institution of
the Passover, Ex. 12.11. That it should be eaten thus, With their Ioynes
girded, their Shoes on their feet, with their staff in their hands, and to
eat it in have. No doubt the reason of all this was, That they might be in a
continual readiness when God should call them to pass out of Egypt into
Canaan. The spiritual use still remains; That we should always be prepared
for our passage out of the Egypt of this world into the Celestial Canaan. And
herein could my pen have aswered my Meditations of this subject, or those
enlargements of the Spirit that many times we meet withal, in our public
Ministry, (which none can expect) It had not appeared so livelesse as here it
does. And howsoever I may seem to light a candle to the Sun, in these times
wherein so many exquisite pens have been set on work, as no age since the
Reformation of Religion could parallel. Amongst whom I cannot forget the
fruitful labors of my Learned Friend Mr. Richard Baxter, those Practical and
Soulesearching pieces of his already published, Especially his Saints
Everlasting Rest: which I could wish that every Family in England (where any
one can read) were not without. Yet if in the Exposition of this Psalm, I can
but add one cubit to thy Stature, and help thee forward through the
wilderness of this world toward thy Celestial Canaan, I have my desire. In
which journey I wish thee good speed, chearefulness in thy way, and constancy
in thy course. And in the end that happy rest of Gods Redeemed ones purchased
by the blood of the Lamb. And rest

Thine in the common Savior, SAMUEL SMITH.

The XC Psalm.
A Prayer of Moses the man of God.
v. 1. Lord thou have been our Dwelling place in all generations.

2. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the
earth and the World, even from everlasting to ever lasting thou art God.

3 Thou turnest man to destruction, and say, Return ye children of men.

4 For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday, when it is past as
a watch in the night.

5 Thou Carriest them away as with a flood, they are as a sleep in the
morning, they are as grass which grows up.

6 In the morning it flourishes and grows up: In the Evening it is cut down
and withers.

7 But we are consumed in thy anger: and by thy wrath are we troubled.

8 Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance.

9 For all our days are passed away in thy wrath, we spend our years as a
tale that is told.

10 The days of our years are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of
strength they be foure-scere years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow,
for it is soon cut off, and we flee away.

11 Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is
thy wrath.

12 So teach us to number our days: that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

13 Return O Lord how long? And let it repent thee concerning thy Servants.

14 O Satisfy us early with thy mercy: that we may rejoice and be glad all our
days.

15 Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us: and the
years wherein we have seen evil.

16 Let thy work appear unto thy servants: and thy glory unto their children.

17 And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, and establish thou the
work of our hands upon us: yea the work of our hands, establish thou it.

MOSES His PRAYER. Or, An Exposition of the Nintieth PSALM.
A Prayer of Moses, the man of God.
A Word spoken in due time (says Solomon) is like unto Apples of Gold, Prove.
25.11.
and pictures of Silver. And hence it is, that the Doctrine of Humiliation does
best suit with the times of Humiliation; and the Doctrine of Man's Mortality
those times wherein that of the Apostle of the Church of Corinth is true to us
That many are sick, and many are weak, 1 Cor. 11.30.
and many are taken away by death. God having shaken the rod of his Anger and
displeasure of late over this Land and Nation, with unwonted diseases and
sudden deaths of many, that the learned Physician cannot find out the Cause,
much less is able to prescribe a remedy.

The Consideration whereof has set me upon this portion of Scripture at this
time.

The Psalm you hear is a Prayer.

The Author and inditer of it is the Holy Ghost.

The Penman or Instrument that wrote it, was Moses the man of God.

The Sum of it is nothing else but a pitiful complaint of Moses and the people
of Israel, The Argument of the Psalm.
of their woeful estate and condition, in the which they now were in the
wilderness, by the heavy hand of God upon them for their sins, whereby they
were miserably wasted and consumed. And withal a humble suit and petition that
they make unto God, that he would in mercy be entreated, to spare them, and be
gracious unto them.

The Psalm has in it 2. general parts. 1. A Preface. 2. The Psalm it self.


In the Preface we have 1. The person. Moses. 2. His praise. The man of God. 3.
His practice he prays. 4. The time when: when the Church was in great
affliction and distress.


In the Psalm it self, we have three particulars.

1. An acknowledgement of Gods goodness and mercy to their Forefathers
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and to their posterity, in protecting them from
their Enemies, and that in many dangers: Even for his own names sake and his
merciful Covenant sake unto them. v. 1, 2. 2. From the third ver. to the 12
there is a Narration, in the which is set down the common frailty and mortality
of mankind: And this he does 1. Generally from ver. 3. to the 7. wherein Moses
compares man's life to a watch in the Night, to a Flood, to Sleep, to Grass,
etc. 2. In particular, that their estate was far worse then the Common estate
of the rest of mankind: for whereas the life of man ordinarily is 70. years, or
80. years, their life was far shorter by reason of Gods Judgments upon them
for their sins, they were suddenly wasted and consumed. 3. An humble
Supplication of Moses and the people unto the Lord, that he would in mercy turn
away his Judgment, and return again unto them in mercy: and grant them
gracious deliverance and his former favor.
Concerning the occasion of this Psalm; The occasion of the Psalm.
It is like that it was penned by Moses, when as the spies returned from
searching the Land of Canaan. Numb. 14. In the thirtieth of Numbers we may see
how the Lord commanded Moses to send twelve men of the heads of the tribes of
Israel, to search the Land of Canaan. They return after forty days, and bring
of the first fruits of the Land. Now all of them ( Josuah, and Caleb excepted)
discourage the people, telling them that their Cities were strong, and their
walls high, and that there were the Sons of Anak, of the generation of Giants,
and that these would devour them. Only Joshua and Caleb encourage the people
to set upon that Land.

The people hearing this, they murmured against Moses and Aaron exceedingly,
wishing that they had dyed in Egypt.

Now the Lord hearing of the murmuring of the people, was angry, and told
Moses; that of all them that had seen his Miracles in Egypt upon Pharaoh, and
the Egyptians, and at the red Sea, there should not one of them come into the
Land of Canaan. But that great multitude even six hundred thousand that came
out of Egypt, that were above the age of twenty years, Joshua and Caleb
excepted, should perish in the Wilderness, as Numb. 14.37.

This being the occasion of this Psalm: We may first note, grievous thing it
is in the sight of God for those that have had experience of Gods mercy in
former times, to call his power into question, and to despair of his mercy for
future times.

This people had many times experience of Gods power, his goodness and mercy
in many great deliverances: As in their deliverance from Pharaoh, and the
Egyptians at the red Sea; How did the Lord there fight for this people? when
Pharach and his Host pursued them, when the Sea was before them, the Egyptians
behind, the Mountains on each hand of them, that they could see no means left
them to escape. Yet how did the Salvation of the Lord appear in their
deliverance. Besides, he had given them much experience of his mercy and
goodness in the Wilderness, giving them Manna from Heaven, and water out of a
Rock, etc.

And now after all this to doubt of his providence, and to call his Covenant in
question, and to make God a liar, in that they would not believe that he would,
or was able to bring them into the promised land, was such a sin, as the Lord
did punish most severely, as we may read, Numb. 14. and 1 Cor. 10.

Now this calling of Gods power and goodness into question by such as have had
experience thereof, must needs be a heinous sin.

Because God is so highly provoked by this sin. See Psalm 78. Psalm. 78
the whole Psalm, there the holy Ghost reckons up a large Catalogue of those
mercies and deliverances he had bestowed upon this people.

Marvelous things did he in the fight of their Fathers, Egypt, in the field of
Zoan.

He divided the Sea,

He led them in the day with a cloud,

He clave the Rock in the Wilderness, and gave them drink. And so goes on in
that Psalm, to set forth the great deliverances, that God, from time to time,
showed unto his people.

But here was their sin. For all this they believed not his wondrous works but
limited the holy one of Israel.

And therefore this made way for his anger, This sin above all others provokes
to wrath.

This sin of calling Gods power and goodness into question, Heb. 2.4
The just shall live by faith. And this was the commendation of Abraham's faith,
that he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief. Romans 4.20.


So on the contrary part, no sin does more dishonor God, as when we limit the
holy one of Israel, and dares not trust him in times of straights; Joh. 5.10.
He that believes not, has made him a liar. And what greater disgrace can be
cast upon any, than to give him the lie.

Serves to admonish us by their sin, to take heed that we commit not the like;
but learn by the experience of Gods former mercies, to be encouraged to rely
upon our gracious God for time to come. And if the Lord should be pleased to
bring us into trial by one means or another, let the remembrance of Gods
former love and mercy arm us against doubtings and distrust. This
consideration was that which armed David, when he was to go out against Goliath,
The Lord has delivered me from the Lion and the Bear, so shall he deal with
this Philistine. How comes David to conclude so confidently against Goliath?
Surely it was the experience he had of Gods former goodness and mercy toward
him.

And this serves likewise to admonish us,

Experience (says the Apostle) breeds To. 5.4.
hope. Upon this we may stay our hearts, and comfort our selves in time of
need, He has delivered us, and he will deliver us. O let us take heed that we
despair not of Gods mercy, and so murmur against the Lord, lest thereby we
provoke him to anger as this people did, 1 Cor. 10.10.
Neither murmur ye as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the
destroyer. Hitherto of the occasion of this Psalm.

A Prayer of Moses, the man of God.
BEfore we come to the Psalm it self, we are to speak of the Title or
inscription, which is part of it, and is of no less authority then the Psalm
it self, and ought to be read together with the Psalm. A Prayer of Moses the
man of God. In this Inscription we have 1. The person, Moses. 2 His praise, The
man of God. 3. His practice, He prays for the Church. 4. The time when, When
the Church of God was in great affliction and distress.


Moses, the man of God; The Person.
or a worthy Prophet and servant of God. And thus were the Prophets of old
called, a man of God, or a servant of God; a man inspired and guided by the
Spirit of God. He is the Penman of this excellent Psalm: a man highly honored
of God, if we look upon his Birth, his Life, his Death: In all these, God takes
special care of Moses, and his special providence is seen ^n them all.

First, for his Birth, For Moses Birth. Exodus 1.15.
that he should be born at such a time, wherein it was death to be born: for
now had Pharaoh published that bloody Edict, that the Midwives of Egypt should
destroy all the male-children of the Israelites.

Yet notwithstanding, that the Lord should preserve him at such a time, and
cause him to be nursed up under the nose of that bloody Tyrant, as the reputed
Son of Pharaoh's Daughter. This thing could not, but clear the special care
that God had of him, and that he intended him for some special service in his
Church.

Secondly, For Moses Life.
as in his Birth, so in his Life, Gods special providence still goes along
with him, in directing him to be an isntrumental Savior unto his people, and
a great Prophet in his Church; and to that end preserved him in the midst of
many dangers, when it was even death for him to come into Pharaohs presence.
Exodus 10.28.


Thirdly, For Moses Death.
as God takes care of Moses in his Birth, and in his Life, so also for his
Death and Burial, God disposes of all these according to the good pleasure of
his own will, for the time When, the place Where, and the manner How, as it is
recorded, that Moses the servant of the Lord dyed in the land of Moab, Deuteronomy.
34.5.
according to the Word of the Lord.

This is that Moses that is the Penman of this Psalm, a man highly beloved of
God, and so familiar with his Maker, that the Lord was pleased so to manifest
himself unto him, that we never read of the like, for the Lord talked with
him, as one man talks with another. A man so powerful with God in prayer, and
so full of such rare zeal in prayer, wherein he had such a notable dexterity
and gift that we do not read that God denied him any thing that he sought at
his hands, especially for the Church. He is the penman of that Psalm.

Which should teach us highly to esteem this Psalm as an excellent prayer of
his. Prophet, a man highly in Gods favor, how ought it to be highly esteemed
of us?

For his praise, His praise.
he is here styled A man of God; which is his compellation or Title given him
by the spirit of God. The man of God. Where Note,

That Moses Name is not barely set down, but with an Appendix or Attribute of
Honor, and such an honor then the which none can be greater. The man of God.

From whence we learn, to be styled A man of God, The greatest honor to be
called a Man of God.
or a Servant of God, is the highest pitch of honor that can be given to the
Sons of men. As it is a great comfort in life, so it is a high honor in death
to be a Man of God. This is an honor that remains to posterity, a precious
name that will not perish.

This honor the Spirit of God gives to Moses here, Josu. 1.2.
Moses the man of God, and else where The servant of the Lord. Heb. 3.2.
Moses my servant: And he is called A faithful servant in Gods house. Heb.
11.24.
Yea Moses himself preferrs this service before the pleasures in Pharaohs
Court.

This was it that David so much gloried in, Behold Lord I am thy servant. Jude
1.
This was it that Paul gloried in, Paul a servant of Jesus Christ, and Jude, a
servant of Jesus Christ. And of those Primitive Fathers it is said, Through
faith they all received a good report. Heb. 11.
Thus Noah's commendation rests upon record, That he was a Preacher of
Righteousness, and Lot is called a just man. And thus good King Asa has left
a name behind him. That his heart was upright with the Lord all his days. 1
Reg. 15.14. Number. 25.8.
And thus Phineas zeal in executing judgment upon Zimri and Cosbi remains as
a precious ointment to his name.

Yea, this is in a special manner to be marked and observed, That in what
virtue or grace soever his servants have most of all honored and glorified God
withal in life, for the same God vouchsafes unto them titles of honor after
death.

As we may see in those godly Kings of Judah and Israel, that were zealous for
the glory of God in plucking down the high places, and suppressing Idolaty,
and advanced Gods pure worship, these have left behind them an honorable
memory, a name that shall not be forgotten, or blotted out.

Whereas others that matched with the daughters of a strange God, which drew
them to Idolatry, and were remiss and negligent in advancing of Religion, and
se^ up and countenanced Idolatry, the Lord has left a brand upon their names
that shall not be wiped out. As Jeroboam which mingled his own devises with
the worship of God, he has this brand set upon him, to the perpetual infamy
of his name. (...) 10.
Jereboam the Son of Nebat that made Israel to sin. So true is that of Solomon,
The memory of the Righteous is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot.
And the reasons ^e.

That herein and hereby, (...) hold what love the Father has ^^stowed upon us,
1 Ioh. 3.1.
that we should be ^^lled the sons of God. They are called Friends, Mat.
12.50.
you I have called friends, Brethren, and Sisters, etc. Heirs of God, Romans
8.17.
Temples of the Holy Ghost. Gods peculiar people. Vessels of mercies. Children
of the marriage chamber, etc. And thus the Lord dignifies his servants with
honorable titles, to show the high esteem that he has of such, though in the
eyes of the world, they are esteemed but the of scouring of the earth, who only
see the vessel but not the treasure in it: Yet God honoreth them according to
the graces given, and his own Image restored in them.

Secondly, because grace and glory, 1 Samuel 2.30.
I will honor them that honor me says the Lord, then those that dishonor
him, he will dishonor. As the sins of wicked men testify to their faces
what they are; so their names to posterity shall publish their shame. Pro. 10.7
The memory of the righteous shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall
rot.

What got the foolish Virgins by their Hypocrisy, holding forth the Lamps of
an outward profession, when they wanted the oil of grace in their hearts, and
wanted truth in their inward parts, Mat. 23
but a blot that shall never be wiped out, foolish virgins? Whereas the godly
wise, that labored for grace, and to be in truth that they made profession of,
their names stand upon record to posterity for wise virgins. Let us apply this.

This shows the vanity of the men of the world that seek to perpetuate unto
themselves a name; but begin not at this, Gods service, such do but build a
Babel unto themselves, Esaias 65.15.
ye shall leave your name a curse unto my chosen. And if we had no example in
the book of God, experience proves it, that if this testimony of Moses follow
them not when they are dead and gone, The man of God, and the servant of the
Lord they do, and will leave their names a curse to their houses and families.

We have seen the sumptuous funerals of many great men in their Haralds and
Hearses, decked and adorned with the Scutchions, Arms, and other Ensigns of
honor, much good may they do them, we envy them not. I doubt not but that it
may stand with Religion, that such as have been truly honorable in life,
should have all due honor done to them in death. But if they have not this
testimony pinned upon their Hearse, The man of God, or the servant of the Lord,
their Arms and Scutchions and other Ensigns of honor shall moulder to dust,
when this shall remain as an indeleble testimony to their names and houses,
and posterities, that shall not perish with time. Moses the man of God.

Secondly, man of God: we are taught hence, how to get a good name, a name
that shall not rot: namely, that we lay the foundation of it in Religion, and
in the service of God. Godliness (says the Apostle) has the promise of this
life, and the life to come. 1 Samuel 2.30.
And he that honoreth me, I will honor.

How preposterous then are the ways and courses of the greatest part of the
men of the world. Every man for the most part desires a good name, and diverse
men have propounded diverse ways to themselves to get themselves a name. Some
run to Court, some to the Camp and some to School Absaelom will have his
pillar, and some have not stuck to lay the foundation of their names and houses
in blood. Alas what of all these, when men begin not at this in their ways and
services of God? what is become of Nabuchadnezers Babell, Achitophells wisdom
and deep policy. Herod's applause, Jezabels craft to make Ahabs house great;
Hamans high favor with his Prince, and Senacheribs vain gloryings? has not
God left their names a curse to his chosen for ever?

Whereas Phineas his zeal, Mary's box of ointment, and the widows mites are
kept in record; never to be forgotten. A holy life, a sincere conversation,
raises a good name and a good report upon such a sure foundation that cannot
be shaken.

And this serves for the just reproof of the greatest sort of men at this
day,

Indeed I confess that such as are in the place of Magistracy, or in any other
condition wherein they go before others; these are to be reverenced according
to their several conditions and places they are in, for so much does Religion
it self require. But in whomsoever Gods Image does appear, when men excel in
virtue, abound in zeal, in Religion, and holiness, and other graces of the
inward man, these ought to have the highest place and the chiesest room in a
Chrians heart, and we ought to honor them most, that most honor God.

Fourthly and lastly, Bur. And you that profess godliness, take heed of this
offense ye give to others; and know that hereby thou strikest into every side
of Christ himself, woundest Religion, keep others from the faith, who
happily had come on before this time, had not thou lain a stumbling block
in their way: thou art a grief to the godly, and make work for thy self of
deep sorrow, and humiliation of Soul for this sin at last: and withal let
such men know that are so ready to rake into the Dunghill of other men's faults
and infirmities, that the best gold is not without some dross, nor the best
Christian without some imperfections. It is the privilege of the Saints in
Heaven, to be free from sin; It cannot be expected whilst we are here, till we
come to be Clothed upon: and it is a sign that such men are little at home,
that are so busy abroad; did men truly look about them in respect of their
own^ failings, such men would be less censorious of others. Hitherto of his
praise, The man of God.

A Prayer of Moses.
HEre we have his practice, His practice
he prays. A prayer of Moses the man of God. And this Psalm is a prayer of
his that he put up to God in the behalf, of the people at this time in great
affliction and distress. Whose practice and example may learn us this lesson

That such as are Teachers of Gods people should pray for Gods people. Teachers
of Gods people should pray for Gods people.
How frequent is Moses in this duty at all times when Gods wrathful
displeasure was kindled against this people: Still he stands in the gap to
turn away Gods wrathful displeasure from them.

Thus Abraham prayed for the Sodomites that they might be spared: Genesis 18.23.
whose prayer was so prevalent with God, that if there had been but ten
righteous found in the five Cities, God had spared those Cities for their
sakes. Genesis 20.
And thus he prayed for Abimelech and he was healed by his prayer. When the
people desired Samuel to pray for them, 1 Samuel 12.23,
God forbid (says he) that I should sin against God, and cease praying for you.

It is the duty of faithful Ministers, not only to teach and instruct their
people, but also to pray earnestly to God for them. A Preaching and a Praying
Ministry must always go together.

And this was the high commendation of Moses, Aaron, Samuel, and Daniel, and
other the Prophets and Servants of God, that upon all occasions, they still
preferred their suites to God in the behalf of the people. And this was
frequent with the Apostle Paul in the behalf of the Churches; as for the
Romans, Romans 2.9, 10.
God is my witness whom I serve in the spirit, that without ceasing I make
mention of you in my prayers.

So having exhorted the Ephesians, not to faint at his troubles he prays for
them. Ephesians. 3.14, 15.
For this cause (says he) I bow my knee to the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye may be strengthened by the Spirit in the inward man. And this
duty did he likewise perform in the behalf of the Colossians, We give thanks
to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Col. 1.3.
always praying for you. And this duty no doubt, the Apostles learned of their
Lord and Master^ whose custom was to teach the people in the day time, and to
go out at night and pray for them. And this duty belongs to all that are
Pastors of Christ's flock. Is any afflicted, James 5.
let him pray; and let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray.

Because as they are by their calling and function to be Gods mouth unto the
people, Mal.
You shall hear the Law at their mouth: so again are they to be the mouth of
the people to God. As he speaks from God, therein he performs his Prophetical
Office: as he speaks to God, therein he performs his Priestly Office, in
offering up the Sacrifice of Prayer.

Secondly. Teachers of the people, 1 Cor. 3.7.
which will come to nothing, if God give not the increase. Ministers may speak
to the ears, but it is Gods privilege (...) to the heart, and to (...) their.
Lydia may hear Paul preach, but God must open her heart, or else it cannot be
effectual.

Serves to let us see the great necessity of a praying Ministry, where
Prophesying fails, the people perish. Yet this is not all, there is more
required at their hands. Gods house is a house of prayer, as a house of
preaching: and as there we come to know the mind and will of God, in things
appertaining to life and salvation by preaching; so there we come in a
comfortable expectation to have the same bestowed upon us from God by ear nest
and hearty prayer. We have amongst us many that are frequent in the former duty
to preach unto their people; yet make little reckoning or account of the
latter: whereas a preaching and a praying Ministry must go together. You shall
find Moses, and Aaron, and Samuel as frequent upon their knees, earnestly
striving and contending with God in prayer for the people, as preaching and
instructing them in the mind and will of God. And for this was Eliah called
the Chariot and Horseman of Israel, because his prayers were so powerful with
God.

Secondly, Let men so account of us (says Paul) as the Ministers of Christ,
and stewards of the mysteries of God. They are the Joseph's that God has sent
into the land, to open the Lords granaries, to preserve the souls of Gods
people from spiritual famine. Had it not been that God had had these Moses,
Aaron, Phineas, Jeremie, and Daniel amongst us, and such faithful ones, that
had stood in the gap, Englands sin had brought Englands ruin before this day.
How forcible were the prayers of Abraham to spare the Sodomites? What had God
done at his request, if there had been but ten righteous found in those Cities?
How did Moses bind the hands of God by his prayers, when his wrathful
displeasure was ready to break out against the people?

Surely our days of Humiliation, Exodus 32.10.
and our seeking of God, have not returned in vain; But God has heard us. And
for the sake of some few in this Land, God has deferred his wrath, that
England has not been a Boachim, a Land of mourning and desolation.

And what may England now expect when these that have been the Chariots and
Horsemen of our Israel, and have hitherto stood in the gap, and for whose sake
the Lord has spared the Land. When these I say shall be judged the troublers
of Israel, as they that are the greatest Enemies of Englands peace. Surely this
high contempt of the Ministry of England this day, is that which prognosticates
no good to England this day:

This may serve to mind us of the Ministry of a necessary duty that belongs
unto our calling, viz. that we be frequent and often in this duty of prayer, not
only at Sermon time to begin and end the same with prayer: which the most do.
But even in private to be earnest Solicitors to the Throne of grace in the
behalf of our people. What blessing can we look for from God upon that Sermon
that God is not sought unto by prayer. I am sure it is not the least comfort
that many a Faithful Minister of Christ reapes to himself his conscionable
discharge of this duty of private prayer for his Flock: When he receives but
little comfort in his public Ministry.

And that Minister that minds only preaching, and neglects this duty of
prayer, may well question his own heart that he aims more at his own glory
then Gods.

And last of all this may serve for Exhortation; in prayer, Es. 62.2.
to give the Lord no rest until he have mercy upon Sion. Let us that be the
Lords Remembrancers, and the Watchmen of the Lords Flock never give the Lord
rest, nor let him be still till we see that he shall in mercy remove his
Judgments which lie heavy upon us for our sins.

Let us that are the Watchmen of Israel, take heed that the Lord put not up
against us that woeful complaint, Eze. 22.30.
I sought for a man that should have made up the hedge, and stood in the gap
before me for the Land, that I might not destroy them; But I found none,
therefore have I poured out my indignation upon them, and consumed them with
the fire of my wrath.

What shall then become of those that should make up the hedge and stand in the
gap to stay the wrath of God; That shall be hedge-breakers, and open a gap by
their sins, their negligence, and carelessness, their scandalous lives. How
fearful will Gods anger be against such one day, as we may see in that
Chapter.

A Prayer of Moses the man of God.
THE last particular in the title is the time when Moses composed this prayer.
The time when Moses made this prayer.
viz. when the Church and people of God were in great affliction and distress
now in the Wilderness, being almost wasted and consumed with the plague and
pestilence, and other Judgments of God upon them for their sins.

Now in as much as they make this their only refuge to fly unto God by prayer.
The time of affliction is the time of prayer.
The Doctrine is

That the time of affliction is the the time of prayer. This Moses and the
people of God at this time make their only Refuge to fly unto God, to humble
themselves before him, and entreat the pardon of their sins, and that the Lord
would turn away his wrath, and return again in favor and mercy toward them:
and indeed this is the Argument of this Psalm. And this is such a remedy as the
Lord himself prescribes. Ps. 50.15
Call upon me in the day of trouble and I will hear thee and deliver thee:
Where the Lord prescribes this as the chiefest remedy, and refuge in times of
calamity and distress, To seek unto God by prayer. This does Moses and the
people of God at this time of great affliction and distress, when they were
almost wasted and consumed with the Plague and Pestilence; they fly unto God as
their only Refuge in this time of distress.

And this has been the practice of Gods Church, and people in all ages. The
Jews in Hesters time when Haman had laid his plot utterly to destroy them,
Hest. 4.
they make God their Refuge. Thus when Senacherib sent a mighty Host against
Hezechiah and his people; 2 Reg. 19.17. 2 Cron. 20.
He spreads his blasphemous letters before the Lord, and makes an earnest
prayer unto God. Thus was it with good King Jehosophat when the Ammonits and
Moabits came up against them, that he and his people were at that straight,
that they knew not what to do, or which way to turn themselves, yet flying
unto God by prayer were delivered.

And this the Lord himself does witness unto, when he says, Hos. 5.14.
I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to the house of Judah,
etc. till they acknowledge their offenses and seek my face, for in their
affliction they will seek me early. And so indeed they did, for immediately
they call on one another, and provoke one another, Come let us return unto the
Lord, Hos. 6.1.
for he has wounded us, and he will heal us.

And if we look into particular Examples, we shall find, that Gods servants
in their greatest straights have still had recourse to God. Jonas in the Whales
belly. Ion 2.1, 2.
Out of the belly of Hell cried I, and thou heardst my voice.

Manasses albeit in the time of his prosperity, he forgot God: 2 Chronicles. 33.
yet in his tribulation, he knew God to be the Lord, and humbled himself
greatly before him.

Thus David in all times of his distress had still recourse to God. Ps. 18.3,
4.
The Lord is my strength in whom I trust, my shield, my salvation, and my
refuge.

Thus Paul buffited by Satan, 1 Cor. 12
prays three times. So that the point is clear and plain, that the only refuge
of Gods Church and people in time of affliction and distress, has ever been
Gods bosom, as a sure refuge.

And great Reason.

Because it is the Lord that has the principal hand in all the trials and
afflictions of his people. Deuteronomy. 32.39. Hos. 6.1.
It is he that kills, and makes alive. He wounds and he heals. When we
are judged, we are chastned of the Lord. 1 Cor. 11.32.
And he is said to be the God that hears prayers, and therefore to him shall
all flesh come.

Secondly, God, and of our selves.

1. 2 Chronicles. 33.13.
Of God, as Manasses by his affliction knew that God was the Lord.

2. Of our selves, for now the Lord awakens conscience, and brings our former
sins to remembrance, that we had forgotten, as Job has it, If they be bound
with fetters, Job 36.8, 9.
and holden with the cords of affliction, then he shows them their works, and
their transgressions that they have exceeded.

When sickness comes, and affliction seize upon us, that we know not which way
to turn our selves; then if ever we begin to look up to God, the thoughts of
death, and the thoughts of eternity, will make the most desperate and
hard-hearted sinner to look about him.

Object. But do we not see, Ahaz, that in time of his distress, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
he sinned yet more against the Lord.

Answ. It Is true, Pharaoh: but they tend to the great benefit to such as love
and fear God, Romans 8.28.
to whom all things work for their best.

Is the time of affliction the time that God is to be sought unto by prayer:
Hear the rod, and who has appointed it. Mic. 6.9.
Hear the rod What is that? Why all Gods rods are speaking rods: all Gods rods
utter a voice or a cry, and therefore must be hearkened unto, Lam. 3.39.
Man suffers for his sin. Our sufferings then do tell us of our sins, and the
Lord says, I will plead against them by the pestilence, and by blood.
Afflictions are Gods messengers, and always come with a message from God, and
that is, that we find out in our selves the cause of Gods displeasure, and
that we speedily meet the Lord by repentance. And when Gods hand is upon us in
what kind soever, every soul should make this application to himself, Jer.
2.1^.
as to say, Have thou not procured this unto thy self, in as much as thou have
forsaken the Lord thy God? Surely it was a sad complaint that the Lord takes
up, I have corrected them, but they have not been humbled. The Lord help us to
find out the plague of our own hearts, wherefore the hand of God is gone out
this day against the Land so many ways. And yet, O the cursed Atheism of our
hearts, that lay no more Gods judgments to heart: the Pestilence has spoken
aloud to us, the sword has spoken aloud, and this strange sickness and
visitation that has swept away so many has spoken aloud, all calling upon
this Land and Nation for speedy repentance. But we have not laid Gods judgments
to heart, we have not been humbled to this day.

Secondly, They cried not to me when they howled upon their beds. Hos. 7.14.
O when the Lord shall make no more account of our prayers then the very
howlings of a Dog who is able to put to silence the voice of desperation? But
now for the godly, the Lord does not only give them free liberty to come to the
Throne of grace, in times of misery, but does give them a comfortable assurance
that they shall be heard, Mat. 7.
Ask, and ye shall have. And if earthly Fathers can give unto their children
good things, much more will our heavenly Father give, not only what we ask, but
more abundantly, Ephesians. 3.20.
Above all that we are able to ask or think.

Enemies, Tyrants, Death, Devils, cannot make a true believer miserable, that
has such a God to fly unto.

Thirdly, made by the holy servants of God, that so we might use them in the
like case, as Psalm 92. A Psalm for the Sabbath, as most proper for that day.
So here, A Prayer of Moses, when the Church was in great affliction and
distress. Dan. 9.
So the Prayer of Daniel, Nehemiah, David. etc. which we may use in the like
case as they did.

So that there is none in the Church that can plead ignorance, but they may
learn out of Gods Book how to pray. The Lord deals with his people as a Father
with his child bids him say after him. Thus does the Lord with his people, Take
unto you words, Hos. 14.3.
and say thus; Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, and so will
we render the calves of our lips. And the Lord foretells by his Prophet, that
he will power upon every member of his Church this Spirit of supplication and
of prayer. Zach. 12.10.


But may set forms of prayer be used, Moses be used in the like time of the
Churches misery and distress? or may we pray by a book?

Answ. Mat. 6.9.
After this manner pray ye; but also that they might pray in those very words;
Lnke 11.2.
as, When ye pray, say Our Father, etc. The purest Churches have had their
Lythurgies, and set forms of prayer.

And for Heads of families, where the spirit of prayer is wanting, and such
other qualifications, as are necessary in prayer, a set form may, and ought to
be used.

For every child of God, though he have an honest heart, yet has he not ever a
flowing tongue, but is weak in invention, frail in memory, bashful and
fearful: Such may use the help of others in a form prescribed before them,
with this condition,

That they take heed that they rest not in those beginnings. It is requisite
that the Nurse take the child by the hand at first to teach it to go. But she
will not always give it the hand.

The Lord looks for a proficiency at our hands, as in all gracee, so in the
gift of prayer.

Besides the daily occurrences that come in upon us in this life, sometimes
fresh temptations, from Satan; troubles from the world, and the workings of
corruptions daily within us call for a pouring out of our hearts to God, and
the inlargings of our requests, which many times are not in our stinted prayers.

Besides, God has promised, To him that has shall be given. By the
conscionable use of thy small gift thou have in thee, thou shall increase it,
and perform it daily with more comfort.

And that this prayer of Moses may be used in times of common Calamities; It is
the Churches constant practice to make use of several Psalms, upon several
occasions, to be sung in our Churches, as Ps. 92. Ps. 22. Ps. 39. Ps. 102. etc.
Hitherto of the title of the Psalm.

Ver. 1. Lord thou have been our dweling place in all generations.
MOses and the people of God begin this prayer of theirs with a Complaint of
their great sufferings, and grievous afflictions, that they ind^red not only
in Egypt under Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, but now in the Wilderness, since
the Lord delivered them, and brought them out with his Almighty hand, and
stretched out arm.

And the first part of their prayer is a Complaint unto God, that their estate
was far worse, then the estate and condition of their Forefathers. And this is
called A Prayer of Moses, though indeed it be but a Complaint. Hence we learn.

That in times of misery and affliction, The very complaints of the godly are
effectual prayers with God.
the very Complaints, and Sobs, and Sighs, of Gods people, be forcible prayers
in the sight of God, and loud cries in his ears. This is a special point to
be observed of us, that our very complaints to God our sighs, and groans in
times of misery and distress are with God as powerful and effectual prayers.
Moses complaining and mourning now in their misery, calls it a prayer.

A man may pray effectually, when in his own feeling and apprehension his heart
is utterly indisposed to prayer; When a child of God is overwhelmed with grief,
and his thoughts perplexed and sore troubled, that he is not able to conceive a
prayer, either for matter or method; yet even then may this troubled and
perplexed soul make an effectual prayer unto God, by his Complaints, sighs,
and groans unto God.

This was Moses case at another time, when the people of Israel were in great
distress by Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, who pursued after them with their
Chariots and Horsemen, and they were in that straight, that they knew not how
to escape. Moses, Exo. 14.15.
wherefore cryest thou? Says God; yet we do not read that Moses spoke a word;
But it is like that he groaned in spirit, and yet this was a loud and
effectual prayer with the Lord.

And such was the behavior of Hannah in the Temple; no voice of her at all was
heard, and yet then it is said, 1 Samuel 1.13.
that She poured out her soul before the Lord.

Thus did Hezechiah. Esaias 38.14.
Mourned like a Dove, and Chatter like a Crane: being much oppressed with
grief. And this was looked upon as an effectual prayer with God. Ps. 77.3.4
How often was David in such straights in his spirit. That his spirit was
overwhelmed within him, and he not able to make a distinct prayer unto God,
nor speak a word yet even then did David pray effectually to God. This honor
have all the Saints that their complaints, their very sighs and groans are
accepted of him. Ps. 88.
See the title of the 88. Ps. A prayer containing a grievous complaint.

Whereas it is true of all wicked and ungodly men, though they make many
prayers, Es. 1.15.
God will not hear them. Albeit ye make many prayers, I will not hear you, for
your hands are full of blood. And again, Will you steal Murder, and commit
Adultery; and stand before me in my house? Behold I see it (says the Lord) And
therefore cast you out of my sight.

O the misery of every wicked and ungodly man, that whereas in times of
affliction, and distress, his only refuge is to fly unto God, by earnest and
hearty prayer. This man cannot pray, if he pray he speaks in a language that
God understands not, Prove. 15.8. Psalm. 66.18.
his prayers are abomination unto the Lord. If I regard wickedness in my
heart, the Lord will not hear me.

Quest. But what may be the Reasons, why the complaints and groans of the
godly, are thus looked upon as powerful and effectual prayers with God?

First,

Secondly, Romans 8.26.
with sighs, and groans that cannot be expressed. But he that searches the
heart, knows what the mind of the Spirit is: And a complaint, sigh, and
groan, proceeding from the Spirit must needs be heard and answered of God.

This may minister matter of singular comfort and consolation to ma^y a poor
distressed soul and wounded conscience, such a case as this, what is the
comfort of a poor distressed soul, thus humbled, and amazed, and cast down; But
to make their moan and complaint to God, as Moses does here? Tell the Lord
that thou can not pray as thou desire: Complain unto the Lord, and say, O
Lord, what will thou have me to do, will thou leave thy servant thus Say with
Jehosophat I know not what to do Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
but my eyes are upon thee. If we can but complain thus, and mourn thus for our
misery, this is an earnest prayer in Gods sight; as this of Moses, and of
David, and Hezekiah.

Tell me, you that are tender hearted Parents, have not the sighs, and moans,
and groans of your little Infants, moved your bowels within you to pity and
compassion toward them, as ever the requests that they have made unto you? O
the Lord does as much, yea, more then you can do this way; the very sighs, and
groans and tears of his children, prevail with him much more than their words
can. The Lord is said to hear the groaning of the Prisoner. Psalm. 102.20. Esaias
38.5. Psalm. 39.
And of Hezekiah, I have seen thy tears. And, Hold not thy peace at my tears.
And I doubt not, but Gods people have found as much comfort in their sighs and
groans, and tears, as in their requests in prayer.

Yet we must take heed that we abuse not this comfort, to make us the more
negligent and sloathfull in the duty of prayer, in the times of health and
prosperity: No, then we ought with all freedom of heart and tongue to exercise
our selves in this duty. But this comfort belongs unto such, as in times of
affliction are not able to perform the duty.

And this serves to discover unto us the misery of all wicked and ungodly men;
Prove. 28.9.
He that turns away his ears from hearing the Law, even his prayers shall be
abominable. And as the Lord says, Ezekiel. 8.18.
Therefore will I deal in fury, my eye shall not spare, neither will I have
pity, and though they cry with a loud voice, I will not hear them.

O the misery of a poor creature, when God shall shut out his prayers, and if
they do pray, that the Lord should make no more account of them then the
howling of a dog: Hos. 9.4.
for how can that prayer be effectual, when the person is not accepted? It Is
true, wicked men have sometimes good motions in them, but they last not, like
that of Balaam, O that my soul might dye the death of the righteous. Thus in
times of sickness and distress the wicked may pray, but these wishes and
desires of theirs, proceed only from some light in the understanding, but not
out of any affection in the heart, and so quickly vanish away like the morning
dew. Hos. 6.4.
And hence is it that the Lord will laugh, when the destruction of such a one
comes.

Whereas the complaints, the sighs and groans of a broken heart, proceeding
from humiliation for sin, and sense of Gods displeasure, and a hope of Gods
promises, preserves the soul in life and sends it to God as a sure refuge in
times of trouble.

So that the only hope to find mercy and deliverance in time of trouble,
belongs to a godly and an humbled soul, that formerly has had acquaintance
with God. Job 22.21.
The prayers, and sighs and groans of such only are heard.

Lord thou have been our habitation from generation to generation.
In this first verse we have the first part of their complaint; And the words
bear this sense.

q.d. O Lord thou have been gracious to our forefathers, to Abraham, Isaak, and
Jacob, and to other ages, and generations after them; thou wast a covert and
defense unto them, when they pitched their Tents from place to place, and
traveled from Country to Country. Thou command saying, Touch not my
Anointed, Ps. 105.15.
and do my Prophets no harm.

But thou dealest not so graciously with us that are their posterity, we are
in great affliction and distress, yea, for our Rebellions and sins thou have
left us, and go not before us as thou did with our Forefathers.

So that this was it that humbled Moses and the people of God at this time,
when they saw that their estate was far otherwise, then their Forefathers; and
that God did not now deal so graciously with them, as he did with their
Forefathers. Hence note,

That when a Nation, When a people decay in glory, then it is time to seek to
God.
Church or people decaies in beauty, in riches, in glory, or strength; then it
is time, high time, and more then time, to make their complaints to God, to be
humbled for their sins, and to meet the Lord by unfeigned repentance.

When a Nation or people upon whom his name has been called, where the Gospel
has been preached, and his ordinances have been duly administered, where God
has heretofore declared his presence. When such a Nation or people shall decay
in their former beauty and glory, when the glory of Religion shall begin to be
Eclipsed by Sects and Heresies, that shall increase daily in the Church and
when God by many apparent signs shall seem to depart from such a people; in
guard of his wonted presence, then it is high time for such a people to humble
themselves, and to meet the Lord by repentance. Thus did Moses and the people
here, when the judgments of God were upon them, and they saw that it was far
otherwise with them, then with their Forefathers; it was then high time to put
up their complaints to God. Lam. 1.12, 35. Psalm. 107.

Hereby the Lord will make us know that he is not tied to any Nation, Corinth,
Ephesus, Philippi, Colosse, etc. once glorious and flourishing Churches, but
now have the Candlestick removed from them.

The Lord many times does lay his hand upon a Nation and people to this very
end, of a Famine, that was such a wanton in times of prosperity. And welfare
those afflictions that send us home to God.

By this dealing of the Lord with a Nation, and with a people, If a Nation
against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, Ier. 18.5.
I will repent of the plague that I thought to have brought upon them. Thus
Niniveh prevented her Judgment. And this is the right way to stop the breach
of Gods wrath, and to call in his Judgments, when they are gone out against us.

This serves to show the monstrous impiety and profaneness of this age, nay,
what Family has not suffered in these times; the sword has been in the
bowels of this Nation, and has drunk much blood. The Lord has likewise sent
forth other messengers of his anger against us, as unseasonable years, at one
time making the fruits of the earth dung for the earth; at another time making
the Heavens as Brass, and the Earth as Iron, that the Creature has mourned,
to teach us to mourn; and now again by an universal sickness and disease, the
like whereof no age can remember, when so many are sick and weak, and taken
away by death.

Yet who makes this use of it as Moses and the people of God here? who is
humbled under Gods hand, who mournes for sin, the cause of all? No, no we can
be content to pass over the Lords dealing thus, with the Land, as if these
Judgments concerned us not, we lay them not to heart.

Surely it is to be feared that the Lord will come nearer unto us yet in the
end. Take we heed that it be not found true of us which the Lord speaks, I
called for sackcloath and fasting, Esa. 22.13, 14.
but behold mirth, eating, and drinking, etc. when was there ever the like
excess of drinking then at this day, but what says the Lord, This inquity
shall not be purged until ye die.

Secondly, Moses here. Surely it is a dangerous fin heedlesly to pass by Gods
dealing with us at this time, from former times. How can we be humbled aright
for our present miseries, if we do not consider hi^ former mercies. This were
to deprive God of his glory, and our selves of confidence and comfort.

Lord thou have been our dwelling place.
WE are farther to observe in this prayer of Moses, viz. with putting the Lord
in mind of his former mercies showed unto their Forefathers in times past, and
in former generations. Thou have been a Covert unto our Forefathers, and good
unto them; guiding, directing, and protecting them. Note hence,

That it is a special motive and reason to plead in prayer, To plead Gods
former mercies a good Motive for futute.
to move the Lord to pity and compassion, to put him in mind of his former
mercies and deliverances, bestowed, either upon us or our Forefathers.

The Prophet out of experience of former mercies, prays for the continuance
thereof.

Lord thou have been favorable to the Land, Ps. 85.2, 3, 4.
thou have brought back the captivity of Jacob.

Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou have covered all their
sin.

Thou have taken away all thy wrath thou have turned thy self, from the
fierceness of thine anger, etc.

And hence he grounds his request to God.

Turn us O God of our salvation,

And thus do Nehemiah and Daniel begin their prayers for the Church, Nehc. 1.
Dan. 9.
they mind the Lord of his Covenant, and merciful promise to his people.

And thus David persecuted by Saul, he pleads his cause with God thus. Ps. 4.1.
Hear me O God of my righteousness. thou have set me at liberty, etc. He
minds God of his former mercies, and deliverances, and thereby is confimed in
his faith and confidence, that God would not now leave him at this time of
distress. And so when he was to go out against Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.34.
he calls to mind the Lords merciful deliverance from the Lion and the Bear,
and grounds his hope of success, at this time also, upon it.

And this has been the care of Gods people to keep a Catalogue of Gods mercies
and deliverances to strengthen Ps. 22.21
their prayers in the like time of danger: yea, so careful have the people of
God been to keep in memory former mercies and deliverances, that they have
raised up monuments and given name to prisons, times, and places, for
perpetual records of mercies and deliverances; as Jehosophat called the place,
wherein the Lord had given him the victory, 2 Chronicles. 20.26.
to be called, the valley of Beracha: and the Jews, it is thought, have their
Purim to this day.

This is to give the Lord the honor and glory of his works, 1 Samuel 12.24.
Consider how great things God has done for you, says Samuel to the people,
that his glorious works might be kept in remembrance amongst them. Yea, this is
such a duty, that we are often to press upon our hearts, Ps. 103.2.
as David did, Bless the Lord O my soul, and for get not his benefits. We
cannot honor God more, then to mind him of his former mercies and
deliverances. This makes a believer bold with God, as we are with a trusty
friend, that we have had experience of. It serves to strengthen our faith, to
quel our doubts, and fears, and causes us with much confidence to rely on him.

Besides, Experience (says the Apostle) works hope. God being the same ever
to his people, In him is no variableness, Jam. 1.17
nor shadow of change. And hence it is that the godly, in times of adversity,
can hold up their heads with comfort, when wicked men are at their wits end,
and many times overwhelmed with sorrow.

This serves for our Direction, viz. to remember the former mercies of God unto
us, and to our forefathers, to put the Lord in mind how he has heretofore
been our God; that he has been seen upon the Mount, when our fears were great,
and our dangers many: and that therefore he would now in mercy be good unto us.
Thus, O Lord, thou have been our God, our refuge, and our Dwelling place, thou
have kept us a long time by thy power, thou have many, and many a time,
commanded salvation to thy Church and people in times of their greatest
dangers. Therefore Lord defend us still, leave us not, nor forsake us, O God of
our salvation.

We should thus wrestle and strive with God, Psalm. 85.
as David did, and as Moses and the people of God here did, and say, In time of
famine thou have fed us, in times of persecution and dangers thou have kept us,
when the bloody sword was shaken against us, thou did preserve us; in these
times of ficknesse. our habitations have been safe. Ah Lord, do not forsake us
now, leave us not at this time of trouble and danger, but turn our hearts unto
thee by unfeigned repentance, and turn away thy heavy displeasure from us.

Secondly, viz. by recounting the ancient mercies of God, and experiments we
have had of his love from time to time, we ought to keep a catalogue of them,
and to repeat them often to our own souls; to that end we may grow up in
experience of his power, and providence, and goodness toward us.

A Christians memory should be a Chronicle of antiquity. And besides our own
experience we have had of Gods merciful dealing toward us, we should remember
what our fathers have told us, and we should show the same to our children, Ps.
102.18.
that the children yet unborn may praise the Lord.

This observation of Gods goodness to us, will be a special prop to hold up
our hearts and hands in prayer, Ps. 27.10.
Put not thy servant away in anger, thou have been my help. There is nothing
can strengthen us more under our present sufferings, then a fresh memory of
Gods former mercies.

Lord thou have been our dwelling place.
THat is, Lord, thou have been to our forefathers, what a dwelling house is to
men, viz. a covert and a safe defense, and a Castle to defend them, and protect
them from all hurts and dangers; that though they had no dwelling place, but
traveled from Country to Country, yet they had a sure defense, for thou did
protect them, and wast unto them their Dwelling place.

That Gods Church and people have ever had a Dwelling place. Gods people have
ever had a dwelling place. Deuteronomy. 33 27-29.
Lord thou have bin our dwelling place from generation to generation. The Lord
himself under his wings protects and defends his people; and they are safe whom
he keeps, The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting
arms. Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee, O people, saved of the
Lord. Ps. 127.1, 2. Ps. 91.1.
If the Lord keep the City, it is in safety. The godly are said to dwell in the
secret of the most High., and to say unto God, thou art my rock, my refuge, and
my strong tower. He shall hide me (says David) in the secret of his
Tabernacle. Ps. 27.5.
The godly must not look to be freed from dangers, it is enough that they are
preserved in dangers.

How was the woman pursued in the Wilderness by the red Dragon, Rev. 12.14.
yet God provided for her a habitation there for her self, and her child,
which she brought forth.

So when the Church shall be persecuted by Tyrants, she must not think that any
earthly hold can keep her safe, only here is her privilege, she has the
shadow of the Almighty, Ps. 91.1. Ps. 18.2. 1 Samuel 22.1, 5.
and the secret of the most High to fly unto. How often was David pursued by
Saul, sometimes by Absalom his own son; yet still God provided for him a hiding
place.

Object. But has not the Church,

Ans. It is true, They would not be delivered, Heb. 11.
because they looked for a better resurrection.

And God is pleased thus many times to suffer the wicked to prevail against
their bodies for these Reasons.

1. That herein, and hereby, the wicked might fill up the measure of their
sins, and so hasten their own destruction.

2. Hereby God will have his truth witnessed; yea, sometimes with the very
blood of the Saints.

3. God will have it so, for the utility and profit of his Church; for the
blood of Martyrs is the seed of the Church.

Yet still the promise is most sure, God will be a hiding place unto his, and
the worst that Tyrants can do, is but to kill the body, and so hasten their
happiness and glory; they can never prevail against the inward man nor
overthrow their faith, nor disappoint them of salvation.

But hereby our faith is exercised, our patience tried, and the bitterness
that we have tasted in our sufferings, makes our deliverance but so much the
more sweet and comfortable unto us.

And the Reason is, habitation, they are his Sons, they are his Spouse, members
of his body, his friends, his servants; and shall not God be a house and
habitation unto them; Nay more, they are so near and dear unto God that he that
touches them, touches the apple of his eye. Zach. 2.8
Such cannot want protection.

Seeing there is no protection and safeguard unless our God become our
habitation, and dwelling place.

Seeing they only be in safety whom the Lord covers, and whom he protects with
his arms, and with his power; we see then it is our wisdom to seek unto God
for safety, and to creep under his wings; for if he keep us all shall be well
with us. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, Prove. 22.3.
and hides himself; that is, he flies to God for protection. For let men seek
what shifts they can, and use all the means they can, to wind themselves out
of misery, yet unless the Lord keep them, unless they seek unto him by
repentance and prayer, they shall be but as the bird in the net, strive and
struggle, but shall never be able to get out, but the more she strives, the
more she is entangled.

So the wicked, the more they seek to avoid Gods judgments, by their shifts and
devices, the more they are ensuared in them. Unless the Lord be our habitation
and dwelling place, to protect and defend us by his own power and providence.

Thirdly, storms and tempests are up, and ready to annoy us; The consideration
hereof should serve to arm Christians with a holy resolution to keep in with
God, to obey him, and to go on in a godly course, and not to fear the threats
and terrors of men, or what man can do unto us. Has God undertaken to protect
us, and to be a habitation unto us, to be our shield and buckler, our defense
and hiding place? Whom then should we fear?

It Is true Gods servants whilst they are here, are subject to a world of
dangers, inward, and outward: But why should we fear, when the Lord has
undertaken to be a buckler, a shield, a shadow, and a hiding place unto us?

How often does David the to this, Psalm. 18.
in times of danger, I love the Lord, my buckler, my shi^^d, and defense: q. d.
What though my troubles are many, and my enemies are mighty: yet I have at hand
a buckler, and a shield, that will keep off all dangers, He is my buckler, my
shield, and my defense. What a comfort was it to Jonas, when scorched with
heat, God so seasonably provided the Gourd to spring up, that refreshed him
from the scorching beams of the Sun; this God provided for him: and thus will
the Lord provide a shadow and shelter for us in times of danger. What comforts
have we here, that may not fitly be resembled to Jonas Gourd, riches, honor,
power, etc. These may yield a shadow for a time; but then comes the Sun shine,
the East Wind, or the worm, that nips them, and they are gone. Who would then
trust to such shadows as these are? the days and times that we have lived to
see has declared this unto us, that all earthly things are mere shadows: How
is the Crown it self withered? how many noble families and houses are now laid
in the dust? and what is it that we do enjoy, that we can promise to our selves
any certainty in? at the best, they are but weak helps. But says David The
Lord lives, and blessed be my strong help.

If God be a dwelling place to his people, his wings, whose faithfulness and
truth shall be their shield and Bucker;

Then how fearful is the condition of those, that walk not in his ways, and
live not under his protection, that have not God for their Habitation, these
lie open to all storms, and Tempests, of Satan's temptations, and all such
miseries that a poor Creature can be subject unto. Howsoever God may feed them,
and fill their bellies with the good things of this lise: yet what comfort can
they have in the evil day, when conscience is let loose to speak terrible
things to the soul, and Satan shall cast his fiery darts against them, such
must needs be at their wits end, that have not a God to fly unto.

Does not carnal policy teach us thus much, to get into some Noble man's, or
some great man's Family, and then we think our selves highly privileged, and
we look for protection under them. O where are our hearts Christians, and
where is that spiritual wisdom that ought to be in us, that look no more after
Gods service, whose service is perfect freedom, and which brings with it so
much safety, and security.

And the last is, Moses here, Lord thou have been our dwelling place: our
Covert and defense in dangers, thou have protected and covered us by thy hand,
thou have kept us in these contagious times, wherein many have been sick, many
weak, and many taken away by death; Lord thou have given us health after
sickness, deliverance from dangers, consolation after all our sorrows and
afflictions; thou have been our defense and protection. Thou have been a cover
unto us, or else we had long a go perished.

O what shall we render to the Lord for all these benefits, what rent do we
owe unto God for our Habitation and safe protection! If we should find this
favor at any man's hand; that he would let us have a dwelling place fit and
needful for us, to defend us from storms, and tempests, and that for seven
years or twenty years together, will he not look for some rent or service at
our hands, but the Lord has been our dwelling place twenty, thirty, forty
years, from time to time unto this day. Now will not the Lord look for some Rent
and service at our hands, even the Rent and service of obedience and
thankfulness, that we should not displease our Landlord, that we should not
grieve him, or provoke him to anger: but keep his favor, and good will, and
please him in all things: this Rent of obedience and thankfulness does the
Lord require at our hands.

But alas how few do pay the Lord this Rent, and perform this service, who
albeit they receive daily from him many benefits, and mercies; few with that
Leper in the Gospel, remember to return thanks.

From generation to generation.
MOses does not here speak in the present tense, that God was their Habitation.
But that he was the same to their Forefathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob long
before, even from Generation to Generation.

Hence we learn that the Church in all ages is one and the same, The Church is
ever one and the same.
since the first Creation; God has ever had his Church, and so from Generation
to Generation, God has continued his Church in the world, and ever will to the
end.

It Is true, it was sometimes limited to one Nation, as to the Jews. He showed
his word to Jacob, his statutes and judgments to Israel, He has not done so
with any Nation, Io. 4.22.
and Salvation is of the Jews. But now in the times of the Gospel, since the
coming of Christ, that Wall of separation is plucked up; and Japhet, is
persuaded to dwell in the Tencs of Sem. Cant. 6.8
My Dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her Mother. And this
is testified by that of Paul, 1 Cor. 12.12.
As there are many members, but yet but one body; so we being many, are one in
Christ.

And this does our Savior make clear and plain unto us, Io. 10.16
when he says Other sheep I have which are not of this Fold, them also must I
bring; and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one Fold and one
Shepherd. And the Church is figured by one woman. Rev. 12
And this woman has Christ married to himself, which shows the unity of the
Church in all ages. Hos. 2.19


It Is true, this one Church of Christ may have many parts, as the Sea has many
Chanells, and is called by the name of the Country by the which it runs, as the
Germ an Sea, the Baltique Sea, etc. so the Church of France, the Church of
England and the Church of Scotland, etc. yet the Church of God is but one
Militant Church upon the face of the whole Earth.



As we account that but one Commonwealth, that is under one King, and governed
by one and the same Laws, and is under one Government So is the Church of
Christ one, professing one and the same faith; has one and the same hope, and
Baptized into the same spirit, and reserved unto one and the same glorious
inheritance, is but one.

This quite overthrows the Church of Rome as no true Church of Christ, who
quite overthrow the Nature of the Church Catholic thus enlarged by God, and
confine the same to Rome. What is Catholic, but Universal? And to speak in
their language, The Catholic Roman Church, is as much as to say, the
Universal Church; which must needs sound in the ears of any reasonable man, to
be most absurd.

Gods Church is not tied to any one time, much less to any one place; but in
respect of time and place, is Catholic and Universal?

Secondly, generation to generation?

This may serve to unite the hearts of believers together, in unity and peace.
The Unity and Oneness of the Church, should teach unity and concord amongst
those that profess themselves members of this Church. We are all of one house
and habitation, have one Father, one Christ, one Spirit, one Bread, one board,
one Bread to feed upon, one Cup to drink on: so should we be of one mind, and
of one heart.

Christians should cleave together, and hold together. If one member suffer,
all should suffer with it, 1 Pet. 4.10.
if one member be in honor, all should rejoice at it, As every man has
received the gift, even so minister the same one to another?

Those that are of the family of the Devil will do so: Drunkards have a league
amongst themselves; what a shame then is it for Christians, that profess
themselves of the household of God, to rent asunder the seamlesse Coat of Christ.

Surely, the sad divisions that are in England this day, like the divisions of
Ruben, cause great thoughts of heart, and frustrates all our hopes of our
desired peace.

O what a shame is it, that there should be strife and dissension in that
family, where the Father is the God of peace, and the son is the Prince of
peace. What an excellent Church and house of God was it in the Apostles time,
when the multitude of believers were of one heart, and of one mind. Such
therefore as make these rents and divisions in the Church, as too many do in
these days, show apparently that they are not of Gods household. See that place
of Paul, Now I beseech you brethren, Romans 16.17.18.
mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which
ye have received, and avoid them, for they are such as serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own belly; and by good words, and fair speeches, deceive the
hearts of the simple.

Ver. 2. Before the mountains were made, or ever thou had for med the earth,
or the world, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God.
IN this second Verse, Moses prevents an objection, and removes a doubt that
might arise in the minds of the people, who might think thus.

Surely, though the Lord did deliver our forefathers by his mighty power, and
defended and protected them in all dangers and straights; yet now his power
being not put forth for our succor and defense, that are their posterity, he
is not now so able to save and deliver us.

No, says Moses, that cannot be, for the Lord is that mighty God, from all
eternity, he is that eternal God, and therefore cannot lose any of his power
or strength; but is now as able every way to save us, as our fore fathers of
old: inasmuch as he does continue the mighty God, from all eternity: from
generation to generation thou art God.

Hence we may see what is the corrupt nature of man: In times of distress we
are ready to uestion Gods power.
when we have not that we desire, and when it goes not with us as we wish, we
are ready to question Gods power, and to put off the cause from our selves, and
to lay the same upon God. And hence is it, that the Lord expostulateth the case
with his people thus: Es. 50.2.
Is my hand shortened at all that it cannot redeem, or have I not power to
deliver? Behold, at my rehuke I dry up the sea, I make Rivers a wilderness.
And again, Es. 59.1, 2.
Behold the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, neither is his ear
heavy that he cannot hear. But your iniquities have separated betwixt you and
your God. How did the people provoke the Lord to wrath against them, Psalm.
78.19, 20.
when they said, Can God prepare a table in the Wilderness, can he provide
flesh for his people? This the Lord was angry at, Therefore the Lord was angry,
and the fire was kindled in Jacob, Ver. 21.
and wrath came also upon I srael. And the reason is given, because they
believed not in God, Ver. 22.
and trusted not in his help. And whereas God swear unto their fathers, that he
would give them the Land of Canaan, to them and their seed after them; yet the
Holy Ghost says, Heb. 3.19.
They could not enter in because of unbelief. This was the sin of the Prince
of Israel, that when the Prophet had told him of the great plenty that should
be in the gate of Samaria, 2 Reg. 7.
To morrow this time: he doubted of it, and concludes against the words of the
Prophet, that it could not possibly be, Though the Lord should open the
windows of heaven: Ver. 20.
But he saw it with his eyes, but did not eat of it; for the people trod him
to death in the gate of the City.

Yea, the Lord has severely punished this sin in his own servants themselves,
that have been guilty of it; as we may see in Moses the man of God, Number. 20.8,
12.
that shut him out of the Land of Canaan: And the Lord was so highly displeased
with Zachary, Luke 1.20.
otherwise a good man, who doubted of the promise concerning Elizabeth his
wife, that she should bear him a son, that the Lord struck him dumb, till the
day that the promise was fulfilled. So that the point is clear and plain, that
our corrupt nature is such, that we often call Gods power into question, in
times of straights that we fall into.

Because it was the first sin of our Father Adam, Genesis 3.4.
and so drew him from God to question Gods love, and the same is derived to all
his posterity. And this is the root and mother of all other sins; by it we
depart from God, when we call Gods power, truth, promises, Heb. 3.12.
and mercy into question: what is this, but to make God a liar, 1. Joh. 5.10.
and so dishonor God in a high degree. As we cannot honor God more, than by
sanctifying his name, Numb. 20.12.
and acknowledging his power in times of affliction and distress: So is God
highly dishonored when we doubt of his power and goodness, and call the same
into question.

Secondly, Abraham's faith, that he doubted not of the promise through
unbelief; Romans 4.20.
for he was persuaded, that what he had promised he was able to perform.
Whereas the unbelieving heart blocks up the gate of mercy against it self, and
makes a man incapable of mercy.

If we examine our selves by this Doctrine, When we are in health, peace, and
prosperity, and set free from trouble, O, then we can acknowledge and say, that
God is all-sufficient, merciful, and gracious. But if the Lord send
affliction, sickness, trials, times of adversity; then we are ready to call
all into question, and think that Gods power is shortened; we dare not follow
God in the dark: we can hardly confess God to be almighty, powerful, just,
merciful, at such times, Judge. 6.13.
but are ready to say with Gideon, If God be with us, why is this befallen us?
We shorten Gods arm, and call his power into question, as this people did, Can
God furnish a Table in the Wilderness? Psalm. 78.
He gave us drink indeed out of a Rock, but can he give bread also? This is
that sin which this cursed nature of ours is most prone unto; and therefore are
the more carefully to watch over our own hearts against it.

Seeing it is the sin of our nature thus to question Gods power, learn to
know that God is always one and the same, most mighty, most just, true, and
faithful in his Covenant toward his people. Though our condition change, yet
God changes not, he is one and the same from all eternity, and cannot change.
But if our condition be otherwise with us than we desire, Lam 3.39. Es. 59.2.
let us ascribe all to our selves. Man suffers for his sin. Your iniquities
have separated betwixt you and your God. Your iniquities have turned away these
things, and your sins have withholden good things from you. Let us condemn our
selves, and accuse our selves, that we are thus afflicted; and know that God is
just, and the arm of his power is not shortened toward his people.

Quest.

Answ.

First, the same, then yet they have attained unto. We are apt to think, that a
little sorrow for sin is enough, and every light and slight confession will
serve the turn: But the Lord sees it meet, that the foundation of our
repentance and conversion should be laid deeper.

Secondly, herein, and hereby, the Lord will exercise our graces, which in
times of Gods delays are exercised in us. How was the faith of Abraham
exercised, whilst he took Isaac in his hand three days together, when he went
up to the Mount to sacrifice him? How was the faith of Paul tried, when he
received this answer from God My grace is sufficient for thee, though the
temptation was not removed?

The Lord will have it so, in prayer, and have at last a welcome deliverance.

Before the Mountains,
MOSES being now to have recourse unto God by prayer for his people, flies unto
the Covenant of grace made unto the Church in Christ, pleads that, minds the
Lord of that, and that gives him boldness in prayer, Before the Mountains,
etc. thou art our God.

Hence we learn That the knowledge of Gods Covenant of grace in Christ, The
knowledge of Gods Covenant gives boldness in prayer.
It is the knowledge of our interest in the Covenant of grace, that God is our
God, kindles prayer, as a Sacrifice kindled with fire from heaven, and is much
accepted of God.

Upon this ground we are to pray. Gods Cov^nant made with his Church, and
faithfulness in all generations in keeping promise with his people, is the
staff and strength of prayer. And this Covenant of grace, the godly have been
ever careful to lay hold upon in prayer, Heb. 10.23. Rev. 19.11.
He is faithful that has promised. And he that fits upon the white Horse is
called faithful and true.

Thus the Lord minds Jacob with his Covenant made with Abraham and Isaac his
father, Genesis 28. ver. 15.
and then confirms the same unto Jacob, Behold I am with thee, and will keep
thee which way thou go. Romans 10.14.
This made Paul to ask that strange question, How shall they call on him on
whom they have not believed? implying thus much, That where there is not faith
in Gods Covenant, there is no calling upon God. Iam. 1.5.
If any man lack wisdom (says Saint James) let him ask it of God. But how?
Let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. And again, Let us draw near with a true
hears, in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience.
So that the point is clear and plain, Ephesians. 3.12.
That it is faith in the Covenant that God has made unto us in Christ, that
gives boldness and confidence when we go to God in prayer.

And one Reason may be taken from that unchangeable nature that is in God, Genesis
17.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee, by an everlasting
Covenant. And he will not suffer his truth to fail: This does Moses mind the
Lord of in the entrance into his prayer, Lord, thou have been our habitation in
all generations, in the days of our forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:
and as it is in this Text, from generation to generation, this they plead, and
that he will be the same to generations to come, they rest upon. Thus all his
promises in Christ are Yea and Amen. 2 Cor. 1.20.


Besides, his Word is unchangable as himself is, Heaven and earth hall pass
away and perish, yet not one jot or tittle of the Word shall fail. All the
promises of God are yea and amen in Christ, firm and faithful, and God will
be sure at last to speak peace to his people. May not a man rest upon that, for
the which he has a word for? Thy testimonies (says David) are sure. Ps. 93.5
To. 10.8.
And the Word is called the Word of Faith, which cannot fail.

This serves to direct the Church of God in general,

This lets us see upon what ground we must lay all our suits and requests that
we put up unto God: It is true, our unfaithfulness in keeping Covenant with
God, is enough to stop our months, and make us ashamed, when we come unto him.
But when we come unto him thus, Deliver me O Lord, Ps. 31.1.
according to thy righteousness, and disclaim our own, and rest upon his
faithfulness, we may hope to prevail with him.

And therefore seeing Gods Church and children have such a Rock to fly unto,
and such a ground to build their suits upon, with what boldness may they go
unto God, and be assured of deliverance.

Before the Mountains were brought forth,
MOSES here speaking of God and to God, mentions his eternity, saying, That
before the Mountains, or the Earth, or the World were made, thou art God.

Wherein he affirms two things of God.

1. That he was the Creator of the earth and the world. 2. That he was from
eternity long before.
Or ever thou had formed the earth or the world.
HEnce we learn, Three was a time when there was no earth or world.
That there was a time, when there was no Mountain, Earth, or World, but God
created them all. The glorious Heavens and all the host of them, the Earth, and
all the creatures therein, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, had all God for
their Creator.

Yet this point is warily to be understood of us, for howsoever this work of
creation is attributed to the first Person in Trinity, we are not to exclude
the Son nor the Holy Ghost: for the whole Trinity did create the world, Let us
make man. Genesis 1.26.
This being a rule in Divinity, That the works of God that are without are
undivided: for that which one does, all do.

Yet there is this difference in their order of working: 1. The Father wills
it. 2. The Son works it. 3. The Holy Ghost finisheth it.


Now that God Created all things at first, it is clear, In the beginning God
created the heavens and the earth. Genesis 1.1.
And, I am the Lord, and there is none other. How proves he that? but by this
work of Creation, Es. 45.7.
I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I the
Lord do all these things. And thus again does he prove his Godhead, Ier. 10.12
He has made the earth, and established the world by his wisdom. And He spoke
the word (says the Psalmist) and it was done, Ps. 33.9.
He commanded, and it stood fast.

And the Lord did without faintness and weariness, Es. 40.28
The everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, faints
not, nor is weary. The visible creatures, from the most glorious Angels, to
the most contemptible worm of the earth do all declare that there is a God, and
that this God is the Creator of them. The visible creatures have in them all
the print of an invisible God: His power and his wisdom is engraven in them
all; yea, in the smallest creatures does Gods wisdom and power most of all
appear.

Quest.

Moses tells us, when he says, In the beginning: the meaning is, Genesis 1.1.
In the beginning of Time. For before the Creation, Time was not, but Eternity
instead of Time. And indeed, the thoughts of man are here drowned, here is the
Ocean that we are not able to fathom, what was before the world was. And it is
not meet that we should search into that: for what are we to judge of eternity?
what has plants to judge of sense? or what have beasts to judge of reason? or
man to judge of Eternity, that is himself finite?

But how did God create all things?

Not as man brings his works to pass, by labor and pains: no, Ps. 33.9.
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them. He
did but speak the Word, and it was done, the commanded, and it was created. God
did but say, Let there be light, and there was light; and all other creatures
had their being at his command.

Seeing there was a time when there was no Mountain, Earth, or World, all; then
the heavens that are above us, and the earth that is below us, and all the
creatures that are in the world, they may serve to teach us this lesson, that
there is a God: though these teach us not this lesson as the Scriptures teach
us, yet they are as a Christians Primer to teach us to spell; for God teaches
us two ways.

1. By his Philosophy Lecture in the creature: Romans 1.20.
The invisible things of God from the creation of the world are clearly seen.
2. By his Divinity Lecture in the Word. Ps. 19.1.
Now if the knowledge we have of God in the creature, shall leave men without
excuse, how much more inexcusable are those that have the Word to instruct
them.
Seeing this is so, by fire. 2 Pet. 3.10.
The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, in the which the
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the Earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.

All our goodly houses and stately buildings, the whole Earth and all the
Creatures therein shall at last become but fuel to the fire. And therefore why
should we set our hearts upon the Creature, seeing he that made all, can
destroy all, and bring the wealthiest of us all to nothing at his pleasure.

And this also meets with a vain conceit, etc.

So art thou no nearer Heaven then thy Ox or thy beast thou ridest upon; for
are not they the Creatures of God as well as thou!

If thou be not in Christ, and so a new Creature, thou art in a worse estate
then they, for when they die, they vanish away and come to nothing. But thou
have in thee an immortal soul that shall live to all eternity, even whilst God
himself lives.

Creation is but a Common benefit, extended to brute beasts as well as to man
they have God to betheir Creator is well as we: we are never then to rest til we
have Christ to be our Redeemer, and the Holy Ghost to be our sanctifier to
partake of a new Creation or Regeneration. As Christ says to Nicodemus, Ioh. 3.
Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Herein
lies the happiness of man, above other Creatures in our title to Christ as our
Redeemer, otherwise of all creatures man is most miserable.

Hitherto of the first, that God is the Creator of all things.

Secondly, God was from all eternity.
Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the Earth
or the World, even from Everlasting to everlasting thou art God.

Herein Moses proceeds to a farther proof of the Godhead, and that is taken
from his Antiquity, and Eternity: Before the Earth or the World wa^ made, thou
art God. From whence we learn that in respect of time God was before all time,
even from Eternity: and so is eternal.

Some things there are that have a beginning in time, and have their periods
and ending in time as brute beasts, etc.

Some things have a beginning in time, but have no time to end in, as Angels
and men.

Only there is God that neither had a beginning in time, nor shall end in
time, but is eternal.

Now that God is Eternal, is clear in this from ever lasting to everlasting
thou art God. Pro. 8.23.


I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the Earth was It is
spoken of God and of Christ, Mich. 5.2.
But thou Bethlem Ephrata, though thou art little among the thousands of Judah,
yet out of thee shall come forth unto me that is to be Ruler in Israel, whose
goings forth have been of old from everlasting.

As God had no being in time, but is without the measure of time; so Eternity
is his essential property, which shows that God cannot end in time, but as he
was from Eternity, so shall be ever one, and the same God, without shadow of
change. Ps. 102.25.26, 27.
Of old thou have laid the soundations of the Earth and the Heavens are the
works of thy hands. They shall all perish, but thou shall endure, they shall
all wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture shall thou change them, and
they shall be changed. But thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

The Consideration of this Eternity of God should serve to humble us in our own
eyes, This made Abraham, when he was to come unto God, to confess that he was
but dust and ashes, when he was to deal with him. And the Saints of God have
ever laid themselves low before him, when they have come into his presence.

Secondly, They shall all perish, Ps. 102.27.
and wax-old like a garment, and they are reserved to the fire of the day of
judgment, 1 Pet. 3.10.
when the earth, and the works thereof shall be burnt up.

Thirdly, seeing God is eternal, For such he knew before. Ephesians. 1.4.
And there is an eternity before us, and that is our eternal Glorification.
Now betwixt these two Eternities, there is a short interjected time cast in,
which is our short life and being here in this world: and our weal or woe for
ever does depend upon this short inch of time, allotted unto us here. Some are
so spiritually wise to improve this time, to make their Calling and Election
sure: 2 Pet. 1.10.
and to work out their salvation with fear and trembling. These pass from
Eternity past, their eternal Election, to Eternity to come, their eternal
Glorification. Othersome there are, and that the greatest part of the world,
that spend their time in eating and drinking,

Ver. 3. Thou turnest man to destraction, and say, Return again ye children
of men.
FRom the beginning of this Verse, to the eleventh, we have the second general
part of this Psalm, and that is his Naration, in the which he sets down the
common frailty, and mortality of mankind, from Verse 3. to the 11. and this he
does, 1 In general: 1. By the efficient cause of man's frailty, and mortality,
verse 3. Thou turnest man, etc. 2. By the isntrumental cause, viz. The
manifold miseries, sicknesses and diseases, these frail bodies of ours are
subject unto. As also from the composition of man's body, which is made but of
the dust of the earth, and therefore must return to dust again.
2. In particular, by comparing it 1. To a Watch in the night, that is the
space of three hours, ver. 4. 2. To a Sleep, or a Dream, that is a vanishing
thing, and of no continuance verse 5. 3. To a Flower, or Grass, that grows
up in the morning, but cut down and withered ere night ver. 6. Thus of the
estate of mankind in general.



Then verse 7, 8, 9. he applies this to themselves in particular, now in great
affliction and distress in the Wilderness: and shows that though the life of
man be frail, and short, yet their estate at this time was far worse and more
miserable: and the Reason was 1. Because of Gods anger and terrible
displeasure, whereby they were pitifully wasted and conconsumed, verse 7. 2.
He sets down the special procuring cause, why their estate was thus miserable,
viz. Their sins and rebellions, which the Lord did now charge them with, verse
8.


Thou turnest man to destruction.
THat is at thy will, and pleasure, and appointment is the life of man; when it
pleases thee, thou turnest man to destruction, that is, to breaking and
crushing, even to dust and ashes.

Hence we learn, Greatest comfort to the godly in times of affliction, that
they come from God. Hos. 6.1. Am. 3.6.
that their miseries and afflictions come from God, He has spoiled, he has
wounded, says the Church. They do not look so much upon the Assyrians that
afflicted them, but they look up higher, and see Gods hand upon them, and say,
The Lord has spoiled; and, He has wounded us. Is there any evil in the City,
and the Lord has not done it? That is, any judgment, sickness, afflictions,
or calamities, but they come from the Lord, it is he that sends them, and lays
them upon his people.

Thus when the Lord was minded to bring his Church from Idolatry, he says
thus, Behold I will stop thy ways with thorns, and make a hedge that she shall
not know her paths. Thus the Lord threatened Senacherib, 2 Reg. 19.6.
Behold I will sond a blast upon him.

This is more clear by that of Moses, Lev^t 26.16, 17.
If ye will not obey me, and do these commandments, I will appoint over you
fearfulness, a Consumption, and a burning Fever, the Sword, Famine, and
Pestilence to destroy you. And this truth is acknowledged by Job, in his
sharpest trials, Job 1.21.
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, even as it pleases the Lord, so
comes things to pass. 1 Cor. 11.32.
And, When we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord.

The Reasons will make the point yet more clear and plain unto us.

First in regard of his providence, Fortune, or Chance: but as it pleases the
Lord, so comes things to pass.

This does our Savior teach most clearly, when he says, Are not two sparrowes
sold for a farthing, and not one of them shall fall on the ground without your
Father. Yea, the hairs of your head are numbered. Now if the providence of God
be in such small things, as in the fall of a Sparrow, and the numbering of the
hairs of our head; how much more in the trials and afflictions of his children?

Secondly, No man should be moved with these afflictions, 1 These. 3.3.
for your selves know that we are appointed thereto.

God will have the rod lie upon the back of his servants sometimes a long time,
as upon the Church in Egypt 430 years together, where the Lord exercised them
with cruel bondage under Pharath.

Sometimes shorter, as those seventy years they were in captivity in Babylon;
sometimes shorter, Rev. 2.10.
Ye shall have tribulation for ten days. Sometimes but for a night, Sorrow may
endure for a night, etc. Yea, sometimes not so long, but for an hour, there is
an hour of temptation: and the time that God has purposed and decreed being
expired, they shall see the salvation of the Lord.

Seeing that the only stay and comfort of the godly in times of affliction and
distress,

This duty the Lord requires and looks for at our hands, Ps. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will hear thee, and deliver
thee. Yea, to that end, he has prescribed unto us, a form of seeking him at
such times, Hos. 14.2, 3.
Take unto you words, and turn to the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all our
iniquity, and receive us graciously.

Secondly, Ps. 50.15. Mat. 7.7. 1 Ioh. 5.14.
and that whatsoever we ask the Father in his Sons Name, he will give it us.

Thirdly, Lord, whither shall we go (says Peter) thou have the words of
eternal life. He is known for a sure refuge, Ps. 48.3.
he is the God that hears prayers.

Besides, Psalm. 18.3, 4. 2 Chr. 20 2 Chr. 33
by earnest and hearty prayer, as David, Jehosophat, Hezechiah, Manasses, etc.
who ever had recourse unto God, in times of misery, and God was entreated of
them.

Secondly, the consideration hereof, To. 8.28.
that they shall work for the best to them that love and fear him; what a
ground of patience may this be unto us under the cross, whenever the Lord
shall be pleased to humble us, by any affliction whatsoever, that with patience
and meekness we submit thereunto, I was dumb, Ps. 39.9.
and opened not my mouth, because it was thy doing, says David. And Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. ^ Sam. 15.26.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems good to him. And, Here I am, let him
do to me as seems good to him.

And this may serve for the just reproof of those,

Job was of another mind, he looks not so much upon the Caldeans and Sabeans,
that plundered him of his goods and cattle, but he looks up unto God, and
acknowledges his hand in all. So David, when Shimei cursed him, It may be the
Lord bad him to curse me.

come in with any National or personal deliverance, where to return thanks,
even to him that first smo^e us, and who it is that has healed us. Thus the
Church in all ages, when the Lord was pleased to come in with any singular
deliverance, Exodus 15. 2 Chronicles. 20. Jud. 5.
kept their solemn days of praise and thanksgiving unto God.

Thou turnest man to destruction
THat is, at thy pleasure are our lives and being here; we live at thy
allowance and appointment: when thou will, thou turnest them to breaking and
crushing, even to dust.

Hence observe, Our lives are in Gods hand.
it is in Gods hand and power, we live at his appointment, at his pleasure, he
can, and does turn man to destruction, to breaking and crushing.

Thou have bruised my bones, Esaias 38.
says Hezechiah.

Thou have set me as a mark to shoot at says Job.

Thy arrows stick fast in me, says David.

If the Lord do but say, Return ye sons of Adam, we shall return again to the
dust, and away we must. The voice of the Lord is a powerful voice, he did
create all things by his voice, and by his word, and at the same voice and word
of his, he can turn all things to powder. No man, though never so great, or
mighty, wise or politic, can resist or withstand the commanding and powerful
voice of God; but when death is sent, and God gives his call, they must return
again to dust.

Death knocks with authority at the door of the rich man, and Palace of
Princes, as at the poor, and all must obey, and return to the dust from whence
they came.

Moses this Man of God, that was a man so familiar with his Maker, a man so
holy, so meek, so merciful, who was indeed a compound of virtues, who had fed
many thousands, when they were ready to die with hunger, who had refreshed many
thousands, when they were ready to perish with thirst: yet must himself at
last yield to the stroke of death, and say to corruption, thou art my Father,
and to the worm, thou art my Mother. Psalm. 89.48.
What man is there living that shall not see death and shall deliver his soul
from the pit?

One dies in his full strength (says Job) whose breasts are full of milk, Job
21.23.
and bones are full of marrow: Another dies in the bitterness of his soul,
they shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover them. We
stand not at a stay, but in the midst of life, we are in death, the very meat
we put into our bellies, and the clothes we put upon our backs, all declare
unto us, that dye we must, and return again to the dust. And the Reasons are,

First, Dust thou art, Genesis 3.19.
and into dust shall thou return again. And as the Prophet says; All flesh is
grass, and the glory of man as the flower of grass. As the point of the
Mariners needle does never stand till it attain the North Pole: Such an
instinct there is in these bodies of ours, they still bend themselves downward
toward the earth, from whence they came. And as the nearer the Center, the
swifter the motion, so is man toward his end; every day winds off something of
the thread of our life, and return we must.

There is a necessity of our returning again to dust, sin; the wages whereof is
death, and indeed there can be no divorce sued out betwixt sin and death. Genesis
20.
As the Lord said to Abimelech, Thou art but a dead man because of his sin. And
this was Gods own decree at first, Genesis 2.17.
The day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death. Now Alam eating of the
forbidden fruit, brought in death to all his posterity; for so says the
Apostle, By one man sin entered into the world, To. 5.12.
and death by sin. And inasmuch as all have sinned, all must die the death.

Besides, should die, because by death we must enter into life: death is the
gate of life, ordinarily none entered into life but by death; death is a guide
to bring us into Heaven; though a churlish guide, yet a sure guide to bring us
into bliss.

Seeing the Lord at his pleasure turns man to destruction, breaking and
crushing, sends long and tedious sickness, and grief of body, whereby men are
much deformed, and weakened in their bodies, and turned to dust; This should
teach us patience in times of misery and distress, when the Lord shall seem
thus to crush us, and break us to powder, we should with patience bear his
correcting hand, be it never so sharp and grievous even to crush us to pieces,
and to grind us to powder, in regard it is the Lord that does it. Thus David,
I was dumb, and opened not my lips, Ps. 39.5
because it was thy doing.

There is no sickness, or disease, lamenesse or blindness, or any other
affliction, whereby we come to have our bones crushed, and we brought to
destruction, but all is of the Lord; He turns man to breakings and
destruction, and it is the want of the knowledge of this, that is the cause,
that men do sometimes murmur against Gods dealings, and are not humbled for
their sins as they ought to be, we consider not that it is he that turns man
to destruction.

Secondly, breakings and crushings, yea, death it self, when we are brought to
the dust, are all from God, and come from him, Thou turnest man to destruction:
this may serve to abate the pride of many in these days, who spend their time,
precious time, as if this destruction would never come, in eating and drinking,
ranting and roaring, as if they were immortal, or should never die, or be
called to an account of their ways, think their bodies are not made of the
same common mould with other men: Whereas the consideration of man's mortality
would much abate the pride of many: had they this thought in their minds, that
they must shortly die, and go hence, and be no more;

It was a witty answer of that Cynick Diogenes, that when Alexander mocked him
for being so often amongst the Tombs and Sepulchers of the dead, answered, O
Sir, I am looking for the bones of thy Father Philip, but see no difference
between them and other men's. Why then should men be so proud, and exalt
themselves, when they know not how soon they may be laid full low.

The ignorance hereof makes many to carry their heads aloft, outface heaven,
and swell with pride and disdain of others; whereas the due consideration of
their own end, would make them walk more humbly toward God, and more meekly
toward their Brethren.

And lastly,

In the matters of the world men are wise, they must (say they) provide for a
rainy day, in Summer for Winter; and whilst they are young, to keep them when
they are old. O where are our hearts Christians, that we provide no better for
death before it come.

And howsoever all men know, that one day, die they must, and that rep^ntance
and other graces are to be had to make them truly happy; yet here is the
misery, that men defer this great work to the last, when many times it proves
too late.

Now to that end I may awaken you that hear me this day, Conlide rations to
prepare for death.
in this weighty duty; I beseech you take these few considerations to heart.

First, that you would seriously consider with your selves,

Go to now (says Saint James) you that say, to day, and to morrow, Iam. 4.13,
14.
we will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and
get gain, and yet ye cannot tell what shall be to morrow; for what is your
life, is it not a vapor, etc. What man when he goes to bed, can assure
himself that he shall rise again in the morning. Who knows (says Solomon)
what the day travelleth withal, and may bring forth ere night. Eccles. 9.12.
Man does not know his time, and as fishes are taken in an evil net, and birds
in a snare, so are the children of men.

Secondly, when all the infirmities of our nature will then seize upon us, when
extremity, pain, grief, anguish, will so perplexeus, that the best counsel
will have little taste, and the best prayers little sweetness in them: this
will prove a time of spending, and not a time of storing; What wise man then
will defer all this time?

Consider how often these purposes of repentance, Spyras case, who being
exhorted to say the Lords Prayer, answered, O, I cannot call God Father. And
some again like Nabal, whose heart dyed like a stone within him.

And last of all, shall seek to enter, but shall not be able? Did not those
foolish Virgins cry, Lord, Lord, open unto us; yet were for ever shut out of
the Marriage Chamber? And does not the Lord threaten, that though Noah, Daniel,
and Samuel, should pray for this people, yet I will not hear them. Nay, thy
case may be such, that though all the Angels in heaven, and Saints on earth,
should entreat for thee, yet God will not be entreated: This is clear, Because
I have called, Prove. 1.24, 25.26.
and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and ye have not regarded; But ye
have set at naught my counsel, etc. I will also laugh at your calamity, I will
mock when your fear comes. O the misery of a poor soul, when God shall shut
out his prayers, and shall be so far from pitying him in this time of
distress, as that he shall laugh at his destruction.

And say,
ALbeit, as we have heard, there is an inevitable necessity, laid upon all
Adams posterity, by reason of sin, that they must once die, Thou turnest man to
destruction. So sure and certain it is, that all men shall one day rise again,
Thou say, Return ye sons of men.

q. d. At thy will, and at thy word, they shall at last return from dust and
corruption again.

Though the bodies of men by reason of sin, All men at last shall rise again.
do taste of death, and turn to dust; yet by a word speaking of God, they shall
at last rise again, Thou say Return again ye sons of men.

This is a fundamental truth, and a principal article of our faith, wherein
we profess to believe the Resurrection of the dead. Besides the Scriptures are
most plentiful in this.

I am sure (says Job) that my Redeemer lives, Job 19.23.
and that I shall rise out of the earth at the last day.

The dead shall arise, Esaias 26.19.
even with my body shall they arise. Awake, and sing, ye that dwell in the
dust.

This is acknowledged by Hannah in her song, The Lord kills, 1 Samuel 2.6.
and makes alive, brings down to the grave, and raises up.

The Apostle Saint Paul proves the Resurrection by diverse unanswerable
arguments; as

If there be no Resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen, 1 Cor. 15.
verse 13.
and then is the faith of a Christian vain, his hope vain, and the preaching of
the Gospel vain, and the godly departed this life perished: all which were
foul and gross absurdities, once to think or imagine. Besides these, there
might be added diverse other places of Scripture, to confirm this Doctrine of
the Resurrection, as that of Paul.

If we believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
even so them also that sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. Romans 14.8.
And again, Whether we live or dye, we are the Lords. But I will not insist
upon so clear a truth. Take the Reasons and Arguments, which serve for the
farther illustration of the point.

The first may be taken from that everlasting Covenant of grace that God has
made with his children, I am the God of Abraham, the meaning is not, that he is
the God of Abraham's soul only, but also of his body. And hence it is, that the
bodies of Believers, although they are dead and rotten in their graves, yet
still are within the Covenant.

But is it not said,

In the sense of the Pharisees that denied the Resurrection of the dead, is not
the God of the dead: But he is the God of Abraham being dead in body to be
raised up to life again; And so was he the God of the living, and this is the
meaning of Christ on that place.

Because all true believers being members of Christ have part in the
Resurrection of Christ, Paul calls the first fruits of them that sleep. 1 Cor.
15.20, 25.
Now Christ did not rise from the dead as a private person, as Lazarus or as
his widows Son, but as the head of the Church, and therefore said, Ioh. 11.
when I am lifted up, I draw all men unto me.

Again, Rev. 6.11.
How long Lord which art holy and true, etc. They long for this Resurrection.

If the bodies of the Saints should not at last rise again, 1 Cor. 1^.
for who are more hated, scorned, derided, and persecuted then they? what folly
then was it in Paul, to endure so many watchings, perils, and so much hardship
as he went under, but that he had hope in this Resurrection?

But especially Gods truth and promise lies at the stake, who is yea and Amen
in all his promises and cannot fail. Now he has said, When thou make a
feast, Luke 14.
call the blind and the lame. And he gives the Reason, for God shall reward
thee in the resurrection of the just. I confess there is nothing that crosses
carnal and natural reason more then this, that these bodies of ours should
moulder to dust and rottenness, cast into the Sea, devoured of fishes, burnt
to ashes, and scattered upon the earth, that these bodies thus wasted, and
consumed should at last be raised up again.

To believe this, our faith must be taken up with the admiration of the mighty
power of God, and we must say with Job, I know thou can do every thing, and
that no thought is hid from thee: till we look upon this Almighty power of
his, and captivat our reason thereto, we shall still stagger in our belief of
this Article of our Resurrection.

Now let us apply this.

Seeing these bodies of ours, by reason of sin do taste of death; Thou turnest
man, etc. This may serve to strengthen our faith in this great Article of our
belief, the Resurrection of our bodies. That these bodies of ours shall at
last rise again, it is a point that carnal reason is hardly brought to believe.
But why should we scruple or dispute that which God has so plainly affirmed,
and the Scrptures so fully prove: faith looks unto Gods Almighty power, as
Abraham in the promise of Isaac, he judged him faithful, and that God was able
to do it.

Secondly, Paul would have us to comfort our selves in these things, 1 Thessalonians.
^^ ult.
wherefore comfort you (...) these words: that is, in the Doctrine of the
Resurrection.



Comforts from the Doctrine of the Resurrection.
that a true believer may receive from the knowledge of it.

First of all this will arm us against the fear of Death. It Is true, there is
something in death that breeds fear,

Secondly, to kill the body; yet when they have done that, and put them to the
greatest cruelty and torture that they can devise, they shall be restored to us
again. This was that comfort that Christ gave to his Disciples, Mat. 20.19.
when he spoke of his own death. The Son of man shall be delivered to the
chief Priests and Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, and deliver
him to the Gentiles to be Crucified; but the third day he shall rise again.
Now that which was Christ's comfort may be ours also.

Thirdly, there is comfort in it,

And lastly, that we are subject unto here: In the Resurrection, we shall leave
all these behind us in the grave, and our bodies shall rise again glorious
bodies, and incorruptible bodies. As those two godly Martyrs going to the
stake, the one blind, the other lame, comforted each other: Be of good cheer,
Brother, my Lord of London will this day cure thee of blindness, and me of my
lamenesse. Thus will death do, and in the Resurrection, these imperfections
shall be done away. So that the comforts are great, which flow from this
Doctrine of the Resurrection.

But as this Doctrine serves for matter of comfort and consolation to the
godly,

The bodies of believers shall arise by virtue of that union they have with
Jesus Christ, as members of that mystical body of his, whereof Christ is the
head, so shall he at last draw his members to himself.

But now all wicked and ungodly men, they shall arise by the power of Christ,
at the voice of the Archangel at the sound of the Trump; for as the Apostle
says, the Trump shall sound. 1 Cor. 15
And these shall arise out of their graves, as out of a Prison, and that to go
to the place of execution: These shall no sooner put their heads out of their
graves, and behold the Lord Jesus coming in his glory. That Christ whom they
have crucified by their sins, that Christ whom they have persecuted in his
members, that Christ whose blood they have trampled under their feet; but they
could wish that they had never seen his face.

O, thinks a wicked man, that I were in my grave again; O that this filthy and
polluted carcass of mine, had never been made alive again, but as it tasted of
corruption, it might for ever have perished there. And it is not impossible,
but they that at the last shall cry to the mountains to fall upon them, Rev. 6.
and the hills to cover them, but they may seek to hide themselves in their
graves from the presence of Christ.

As the bodies of believers shall arise glorified bodies, the bodies of the
wicked shall arise most black, ugly, and deformed bodies, black faces, ghastly
countenances, more like Devils than Men and Women; ugly as Toads, hateful to
themselves and others. Thus shall they arise at last; they shall arise out of
their graves quaking and trembling, wishing that they had never been born, or
born Toads or Serpents, rather than Men and Women.

O the horror and terror that shall seize upon the wicked at that day, no
heart is able to conceive, or tongue able to express! When the Lord delivered
the Law to the people upon Mount Sinai, when the Trumpet sounded, how did the
people quake and tremble. Exodus 19
How terrible then will his appearance be at the last day, when he shall come
to exact vengeance upon the transgressors of this Law? O consider this ye that
now forget God you that will not now be wrought upon by the sound of the Word,
to be raised from the death of sin, to the life of righteousness. How will you
endure at this day the voice of the Arch-Angell, and the sound of this Trumpet,
Arise ye dead, and come unto judgment?

And last of all, return again, and rise again; how careful should we be to
keep our bodies clean, and pure, and undefiled, and every member of the same.
The Apostle Saint Paul exhorts us unto this, 2 Thessalonians. 4.4.
To possess our Vessels in holiness and honor. If death leave thee a
drunkard, an unclean person, a swearer, a worldling, a vile and profane
wretch, in a natural condition; in the same condition shall thou be haled to
judgment, when that wretched body, and that woeful soul of thine, that have
been a Simeon and Levi, brethren together in sin, shall now for ever share
alike in punishment and torment. When a man has done some foul and shameful
fact, we use to say of such a man, he will never be able to show his face
again. How then will many a vile and desperate sinner, show his face before God
at that day? How careful then ought we to be, to keep our Vessels in
holiness and honor? This is that very Use the Apostle Peter makes of this
Doctrine of our Resurrection, Seeing all these things shall be dissolved, what
manner of persons ought we to be? Paul professing the hope of the Resurrection,
I exercise my self (says he) to have a clear conscience before God and all
men, Acts 24.
void of offense. And of Jerome it is said, that whatsoever he did, he thought
he heard this voice, Arise ye dead and come to judgment.

Return again ye sons of Adam.
MOSES, as he has showed be fore, that our lives are in Gods hand, and at his
disposing, and that at his will and pleasure he can turn man to destruction, to
dust and rottenness.

He adds also another cause of man's frailty and mortality, and that is the
nature, composition, and frame of man's body, which is of it self very frail
and brittle, subject to mortality.

For the first word Man, thou turnest Man to destruction, signifies a man full
of misery, full of sicknesses and infirmities, a miserable man, Enosh. And the
other word here used in the end of the verse, signifies a man made of Clay, or
of the very slime of the earth.

From hence we learn what is the nature of all men, Man a piece of living clay.
of all the sons of Adam, viz. A piece of living Clay, a little piece of red
Earth. And besides that man is subject to breaking and crushing, every way a
miserable man; so is he of a brittle mould, a piece of red clay, that has in
it for a time a living soul, which must return to God that gave it; and the
body, this piece of earth, return to the earth from whence it came: And if we
had no Scripture at all to prove this, daily experience before our eyes, makes
it clear, how all men, even the wisest the strongest, the greatest and the
mightiest Monarchs, and Princes in the world, be but miserable men, made of red
earth, and quickly turn again to dust: In his first Creation, Genesis 27.
God made man of the dust of the earth. And this is it the Lord pronounced of
all mankind, Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return. This Job knew
well, and therefore said, I shall say to corruption, thou art my Father, and to
the worm, thou art my Mother. And to this agrees that of the Psalmist. Psalm.
49.19.
Man shall enter into the generation of his fathers, and they shall not live
for ever. Psalm. 89.
And, What man lives, and shall not see death? And, Shall he deliver his soul
from the hand of the grave? And, How dies the wise man as the fool? Eccles.
2.16.
q.d. They are both made of one matter, and are both subject to death alike.
Deuteronomy. 34.
And Moses the servant of the Lord died in the land of Moab, according to the
Word of the Lord. It was not Moses greatness, nor Moses goodness, that could
free him from the stroke of death. For the Reasons, see the second Doctrine of
this Verse. The Uses follow.

Seeing this is the estate of all the sons of Adam, subject to misery,

What madness and folly then is it to make such account of this poor earthly
Tabernacle, as though it should last for ever, which at the best is but an
earthly Pitcher, which though it go often to the water, yet at last comes
broken home a House made up of mud-walls, which daily threatens ruin. This
shows the fondness, the vanity and folly, that is in men and women, that
bestow so much time in painting in decking and trimming this poor carcass of
clay, that we know not how soon will to the dust.

Let such proud Peacocks, and painted Tombs know, they are at the best but a
piece of red clay, subject daily to breaking and crushing. An hours ficknesse
will shake the Walls of thy House, turn thy beauty into deformity, and thy
strength into weakness: But rather let us deck our inward man with the graces
of the Spirit, because that beauty will last for ever, that beauty cannot fade
with years, or sickness, or miseries, in the world, but will endure for ever
in life and death.

Secondly,

This may teach us to make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of
it; for who will bestow much cost upon that he shall enjoy but a short time?

Will a Tenant for a year build, and plant, and lay out much cost, and be it
much pains upon that, he must so suddenly part withal? No, he will provide for
a more certain term. Where are our hearts Christians, and where are our
thoughts, that we mind no more our short stay here in this world, and provide
no better for an everlasting habitation?

We cannot assure our selves to continue here a year, but are at an hours
warning, nay, it may be not so much. Whenever it pleases the King to bid
them stay that run at Tilt, either in the entrance, or at the middle of the
race, then he must come again. Even so it is with us; we have a short race to
run here, and when the Lord shall say, Return thou son of Adam, we must yield,
and away we must.

And therefore seeing that we are at this pass; it stands us in hand to be
prepared, and to be in a continual readiness, lest death take us tardy; and
so as death leaves us, so shall the last judgment find us.

If a man be charged to be ready for any service, upon pain of death, at an
hours warning, he will be sure not to be out of the way, but always in
treadinesse. Well let us know, we are at less than an hours warning, for
whenever the Lord shall but say Return, away we must, whether prepared, or
not prepared death will not stay, O that men were wise, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
then would they remember their latter end, that when the Lord comes, whether
at midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or in the dawning of the day, he may find
us so doing.

Ver. 4. For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday, when it is
past as a Watch in the Night.
IN this Verse, Moses proceeds to a farther description of the frailty of man's
life.

And whereas our corrupt nature is such, that we are ready to think, we shall
never die, or not yet, or not for many years, though we see daily before our
eyes, such as are young and strong go before us; yet cannot men easily be
persuaded, that their life is so short, as indeed it is.

Now Moses comes to show, that even the longest life, any man lives or years
that he can attain unto, is but a short life, and very uncertain. He supposes
thus; Suppose that a man should attain to live a Thousand years, which no man
ever did as yet attain unto; no the longest life that we read of in the Word,
is but nine hundred sixty nine years that Methusalah lived. But suppose, says
he, Genesis 5.27.
that a man might live a thousand years, alas, what is the space of a thousand
years, if we compare it to the eternity of God, it is but as a day when it is
past.

Now by this proportion, let us mark how short the life of man is. A thousand
years is but as a day, then what is the ordinary life of man, which is but
sixty years, or eighty years, surely it is not an hour, a poor time to brag
of as many do.

And in the end of this Verse, as though Moses had said too much, and pointed
our the life of man too long, he seems to correct himself, q. d. What, said
I, that the life of man is as yesterday, when it is past? Nay, I say, It is but
as a watch in the night.

Now a Watch was but the space of three hours, Luke 12.38.
the night being divided into four Watches, every Watch had three hours, but a
short time.

And thus Moses, to beat down the pride of our hearts, and those overweaning
thoughts of long life, leads us to God, the number of whose years (says Job)
cannot be known. Job 36.26.
That when we consider that eternity t^a^ is in him, and that everlastingnesse,
that has neither time nor bounds in God: this, compared with the frail, short,
and transitory life of man, is but as a watch of those hours, a time not to be
accounted of. The Point is,

That when we look into Gods Eternity, Our life short, being compared to
eternity.
our life is nothing. Eternity is one of Gods Essential properties, by the
which is signified, that he is without beginning and ending: as he had no
beginning in respect of time, but being more ancient than time, so is more
lasting than to have an end; for eternity altogether excludes time. Thou art
the same, Heb. 1.12 1 Timothy 1.17. Ps. 102.27.
and thy years shall not fail. Now to the King eternal, immortal, etc. Thou
art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

Now when we look upon this eternity of God and compare it with the short inch
of time of man's life, there is no comparison, our life is nothing, we are but
as yesterday, or rather as a watch in the night, as the space of three hours,
so quickly is our glass run, and our time spent.

And to weed out of our hearts this vain conceit and hope of long life, the
Holy Ghost in Scripture, does usually compare these lives of ours, to things
that are of a very short continuance:

As to to a Weavers shuttle, Job 7.6.
My days (says Job) are swifter than a Weavers shuttle.

To the measure of a Span, Ps. 39.5.
Behold thou have made my days as a span long, quickly measured, My age is
nothing unto thee.

To a Vapor, that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes away.
What is your life, Iam. 4.14.
is it not as a vapor?

To a Shadow, Ps. 144.4.
Man is like to vanity, his days are as a shadow, that passes away.

To a Dream, which vanishes, Job 20.8.
as soon as a man awaketh.

To a Post, Job 9.25.
which passes by in all have, and is speedily gone.

To a Cloud that is suddenly blown away with the wind.

Yea, such is the vanity of man's life that a very heathen man could call it a
Shadow, or a Dream; yea, thought not that expression sufficient to express it,
but called it, a dream of a shadow, especially when we compare it with God, it
is a flat nothing to eternity.

The consideration whereof should serve to wean us from the world, If ye be
risen with Christ (says Paul) seek those things which are above, things that
are not transitory, nor bounded within the limits of time. What earthly things
are there: that now we enjoy, but as they had their beginning in time, so shall
they perish in time. But it is God that is eternal, and shall endure for ever,
and and he has provided for us more durable riches even an everlasting
habitation in Eternity also.

Seeing that when we look into this Eternity of God,

For a thousand years in thy sight are but etc.
MOSES by this expression of his, that our life is but of a yesterda^es
standing, and but as a watch in the night, a time of three hours: and in the
Verses following, where he compares our life to a sleep, to grass, that
suddenly is cut down; to a ta^e that is told; and that death many times comes
as a violent flood, suddenly, and unresistably, all tend to this, to show the
shortness and uncertainty of man's life and being here; and herein will teach
us:

That man's life is short: Man's life is short.
a Lesson hardly learned of us, and not easily taken out; all that we can say,
with all our reasons and arguments that we can bring to the contrary, men will
not be convinced that their time is so short, but men think they shall live
this year, and the next year, and so a hundred years, till at last death come,
and seize upon them, and away they must. M^ses uses many arguments and reasons
in this Psalm, to convince us of this, that our life is but short, and to
imprint this useful Lesson in our minds. Though men be young and strong, and
may promise to themselves many days, yet the very frame and constitution of
our bodies, threatens daily a change. So true is that of Job, Job 14.1, 2.
Man that is born of a woman i^ is of short continuance, his days are few, and
full of trouble, he flies as a shadow, and continues not: and as Saint Peter
has it, All flesh is grass, and the glory of man as the flower of grass; the
grass withers, and the flower fades away. Some fall by fire, as the
Sodomites did, Genesis 19. Genesis 19.
Some by water, as the old World did, Genesis 7.4. Genesis 7.4 Number. 16. Acts 12.23. 2
Reg. 19.35.
some by the opening of the earth, as Corah and his company: some eaten up of
worms, as Herod was; some by the stroke of an Angel, as the Host of Senacherib
were; some by cruel Bears, as those children that m^^ked the Prophet.

Yea, and sometimes God can make the means and instruments, ordained by him to
preserve life, to be the means to take away life.

Besides, the daily experience we see in the world, how suddenly are many
swept away by death, some good, some bad, some young, some old, and such as
have not one hours respite given them to repent, or to prepare themselves for
death. Now what assurance have any of us, that God will deal otherwise with us,
seeing our life is but a puff of breath in our Nostrills? there is then no
trusting to it.

And surely this condemns the immoderate, Job, Job 1.18.
feasting together in their elder Brothers house, which in a moment were slain,
and not one escaped? It is wonderful to think how exceedingly men cark and
care for the world, and seek to join house to house, and land to land, and
never think they have enough. O, did these men but consider, that man's life is
short, that we have but our being here as a Guest in his Inn, for a night, and
in the morning must away again: then would we not have our hearts so taken up
for this short, frail, and brittle life, and be so careless for Eternity.

As lastly, since our life is so short, as yesterday that is past, this should
persuade us to a constant preparation for death, for men shall hardly die well,
that be not prepared for death, before death come. It was the great
commendation of Joseph of Arimathea, Joh. 19.42.
that was so mindful of his end, that he had his Tomb ready in his Garden: And
why in his Garden? but that in the midst of all his pleasure and delight, he
might be put in mind of his end. And the people, when they ate the Passover,
Exodus 12.11.
they must have their loins girt, their shoes on their feet, etc. and why so?
but that they should be in a continual readiness, when God should call them,
to pass out of Egypt, to go into the land of Canaan.

And this spiritual use ought every man to make thereof, always to be in a
readiness for our passage into our Celestial Canaan.

Ver. 5, 6. Thou carriest them away as with a flood, they are as sleep; in the
morning they are as grass which grows up, in the evening it is cut down, and
withers.
IN this Verse likewise, Moses proceeds to set out before our eyes, the frailty
of man's life.

And this he does by sundry borrowed speeches and similitudes.

1. He says, the Lord comes by death, as it were by a mighty Flood, that
sweeps away all before it. 2. As a Dream, that is quickly gone and forgotten.
3. He compares man's life to the Grass, and shows, that as the Grass has a
time of growing, so has it a time of withering: So man, when he is young and
lusty, it is the best time of grouth; yet it must have a time of withering when
age comes, and God cuts them down by the since of death.
Thou carriest them away as with a flood.
HEre Moses first of all shows that the Lord comes many times by death as a
Flood, or as the Sea, when it breaks through the banks: And herein will teach
us two things; 1. That death is inevitable, there is no resisting of it, no
more then a man can stop the course of the Sea. 2. That death many times comes
suddenly, as the breakings in of the Sea, when men are not ware, or think
least of it.


Thou carriest them away as with a flood.
NO; we hence. That death; Death is (...)
the Sea, there is no withstanding of it, or stopping the course of it: so
there is no weapon can defend a man from the stroke of death.

And this Flood, sooner or latter, overflowes all men, without exception, as
Noah's flood overflowed the whole earth. It is appointed for all men once to
die, Heb. 9.27.
daily experience makes it clear: the mighty Captains, and noble Warriors,
yea, those famous Kings, and greatest Monarchs that have been in the world,
even those that lived longest, as Methuselah, that lived nine hundred sixty
nine years, Genesis 5.27.
yet at last were overflowed with this Flood of death: This is the way of all
flesh, all the sons of Adam must tack about, and wind, and come into this
Haven the Port of death: Let men use all the skill they can, take the best
Physic they can get, use the sparest diet, and surest ways and means of
preserving health, and lengthning out their life and days. Death at last
overflowes them all. How violently does Death, as a Flood, break in upon us,
sometimes by violent Fevers, which many times cause distractions and frenzies;
sometimes by the Stranguary, and sometimes by one violent disease, and
sometimes by another, that like a violent Flood breaks in upon us, that
overflowes Nature, and sweeps us away.

As it is with the fruits of the earth, so it is with men; some of a harder
kind will tarry till winter; Others fall sooner; some stay till the frost of
old age nip them; David and Ichosophat died full of days: And some again
Death nips them as it were in the blossom, as David's Child, borne of her that
was the wife of Vriah, yet at last Death sweeps all away.

And the Reason seems to be laid down in that confession of the lamenting
Church; Lam. 3.43, 44.
we have sinned and thou have not spared, thou have Covered us with thy wrath
thou have slain and not spared. The Church acknowledges there, that it was by
reason of their sins that Gods hand was thus upon them. And Death the Apostle
makes the wages and stipend of sin. To. 6.23.
The wages of sin is Death. And the Appostle reproving the Corinthians for
diverse abuses crept in about the Sacrament; 1 Cor. 11.30. Ps. 38.3.
says, for this cause some are sick and some ar^ weak amongst you, and some
are taken away by Death.

Seeing Death comes many times thus like a violent flood, All things happen
alike to all. Eccles. 9.1, 2.
And No man knows love or hatred of all that is before them. There is no
judging then of men's estate by these things. Death comes many times violently
and sweeps us away as with a Flood.

Seeing that Death many times like a violent Flood breaks in upon us,
unresistably, what cause then have any to be proud of any outward excellency of
body or mind, that is subject daily to such a change, as Riches, Beauty,
Strength, honor Authority, etc. Especially if we do but consider that the
foundation of that Excellency is but dust a frail body subject daily to
mutabilitie and change, that we have no assurance to jnioy no not an hours
space; How suddenly may this Flood break in upon us, and what becoms of them
then?

Does not Experience teach us, how few there are that pass through this
pilgrimage of theirs; but meet with unexpected accidents in their way, our life
being like a lighted candle, which wastes with the wind, and is often blown
out before it be burned.

How many griefs, and how many cares, and fears, are we daily pestered
withal, that help to waste the spirits of mer: we are like unto him that stepped
upon the stage, and presently went down again; as if he came thither of
purpose to show himself and no more: so many steps upon the stage of this
world and act little, but down again.

And though men should be so happy as to be freed from outward Miseries (which
few are.) Yet we continually carry death in our Bosoms, for look how many
infirmities this frail Natures of ours are subject unto, so many secret Enemies
we harbor within us, to provide for Death; yea every crum of bread that goes
awrie is ready to make a breach for Death to enter in at. In a word, be we at
sea, or on land, be we in City, or Country, at home, or abroad, waking or
sleeping, we are still in danger, that Death like a violent Flood may break in
upon us, we are here never at one stay, but in the midst of life we be in Death.

So often then as this Corrupt nature of ours shall stir us up to pride, because
of Beauty Riches, strength etc. O let these thoughts humble us, these flowers
every day wither apace. The root is dead already. The body is dead because of
Sin. There is a worm at the root, as there was at the root of Jonahs Gourd;
all our earthly felicities are feeding a pace, we know not how soon Death,
like a violent Flood will break in upon us, and put an end to them all.

Thus for the first, that Death is inevitable, there is no resisting of it, it
breaks in upon us as a violent Flood.

Thou Carriest them away as with a Flood.
MOses in these words will likewise intimate unto us, that as Death comes
violently and unresistably as a Flood: Flood. Death comes suddenly.
Many times when men are not aware nor think not of it, then Death coms and
takes them tardy: And no doubt this was Christ's intent and meaning, when he
says; Mat. 25.6.
At midnight there was a cry made, to show unto the world, that his coming by
Death, and judgment will be in an Hour, when men will not think of it, that so
we might expect him every day, and every hour; You know not the day, nor the
hour, Man. 24.42.
when the Son of man comes. It is sufficient for us to know that come he will,
and that his coming shall be at such a time when men least of all expect it,
Mat. 24.26.
and as he says, In the hour that ye think not will the Son of man come. And
upon this very ground, the uncertaintie of the time when Christ shall call us,
is that watchword given, what J say unto you I say unto al watch. Mat. 13.
And Behold, I come as a thief in the Night, Rev. 16.15.
Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his garments. I confess these places
of Scripture are principally meant of Christ's second coming to judgment, yet
are they true also in this sense of his coming by death. When a Thief has a
purpose to do mischief, he makes choice of the night, when men are asleep, and
so comes unawares, when men are not prepared for resistance. Such will the time
of Death and the last judgment be. And upon this ground, Christ grounds that
exhortation of his, to have our loins girded, and our light burning, that we
may be always ready. And certainly, when men are most secure, then is death
nearest at hand, as it was with that rich man, that promised to himself many
years, Luke 12.
had that night his soul taken from him. And when men shall say, peace, peace,
then shall sudden destruction shall come upon them. And besides these clear
examples and testimonies in the Word, that show the coming of death to be
sudden and unexpected, our own experience and observation, daily before our
eyes does declare this truth: How many have gone well to bed at night, that
have been dead ere the morning? some at bed, and some at board, some at home,
and some abroad, death has met them, and suddenly surprised them; and when he
comes, he will have no nay.

The point then is clear and plain that as death comes as a Flood, and there is
no resistance; so as a Flood, death comes suddenly, when men think least of it.

But why will the Lord have the time of death thus uncertain to us.?

Many may be the Reasons wherefore God will not have this day and time known
unto us.

That not knowing the set day and hour, Watch (says Christ) for you know not
what hour the Master of the house comes whether at midnight, etc.

Secondly,

And this serves for the just reproof of the great security,

This was the sin of the old world in the days of Noah, that were so drowned
in their own pleasures, that they would not believe a drowning by a flood, till
the flood came and swept them clean away.

And this is the great sin of this world, and times wherein we live, upon whom
the ends of the world are come. The deadness of heart, and carnal security,
the little laying of Gods judgments to heart, the overflowings of sin in all
sorts and conditions of men, are certain precursors and forerunners, that the
Lord is at hand, either with some sorer vengeance to awake us, or by putting a
speedy end to all things.

But the main use that we are to make of this Point, Flood. It should teach us
this wisdom, at all times to be in a readiness, and prepared, when death
comes: Upon this ground Christ admonishes his Disciples and us all to
watchfulness, because the day and hour knows no man.

But I hope I shall have time to prepare for death,

1. Flood, when men think least of all on death. Alas, do we not see, that on
the Stage of this world, some therebe, that indeed do act a longer part, and
many there be that act a shorter: some die in their youth, passing as it were
from one grave to another, from their Mothers womb, to another womb, the earth:
How few live to the age of fifty? How many do we hear of daily, that go well
to bed at night, and are found dead in the morning? And why may not this be thy
case?

Secondly, consider,

Thirdly, do but consider, understanding about thee, and thy godly friends and
acquaintance about thee, that can exhort thee, and pray for thee: Alas how
know thou, whether God will hear thee at this time of thy death, that
would not hear him in the time of thy life. Nay, is it not distributive
justice now in God, to refuse to hear thee then, that refusest to hear him now?
It is not usual with God to give grace in death, who have despised grace in
life. See that place, and tremble at it, Prove. 1.24, 25. etc.
Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and ye
have not regarded, I will laugh at your destruction, etc. Besides, thou do
but offer up unto God the Halt, Mal. 1.8.
the Blind, and the Lame, which is abomination to him. It is a most base and
unworthy thing to offer that to God, which a man would disdain and scorn to
accept of.

But I hope God is merciful,

It is true, thou may say it, for it is his mercy, that thou have not been
long ago consumed that God has not cut thee off, and cast thee into Hell many
years ago; it is true, it is his mercy. But alas what is this to thee, that
have so long, and so often abused his mercy? Is God merciful? the more
unthankful wretch thou, to sin against so merciful a God, To. 2.4.
Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long
suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads to repentance? Shall
God be contemned for his mercy, Ps. 145.9.
that ought the more to be loved and respected? There is mercy with thee that
thou may be feared. If God be so merciful, the greater the sin, to sin
against it.

And let such men know, that presume thus of Gods mercy, that as he is
merciful, so is he just: as he has his Arms of mercy spread open to receive
poor penitents, so is Hells mouth wide open to receive the impenitent And how
know thou, that have despised grace and mercy so often, and so long a time,
but thou may at last die in a Spira's case, who, in the time of his
sickness, being exhorted to say the Lords Prayer, answered, O, I dare not call
God Father.

And this has been an observation I have made these forty years, that such as
have lived under a godly, zealous, and faithful Ministry, and have not been
wrought upon; it is often found true of such, as was said of Nabal, their
hearts die like stones within them. What little cause then have any to harden
their hearts, and continue in their sins in hope of mercy?

But did not the Thief upon the Cross at last confessing his sin,

Though men have much ingorance in them of the Scripture,

Whereas this example (as one says) is to keep us from desperation, and is no
cloak to sin: Why should not the desperate condition of his fellow Thief that
dyed with him, as much affright us, and terrify us, as his example comfort us?

And for this example of this penitent Thief, we are to know, that it was an
immediate act of the divine power of Christ, and it was not ordinary neither
does it prove that God will deal thus with thee.

It was not ordinary, because he was saved without means: but what was that to
thee, that enjoyest the means.

Besides, one particular act of Gods power, goodness, and mercy can be no rule
to go by.

The Sun once stood still at noonday in Joshuah's time; we must not look to see
it so again. Balaam's Ass once spoke, we must not look for the like any more.
Besides, for ought we know, this was the time that he was first called: Now
what is that to thee, that have been often called; God has often knocked at
the door of thy heart, and to this day thou have not opened unto him. Besides,
this penitent Thief at this time, showed many excellent fruits of his
repentance.

1 Rebuking his fellow railing at Christ. 2. Confessing his sin. 3. And by
making an excellent Prayer to Christ.
Now who can promise these things to himself, when he comes to die?

O then, to conclude, seeing this is so, that death comes as a flood, suddenly,
and unexpectedly, when men are not aware, let it be our wisdom to be in a
continual readiness, that death find us not unprepared: There is nothing
more certain then death, nor more uncertain then where, when, and how we shall
die.

They are as a sleep.
IN these words, lest Moses should seem to undermine and weaken the Doctrine of
the Resurrection by comparing death to a Flood, whereby men are overwhelmed in
the Grave.

In these words, he mitigates that speech, in comparing Death to a Sleep, that
even as a man lying down to sleep, though he seems to be dead for the present,
yet ere it be long awakes again: Even so, though death seems as a Flood to
over-whelm us, and drown us in the Grave, yet ere it be long, at the day of
Judgment we shall awake, and rise again.

From this allusion, the point observable is

That death is a sleep; Death is a sleep. Es. 57.2.
And thus the Scriptures resemble the Grave to a Bed, and Death to a Sleep, He
shall enter into peace, and they shall rest in their beds, every one that
walks before the Lord in righteousness. And this thing holy Job speaks of
himself, Job 7.21.
Now I shall sleep in the dust, and thou shall seek me in the morning, and I
shall not be. And this is said of David, 1 Reg. 2.10.
that he slept with his Fathers. And thus Daniel, speaking of the last
judgment, Dan. 12.2.
Many that sleep in the dust, shall awake to life eternal. And this Christ
says of Lazarus, Ioh. 11. Mat. 9.24.
Lazarus is not dead but sleeps.

And Paul comforting the Thessalonians, for their dead says, 1 These. 4.13.
Brethren, I would not have you ignorant concerning those that sleep in the
Lord. So that you see the phrase is very usual in the Scripture to compare
death to a sleep.

And the Reasons of this resemblance may be these.

The first may be taken from the nature of sleep, rest from their labors: Both
the souls and bodies of the Saints by death are set free from them all. Rev.
14.13.


Secondly, No less sweet and comfortable is the grave to the bodies of the
Saints; these rest in peace as on a bed of down such sleep sweetly and safely,
until the morning of the Resurrection, when they shall arise again: Psalm.
17.15.
When I awake up (says David) I shall be refreshed with thy Image.

Thirdly, Arise ye dead, and come unto judgment, to raise up the dead that are
asleep in their graves.

This may serve for matter of singular comfort and consolation unto the godly,
all believers; Job calls the King of fear, and the Grave, which is the chamber
and house of death, dreadful in their own nature, should thus have their
nature altered and changed, that they should become so comfortable and
beneficial unto them, to become a place of sweet repose and rest.

That soul that has made its peace with God, may with much comfort look death
in the face, and say with Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in
peace. Such blessed souls rest with God, and die in peace, and may commend
their souls to God, as to a faithful Creator. See the boldness and confidence
of the blessed Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.7, 8.
I have fought the good fight, I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid
up for me a Crown of righteousness.

But whence have the godly this boldness and confidence in death?

This thing so comes to pass through the death of Christ, and plucked out the
sting of them, 1 Cor. 15.54. Heb. 2.14, 15.
Death is swallowed up of victory: And that by death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is, the Devil; and deliver them, who through fear
of death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage.

So that death, as a curse, was laid upon Christ, that our death might be
blessed unto us.

So that it is by Christ, and his death that the sting of death is plucked out,
and that our Graves become a bed of rest unto us.

Secondly, To. 14.8.
That whether we live or die, we are the Lords.

Secondly this lets us see the misery of all wicked and ungodly men,
Resurrection, to be joined again to their souls, that both together may be sent
into utter darkness.

The godly and wicked in death may well be resembled to Pharaoh's Butler and
Baker: Both go to Prison, one is restored to serve his Master, the other
reserved for execution.

Is death a sleep? God rest his soul, and Gods peace be with him, etc. a gross
absurdity: and howsoever a common conceit in time of Popery, and times of
ignorance, yet in the times of the Cospell, utterly to be abandoned.

And last of all, John 11.
Parents, Children, etc. Thy Brother (says Christ to Mary) shall rise again:
So shall they. What though they taste of corruption, they shall not perish in
corruption. They go to their graves, but as to a bed, there to rest for a time,
till the morning of the Resurrection come. Now who would not be glad of rest,
after some sore labor and travail? They that die in the Lord, Rest from their
labors. Rev. 14.13. 1 Thessalonians. 4.18.
Let us comfort one another in these things.

Others take the words thus.

Thou over flowest them, and they become as a dream. All is to one effect, both
point out the mavelous frail estate of man, that as a Dream does vanish away
presently: Even so man is gone in the twinkling of an eye and in the turning of
a hand, To day a man, to morrow none. But even a piece of Clay, to day living
dust, to morrow dying dust.

Which should teach us the same lesson, never to be unprepared,

But we pass that, and come to the third similitude.

In the morning they are as grass which grows up;
IN this last similitude, the Prophet compares Man to Grass, that as Grass
has a time of growing, and a time of withering; even so man is like unto
Grass, for he has also a time of growing, and a time of withering.

In the morning they are as grass which grows up. In which words, Moses
compares the former part of man's life, which is the space of thirty three
years, to the time of growing of Grass, and that is accounted the time of the
perfection of man's strength and age; at which age, according to the course of
Nature, Man flourishes as Grass does; that is the time of a man's prime and
flourishing estate.

But in the Evening: That is when the Grass is ripe, and ready to be cut down,
It withers. Even so Man, being once at his strength, and ripest age, does not
stand at a stay, nor continues long so; but presently begins to decay, and to
wither away, till old age come, and he is cut down by the Sith of death.

Now in that Moses uses so many similitudes, and all to show how frail this
life of man is, we are taught:

That the frailty, vanity, The life of man so frail, as no exam ples can
express.
as examples will scarcely show it. Death comes as a Flood, violently and
suddenly; we are as a Sleep; we are as Grass; our life is like a Dream; we
spend our days as a Tale that is told, verse 9 All these similitudes Moses
has in this Psalm, as if he wanted words and examples; how to express the
vanity, frailty, and shortness thereof.

The similitudes used in the Scriptures, to express the frailty, vanity, and
brevity of man's life, are very many, and very significant.

When Pharaoh asked old Jacob of his age, he answers him thus, Genesis
Few and evil have the days of my pilgrimage been: Now a pilgrimage is not
long in traveling, till we come to our journeys end.

It is compared to the days of an Hireling, Job 7.1.
Are not my days (says Job) as the days of an hireling, which commonly are
but few, and withal full of labor. Job 20.8.
To a Dream, He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not bfound; he shall be
chased away as a vision in the night. Job 8.9.
But as Yesterday to a Post, Job 8.26.
My days (says Job) are swifter then a Post, they fly away, they see no
good. They are passed away (says he) as the swift Ships, as the Eagle that
hastes to the prey.

David compares our life to a Shadow, 1 Chr. 29.15.
Our days on earth are as a Shadow, and there is no abiding. A shadow, we
know, has no substance in it, and is of no long continuance. It is compared to
a Vapeur, Iam. 4.14 Job 7.6.
to a Cloud, sudenly scattered by the wind. And in a word, to shut up all, and
in it to include all, Ps. 62.2.
our life is called vanity, The children of men are vanity, lay them in a
balance, they are lighter then vanity it self.

And besides this, that our life is so frail short, and vain, this very short
time that we continue here, is subject to diversity of changes, and alterations
of estates, as prosperity at some times, so adversity at other times; as health
now, so sickness then, sometimes ease, sometimes pain; sometimes we are full,
at another time we want. We have but one way to come into the world, we have
many ways to go out, sometimes by a violent death, and by such ficknesses and
diseases many times, as are loathsome, both to the Eyes to behold, and the
Nostrills to smell: and when breath is once departed, so loathsome are these
Carcases of ours, that we dispatch them presently to the Grave out of sight; as
Abraham did the body of Sarah his Wife, whom living, he loved most dearly.

The Prophet Esaias has an excellent expression to this purpose, to show the
frailty and vanity of man; Es. 40.6.
The voice said Cry: and he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and
the glory thereof as the flower of the field;

Where the Prophet shows, that all those excellencies, wherein we glory so
much, as Beauty, Riches, Honor Strength, Carnal pleasures, etc. these are
all but as the flowers of grass, which suddenly decay, wither, and fall away.

What is Beauty, Beautic.
but as one of these flowers of the field, how suddenly is it nipt and gone,
blasted on a sudden? a days sickness much abates it, a weeks sickness does
quite deface it; at least wise, Time, that rust of all things steals it quite
away, and so this flower is gone.

Honor, Honor.
another flower of this field, how many worms lie at the root of it? and how
many East winds often blow it upon, that causes it to wither, as Jona's Gourd?
How is the Crown withered this day, and how many Noble Houses are tumbled down?
The envy of the ambitious are still undermining it: Besides, the danger that
Envy and Malice exposes Honor daily unto, that this flower often fades.

Riches, Riches.
another flower of this fleld: How often do riches change their Masters? He
that at one time abounded, at another time wants. Lands and Possessions, this
year in the possession of one, the next year in the possession of another.
Riches require pains to get them, care to keep them, and have their vexation to
part with them. They are of a flowing nature like water; they have their wings,
and many times of a sudden fly away: Physic, Lawsuits, Fire, Water, and the
like, are the moths that still consume them. This flower fades away.

What shall we say to strength which is another flower of this field, Strength
How suddenly does this flower fall away? How short a time does this remain
and abide with us? the Agilitie and activitie of man's body is not to be gloried
in, that lasts so short a time: A few fits of an Ague, Fever or other disease,
abates it suddenly; and brings it down: that it is turned to weakness. And
therefore says the Lord, Ier. 9.23.
let not the strong man rejoice in his strength. As Elihu said unto Job. Job
36.19.
The Lord regards not them that excel in strength. The strength of the
strongest, by sickness is weakened, as soon many times as it comes, it takes
its leave and is gone, this flower fades.

And lastly pleasures, Pleasures
these are one of the goodly flowers of man's life. He that gave way to his own
heart, and drunk his fill of all earthly Contentments, and delights, gives in
his verdict that all was vanity and vexation of Spirit, they vanish in the use.
The enjoying of one pleasure is but a lusting after another, and he that
enjoys most, has no satietie in them. How suddenly does the pleasure of
Eating and Drinking vanish away?

The pleasures of sports, and pastimes, they end in a moment. Music is past
and gone in the very hearing; the most delectable plays and shows that most
affect us are gone in a moment. So that of all earthly Comforts and
Contentments, this may be said, and concluded of them all they are but as
grass, or at the best, but as the flower of the field that quickly fades, and
falls away: And the Reasons are.

In Regard of the uncertaintie of our lives that now possess them: long
continue with them, though they might sometime Continue with us, we have bodies
that have in them the Seeds of sickness, Diseases, and Death it self, we are
but as grass, and all our earthly comforts, but as the flower of the field;
which quickly vanish, and fade away.

As we our selves art but as grass. flower of the field, of a withering and
fading Nature. There is nothing here below that is not subject to mutabilitie
and change.

Yea the very Heavens themselves are not freed from Alterations, the Sun and
the Moon, have their eclipses, kingdoms and states have their wanes. The Crown
lasts not from generation to generation, no man is to day that he was
yesterday. Our Bodies, and our estates do daily show, that we are but as
grass; And all our glory and excellencies, but as the flower of the field.

Seeing then that the life of man is so frail as no example can express it.
interest, we have both in our selves, and in what we possess. All flesh is
grass, that is our condition And the glory of man, that is, all his outward
excellencies. But as the flower of the field, that is their condition, why then
should we set our affections on the earth, or on any thing that is here below,
since our life is so momentany, and the things of this life so transitory? We
should rather take out the lesson of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.31.
to use the world as though we used it not, to buy as though we possessed not,
because the fashion of the World passes away.

It was the great Comendation of those primitive Christians, that they lived
here, Heb. 11.
but as pilgrims and strangers, and sought a City having a foundation whose
maker and builder was God.

It shall be our wisdom to look out for a more sure, 1 Pet. 1.3
and certain estate, and such as shall never decay nor change, even that
kingdom that is immortal and fades not away God never gave us these earthly
Cottages to that end our hearts should be so taken up with them. So as to
neglect our seeking after a more durable inheritance.

What wise traveller will loyter and sit still in his way, because he is in a
fair Inn, or take any great Contentment, while he stays; Since his stay is
but short, for a night, and the next day he must leave all, and come to a
reckoning for that short time. Here is our case; we are in ourjourny, the world
is our Inn; we have but a short time to stay in it, away we must, we know not
how soon, and we must be called to a reckoning for the time of our being here.

Secondly, seeing our life is so short, day that is past, to a Flood, to Sleep,
to Grass, which suddenly grows up and as suddenly is cut down; to a Flower
of the field, to a Tale that is told, yea, to vanity it self. O then, how does
it concern every one of us, as we tender the everlasting welfare of our souls,
to provide for eternity, and that life, that shall never give place to death.
Let us consider, that as our life is short, so it is uncertain. What assurance
have we, when we arise in the morning, that we shall live till night, or when
we go to bed, that we shall rise again?

Stewards we are here on earth, and we do not know how soon our great Master
will call us to an account; we should lay up, to provide for a certain estate
that shall not fade nor decay.

We know what hapened to that rich man, Luke 12.19, 20.
that said to his soul, Soul, eat, drink, etc. even the same night God said
unto him, Thou fool, this night shall they take thy soul from thee. This day is
ours, wherein the Lord calls upon us to convert, repent, and turn unto him. Now
he knocks, and cries, and calls, how do we know whether he will ever knock
more, cry, or call any more? But that it may be our case, Heb. 12.
that was the case of Esau, who found no place for repentance, though he sought
it with tears.

And lastly seeing Beauty, and all other endowments of Nature, are but as
Grass, and as the Flower of the field, we should esteem of them as they are,
but as Nosegaies, for the present use, as we do our flowers A Nosegay cannot
long continue, it will quickly fade and then we cast them away. And so far as
they may fit us for Gods service, so to use them, and not to make too high
account of them.

Ver. 7. For we are consumed by thy anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled.
MOSES the man of God, having before showed the common frailty of mankind in
general, that the Lord can, and many times does, take them away suddenly as a
Flood, that they are as a Sleep, and as Grass, that is suddenly cut down and
withered: This being the estate and condition of mankind in general.

In this verse, he comes to apply this unto themselves and shows, that by
reason of their sins, they were in a far worse case and condition then other
Men, and other Nations and People: for their life was not only short, but they
were hastily consumed, by the Plague and Pestilence and other judgments of God
upon them for their sins.

And in the next verse, Moses proceeds to render the cause of this their woeful
misery and distress.

1. The more remote cause, and that was the anger of God, which they had justly
procured by their sins, verse 7. 2. Secondly, by the more near and special
cause, viz. their sins and rebellions, whereby they had drawn down the anger
and wrath of God upon them, verse 8.
For we are consumed in thy anger,
WHence we may first of all observe, how they compare their present estate, now
in the Wilderness, with the estate of other Nations and people, and show, that
their estate was far worse then theirs: for others dyed now one, and then one,
and so they were diminished; but for them, they were hastily consumed, and
suddenly swept away by the Plague and Pestilence, now amongst them. Hence we
may observe first of all.

That it is a ground of humiliation to Gods people, Gods people should be
humbled when it fares worse with them, then with the wicked.
when their estate is worse then Gods enemies.

Moses gathers this, as an argument to humble them, and to move them to
repentance, and to seek unto God; viz. That because of their sins, they were in
a far worse case and condition, then the very enemies of God were.

For though their lives were short, yet they confess, that theirs was far
worse then the very Heathen themfelves, for they were suddenly consumed by his
anger. When God is worse to his own Church and people, then he is to his
enemies: when the Lord shall send Wars in a Nation called by his Name, and
peace in other Kingdoms that are Antichristian; sends famine in his Church,
and plenty to the wicked; sends the Plague and Pestilence in his Church, and
health and prosperity to the wicked. O, here is matter of mourning and
humiliation, and it is that which has touched Gods people to the quick, and
wounded them to the heart, to see the enemies of the Church in better
condition, than the Church it self.

What a grief was it for Godly Jacob to gravail into Egypt, Genesis
to buy corn of the Egyptians, that were the enemies of the Church? What a
grief was it to the Church and people of God, Lam. 5.6.
when they say, We have given the hand to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians,
to be satisfied with bread: They that are our greatest enemies, we have sought
unto them for relief. This was it that was such a trouble to David, Psalm. 73.
to see the wicked prosper, and himself to suffer in distress; David had
almost lost himself, to behold, and to take notice of this.

This must needs be a ground of humiliation to the godly,

Because this is a token of Gods displeasure against his people for their sins,
as it appears, when the Lord threatens them thus, Deuteronomy. 28.43.
The stranger that is within thee shall get above thee, and thou shall come
down very low. And again, He shall lend to thee, and thou shall not lend to
him; ver. 44.
he shall be the Head, and thou shall be the Tail.

This will sin do, make Gods people servants to their very enemies, and the
Lord will set his own people below them.

It is that which makes the enemies of the Church to insult,

This lets us see how great Gods anger and indignation is against sin, Israel
was Gods Church, Israel was Gods chosen one; yet by reason of their sins, their
murmurings, their infidelity, that would not believe in his word, that God
would subdue those cursed Canaanites, and give them their land to inherit, but
feared their strength, their sons of Anack, and their walled Cities, therefore
was the hand of God thus gone out against them, and they perished thus
miserably in the Wilderness. And how severely the Lord has thus punished sin
in his own people, we may likewise see in Moses himself, that because he
honored not God at the waters of strife, the Lord would not suffer him to come
into the land of Canaan. And the like in David: Yea, the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, that had in himself no sin, yet taking our sins upon him, Gods hand
lay most sore upon him. And this should humble us at this time, to consider,
how the Lord has dealt with this Land and Nation, and sent into every corner
of the Land, in every City and Country, yea, almost every Family, the tokens of
his anger and displeasure, this strange and unwented kind of disease amongst
us, that has swept so many away. Besides, how heavy has the hand of God layen
upon the Land by the Sword, Pestilence, unseasonable times, when other Nations
and Countries have been free and yet Gods hand is not removed, but his wrath is
stretched out still.

Secondly,

David speaking of the wicked, Ps. 73.5.
says, They are not in trouble like other men, neither are they plagued like
other folks. Many times God punishes most, when he spares most. It is spoken
as an argument of Gods wrath and indignation against desperate sinners, Es. 1.5.
Wherefore should ye be smitten any more? And again, Hos. 4.14.
I will not visit your Daughters when they play the Harlots, nor your Spouses
when they play the Whores. Was not this a token of Gods wrath and heavy
displeasure that God should thus suffer them to go on in sin?

So on the contrary, great afflictions are not always arguments of a people
cast off of God: How heavy did the hand of God lie upon. Job, Hezekiah, David,
etc. yet dear and precious in Gods fight: so true is that of Solomon, that no
man can judge of Love or haired, Eccl. 9.1.
by all that is before them.

For we are consumed in thy anger.
THere is one thing more yet to be observed hence, Though man's life be short;
yet sin shortens it.
viz. That though the life of man be short of it self, yet it is made far
shorter, than in Nature it is like to be by man's sin, procuring some sudden
and heavy judgment of God upon themselves.

This is that which Moses and the Church confess here, that the life of man is
short of it self, but yet by reason of their sins, their life became more
short; for here they confess, that they were consumed by Gods anger: Number.
14.26, 28.
and so it appears, insomuch as of all that great number that came out of
Egypt being six hundred thousand, besides Children, they dyed all in the
Wilderness, all, save Joshuah and Caleb, above the age of twenty years some by
the Pestilence, some by sudden and fearful fire from Heaven, some swallowed up
of the earth, as Corah Dathan, some killed by fiery Serpents and Scorpions, and
the greatest part by the Plague and Pestilence; so that in the space of forty
years, they were almost all of them consumed.

This example of it self were sufficient to clear this truth, that whereas the
life of man is short of it self, yet our sins many times makes it shorter as
we may see in the old World drowned in the Flood; Corah, Dathan, and Abiram
smallowed up of the earth; Herod eaten up of worms; Saul, Judas, the Children
that mocked the Prophet. Besides, the experience we have in our days of
Drunkards, Whormasters, Thieves, and Traitors, who, by their sins, draw down
Gods judgments upon their heads and shorten their days. As we see the Grass,
though it be left to grow, yet, in time will wither of it self: but, if
suddenly cut down with a Since, it sooner decays. A Leaf, though it hang long
on the Tree yet in the end it will fall of it self: but, by a storm is
suddenly shaken down: Thus it is with men.

It Is true, the sinner in committing of sin, does neither see nor perceive
this, being blinder then Balaam, that saw not the sword drawn before him. But
Satan, that malicious enemy of man's Soul, like deceitful Laban, that gave
Jacob Leab, instead of Rachel: So does Satan deal with the sinner, instead of
profit and pleasure pays the sinner at last with some shameful death, the
just wages and stipend of sin.

Because, Lam. 3.39.
Man suffers for his sin. As the Lord said to Abimelech, Thou art but a dead
man because of this sin; Genesis 20.3.
the taking of Abraham's wife. The wages of sin is death, both Temporal and
Eternal, God has joined them both together, The soul that sins shall die
the death. To. 6.23.


Secondly, long life is promised as the wages of obedience, If ye be willing
and obedient, Es. 1.19.
ye shall eat the good things of the Land. And on the contrary, God often cuts
off the wicked for their disobedience. As a wise Parent will not correct his
child where there is no fault, so will he not spare when he is provoked.
Loathsome sicknesses, foul diseases, and sudden death, are often Gods
revengfull rods, upon vile and wretched sinners.

Seeing the life of man, England become the sink of all those Sects and
Heresies, that ever crept into the Church? And as if these were not enough to
pull down Gods wrath, the Land is guilty of Blood, of Swearing, of Lying, of
Whoring, Sabbath-breaking, contempt of the Word and Ordinances of Christ: with
these, and the like abominations, the Land is defiled, and the Land shall
mourn. Hos. 4.3.
What hope have we to avoid our present judgments this day, and yet live in
those sins that cause them? And how can we think to escape any Plague, so long
as we are guilty of the Plague of sin?

Secondly, The wicked shall not live out half his days, which otherwise, in
the course of Nature, they might attain unto.

But all those miseries whereunto we are subject by reason of sin in this life,
are no way to be compared to those fearful punishments, whereunto the wicked
are reserved after this life, for it is sin that shall shut them for ever out
of heaven. Rev. 22.15.
Without shall be Dogs, etc. And, They that commit such things, shall never
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. 1 Pet. 2.12.
Which made the Apostle so earnestly exhort us, I beseech you, as Strangers and
Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which sight against the soul.

But we are consumed in thy anger.
IN these words, Moses sets down the cause, why they were thus hastily wasted
and consumed in the Wilderness, which he confesses here to be double.

1. The more remote and improper cause, and that was Gods anger in this verse.
2. The nearer and more proper cause, and that was their sins, verse 8. Thou
have set our iniquities before thee, etc.
First cause was Gods Anger, Cause, Gods anger.
which is described by the degrees of it.

1. Anger. 2. Hot anger. 3. Sore displeasure.
But how do Moses and the people gather, that God was so exceedingly angry with
them? But by that manner of death, that they were so suddenly wasted and
consumed, with the Pestilence.

Hence we may observe:

Extraordinary judgments are arguments of Gods anger.
do argue the greatness of Gods Anger: For Moses here inferrs, and concludes,
the greatness of Gods anger and displeasure, by the greatness of their
punishment, that seeing they were so miserably consumed, and so fearfully
plagued, it must needs show the Lord exceedingly provoked by their sins. And
this is that very use the Apostle makes of this their sudden destruction, that
came upon this people, an argument to prove, that God was displeased with them,
1 Cor. 10.5.
With many of them God was not well pleased.

In all extraordinary and strange judgments, which the Lord brings upon us, it
is safe to say to our hearts as the people of God said, Deuteronomy. 31.47.
Are not all these troubles come upon us, because God is not with us. Ruth 1.13.
This use could Naomi make of the death of her two Sons, That the hand of God
was gone out against her.

And this the very Barbarians could conclude of Paul, Act. 28.4.
when the Viper hung on his hand, No doubt this man is a murderer: They
conclude, that it must needs be some great sin, that Paul was guilty of, that
did cause that so sore a judgment.

It was a strange hand of God upon old Eli, 1 Samuel 4.18.
that he should fall and break his neck: And no doubt, his indulgency toward
his children, in their profaneness, was the cause of it. It was no ordinary
death that of the young Prophet, 1 Reg. 13.24.
certainly his sin was the cause of it. That Moses himself must not come into
the Land of Canaan, but only see it, and die in the Land of Moah; surely Moses
his sin shut him out.

And of all that great number that came out of the Land of Egypt, even six
hundred thousand; that all above twenty years, should perish in the
Wilderness, was an undoubted argument, they were guilty of some great sin,
that caused the Lord to be thus angry with them.

are arguments of Gods anger how was it said of the blind man, that lay under
such an extraordinary judgment, as to be born blind, that neither this man
sinned nor his Parents.

The meaning is not, John 9.
but that the work of God might be made manifest in him. Job, though he were a
a godly man indeed, yet Job's sins might justly deserve all his miseries: but
God did not so much look upon his sins, but that he might be a pattern and
example of Faith, Patience, and of other Graces to his Church for ever.

Besides, there be many grounds and causes, wherefore the Lord is pleased many
times to lay his hand and that heavy too, upon his own Children, and such as
are both near and dear unto him.

1. Faith, Patience, Hope, etc.

2.

3.

4.

But since the Lord in his Word has denounced these judgments against us for
our sins, and does not reveal unto us, when he is pleased thus to try us his
secret will and pleasure therein: We are not to pry into his hidden counsels,
but into his will revealed, which is that, Man suffers for his sin. And
howsoever we may err in respect of Gods secret purpose, in sending
afflictions, yet we shall profit thereby, to humble our selves, to justify God
as righteous, to renew our repentance, and hereby become fit for mercy and
deliverance. Whereas in times of affliction and distress, to look upon any
other cause then sin, may hinder our repentance, and cause us to continue in
our wickedness.

Now that great and extraordinary ludgments and afflictions do argue Gods high
displeasure, these Reasons show.

Abraham said to God, Genesis 18.25.
It is far from the Judge of all the World to deal unrighteously. The Lord is
ever most clear in himself from the least stain or mixture of injustice, in
any of his judgments inflicted upon men, Ps. 119.137.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, and true are thy judgments.

Man suffers for his sin. Lam. 3.39.
Miseries and afflictions, yea, all kind of judgments, spiritual and
temporal, are but the sinners harvest that he must look to reap, by sowing the
seeds of sin, Pro 22.8.
He that sows iniquity shall reap affliction, and the rod of his anger shall
fail.

Let us apply this to our selves.

Moses well to gather and conclude the exceeding anger and displeasure of God
against them, by the greatness and grievousnesse of their punishment, that
they were thus hastily, and fearfully, wasted and consumed. Alas then, what may
we think of our selves; how has the hand of God lain heavy upon us in this
Nation! In these later days, the sword has been in the Bowels of the land,
and has drunk much blood in every corner of it; we have had the pestilence
amongst us, what Country has been free? we have had cleanness of teeth, when
many have perished in the open fields, and by the way side for want of bread.
The Lord has made the Heavens as Brass, and the Earth as Iron; that the like
years have not been known. Besides, this strange sickness, that has been
amongst us, whereof few Families have escaped, but some have been either sick,
or weak, or suddenly taken away by Death, that few that are living have
known the like time of sickness and mortality. Now what can we think by all
these messengers of his Anger and wrath, but that God is exceedingly angry, and
displeasedwith us?

Certainly the sins of this Nation, the innocent blood that has been shed the
high contempt of the Gospel, and Mi^listers thereof, the great security,
unfruitfullnesse, and unthankfullnesse of all sorts, may mind us of some
farther judgments yet at hand.

And yet alas, who lays the Lords dealings to heart, to take notice of Gods
Anger, and make but light account of judgments. None consider in heart that the
greatness of Gods judgments is an argument of the greatness of our sins. It
shall be our wisdom to lay Gods judgments to heart, and to meet the Lord by
unfeigned Repentance, lest worser judgments overtake us at last.





No it is not always so, is Angry when he takes men away by Death.

But when he takes them away by such a manner of Death as this people here;
with some strange kind of Death horrible, and fearful, for some sin; as
these people, for their infidelity, murmuring, Rebellion and despising of his
mercy: this is a token of Gods Anger. 1 Cor. 10.10.
Neither murmur ye as some of them murmured, and were destroyed with the
Destroyer.



No. Pilate, to make the Jews odious and their religion hateful, mingled the
blood of certain Galileans with their Sacrifices: here was an unwonted kind of
Death. And so those eighteen upon whom the tower of Silo fell, these dyed not
an ordinary kind of Death. And yet Christ says, that they were not greater
sinners then other men. And many of Gods dear children, and faithful servants,
have dyed strange kinds of death, and none more, then the Son of God himself:
And therefore we may not judge a man out of Gods favor, by the suddenness, or
strangeness of his death; if his life has been good, his death cannot be bad,
Eccles. 9.11.
for as Solomon says, All things happen alike to all.

But now, when we shall see a Man or Woman, whose life has been vile and
profane, a blasphemer, a contemner of grace and godliness, an unclean person,
a drunkard, etc. and see some strange judgment of God upon upon him, to die
some cursed and miserable death, we may say of them thus, Surely this is the
just judgment of God upon him for his sin; as Moses sometimes spoke of Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, Number. 16.
If these men die the common death of all men, then has the Lord not spoken:
So as when they saw them swallowed up of the earth, for their rebellion against
Moses and Aaron, they surely might say, He^e is a spectacle of Gods judgments
for their sins.

And it is good for us to observe Gods dealing amongst our selves, that we
might learn to fear him, lest we be made spectacles of his wrath, as others
have been.

By thy anger, by thy hot anger.
BUt what!

Surely, nothing less,

But the Scriptures thus speak, that God is angry and wrathful, full of
displeasure, etc. for our understanding; as when the Lord does that which men
do, when they are angry, then God seems to be angry.

As when men be angry, they throw about them, lay on load, smite hard, etc. So
when the Lord smites men, lays blow after blow, plague after plague, stroke
after stroke, then he seems to be angry, when he seems not to spare, but one
judgment overtakes another.

Now by Gods anger in the Scripture, Gods anger, what.
we are to understand three things.

First, He that believes not in the Son, John 3.36.
the anger of God abides on him, that is, Gods inward displeasure against the
sin of unbelief, with his purpose to punish it.

Secondly, anger of God is understood those menaces, and threatenings of
punishment against sin, either immediately by Himself, or mediately by his
Prophets and Ministers: as, Hos. 11.9. Psalm. 6.1. Es. 63.6.
I will execute upon Ephraim the fierceness of my wrath: That is, that anger
and wrath that I have threatened.

Thirdly, by the anger of God is signified, the effects of his anger, which
appears in sundry punishments and judgments; and so that place is to be
understood, Ephesians. 5.6.
For such sins comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience; that
is, sundry judgments and punishments, seize upon men for such sins.

And in this third sense and signification, is the anger of God, and his wrath
to be taken here. When Moses complains, that they were consumed in his anger,
he means, by those fearful effects of his anger, as the Plague, Pestilence,
and the other judgments of God upon them for their sins.

Hence we may observe, Man's ignorance of God, great.
who are no whit moved with such speeches, as are agreeable to Gods nature, as
to say, the Lord is just, or, the Lord will punish, or the like.

But he must take upon him such passions as be in our nature, as to say, He is
angry, wrathful, full of displeasure and indignation; and all too little to
move hard-hearted sinners, to fear before him: This shows our gross ignorance
and stupidity in the things of God, that he is fain to descend so low, as to
speak thus to our capacities and understandings, as that he is angry,
wrathful, and full of indignation, otherwise we should understand little of
God.

This proceeds from that bitter root of Adam's sin, Genesis 3.6
given him in his Creation, but aspiring to be like unto God, lost his
knowledge of his Maker, and brought this ignorance upon himself in his own
understanding, and upon all his posterity; so that now we are without God in
the world, Ephesians. 2.12.
strangers from the life of God, through that ignorance that is in us.

Secondly, 2 Timothy 2.26. 2 Cor. 3.5.
We are not sufficient as of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves.

Which may serve to teach us hence, are so ignorant of God, and those glorious
attributes of his; but conceive of God as a man, and call God, a good man, have
very low and mean thoughts of God; consider him not as Omnipotent, Omniscient,
Omnipresent, the searcher of the heart, a consuming fire, etc.

O did we but truly know God, it would make us lay our selves low before him,
when we come into his presence, as Abraham did, Behold Lord, I that am but dust
and ashes: and to cry out with the Prophet, I am undone, I am a man of polluted
lips.

Secondly, this blindness and ignorance of God, that is in us by nature, And
indeed, never was there greater affronts, or more disgrace offered to their
Calling, then there has been of late days.

Whereas there is no Calling (the Magistracy excepted) whereby a Church or
State, receives more benefit, then by a faithful, learned and painful
Ministry; they are the strength of a Nation, the Chariots and Horsemen of
Israel, they manifest Gods presence to a Land and Nation: and when they are
discountenanced, silenced and forced to depart, God usually is not far off,
with some fearful judgment.

We are consumed in thy anger.
THe Lord being provoked against this people by their sins, His anger could not
be appeased but by their destruction. Note hence:

That when Gods anger is once kindled against sin, Gods anger once kindled,
consumes to destruction.
it consumes to destruction.

We are consumed in thy anger.

It is true, the Lords patience toward sinners is great, and he suffers long
the Vessels of wrath: He is a a God of mercy, and is not easily provoked to
strike: Psalm. 2.
But as the Psalmist says, If his wrath be kindled but a little, it consumes
to destruction.

Many were the provocations of this people, that notwithstanding God had given
them much experience of his power and goodness toward them, Psalm. 78.
giving them Manna from Heaven, and Water out of the hard Rock, Quails, to
satisfy their lust, and their provocations were many and great; yet, verse 38.
He being full of compassion, he for gave their iniquity, and destroyed them
not: Yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his
wrath. But such were their sins, and so great were their provocations, verse 50.
that He made way for his anger, and he spared not their souls from death, but
gave over their lives to the Pestilence; Yea, verse 59.
Gods wrath was so kindled, that he abhorred Israel. And who can look upon sin
but as a fearful thing, and the greatest evil, and the wrath of God
intolerable, when he shall but seriously consider, how terribly his wrath has
broke out against sin.

It was for sin that God threw the Angels down from heaven to hell.

It was for sin that he drowned the old World, Genesis 6.
when their wickedness was so great, that it repented the Lord that he had
made man, and brought that Deluge over all the earth.

It was for sin that Sodom and Gomorrah was consumed with fire and brimstone
from Heaven. Genesis 19.


That Pharach and the Egyptians were overwhelmed in the red Sea.

That the earth swallowed up Corah and his accomplices. Number. 16.


That Herod was consumed with worms. Acts 12.


And how is the wrath of God come upon the Jews at this day, to the utmost,
sometimes Gods peculiar people, now become a curse and reproach to all Nations,
a scattered and dispersed people upon the face of the earth this day.

This will sin do, and this will Gods wrath and displeasure do, when sin has
so far provoked God, that it breaks out upon us.

And what shall we say to all those miseries that this land and Nation has of
late years groaned under, as the Sword, Famine, Pestilence, Sicknesses and
Diseases, Sects, Heresies, a Kingdom divided, a Church rent and torn in
pieces, by unnatural Brethren; our Israel given to the spoil, and Jacob unto
robbers: O, who can say, but that England's sin, has brought England's misery,
and that Gods anger that has gone out against us, has been wondrous great.
Yea, if we look upon the Saints and Servants of God themselves, when by their
sins they have provoked Gods anger, and kindled his wrath against them, how
terrible and how fearful has he showed his anger and displeasure against them?

As we may see in Moses, this servant of the Lord, that because he did not
honor God at the waters of strife, was shut out of the Land of Canaan.

And David, who in the pride of heart numbered the people, the Lord let him
blood in the same vein, there dyed of the people for his sin, Threescore and
ten thou sand men.

And this wrath of God, shall at last most clearly break out and appear, when
he shall come in a flame of fire, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
rendering vengeance to the wicked.

And if the beams of Gods anger and wrath, sends forth such terrible
lestruction upon us here, what will that wrath of his be, when it shall be
fully powered out upon his poor creatures in hell for ever? Our God is a
consuming fire. Heb. 12. ult.


Now this anger and wrath of God must needs consume to destruction.

Because anger in God is as himself is, Moses to say, Who knows the power of
thy wrath? Verse 11.
the meaning is, that none knows it, or can sufficiently take notice of it, to
fear as he ought before him.

Because there is such an antipathy betwixt God and sin,

Let us apply this.

Seeing the anger of God, human Nature is subject unto, if all the sicknesses
and diseases in the world should seize upon one man; if all the tortures and
torments, that all the Tyrants in the world could devise, to inflict upon a man
to make him miserable; and all the creatures in heaven and earth, should all of
them conspire together, to make one poor creature miserable, all these were
nothing in comparison of the wrath of God, who is a consuming fire.

How terrible has the terrors of an accusing conscience been to many a poor
creature, we may see in Judas, that was not able to bear them, but preferred
death before them; and others daily that have made away their lives, rather
then live in those horrors of conscience they have felt in themselves. What
then is Gods anger and wrath when it shall be poured out to the full upon the
soul of a sinner?

Why then do we not dread sin more, which is the only cause of his wrath, and
who is never angry, but at sin? Art thou a Drunkard, a Swearer, a profane
person, that live in the continual practice of sin, Be not deceived (says
the Apostle) for these things sake, comes the wrath of God upon the children
of disobedience. An impenitent sinner is like unto a man that goes continually
upon a mine of Gunpowder, he may fear every step he takes, that he shall be
blown up.

Seeing Gods anger once kindled against sin, consumes to destruction;

It Is true, God is many times angry with his own people; and of them only it is
said, Ps. 30.5.
His anger endures but a moment, which implies, that God will be angry with
them. Thus God was angry with Jehosophat, for making affinity with wicked Ahab
God was angry with old Eli, for his indulgency toward his sons; and God was
angry with David, for numbering the people: and so it may be said of every
gross and presumptuous sin in the godly, it provokes God to anger.

But yet there is a great difference betwixt Gods anger toward his children,
Difference betwixt Gods anger toward his children, and the wicked.
and that wrath of his, that comes upon the children of disobedience.

First, his anger toward his Children endures but for a moment, In a little
wrath, Es. 54.8.
but with everlasting kindness will I have compassion on thee. And of the godly
it is said, Ps. 103.9.
He will not always chide, neither keeps he his anger for ever. But as for
the wicked, it is not so with them, but those tokens of his anger and wrath,
are but the beginnings of their sorrows, and a fire kindled, that shall
devour to destruction.

It differs betwixt the godly and the wicked in measure; He will not suffer
them to be tempted above that they are able. 1 Cor. 10.13.
But now the Lord never takes notice what strength a wicked man has, to bear
his punishments, but oftentimes they sink under the burden of them, as Cain,
Saul, Judas, etc. They bring forth the quiet fruits of righteousness in the
one; they make the wicked more desperate in sinning: they tend to the
instruction of the one, they tend to the destruction of the other.

Thirdly, Es. 21.24
Has he smitten him, meaning indeed his own Children, as he smot them that
smot him? meaning indeed the wicked. The Lord is not angry with them both
alike, nor smites them both alike.

And lastly, consuming fire, and lies so heavy many times upon his own
Children, the malignity whereof is taken off by Christ.

It is our duty, that as we sin daily, would not rebuke us in his anger, Ps.
38.1, 2.
neither chastise us in his wrath: That the Lord would not deal with us
according to our sins, nor reward us according to our iniquities; for if the
Lord should, we were never able to answer him for one of a thousand, our
provocations are so many and great, that we may say with the Church, Lam. 3.22.
It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed. There is no way to escape Gods
anger, but, as we sin daily, to repent daily, since we forfeit his mercies
daily by our sins.

And in thy wrath are we troubled.
MOSES and the people of God here confess, that they were exceedingly amazed,
and troubled by Gods anger and wrath, gone out against them for their sin.

Whence we may observe, Sin most of all affects the godly.
wounds their souls, and makes their hearts to bleed, viz. The sense and
feeling of Gods anger, and frowning countenance against them, for their sins:
that by their sins they have so far provoked God, thus to frown upon them, and
to be displeased with them.

For as the loving kindness of God is better than life it self, Ps. 63.3.
so the sense and feeling of his wrath and displeasure, is that which wounds
their souls to the quick, so as there can be no comfort, no joy, no rest, nor
peace, but sorrow, grief, vexation, and trouble of heart. No doubt, there were
many things that troubled the heart of David, in the matter of his sins of
Adultery and Murder; as the murder of his faithful servant and subject
Uriah, the drawing of Bathsheba to the sin of Adultery, and his drawing of Joab
and others, into the guilt of his sin; besides, the seandall that he had given
to Religion: But this was it that wounded him to the heart, his sin against
God, and therefore he cries out, Against thee, against thee have I sinned:
nothing went so near his heart, as his offense against God, and the sense of
his displeasure.

Many times the wicked mourn for sin with worldly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.
when by their sins they bring shame, punishment, or some detriment to their
estate, and the like.

Thus Pharaoh was troubled and took on, Exodus 9.27.
because of the Thunder and Hail, and when that was over, his trouble was over.
Genesis 27.38.
Thus Esau wept, when he had parted with his Birthright, for his own loss, not
for his offense against God. And thus was Saul troubled, when Samuel told him,
1 Samuel 15.14. 1 Reg. 11.21.
that God had rent his Kingdom from him: and Ahab, when the judgment was
denounced against his house. Whereas in the godly, the apprehension of Gods
displeasure, and the sin against him, works the greatest sorrow, though their
sins were never so secret, and should never come to light. A gracious soul
looks more upon God offended, then upon what he has deserved: This the
Apostle calls a sorrow according to God, 2 Cor. 7 10.
when it proceeds not from self love, but because of God.

And this is that, Zach. 12.12.
which the Lord in some measure works in the hearts of all his. And the Reasons
are:

The first is taken from the nature of sin, Transgression of the Law. By sin,
the most holy and righteous Law of God is violate and broken, and hereby God is
provoked. A small offense against a Prince is made Treason; so are sins
committed against him, being an infinite God.

Is given by the Apostle, Ye have not received the Spirit of bondage to fear
again, but ye have received the Spirit of adoption. Now such as have received
this Spirit, the Spirit of Adoption to be made the Sons of God, these cannot
but love God, are afraid to offend God, and much grieved, if at any time, by
their sins, they provoke God.

Is for trial, Ahab mourns, and Judas repents himself; and yet all was but
worldly sorrow that brought death A wicked man, and a very Hypocrite may go
wonderful far this way; but upon trial it will be found, that their sorrow is
conversant about the evil of punishment, and not for the evil of sin.

It is the loss of credit, detriment in estate, shame, punishment, or the
like, that affects them; self love works it in them, and were it not for
shame, punishment, hell, or torment for sin they would live and die in their
sins. Cain cries, but why? My punishment is greater then I can bear. Pharaoh is
troubled, for what? O take away this Plague of Thunder and Hail. 1 Samuel 15.24.
Saul mourns, for what? The loss of his Kingdom. Ahab puts on sackcloth for
what? For the evil threatened against his house. O the deceitfulness of man's
heart! Here is the sorrow in wicked men; let but the judgment be removed, and
Pharaoh hardens his heart again. It is not sin, as it is a breach of Gods Law,
neither is it the apprehension of Gods displeasure they so much care for, or
look after, as the punishment of sin, that thus affects them.

But now come to a child of God, a gracious heart indeed, that has in it the
work of grace; his sorrow is principally for the evil of sin, that God has
been offended, and his righteous Law violate; and if there were no danger at
all in sin, either of shame, punishment, here, or hereafter, yet this wounds
their souls, and grieves their hearts, that they have dishonored God, and
brought upon them Gods displeasure.

Beloved, when we come once to see sin in this glass, in the glass of the
Law, and in the wounds of Christ, as it offends God, and provokes his wrath,
then shall we mourn kindly for our sins, and this sorrow will cause that
repentance, that is not to be repented of.

Secondly, In thy wrath are we troubled: this should stir us up to labor for
reconciliation with God. David, that knew what it was to lie under the burden
of Gods displeasure, exhorts us to kiss the Son lest he be angry. Ps. 2.12.
If his wrath be kindled, yea, but a little, says he, they only are blessed
that trust in him.

And as this should make us afraid to provoke him to anger, so when we
perceive that he is offended, as at this day, the Lord has showed many tokens
of his displeasure against the Land, to look about us, and to labor for
reconciliation, to come in unto him by Repentance, and Humiliation; for he is a
strong God, yea, a consuming fire to all rebellious sinners. When Jacob heard,
that Esau was angry with him, he presently sends a present, and speaks very
mildly to his Brother, Tell my Lord Esau, etc. And when Nabal had provoked
David, we see how Ab^gal, she came with her present, to entreat for her life.
So when any great man is offended, O what riding and running, and laboring to
win his favor again. O where are our hearts, that we labor no more for
reconciliation with our God, whose anger is provoked against the land this day?
But alas, we are little moved with these signs of his wrath, and tokens of his
displeasure.

Verse 8. Thou have set our iniquities before thee, and our secret sins in the
light of thy countenance.
IN these words, Moses sets down the more nearer, and more proper cause of all
those grievous judgments of God upon them, viz. their sins.

Wherein they confess, that the Lord had not only called to a reckoning and
account their great sins of infidelity, and murmuring against Moses and Aaron;
but even their most secret sins, which they committed closly, and whereof none
else could accuse them.

In the practice of this people here, Sight of sin, ground of humiliation for
sin.


That it is impossible for any truly to be humbled, and to seek unto God,
unless they come first to see their sins, the greatness and heinousness of
them.

For so long as this people lived in sin, and rebelled against God so long they
stood out, and were no whit humbled to seek unto God. But now that the Lord by
these heavy afflictions and grievous judgments upon them, having tamed them,
and brought them under; now they begin to enter into their own hearts, and to
call their ways to account.

Thus the Prophet directing the Church to this necessary duty of repentance,
when Gods judgments lay so heavy upon them, exhorts them thus, Lam. 3.40.
Let us search, and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord; implying thereby,
that there could be no true humiliation for sin, nor turning to God by unfeigned
repentance, till they had first found out their sins.

It was a sad complaint that the Lord takes up of his people, Ier. 8.6.
No man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? And no
marvel there was no repentance for sin, because they never questioned their
own ways, to discover their sins.

And hence it is, that the Lord commands his Prophet, Ezekiel. 16.2.
To cause Jerusalem to know her abominations. And, to show Israel her
transgressions, Es. 58.1.
and the house of Jacob her sins. Conviction of sin is the Lords method, that
he uses to bring his people to repentance for sin. Thus was David convinced of
his sins by Nathan; 2 Samuel 12.7. Acts. 2.23. Lam. 3.19.
the Jews by Peter: And this is acknowledged by the lamenting Church, Remember
my affliction, the wormwood and the gall, my soul has them in remembrance, and
is humbled. In remembering I remembered, an Hebraism, that is, by reason of thy
afflicting hand upon me, I came to search out the cause thereof, which was my
sins the happy fruit whereof was their repentance, and their seeking of God. So
that the point is clear and plain, that till we come to see sin, with the
odiousness thereof, we cannot be humbled, nor seek unto God.

Because none can repent him of that whereof he is ignorant; and let us see
wherein we have offended and provoked his wrath against us, we can never humble
our souls as we ought before him. It was David's sense of the heavy burden of
his sins, that made him fly to God for pardon, Make me to hear the voice of
joy and of gladness, Psalm. 32.
that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.

Secondly, The whole need not the Physician, Lu. 5.31.
but those that are sick. And Christ calls such as travel and are heavy laden
to come unto him. Mat. 11.28.
Neither will God ever bestow his saving benefits upon such, that neither see
their wants of them, nor will not esteem them.

This serves first of all to direct the Ministers of the Word, and to use those
means, that God has chalked out unto them in his Word, viz. To convince their
hearers of their sins, that so they may be brought to humiliation for the same:
this is the sure way to find comfort in our Ministry. Christ tells his
Disciples, that he would send unto them the Comforter, Joh. 16.7, 8.
and he should rebuke the world of sin and of righteousness: First, of sin,
unto Condemnation, and of righteousness; that is, the righteousness of Christ
unto Salvation.

There is no comfort to be ministered from the Word, till men are first
convinced of their sins. 2 Cor. 7.7.
Paul tells the Corinthians, that he repented not that he had made them
sorrowful: verse 10.
and he gives the reason, because godly sorrow causes repentance.

And the Lord knows, that this is the reason, why many a man's Ministry thrives
no more in many a Congregation: Ministers lay not a good foundation, by
bringing their people to the sight of their sins, and convince not their
Consciences of the danger of an unregenerate, and impenitent estate.

The sweet promises of the Gospel are unseasonable, when this goes not before:
What is this, but to offer salves to them, that know not whether they have
sores or no and to offer Physic to the whole that see no need of it?

Seeing it is not possible for any to be truly humbled, 1 Ioh. 5.
this serves to discover unto us the reason, why the greatest part of the world
this day lie in wickedness, and go on securely in a course of sin; the reason
is, they were never as yet, thoroughly convinced of their sins. I have heard it
reported of a certain traveller, that traveling in the night, being dark,
forced his horse over a Bridge, over a deep River, that was lately fallen down,
and a planck laid over for foot passengers, which when he saw in the morning,
his spirits were so far surprised with the danger that he had escaped, that he
fell down and dyed.

O, if men did but consider the danger they are in, they travel in danger
every hour, not of water, but of fire, Hell fire, yet they see it not, nor
fear it not; only such, whose eyes the Lord has opened, to see the danger they
have escaped, in coming out of their natural and sinful estate, these can
tell of those great things, that God has done for their souls.

But since the sight of sin is so necessary to the attaining of godly sorrow,
and humiliation for sin,

First, I had not known sin (says Paul) but by the Law. And again, To. 7.7. To
3.20.
By the Law comes the knowledge ost sin. The Law serves to discover sin, and
the punishment of sin: there we shall see the good omitted, and the evil
committed the least transgression whereof deserves death.

Secondly, This (as our Savior says) is the condemnation, that light is come
into the world, and that men should love darkness rather than light. O the
sins against the Gospel, these are the soul-condemning sins, for the which we
shall have nothing to say for our selves at last.

Thirdly, Job 4.18. Es. 64.6.
and the very Angels themselves do cover their faces; how much more is man
abominable and filthy before him? In his sight, our best righteousness, is as
amenstruous and polluted cloth, the consideration whereof made Job to abhor
himself, and to repent in dust and ashes; and Abraham, when he was to come
into his presence, to confess himself to be but dust and ashes.

And last of all, 1. The multitude of the sins of one day, then what of a year?
what of our whole life? 2. That all the world is the worse for our sins. 3.
That many thousands are now in hell for the same sins. 4. That Gods wrath burns
against sin, compared 1. To a Bear, robbed of her whelps. 2. To an evening
Wolf, woe to that Lamb he first meets withal.
3. To a consuming fire, Heb. 12.^^.
Our God is a consuming fire.


The consideration of these particulars, may help us to find out the evils of
our own hearts, and to humiliation for the same; for till we come to the sight
of our sins, we shall never truly repent us of them, nor see the danger of sin,
how it provokes God to anger and wrath against us.

Thou have set our iniquities before thee, etc.
THe Church and people of God having in the former verse confessed, that they
were consumed by Gods anger, and by his wrath they were sore troubled: come now
to acknowledge the proper cause of all those grievous judgments of God upon
them, and that was their sins; they clear Gods justice, and acknow ledge, that
he was most righteous, and that it was their sins that had drawn down his
wrath and heavy displeasure against them.

Hence we may note, Sin, the cause of all judgments upon a people.
and what it is that draws down Gods judgments upon a Land and people and so
likewise upon particular persons, viz. Sin.

Our open sins; and our secret sins against God, and against men, these provoke
the Lord to anger, and draw down his judgments upon a Land and People. Thus
Danie confesses their misery and captivity, was justly inflicted upon them for
their sins; Dan. 9.5.
We have sinned, and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, by departing
from thy precepts, and from thy judgments. verse 8.
And again, O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face, to our Kings, to our
Princes, and to our Fathers, because we have sinned against thee: they confess
the hand of God was justly upon them for their sins.

And this is that which the Lord threatens by Moses, Deuteronomy. 28.15. verse 21.
that if the people would not hearken and obey, He would make the Pestilence to
cleave unto them, until they were utterly wasted and consumed; which the Lord
made good unto this people at this time in the Wilderness. This is
acknowledged by the lamenting Church, when they say, Lam. 5.16.
The Crown is fallen from our head, woe unto us, we have sinned.

Thus the Psalmist reckons up the great things that God had done for this
people, in the land of Egypt, Ps. 78.12
in the field of Zoan, gave them Manna from Heaven, gave them water out of a
Rock, verse 32
Quails to satisfy their lust; yet for all this, they sinned still, and
believed not his wondrous works. But what followed, verse 33.
Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble. To
this agrees that of the Prophet, Behold, Es. 59.1.
the Lords hand is not shortened, that he cannot save, nor his ears heavy, etc.
But your sins have separated between you and your God, Ephesians 5.6.
and your sins have hid his face from you.

But what are those sins,

All sin, Special sins that provoke Gods anger.
yet there are I confess, some special sins, which do inflame the anger of
God, and these be capital and heinous sins, and such are

First, Idolatry, Idolatry
to worship a salfe God instead of thetrue God, or the true God in a false
manner; this the Lord can no more endure, then a Husband can endure the wanton
behavior of his Wife, but is exceedingly provoked by it. This appears by that
golden Calfe that the Israe^ites made to worship, for this sin three thousand
were slain, Exodus 32.4, 28.
There fell of the people that day, about three thousand men.

O, it is a dangerous provoking sin in a Land and Nation, that have enjoyed the
glorious liberty of the Gospel, to Apostatize, and fall from their first love,
either to Babylonish Idolatry, or to Sects and Heresies; this is a provoking
sin, and causes God to remove the Candlestick from such a people. The Lord lay
not this sin to our charge.

The second provoking sin, Infidelity.
that stirs up the Lord to anger against a People, is Infidelity, or a
distrusting of Gods power, or calling into question his promises, in times of
trial; that either the Lord cannot, or will not help: This was the great sin
of this people, for the which the Lord was so wrathfully displeased with them,
Ps. 78.33.
and for the which their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in
trouble.

The third provoking sin, Blasphemy.
is the blaspheming of the Name of God, Because of Oaths, the land shall mourn.

The shedding of innocent Blood is a provoking sin; Blood.
as a loving Father cannot endure to see his Child slain before his face, and
the blood of his Child to be shed; no more can the Lord endure the wicked to
shed the blood of his Children.

Again, the sin of Adultery, Uncleanness.
Fornication, and uncleanness, these are provoking sins, as appears in the
firing of Sodom and Gomorrah.

It is true, every sin provokes the Lord to anger, but these sins especially
increase his anger against a Nation or People, Hos. 4.2
by swearing, and lying, and killing, and whoring, they break out, therefore
the Land shall mourn.

The point then is clear and plain, that the principal cause of Gods anger and
displeasure against a Land and people, is their sins.

Gods justice calls for vengeance upon the sinner. The Angels (says Saint
Jude) that kept not their first estate, he has reserved in chains, etc. The
sinful World drowned, Sodom and Gomorrah burned, Pharach and the Egyptians
plagued; yea, the Nation and the People of the Jews, fearfully consumed: all
clearing this truth, that sin is the principal cause of Gods anger and is that
which draws down his judgments upon a people.

Seeing then it is sin that stirs up God to anger,

Do not those forementioned sins that pull down Gods Judgments upon a land and
people, abound amongst us, and make head at this day? Idolatry and Popery in
open and secret manner, seems to take root again; Sects and Heresies in former
ages cried down, and for many years dead and buried, we have seen their
resurrection again from that Bottomless Pit. What age did ever produce the
like outrages and abominations that this day are rife amongst us; Swearing and
Blasphemy, Drunkenness and Uncleanness, Contempt of Christ and his Gospel,
Thefts, Murders, and all other abominations, the like never age produced? And
unless the Lord put it into the hearts of those in present Authority to root
out these sins, it is not to be expected that England shall long escape more
heavy Judgments then yet we have tasted of.

And yet alas how few are the number of those that lay these things to heart.
We hear and talk of our miseries, but we are not affected with the cause of
them, which are our sins, no man lays Gods judgments to heart, as to say,
Alas, what have I done?

Secondly, or indeed what hope can we have it will be, so long as Tobias and
Sanballats are amongst us; so long as our Chams continue their scoffing, our
Esaus their profaning, our Nabals their coveting, our Achans their thieving our
Jezabe^s their whoring, and all of us our sinnings and rebellions against God:
Our Parliaments and Councels will be rendered weak, and they will not, they
cannot help us. How can England look to prosper when the most high God is
against us, and does forsake us?

What has been the ruin and overthrow of Nations and Kingdoms but sin? What
has tumbled down Cities, ruined stately Houses, and overthrown so many Noble
Families, but sin? And when we shall see Religion countenanced, a faithful
Ministry set up and maintained. Discipline in the Church established, Justice
duly administered, and wholesome Laws duly executed, Piety encouraged, Sin duly
punished, and the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus set up in the hearts and
Consciences of men; Then there will be hope of better times, that God will
delight to dwell amongst us.

Seeing sin is the principal cause of all Gods Judgments upon a land and
people; Israel; and the reason assigned was this, Every man did that which was
right in his own eyes. Judge. 17.6.
What confusion is there at this day in Church and State, and all under
pretense of Liberty of Conscience? Who does not see that Sects and Heresies,
Blasphemies, Contempt of Magistracy and Ministry in all places of the land, is
grown to such a head, that if the Lord put not a stay to these spirits and
licencious times, what can be expected but Confusion?

The Apostle says, The Magistrate does not bear the sword for naught: To. 13.4.
But as the Ministers of God are to take vengeance on them that do evil. It is
a sad condition that that Land and State is in, when Magistrates that have the
sword in their hands shall stand like a George on Horseback with his sword
drawn, yet never strikes. How can such Magistrates approve their calling from
God, and look for protection from him, that show no more zeal for God?

Phinehas zeal in executing judgment upon Zimri and Cosbi, Number. 25.11, 12.
brought a blessing upon the whole Congregation of Israel. And the Lord showed
mercy to good Nehemiah, Neh. 13.20.
because he had showed such zeal for God in punishing the profaners of the
Lords Sabbaths. The Lord knows this zeal for God is wanting in many Magistrates
amongst us.

And indeed the want of the execution of Justice against the sins of these
times, is not the least cause wherefore things are at this pass in the Church
and State as they are at this day, and wherefore things prosper no better under
our present Government.

O that all that are in Authority from the highest to the lowest, would make it
their care with David, Ps. 101.8
early to destroy the wicked of the land, and to cut off wicked doers from the
City of the Lord; Can. 2.15
And take those foxes, those little foxes that spoil the vines; That Justice
might run down like a stream, and be duly administered, without partiality, that
Sects and Heresies might be discountenanced and punished; piety and godliness
more encouraged, that God at last may remove his anger from us and delight to
dwell amongst us.

Thou have set our iniquities before thee,
THis Moses speaks for our capacities; as if the Lord did keep a Register of
our sins, and set them before his sight. The meaning of the words will appear
by the contrary. As when the Lord is said to cast our sins behind his back, as
things he never means to call to mind, but to put them out of his remembrance,
and to drown them in the sea, as he did Pharaoh.

Now as the Lord is said to cast our sins behind his back, when he means not
to punish them: So he is said to set them before his eyes, when he calls them
to mind to punish them.

Whence we may note the happy fruit of affliction, Times of affliction
discovers corruption.
when the Lord is pleased to send and sanctify the same unto his people. This
makes them look home and to discover the evils of their own hearts and ways,
which before this time they could not see.

In times of peace and prosperity many sins lie hid, and undiscovered in Gods
people; but Gods judgments bring them to light. Now that Gods hand is upon
this people, being miserably wasted and consumed with the Plague and
Pestilence; Now they can say, Thou have set our iniquities before thee, etc.

In the times of Gods forbearance whilst they had their Manna and their Quails
at full, they were fat and wanton: Jesurun waxed fat, Deuteronomy. 32.15,
and lightly esteemed the Rock of their salvation: But now in their affliction
and distress, they are taught to know themselves, to look home, and
acknowledge that God called their sins to account, and justly punished them for
them.

This the Lord himself does witness unto, Hos. 5.14, 15.
when he says, I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to the
house of Judah; I, even I will tear and go away, I will take away and none
shall rescue; I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
offense and seek my face, for in their affliction they will seek me early. And
so they did; for in the next Chapter they say one to another, Hos. 6.1.
Come, let us return to the Lord, for he has wounded us and he will heal us,
etc.

Thus Esaias; Es. 26.16
Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured forth they, prayers when
thy chastisements were upon them. The Scriptures are full of examples in this
kind, how that in times of peace and prosperity many sins in Gods people have
lain hid and undiscovered, which Gods judgments have discovered and brought to
light. Genesis 37.24.42.21
An excellent example wherewhereof we have in the Brethren of Joseph, whose sin
against their brother never came to Conscience, for many years together, until
they came into Egypt, and were there stayed as spies. Then their hearts smote
them for their sin; We have justly suffered these things, for we sinned against
our brother.

The like we may see in Manasses, who did much evil in the fight of the Lord,
till he was carried captive into Babylon, and there laid in cold irons: Then
Manasses knew that God was the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 33.13.


And this we may see in the Prodigal; whilst his purse was full, he cared not
for his father, Luke 15.
nor for his fathers house, only a famine makes him think of returning home.
Thus did Hagar grow proud, and insolent, in Abraham's house, she then knew not
her self but despised Sara her Mistress; but being in the wilderness in want,
was taught to know her self.

It is true, the Philistines could not understand Sampsons Riddle, Judge. 14.14.
how sweet should come out of sour, and meat out of the eater: So worldlings
cannot understand, that tribvlation brings forth patience, To. 5.3. 2 Cor.
4.13. Heb. 12.11.
and patience experience, and experience hope; and our light and momentany
afslictions should cause us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory.

But Gods children find it true by comfortable experience, that howsoever no
visitation be sweet for the present, yet afterward it brings forth the quiet
fruits of Righteousness unto them that are thereby exercised.

And it must be so, in regard,

Because miseries and afflictions are excellent means to humble the heart of
man, Iam. 4.6.
God resists the proud. Now the Lord many times lays sore afflictions upon
his own children, for this end and purpose, to cure the evil. And this is one
end that God aims at in correcting man, Job 33.17.
That he might hide the pride of man. Miseries and afflictions awaken
Conscience, and bring those sins to remembrance that were long ago forgotten.

Secondly, Manasses it is said, Then Manasses knew that God was the Lord, he
that in his prosperity forgot God.

And as they bring a man to know God so likewise to know himself; as the
Prodigal, of whom it is said, Luke 15.
He came to himself; when he was thoroughly pinched with poverty and his
companions had cast him off, now home, home, welfare home, I will home again, I
will go to my father. And as Job has it, Job 36.8, 9.
If they be bound in fetters and holden with the cords of afsliction. then he
shows them their works, and their transgressions that they have exceeded. And
thus at one time or other, by one affliction or another, we shall be brought to
know God and our selves if we belong to him.

Seeing that Gods judgments bring thus sin to light, that in times of peace
and prosperity lay undiscovered;

This may serve for matter of trial, whether we have made the right use of our
sufferings, yea or no, which may be known by this; If we have discovered those
corruptions in us, that before were undiscovered.

Many are at that pass to bear off crosses and afflictions with head and
shoulders, as they say. Many have been sick, say they, and have been well
again. Many have this Ague amongst them, and done well enough, and so I hope
shall I. Thus men flatter themselves as they did, Ier. 10.19.
It is my sorrow and I will bear it. Why the best have their afflictions and
whom God loves them he chasteneth and with these and the like conceits men put
off Gods strokes and dealings with them.

But alas where is that searching into our own hearts and ways, to find out
our sins that have not yet been discovered, the cause of Gods anger and
displeasure? few make this use of Gods judgments, to say, What have I done?
what are those sins I am guilty of that have provoked the Lord to be thus angry
with me? But it may be truly said of many of us in our afflictions and
miseries, Es. 42.25.
He has poured upon him the fury of his anger, and he knew it not; and it
burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.

And this is the reason the Lord many times brings long and lasting sorrows and
afflictions upon us, till we be brought to know our selves, and find out those
sins, for the which the Lord is so displeased with us. O that men were wise in
this particular, to find out the cause of Gods anger and displeasure, and to
desire the Lord to help them in this search; as holy Job did, Show me (says
he) wherefore thou contendest with me: and again, Job 10.2. and 13.23.
Show me my rebellion and my sin. Till we do this we do nothing, neither can we
have any comfort in our sufferings that the Lord intends our good therein, or
that the same are sanctified unto us.

Secondly, prosperity lies hid undiscovered This may teach us to admire the
wonderful wisdom, power and goodness of God, who has so many ways to do us
good, to humble sinners, and to bring them home unto himself.

Indeed the preaching of the Word is the ordinary means whereby God does break
the stony heart of man this is Gods Hammer, Ier. 23.
appointed by him to that end. It will make the hardest heart to quake, and
tremble as Felix did; and the most desperate sinners to be humbled, as those
wicked Jews that had imbrued their hands in the blood of the Lord Jesus. Act.
2.37
It is a two-edged sword cutting both ways.

But when that will not serve the Lord can clap such irons upon the soul and
conscience as can make the stoutest heart to buckle. As the Lord dealt with
Manasses, laid him in cold irons, and then he knew that God was the Lord. Thus
dealt he with the Prodigal, Acts 16.
the Jailer, and with this people here, by sharp and sore afflictions, he makes
way many times for repentance: So that we may cry out with Paul, Romans 11.33.
O the deepness of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God? how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out. Surely the
greatness of his wisdom and power is wonderful, that by so many means can
work good to his people.

And last of all this may serve for matter of terror unto such that have been
in the furnace of affliction,

But alas, the Lords hand has been upon many of us, upon some in one kind,
and upon others in another, and yet they are not bettered. It was a sad
complaint that the Lord takes up of his people, I have corrected them, but they
have not been humbled; there cannot be a greater sign of Gods anger, then to
set light by afflictions. In that day did the Lord call for weeping, Es.
22.12.13, 14
and mourning, etc. and behold joy and gladness, etc. But what says the Lord,
This iniquity shall not be purged till ye die. Am. 6.9.
Shall a Trumpet be blown in a City, and the people not be afraid? Shall Gods
judgments be upon a land and Nation, or upon any particular person and they
not lay them to heart? There can be no more certain sign of a hard heart, and
desperate sinner, then not to profit by the rod. I have brought thy way upon
thy own head, Eze. 16.43.
yet have thou no consideration of thy abominations. And as it is said,
Reprobate silver shall men call them, Ier. 6.30.
because the Lord has rejected them.

And our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.
NOte we farther, how Moses confesses here, that the Lord did punish them for
their secret sins, as for their open iniquities. And these God did set before
his eyes to take vengeance, and to punish them for, as for their open
rebellions; teaching us,

That it is the nature of godly sorrow and true repentance, A true pentient
will be humbled for his most secret sins.
to be humbled and repent for lesser sins, as for great offenses; yea for our
most secret sins such as the world could never take notice of, yet a true
penitent soul will be humbled for.

It is not enough for men to sorrow and repent for open, notorious, and
scandalous sins, such as are Murder, Whoredom, Drunkenness, etc. But our
repentance must reach to lesser sins, that is, such sins as we have committed
in secret, that never came to the view of the world. To clear this:

Take we notice first of all of David's Example and Practice herein. When Nathan
by his parable had convinced him of his sins, of Adultery and Murder and that
his heart smote him for the same, these sins he acknowledges, 2 Samuel 12.13.
I have sinned (says he) against the Lord. And how heavy the guilt of those
sins lay upon his soul, Ps. 51.
we may see in that penitential Psalm of his, by his manner of begging pardon,
Wash me, cleanse me, blot out; restore me to the joy of my salvation, etc.

Yet as though all this were not enough, he accuses himself of that, which
Nathan did not, by acknowledging the very root and spawn of all those evils,
ver. 5.
saying, Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive
me. David will no longer flatter himself in his sinful courses and secret sins,
but confesses all, and begs pardon of all; Ps. 19.12
Cleanse thou me from my secret faults.

O how ready are these wretched hearts of ours to deceive us in this
particular: If our hearts smite us, and our consciences accuse us for some
gross sin or other that we have committed, and the world cries shame of, and
we confess the same to God, and beg pardon for it, we think all is well: In
the mean time there is a world of wickedness that lies hid in the soul we see
not, Genesis 6.
the very thoughts and imaginations of our hearts being evil continually; and
all our righteousness, even our best duties themselves, are as a menstruous
cloth; and When we have done all that we can we are unprofitable servants, and
have cause to pray with good Nehemiah, Neh. 13.21.
O my God pardon me according to the greatness of thy mercy. And without this
sense of the universal depravity of our Natures, and of those secret sins that
cleave to us in our best duties, our pronenesse to all evil, our indisposition
to any thing that is good; the blindness of our Understanding, the rebellion
of our Wills, the disorder of our Affections, and that indeed we carry about us
a very Body of sin, and can be humbled for these, and repent of these as well
as for our gross sins, we are strangers to godly sorrow and true repentance.

And the first Reason may be taken from the nature of true Grace, sin, yet it
will set it self against it, and will be humbled for it. The nature of true
Grace is to make the inside clean as the outside; it works faith in the
soul: and it is the nature of faith, to purify the heart; Acts 15.9.
and the heart being clean and pure, the thoughts, the words and actions of the
life, will in some good measure be suitable.

May be taken from the nature of God, Thou have set our secret sins in the
light, etc. There is nothing that ever we did, but the Lord is privy to it: Ps.
119.168. Ps. 139.4
All my ways (says David) are before thee; there is not a word in my tongue,
but thou, O Lord, know it altogether; and Job acknowledges, Job 42.4.
There is no thought hid from thee.

And as the Lord sees and observes our ways, so he will not fail to judge
every man according to his works, 2 Cor. 5.10. Eccl. 12.14.
And will bring every work to judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good or evil.

So then whether we consider the nature of true Grace, that albeit it cannot
subdue every corruption by and by, yet will it set it self against all and is
humbled for all; or that God sees and beholds our most secret sins, and will
not fail to punish them. This shows the Doctrine to be clear, That godly sorrow
and true repentance does reach to the most secret sins.

This serves to discover unto us in what a miserable estate and condition many
in the world are in at this day;

O how far are such from the grace of true Repentance, whose property is to set
it self against our most secret corruptions, since our most secret sins are
such as the Lord will most severely reckon for.

Moses sin for the which the Lord would not suffer him to come into the land of
Canaan, was a secret sin in his heart, yet how severely did the Lord punish
this sin in his servant?

And Peter with Simon Magus to pray, Acts 8.
If perhaps the thought of his heart might be forgiven him. So that there is no
true repentance when men are not humbled for their most secret sins.

And Gods children that have the truth of grace in their hearts, are as much
humbled for their secret sins, for their privy and close sins, their sinful
thoughts, and lusts of their hearts, hypocrisy, neglect of duties, coldness
in prayer, etc. they be often brought upon their knees for these.

And this shows the folly and madness of those likewise, that if they can but
commit their sins in the night when none can see them, as to steal, commit
Adultery, etc. think all is well: whereas though thou may hide thy sins from
men, yet even thy most close and secret sins are open and naked in the sight of
God, his All-seeing eyes were then upon thee; he took thee in the manner. Rev.
1.17
His eyes are like a flame of fire, and his feet like fine brass. He sees in
the darkest night, and into the most secret corner, and he will not fail to
punish the sinner.

Seeing it is so sure a note of godly sorrow and true Repentance,

This may serve to justify the ways and courses of the godly, against all
those scoffs and taunts of wicked and graceless ones daily cast upon them for
piety sake, that they are so strict, and so precise in every thing, even in
matters of the smallest moment that they love singularity, and deprive
themselves of that liberty and pleasure that others enjoy, they will not swear
nor drink for company, nor run with others into the same excess of riot,

It is true indeed this they do not, neither dare they do it; and this is
indeed the main cause why the world hates them: But it is better that men
should hate us for good, then that God should plague us for evil.

Little does the graceless world know what the terrors of the Lord are, and how
sensible a tender conscience is of sin, especial such as have been in the
furnace of Soul-affliction. David's heart smote him for the very renting off of
Saul's garment, when his life it self was in his hand. It is neither folly nor
preciseness in any, to avoid the least sin, that is so hated of God, and will
be so severely punished of him. Let such remember, that it was the sin of
cursed Cain to hate his brother for good. 1 Ioh. 3.12.


And last of all, be humbled for his offense, and to beg pardon, there cannot
be a more certain sign of an obdurate and hard heart, then thus to stifle
Conscience, to hate reproofs, that they might go on in a sinful course without
controlement. Ps. 141.5.
Whereas a godly heart can say with David, Let the righteous smite me, for that
is a precious oil. And by their judging of themselves, they shall escape the
judgment of the Lord: 1 Cor. 11.32.
That sin that is judged here, shall not be judged hereafter.

Our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.
THere is one thing more observable in this Text, viz. That the Lord having now
by those sharp afflictions humbled this people, they are brought at last to
know and acknowledge, that God had not only set their iniquities before him,
but even their most secret sins in the light of his countenance.

Whence we learn,
That our most secret sins that are committed, are done God looking on. The
most secret sins are done, God looking on.
Our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.

It is true, Job 22.13.
carnal hearts are ready to reason as Eliphaz with Job, How does God know, can
he judge through the dark? Thick clouds are a covering to him that he sees
not. These and the like are the carnal thoughts of carnal men, Does God know?
or is there any knowledge in the Most High?

Many a wicked and graceless wretch thinks the dark night will cover his sin,
and hide his abominations, where as there is nothing that ever we did, but the
Lord is privy to it. Ps. 119.168. Ps. 139.4.
All my ways (says David) are before thee; and There is not a word in my
tongue but thou O Lord know it altogether. And as Job has it, Job 42.4.
There is no thought hid from thee. So that all our ways, words and thoughts
are known to him.

Many are those glorious titles that are given to God in the Scriptures: And
amongst the rest this, that He is the Searcher of the heart, a property no way
communicable to any creature for of him only it is said, Heb. 4.13.
All things are open and naked before his eyes.

This is fully cleared by the Prophet David, Ps. 139.2
Thou know my down-sitting and my up-rising; thou understandest my thoughts
afar off: verse 4.
There is not a word in my tongue, but lo thou know it a together. And
again, verse 12.
The darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day, the
darkness and the light are to thee both alike. Am I a God at hand, says the
Lord, Ier. 23.23, 24.
and not a God afar off? Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not
see him? Do not I fill heaven and earth says the Lord? There is no point of
Doctrine in all the Scriptures, more clear and plain then this. That it is God
that searches the heart, sees all things, and beholds our most secret thoughts
and ways.

The Reasons will make it more clear.

First, Heb. 4.13.
All things are naked and open to his eyes, or as the word is anatomized before
him. He is that God that fills heaven and earth with his presence, and
therefore must needs know and observe all our actions, and take notice of our
most secret sins. Ps. 94.9.
It is he that made the eye, shall he not see? It is he that made the ear,
shall he not hear? He teaches man knowledge, shall he not know? These were all
absurd to think or imagine in God, that has in him perfection of all things.
Can the work be unknown to the workman, or the creature to the Creator? Since
it is in him that we live and move and have our being. Acts 17.27.


The Lord at the last day will then lighten things that are hid in darkness, 1
Cor. 4.5. Eccl. 12.14.
and will make the counsels of the heart manifest; and bring every secret thing
to Judgment. Therefore out of question he knows every secret thing; yea, he is
privy to all those secret thoughts, motions, windings and turnings in the heart
of man, and every man at last shall receive judgment accordingly. We shall now
apply this.

Seeing that our most secret sins are done, and committed in the light of his
countenance; How may this strike terror in the hearts of all wicked and
ungodly men, that live in the daily practice of many known sins? Can therebe a
greater terror to a malefactor, then to know that the Judge himself is an
eyewitness of his villainy? So what greater terror can there be to the wicked,
then this, to have the Lord himself to behold their doings.

Many a wicked wretch thinks with himself, that the sins he daily commits, that
no eye sees him nor beholds him, could they be persuaded, that but the eye of
some godly man, yea but a child of five years old did see, and beheld them,
what a terror would this have been unto them? O where are our thoughts of the
Lords All-seeing Presence, whose eye is ever upon us!

Yea, the more cunning and slight men have used in covering and concealing
their sins, the more does the Lord abhor them, and the greater weight of
vengeance he will at last lay upon them. Inasmuch as their sin went not alone,
but had joined with it, that cursed Atheism of the heart, that God saw them
not and that there was not knowledge with the Most High. Whereas God ever takes
them in the manner, and will bring in evidence against them at last; These
things have ^hou done, Ps. 50.21.
and I kept silence, and thou thoughtest that I was such an one as ^hy self:
But I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee.

Secondly, secret sins are in the light of his countenance, why then should we
labor so much to avoid gross sins in our lives, such as bring a blot upon our
Names, and shame before men; And in the mean time make no reckoning at all of
lesser sins, but foster and cherish in our bosoms noisome lusts, and sinful
affections, as Envy, Wrath Malice, Pride, Uncleanness, etc. which makes us
odious and abominable in the sight of God, who sees and knows the heart, and
takes notice not only of the gross evils of our lives, but of the most hidden
corruptions of our hearts.

Yea more, consider with thy self that the Lord knows thy heart better then thy
self do; To. 8.27.
for he is the fearcher of the heart: when thou have been most careful to
search into thy thy heart, he knows more by thee, then thou by thy self. And
this made David pray so earnestly. Ps. 19.12
Cleanse thou me from my secret faults. O then how careful should we be to
avoid not only the grosser evils of our lives, but to purge our hearts from
evil thoughts, unclean thoughts malicious thoughts, and those most secret sins
that lie lurking in our souls.

There is no deceit of Satan like unto this, to sin under hope of secrecy. Job
24.15.
The Eye of the Adulterer (says Job) waits for the twylight, and says, No
eye shall see me. Ier. 29.23.
But what says the Lord, I have seen the lewdness of thy whoredoms, even I
know and am a witness, says the Lord. The eyes of the Lord are in every
place, beholding good and evil. Adams bushes could not hide him from God nor
the keele of the ship secure Jonas but God could find them out.

And last of all seeing our most secret sins are in the light of his
countenance: what a care then ought Christians to have in all those holy duties
they perform to God that they labor to approve their hearts to him, in doing
them, that they be performed with all sincerity and singleness of heart, as in
his Presence.

The Lord knows with what mind you come to the Word, with what mind you come
to the Sacrament, with what hearts you come to prayer, or any duty you perform
to him: Why should we halt and dissemble with him, who is the searcher of the
heart?

Wicked men, and the prophanest hypocrite, may in outward show match the best
Christian; he will frequent the Assemblies of Gods people, hear the Word,
receive the Sacrament, pray, etc. and carry himself very fairly in outward
appearance as the best. You shall have Cain sacrificing as well as Abel; Esau
begging a blessing as earnestly as Jacob; Saul confessing his sin as well as
David; Ahab humbling himself as well as Hezekiah, and the Pharisee praying as
well as the Publican. But here is the difference; a godly Christian in all
these duties seeks to approve himself to God, doing all things with a single
heart, with a sincere heart as in Gods presence, as Nathaniel, Behold a true
Israelite in whom there is no guile. He does all things as to the Lord Christ,
knowing that the All-seeing eye of God is upon him.

V. 9. For all our days are passed away in thy wrath, we spend our years as a
tale that is told.
IN this Verse Moses proceeds to set forth, their miserable condition now in
the wilderness, and how far unlike their estate and condition was unto other
Nations and people in the world, in that their life was not only short, but
they were suddenly swept away in Gods wrath; so as the very Heathen themselves
that knew not God, seemed not to lie under the like misery as they did.

We learn hence, Godly suffers many times when the wicked flourish.
that there is ground of sorrow and humiliation to Gods people, when their
estate and condition is worse then Gods enemies, when the Lord shall be so far
provoked by the sins of his people, to lay his hand more heavy upon them, then
upon the wicked; this wounds the godly at the heart, and fends them with
complaints to God. See more of this ver. 7. the first Doctrine.

All our days.
MOses and the people of God, do here acknowledge, that their miseries and
afflictions lasted not for a few days, or a few years, but All their days:
Forty years together, whilst they were in the wilderness, after their coming
out of Egypt, they were miserably wasted and consumed in Gods wrath.

Hence observe:
That the afflictions of the Church and people of God, Gods hand sometimes long
upon his people.
may, and do sometimes last long, even All their days: for, say they, All our
days are past away in thy wrath. Their miseries and afflictions were not only
great and sharp, but long and lasting.

It was Jacobs case, that godly Patriarch, that wrestled with the Angel, and
would not let him go till he had a blessing, yet he loosed his thigh, that
Jacob went halting all his days. It was a daughter of Abraham that was
possessed of a Devil eighteen years; the poor woman in the Gospel had an issue
of blood many years together.

And this was the case and condition of the Church and people of God, they
served as bondslaves in Egypt four hundred years together; and their
Captivity afterward in Babylon was for the space of seventy years. And that
place in Zachary is clear; Then the Angel of the Lord answered and said, O Lord
of Hosts, Zach. 1.12.
how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah,
against whom thou have had indignation these threescore years and ten!

Thus did those ten general Persecutions last upon the Church three hundred
years, until the Reign of Constantine. And if we look unto particular
Examples we shall find, that such as have been near and dear unto God, have
lain under piercing sorrows, and sore afflictions a long time together. As we
may see in Job; of whom the Lord himself gives this testimony, That he was the
justest man upon the e^^rth, yet exercised with such sore afflictions as that
he complains in the bitterness of his soul, that the arrows of the Almighty
are in me, Job 6.4.
the venom whereof drinks up my spirit. And again, 13.26.
Thou writest bitter things against me, 19.11.
and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth. And, He has kindled his
wrath against me, and counted me as one of his enemies. The like we may see in
David, that was a man after Gods own heart, yet exercised with sore afflictions
in his estate, body, mind, and conscience, as that he has often very sad
complaints, Psalm. 6.3.
My soul is sore troubled, but Lord, how long will thou delay? Thy indignation
^ieth upon me, and tho^ have vexed me with all thy waves. Will he Lord absent
himself for ever, (...). 88.7.
and will he show no more favor? Ps. 77.8.
Has God forgot^en to be gracious, and has he shute^ his loving kindness in
displeasure? All his days, even from the Manger to the Cross, his whole life
indeed was a continual passion. So that the point is clear, that the
afflictions of Gods Church and People, many times do, and may, last long.

But how can this stand with those places of Scripture, that say, 2 Cor. 4.17.
Es. 54.7.
Our light afflictions which are but for a moment; and again, for a small
moment have I forsaken thee?

The afflictions of Gods Church and People are short,

They are not short to sense, they are so which apprehends Gods favor,
presence, and grace, in the sharpest trials and expects the accomplishment of
Gods promise in giving a happy issue unto them, so are they short.

If we look unto this life;

But what might be the Reasons why Gods hand should lie so heavy,

The first may be that of the Apostle, We are chastened of the Lord, that we
might not be condemned with the world. 1 Cor. 11.32.
Should not the Lord many times put this bridle upon us, by sharp affliction,
to keep us in and make us know ourselves; the Prodigal would never think of
returning home, nor Manasses know that God is the Lord. Were it not for the
rod, many of Gods children would run riot, as the Prodigal did and kick against
God, as Manasses did. But afflictions keep them in. And David can say, Ps.
119.75.
I know that thou of very faithfulness have caused me to be afflicted. It is
an argument of Gods anger and heavy displeasure against the wicked, to suffer
them to go on in sin, without check or controlement, to fill up the measure of
their iniquities. Hos. 4.14.
I will not visit your daughters for their whoredoms; that was a heavy
judgment of God upon them. Thus does God many times plague most, when he seems
to spare most: Whereas of his own people the Lord speaks thus; Amos 3.2.
You only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore will I
punish you for all your iniquities.

Gods glory is another main end of all Gods chastisements and afflictions he
lays upon his people.

O how did the patience of Job, and his holy dependency still upon God even in
his sharpest brunts and trials, (which Satan by Gods permission brought upon
him) shine and appear to the glory of Gods grace, that he could bless God, Job
1.12.
and say, Though the lord kill me, yet will I trust in him. And when we can be
content for Gods sake, Ps. 44.22
To be killed all the day long, and with those blessed Apostles, Rejoice that
we are accounted worthy to suffer for Christ.

Hereby Gods people are driven to God the only Refuge in times of misery,
David's misery that caused him to send forth deep sighs and groans to the Throne
of Grace.

And lastly,

And to procure unto us the sounder comfort: the deeper the incision is made
into the wound, the more perfect will the cure be. The Prophet cries out, My
belly trembled, my lips ^^rok, rottenness entered into my bones; but the end
and issue was, Heb. 3.16
that I might rest in the day of trouble.

And herein the Lord provideth for his own glory, in bringing light out of
darkness, and by the humiliation of his children, brings their greatest
exaltation.

When Jacob must be blessed, he must first wrestle for it, and when Joseph shall
be exalted, he must first to the Prison. Thus God many times deals with us.

Seeing afflictions thus many times lie long upon Gods people: Jobs friends,
though otherwise good men, yet when they saw the hand of God upon Job in that
strange manner, most uncharitably judged him for an hypocrite. Eccl. 9.1, 2.
This is a false rule to go by: and this is to condemn the generation of the
righteous. Pro. 3.12
No man (says Solomon) can judge of love or hatred by all that is before him.
God many times plagues the wicked in sparing them; and God loves his children,
when most severely he corrects them.

So that outward prosperity is no infallible sign of Gods love, neither are
afflictions crosses and calamities, infallible signs of Gods displeasure.

Secondly, this may admonish us, that if the Lord shall at any time thus deal
with us, as with his people here, and send us long and tedious afflictions in
our bodies, minds or estates, by trouble of mind, sickness, poverty, losses,
crosses, or the like, we are not therefore to despair, or presently to think
that God loves us not, but has cast us off.

Shall we not drink of the cup that Christ himself drank off We pray, Thy will
be done: Now if it be his will that we shall thus spend our days in affliction
and misery, our very passive obedience in suffering Gods Will be to done upon
us brings not less glory to God, then when we actually do his will. We are
not to murmr, repine and complain, but possess our souls by patience, Acts
14.22.
for if we will be his Disciples, we must through many tribulations enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven.

But is it possible,

The Lord is never so displeased with his children, as to hate them, wrath,
though he seems at these times to be angry.

A Father, when he corrects his Child, the Child thinks his Father is angry
with him, yet even then he loves his Child dearly, when he does most sharply
correct him. So when the Lord lays his Rod upon us, in the sharpest manner, we
think God is angry and wrathfully displeased with us; when he does that which a
Father does, when he is angry. Thus does the Lord seem to us, when
notwithstanding he has the bowels of pity and compassion even then toward
then.

And last of all, godly and the wicked in all those miseries and afflictions
that lie upon them; their sufferings many times are alike.

But to the wicked, they are punishments indeed, and the beginning of Gods
eternal wrath and displeasure, which at last shall seize upon them in soul and
body for ever.

But to such as are in Christ, the malignity of the Cross is taken away, and
laid upon Christ, and therefore not properly punishments unto them, but
chastisements and Fatherly corrections, inflicted upon them in Mercy, Ier.
10.24. 2 Samuel 7.14.
and not in Judgment; and are as the rod of man for their Instruction, and not
for their Destruction; they grow better by the rod, are humbled by their
afflictions, provoked to prayer, and to seek unto God, with this people here.

Whereas wicked men, when Gods hand is upon them, they are not bettered by the
rod, but grow worse and worse, more hard-hearted, more careless, and more
secure under afflictions, a fearful sign, such are none of Gods.

For all our days are past away in thy wrath.
HEnce we may observe, how terrible the effects of Gods anger and wrath for sin
is. That man's life being so short of it self, by Gods anger and displeasure
for sin, is made more short. Note hence:

That when God is angry, The effects of Gods anger, terrible.
The infidelity and murmuring of this people, brought ruin and destruction
upon many thousands, who were miserably wasted and consumed, now that the wrath
of God was kindled against them.

But herein we must be exceeding careful, Anger of God what.
that we conceive not amiss of God.

It is true, the Scriptures frequently make mention of Gods anger and wrath;
but we must know, there is a great difference betwixt these sinful passions in
our corrupt nature, and these essential properties that are in God.

He is angry and sins not; but our anger and wrath is mixed with sin and
therefore evil.

Gods anger and wrath is as pure and holy as his mercy is, being nothing else,
but the execution of his justice.

So that this anger and wrath in God, are not in God according to passions,
whereunto God is not subject, but according to the effect. As when God
chasteneth for sin, he seems unto us to be angry, and so we judge of God
according to humane sense.

The terms thus explained, we return to the Doctrine.

That the effects of Gods anger and wrath are very terrible; His anger is a
consuming anger, and his wrath devoures to destruction. Ier. 3.9. Ps. 2.5. Heb.
12.29. Deuteronomy. 32.22.
It is called a fierce wrath, sore displeasure, a consuming fire. As Moses has
it, For a fire is kindled in my anger, and shall burn to the lowest hell.

The consideration hereof made the Church to pray so earnestly, Turn us, O God
of our salvation, Psalm. 85.4, 5.
and release thy anger toward us for ever. Will thou prolong thy wrath from
one generation to another?

How earnestly do they beg and in treat to be discharged of Gods anger, and
that they might enjoy his former favor and countenance again.

And if we look into those examples in the Word whom God has made spectacles
of his anger and wrath for fin; who can but conclude, that the effects thereof
are terrible.

In the casting of the Angels out of Heaven. Jude 6.


In the destruction of the old World, Genesis 6.
Sodom and Gomorrah.

In the example of Corah, Dathan, Number. 16.
and Abiram, Herod.

The rejection of the Jews etc.

Besides Gods severity toward his own people themselves, when they provoked
his anger against them, as we may see in Moses, David, etc.

Because it is the wrath of God, as the roaring of a Lion, O what is the wrath
of God? the wrath of man can but reach to the bodies and estates of men, but
the anger of God reaches to the soul; the anger of men is finite, the anger of
God is infinite, as himself is.

Secondly, Who knows the power of thy wrath, says Moses? And the duplication
of the word anger and wrath, denotes the heat and fury of his displeasure; that
Moses and the Church apprehended deeply the sense of Gods indignation against
them for their sins for God is angry at nothing in his creatures but sin.

But do not the sins of the godly so far provoke Gods wrath,

No,

He is angry, and sins not, since he is only angry at sin; as a Father that
sees a Serpent in his Child's bosom, he hates the Serpent, but loves the Child:
So here, God is not angry with his children to destroy them, but with their
sins to save them.

And howsoever the sins of his Chosen may so far provoke the Lord to wrath, as
to turn his smiles into frowns, which God many times does by their sins; and
those fruits of his love, are many times turned into the effects of his hatred,
in outward appearance; yet then, even then, are they beloved of him, and the
Lord is about to do them good. God never hates any, whom he once loved in
Christ.

Neither can any sin of any of Gods Elect, cause the Lord to reject them,
though the Lord hates sin in them; yet he still holds a fatherly affection
toward them.

Let us apply this.

Seeing the effects of Gods anger and wrath are so terrible,

Man's anger and wrath proceeds from corruption within, which is quickly
provoked to any thing that crosses it.

But Gods anger and wrath is ever at sin, which is so contrary to that holy and
pure nature of his, that he will not fail to correct, even in his own children.
O how happy were we, if we could bring our hearts to this, to be angry, Ephesians;
4.26.
and sin not, to make sin the object of our anger and wrath in our selves and
others: As Moses, though he were the meekest man living, yet when the people
had made the golden Calfe, he caused the same to be grownd to powder, and made
the people in a holy anger and indignation to lick up the dust thereof.

Thus was the zeal of Phineas kindled against Zimri and Cosbi, and executing
judgment upon them, Gods wrath was appeased.

Secondly, is worse then the effect. Now all the plagues and judgments that God
executes in the World, are but the effects of sin. We have seen in our times
the great alterations that have been in Church and State; the Crown it self is
withered, many Noble Families and Houses brought down and laid in the dust,
Inheritances translated to others, the Sword has begot a new tenure, confusion
in the Church, Sects and Heresies abound in every corner, the Ordinances of God
contemned and despised, the Ministry slighted and disesteemed, as if it were
useless and might be spared: never more open profaneness, nor aparent signs
of Gods anger and wrath against a people, then God has manifested against us,
with his unwonted judgme^ts, and strange visitations, by unwonted sicknesses
and diseases. Surely, in the midst of them all, we are to justify God, since
England's sin has caused all our plagues upon us this day; and we are to
confess with the lamenting Church, that it is the Lords mercy we are not quite
laid wast: That it might be said of England, that we were a people that kept
not Covenant with God.

And when we shall see Religion advanced, discipline and order in our Church,
Sects and Heresies discountenanced, Piety encouraged, and Profaneness
suppressed; then, and not till then, may we hope that God will remove his
wrath, and turn away his anger from us.

And last of all, Exhortation, to admonish all to take heed of sin; we shall
never escape Gods anger nor displeasure, whilst we are guilty of sin; sin lays
us naked and open to all judgments.

But especially this concerns Magistrates, that as they desire to keep off Gods
judgments from a Land and Nation, that they see that sin be duly punished: When
Phineas executed judgment, the Plague ceased.

And this care ought Parents and Heads of Families to have, that as they desire
protection from God, and to see his blessing upon their Families, that they
suffer not an Achan under their roof, Ps. 101. Zach. 5.4. Pr. 3.33.
but purge their house, as David did his. For certain it is, the curse of God
is upthe habitation of the wicked, whereas the habitation of the righteous
shall prosper.

There is one thing more to be observed, that as the effects of Gods anger and
wrath are terrible:

So it is the sight of sin, Sight of sin, and sense of Gods displeasure for
sin, ground of repentance.
and ^^^ious consideration of Gods anger and displeasure against sin, that is
the groundwork and foundation of true repentance.

There are many excellent fruits of godly sorrow and true repentance manifested
by this people, from verse 12. to the end; yet, if we observe well these two
verses, 8, 9. we shall see it was the sight of their sins, and the apprehension
of Gods anger and displeasure for sin, that set them upon their repentance.

The fight of sin, and the apprehension of Gods anger and displeasure for sin,
ever goes before true repentance. This Church and people acknowledge, that God
had set their their iniquities before him, etc. And withal had a deep sense of
Gods anger and displeasure* before they address themselves for pardon.

And surely this is Gods order of working, in the great work of Repentance and
Salvation; first, to cast down through the sight of sin, and apprehension of
Gods displeasure for sin and then to raise up in the apprehension of mercy in
Christ.

Never did any truly repent, but first apprehended the curse, and Gods
indignation against sin before. Let this be duly thought upon as a most certain
ground of truth, that those whom the Lord intends to save, he will first
discover unto them their sin, and Gods wrath due unto them, even the curse of
the Law, which is eternal death of Soul and Body for ever, before he ever give
them the sweet apprehension of his favor and love in Christ.

The Scriptures are clear and plain in this point; Come, let us return unto the
Lord, Hos. 6.1.
for he has wounded us: Where we see the Lords order first to wound, and then
to bind up. Thus dealt he with those Jews, Act. 2.37
who had imbrued their hands in the blood of the Lord Jesus, they were first
brought to see their sins by the Ministry of Peter, and apprehend Gods wrath
due for the same, and then they cry out to the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do to be saved. The Lord deals with a pure soul, whom he intends to
save, as he said to Moses, Deuteronomy. 28.66.
Thy life shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day and night.
Now it is with a soul in this plight, as it was with Balshazar in his cups,
Dan. 5.
when he saw the hand writing, the joints of his knees smote together: thus
does the Lord strike the soul with amazement and fear, whilst he shall see
before him nothing but death, hell, and condemnation; thus the Lord ordinarily
breaks the heart, and humbles the ^oul, before he fills it with mercy.

Baloved, let us not flatter our selves, to think, that repentance and
reconciliation with God were a matter so easily got: No, no, the Lord will have
us into the furnace first, and the Lord will make us to see our sins, and to
feel the weight and burden of them, Mat. 9.13 Es. 55.1. Joh. 7.37.
with the sense of his anger and wrath against sin, before we can look for
mercy. The Scriptures are full in this particular. And the Reasons are:

God has so appointed it, Ioh. 16.8
I will send you the Comforter (says Christ) and he shall rebuke the world of
sin and of righteousness. First of sin, unto condemnation, and then of
righteousness, viz. the righteousness of Christ unto salvation. And thus the
Prophet brings in Christ, speaking thus, Es. 61.1.
The spirit of the Lord is on me, and the Lord has anointed me, and sent me
to preach good tidings to the poor, to bind up the broken hearted, to preach
liberty to the captive, etc. Here you see to whom Christ is sent, and here is a
soul qualified for mercy; not all and every one that lives under the Gospel,
that has been Baptized, and goes under the name of a Christian; but such only
as are sensible at their spiritual misery and thraldom by reason of sin. I
came (says Christ) to seek and to save that was lost. Miserable creature thou,
Luke 19.10.
if thou be not one that Christ came to seek and to save: But if thou be not a
lost creature, a poor, wretched, damned creature in thy own apprehension, thou will never have Christ to save thee.

Secondly, till we thus see sin, The full soul loatheth the honey comb.

But take a poor wounded soul, whose heart is truly humbled, it is like a
smitten Heart; O, to the soil it flies, Ps. 42.1.
As the Heart brayeth after the Rivers of water, so longs my soul after thee,
O God.

Let such a soul have all the treasure in the world presented unto him on the
one hand, and the least drop of the blood of Christ on the other hand: O, it is
Christ's blood that he priseth above all. As Rachel said to Jacob, Give me
Children, or else I die; so says a poor soul, Give me Christ for the pardon of
my sins, or else I die, and shall perish for ever.

This serves to discover unto us what is Gods manner of dealing in the work of
man's Conversion and Salvation;

Well then, would you know how it fares between God and your souls; call to
mind your sins past, the sins of your youth, the sins of your middle age, and
the sins of your riper years, and see how your hearts stand affected toward
them: Can you think of them without grief of heart? have you as yet never felt
the terrors of the Almighty for sin? You never felt such a weight and burden
of sin, that you were ready to sink under it. O, deceive not your own souls,
the foundation of grace and salvation is not yet laid.

But now, if upon examination, you find the terrors of the Lord, your hearts
wounded, that the remembrance of your sins is grievous unto you, and that the
burden of them is intolerable; here is a good mark, that God intends much
good to such a soul.

Seeing this is Gods manner of dealing in the work of Repentance and conversion
to God,

Here is matter of mourning and lamentation, in regard of the great security of
this age wherein we live; there is little fear or dread of Gods anger and wrath
for sin amongst men; a clear argument, that men are far from this grace of true
repentance.

The Lord be merciful to a world of men that live amongst us, even in the
bosom of the Church, if we had a fountain of tears with Jeremy, we might weep
them out, to see the misery of the greatest part of the world, that though they
live in the bosom of the Church, and partake daily of the Word, yet are not
wrought upon.

How many have we, that are so far from grieving for their sins, that it is
their grief they cannot sin more freely? Men cannot endure to meet with any
check or controlment in their sinful courses.

You that know the world, and you that know the state of this place, cannot but
know, how many we have that sit upon their Ale-bench, and there despite the
Spirit of grace, glorying in their sin: O that such would but consider that
dreadful place of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
That all might be damned that took pleusure in unrighteousness; yet fear not
damnation: But the damnation of such does not sleep.

And last of all, work, that have been under the Spirit of bondage, and have
layne under the threats of the Law, have seen sin and have apprehended Gods
displeasure in their souls for sin: I may say to such a one, as it was said to
blind Bartimaeus, Behold, Christ calls thee; who for this spirit of
heaviness will give thee the spirit of gladness: sorrow may endure for a
night, but joy comes in the morning; and, Mat. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall rejoice.

O,

Even this fear of Gods wrath, Paul, Ye have not received the Spirit of bondage
to fear again; To. 8.15.
which word implies thus much, that even the very godly themselves, had at
first in them the spirit of bondage to fear God for his wrath, hell and
damnation. A degree of grace, if I may so call it, that, for ought I know, all
Gods children at first, in some measure or other pass under.

But how shall I know,

True sight of sin and humiliation of the soul that shall find comfort,

First, 2 Cor. 7.11.
What indignation (says Paul) has it wrought in you? A heart-rising against
our most secret corruptions, stirring in us, is a good sign our sorrow for sin
is sound.

It may again be known by that full purpose of heart that is in us, Paul,
Zacheus, Mary Magdalen, Peter, etc. fell not into their sins again.

Thirdly,

Ver. 10. The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by reason
of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength but labor and
sorrow, for it is soon cut off, and we fly away.
MOSES having before showed how unlike their life was to other Nations and
People: 1. In that they were continually wasted with judgments, For we are
consumed in thy wrath. 2. In that they were so speedily swept away.


Now he comes to set down the bounds and limits of man's life, and shuts it up
within the compass of threescore and ten years, or at the most fourscore
years: and this time is not all replenished with joy and pleasures, but even
the best part is spent in labor and sorrow.

In this Verse Moses sets down two things, touching the brevitie and shortness
of man's life in general.

1. That the ordinary term of man's life, according to the common course of
nature, is seventy years, this is the ordinary stint, few do pass this, not
one of a hundred, and where one does, a hundred do not. But if men be of such
exceeding strength of nature, and constitution of body, that they spin out the
thread of their days to eighty years, that is a great age indeed, and not one
of a thousand reach unto. 2. Lest men should think too well of this life, and
be in love with it, he shows, that even the best and most flourishing time of
man's life, is but a bitter sweet, full of cares, griefs, sorrows, and cutting
labors, which makes it more like a continual death, then a happy life.
And that which does increase their misery is this, that their flourishing
estate does last but for a while; For, it is soon cut off, and we fly away.

The days of our years are threescore, etc.
WHen Moses says, that the days of our years are threescore years and ten, he
does not affirm all men to live so long, or none to live longer, but that the
ordinary stint and term of man's life is seventie years, which men do not
usually pass, for the best and strongest bodies, he affirms, do not pass
eighty years, and where one does, a thousand do not.

Seeing that within this compass is the longest bounds of men's lives, Moses
would here show us again the shortness of our time in this world.

That man's life is short. Man's life is short.
they seem to us to be soon gone, and but a few days: and therefore Moses
says, The days of our years; and Jacob, though he lived long, yet
acknowledged that his time was but short, and that his days were but few and
evil; Genesis 47.9.
The days of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years, few and evil have
the days of the years of my life been; and I have not at tained to the days
of the years of the life of my Fathers, in the days of their pilgrimage. Now
if Jacob could say that his days were few and evil, that lived sixscore and
ten years, what are our days that scarce live half so long.

Our life is short, if we do but consider what our childhood is, and how much
of this time was spent in that state of life, which cannot truly be termed life
indeed; for, howsoever in childhood and youth we had wit and discretion to
discern good and evil, yet there wanted that reason and understanding to
choose the good and refuse the evil: so that part of our life was past without
any fruit, before we could truly be said to live; for so long as we know not
God, nor wherefore he created us, and are ignorant of the end wherefore we were
sent here into the world, we cannot properly be said truly to live.

When we come to riper years, and come to our selves, as Solemon says, He that
increases knowledge, increases grief: Then do the cares of the world, and
the thoughts of providing for Wife and children take up our thoughts and time,
that we martyr our selves, and our life is full of misery.

Let men come to the age of fifty years, does not death then by their gray
hairs summon them daily, though neither sicknesses nor diseases do assail us;
yet we may then perceive that nature decays, and we draw apace toward our
long home.

But suppose (as Moses says) that we draw upon eighty years, are not our
lives then a burden unto us, whilst we wrestle daily with aches, pains,
griefs, and a world of infirmities, that old age is subject unto; all which
render our lives a burden to our selves, and no less are we burdensome to
others.

How frail then and how miserable is the life of man? And indeed, that time
cannot truly be said to be long, that at last shall have an end.

So that all things considered, there is more detracted from man's life, then
added to it.

Infancy is swallowed up with childhood, childhood with youth, youth with riper
years; and both infancy, childhood, youth, and riper years, are all swallowed
up of old age, and old age with death: So that our continuance here cannot
truly be called Life, but a continual passage from the womb to the grave.

Besides, if we consider, the half of this time of seventie years is spent in
sleep, which it a kind of death, and is half our time: And out of the other
half, if we would subduct our childhood, time spent in sickness of body,
trouble of mind, so much time spent in doing nothing, so much time in doing
little, we shall find at last, that our days and time on earth, may easily be
measured by the short Ell of a few days, as Jacob said to Pharaoh, Few and
evil have the days of my pilgrimage been.

Now then, Moses days, that ordinarily men lived not above seventie years;
this confutes that common opinion that is in the world, that as the world
grows older, so men's lives grow shorter, and that the earth it self grows
weaker and weaker, and carries less burden. Was not this in Moses time, that
men lived ordinarily not above seventie years? And therefore we are not to lay
the shortness of man's life upon the Lord, or the age of the world, but upon
our selves and our sins, that our lives are shortened unto us.

Let us not then lay the blame upon God when it is in us; for, if our days be
cut off shorter, and we live not so long, if we decay in strength, and our
lives are shortened, our own intemperancy, in surfeiting and drunkenness, and
other disorders in our lives, many times shorten our days, which otherwise we
might attain unto.

Seeing man's life is so short, how should this move us all to esteem less of
this life, that is so frail and short, and transitory, and to seek for an
everlasting rest, and a Kingdom that shall not fade, with those primitive
Christians, Heb. 11.
That looked for a City, the maker and builder whereof was God. And if we can
be content to study, labor, and sweat for a poor life here, of so short a
continuance, how much more should we study and labor for life eternal? As
Christ says, Labor not for the meat that perishes, John 6.
but, etc. So let us labor for that life that perishes not, and shall not
last for seventy or eighty years and then end, as this life does; but shall
last whilst God himself lasts, even to all eternity.

Thirdly and lastly, of heavenly knowledge, faith, repentance, and other graces
may a man get in these seventie or eighty years, if we are not wanting to our
selves.

But alas, who makes this use and benefit of his time? Commonly, men bestow
this time, precious time, vainly and unprofitably, and little of it is spent in
the service of God, in doing good to his Church, and furnishing their souls
with grace against the time of need. Did men but learn-one lesson at every one
Sermon that they hear, how much knowledge might be gained in seventie or
eighty years, and what a stock of grace might men have in store against the
time of sickness, and when death shall come.

Yet is their strength but labor and sorrow.
MOSES having in the former part of this Verse showed the common rate of our
life here in this world, and the ordinary stint, beyond which few pass;

Does here likewise show, that as this long life that men (...), being compared
to eternity is but short, and not to be stood upon, so it is not free from
trouble and sorrow, from misery and affliction; but that the chiefest part of
it, even the pride and flower of the strongest man is but labor and sorrow: so
that the sweetness of the longest life is tempered with manifold sorrows
troubles, and afflictions, we never continue long at one stay, but in our
chiefest prosperity, our comforts are often blasted, and suddenly gone.

So that in these words we have to observe, 1. The misery of man's life, even in
his best and most flourishing estate, it is mixed with labor and sorrow. 2.
The ground and cause of this, which is, It is soon cut off, and we fly away.


First, in that Moses affirms, that the life of man is ordinarily, not only
short, and shut up within the compass of seventie years, or at the most
eighty years; but also affirms, that the best and most excellent part of this
time is (...) ^^ouble and sorrow:

Hence we learn,
That the misery of man since his fall is exceeding great; Misery of man since
the fall, great. Genesis 47.9.
because let his life be what it will be, yet his very best time is full of
labor and sorrow. As Jacob said to Pharaoh, The days of the years of my
pilgrimage, are few and evil: So true is that of Job, Job 14.1.
Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble.

The very honey and sweetness of this life is mixed with wormwood and gall:
what day almost passes over our heads without some cross or other, and cause
of grief. He that drank deepest of the cup of all worldly prosperity; as
Solomon took his fill of them yet at last concluded, Eccl. 2.13.23.
That all was but vanity and vexation of spirit.

That man's day^ are full of sorrows, and his travel grief of heart, we see our
joys are uncertain, our sorrows and grief more sure: whilst as Job says, The
evils which we fear, befall us, and the comforts we desire fail us.

We are still expecting better days and times, but find worse: In our mirth
there is mourning, in our joy there is sorrow; our false fears beget real
grief, though the things we fear never come to pass: And as if our present
miseries were not enough to make our lives miserable, we torment our selves, in
laying hold of those we have already suffered, and fear those that are to come,
by which means, many times, we torment our selves before the time. In a word,
there is no age or time of man's life, nor estate or condition we are in here,
but it meets with its several miseries incident thereunto, youth, middle age,
old years, all of them have their labor and sorrow, days of vanity, full of
misery.

Seeing our life here in this world is so frail and so miserable, labor and
sorrow, both inward and outward, of body and mind; this shows, that the
greatest part of the world are far from this persuasion of Moses, as look not
upon this world to be so full of misery; for many a man could wish, he might
ever live here, and never die. It seems, these men did never yet taste of the
misery of sin, and of the misery of this life; or, else they could never yet
see what a blessed thing it is, to be freed from these miseries, and to live
eternally in Heaven.

Secondly, seeing our life is so short, labor and sorrow; this should teach us
that lesson of the Apostle, To use this world as though we used it not, seeing
it is so full of misery and trouble. We see a Mother, when she would wean the
Child from the breast, she lays some bitter thing upon it, that so the Child
tasting of it, might be out of love with it, and desire it no more. Even so the
Lord, knowing that we are exceedingly in love with the world, with the
pleasures and profits of this life, lest we should surfeit with these things,
has laid many bitter troubles and afflictions upon us, and all to wean us from
the immoderate love of it.

This does David acknowledge from experience, O Lord, thou have made my days
as an hand-breadth. Surely every man in his best estate is but vanity. Ps.
39.5, 6.
And that this might be remembered of us, he sets upon it a note of attention,
Selah, and shows what use himself made of it, O Lord, my hope is in thee: He
casts off all care of the world, and only flies to God and seeks to him for
succor.

Yet is their strength but labor and sorrow.
WE have yet farther to observe, that in asinuch as Moses says, their
Strength, that is, the chiefest and most excellent estate, the very flower of
their life, wherein men do so much glory and rejoice, is but a time of labor
and sorrow;

We are taught, No estate, but full of labor and forrow.
so high, or so sure and certain, or so sweet and comfortable, but it is
subject to alterations and change, subject to misery and trouble. For Moses
speaks this in general, both of Prince and Peer, rich and poor, one and all,
there is no estate, but has misery enough attending upon it.

Who is there living amongst all mankind, that is so happy and profperous in
the world, who if they should compare their comforts with their Crosses but
must acknowledge, that man's life is full of labor and sorrow: No, not the
greatest Prince and Monarch in the world, that is free from cares, fears, and
troubles; as we may see in David, who was a man of trouble all his days,
exercised sometimes by foreign enemies, sometimes by his own Courtiers, yea,
by Absalom his darling son: Their Crowns are continually attended with cares
and fears of treasons, and they are still filled with the cares and troubles of
the Commonweal they are set over; and are to look unto.

And those who have been highly advanced to honor and dignity, as who but
they, waited upon by a great and sumptuous train, in all glory and honor, yet
have suddenly been thrown down to the lowest degree of shame and dishonor.

And the like may be said of all ranks and conditions of men, what with cares,
fears, discontents, crosses, losses, and daily vexations, and molestations we
are incident unto, and daily meet withal it is not the least of our misery to
live long to bear them.

So that it may be said of man as it was said of the Angeil of Lavdicea, Rev.
3.17.
He knew not that he was wretched, and poor, and blind, and naked.

Here is our case, in the midst of all our pomp and glory, and outward
felicities in this world, we are ignorant of what miseries daily attend us: for
what have we here, that is not got with labor, kept with care and fear, and
parted withal with grief^ and sorrow: so that in the getting, enjoying, and
parting with what we enjoy here below, we may say with the Prophet, Hab. 2.13.
The people shall even weary thomselves for every vanitle. Like little
children, we sweat again in catching Butter-flies, whilst in the mean time, we
neglect the true treasure of life and glory.

Besides, the spiritual evils of this life as ignorance, unbelief, pride
hypocrisy, hardness of heart, and the like, these so pester and annoy even the
best of Gods servants, To. 7.24.
that they often complain with Paul, O wretched man that I am, etc. and with
the father of the child, Mar. 9.24.
I believe, Lord help my unbelief; as Bradford, that blessed Martyr of God,
was wont to do, so that we have cause continually to groan under the burden of
our miseries here, and subscribe this truth of Moses, that our most happy and
flourishing estate in this world, is but labor and sorrow.

That herein and hereby the Lord might exercise our spiritual armor,

Secondly,

And lastly, a better life, where all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes,
and sin from our so^ls.

Seeing this is so, labor and sorrow, cares, fears, vexations, and
molestations, but that our whole life is full of labor and sorrow;

As this should wean us from the world, and put us out of love of all things
here below: so it should stir us up to seek that life, where all these miseries
shall be taken away, where God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes, Rev.
21.4.
and where there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain, but pleasure without pain, and fulness of joy
at his right hand for evermore. Our best estate here is mixed with grief,
sorrow, care and trouble. But happy, and thrice happy are they, which shall be
judged worthy to inherit that life which shall last for ever, and that without
all cares, fears labor and sorrow, Rev. 14.13.
Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, they rest from their labors.

Secondly, labor and sorrow.

There is no calling or condition of life, but has miseries enough attending
upon it, to make them wretched that live in it, if they want patience to bear
them.

And those that seem most happy, and we look upon them as most free from those
miseries, themselves many times could wish rather to be any other, then that
they are; and if we could change our estates with theirs, it is possible we
should wish to take our own again. Why then should we be weary of those
callings wherein the Lord has set us, but rather undergo the same, and arm
our selves against these troubles and sorrows, and not to use unlawful means
to escape them, for that will but increase our sorrows, and make our selves
more miserable.

For it is soon cut off, and we fly away.
MOSES in the former part of this verse, having showed the miseries, sorrows,
and troubles, incident to the best and flourishing estate of mankind in
general; in the latter part of this verse, applies it to the state and
condition of the Church and people of God in the Wilderness, and shows: But
for us, says he, our time is cut off swiftly, and we fly away.

For so I take it, it makes the sense plain, though it seems to be read
otherwise in our common translation; yet, if we mark the scope of the Holy
Ghost, which is to show, that their estate in the Wilderness was far worse
then other peoples were. Thus, though the ordinary time of man's life be
seventie years, or eighty years; yet, we are otherwise dealt withal, our life
is neither so long, nor yet so free from labor and sorrow as other men are,
because, we are cut off suddenly, in the turning of an hand, we fly away and
are gone.

Hence we may see and take notice of the heinousness of sin, Sin causes many
times sudden death.
and especially of the sin of Infidelity, and murmuring against God, it made
the Lord to cut down his people confusedly and hastily, even as a man by his
Sith sweepeth down his grass: Even so the Lord is here said to cut down his
people with the sharp Sith of his judgment, as it had been grass.

And surely, amongst other sins wherefore the Lord, even in our time, has cut
down so many, some with one disease, and some with another, confusedly,
quickly, and hastily, this sin has not been the least provoking sin of this
land this day: Our distrusting of Gods power and providence, and murmuring
against the Lord, as though we should never see peaceable days again, or
Religion established, and the Gospel to flourish, and that we shall never see
those golden days we have so long defired.

Even this sin of murmuring and distrusting of Gods power and providence, is no
small let and hindrance to our desired peace.

This, this, was the sin of this Church and people, though they had had much
experience of Gods power, and goodness toward them, in delivering them from
their cruel bondage in Egypt, and that the Lord had now brought them to the
sight of Canaan: yet for their sin of unbelief and murmuring against. Moses
and Aanon, the Lord would not suffer them to possess that good Land, but cut
them off and swept them away by hundreds, and thousands, that they dyed in the
Wilderness. And how severely God has punished this sin in his own servants,
Numb. 20 8.12. Luke 1.20.

For the Reasons and Uses, see the first Doctrine.

And we fly away.
MOSES speaks not here of the people alone, that they were wasted and consumed:
But joins himself with them, The Lord has cut us off and we fly away. He
joins himself in the sin, and also in the punishment. They all had sinned,
even Moses himself, and for his sin the Lord would not suffer him to come into
the land of Canaan. Number. 20.8.12.
His sin he here confesses with the sins of the people, and Gods righteous
Judgment upon them for the same.

Hence we may observe. Gods servants confess their own sins as the sins of
others.
in their prayers has been to confess themselves sinners; And by their sins
to have drawn down Gods Judgments as well as the sins of others; This does
Moses here, links himself with the rest of the people of Israel, in the case
of Gods Anger.

Thus Daniel in that solemn prayer of his for the Church, Dan. 9.5.
that the Lord would make good his promise to deliver them from their Captivity
and Bondage, confesses his own sins and the sins of the people. We have sinned
(says he) and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled,
even by departing from thy precepts and from thy Judgments. And again, Ver. 7.
O Lord, righteousness belongs to th^e, but unto us confusion of face as at
this day. Thus godly Nehemiah when he makes his prayer in the behalf of the
Church, Neh. 1.6.
We have sinned against thee, both I and my Fathers house have sinned. If any
man sin (says Saint John) we have an Advocate, etc. He joins himself with
others that stood in need of Jesus Christ for their Advocate. And who could
have said more against Paul, then he against himself, when he confesses that
he was the Chiefest of sinners. Luke 16.13. Luke 15.18.
And thus does the poor Publican, the Prodigal, etc.

And it must be so: For

First,

This Reason does Joshua press upon Achan. Jos. 7.19.
My Son, I pray thee give ^lory to God, and confess thy fault. Hereby we clear
his Justice, when we take shame to our selves.

And this was David's Reason, Ps. 51.4.
why he was so long and ample in the Confession of his sins. That thou might
be justified, etc.

Secondly,

Thirdly in a true and hearty Confession of our sins,

And hence it is that we shall find Gods people when in the most solemn manner,
they have sought the pardon of their fins, they have grounded their hopes of
Mercy, from their hearty confession of their sins. Thus David, Ps. 51.3.
Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin: for, says he,
I acknowledge mine iniquity. Ps. 32.5.
And again, David presses the Lord with this, I acknowledged my sin unto thee,
and mine iniquity have I not hid. And in times of public Humiliation much of
the work has been spent in Confession of sins.

This serves for the just reproof of those, Moses say thus of this people? did
he so unmercifully single out himself and say, that it is but just that these
Rebels be plagued, they murmured against me, and would not belive me: No, no,
Moses joins himself with them, and says, We are Cut off, and we fly away:
What Spirit then are those led by, that condemn others without pity and
compassion, and justify themselves as if they were Righteous.

This may serve also for our instruction. Moses his Example, who though he was
an excellent man of God, highly in Gods favor: yet he humbly joins himself
with the Church in the Confession of his sins, as well as theirs. Acknowledging
that his sins were the cause of Gods Judgments, as the sins of the people;
though he escaped and they were punished.

Thus should we do now, that so many places and Families, and persons are
visited with sickness whilst we escape; let us not think onr condition better
then theirs, or that they were greater sinners then our selves: But let us know
that our sins have been the cause to pull down Gods Judgments upon others, as
well as their own.

As Moses here acknowledges himself in the number of them that had sinned, and
had compassion on them, and prayed for them.

Even so though others die, and thou escape, others are in misery when thou art
free: O know that thou may have a hand in their plagues; Thy sins may be deep
in the cause of Gods Judgments on the Land. And therefore to have compassion
on others miseries, to pity them, and to pray for them, and to acknowledge
that it is not thy goodness above others, but the Lords goodness toward
thee, that thou escapest, and art not wrapped up in the same misery.

Ver. 11. Who knows the power of thy Anger: even according to thy fear, So is
thy wrath.
IN this verse Moses seems to apply and to make use of the former destruction,
of so many thousands of the people, that were so suddenly cut off, and swept
away. Who knows the power of, etc. q. d. what man living is able sufficiently
to confider of the greatness of thy wrath, and fearful Anger against sin: And
who does fear thee according to thy exceeding and unspeakable Anger to tremble
at it, as thine indignation and displeasure ought to be feared: As if he should
say, surely few or none. For Interrogations in the Scripture are often strong
Negations. And those that do fear thee, yet fall short of the measure of their
fear, that thy anger and wrath does require.

Who knows.
THat is, does well consider it, and acknowledges the unsupportable weight and
burden of it.

The first Instruction observable is:

That albeit we taste of Gods anger, Few take notice of Gods anger.


And that is ordinarily the case of desperate sinners, that contemn the rod of
Gods chastisements, and profit not by them, Jer. 8.6.
as the Prophet has it. No man said, What have I done? And again, Ezekiel. 16.43.
I have brought thy ways upon thy own head, yet have tho^ not had
consideration of thy abominations.

Thus did the Lord call to weeping and mourning, Es. 22.12, 13, 14.
to baldness and sackcloath; and behold, joy and gladness, eating of flesh,
and drinking of wine. But what followed this damnable security, Surely this
iniquity (says the Lord) shall not be purged till ye die. Genesis 6.
This was that damnable security of the old World in the days of Noah, though
Gods judgments were threatened, and even at the door; Yet, they gave themselves
to eating and drinking, marrying, etc. till the Flood came, and swept them all
away.

And hence it is that we are commanded, to hear the rod, and who has appointed
it. Mic. 6.9.
Every affliction and every judgment from God, utters a voice, which we are to
give ear unto, and labor to find out the Lords mind in, wherefore the Lord
sends forth such tokens of his anger and displeasure, and not to do this, when
Gods hand is upon us, argues much security. It is a dangerous thing, when Gods
wrath is gone out against a Land and Nation, or any particular person, to
harden our necks against the stroke of the Almighty. It was a sad complaint
that of the Prophet, Strangers have devoured his strength, Hos. 7.9.
and he knows not. O when the Lord shall inflict upon his people, and plead
against them, with the pestilence, and with blood, Ezck. 38.22.
and men shall not take notice of it, but remain senseless under Gods hand,
this is the way to double Gods strokes, and to kindle a fire that shall devour
to destruction, He has poured upon him the fury of his anger, and yet he knew
it not, Es. 42.25
and it burned him, and he laid it not to heart.

Such look not up to God that strikes them, nor to their sins,

Secondly, sufferings; whereas David in his greatest trials could comfortably
conclude, I know that thy judgments are just, Ps. 119 75.
and that thou of very faithfulness have caused me to be troubled.

This serves to admonish us,

In all extraordinary and strange judgments of God upon us, we should look
home, Deuteronomy. 31.17.
and say, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and true are thy judgments: And all these
things are come upon us, for we have sinned against thee.

This was Jobs care under his sore afflictions, he puts not off the matter,
looks not upon the Caldeans and the Sabeans that had plundered him of his
substance; but he looks up higher, even unto God, and desires to find out the
cause of all his misery, Job 10.2.
Show me, wherefore thou contendest with me.

Thus does the Church in great afflictions, first, they acknowledge, that their
sins had deserved all their miseries, and they desire to find them out, and to
turn unto the Lord, Man suffers for his sin. Lam. 3.39.
Let us search, and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord.

This is one main end of all those tokens of his anger and displeasure, to
humble the proud heart of man, to make him look home; and then is God
glorified, when he attains the end of his corrections laid upon us. The Lord
knows, this Land and Nation of ours is too too faulty in this, that
notwithstanding his wrath has gone out against us, by many tokens of his
displeasure, by the sword, by the pestilence, and by our late visitation of
common sickness, and unwonted diseases, whereby many, in all parts and corners
of the Land, have been suddenly swept away, as it was the case of this Church
and People here: Yet, how few lay these judgments of God to heart, to be
humbled for sin, the cause of all. We have had our days of Humiliation, but
where is that Reformation the Lord looks for at our hands?

We still complain of our miseries we groan under, but we complain not of our
sins the cause of all. How can we look that Gods hand should be removed, and
his wrath appeased, whilst Englands sins cry for fresh judgments upon us?

I am no Prophet nor the Son of a Prophet, yet I am given much to fear, that
Englands's miseries are not yet at an end, but that God has yet a farther
controversy with us.

When Moses entreated the Lord for his sister Miriam, Number: 12.14.
God returned him this answer, If her Father had spit in her face, should she
not have been ashamed seven days? q. d. How much more ought she to be humbled
and ashamed, since I have showed my displeasure against her? God has many
ways showed his anger and displeasure against this Land, and yet we have not
laid his Judgments to heart; why then do we not fear, that he will yet plead
against us, with pestilence, and with blood; and bring worser days, then
England has yet seen.

Who knows the power of thy Anger, etc.
THat is, none does sufficiently consider of thy Anger, and wrath for sin, and
does fear thee accordingly, to tremble at it: Surely they are very few, and
those that do fear thee, and the power of thy wrath: yet come far short of that
measure of it, that thy Judgments deserve.

Hence we learn, Gods wrath is more terrible. Psalm. 2.5.
nor is able sufficiently to conceive of it: It is called a fierce wrath, sore
Displeasure: when his wrath and anger is kindled, it devours to destruction.
Our God is a consuming fire.

First, it is the wrath of God. The Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth, Nahum.
1.23.
where the repetition of the words shows not only the certainty of his wrath,
but the severity of it.

Secondly, Deuteronomy. 32.22.
For a fire is kindled in my Anger, and shall consume to the lowest Hell, etc.

Thirdly, Romans 2.5
Thou according to the hardness of thy heart treasurest up wrath. As rich men
add to their Treasures, so God adds to the Treasures of his wrath, as men add
to their sins, so God adds to his wrath, and when the measure of sin is full,
God then powers out his full wrath.

It is a powerful wrath: Who knows the power of thy wrath? It is not like the
wrath of man, which howsoever hot, and great, yet many times wants power to
accomplish it; but it is a wrath, that has much power in it, so that look how
much more God is stronger then man, Romans 9.22.
so is his wrath.

It is a sudden wrath, Their Damnation does not sleep; it travails as fast as
men's sins, and will be sure to meet them at their journies end. It surpriseth
them suddenly, it comes as an Earthquake, and as a Thief in the night. And if
we look but upon those examples, whom God has made spectacles of his wrath,
who can but acknowledge that Gods wrath is terrible. The Angels were cast out
of Heaven in his wrath, the old world destroyed in his wrath, Sodom and her
Sisters consumed in his wrath, Corah and his Accomplices swallowed up of the
Earth in wrath, Pharaoh and the Egyptians drowned in his wrath: The Jews once
Gods Church and peculiar people now rejected in his wrath. Besides experience
daily before our eyes of Nations, and Kingdoms flourishing Kingdoms, brought
low almost to destruction, all the woeful fruits and effects of Gods anger and
wrath: For the Reasons and Uses see ver. 7. Doct. 5.

Who knows the power of thy Anger according to thy fear.
q. d. WHat man living is able sufficiently to consider the weight of thy Anger
for sin, ahd who does fear thee accordingly? surely very few. And those that do
fear thee, yet come far short in the measure and degree of the fear, that they
ought to have.

Hence we may observe, Men fear God no more because they know not the power of
his wrath
or have little or no sense of his Anger and wrath for sin, or else fear the
Lord but little and less then they ought to do. The Reason is plain, because
that few do truly and indeed acknowledge the Power of Gods wrath, what a woeful
thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God: would you know why men
fear Gods Anger no more, and make so light account of his wrath and
displeasure; surely it is because they never yet knew the wonderful and
unsupportable weight and burden of Gods displeasure. See how the Scriptures
speak of this Anger and wrath of God. Nahum. 1.5, 6.
The Mountains quake at him, and the Hills melt, and the Earth is burnt at his
presence, yea, the world and all that dwell therein. Who can stand before his
indignation, v. 6.
and who can abide the fierceness of his anger, his fury is poured out as
fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him. Yea, the best of Gods Servants that
have ever lived, have been astonished and cast down, with the beholding of Gods
anger.

What a sad complaint was that of holy Job, Job 6.2. Job 16.12, 13. Esaias 38.15.
O that my grief were weighed, and my calamity laid in a balance together, it
would be heavier then the sand of the Sea, etc. And again, He has broken me
with one breaking after another, and runs upon me as a Giant. Which shows
that Jobs very inward and most noble parts were most afflicted with the sense
of Gods anger, and displeasure.

And thus likewise does Hezechiah complain: that God had bruised his bones like
a Lion.

And David affirms the combating with Gods displeasure. His Soul was sore vexed
and the very pangs of Hell gat hald upon him. And Jonas, Ps. 116.3
out of the belly of Hell cried I.

His wrath sets all on fire, sets the conscience on fire as it did the
conscience of Jadas, and burns that. Sets the estate of a man on fire and
consumes that, falls upon a man's house and habitation, sweepes away Sons and
daughters, his Anger sets all on fire. If his wrath be but once kindled, Hos.
2.5
perishing and destruction is the issue of it. Now whilst men cast off this
fear of Gods wrath, no marvel though men live in sin, and cease not to
provoke him day by day, by their evil ways, the fear of God is wanting.

The Reasons are
First, How can I do this great Wickedness says Joseph and sin against God?
Genesis 39.
It was the fear of God that kept him from consenting to his Adulterous
mistrisse. It was the fear of God that kept Job, that he durst not give
liberty unto himself so much as in a wanton look. And he professes, that he
durst not oppress nor wrong any, and that for this very Reason; Job. 31.23.
for Destruction from God was a terror to me. He was not able to bear Gods
wrath.

And from this ground Saint Paul exhorts men to obedience knowing (says he)
the terrors of the Lord, 1 Cor. 5.11.
we persuade men. See that the consideration of Good anger, and wrath against
sin, is an excellent preservative against sin.

But before we come to the Uses,

I answer,

Yet this sense of Gods wrath, and heavy, displeasure against sin, must not,
nor may not be cast aside, this was the case of David. Psalm. 119 120.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. David
no doubt had a child-like fear and awe of God; And yet in the second plaee, he
stood in awe of Gods judgments, thus were Gods judgments a terror unto Job,
the Destruction from God was a terror unto me. Job 31.23.


So that howsoever, the godly are freed from Gods wrath by Christ, yet being
continually preserved with the ill neighborhood of the flesh, by the which we
are often drawn into sin; the consideration of Gods judgments, is an excellent
preservative to keep us from sin.

Seeing the power of Gods anger is so great and terrible, Mal. 4.2.
Unto you that fear my Name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing
under his wings. It is he that must Shield us from the heat of Gods wrath.
Would we then have the heat of Gods anger to fly away, and to be safe from
wrath, kiss the Son; get we under the wings of Christ, and so shall we be safe
under his Feathers; otherwise we lie open to the fire of Gods anger, which at
last shall devour to destruction.

This serves likewise to inform us of the Reason,

There are two special causes why so few do so truly fear God.

Is a high conceit of our selves, Be not high minded in thy own eyes, Pro. 3.7.
Where the Holy Ghost opposes pride to the fear of God Such as are proud and
think their estate good enough, cannot truly fear God.

The second Reason why men cast off the fear of God, Blessed is the man that
har- of their that fears the Lord. Prove:
But he dens his heart shall fall into misery: a hard heart shuts out all fear
of God.

Is for Exhortation, ^eut. 29.18.
take heed that there be not amongst you man or woman which should turn their
heart away from the living God.

And he gives the Reason. Lest the wrath of God break out, and every curse
that is written in this book light upon him. It is sun that Brings this wrath
of God upon the Children of Disobedience.

Who knows etc:
THe meaning is, The best fail in the fear of God.
according to that measure of fear, wherewith thou ought to be feared.

Note hence, How Moses and the people of God, though they feared God yet
notwithstanding confess that they failed in respect of that measure of the
fear of God, which they ought to have had; for we must not think, but Moses,
and some of this people did truly fear God. But yet in regard of the power of
Gods anger, which was now very great, and grievous, their fear of God was not
answerable and proportionable; then it is apparent, that Moses and this people
failed in respect of the measure of the fear of God, which they ought to have
had, in regard of the greatness and grievousness of the judgments of God upon
them.

See that the best of Gods servants in this life fall short in their fear of
God and so in all graces of the spirit, in that love of God, in faith, in
repentance and in obedience, we come short all of us of that measure the Lord
requires at our hands, and which in regard of the means we ought to have.

For though we do know God, and that he is a just God, and righteous, and
cannot wink at sin; Yet what man is there that so fears before him as he
ought to be feared? what man so quakes at his anger as he should; and is so
afraid of sin as he ought to be, we have no grace here in perfection, but the
best faith is mixed with infidelity, our hope with fear our joy with sorrow.
It is well we can discern our wants and imperfections and cry out with the man
in the Gospel, Mar. 9.24.
I believe, Lord help my unbeleefe.

It is true our Justification is done at once, and perfect when we are
ingrafted into Christ. But our faith whereby we apprehend it, is not perfect
here, but grows and increases as our sanctification does, Romans 1.17.
the Righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith. It is the
privilege of the Souls in Heaven, Heb. 12.23.
to be just, and perfect. But not on earth; Paul himself that had a great
measure of the Sanctifying graces of the Spirit, yet confesses, I account not
my self that I have attained, Phil. 3.12.13
either am already perfect. But I forget those things that are behind, etc. and
press toward the mark.

It is a good sign of the truth of grace, when we can discern in our selves,
the want of grace, and strive against those doubts and fears that are in us.
Whereas it is an ill sign that that man wants the truth of grace in his soul
that discovers not those manifold wants and imperfections in himself.

If thou have not a greater measure of grace then David had it may be thy case
to complain as David did fear and trembling are come upon me, Psalm. 55.5.
and an horrible fear has overwhe^med me.

Our life (says the Apostle) is hid with Christ in God. It is hid from the
world, and it is hid many times from us here, in respect of that fulness, and
perfection of it, our hope and happiness is in reversion not in possession.

And God will have it so.

increased daily in us.

We have here no grace in perfection; sigh desiring to be clothed upon, 2 Cor.
5.2. Romans 8.24.
we are saved now by hope, our happiness is not in present possession but in
reversion.

This serves both discover unto us the misery of such, and fears in themselves.

Surely these are the most miserable men in the world, they show that the
strong man has taken possession of their souls, that thus holds them in this
damnable Security, there is but a step betwixt such a one and hell, thy case is
fearful, it is a sign that thou ar thardned in thy sin, and art far from the
work of grace in thy soul, Mat. 5.
woe unto such as now laugh, for they shall wayle and weep; and Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Such as have had the greatest
measure of Grace, have found many wants, and imperfections in their graces, as
Moses here, and not to be sensible of our wants and imperfections, is an
argument of the want of the truth of grace in such asoule.

Secondly, case is not singular, neither art thou alone in these complaints,
many of Gods dear children are full of them. My faith is weak, my hope
feeble, my love is cold, and I find so much backwardness, and coldness in
duties O what shall I do, I fear my estate is not good.

I confess here is just cause of trouble and complaint in the Godly, when they
find this to be their case, that grace is no more vigorous and active in them,
and when they want the Sensible assurance of Gods favor and love. But such
must stay themselves upon this that a man may be in the state of grace, and yet
want the assurance of it in himself; A man may have faith in him, and yet
conclude against it.

What a case was David in when he complayneth thus. Psalm. 13.1, 2.
How long-wilt thou forget me O Lord? how long will thou hide thy face from me?
How long shall I take counsel in my soul, and have sorrow in my heart? His
heart must needs be full of sorrow, when God hides his face from him. But yet
God turned again and spoke peace to his servant, and filled him at last with the
joy of his salvation, and thus will the mourning and sadness of Gods Children,
bring a joyful harvest at last, when these doubts and fears shall vanish
away, and their hearts shall be filled with comfort.

Verse. 12. Teach us O Lord to Number our days, that me may apply our herts to
wisdom.
Hitherto we have spoken of the two first general parts of this psalm. viz.
The complaint of Moses and the people, that they put up unto God now in the
wilderness in great affliction and distress, verse 1, 2. Secondly, the
Narration of the frailty and misery of man from the third verse to the 11.

Now in the 12. ver. and so to the end of this Psalm, He comes to the third
and last general of this Psalm; and that is the prayer of Moses and the rest
of the people of God, put up to God for grace and mercy.

And this prayer of theirs has in it two parts.

1. They beg for reconciliation again with God, ver. 13. Return O Lord, how
long? etc. 2. They pray for the happy fruits and effects of Gods favor and
reconciliation from verse 17. to the end of the Psalm.
Teach us O Lord to number our days etc.

In this v. we have their first petition wherein Moses this man of God prays,
that the Lord would make them to consider of the shortness and uncertainty of
their time, that so they might be wise, to provide for their latter end. God
seeing our life is so short so frail, and so momentary, But as yesterday that
is past as a watch in the night. And that death comes as a flood unresistable,
and suddenly, that our life is but as grass and all our excellencies, but as
the flower of the field, and our days but as a tale that is told. And that we
are so suddenly cut down and we fly away, that we may thoroughly consider of
this brevitie and shortness of our life, and being here to the end that laying
aside the excessive cares for the things of this life, we may apply your hearts
to wisdom, that is, to repent of our sins past to cast up our accounts, and
to provide for a better life: where we have 1. the petition it self, which
Moses made for himself, and in the behalf of the people, teach us O Lord to
number our days. 2 the end of this petition, on the use of this request, viz:
that we may apply our hearts to wisdom.


Note we first of all, How Moses prays to God to teach him and the rest of
the people of God, to Number their days, that is to be persuaded of the
shortness of their time in this world, and what shall become of their soul in
Death, hence we learn that.

Though God in his word has plentifully taught us and experience daly before
our eyes, We can not number our days unless God teach us
does confirm the same, that our life is short, frail and momentary; yet
unless God become our Schoolmaster, we shall herdly take out this lesson, our
foolish hearts are so ignorant of this knowledge, as Christ said to Peter, when
he had made that confession of Christ, Mat. 16.17.
flesh and blood, has not revealed this unto thee but my father which is in
heaven. So no man by nature can attain this knowledge to judge aright of the
frailty and shorinesse of his life, but must have God to be his teacher from
whom every good gift, Iam. 1.17
and perfect gift proceeds. How earnest is David with God to teach him this
lesson, Lord make me know my end and the measure of my days what it is, Psa.
39.4.
that I may know how frail I am

And indeed we have manifold examples in the word, that let us see, that
naturally we do the clean contrary viz. forget our latter end, and put the
thoughts of death, far from us, and what shall become of our souls at last:
that Rich man that was so wise for the world yet was a stark fool in this
knowledge, he could number his Riches, his Gold and his silver, His Sheep and
his herds of cattle, but had no Skill at all to Number his days. But reckoned
them up by the gross sum even many years to come. And yet alas poor man, he
lived not one day.

But even that night had his soul taken from him, and was sent to hell.

So that ungratious servant, Luke 12
that thought his Master would not come yet, but fell to eating and drinking,
and beating his fellows, was suddenly taken tardy, Mat. 24.49, 50.
and what shall I say of those foolish virgins, who never thought of providing
of oil, but slumbred and slept, and at midnight the Bridegroom came and then
it was too late to cry and call, Lord, Lord, Mat. 25.
open unto us, so that you see that naturally we are ready to forget the
Numbering of our days, and are not easily brought to consider the shortness,
and uncertainty of our life. Besides, experience makes this clear, for what
man is there amongst us, though he have lived threescore or fourscore years,
which does not flatter himself, to think that he may rub out yet another
year, and so another to that, so that you see it is naturally given to us to
be ignorant of this knowledge that Moses prays for, unless we are taught of
God; neither nature, learning nor daily experience, can teach us this lesson,
that our life is short

It is God only that must teach us this wisdom, Job. 32.
But as Job says, It is the inspiration of the Almighty that gives
understanding; till we come to be weaned from the world, and have our eyes set
upon more glorious things, thou are here below, our hearts will b^ bound up
from this wisdom.

Because none can teach the heart, Doctrine to heart, let us try and examine our
selves, whether we be not as forgetful of this point, and do promise long life
to our selves. If this be our case, let us likewise entreat the Lord to give
us this wisdom, and to teach us and persuade us of the exceeding shortness
of our life, that we might apply our hearts to this wisdom of learning to
dye; for till the Lord od open our eyes, and become our Schoolmasters, we
shall never come truly to know it, nor to make that right use of it as we
ought to do.

Secondly,

Moses was a wise man, yet as not sufficiently instructed in this point, he
humbly entreats the Lord to teach him this knowledge, that he might number his
days aright, this is that David does so earnestly beg for at Gods hand, Psalm.
39.4.
Lord make me to know my end, and the measure of my days, that I may know how
frail I am. And therefore seeing it is so hard a lesson to be learned, and of
so great use being attained, let us entreat the Lord to teach it us.

To number our days.
But may not this seem strange that Moses should so beg for this? Adams days
and set down how long he lived; He could number Enoch his days, and set
down how long he lived, Methusala, Abraham, Izack, Jaacob, and all the.
patriarks days, and how long they lived, and could not Moses number his own
days? this may seem strnage: we see a child of ten or twelve years old can by
arithmetike quickly tell you how many days he has lived, yea how many hours
and minutes.

I answer that neither Moses, etc. can skill of this numbering, unless the
spirit of God be his Schoolmasters, unless God give him wisdom and grace
from above, to persuade us, of the shortness of our time, and of the sudden
and speedy coming of Death, can truly learn this lesson to number his days
aright, but it must be the Lord that must teach it us.

Hence we learn, We ought to esteem of every day as our last day. Deuteronomy. 32.29.
to practice that which they so earnestly prayed for, viz: that upon the same
grounds that they were moved withal, that we learn to number our days
aright, and make account of every day as our last day. O that men were wise
(says Moses) that they would consider their latter end! True wisdom consists
in this, in the continual meditation of the shortness of our life, when we
arise in the morning, to think that we may be dead, ere night, and every night
to think this may be my last.

Many men think to what end is this? who knows not that our life is short
and uncertain, who knows not this?

But it is not for naught that the spirit of God in the scripture beats so much
upon this point and puts us so often in remembrance of it, would men be so
careful for the world, and so careless for heaven, and eternity, did we
truly know and were persuaded of the frailty and uncertainty of our being here?

Surely if we could but reckon our life and days as Moses does all along in
this Psalm, that it is but as vesterday, nay not so long, but rather as a
watch in the night, the space of three hours, that death comes as a flood,
that our life is but as a sleep or a Dream, suddenly vanishing away, that it
is but as grass. And all the excellencies of man, as Beauty, Honor riches
strength pleasures etc. but as the flower of grass, and that our days are but
as a ta^e that is told, were these thoughts thoroughly imprinted in our hearts
they would dam all our pleasures, and cause us to think more of Death then we
do.

Could we reckon our days upon our fingers ends, as we can other things, and
withal the great work that God has sent us into this world to do, and how
prodigally we have misspent our time; how little we have done and how much is
yet to do, when we are ready to drop into our graves could we, I say, thus
number our life and days we would never live as we do, so careful for this
life, and so careless for Heaven.

We see that those that shoot at Buts, they prick their arrows, sometimes
here, and sometimes there, round about the mark, at last they hit the white
thus does Death cast his Darts, sometimes a friend is taken away, sometimes a
kinsman sometimes he comes nearer and takes a Husband wife, child, at last we
our selves are struck with death and away we must.

Though we see this daily before our eyes, and see coarses daily carried upon
men's shoulders to the grave^ yet who lays it to heart and considers that the
feet of these that carried them may carry us to our long home, ere long; we
pass not away one minute of our life, but we have taken one slep more toward
the grave to day we hear that A. B. is dead to morrow we may hear that C. D.
is dead, shortly you shall here that S S. is dead.

It is noted for the great commendations of Joseph of Arimathea, Jo. 19.
who whilst he was in health made his tomb in his garden: and why in his
garden? No doubt to put him in mind continually of his Death, and that in the
midst of all his delights, and pleasures he might think on his latter end. Thus
it is said of that godly Father St. Jerome, that he thought with himself, that
whether he did eat or drink, or whatsoever he did, he thought he heard that
voice, Arise ye dead, and come unto Judgment.

Now that we ought thus to make account of every day as our last day, let this
reason persuade.

Because of that inevitable necessity that lies upon all Adams posterity that
dye we must, Tekoah said to David, that mourned so excessively for the death of
Absalom, We must all dye.

And as the Psalmist has it; Ps. 89.48 Ps. 49.19 Heb. 9.27.
What man lives and shall not see death? and shall he deliver his Soul from
the hand of the grave. Again Man shall enter into the generation of their
Fathers, and shall not live for ever. And, It is appointed for all men once to
dye. The consideration where of may put us in mind of our duty, to be in a
continual readiness for death.

We ought to make account of every day as our last day,

They that dye in the Lord are blessed, Rev. 14.13.
Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord: and these at last shall rise again
to life and glory: but as for the wicked, it is not so with them, for they
enter by death into everlasting pain, where the worm dies not, and the fire
shall never be quenched; so that our weal or woe for ever does depend upon
that short inch of time that is allotted unto us here, which also should put us
upon this duty to be in a continual readiness when death comes.

This serves to instruct us in the necessity of learning this lesson well,





First in Accompting every day as our last day,

To number our days aright is to dye daily; 1 Cor. 15.
this was the care of the blessed Apostle, I protest by our rejoicing which I
have in Christ Jesus our (...) I (...) dye daily: that is, by the continual
thoughts, and meditation of death, inure our selves by little and little, whilst
we are here, of the art of dying well, before we come to dye indeed. Paul dyed
daily, because he knew not the day and time when God would call him away by
death, the more we fit and prepare our selves for death, the less terrible
will death, this King of fear, be unto us, when it comes.

Thirdly to number our days aright and to be prepared for death; sting of
death is sin, 1 Cor. 15 56.
the sting being taken out, death cannot hurt. The Philistimes were so wise as
to discover wherein the strength of Sampson lay. Iud. 16.5
And therein they prevailed; it shall be our wisdom to repent us of our sins,
for therein lies the strength of death.

And last of all, the name of wise Virgins, and entered into the marriage
chamber, whilst those foolish Virgins that were careless of the bridgrooms
coming, and rested themselves with the bare name of Virgins, and with the
bearing the Lamps of an outward profession, without the oil of grace in their
hearts, were for ever shut out.

This serves to discover unto us the reason why sin does so abound,

This was the reason of that damnable security in that rich man; Luke 12.37.
That bad his soul to take her fill of all pleasures and delights, little
thinking that that night his soul should be haled from him.

And this is the reason why men power out their hearts to all manner of sins
and abominations, they never consider the shortness and uncertaintie of their
lives. Is there any so vile or so wretched, that if they were persuaded that
they should dye this night before to morrow, would they deck and trim, paint
and pounce, and pamper those bodies of theirs, that so suddenly must feed the
worms? no, no, if men made this account of their life, as at an hours warning,
they would provide better for that life that shall last for ever. This was the
reason why that evil servant fell to eating and drinking and beating his
fellow servant, Mat. 24.48.
he thought his master would be long a coming.

A contrary example we have in Moses this man of God, that albeit he might have
inioyed the pleasures of Pharaohs Court, with honor, wealth, and what not; yet
refused them all upon this account that they were but for a season. All the
pleasures, comforts, contentments, and outward felicities that the world can
afford us, are but for a season, short and momentany, and must have an end. And
the end of a wicked man's pleasures ends in pain. Son remember that thou in thy
lif time, Luke 16.
etc. when one hours torment in hell, will make the wicked forget all their
pleasures on earth.

And therefore this should serve in the last place for Exhortation. That we
always have death before our eyes, and to think upon it, to account of the
present time and day as our last, and so to live as if every day we should dye,
that we may be in a continual readiness for our dissolution, and change, when
we shall go hence and be no more.

There can be no worse deceit then when a man deceives himself in this
reckoning. Luke 12.37.
He was worthily called a fool that said, Soul, thou have much goods laid up
for many years, eat, drink and be merry.

And since it is the Lord that must teach us this wisdom, we must pray unto
him to teach us this lesson, to number our days aright, for till God teach us
this wisdom, we shall never repent, forsake the world, and seek for a better
life. And therefore I earnestly commend this duty to you, and it is my desire to
press it upon my self, that we all reckon this with our selves, as though this
day should be our last day, and this nigh our last night that when the Lord
shall call us hence, he might find us so doing: hitherto of the petition, Lord,
teach us to etc.

That we may apply our hearts to wisdom.
HEre we have the second part at first propounded. viz. that we may apply our
hearts etc.

These words may be taken in a double sense.

That we may apply our hearts to wisdom. That is, that seeing our life is so
short here, and so uncertain, we may no longer live in sin, as we have done,
but may truly repent, Men are never truly wise till they account of every day
as their last day.
and be afraid to provoke thee by our sins as we have done this Moses accounts
true wisdom. And the words being taken in this sense, the doctrine is.

That men are never truly wise, till they account of every day as their last
day. Herein lies true wisdom. O that men were wise, Deuteronomy. 32 29.
then would they remember their latter end. As if men were never truly wise
till then.

There is nothing more natural unto us, then to persuade our selves of long
life. And that we shall still continue in a happy and flourishing estate.

It was David's case to be thus lifted up in times of prosperity. I said (says
he) I shall neve be removed, Psalm. 30.6.
thou Lord of thy goodness have made my hill so strong. When God had settled
David in his Kingdom, had made him to prosper, and given him the upper hand of
his enemies. He was ready to fall asleep and to make his reckoning that he
should ever continue thus happy. That his good days should last for ever, and
his prosperity should never fail.

And this was the case of Job, that holy man; In the time of his prosperity;
he had such thoughts as these. I said I shall dye in my nest, Job 19.18.
and I shall multiply my days as the sand. And again, my glory shall be
renewed, ver. 28:
and my bow shall be strengthened in my hand. What is this but to reckon
without our host, when we shall thus flatter our selves that we shall continue
in our state: whereas our very lives, and being here, with whatsoever we have
and enjoy is only at his pleasure; we have nothing so intayl'd upon us here,
that we enjoy in life and death, but the Lord, when it pleases him, can either
take us from it, or it from us.

It is wisdom then to provide for our change before the evil day come upon us;
this is Solomon's advice, Eccle. 12.1.
Remember thy creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come
not, nor the years of affliction, wherein thou shall say, I have noe pleasure
in them. q. d. certainly the time of sickness, and death will come, when all
these earthly comforts will fly away. A man never comes to be truly wise, till
he thus comes to esteem of his life, and to provide for his change.

And indeed, what man will have his evidence then to seek, when his cause comes
to be tried? In the matters of this world men are so wise in summer to provide
for winter, in health to provide forsickness. We will count but such a one a
fool that will then go to sow when other men go to reap: O where are our
hearts, that we are noe more spiritually wise for our souls. Pro. 10.14.
Wise men (says Solomon) lay up knowledge before hand. And such prove
themselves fools at last: With those foolish virgins, that have not the oil
of grace in readiness when death comes.

Seeing that herein lies true wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.
for whom do men commonly judge to be wise men, but such as have reaching
heads to buy and to sell, that can tell how to purchase lands and livings and
grow rich in the world, and grow great and mighty here. All this wisdom comes
from nature, and may have nothing in it but nature. If this be not guided by
the word, you shall see what reckoning and account the Lord makes of it. When
he says, they have rejected the word of the Lord, Ier. 8.9.
and what wisdom is in them? what greater folly can there be in the world, then
for these vain and foolish trifles, the pleasures of sin, that are but for a
season, to lose for ever a man's most pretions soul, to pass away for earthly
things with Esau the birthright of our inheritance, which such do that are not
wise for eternity.

O then would we be loath to be accounted fools in death as, Nabal was, who
when he came to dye the text says, His heart dyed like a stone within him, let
us take out this lesson whilst we are alive, to number our days aright and to
provide for death continually.

Secondly, exhortation, that as we desire to approve our selves to be the sons
of wisdom, to make this our principal care to make sure for eternity. This is
that one thing that is so necessary, that if we miss of that, we are undone
for ever.

But how may we come by this wisdom?

Saint James tells us. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God. Jam. 1.5.
And Moses his practice here may also inform, us Lord teach us to number our
days: It is God that must be our Schoolmaster to teach us this wisdom And the
humble he will teach in his way. The humble and most self denying christian, is
ever the most wise christian, whereas God rejects the proud and sends the
rich empty away. Seldom does any grace either grow or prosper in a proud man,
or in a proud heart. The humble christian tastes of the kernel, and sweetness
of religions when the prond man has only the shell.

Now in seeking this wisdom, these Rules must be observed.
Come in a self-denial of thy self and of thy own wisdom, 1 Cor. 3.18.
let him that would be wise, became a fool that he may be wise.

Seek it at Gods hand die humble and hearty prayers earnestly, Pr. 2.1.
Search for wisdom as for treasure, Says Solomon, the kingdom of God suffers
violence, and violent take it by force.

Meditate much and often of the doctrine now taught, viz Of the frailty of man's
life, and our uncertain being here, and that this grace must be had to make us
happy.

That we may apply our hearts to wisdom.
A Gain, the words may be taken in this sense, that is, as we have heretofore
lived in sin, now we may live to God, to repent, and amend our lives, and to
walk more humbly, and more holily with God. And thus Moses seems to expound
the words. This is your wisdom, Deuteronomy. 4.6
and your understanding, in the sight of the nations which shall hear all
these statutes, and say, surely this nation is a wise, and understanding
people, viz by keeping of the Commandments and doing them.

In this sense, the thing that Moses prays for, is for wisdom and care to
keep the Commandments of God, that for the time to come they might walk in
his fear as obedient children before him and then the doctrine is.

That Heavenly wisdom does consist principally in keeping the Commandments of
God, to live in faith, True wisdom consists in true obedience.
Repentance and true obedience to God. This is true wisdom by the testimony of
Moses himself. Or thus, true wisdom does consist in true obedience to the will
of God.

True wisdom and the knowledge of God is the candle of the soul to light it, and
to shine unto it in the ways of God. Thy word (says David) is a Lantern
unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. When we carry an awful and reverent
awe and dread of the majesty of God, and fear to sin against him, this is
true wisdom. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, Pro. 1.7.
but fools despise wisdom.

And thus have the Saints and servants of God approved themselves to God in
walking in the Commandments of God; thus Enoch is said to walk with God. Genesis
5.21. Lu. 1.6.
And Zachary and Elizabeth walked in all the Commandments of God. When we are
holy, as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1.
perfect as our Heavenly father is perfect; when our desire is to walk in an
universal obedience to all Gods Commandments with David. Psalm. 119
O that my ways were so direct, that I might keep thy statutes, so shall I not
be confounded, whilst I have respect to all thy Commandments. These are truly
wise and truly blessed. Ps. 119.1
Blessed are they that are undefiled, and walk in the law of the Lord. And in
this did Job comfort himself, and approved the uprightness of his heart to
God. Job 23.10.
He knows my way and tries me, and I shall come forth as gold. But whence
has Job this confidence? verse 11.
this he shows, My foot has followed his steps, his way have I kept.

A contrary example whereof we have in Iehu, 2 Reg. 10.31.
that howsoever he did many things that God had commanded him in the matter of
Ahab, yet this is left for a blot upon his name that shall never be wiped out;
Hos. 1.4.
Iehu took not heed to walk in the Commandoments of God, with all his heart.
And hence it is, that the Lord threatened to charge upon Iehu, all the blood of
the house of Iesreel. And this is it the Lord requires of his people. A Son
Honoreth his father, and a servant his master. If I be a father where is my
honor etc. So that the point is clear, that heavenly wisdom consists
principally in this in walking humbly and holily before God, and in keeping his
commandments.

By this we are known to be Gods, as a servant by his livery is known to
belong to such a Master; hereby we know; And by this shall all men know that ye
are my disciples, etc.

Secondly we owe unto God our lives our liberties, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
Ye are not your own, but ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in
your bodies and spirits, for they are Gods; we cannot serve a better master,
neither can we expect a surer reward.

We shall all be judged at last, 2 Cor. 5.10. Romans 8.14.
Then such as have lived after the flesh shall dye. And such as have lived
after the spirit shall live. Then we shall see the Difference betwixt him that
served God, Mal.
and him that served him not. Then those wise virgins that with the Iamps of an
outward profession had the oil of grace in their hearts, shall be known from
the foolish that wanted grace.

who want this fear of God before their eyes, that live in all manner of
iniquity and prophannesse, these reject the word of the Lord. They cast away
all care of keeping Gods Commandments, And what wisdom is in them? Ier. 8.9.


Secondly noe less folly appears in those that are so wise for the world and
such fools for their souls, Mat. 6.19.
Lay not up for your selves treasures on earth (says Christ) where moth and
rust does corrupt, and where thieves break thorough and steal. But lay up for
your selves treasures in heaven etc.

Christ commends Mary's choice that she had chosen the better part, Luke 10.
she sat at Christ's feet, she heard his heavenly doctrine. Whilst Martha was
busy for the body, Mary provided for her soul; what if Martha had let the
pott sees over, for that time, it had been a very tolerable neglect; but now
Mary carries the praise, the lord knows we have many Marthas, few Mary's, for
almost all be for the world, look after their bodies, few for heaven, that
take care for their precious Soul.

Verse. 13. Return O Lord, How long? let it repent thee concerning thy Servants.
MOses this man of God, having in the former v. prayed unto God, that he would
teach them by his spirit to make the right use of the shortness and
uncertaintie of their life:

Now he proceeds to make prayer unto God, for himself and the rest of Gods
people, for favor and mercy.

And all the petitions of his prayer are either for

Reconciliation to God, or else For the fruits of their reconciliation to God.
In this 13. v. they pray for reconciliation: that he would in mercy Return
again unto them, and be pacified again toward them.

In the verses following, they pray for the frui^s of this reconciliation, as
1. For the comfortable feeling of Gods love and favor again toward them,
which they had broken off by their sins, v. 14. 2. They pray for comfort
against their miseries and long afflictions verse. 15. 3. For defense and
protection and the blessing of God upon their labors and endeavors,
especially in their journey toward the land of Canaan, that God would defend
them from their enemies, and bring them at last into that promised land.


Return O Lord.
In this first petition and request we are to note two things.

1. What they pray for, viz. Reconciliation with God. Return O Lord; let it
repent thee. 2. And for this purpose they use 2. Arguments or Reasons to move
the Lord to take pity on them and to be favorable unto them. 1. Taken from the
continnance of their afflictions, which were both long and tedious, and very
sharp and grievous. How long? shall we lie boiling in the furnace of
affliction, and how long will thou be angry with us? 2. From their estate and
condition we are thy Servants. O then be gracious unto thy Servants, be not
for ever angry with thy own Servants; but receive us into thy favor, be
reconciled again unto us: And turn away thy wrath, and displeasure from us.
Return O Lord, q d. Although for our sins thou have justly turned thy face
from us, and been angry with us, yet be thou in mercy reconciled to us again;
show us thy favor and remove thy heavy hand. For as the Lord is said to turn
his back, and to hide his face when he takes away the tokens of his gracious
love and presence from a people: even so when he does manifest the signs of
his love and gracious presence unto a people, then is he said to return again.

Whence we may observe first of all, when Moses and the people of God do seek
unto God for mercy and reconcilation, viz. when they have been well whipped in
the school of affliction, and humbled and tamed, by the Lords corrections upon
them for their fins.

We observe, Men never seek to God forreconciliation, till they feel his
displeasure.
That men will never seek unto God for reconciliation, until such time as the
Lord has truly and thoroughly humbled them, and caused them to feel his anger
and displeasure for sin, staborn, rebellious and hard hearted sinners will
never truly seek unto God till such time as the Lord has broken their hearts,
with the apprehension of their miserable estate by reason of sin, and that they
come to feel Gods terrible anger and displeasure against them for the same.

The Lord knows that these hearts of ours are many times so hard, that our
greatest sins, have little effect upon our souls to work that godly sorrow and
humiliation as our sins have deserved. But when the Lord shall be pleased to
bring a sinner to the rack, and there lay weight upon weight upon him, and to
the weight of his sins add the weight of his anger and sore afflictions, this
dealing of the lord with a poor sinner many times causes such a stream of
tears, which bathe the soul in the water of true repentance, and bring the
sinner to a hearty confession of his sins: how were Jacobs sons wrought upon
by their troubles in Egypt? that their sin against their innocent brother
selling him for a bondslave, should lie hid for many years together, should
now come to conscience. Genesis 42.21.
We have sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul,
when he besough^ us, and we would not hear him, therefore is this trouble come
upon us. And thus David, when the hand of God lay heavy upon him day and night,
then, and not till then, he flies to God; and by humble confession of his sins
begs pardon at Gods hand. Ps. 32.4, 5.
I acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquity: for I thought I
will confess against my self my wickedness, Es. 26.16.
and then thou forgavest the punishment of my sin. The scriptures are clear in
this Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they poured forth their prayers
when thy chastisments were upon them; and again, they being bound in
affliction, Ps. 107.10, 13, 14.
and Iron, cried unto the Lord in their affliction and distress. Yea, this is
that which the Lord himself speaks of stubborn and hard hearted siners. Hof.
5.14, 15.
I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house of Judah
etc. till they acknowledge their offense, for in their affliction they will
seek me early.

So that miserable, rebellious, and hard hearted sinners will never seek unto
God, till such time as he has exercised them, with the sense and apprehension
of his terrible anger against sin, besides the examples the scriptures afford
us, are many, as Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33.10, 11.
the prodigal, the jailer and those cruel Jews.

Such only are capable of mercy from God, when in the sense of their own
misery, and apprehension of Gods displeasure they become fit objects of mercy;
full vessels can hold no liquor, and proud and haughty hearts are not fit for
mercy. Es. 57.15.
He will revive the spirit of the humble, and revive the heart of the contri^e
ones.

When our hearts are subdued,

When God sent his prophet to Niniveth to cry, Ion. 3.
Yet forty days, and Niniveh shall be destroyed, the Ninivits humbling their
souls in sackcloath, fasting and praying. God turned away from his wrath, he
intended against that City, 1 Reg. 21
yea, when wicked Ahab himself, shall but humble himself the Lord suspended
the judgment against him and his house.

And this is no other thing then what the Lord himself has promised: Ier.
18.8.
If a nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I
will repent of the plague that I thought to bring upon them: so that this is
the only way to stop the breach of Gods anger and displeafure, and to call back
his judgments, when they are gone out against us.

Seeing this is our wretched nature, reconc. liation till the Lord do even by
strong hand humble us, and break our hard and stony hearts; and cause them to
taste of his anger and sore displeasure against us, this bewrayes the monstrous
security and sinfullness of our hearts, that will never seek to God, till we
see our selves left and forsaken of him, and till he break our hearts by the
hammer of his judgments, that will not seek for heaven till he first send us
to hell. O the cursed security that is in these hearts of ours, that can by no
other means be humbled and brought home, but by the rod and frowns of so
gracious a God.

Surely it were our wisdom not to be so stubborn and rebellious to stand it
out, till the Lord do thus bruise us and break us by his judgments, and so
compel us to seek unto him.

Secondly seeing we shall never seek unto God for reconciliation, feel his
anger and displeasure. O what a terror may this strike in the hearts of those,
upon whom the Lords hand has been often, and yet have not been humbled to
turn unto him: when the Lord shall not only give us his Word, the ordinary
means of conversion and bringing us home; but shall also send his rod, even
sharp and sore afflictions, and yet men shall stand out against all, will not
be convinced of their misery, nor seek unto God for mercy: Here is a sign of
an obdurate heart indeed. Surely the case of such seems desperate, such have
cause to fear that they are in a hopeless condition: Ezekiel. 22.18, 19, 20.
Let such consider that place, and tremble at it; Because you are become
dross, behold, I will gather you in the midst of Jerusalem, as they gather
silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the furnace
to melt it. So will I gather you in my anger and in my fury, and I will leave
you there, and melt you; yea, I will blow upon you in the fury of my wrath. And
what account the Lord makes of such we may see; Jer. 6.29, 30.
The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed of the fire, the Founder melts
in vain; for the wicked are not plucked away. Reprobate silver shall men call
them, because the Lord has rejected them.

O it is a fearful sign of Gods wrath upon that soul, that when the Lord has
traveled upon us to do us good, by the Word, and by the Rod, and nothing will
work upon us; but still we persist in our sinful courses; Reprobate silver
shall men call such, and such may fear they are cast off of God.

And last of all, reconciliation: This may serve likewise to be a stay unto us
in the midst of our sharpest afflictions, and sorest trialls that may betide
us here, whether inward or outward, to consider the end whereunto God has
appointed them; viz. to humble us, Mic. 6.9.
to discover our sins, and to make us look home, this is the erand they come
with from God. There is no visitation, sickness, misery, or affliction, but
comes with a message from God: What have we then to do, but to search and find
out our sins, the cause wherefore the Lord is thus displeased with us, and to
be humbled for them, that so his wrath may be appeased. Surely this is the
Lords aim and end in his sharpest afflictions laid upon his children, to make
us look home, and to say to our own hearts, Have thou not procured this to thy
self, Ier. 2.17.
inasmuch as thou have forsaken the Lord thy God? And with the Church, Deuteronomy.
31.17.
Are not these evils come upon us, because our God is not amongst us? Not to do
this in times of affliction and distress, argues a high contempt of God and
his works. It ought to be the care of every one of us, Ezekiel. 16.41.
to know the plague of his own heart, and to find out that special sin, that
has made the difference betwixt God and him.

Return, O Lord.
THe next thing that we may observe is the person they pray unto, viz. the Lord
himself: They run to no Saint nor Angel for help and succor in this time of
their great distress; but they fly to God, because that he alone was
offended, and of him they seek for reconciliation, Return O Lord.

Hence we Iearn that in times of misery and distress God alone is to be sought
unto. In times of misery, God is to be sought unto. Ps. 50.15.


And for this we have both precept and example: Call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will hear thee, and deliver thee. And, Ask, Mat. 7.7.
and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, etc.

O what gracious and merciful promises has God made unto his Church and
people, and all to make them fly unto him, and rest upon him in time of
trouble; yea, such is the Lords inclination to pity and compassion toward his
people in times of misery and distress, that he has said, Es. 65.24.
Before they call I will answer, and whilst they speak I will hear.

And as for Example; the Scriptures afford us diverse in this kind, of the
faithful, that in times of misery and distress have made the Lord their only
refuge to fly unto, and have found comfort and deliverance: as that of
Jehosophat and the men of Judah, when the Amorits, 2 Chr. 20
the Moabits, and they of Mount Seir came up against them, that both Prince and
people were at a great straight, and knew not what to do, only say they, Our
eyes are upon thee. They seeking help from God were delivered.

Thus David in all his troubles, Ps. 109.4. Ps. 4.12. Ps. 86 5, 6. Ps. 86 7,
Ps. 65.2.
had still recourse to God; for my love they are become my Adversaries; But I
give my self to prayer. Yea, God is pleased to be styled by this very name, to
be the God that hears prayer. O thou that hear prayers, to thee shall all
flesh come. Thus Hezekiah, when that mighty Host of Senacherih was ready to
fall upon him and his people He made the Lord his only Rock and Defense, 2
Reg. 20.1, 2.
to fly unto. And when he received in himself the Sentence of death, still he
flies to God. Jonas 2.1, 2.
And that fugitive Prophet, Jonas, Out of the belly of Hell cried I, and thou
heardst my voice. And great reason. For

This is one principal end, help and succor; and to let us see how vain and
helpless all earthly helps and comforts are without him: And this very end the
Lord himself expresses, Hos. 5.14.
when he says, I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, etc. till they acknowledge
their offenses, and seek me diligently.

Secondly, 14. Ps. 50.51.
Call upon me in the time of trouble, etc. There is indeed no time to the time
of affliction, either for us to pray, or for God to hear prayer, for now if
ever the heart is in a right frame and temper of seeking God. If there be any
zeal and affection at all in the heart, times of affliction and adversity draw
them out, and lay them out, in seeking of God, when the rod is upon us.

What a stay and comfort have the godly then to lean and rest upon, of comfort,
and deliverance. This Honor have all the Saints.

Whereas wicked and ungodly, men here is their misery; they are destitute of
the very means of deliverance, they cannot pray. Let them perform this duty,
Pro. 15.8.28.9.
at any time, God shuts out their prayers, they are abomination to the Lord.
Io. 9.21.
God hears not sinners. If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will
not hear me. Es. 1.15.
How does the Lord protest against the Jews, that though they should stretch
forth their hands to him, he would hide his eyes from them; and though they
should make many prayers, he would not hear, because their hands were full of
blood.

O the misery of wicked men, that whereas their only refuge is to fly unto God
in times of misery and distress that the Lord should not only shut out their
prayers, but that the same should become abomination in his sight; who can put
to silence the voice of Desperation.

But God does sometimes hear the wicked; Ahab, when he humbled himself, 1 Reg.
21.
and sat in ashes?

I answer,

God bestows these indeed many times upon wicked men,

Whatsoever God bestows in love, For all the promises of God are yea, and amen
in Christ.

But do we not see that many times the godly themselves pray, David himself
complain, Ps. 22.2.
O my God I cry by day, but thou hear not; and by night, but have no
audience.

And David prayed most earnestly for the life of the child, 2 Samuel 12.14.
and yet the child died. God did not answer him according to his prayer.

God many times delays his children, etc. For what would become of these
graces, if there were no more but ask and have. No doubt Christ heard the
request of the poor Canaanitish woman at first, but it was after many requests
that he answered her, delighting in her often calling upon him, Josias, Jesus,
mercy, mercy.

Secondly,

Thirdly, desired. As Paul that would have had the Buffettings of Satan
removed. 2 Cor. 12.
But the Lord answered him in another kind, giving grace in the stead thereof
to support him. My grace (says he) is sufficient for thee. Thus does God many
times when we ask for Silver, give us gold. Something or other equivalent
thereto; as when we ask for Earthly blessings, if he give us Heavenly, he is
not behind-hand with us.

Thus long life is promised as a blessing in the keeping of the fifth
Commandment to children that obey their Parents: yet we know that many obedient
children die young, as Jesus did, yet the Lord makes good his promise in giving
them a better life. Yea, Christ himself, when he prayed that the cup might
pass from him: yet did he drink of it, yet was heard in his prayer, when God
gave him strength to bear it, and withal an Angel to comfort him.

And last of all, in all our prayers and requests that we put unto God, we are
tied to certain conditions, which not performed, we must not look to speed.

As first that all our petitions be according to his will. If we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us.

All our petitions must be put up in faith. Iam. 1.
Pray in Faith and waver not.

As we ask good things at Gods hand so we must ask them to a good end, James
has it. Ye ask and receive not, Iam. 4.3
because you ask amiss, that ye may spend them upon your lusts. Let us apply
this.

Seeing Moses and the people here, reconciliation again with him; We are taught
now at this time, that Gods hand lies so heavy upon this Land so many ways, to
go unto him likewise, and pray, Return O Lord, How long? that he would be
pleased again to be reconciled unto us, and receive us into his favor again.

And because we cannot come unto him without Christ, who alone must stand
betwixt the wrath of his Father and us. We must come in his name, and through
his Mediation and intercession, who will accept our prayers, not for any
worthiness in us, or them, but for his sake alone. It is he alone that must
perfume our prayers, with the sweet incense of his merits, Rev. 8.3. Io. 16.23.
and mediation, without which, our persons and prayers can find no acceptance
with him.

Seeing it is God alone that in all misery and distress is sought unto, Rome,
who teach men to pray to Saints and Angels, to Peter, and Paul, the Virgin
Mary, to this He-Saint, and to that Shee-Saint, etc. we utterly renounce this
Doctrine, and abhor this practice, as that which has neither precept nor
promise, nor Example in all the Book of God, to leave the Creator for ever
blessed, and fly to the Creature.

What greater dishonor can be done to God and Christ, 1 Ioh. 2.1.
since we have one Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he
is the propitiation for our sins. What is this but to leave the Kings son, and
to go to a servant to speak to the Father: Nay, what is this but to rob God of
his honor, and Christ of his office; both to be an advocate, and to make
reconciliation, are proper to the person of Jesus Christ: 1 Timothy 2.5.
There is one Mediator, even the man Christ Jesus. Besides, the Angels are but
fellow-servant^, Rev. 22.9.
See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant.

As for the Saints in heaven, they know not our wants, Es. 63.16.
Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
know us not.

And no less folly and madness is it to pray to stocks and stones, relics
and bones, as the Papists do.

And the last is, Lord (says Peter) whither shall we go? thou haft the words
of eternal life. It is our duty then to repair and resort to God the Father,
through the merits of his son Jesus Christ. What Parent can be more
compassionate of the child in time of misery and distress, then the Lord is to
his children in their afflictions? yea, such is his love and compassion toward
them, that though (by reason of their affliction) they are not able to put up a
distinct prayer to him; yet, their very sighs and groans shall pass for
powerful and effectual prayers. Hezekiah mourning like a Dove and chattering
like a Crane is heard, and answered of God: yea, the Spirit helps our
infirmities, when we cannot pray as we ought, Romans 8.
With sighs and groans that cannot be expressed.

We may rest assured, the Lord is near to them, that draw near to him.

Is our faith weaks he will strengthen us; are weignorant, he will instruct us;
do we want grace, he will supply us; is our love cold, he will quicken it; is
our repentance imperfect, he will perfect it; are judgments amongst us, he will
remove them; are we in distress, he will have mercy upon us; do our sins
trouble us, he will discharge us; are we in sickness, he will restore us; are
we in misery, he will deliver us.

So that every true believer may comfortably conclude, that his wea kest
prayers, sighs, and groans, proceeding from a broken heart, a hungring and
thirsting desire after grace and mercy, shall not return in vain but God in his
due time will answer the desire of their souls. We shall not want that grace
that we unfainedly desire, neither shall we be hurt with that corruption we
unfainedly lament.

Return, O Lord.
THe words are not so to be under stood, as if God at any time did totally
leave and forsake his people; for so God never departs from his, whom he once
loved in Christ: Howbeit in times of affliction and distress, the Lord seems
to them thus to do: as the Sun may be sometimes under a cloud. yet will appear
again; so though the cloud of our fins may hide the face of God from us for a
time; yet, he will pierce through them, and shin^ upon us at last. But now
whilst the Lord thus withdrawes himself from his people, it is a most bitter
time unto them, they can have no rest nor peace, till the Lord return again,
and be appeased toward them.

Hence we may farther observe, Whilst God seems to be angry, there can be no
peace.
no comfort to a poor sinner, but extreme sorrow, grief, and perplexity of
spirit.

We may see this in those sad complaints of Gods people, that have felt his
frowns and angry countenance upon them for their sins: how heavy and intol
lerable the sense of his displeasure has bin, we may see it in that sad
complaint of David, Ps 6.1, 2.
O Lord rebuke me not in thy anger, neither chasten me in thy sore displeasure;
my Soul is sore vexed, but Lord, how long? David could have no rest, nor peace
in his soul, so long as he lay under Gods displeasure. And thus prays the
Church, O Lord correct me, but with Judgment, Ier. 10.24.
not in thy anger, lest thou bring me to nothing. Yea, the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, in the sense of Gods anger and displeasure, cries out, Mat. 27.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? What are a man's wife, children,
gold, silver lands, livings, or all the world, when the soul shall combat with
Gods wrath, A wounded spirit who can bear? Es. 57.


The poor soul, scorched with the heat of Gods anger and displeasure for sin,
nothing can comfort it, but the Lords returning again in love and favor. Ps.
4.6.
Lord (says David) lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, thou
have put gladness in my heart more then in the time that their corn and their
wine increased; the whole world is not to be compared to it. David having
sinned, and by his sins having eclipsed this favorable countenance of God
toward him: O how earnest is he in begging his gracious presence again toward
him: Ps. 51.10, 11.12.
1. He prays, that God would turn away his angry countenance from him: 2. That
he would restore him again to the joy of his salvation. 3. That he would not
take away his Spirit from him.

But, Sinai, and then the joyful voice and shouting upon Mount Sion.

Seeing that so long as God is displeased with us, we can have no peace, return
again, and be reconciled toward us: How should this move us to seek
reconciliation at his hand; that we never give our soul any rest till we be at
peace with him. And because we can never be reconciled to God, as long as we
live in sin, and delight in sin, with a purpose to continue therein. Let us
take heed we deceive not our own souls, to think that we can ever be reconciled
to God and take pleasure in sin.

It had been to no purpose for Moses to entreat the Lord to return to them, if
they had still lived in their sins, and rebellions against God. And therefore
if we desire the Lord to return again unto us, and to be a reconciled God unto
us, then we are to return again to the Lord by true repentance, else there is
no hope, that ever the Lord will return unto us, Zach. 1.3.
Turn unto me and I will turn unto you says the Lord. And this favor and
loving countenance of God, David accounts more dear unto him then the life it
self. Ps. 63.3.
Thy loving countenance is better then life it self. It was a great favor to
Absalom, considering his offense, that heemight have his life for a prey, and
be permitted to live in Jerusalem. 2 Samuel 14.32.
But all this was nothing unless he might see the Kings face.

Alas, what are all the comforts the world can afford us, unless we can enjoy
Gods countenance and favor, and that he look cheerfully upon us in the face of
Christ; this gives more joy of heart, Psalm. 4.6.
then worldlings have in their corn, and wine and oil. Cant.
Let him kiss me (says the Church) with the kisses of his mouth, for his love
is better the^ wine.

Seeing there can be no joy nor comfort without Reconciliation to God; I said
(says Solemon) of laughter, thou art mad. There is no madness like unto this,
to live under Gods high displeasure, and yet to be secure. Belshazzar drinks
and quaffes when the handwriting was upon the wall; Dan. 5.
the end of such mirth will be bitterness at last. O then let us never give
any rest unto our souls, till we are reconciled to God, till we have truly
repented of our sins, and be in with God again.

Hitherto of the petition and request they put up unto God, and pray for, viz.
Reconciliation again with God.

Now follows the reasons that they use to move the Lord to take pity on them,
1. Taken from the continuance of their misery, and length of their sufferings,
How long? 2. Taken from their estate and condition, we are thy servants.


The first reason or motive they use, is taken from the long continuance of
their miseries and afflictions, How long? q. d. O Lord, thou have justly bin
displeased with us this many years for our sins and rebellions against thee, so
as we have lived four hundred years in great bondage in Egypt, and now again
we are grievously afflicted in the Wilderness, where we have been almost
utterly wasted and consumed. O Lord, how long will thou be angry with us? O
Lord, make an end of this our great, tedious, and long affliction, and show us
thy favor and loving countenance again, and be thou a gracious God unto us, as
unto our forefathers of old. The words are an abrupt interrogation, how long?
When through the great perturbation of their spirits, their speech is short,
cut off, as it were in the midst, as if they were not clearly able to utter
their mind, through the greatness of their grief.

From this example of Moses and the people of God here, we learn. To mind the
Lord of the continuance of our affliction, a good motive to move him to pity.
That it is an excellent argument to move the Lord to pity and compassion, to
put him in mind of the long continuance of his hand upon us in affliction. For
here we have Moses and the people of God, as it were, fainting and longing
after Gods mercy, and crying out How long Lord? how long will thou be angry
with thy people, and defer to helpus? Thus David in long and tedious
afflictions, even with tears cries out to God, How long will thou forget me, O
Lord, for ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me? how long shall I take
counfell in my soul, and have sorrow in my heart. He makes the continuance of
his misery an argument to move the Lord to pity.

And again, Ps. 79.5.
How long will thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like fire? Ps.
89.46
And, How long will thou hide thy face for ever? shall thy wrath burn like
fire? How long, Lord, will thou not have mercy upon Jerusalem, Zach. 1.12.
and on the Cities of Judah, against whom thou have had indignation these three
score years and ten?

Thus Job complains to God, Job 7.19.
Thou will not let me alone till I swallow my spittle. Luke 13.8. Luke 8.43.
It was a Daughter of Abraham that was bowed by Satan eighteen years, and
another that was troubled with a bloody issue twelve years: and for eight and
thirty years together did that lame man lie at the pool of Bethesda, Ioh. 5.5.
expecting help.

Thus God has exercised his children with long and lasting sorrows, all which
his people have pleaded to God to move him to hear, and to take pity upon them.

Which serves to inform us, body, as by sickness, grief, misery, etc. we may
even cry unto God as Moses here, and say, Lord, how long will thou defer to
hear and help us? But, let us take heed of this evil, whereunto our hearts are
most prone in times, of affliction, that we do not murmur, repine, and grudge
against the Lords dealing; for this, Moses, nor this people do not, they do not
complain of any hard dealing of God toward them: But, being pressed with the
sense of Gods anger and displeasure against them for their sins, do move the
Lord to take pity upon them, in regard of their long and tedious afflictions,
they had so long a time groaned under. And thus in the like case we may in our
prayers and complaints to God, lay open our miseries, and plead our long
continuance in them.

Secondly, Moses and the people of God here do labor to move the Lord to pity
and compassion, from the consideration of their long continuance in their
miseries. We may take notice how prone we are, when God hides himself from us
for a short time, (which he may justly do when we sin against him) albeit it
be but for a short time, yet it seems unto us long.

A gracious heart cannot be long without Communion with God. Ps. 143.6.
My Soul thirsts after thee (says David) as the thirsty Land. None know the
worth of God, but the gracious Soul. What were all the World without the Sun?
and what were a believing Soul without God? Such as have tasted and seen how
sweet the Lord is, hunger, and thirst more and more to be filled with his
presence. As Moses, the more familiar he grew with God, the more he desired to
see of God: and when the Lord is provoked to withdraw himself at any time from
his people, which sometimes the Lord does, being justly provoked by the sins of
his people This brings horror and terror to to the Soul: Thou did turn away
thy thy face (says David) and I was sore troubled. And again,

Hide not thy face from me, Ps. 43.7.
else I shall be like to themthat go down into the pit. Ps. 63.3.
Thy loving kindness (says David) is better then life it self. He accounts
himself a dead man if God be not reconciled to him in Christ. What life, what
comfort, what joy, in a man's Soul, unless God vouchsafe his gracious and
comfortable presence there.

Return O Lord, how long?
WE are farther to observe.

That in respect of Gods comfortable presence, God may turn aside from his
people for a time. Io. 13.1.
God may turn aside for a time from his own people.

It is true, God does never totally leave or forsake his. For whom he loves, to
the end he loves them. His gifts are without repentance, in some gracious
operation or other his spirit is always present; yet in respect of his
comfortable presence, he may seem to turn away from his people for a time.

It was David's case when he had fallen into those dangerous sins of Adultery
and Murder: for the present he lost the comfort of Gods gracious presence,
that he had formerly felt, and therefore prays, Ps. 51.8.
Restore me to the joy of thy Salvation, and make me to hear the voice of joy
and gladness, that the bones that thou have broken may rejoice. Ver. 11.
And, Cast me not away from thy presence.

And thus he complains at another time; Ps. 22.1.
Why have thou for saken me? why art thou so far from helping me, and from the
words of my roaring?

Doubtless at that time David wanted the assistance of Gods gracious presence,
in as much as his Soul is thus perplexed. And thus again he cries out in much
anguish and perplexity of Spirit, Ps. 88.14
Why have thou cast off my Soul? why hidest thou thy face from me.

It seems David's comfort and assurance was much eclipsed at these times.

This was the case of Job, Job 30.20.
I cried unto thee, and thou do not hear me, I stand up and thou regardest
not. And this was the sad complaint of the Church: Lam. 3.8
When I cry and shout he shuts out my prayer. O this has been that, that
has wounded the Souls, and troubled the Spirits of the godly, that the Lord
has seemed to shut out the prayers, and not to come in to their succor in
times of distress.

The woman of Canaan, Mat. 5.26.
what might she think but that Christ had cast her off, seeing he would not
answer her, and when he did speak, called her Dog, an answer able to have broke
her tender heart; yet at last comes in and grants her request.

The Lord deals many times with his Children as Joseph with his Brethren,
deals roughly with them. Genesis 42.9.
You are spies, and to prison they must go; yet at last, fill their Sacks,
Says he.

Thus does the Lord seem to take day with his people, and puts them off to a
fitter time when mercy will be more seasonable, and deliverance will be more
welcome.

Neither let this seem strange unto us: for the Lord may do this,

That hereby he might take trial of the graces of his: etc. All which are now
set on work whilst the Lord is pleased to suspend deliverance: for else what
would become of the patience of the Saints if there were no more but ask and
have.

Secondly,

And that when upon our Repentance we have obtained peace and reconciliation
again with God, is highly prized, and not easily parted withal. And last of
all, God many times deferts to help his Church and people in misery and
distress,

After three days he will raise us up, Hos. 6.3.
and we shall live in his sight. The Lord has made every thing (says Solomon)
beautiful in his time. Eccl. 3.11.
And there is a time for all things under the Sun.

No doubt but Zachary and Elizabeth prayed for a child whilst they were young,
Luke 1.
and no doubt but God heard them, only they must leave the time to him, in
whose hands are times and seasons. Daniel mourned three weeks of days, and
receives no answer: Yet see the place. Dan. 10.12, 13.
From the first day that thou did set thy heart to understand, etc. thy words
were heard. God ever suspends deliverance for a fit time, when it is most
seasonable for his own glory, and his peoples comfort.

Seeing the Lord deals thus with his own people, thus to withdraw himself,
taught not to despair when we find that this is his dealing with us.

What though the Lord should bring us low, and deny his comfortable presence to
us, that we meet not with him in that comfortable way of his providence, and
mercy, in the return of our prayers, and seeking of him, as heretofore we have
done. But that he seems to write bitter things against us, and to call our sins
to account, and seems to withdraw the comfortable aspects of his favor and
love from us for a time; yet in an acceptable time deliverance will come.

Every vision is for an appoin^ed time. Every vision, that is, every promise,
or every word of prophecy God makes good in his appointed time, Es. 28.10 Hab.
2, 4.
and the just shall live by Faith. What though things stand at a stay in Church
and State what though Parliament, upon Parliament, are rendered unfruitful; what
though Sects and Heresies increase, and get head, threatening all confusion. And
all this while God se^ms to stand a far off, as one that will not be spoke
withal;

Yet let us rest assured, that God is the God of the abject; his promise is,
that such as mourn in Sion shall be delivered and they shall have beauty for
ashes, Es. 61.3.
and the spirit of joy for the spirit of heaviness.

Secondly, Jer. 31.3. Romans 11.29 Joh. 10.28.
with everlasting love he loves them. His gif^s are without repentance. And no
man shall pluck them out of his hand. Sin may take away the feeling of his
grace, but not the possession thereof. Though we often meet with repulses at
Gods hand, yet a believer has no denial, but at one time or other, in one
kind or other, God answers the prayers of his people.

It is our duty then with Moses and the people of God here, to ply the Lord
with prayers and complaints; and herein to press the Lord with arguments, as
they do, to move the Lord to take pity upon us.

But,

These and the like arguments may we use in prayer.

1. Moses here, that we are his people, even the sheep of his pasture, a people
upon whom his Name is called: And will God forsake his people?

2. Ps. 65.2.


3. Job 5.19.
and that he will never leave them, nor forsake them.

4. Thou have set me at liberty (says David) when I was in trouble: And let
the consideration thereof strengthen our prayer, and support our faith.

5. that what^ever we ask in his Sons Name, he ^ill hear us.

6. And last of all, Sion; that if the Lord will be so graciously pleased to
hear and answer us, we will ever give him thanks and praise.

These and the like arguments will be excellent props to stay our faith, and to
strengthen our hands in prayer.

What means our Savior in propounding the example of the unrighteous Judge,
Luke 18.
but to encourage us in our suites to God, and to show the blessed fruits and
effects of importunate prayers.

Hitherto of the first argument that they use to move the Lord to take pity on
them, viz. that they had been so long time in misery: How long Lord?

The second argument that they use to move the Lord to pity and compassion,
Let it repent thee concerning thy servants. And is taken from the Covenant of
grace made unto them in Christ, viz. that I will be thy God, and thou shall be
my people.

So then the force of their reason is this.

q. d. O Lord, we confess that we have grievously sinned, and provoked thy
anger, and thou might justly have cast us off: But, Lord remember thy old
Covenant toward us, that we are thy Servants, and thou art our Lord; we are
thy people, and thou art our God; we are thy children, and thou art our Father.
O then be pacified, and reconciled unto us, thy poor and unworthy Servants; for
thou have not plagued the very heathen that know thee not, but even us, thy
Servants, and thy own people: And therefore we humbly entreat thee to be
reconciled to us.

And as Moses uses this as a reason to move the Lord to take pity upon them,
To plead Gods covenant an excellent motive to move the Lord to pity. Neh.
1.10, 11.
because they were his Servants, a people in Covenant with him;

We learn, That it is a very forcible reason and good, motive to move the Lord
to pity, when we can prove that we are his Servants, and so mind the Lord of
his Covenant that he has made with us in Christ. Thus Nehemiah, when he came
to entreat the Lord in the behalf of the people, pleads this as an argument to
move the Lord to pity and compassion: Now these are thy servants and thy
people, whom thou have redeemed by thy great power, and thy strong hand. O
Lord, I beseech thee let now thy ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servant,
and to the prayer of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name.

And thus does the lamenting Church plead their case with God: Lam. 2.20.
Behold Lord, and consider to whom thou have done this: q. d. O Lord, thou have
not done this to the heathen people that have not known thee, nor call not upon
thy Name; but, to thy own people, that know and fear thy Name. Upon this very
ground, Ps. 119.94.
David grounds his request to God, I am thine, O save me. And thus Jacob, when
he desired to be delivered from his Brother Esau, pleads this Covenant that God
had made with him, Lord, thou have said, I will do thee good. And often does
David put the Lord in mind of his promise; Quicken me O Lord, according to thy
word. And, Ps. 119.
Let thy merciful kindness be my comfort, according to thy word.

Whereas such as are not his servants, neither are in Covenant with God, cannot
look to speed in prayer: But of them the Lord speaks thus, What have thou to
do, Ps. 50.21
since thou have cast my Covenant behind thy back, and hate to be reformed.
There is no hope that ever such should obtain any thing at Gods hand, that are
not in Covenant with God.

Let a wicked wretch come to God, in prayer, to ask for any mercy or blessing
at Gods hand, either for himself, or for the Church, he does but put the Lord
in mind to plague him for his sins. Albeit there are many excellent and
precious promises made unto the Godly in the word, there not one of them
belongs to a wicked man, that is not in covenant with God. And the Reasons are:

First, and without faith and reconciliation, God looks upon us as enemies to
him, and so is God an enemy to us, and so long are excluded and shut out from
all mercy and pity from God, God will not be moved toward those that are not
in Covenant with him: these are Loammi, not his people, Hos. 1.
nor God their God, none of his house and family; but may be called Loruami,
Hos. 2.4.
such as on whom the Lord will have no mercy.

Secondly, Gentiles were not in Covenant with God, Ephesians. 2.12.
and were therefore called, Strangers from the Covenant of promise. And all
this while Christ esteemed of them but as Dogs, as Christ said to the
Canaanitish woman, It is not meet to take the Childrens bread, and to cast it
to Dogs. Mat. 15. Mal. 3.
The Lord will be a swift witness against such. Now what a grievous thing is
it to have the Creator blessed for ever, against his poor creature?

When Saul was an enemy to David, yet David could fly to Gath, and there secure
himself from the rage of Saul: But, if God become our enemy, whither shall we
fly from him?

This shows in the first place the miserable estate and condition of all
unregenerate men, Cain, when he was cast off of God, but as a vagabond, and one
that traveled without a pass, lived from under Gods roof, and from under his
protection. Let such a one come unto God in prayer, he can use no argument or
reason to move the Lord to show him any pity or compassion: Why? God is not
thy God. What though thou be baptized, and so a member of the visible Church,
so was Simon Magus; thy Baptism will no more prove thee his servant, and one
in Covenant with God, then his Baptism did him; thy name may be called Loammi,
thou art none of his people, neither is God thy God.

Let a wicked man that is none of Gods servants, and in Covenant with God, come
and cry as Israel did, My God I know thee. Hos. 8.2:
God will say upon what acquaintance, come thou to me? Do thou call God
Father? so did Ephraim. But God said, Hos. 11. ult.
that Ephraim did compass God about with a lie. If God should own a drunkard,
a swearer, an unclean person, or one that is profane to be one of his
servants, and one in Covenant with him. God might go to Hell and have such
servants there.

Many great and precious promises are made to Gods servants, and such as are in
Covenant with God; as Saint Peter has it: 2 Pet. 1.4.
promises concerning Justification, precious promises concerning
Sanctification, precious promises concerning redemption, remission of sins,
Adoption, etc. precious promises concerning this life, and concerning the life
to come.

Now not one of them all belongs to thee if thou be not of Gods Family, a
Servant, and one in Covenant with God.

1. For pardon of sin, the promise is, God passes by the iniquity of his
people. But what is that to thee? that art none of his people, God will not
pass by thy sins. 2. I will give you a new heart, Eze. 21.
says God, a promise made to such as he enters into Covenant withal, but what
is that to thee that have thy old heart still?
So for the outward things of this life, they are all promised in Christ, All
things are yours, and ye are Christ's. But what are these promises to thee, that
art out of Christ. Has a wicked man riches honor, prosperity, etc? He holds
themnot by Virtue of any promise, and hence it is that that which they think a
blessing is a curse unto them.

Nay, that which is most lamentable, if thou be not in Covenant with God. thou
art most cruel to thy very posterity after thee; for thus runs the promise,
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, and I will Circumcise thy hear, and
the heart of thy seed after thee.

So that if thou that art a Parent art not in Covenant with God, and on, of his
servants how injurious art thou to thy posterity: I deny no^^ but God to show
the freeness of hi^ grace many times does call home such unto himself, that
were the seed of wicked Parents; yet if the Lord be not the more merciful unto
them, thou inthralst them under the curse; and many times it falls out, that
graceless Parents leave behind them a graceless posterity. And let every one
of us think what shall become of us, when datch comes, if we are not servants,
but out of Covenant with God; nothing is ours but Hell.

This may serve in the second place to stir us up to labor toget into Gods
service to become his servants and to enter into Covenant with him so may we be
bold to come to our Master to request any thing at his hand, Servants as many
do in word, and show, that get the Livery of Gods Servants upon them, to hear
the Word, to receive the Sacrament, etc. as if to wear the Coat of Christ, were
enough to prove us to be Servants of Christ, like those. foolish Virns, that
had the Lamps of an outward profession, and the names of Virgins, when they
wanted the oil of grace in their hearts. Mal. 1.6.
This will not serve the turn: If I be a Father, where is my honor? If I be a
Master, where is my fear, says the Lord? If we fear to offend God, fear to sin
against him, fear to break his Commandments, fear to offend him.

If we enter into a straight Covenant with him, to take him for our only God,
to love him above all, to trust in him, and to make our portion, and accept of
the righteousness and obedience of Jesus Christ for Justification to life,
Then his promise is to give us all good things for this life, and the life to
come. Then may we come with boldness unto him, and claim the privilege of
Servants, and the performance of his promise. But if we rest upon the bare name
of Servants, it will not serve our turn.

We see in great men's houses, all are not covenant-servants that retain
thereto, that now and then may do a Char for a meals meat. These can claim
nothing as due, in regard they are not in Covenant, but are hang bies: They
cannot claim protection from the Master of the Family, as a Covenantservant
may, as David did, Save me, ^s. 119.94.
for I am thy servant, and I keep thy Commandments.

It is a certain mark of a Servant of God to keep the Commandments of God, if
thou keep not the Commandments of God, thou art no servant of God. God takes no
more pleasure in rebellious sinners, then a Prince does in rebellious Traitors.

Let us then use this reason and argument to move the Lord to pity and
compassion, and to be pacified toward us, even because we are his Servants,
and are in covenant with him.

Ver. 14. O fill us with thy Mercy in the Morning, that we may rejoice and be
glad all our days.
IN the former Verse we have heard how earnestly Moses and the people of God
beg for Reconciliation again with God, and the arguments they use to move him
to take pity and compassion upon them.

Now in this fourteenth verse, and so to the end of the Psalm they come to beg
the blessed Fruits, and Estates of this Reconciliation.

And first they pray for Mercy. O fill us with thy mercy: That is, that God
would grant them the lively sense and feeling of his love again toward them.

And in this request of theirs we have two parts.

1. The Petition it self. O fill us with, etc. 2. The end of their desire. That
we may rejoice, etc.
1. The Petition is, of mercy: and this is amplified, 1. By the quantity of it,
Satisfy us, or fill us. It is a great measure that they require, according to
their great misery and need. 2. By the time, viz. In the Morning: That is, as I
take it, with speed, or presently after their Night of their long and tedious
afflictions, or else in time convenient, as some expound it.

2d Part of the Verse is the Reason, or the end, why they so earnestly desire
this lively sense, and feeling of his love again toward them, viz. Not to grow
secure thereby, as carnal men do^ Nor yet to abuse it to carnal and worldly
rejoicing, as libertines use to do. But to this end, that feeling the love of
God shed abroad in their souls they might have matter of joy and rejoicing to
praise God; that so they might be joyful and cheerful in his service. And that
not for a day or a year, but all our days.

Where first of all we are to observe ^ Coher.
their order and proceeding in this prayer of theirs.

In the former verse they pray for Reconciliation again with God, that he would
pardon their rebellions, and sins, and receive them again into favor. Return O
Lord, etc.

And now in this verse, they pray for the blessed fruit of that Reconciliation,
viz. the comfortable feeling thereof in their souls, O fill us with thy mercy,
etc.

The Doctrine is.
That until a man repent of his sins, No comfort but in reconciliation with
God. Esaias 57.20, 21.
and be reconciled to God, he can have no true peace, joy, or rejoicing in his
own Soul.

There is no peace to the wicked; but they are like the troubled Sea, that
casts forth mire and dirt.

Thus will the conscience of wicked men, rage and accuse them and cast up many
thoughts of fears, and desperation, but can find no comfort, till they be
reconciled to God.

It is true, wicked men have a kind of Drunken peace, or rather indeed a
Damnable security, which Job compares to a Dream. Job 20.7
And to the crackling of thorns under a pot, soon in, and soon out, which is
wonderful in three respects.

1. It is uncertain, their Sun many times goes down at noon day. As
Nebuchadnezzar in the midst of his banquet, had his mirth marred. 2. It is
unsound, it is sometimes in the face, but not in the heart. For, in the midst of
laughter the heart is sad. 3. The joy and rejoicing of the wicked does end in
misery. Mal. 2.2.
The Lord curses their blessings, though they may seem right to themselves yet
the issue thereof is death. Prove 16.25.

Whereas it is the godly that enjoy sound, and lasting peace, joy, and comfort.
It being grounded and founded upon this sure foundation, Repentance for sin,
and Reconciliation to God.

What way sought David for comfort, when Nathan had convinced him of his sin,
but by flying unto God by true repentance? Wash me, cleanse me, purge me, Ps.
51.8.
and then make me to hear the voice of joy and gladness. This is Gods way of
dealing ordinarily with his people, as the ground of all true comfort.

Comfort ye, Es. 40.1, 2.
comfort ye my people, says our God speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem. But how
shall they be comforted? The Lord tells them there, Cry unto her, that her
iniquity is pa^doned.

Sin pardoned brings true comfort, and indeed there can be no true comfort nor
peace till then. How does Christ comfort the man sick of the Palsy, Mar. 2.3.
but by telling him, that ]his sins were forgiven him.

And thus Christ raised up Mary that sat weeping and blubbering at Christ's
feet, by telling her, that her sins were forgiven her. So that the point is
clear, that till a man have repented of his sins, and be reconciled to God, and
have embraced Christ, he can have no true peace and comfort in his own soul.
And it must needs be so,

Because it is the nature of sin unpardoned, man that truly knows sin, and the
woeful fruits and effects of sin, cannot but account the pardon of sin, the
greatest mercy. When had this people peace, but when they had left Egypt, the
Wilderness, the Red Sea, and the Mountains behind them? And when shall a
Christian look for peace, but when his spiritual enemies, sin and satan are
overcome.

Secondly, Es. 66.2
To this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit.
And, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. And again, Es.
57.15
Thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is
holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones. These are they God has promised to look upon, and to
have respect unto, to give them beauty for ashes, Es. 61.3.
and the oil of gladness for the spirit of heaviness.

This then lets us see the happy privilege of the faithful, Joh. 16.20.
Ye shall weep, (says Christ) but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, and
your hearts-shall rejoice. It is true, affliction, and the pangs of repentance,
do sometimes so dazzle the eyes of the godly, that their privileges are
sometimes hid from them. There is a seed-time for peace, and a seed-time for
joy, which many times proves sharp and bitter; Light is sown for the
righteous. The time of repentance and godly sorrow is this seed-time, which
howsoever the godly sow in tears, yet they shall doubtless come again with
joy, and bring their sheaves with them.

Worldly sorrow is comfortless, that separates from God: But godly sorrow
causes repentance unto life, and brings peace at last, in as much as it draws
us near to God.

This also lets us see the misery of many thousands in the world, what enemies
they are to their own peace and comfort, that hoodwink themselves, and labor
for nothing more, then to keep sorrow from their hearts; they will not be
brought to see the foulness of their sins, but labor to smother the checks of
their own consciences; that when either by the Ministry of the Word, or by
some sharp affliction, they have had their sins discovered, and their
consciences awakened, fall to sports, and pastimes, and merry company, and
drink away care, and to put away these melancholic thoughts (as they call
them) out of their heads, and use all means possibly, to thrust out of their
minds the thoughts of sin, that they may not be troubled; like a man in a
burning Fever, that drinks cold water, which at last does but increase his
fit. Alas, what cold comfort is this to a distressed conscience: whereas the
only way is to fly unto God, to confess sin, and by true repentance and godly
sorrow, to lay the soul low at the footstool of the throne of grace with David,
and to beg for mercy.

O fill us with thy mercy.
WE have felt thy anger justly upon us for our sins, q.d.
so as thou have justly turned away thy savor, and showed thy heavy
displeasure against us; Yet, we beseech thee be a reconciled God unto us again;
and according to the extremity of our misery, fill us with thy mercy.

Hence we-learn, Before we be filled with ^nercy, we must feel our misery.
That before we can be filled with Gods mercy, we must have a lively sense of
our own misery. Moses and the people here confess their sins, and the
exceeding misery they had plunged themselves into by reason of sin; and then
they beg for mercy, and cry and call for mercy, and that for no small quantity,
but for abundant store of it, Fill us with thy mercy. Before we be filled with
mercy, we must feel our misery.

When Adam had sinned, how did the Lord bring him into a capacity of mercy and
deliverance, but by bringing him to see into what a bottomless gulf of misery
he had plunged himself into? Genesis 3.9.
Adam, where art thou? And again, Have thou eaten of the tree, And this is the
direction the Lord gives to his Prophet, Es. 58.
Cause Jerusalem to know her abominations. And this Doctrine is taught by our
Savior himself, in that Sermon of his upon the Mount, Mat. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. And, Blessed are
they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, etc. where our Savior tells
us, that none can be satisfied with Gods mercies in Christ, but the hungry and
thirsty souls.

Look we upon all those godly converts mentioned in the Scriptures, David,
Peter, Mary Magdalen, those poor Jews, that had imbrued their hands in the
blood of the Lord Jesus, and see how sensible they were of their sins, and
misery by reason of sin, before they were filled with Gods mercy in the
assurance of the pardon of their sins. David, he sits weladaying night and day,
and waters his couch with tears; Peter weeps bitterly; Mary Magdalen washes
the feet of Christ with tears; the Jews cry out, Men and brethren, what shall
we do to be saved? In a word, all of them in some measure, have had their
hearts broken, have felt the terrors of the Lord, and their consciences
touched with the apprehension of Gods wrath, and have tasted of the bitterness
of sin, before they have tasted of the mercies of God in Christ for the pardon
of them.

This wounding of the heart, and terror of conscience for sin, bondage, which
is the spirit of fear, and then gives a spirit of adoption, which gives
boldness and comfort; when the threats of the Law have had their proper work
upon the conscience, to convince of sin unto condemnation, then the sweet
promises of the Gospel will prove seasonable to the humble soul, to convince
them of Christ's righteousness to salvation.

Secondly, the Lord may make his children come to know the price and worth of
mercy, which the Lord will do to those, upon whom he intends to bestow mercy.
How welcome will a pardon be to a condemned person, that looks every day for
execution? O how precious, will the least drop of Christ's blood be to a wounded
soul, that pants and breaths under the heat of Gods wrath for sin: No chased
Heart does more earnestly covet the soil, then such a distressed soul for
Christ.

Besides, Luke 1.53.
all the promises of mercy are made to such; and such only. He fills the
hungry with good things, but sends the rich empty away. Luke 5.31.
The whole needs not a Physician, but those that are sick, Joh. 7.37. Matthew.
5.5, 6.

This lets us see the reason, and the blood of Christ to save their souls; they
did never truly hunger and thirst after it, but like the Laodicean Church,
thought themselves well enough, Rev. 3.17.
and needed nothing; but knew not that they are miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked. Would you be filled with Gods mercy? would you drink your
fill of the water of life? then you must hunger and thirst after it, and find
your extreme need of mercy: beg mercy at Gods hand with tears. Men hunger and
thirst after the things of this life, because they feel the want of them; but
they thirst not after mercy, because they feel no want of mercy, their stomachs
are so cloyed with the love of the world, with the profits, pleasures, and the
delights of the flesh, that they have no desire of mercy, and these the Lord
sends away empty.

O fill us with thy mercy.
THey crave not here a small pittance, or a light taste of Gods mercy, but even
to have their hungry souls filled and satisfied with mercy.

Hence we see, We should labor for a plentiful sense of Gods mercy.
that it is not enough for us to have some light taste of Gods mercy in Christ
for the pardon of our sins, but we must labor to have it in a plentiful
measure, To be filled with the fullness of God, and the feeling of his love.

The Lord is a bottomless Sea of mercy, able to fill every soul that comes
unto him; but we are like a vessel that has a narrow neck, which if it be
cast into the Sea, yet is not quickly filled, but by degrees. Even so, the
mercy of God is as the bottomless Sea, able to fill every soul that hungers
and thirsts after mercy. Whence then is the cause that we are not filled with
mercy? Surely in our selves; our Faith, which is the mouth of the soul, is so
narrow, that though the Lord be able and willing to power his graces and
mercies into our souls; yet, we cannot receive, but drop after drop, one drop
after another. And hence it is, that in a long time we receive but a small
measure of grace and mercy, because the Lord must distill it into our hearts,
as we are capable to receive it; now a little, and then a little, Es. 28.9, 10.
precept upon precept, and line upon line, here a little, and there a little.

It was only true of Christ, Ps. 45.7.
that he received not the spirit by measure. He was anointed with the oil of
gladness above his fellows. But as for us, we receive grace by measure.
Whilst we are here We know but in part. 1 Cor. 13.9.
And according to our knowledge, so are our other graces proportionable. Gods
children in this life have not fullness or perfection of any grace, but only so
much as the Lord in his wisdom sees meet for them, and we are still to be
adding grace to grace, Grow in grace, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.
As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby. And the Apostle exhorts us, to join to our virtue faith, and to faith
knowledge, etc. So that it is not enough for us to have some light taste of Gods
love, or of the graces of his Spirit; but we must labor to have them in a
plentiful measure, to be filled therewith.

The best of Gods Saints in this life, but must pray still, Lord increase our
faith, and with the Church here, Lord fill us with thy mercy. And Christ
teaches us daily to pray, Thy Kingdom come.

The Lord is pleased thus to exercise his people with many wants and
imperfections in his graces given them here, Paul, lest he should be lifted up
with the abundance of Revelations, had that prick in the flesh, that he should
not be exalted above measure. 2 Cor. 12.8.
Thus many times are the godly kept low in their own eyes, that they might walk
the more humbly with God.

Seeing then, filled with the feeling of his love: This serves to condemn the
greatest part of the world, even Professors themselves, that when they have got
a little taste and feeling of Gods love, and of the work of grace in theirsouls,
have a little measure of knowledge, of faith, and other graces content
themselves and think they have enough. But this ought not to be; If ever thou
had any true taste of Gods mercy in Christ, it will make thee hunger and
thirst after more and therefore the Apostle Exhorts, 2 Pet. 1.2
that As new born babes, we should desire the sincere milk of the Word, that we
might grow thereby. He adds, If you have tasted how sweet the Lord is,
intimating thus much, that until such time as we truly taste how sweet the Lord
is; we shall never truly desire the sincere milk of the Word.

Seeing the cause why we are not filled with the mercy of God, Faith, which is
the inlet of all grace into the soul,

It is our duty to increase in Faith in knowledge, repentance, and obedience;
for as these graces grow, and increase in us, so will the feeling of Gods
mercy, and love toward us in Christ increase in us. Such as have a great
measure of Faith, there will be a great measure of the feeling of Gods love.
Fill their Sacks, says Joseph. Scanty sacks could not carry away any
plentiful store of provision; where Faith is weak, and the neck of the soul
narrow and straight, there will be but a little measure of the feeling of Gods
mercy: which should stir us up to grow in Faith, because as our Faith grows, so
our feeling of Gods mercy grows.

Satisfy us early (or) in the Morning.
THat is, with speed; they that lust for a thing cannot endure to be delaied:
It is death to a thirsty man to belongwithout drink. So they that have their
Souls scorched with the sense of Gods anger; O it is mercy, they long for. And
such a Soul thinks every hour ten, and every day a year, till they be refreshed
with Gods mercy.

All delays to such distressed souls, is death it self. Hear me speedily O
Lord says David, My Spirit fails, hide not thy face from me, lest I be like
unto them that go down into the ^it.

Satisfy us early (or) in the Morning. q. d. Lord let us not lie any longer
soaking in extreme miseries, lest we be even swallowed up in desperation; but
make speed to take pity upon us The like we have by that of David, Ps. 5.3.
Hear my prayer in the Morning: where David entreats the Lord not to defer his
mercy, but to to make speed to his help. So Moses here entreats the Lord to
hear them in the Morning. That is, with speed, that he would not defer to
hear them, but with speed to take pity on their miseries and troubles.

Now when Moses and the people of God pray thus, that God would not defer to
help them; they do not this with impatient minds, but partly in regard of their
own frailty, lest if the Lord should suffer them to lie longer in misery; their
faith should fail them in their expectation of Deliverance; Only Gods favor
refreshes a distressed Soul.
and longing desire and comfort, and feeling of his loving countenance again
toward them.

Hence we learn, that only God favor, and loving countenance gives
satisfaction to a distressed Soul: or, a poor soul will count it self most
happy in the enjoyment of Gods favor. And thus did Aaron and his sonns usually
bless the people. Number. 6.6.
The Lord lift up his countenance upon you, and grant you his peace.

Deu. 28.
Thus Moses makes the favor and loving countenance of God the foundation of
all happiness having this they should be blessed with all the blessings of
Heaven, and of the Earth in Soul and Body. Herein David places true
Blessedness, Ps. 32.12.
Blessed is the man whose iniquity is forgiven, an^ whose sin is covered:
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. Pardon of sin, and
reconciliation to God, causes a man to be truly blessed.

The favor, and comfortable presence of God to a poor distressed Soul, is as
the Sun to the Creature in Summer; it quickens all Creatures, Man and Beast,
Trees, Plants, Herbs and Flower; All Creatures are revived and quickened by the
Suns presence, which in winter time, seem to mourn for its absence.

So whilst we enjoy Gods favor, the Soul is filled with joy, and comfort:
whereas if God hide his face and frown upon us, the Soul is then cast down Thou
turnest thy face from me, and I was sore troubled. And it must needs be so,
that the poor Soul will count it most happy in the enjoyment of Gods favor.

For all the time the Conscience apprehends his displeasure, Esaias 57.
and torment a man. There is no peace to the wicked says my God and as Job
has it, Job. 15.
A dreadful sound is in his ears. Such a Soul sees as it were the Heavens on
fire over him, and Hel^ mouth ready open to receive him: Men, Angels and
Devils, Enemies unto him, whilst God remains his Enemy.

Secondly, Throne of grace, then we come boldly into his presence, and ask any
thing at his hands, with much assurance to be heard: Which whilst we lie in our
sins, and in an impenitent estate, God looks on us his enemies; neither can we
look to obtain any thing at his hands.

Seeing that Gods favor, 2 Reg. 9.2.
As Jehu sometimes said to Jehoram, What have thou to do with peace? so what
peace, what joy, what comfort, can such have, to whom God is not a reconciled
God, but an angry Judge; who is a consuming fire, and all wicked and ungodly
men are but as stubbble before him. Surely all the peace, all the joy, and
rejoicing of such, is but as the crackling of Thorns under a pot, soon in, and
soon out, they want that which is the ground and cause of true joy, and that is
Gods countenance: Ps. 63.3.
which is better then life it self: the spirit of bondage and fear must needs
torment them; And howsoever soever they may outface conscience for a time, yet
God at last will open the Mouth of conscience, and when conscience shall speak
out, Horror, and Dread, will be ready to overwhelm that soul If a poor
condemned Creature were now going to execution, what were the thing now to be
desired, that would yield him comfort, and render him happy; not gold, or
silver land, or livings, would not now to be looked upon, but the Princes
pardon would be the most welcomest thing in the World This the graceless World
shall find true one day. That howsoever Satan the God of this World has
blinded their eyes, and their consciences are fast asleep, that they neither
see their misery, nor what it is to lie under Gods displeasure; yet the time
will come when this poor wretched Creature, would give all the world for one
smile from this angry God.

And this lets us see the happy privilege of the faithful above all the men in
the world, banishment such cannot be miserable, that are at peace with God,
have their sins pardoned, and they reconciled unto him. Enemies, Tyrants,
Death, Devils, cannot make such miserable: what though thou want health,
peace, liberty, and those comforts that others enjoy; if thou have that which
thousands in the World do want, the favorable countenance of God in Christ, is
that, which will make amends for all.

That we may be glad and rejoice all our days.
HItherto we have spoke to the first part of this verse, and that is their
Petition.

Now follows the second part of the verse, and that is their Reason, taken from
the end, Gods mercies should provoke to cheerfulness in his service.
and favor again toward them. viz. That we may be glad and rejoice all our
days.

Hence we may observe, what is the true use that is to be made of Gods mercy,
of his favor, and love, viz. to make us more joyful, and cheerful, in his
service to honor God, and to set forth his praise. If the Lord would be so
gracious unto them, as to Return again, and to fill them with his mercy, they
will not hide such a mercy, as that unfaithful servant, that hid his Masters
Talent in a Napkin; but they will put it out to the most advantage of their
Master; It should make them more cheerful in his service, and to serve the
Lord with gladness all their days. As a covetous man puts out his money for
his own advantage; So will every godly Christian put forth the Lords gifts for
his advantage.

And indeed this is that that God promises unto his people, as the wages of
their service, and as a fruit of their seeking of him. Esaias. 65.13.
My servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed. My servants shall sing
for joy of heart, and ye shall howl for vexation of spirit; as if the Lord had
only intailed this joy to his chosen ones; it is limited unto them. Ps. 40.16
Pro. 29.6.
Let them that seek the Lord rejoice. The righteous shall sing and rejoice.

And of the Churches returning out of Captivity, it is said, Ps. 126.6
They went weeping and bearing good seed, but they return with joy, and bring
their sheaves with them.

And this did the Lord make good to his Church and people, here in the
Wilderness. How soever he chastised them for their sins their infidelity, and
murmuring against Moses and Aaron, for the which his wrath brake out against
them, and swear in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest. Yet he
made good his promise to their seed, and gave them that good Land to possess
it.

Which serves for the just reproof of those, all profaneness, more liker
Heathens then Christians. But let such know, that thus turn the grace of God
into wantonness, they will cause the Lord one day to turn their mirth into
mourning, and their carnal rejoicing into weeping and lamentation.

This was the case of this people, though in Egypt they were somewhat moderate;
yet when they came out of bondage, whereas they should have rejoiced in the
Lord, Exodus 32.6.
and set forth his mercy in their deliverance, They set them down to eat, and
drink, and rose up to play.

Secondly, seeing Moses and the people of God here, will make this the end of
Gods mercy to them, in their deliverance, and in being reconciled again unto
them, to rejoice in the Lord with joy and gladness. Then Religion exceeds not
mirth and joy, neither is matter of dumpishnesse, and sadness, as many
virtuous speak of it; but it is matter of joy, and gladness; nay, there can be
no sound mirth, joy, or rejoicing without this; when a man does truly repent
him of his fins, is reconciled to God in Christ, and feels his love shed into
his heart; this alone will yield matter of sound joy, and solid comfort.

O say the cursed Ismaels of our times, these professors are always sad, and
heavy, full of sighs, and groans, and complaining; there is no pleasure at
all in their ways, and courses, etc. Such are altogether ignorant of the life
of a Christian, as Christ said, I have meat to eat that ye wot not of; So has
a Christian joy that the world wots not of, when a poor Prisoner that has
offended the Law, shall have the King to come to his house, and speak kindly,
and lovingly unto him; How will this cheer up his heart? then what greater
comfort to a poor soul, then when God shall put his spirit into the heart of a
man, and assures him of his love in Christ, and where the spirit of the Lord
is, there must needs be comfort and joy, for he is the spirit of comfort. It is
true, in regard of our sins and corruptions we have in us, matter of mourning,
and sorrow; yet in regard of Gods love in Christ, we may lift up our hearts,
and rejoice. O then all we desire to have matter of sound and solid joy in our
souls; let us labor to feel the love of God in Christ shed into our hearts;
this will make us joyful in sickness as in health, in the Prison; and at the
stake, as those blessed Martyrs were.

Ver. 15. Make us glad, according to the days, wherein thon have afflicted us:
And the years wherein we have seen evil.
IN this verse Moses and the people of God make their third Request, and
petition unto God: and that is for comfort, that the Lord would gladden their
souls after their sorrows, and afflictions. Make us glad according to the
days, etc.

And herein we have
1. What they pray for, Comfort: 2. That in their comfort, that the Lord would
keep some proportion; that as he had a long time afflicted them for their sins;
so he would in mercy give them answerable matter of comfort and rejoicing.
For this is the Lords manner of dealing with his people, the lower he humbles
any poor soul for their sins, and the deeper sense they have of their misery;
the greater measure of joy and of comfort he usually bestows upon them.

Observe we first of all from the coherence of this petition with the former;
1. They pray for reconciliation, verse 13. 2. For the feeling of his mercy,
verse 14. 3. Now for comfort in their misery, verse 15.


From which order in their requests we learn;

That the fountain of all true comfort to a distressed soul, Reconciliation the
fountain of true comfort.
is our blessed reconciliation to God in Christ, and the comfortable feeling of
that love of his to our souls.

For till a man have truly repented of his sins, and comes to be reconciled to
God in Christ, what dram of comfort can such a one have?

When the day begins to break, then we know the Sun will soon arise. In the
dark night of affliction, what comfort to a distressed soul; but, when the Sun
of righteousness shall arise, Mal. 1.
with healing under his wings; and Christ, which is our life shall appear: Here
comes true comfort, and the soul is here refreshed, as the Sunrising does the
world.

It fares many times with a poor soul, Mat. 14.24.
as it did with the Disciples in the ship, they tugged all night, but in vain;
but, in the fourth watch of the night, Christ came and relieved them, when
their hope was almost past. Jacob wrestled all night with the Angel, but about
the break of the day, he obtained the blessing. When we have tugged long, and
striven hard with God by repentance and prayer, at last he will come, and in an
acceptable time he will command salvation to his people: Ps. 9.18.
The poor shall not always be for gotten, the hope of the afflicted shall not
perish for ever.

Whereas wicked men that are in their sins, and not reconciled to God, they can
have no peace, they can have no comfort, Es. 57.
There is no peace to the wicked, says my God. 1 Samuel 16.23.
We may see this in King Sanl, what comfort had he in his Kingdom, Wife,
Children, Harp, Music, or what else, so long as God was angry with him, and
was without the feeling of his love: all the world could not yield him one dram
of comfort, the evil spirit did still torment him.

A poor condemned Traitor, what comfort can he have in wife, children, gold,
silver, etc. nothing will cheer up his spirit but the Kings pardon. So a poor
distressed soul, feeling the anger and wrath of God pressing his soul, unless
God show his loving countenance in the pardon of sin, can have small comfort.

It Is true, wicked men may taste of worldly comforts, and they may seem to have
much peace in their consciences, as any of the godly themselves, for so says
Job, Job 2^
Their houses are peaceable, and without fear: And, they a^^ not in trouble as
other men are. Thus Saul, when David played upon his Harp, had some kind of
ease, that the evil spirit for that time did not torment him: and thus many
wicked men can run to their harps, to their pipes, and to their pots, and to
merry company, etc. of whom it may be said, Es. 55.2.
They lay out their labor for that which satisfies not. A poor comfort to
give a Malefactor a cup of sack when he is going to execution. The case of such
miserable creatures is well desuibed by the Prophet, Es. 29.8.
A man dreameth, and lo he drinks; but, when he awaketh, behold, he is faint,
and his soul longs.

This Doctrine shall hold, when all the seeming joys of the wicked shall
vanish away, that the fountain of all true comfort is our peace with God, when
we come to be reconciled to him in Christ.

Because sin breeds enmity, what true comfort can such a one have, whilst he
abides in such a condition; all the curses that are written in the book of the
Law do wait upon him, hardness of heart, blindness of mind, searednesse of
conscience, a continual fear of hell, Gods wrath, and damnation to come; all
these does the guilt of sin contract, and draw upon us, the misery whereof we
shall never be set free from, but by our reconciliation to God in Jesus Christ.

The Lord crowns all the sorrows of his servants, all their tears, I love the
Lord, Ps. 116.1.
because he has heard the voice of my weeping. If the husbandman should
always think on his seed-time, and of his labor and pains, and never think of
the harvest, who would be a husbandman? And what would become of the Christian
in the midst of all his watchings, fastings, and temptations, which here he
undergoes, were it not for this harvest of comfort at last.

Seeing then that all sound comfort flows from our peace and reconciliation
with God, Rome is most vile hellish, and uncomfortable, who affirm, that no
man in this life can know or be assured whether God loves him or no; and that
no man can know whether his sins be pardoned, and whether he be reconciled to
God yea or no: I will say to them as Job sometimes said to his friends,
Miserable comforters are ye. Alas, what comfort can a poor sinner have, or what
joy, if it arise not from Gods mercy in the pardon of sin? What is this but to
set up a gibbet to torture distressed souls? How can a poor creature have any
comfort in the service of God, in prayer, hearing, receiving, etc. whilst he
cannot tell whether the Lord loves him or hates him? We utterly renounce that
cursed Doctrine, and believe this to be the truth of God that all sound comfort
stands in the feeling of Gods love toward us in Christ, and in the pardon of
our sins; and we should never rest, till we be able in some measure to say with
Paul, Romans 8.38.
I am persuaded, etc. This will make us cheerful in prayer, and in all other
duties of his worship and service.

Seeing all sound and solid comfort arises from our reconciliation with God,
and until then, according to the multitude of his mercies, do away thy
offenses; that he would be a reconciled God again unto thee, that he would lay
aside his displeasure, and give thee the feeling of his favor and love again;
there is no other way to procure sound comfort to thy soul.

Comfort us.
THe Lord before had exercised this people with pressing sorrows, and sore
afflictions, both in Egypt a long time, and after that in the wilderness; and
now they beg for comfort.

Hence we may observe, what is the outward estate of Gods children in this
life; The outward estate of Gods children subject to alterations and changes.
it is subject to such alterations and changes, that they are sometimes up, and
sometimes down, sometimes full of sorrow, at another time filled with comfort.
Here Moses and the people of God pray for comfort, being for the present
comfortless, perplexed, and much distressed; the Lord tries, humbles, and
proves this people here in the Wilderness, That he might do them good at
their latter end. Deuteronomy. 8.16.
look we upon the estate of the Church in general, and upon the particular
members of the same, and we shall find, that our condition here is like the
days of the year, sometimes winter, sometimes summer, sometimes fair,
sometimes foul.

What a long night of affliction did this Church and people of God endure in
Egypt for the space of four hundred and thirty years; yet, at the last, the
Lord raised them up saviors, Moses and Aaron, by whom he brought deliverance
unto his people. What a condition was the Church in in Hesters time, when all
the Jews were appointed as sheep to the slaughter; yet God laughed the
counsel of Haman to scorn, delivered his people, and brought ruin and
destruction to their enemies.

What a condition was the Church in, in Jezebels time, that slew the prophets
of the Lord, insomuch that Elias thought himself alone; yet, what a sudden
alteration was there, when Eliah slew the Prophets of Baal, and restored
religion again.

How was the Church of God in Christ's time pestered by the High Priests, who
had given commission unto Saul, to bind, and to deliver bound at Jerusalem,
all that made profession of Christ; yet, at another time, had the Churches
peace, and multiplied. So changable has the estate and condition of the Church
of God been in all ages and times of it.

And if we look into particular examples, we shall also find it true, that the
estate and condition of the best of Gods children has been subject to
diversities of alterations and changes. Joseph, one while hated of his
brethren, at another time advanced under Pharaoh; at one time cast into Prison,
at another time made ruler over the Princes. Jacob, one while wrestling with
the Angel, at another time going away with the blessing. David, one while
persecuted by Saul, at another time swaying the Scepter.

Job, Job 42.
at one time plundered out of all, at another time as wealthy as before. Thus
God is pleased in his wise dispensation to dispose of his people, that many
times we are no sooner rid of one misery, but there comes another in its room,
yet, at last the Lord gives peace.

And who does not find this true by experience in himself, sometimes to feel
much joy and comfort in himself; yet, by and by, either by some sin that they
have fallen into, or by some cloud of affliction or other, that joy is
eclipsed, and to be lost for a time.

As we see the trees in winter seem to be dead; as though they would never grow
again; yet, when the spring comes, the heat of the sun revives them again. So
many a dear child of God, either by some sin committed, for want of keeping a
stricter watch, and walking more closely with God; or, by some storm and
tempest of affliction and temptation, seems even to be void of comfort for a
time; yet, when this winter and storm is over, the presence of Gods love and
favor cheers them up, quickens their hearts, Ps. 6.38.
and puts into them comfort and spiritual joy again.





we have tasted and seen how sweet the Lord is, which should teach us for ever
to walk both humbly and holily before him, and to be afraid to offend him, and
provoke him, lest his loving kindness should be turned into frowns and
displeasure. Yet alas, we are many times, what with the temptations of Satan,
and our own inward corruptions, so hurried about, that we are often drawn to
dishonor God, and fall into those sins that turn his favors into frowns, as
it was the case of David, after he had sinned so hainously, he lost much of
that comfort he had formerly felt, and is fain to beg hard, that God would
restore him again to the joy of his salvation. Ps. 51.12.


Secondly, thankfulness. Mary loved much, because many sins were forgiven her.
And David can say, I Love the Lord becanse he has heard the voice of my
weeping.

And thirdly, herein and hereby, They cried, Ps. 18.41
but there was none to save them, even to the Lord, but he answered them not.

Let us apply this.
Seeing our condition here is so variable, and changable, etc. It shall be our
wisdom to take heed to our hearts, how we pitch our Tabernacle here, as to
think that that health, peace, or prosperity, that sometimes we enjoy, is built
upon such a foundation, that will not be shaken.

It was David's case to be ready to fall asleep upon his bed of worldly pomp,
and ease. I said in my prosperity, I shall never be removed, thou Lord of thy
goodness have made my hill so strong. But God-awakened him out of that sleep,
as he says, Thou did turn away thy face from me, and I was sore troubled.

We may sometimes have the joy of faith, but it may quickly be clouded with
infidelity; we may now be full of hope by and by our hearts may be filled with
fear, now we may have a glimpse of Gods Tabernacle, by and by his back parts
are turned toward us.

As the flesh Iusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, so
the graces of God themselves within us are continually in combat. The
consideration whereof should wean us from the world and make us more mindeful
of that life, where all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes, and sin from
our souls; for whatsoever we here have and enjoy is movable, but that
Inheritance fades not.

Secondly, heaviness, sometimes comfort, sometime sorrow: It should teach us
this wisdom, to take heed that we do not despair, as if we were utterly cast
off of God, when the Lord seems thus to frown upon us. But rather when we have
lost the comfortable feeling of his love, and lost our hold of God, seek again
unto him for comfort, as David did, Ps. 51.12
Restore me to the joy of thy Salvation, and Make me to hear the voice of joy
and of gladness, that the bones which thou have br^ken may rejoice. And where
we have got it, to make more account of it, and to apply it to our souls.

Seeing what comfort we have in the feeling of Gods love, for the present, and
bring horror, and terror in the soul instead thereof. Certainly he is but a
titular Christian, that does not find this true by experience in himself. Have
thou been bold to sin against thy God, to lie, to deceive, to commit
uncleanness, etc. Thou shall presently feel thy joy and comfort for the
present, clouded, and eclipsed, till by repentance the breach be made up again
betwixt God and thy soul, and God becomes again reconciled All duty in public,
and private, will have little relish in them, and yield but small comfort, till
thou have been at the Throne of grace, and there begged pardon, and made thy
peace. O then let us dread sin, that robs us of our comfort, and overwhelms our
souls with grief and sorrow.

And last of all, in Church and State, which our eyes have so long desired to
see, yet retarded, and Sects and Heresies to make head amongst us; threatening
daily some farther distemper, in the body politic of our State, if not
confusion at last. Yet let us stay our selves upon the consideration of this
point. That howsoever the Church, as the Disciples boat, may be tossed and
tumbled up and down with the waves and billows of furious spirits for a time,
let us not despair, for the day of her Deliverance will come, when the Sun of
righteousness shall arise, and healing shall be under his wings, and that at
such a time, when deliverance will prove most seasonable, and comfortable.

Hitherto of what they pray for, Comfort.

According to the days wherein thou have afflicted us.
AS they crave this at Gods hands, that the Lord would comfort them in their
misery;

So they entreat the Lord to keep some proportion; and according to the time of
their great affliction, to give them comfort, that as the Lord had a long time
kept them under the rod, so he would now upon their true repentance, be
reconciled unto them, and vouchsafe a plentiful measure of comfort and joy unto
them.

Hence we learn that the Lord does never cast his people so low by affliction,
The godly as they are cast down, God will raise them up.
but he will in time raise them up as high with comfort. They that sow in tears
shall reap in joy. It is spoken of the Churches return out of Captivity they
went out weeping, and carrying pr^tous seed, but they shall return with joy,
and bring their sheaves with them. And this does the Lord make clear by his
Prophet, Ps. 126.5, 6.
when he says. For a little time have I for s^ken thee, but with great
compassion will I gather thee. Our light afflictions (says Paul) which last
but for a moment, Esaias 54.7, 8.
bring unto us a far more excellent, even an eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor.
4.17.


If the Lord should always dandle us as an indulgent Father his child, it were
the way to make us wantons. And if he should always be beating us, as our sins
deserve, we could not serve him so cheerfully: But now he mixeth his frowns
and favors together, that he might show his hatred to our sins; yet so as to
love our persons. Thus the Lord in his wise dispensation is pleased to carry us
through the wilderness of this world, as this people through the wilderness,
they travailed through: yet at last they came to Elim where they had fountains
of water to refresh them.

And if we look for Examples of Gods dealing in this kind, we may see it in
Job who was brought low even to the Dunghill, Job 42.
yet the Lord did restore him, that the latter end of Job was better then the
beginning. Thus Dav^d, Daniel, yea, Christ himself, were thus humbled, and
laid full low, and then raised up again with Comfort. According to that of
David. Psalm. 34.19.
Many are the troubles of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of
all.

The Lord is thus pleased to cast his people many times full low, he is privy
to our sins, and to our wickedness, as that he will not wink at our sins, but
will visit our iniquities with the rod, and our sins with scourges. So he has
always compassion upon the weakness, of his servants, for he knows whereof
we are made he considers that we are but dust.

What Father will suffer his Child's Rebellion and disobedience, but will
correct him; and yet in his misery will not pity him, 1 Cor. 10.13.
the Lord is much more good to his children, who will not suffer us to be
tempted above that we are are able.

In all the miseries of Gods children, I have seen, I have seen, (says the
Lord) the troubles of my people, I also have heard their cry, and I will
deliver them. So long then as the children of God have a tongue to call upon
God, and a heart to sigh, and groan unto him, why should they doubt of
deliverance?

Seeing the Lord deals thus with his people, their afflictions and comforts,
that their comforts shall be answerable to their sorrows, yea much greater,
this may teach us this profitable lesson to possess our souls with patience, in
bearing afflictions and corrections, and not to gr^dg and repine at the Lords
dealings, though he seem to load us with great and long calamities, as this
people here, not to pine and murmur at his hand; but patiently to bear them
because here is comfort unto us, that if the Lord lay long and piercing sorrows
and afflictions upon us, yea, for many years together, yet he will make us
amends at last, by giving us such a measure of comfort as shall be
proportionable and answerable unto them; if not in this world, which the Lord
often does, yet most certainly in the world to come. As Christ says, Mar.
16.28.
If any man forsake all for me, I will give him in this world a hundred fold,
and in the world to come life everlasting. That is comfort for ever.

Seeing that God does thus often cast down his people low, ground of
patienceunto us in all our trials and miseries: So we are hence instructed, not
to judge of our condition according to our present comforts: But to have an eye
to the end. Mark the upright man and behold the just, the latter end of that
man is blessed. The end we say proves all things. Should the painful and
laborious Husbandman hope only upon his seed-time, which is so full of labor
and toil, wet and cold, and not to look withal upon the Harvest, it were
able to make him heartlesse to undergo his labor; But when he considers of
that beautiful increase that he may reap, this makes him endure all weathers.

The godly in all their greatest miseries and sufferings want not the grounds
of joy, and when the Lord has sufficiently humbled them, and fitted them for
comfort and deliverance, the Lord will not fail to come in to their succor.

According to the days where in thou have afflictedius.
WHen once the days of sorrows and times of afflictions are over, gone, and
past, Afflictions past seem but a few days. 2 Cor. 4 19. Ps. 30.6.
they seem but a few days. According to the days. etc. The Apostle calls our
afflictions light and momentary. And God indureth but a while in Anger.
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. And the
reasons why they esteemed their affliction short and but for a few days, are,

Was because they had deserved great and more tedious Calamities,

Though afflictions seem to be long whilst we are under them, Jacob when he
served Laban s^aven years, when he enjoyed his Rachel, they seemed unto him but
a few days.

Which should serve for our instruction, together, to consider that the Lord
might have laid a thousand times more for our sins: and the joys of their life
to come will quickly swallow up the remembrance of them all, so as we are with
one eye to look unto Gods mercy, that our afflictions are no sorer and that
our comforts at last will surmount them all, as with the other eye to look
upon our present sufferings how bitter soever.

And the years wherein we have seen evil.
No doubt herein Moses had respect to the time of their affliction in Egypt,
Exodus 1.
wherein passed many years, even four hundred and thirty; and now again,
for the space of forty years in the wilderness.

q.d. O Lord we have been a long time in misery and sore affliction, we beseech
thee now at last, let us receive comfort, proportionable and answerable
thereto.

Whence we may further observe, We may pray for mercy answerable to our misery.
that we may and ought to pray, that God would bestow mercy, answerable to our
misery. As we see a man that has a great wound in his body, the plaster must
be made as large as the wound, or rather broader; so must we crave at Gods hand
that our comforts may be not only as great as our miseries, but, if the will
of God be more plentiful. A man that has been many years in misery and
affliction, had need of a great measure of comfort, as a man that has been
made weak by long sickness, so as his strength is much decayed; he must have
a time answerable to recover his strength again. So here a child of God that
has been long humbled, and afflicted, by Gods hand, such stand in need of a
great measure of comfort to recover the health of their Souls again.

ver. 16. Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their
children.
IN this verse we have the fourth petition which Moses and the people of God do
make unto God.

And the thing they here beg and crave at Gods hand is protection, which they
acknowledge to be the proper work of God. And this protection of his they crave
not only for themselves, but also for their posterity after them.

Let thy work.
HEre by the work of God, we are to understand some special and singular work
of God, toward them in their protection, safety, and deliverance. And for this
they use a double Reason.

1. Drawn from the end of their protection viz. the glory of God; because this
glory of God would appear in protecting them from their enemies, the cursed
Canaanites, whose country they were now going to inhabit. 2. That so it might
fare well with the Church of God after them. And that the promise of God made
unto their forefathers, Abraham, Izaac, and Jacob, might not be frustrate, but
the Lord would give them, and their posterity after them, the land of Canaan to
inherit.
Let thy work appear.
Seeing Moses and the people of God, crave protection at Gods hand, and this
they acknowledge to be a work of God;

We learn, God the protector of his people.
and in times of distress, viz: of the Lord. Because all our help, comfort,
and protection comes from him. He is the Lord high Protector of his Church and
people.

Thou art the God of my salvation (says David,) Ps. 15.5.
on thee do I wait all the day. He looks not to men, or Angels, but unto God
alone to be his Savior and Protector.

Salvation (says he) belongs unto the Lord. Psalm. 3.8.
Whatsoever the Instrument be that God uses in the deliverance of his Church
and people, it is not in their Horses and Chariots, but God only that saves.

Thus Jehosaphat and the men of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 20.
when they were at that great straight, that they knew not what to do; Our eyes
(say they) are toward thee. And hence is it that David was so confident, and
held himself so safe in danger that he rested upon Gods protection. Psa. 23.4.
Though I walk throughout the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fea^e no
evil, for thou art with me. And again,

The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life of whom shall I be afraid? what became of Pharaohs plots
from time to time against the Church, did not God disappoint them, and still
delivered his people? what became of Hamans plot? Achitophels counsel? And
those that vowed they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul?
Acts 23.10.
Was not the Lord their Protector? And hence is it that he is called the God of
patience, the God of Consolation, and the God of comfort. By whose power
assisting us, and Spirit inabling us, we who can neither do, nor suffer, any
thing as of our selves, 2 Cor. 1.4. Romans 15.5.
are able to do al things thorough Christ.

Now the Reasons why we must only seek for protection, comfort, and
deliverance, in times of distress only from God, are,

time of misery and distress we should still have recourse unto him. Ps.
50.15. Jam. 5.13.
Call upon me in the time of trouble etc. Is any be aflicted let him, pray. And
thus when the Lord has foretold the great afflictions that should betide the
Church, the Lord directs them to this way of their deliverance take unto you
words, Hos. 14.23.
and turn unto the Lord. Yea, he prescribes unto them, the very form of
words, how they are to seek him; Take away our iniquities and receive us
graciously.

Secondly, this is our maine end, in their afflictions they will seek me
diligently. Esa. 26.16.


Thirdly, God only is to be sought unto for protection in times of danger;
because the power of all creatures is but finite; and they are but servants, to
his hand of providence, but it is he that is the great Lord Protector of heaven
and earth. And without him neither Satan, nor his instruments have power so
much as over one hair of our heads; and therefore the Apostle exhorts us, To
go boldly to the throne of grace, Heb. 4.16
that we may receive mercy, and find grace, to help in time of need.

Seeing all protection and safeguard is from God, work; How may this condemn
the preposterous course of many in these days, that in times of misery and
distress, seek any where, even every where, rather then unto God, for help
and protection, yea fall upon unlawful shifts, and use unlawful means, to
help themselves.

If they can but get under the protection of some Noble man, or great man, they
think themselves secure from danger. But if thou have not the Lord for thy
Protector, vain is the help of man Men may see, and hear, and pity our
miseries; but they are not able many times to help and succor us. But this
honor have all the Saints, That they have a powersull and omnipotent God, that
is able, and ready, to help us.

Seeing all protection is from God, work to save; this may serve to stay us at
this day, now that the Church and house of God, has many ruins and breaches
on it; rent and torn in pieces by many unnatural brethren, that have of late
endeavored to divide the seamlesse coat of Christ, by Sects and Schisms,
factions and fractions, the like whereof was never seen in the days of our
forefathers. Since the times of reformation, sad presages of fearful times, if
the Lord speedily put not to his hand and work sure reformation.

Yet here is our hope, and here is our stay, that we have a God to fly unto,
and it is he that must purge his house, and protect his Church. O this is a
singular work of God. We must pray to him to work all our works for us, and to
be humbled for our sins, that have looked so much to an arm of flesh our
Counsels and Parliaments, which hitherto have not stead us, whilst in the
mean time we have overlooked God, the rock of our Salvation. O let us at last
return unto him and seek for protection, safety, and deliverance,
reformation, and Salvation at his hands; and entreat the Lord and say, Let thy
work appear to thy servants. And that he would take the cause of his poor
Church, Religion, and Gospel, into his own hand, and become our Mighty
Protector.

Seeing all Safety and protection come from God, viz. to this Lord Protector of
his people, who ought to have the praise and glory of his own Work.

Thus when the Lord has been pleased to come in with some speedy mercy or
deliverance to his Church, they have had their solemn days of praise and
thanksgiving unto God as Isreal's Deliverance from Pharaoh: the Jews
deliverance from that damnable plot of Haman. Exodus 15.
And Jehosophat and the men of Judah their deliverance from their iniquities.
Hest. 9.2 Chr. 26
And David never partakes of any great mercy, or deliverance, but still he
returns ptaise and thanksgiving unto God.

Let thy works appear unto thy Servants.
Hitherto of their request, that God would be their protector and deliverer.

Now for this they use a Double Reason. 1. Taken from their condition they were
his servants. 2. Taken from the end of their protection and deliverance, and
that is his own glory.
Unto thy ^^ervants, that is, to those that be in Covenant with thee, love and
fear thee, and serve, and obey thee, as their Lord and master whence note.

Who they are that may look for protection at the hands of God, Gods servants
only may look for protection from God.
viz. those and only those, that are in covenant with God, that honor him as
a Father, fear him as a master, and are ready to do his commands. These being
the Lords servants, and under his roof, they may assure themselves of
protection at his hands.

Whereas such as are not his servants, neither in Covenant with him, these can
look for no protection from God, the framing of the Mercy-seate was a type of
the Church. In the Arc was the Commandments of God, to show.

1 That those that are in the Arc and so members of the Church, these keep
his commandments, and

2. That they that keep the commandments of God, may look for protection
from God.

For the mercy-seate was made just as big as the Arc, and no bigger, to show
that none be shadowed, and protected, by Gods merciful providence and
protection, but only the servants of God, and no more.

So that of those and none else it may be said, Deuteronomy. 33.29.
Happy art thou O Israel, who is like unto thee. O people saved of the Lord,
the shield of thy help, and the sword of thy excellency. Now wherein stood the
happiness of this people, but in that they were in Govenant with God; that God
was their God, and they his people.

And hence is it that it is usual with the faithful, when they have come unto
God in prayer; to plead Gods covenant with them, as Jacob did, when he prayed
to be delivered from his Brother Esau, Lord (says he) thou have said I will do
thee good. And thus David oftentimes minds the Lord of his promise. Psalm. 119
ver. 74.
Quicken me O Lord according to thy word, and, Let thy merciful kindness be
my comfort according to thy word.

Whereas the estate and condition of all wicked and ungodly ones is most
mi^erable, for such can have no hope at all to be heard in prayer, for they are
out of Covenant with God. Nay, let such pray in time of misery and distress,
and God will say unto them, Psalm. 50.
What have thou to do since thou have cast my Covenant behind thee?

Now that such as are in Covenant with God may look for protection at Gods
hands, these Reasons show.

First, Esa. 43.4.
Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been Honorable, and I have
loved thee. They are Gods Jewels. Mal. 3.17
And they shall be mine says the Lord in that day that I make up my Jewels.
And will not a man look to his Jewels? They are his Friends, his Sons, and
Daughters, yea, as the Apple of his eye, God makes more account of them then of
all the world besides, and therefore his special providence must be over them,
to protect, and defend them.

Secondly, I will dwell in them and walk in them, 2 Cor. 6 16.
and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And how can such want
protection from God? for as it is a just thing with God to depart from them
that depart from him, so to stand by them that stand by him and keep covenant
with him.

This may yield matter of Singular comfort and consolation for every poor child
of God: Servants of God, a true believer, one that art in covenant with God,
thou may both claim protection at Gods hand in time of distress, and assure
thy self of it, for can a father be unmindfull of his child? or will not a
loving Master take care of his Servants? Will not a King protect his Subjects,
or a loving Husband his Wife? So if thou be a true servant of God, thou may
assure thy self, that God will let his work appear, to protect and defend
thee.

And this lets us see the happy privilege of the faithful above all wicked
and ungodly men:

Has God made this known to thy Soul that thou art one that God has taken
into covenant with himself, O happy and blessed for ever is thy condition.
Psalm. 144 15.
Happy be the people that be in such a case, Blessed be those folk that have
the Lord for their God; others may be more rich in regard of these outward
things, but none more happy.

The prophet concludes the happiness of such, when he says, Ps. 84.11
The Lord is a Sun, and a shield, the Lord will give grace, and glory, and no
good thing will he withold from them, that are upright.

1. He will be a Sun to them, that is, as the Sun gives light and comfort, so
will God be all in all unto them.

2. He will be a shield unto them, nothing shall hurt them that are in covenant
with him.

3. He will give grace more to them then to all the world besides; which is
more worth then kingdoms.

4. Glory. I am thine (says David) O save me. When Christ which is our life
shall appear, then shall we appear with him in glory.

5. And lastly, No good thing will he withold, if he give the greater, he
will not deny the lesser.

If riches be good, they shall have it; If credit be good, they shall have it,
if health, peace, prosperity, etc. if the Lord see them good for them, they
shall not want them. But if afflictions, poverty, sickness, etc. be best,
they shall have them too. See there what a portion they shall have, that have
the Lord for their God, that are his servants, and are in covenant with him.

All those gracious promises that God has made in his word belong to thee! And
I tell thee, that one promise is more worth then all thou have in the world
besides, and will last longer, and do thee more good, yea more, thou have now
to leave to thy posterity a promise that God will be thy God, and the God of
thy seed after thee, which is more worth then all the portion thou can leave
them.

Let thy works be seen.
q. d. O Lord let all the world see and know that thou art a merciful
deliverer of thy people, that thou art their mighty Protector, so that it
seems they speak of some singular work and protection of God of his Church
and people: Hence we learn.

That of all the works of God, No work more excellent then Gods protecting his
Church.
viz. the protection of his church and people; for this in a way of excellency
is called the peculiar work of God.

It is true indeed, when the Lord does punish the stubbornness and rebellion
of his people, their infidelity, murmurings and unthank fulness etc. then
appears the power of God, the truth, and Justice of God. But in nothing more
does the Lord show his power, then in protecting of his Church and people,
against the face of their cruel and bloody enemies. And this Moses here shows
when he calls this in a way of excellency, The work of God.

Let thy work in protecting and delivering us thy Church and people Appear,
wherein Moses does prefer this work of God in taking care of his Church, in
protecting, defending, and delivering of it, to all other the works of God,
whereby he makes his power known, then by any other token of his besides.

As we may see in Pharaoh: when did the Lord ever get himself a greater name
then in delivering his people out of Egypt, and over his armies, at the red
Sea? Exodus 1.
Come let us work wisely (says Pharaoh) but the Lord let him see that there is
neither wisdom, nor counsel against him, but the more he sought to suppress
the Church, the more it multiplied and increased.

Hamans plot against the Church was very dangerous and damnable, Hest. 3.7.9.
but the plot that he contrived, the Lord disappointed; and himself fell into
that pit that he had dug for others. Zac. 12.3
The Church of God is such a heavy stone that never any lifted at it, but was
crushed in pieces. So that of the Church the Lord speaks thus. Esa. 59.16.
I wondered that there was no intercessor, therefore his arm brought Salvation
unto him; and his righteousness it sustained him. What though the Church of
God be but as a garden in comparison of the rest of the world, yet it is a well
fenced garden, and though the godly in themselves, are but few, weak, simple,
and so more shiftlesse then others, yet they are strangely kept, 2 Reg. 6.10.
and strongly preserved, and have more with them, then those that are against
them.

Not that the Church and people of God are free from perils and dangers; It is
enough that they are preserved in them, and at last shall be delivered from them;
as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4.8.
We are afflicted on every side, yet are we not in distress, in poverty, but
not overcome persecuted, but not forsaken, etc.

Now that of all the works of God there is none more excellent then the
protection of his Church, these Reasons further show.

First, Gather together on heaps ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces.
Zeph. 3.14.
The reason is there given, for God is with us; and again, rejoice, O Daughter
of Sion, be joyful O Israel, for the Lord thy God is in the midst of thee.
The Lord indeed is present every where, but in a special manner he is present
in his Church. He walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks,
that is, the Churches.

Secondly, He loves the gates of Sion more then all the dwellings of Jacob.
Ps. 87.2. Es. 43.4.
And, Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, aod I
have loved thee. And hence is it that the Church is called, Esaias 49 22.
The beauty of the whole earth. The fairest amongst women etc. Cant. 14.13.
All showing the high esteem that God has of his Church and people.

Thirdly, work for his Churches safety, protection, and deliverance, for his
own glory, that his power, might, and stretched out arm might appear. As the
Lord said to Gideon, Judge. 7.2
the people that are with thee are too many for me to give the Midianits into
thy hand, lest Israel say, my hand has saved me.

Thus David when he was to encounter with Goliath, The Lord (says he) Saves
not with sword nor spear, 1 Samuel 17.4.7.
but the battle is the Lords. That no flesh should rejoice in his presence. 1
Cor. 1.19.31.
But that he that rejoices should rejoice in the Lord.

And lastly, Exo. 14.14.
the Lord shall fight for you, therefore hold your peace.

Seeing that herein, viz: work of God, his power, wisdom, justice, and
providence, does appear. How may this stir up all Gods people, to beg and
entreat the Lord, that his work may appear to us at this time, wherein so many
are daily plotting to undermine Religion, the Gospel and ministry and all.
That God would now take care of his Church and people, that we may at last see
Sion in her beauty, and that at last we may see the Church thoroughly purged,
and all things which make for the beauty of the Church established. Let all
the Lords remembrancers give him no rest, till he thus show his work upon us.
and make Jerusalem the praise of the whole earth.

O that England might now see this work of God when so many are wrestling
against this work. Esa. 62.6, 7.
Now Lord let thy work appear; and let thy power, thy providence and mercy, be
seen in the defense and protection of thy Gospel and Church, that all the
world may see that thou art mind full of thy Church; And let shame fall on them
that be enmies to the work of the Lord amongst us. That the Lord would regard
the prayers of the destitute, that it may be written for the generations to
come, Psalm. 102.18.
that the people that shall be created may praise the Lord.

Secondly, that never slumbreth nor sleeps. Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12.
It is he that keeps them as the Apple of his eye, that spreads abroad his
wings, and bears them up as the Eagle her young ones. And the ground of all
is, his people are his portion; and Jacob is the lot of his inheritance. O who
would not bea member of his Church to whom these excellent privileges belong
and appertain? why should we not thus trust in him in the worst of times, and
in the sorest danger? Nothing can stave off his mercy, but sin, let us be
humbled for sin, and meet him by unfeigned repentance, let us awake him by our
prayers as the Disciples did Christ, and say, Master save us lest we perish.

And last of all, work, and shall be pleased to send deliverance to his Church
and people, Zac. 3.2.
that they are as a brand taken out of the fire, It becomes the just to be
thankful, and to look up to the hills from whence our deliverance comes, and
to say with Mary, He that is mighty has done great things for me, Lu. 1.49.
and holy is his Name.

Many of us partake of many mercies and deliverances from God, with those Nine
Lepers, but few return thanks to God but hereby we may know whether any mercy
or deliverance we receive from God bebest owed upon us in mercy or judgment, by
considering how our hearts stand affected in thankfulness to God after the
same.

And thy glory unto their children.
HItherto we have heard their petition, and that was for protection.

Now for their reasons to enforce their petition, and they are two.

1. If the Lord would be thus pleased graciously to hear them, and protect
them, in their journey toward Canaan, it would redound much to his glory. For
then should those Canaanites see, and all the wicked of the world, that there
is a God that takes care of his Church and people, and might be afraid to
offend him.
2. If the Lord would be thus pleased to prosper them and protect them, then it
should fare well with the Church and people of God for Ages to come. His
merciful dealing toward them would be made known to their Children.
And thy glory to their Children.

The Lord had promised, to give the land of Canaan to this people, the seed and
posterity of Abraham. The Lord had now begun to bring them onward of their
journey thither, and if the Lord should now have cast them off in the
wilderness, then the glory of the Lord should have been obscured, and the
ungodly Heathen, would have blasphemed God, and said, that it was because he
was not able to do it.

And therefore that the glory of God might not be thus obscured or dimmed, or
evil spoken of by their enemies, they entreat the Lord, to go before them, to
direct and protect them so, as their enemies might have no cause to insult, or
they once to doubt of Gods promise.

From hence we learn, To plead Gods glory, a good argument to move the Lord to
pity his Church.
That there is no greater argument to move the Lord to protect his Church and
people, in times of misery and distress, then this; that it shall turn much
to his own glory.

Our Savior teaches us in this prayer left unto his Church as a pattern and
platform of all our prayers. First, to pray that his name may be hallowed, and
to conclude our pravers with, for thine is the Kingdom, power and glory. To
show, that we can use no better argument to move the Lord to grant us any thing
we stand in need of.

Then when it shall tend to his own honor, and glory: for of all things the
glory of God is most dear to him, so as he is most tender of it, and will part
with it to no other. Esa. 42.8
I am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not give another.

It was our Saviors prayer and practice to seek his Fathers glory, Jo. 12.28
Father glorify thy name, Joh. 8.49, 50.
and again I seek not my own glory, but his that sent me.

Thus Moses was so set upon Gods glory, Exodus 32.32.
as that he preferred it before his own part in the book of life. And thus
those Seraphims cry one to another, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts,
Esa. 6.3.
the whole earth is full of his glory.

And those four and twenty Elders say, Rev. 4.11
thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory and Honor and power etc.

And when this glory of God is set before our eyes, and pleaded in our prayers
as the principal end of our requests; It is the greatest argument, and motive
to move the Lord to hear, and grant our requests.

Because Gods glory is the chiefest good, man's life, yea, Moses to wish rather
to have his name blotted out of the book of life, then that God should be
dishonored by the Egyptians which would be ready to say, that God brought them
out of Egypt into the wilderness, but was not able to bring them into the land
of Canaan.

Secondly, Whatsoever ye do, 1 Cor. 10.30.
do all to the glory of God. It is true this glory is eternal with God; and
admits of no addition, or diminution; As the Sun would still retain his
brightness, though no creature had an eye to see it. But hereby we set forth
our high esteem of it, not that God reaps any good by it, but the fruit
redounds to us, God loves his glory as he loves himself; And as we love him,
so we love his glory.

It is the end that God purposes to himself in all his works, God made all
things for his own glory, Psalm. 19.
the Heavens declare the glory of God. It is the end of our Redemption, Ye are
bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20.
therefore glorify God etc.

It is the end of our Adoption, to the praise of his glory. Ephesians. 1.6.
And therefore this being the end of all his works, to set forth his glory, we
are not to prefer any thing before it. And such as prefer any thing before his
glory, as too many do in these days, the Lord at last will power contempt upon
them. Let us apply this.

This may serve for a prop and stay unto the godly in the land at this time,
wherein God has showed so many tokens of anger and displeasure against our
land and Nation, by those woeful Changes our eyes have seen, and our daily
fears of farther miseries that the gospel it self is departing from us, by
the daily increase of Sects, Heresies, with all manner of sin, and profanesse,
which increasing in a nation and kingdom, where the Gospel has been
sincerely professed, and maintained, have ever proved a forerunner of
desolation if not the departure of the gospel from such a people. Surely now
is the time if ever, that the Spirit of the faithful should be kindled in
prayer. And in prayer, that we set before our eyes Moses example here, that the
Lord will take the cause of his Church into his own hand, and root out these
Sects and Heresies that are crept in amongst us, and every plant that is not of
his own planting. And this must be the Reason and motive, that we must press
the Lord withal, His own glory, that does now suffer. And this will be a
powerful motive to move the Lord to hear and help. Because he is most most
jealous of his own glory. And if the Lord would be pleased, to save this Land
and Nation, deliver his people, and purge his Church, this will redound to his
own glory. Say, O Lord what will become of thy glory, should the enemies of thy
truth, and Gospel, still prevail, shall thy vineyard be trodden down? shall
this Land and Nation in the which thou have taken delight to dwell, and where
thy Gospel has been preached, and thy name called upon for so many years,
now at last become an Habitation of Ohims, and Zijmes, that the Lord would be
pleased rather to humble us, if it be his good pleasure, by any other
judgment, then this spiritual Judgment of the Gospels departure from us.

If Master Herbert, some years before our troubles began, could say that
Religion does on Tiptoe Stand,
Ready to pass into America Land;


What would he have said, if he had lived at this day: to behold those
abominable Sects that now have gotten head amongst us. O pray, pray, that the
Lord would take his own cause and his Churches cause into his own hand, and
plead his glory, that does now suffer.

Secondly, viz: By our seeking of Gods glory above all our carnal Interests:
many men in time of sickness, misery, and distress, can pray to God for help,
and succor, but their prayers are but the fruits of self-love, whilst they
mind their own Benefit, and comfort, more then Gods glory, they can be content
that God should serve their turns, and supply their wants, if poor to releeve
them if sick to recover them, or in any misery to help them. But all this while
they have no eye at all to his glory, neither do they plead that at all in
their prayers. Whereas a gracious heart, and a prayer formed according to Gods
will, that shall prevail with God; has ever Gods glory the principal end of
it, and Argument in it, to move God.

David in extreme sickness flies to God to be his Physician.; Psalm. 6.5.
And what Argument does he use to move the Lord to pity him? In death there is
no remembrance of thee, and who will give thee thanks in the pit?

q. d. Thou may let me live if thou will, which if thou will, I shall praise
thee, and glorify thy name. If I die, Who will give thee thanks in the pit?
Thus he Challenges his life at Gods hand, from this very ground, the glory and
praise that God should receive by his recovery.

The like we have else where, What profit is there in my blood, Ps. 30.9.
when I go down to the pit? Shall the dust praise thee, shall it declare thy
truth?

Shall the Dead arise and praise thee? Ps. 88.10
Selah.

It is a sign our hearts are sound and our prayers sincere, when Gods glory
does principally affect us.

The Idolatry of the people, whereby God was Dishonored, did most of all
afflict Moses.

And the reproach done against God, Dan. 32.19.
by the blasphemous letter of Senacherib did more trouble the heart of good
Hezekiah then all his threats against him, and his people. Esa. 39.3.4.
O well fare a gracious heart, that can thus render Gods glory above all.

And lastly,

If a minister of the word shall teach never so well, and do not propound the
glory of God to himself therein but preach for gain, preferment, vain glory
etc. Alas what comfort can he have in it?

So to give much to the poor, as some to merit, some to be seen of men,
pharisaical like, etc. And do not thief things for Gods sake, to honor God
with their substance, can have no comfort at all in it.

And thy glory unto their Children.
Here we have the second end of their petition and request made unto God for
protection. viz: that it might not only fare well with them, but also with
their posterity; and the Church of God that should live after them.

From whence we learn, We ought to take care of the Church after our days.
to have a special care of the Church of God after their departure; that when
we are dead and gone, yet our seed and posterity after us, may likewise
flourish and be in a good estate.

How earnest is David for the Church that it might prosper and flourish. O be
favorable to Sion, Psa 51.18
build thou the walls of Jerusalem. Where David prays for all heavenly
blessings, and graces for the Church. That God would repair the decayed estate
of it, and fence it about with the walls of his protection, against the Churches
enemies.

And this has been the special care of Gods people in all their prayers, to
pray for the good of Gods Church, and people; Even after their days, that it
might prosper and flourish. As for such as are the enemies of the Church, he
prophecyeth vengeance against them, They that hate Sion shall be ashamed. Psalm.
12.9
By all which he shows his exceeding care he had of the Church. And such was
that tender affection that good Nehemiah bare toward the Church of God; That
when he heard by those poor Jews, Nehem. 1
that came to the Palace at Shusan for relief, by whom he understood the
miseries of the Church that was at Jerusalem; He sat down and wept, and
mourned and fasted, and besought God for his Church.

We are all members of one and the same mystical body the Church,

Secondly the welfare of a State and Kingdom is lapped up in the happy and
flourishing estate of the Church. never look to be truly settled on their
thrones.

This condemns them as no true members of the Church of God, Moses, Josuah and
David, Deuteronomy. 33. los 24.
their greatest care was for the Churches welfare after their days that the
generations to come might serve the Lord.

And surely there is no religion, where the coutinuance of religion for our
posterity is not thought upon. The Lord knows this duty is little thought
upon, at this day, now that Religion is ready to take her wings and fly away;
though we see the enemies busy, to sow tares, and sects, and Heresies increase
upon us; all threatening ruin, as if the Lord had a purpose to lay his vineyard
waste: Yet how few lay the Churches miseries to heart. Doubtless the great
security that is amongst all, even amongst professors themselves this day' are
sad Omens, and presages, that God is not far off with some further judgment,
then yet we have tasted of.

It shall be our wisdom then to make more conscience of this duty, Englands
glory, may not depart from us.

And thy glory to their children.
THere is one thing more observable in these words, that they which in the
former part of this Psalm, lay as it were in the gulf of despair, as not
worthy to open their lips to God for themselves; Yet now are bold not only to
pray for themselves, but for the Church of God, and their children and
posterity afer them.

Hence we are taught that poor sinners; Sinners cannot pray for themselves no^
others. Pro. 28.9
whilst they live in their sins, and are not reconciled to God, can neither
pray for themselves nor for others. But upon their Repentance and
reconciliation to God can pray for themselves and others. The sacrifice of the
wicked is abomination to the Lord, but the prayers of the righteous are his
delight; Job. 9.31
God hears not sinners. And ye as living stones, Heb. 13.16.
are made a spiritual house etc. To offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable
to God thorough Jesus Christ. Till we become living stones in Gods Temple,
there is no accepting of our sacrifices we offer up to God. The Lord had first
respect unto Abel and then to his Sacrifices; where the person is not accepted,
the sacrifice is rejected. And the reasons are.

First every unregenerate man is called a stranger and an enemy to God. Ye that
were strangers and enemies to God etc. Ephesians. 2.19
Now things done by strangers are not much looked upon, but by Enemies are no
whit regarded.

Secondly, whilst a man lies in an impenitent estate and in his sin,
reconciled to God, such can ask nothing at Gods hand by virtue of any promise,
for God has not made any promise to the wicked, unless it be of Hell, and of
wrath but all the promises are made over to the faithful in Christ; In whom
all the promises are Yea and amen.

But now when a wicked man shall turn from his wickedness, and by repentance
come to be reconciled to God he may go boldly to the Throne of grace, and beg
mercy not only for himself, but for others. There is no way to be heard of God
in prayer, but first to be at peace with God; and reconciled unto him.

How may this stir up every Soul speedily to return unto God, reconciled to
God. How dare we approach his presence who is a consuming fire? Let us then
labor above all things for reconciliation, and for the comfortable feeling of
Gods love in Christ, without which we cannot pray with faith, or comfort, for
our selves, much less for others.

And this may serve for matter of singular comfort and consolation to the Godly
that are reconciled to God in Christ,

Their Sacrifices God is well pleased withal, and their worship and service
they do unto him, howsoever accompanied with manyfailings and imperfections.
Yet because they proceed from a person accepted in Christ, they please God, and
are accepted of him. A little thing done of a child in love, is more acceptable
to a loving and indulgent father, then much done by a slave in fear.

ver. 17. And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, and stablish thou
the work of our hands upon us; Yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.
THis verse contains the conclusion of the whole Psalm, and the end at which
Moses and the people of God aimed in all their former petitions: viz. The glory
of God; that he would make himself glorious, and take honor to himself, in
protecting and defending them, and in causing his favor, love, and kindness
toward them appear unto all nations under Heaven.

In the verse, they pray for two things.

1. That the Beauty of the Lord might be upon the^, by beauty they understand
the special favor, grace, and protection, of God toward them; for when the
Lord withdrawes his favor, love, and protection, from his people, they seem
to be forlorn as a woman forsaken of her Husband. Nehe. 1.3. Even so when the
Lord is pleased to manisest his love, favor and protection toward his people,
he seems then to beautify, and adorn them. 2. They pray for the Lords
gracious blessing to the work of their hands, that he would direct them,
bless, and prosper them: but specially, as I take it, they mean their journey
toward the land of Canaan, that the Lord would go along with them, and guide
them in their journey, that they might in the end enjoy that good land,
promised unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that he would give it: Let the beauty
of the Lord.
q. d. O Lord we have lain a long time in cruel bondage in Egypt, and now
again in the wilderness, soaking in much misery and affliction, without any
beauty or Honor; So as all Nations have contemned, and despised us: But now
let thy Beauty shine upon us, let thy favor, and loving kindness be so
plentifully showed toward us, that we may not only have comfort in our selves,
but may also recover again, that ancient Honor, and glory, and reputation;
that formerly we had amongst the Nations.

Whence note first of all, How Moses and the people of God crave that the Lords
Beauty might be upon them, herein then, they confess that they had none of
their own, but were indeed deformed and full of shame in regard of their Sins.

That no man by nature is decked with this Beauty, We are deformed till the
beauty of Christ be put upon us. Eze. 16.
till the Lord put it upon us, but we are rather deformed with our sins, and
have no joy of spiritual Beauty, till the Lord put it upon us; and until his
Beauty, even the pure Beauty of Christ's Righteousness, the Lamb without spot
be put upon us.

Our natural misery is most lively set forth, by the Prophet, by the misery of
a poor distressed Orphan, destitute, and forsaken, and lying in its blood etc.

And that which Christ spoke of the Church of Laodicea; Rev. 3.17
thou art miserable poor, and blind, and naked, is true of every one of us by
nature. Miserable, deformed creatures are we, till the Lord, beauty be put upon
us.

What Beauty is in a poor naked Infant, polluted in its blood? We are all by
nature under this misery of spiritual Nakedness, naked of original
righteousness, and we have nothing to cover our nakedness, until the Lord
put upon us the righteousness of Christ, to cover our deformity.

Now it is only Christ that must take away this deformity from us; it is he
that must cover it with his own white raiment; I counsel thee to buy of me
white raiment. That thy shameful deformity may not appear.

If a man have but this garment upon him, Cant. 6.1
though he be black of himself, as the Church confesses, yet he will be
comely. Yea, if a man have this garment upon him, if he were in Hell, Hell fire
could not touch him. It gets the blessing as Jacob did, that was covered with
Esaus garment.

This serves for matter of Humiliation, beauty at all in us, but are deformed,
miserable, poor, blind, and Naked have no beauty at all in our Souls but are
full of blemishes, and deformities, and more filthy uncleanness; though thou
art never so fair or beautiful in body, clothed in silk and purple, yet
unless thou have Christ's righteousness put upon thee, thou have no beauty at
all; but art a most vile, loathsome, and wretched creature.

O how may this humble us in our own eyes, seeing we have no beauty of our
own to be proud of, nor spark of true beauty. And the more we see our own
natural deformity, and spiritual nakedness, the foul spots and blemishes of
our Souls, the better it is for us, to humble us, and to make us loath our
selves, and to repent in dust and ashes.

O then let us take the glass of Gods law, and behold these foul, and deformed
faces of our souls, and be ashamed to behold them; be humbled for it, God
looks not after the beauty of the body, whilst thy Soul is thus deformed, if
thou lie in thy sins in an impenitent, and unregenerate estate, know that
thou art a most vile and loathsome creature in his sight.

Secondly, beauty by nature let us labor to have the beauty of the Lord our
God upon us; to make us truly beautiful.

Now wherein stands this beauty of the Lord? Not in a painted face, which is
not b^autie of the Lords making, but rather of the devils, like a rotten sign
post gilded over to make a show, no nor in the beauty of nature it self, which
is but as a flower which will quickly wither and decay, there is no such
excellency in that which is not only unprofitable, but often times pernicious;
but in God who is beauty it self, and infinite in all perfections. And all the
beauty that is in the heavens, in the earth, or in any other creature, is not
so much as a star in comparison of the Sun in respect of him. And in those
spiritual indowments of the soul, and sanctified graces of his spirit,
humility, meekness, faith, patience, love, fear of God, etc. If thou want
this inward and spiritual beauty, though thou were as fair as Absalom, or the
fairest woman in the world, alas thou art but a deformed and filthy creature in
the sight of God. It is the white raiment of Jesus Christ, that thou must be
clothed withal, that thy filthy nakedness do not appear. Revel. 3.18.
That must make thee truly beautiful in his sight.

Seeing the Church is thus deformed, The beauty of the Lord upon it.

Then when the beauty of the Church is observed, as at this day, by sects and
heresies, and for want of order, and discipline which is the greatest blemish
to a Church. Then it is time, high time, and more then time, to beg hard at the
Throne of grace, that the beauty of the Lord may be upon his Church; that the
Lord would take from us that shame and reproach that at this day we lie under,
Eze. 36.26.
amongst other reformed Churches. That the Lord would be pleased to adorn
Sion, and deck his Church with her perfect beauty.

That the Lord would take away his Churches mourning-weed, and put upon her her
beautiful attire, fit for the Spouse of Christ, that all Heresies at last may
be abandoned, the Gosp^ll truly preached; the Sacraments duly administered, and
Discipline executed herein stands the beauty of a Church; which beauty of the
Lord, Lord let it be upon us.

Stablish thou the work of our hands upon us.
HEre we have the second thing they crave at Gods hand. That as before they
desired his glory in the first place, so now they pray, that the Lord would so
order, direct, guide, and prosper them in their work, and enterperize that
they had in hand, that all might be for his glory.

Hence we learn that nothing that men take in hand can prosper, Nothing can
prosper without Gods blessing. Ps. 127.
and come to good effect, unless the Lord give a blessing to it and prosper
the same. Except the Lord build, the House, they labor but in vain that build
it. Except the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain.

It is vain to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the Bread of sorrows,
for so he gives his beloved sleep; wherein the Prophet shows, that
whatsoever is attempted, or taken in hand, either in family, or City, either
for the good of one, or another, cannot be succe^sfull without the blessing of
God.

When Nehemiah and the Jews were about to reedifie the walls of Jerusalem, how
were the people disheartened, discouraged by Sanb^^^^d and T^b^ah, Neh. 6.16.
yet because the work was of God, the Text says, Pro. 10.22.
That the enemies of Gods people were afraid, and their courage failed them,
for they knew that the work was wrought by God. The blessing of the Lord (says
Solomon) makes us rich.

And where this blessing of God is wanting, men put their money in a broken
bag, as the Prophet has it. Ye have sown much, and bring in little, ye eat
and have not enough ye drink and are not filled, you cloth you and are not
warm, and he that earneth wages puts it into a broken bag. Meaning indeed
that there can be no success in any of our labors, or indevours that we take
in hand without Gods blessing.

And hence it is that the servants of God in all their enterprises that they
have taken in hand, especially such as have been of weight and importance, have
ever first had recourse to God for a blessing.

Abraham's servants being sent to provide a wife for his Masters Son, Genesis 24.12.
begins first with prayer to God, O Lord God (say he) of my Master Abraham, I
pray thee send me good speed this day, and show kindness unto my Master
Abraham.

Thus good Nehemiah, when he heard of the desolation of Jerusalem, and
intending to beg help of the king his master, Neh. 1.11.
he betakes himself to prayer and desires the Lord to prosper him therein; and
to give him favor in his sight.

Thus Paul before he went to Sea, and undertook his voyage he kneeles down
upon the shore and calls upon God; so that if we desire to have the work of
our hands to prosper, and to see a blessing upon our labors, trades and
occupations: O then begin with prayer to God, without whose blessing we cannot
prosper.

See the reasons.
First in regard of that propriety that God has in all his creatures; The Gold
is mine. etc. says God. Hag. 1.9 Psalm. 50.
And the Beasts upon a thousand Hills are mine; He is the sovereign Lord of
all things and it is he that gives them to the children of men to some more to
some less; And to him they must one day be accomptable for their receipts and
expenses.

He only is wise, Job 12.13.
Counsel and understanding. He knows best, when where, and how to bestow his
help and blessing, and therefore our dependency must be upon him.

And lastly, Psalm. 78. 2 Reg. 7.
VVhilest the meat was in their mouths the wrath of God fell upon them. And
the prince of Samaria saw the plenty that was prophesied of, but did not taste
of it. For men to eat and drink and rejoice in their labors, (says Solomon)
I find that this is the gife of God. So that in the getting, and inioying, of
all earthly comforts, God is to be sought unto for his blessing, without whom
no creature can do us good.

This shows the wickedness madness and folly,

Besides, here is the misery of such wicked men, they cannot thank God for
their riches. What? thank God for thy substance thou have gotten wickedly, and
deceifully; what is this but to make God a partner in thy sin. Now God is not
the author of sin, nor partner with any in sin; but his curse rather shall
pursue such to destruction.

Seeing that nothing we take in hand can prosper, and indevours, or else, be
our work never so lawful, honest, good or necessary, if the Lord do not direct
us, and bless our indevors, we cannot prosper. What is the reason why many
men, though they have honest callings, lawful, and good, yet they do not
prosper, nor see any fruit of their labors. Surely one main cause may be this,
they seek not unto God for a blessing.

Thou may ride and run, dig and delve, plow, and Sow, rise up early, and go
late to bed, and eat the bread of Car^fulnesse, and yet if God give not a
blessing, all is in vain.

Seeing nothing we take in hand can prosper,

This lets us see the cause, why the Word does no more prosper in many places,
Congregations, and families, at this day, we preach and you hear, and little
fruit and effect follows. Men were ignorant before the word came amongst them
and ign^rant still, profane before, profane still, men are not, will not, be
wrought upon. Surely, setting aside Gods secret purpose and will, who will have
mercy on whom he will have mercy and whom he will he hardens; And the word must
be to some the Savor of death to death; as to others the sweet savor to life.
One principal cause is, men do not begin with prayer, and beg not a blessing
from God, we that are Ministers may look that God will blast that Sermon, for
the which we beg not a blessing from God: And you that are our hearers, may
look that God will blast your hearing, when you neglect this duty.

But do we not see that many times the wicked do prosper, Psalm. 73.12.
Lo these are the wicked, these prosper in the world, these increase in
Riches, this was such a dangerous temptation, that David was assaulted withal,
to behold that it made him to think, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed my hands in innocence.

David himself shall make answer to this, When I went into the Sanctuary of
God, then understand I their end. Surely thou did set them in Slipp^ry places
thou castest them down to destruction.

What though God bestows upon wicked men riches, honor, prosperity and all
things that their hearts can wish, these are but few gifts of Gods lefthand,
and are often bestowed in wrath, not with his blessing, but there goes many
times a secret curse with them, either they want most, that they seem to
enjoy, having no heart to use the riches, or else God gives them, to fat them
up to the day of slaughter.

Yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.
THis Duplication and doubling of this petition that God would prosper the work
of their hands upon them, denotes the earnestness of Moses and the people of
God, in craving his blessing upon their work, especially now in their journey
toward the land of Canaan, and now that they were to encounter with the
Canaanites.

Teaching us thus much, Prayer before war.
but God must first be consulted, and sought unto. Now that they were to go out
against those cursed Canaanites, which God had threatened to root out, and to
destroy, they entreat the Lord first, to prosper their endeavors. Exo. 17.13.
When Josuah the Lords Captain fought with the Amalekits, that would have kept
this people from entering in to Canaan, how fervent was Moses in prayer, and at
the time that Moses held up his hands, Israel prevailed, and when his hands
were let down, the Amalekits prevailed, thus did Jehosaphat, and Hezechiah,
those godly Kings of Judah and Israel. When they and their people were
threatened with those mighty Hosts of their enemies they sought God, and were
heard of him, and delivered. And great Reason.

Why God is first to be consulted with,

This may serve for our Instruction, A Horse is a vain thing to save a man. 1 Samuel 7.8, 9. 1 Cor. 5.20.
Neither is the mighty saved by much strength. Herein Jehosaphat strengthened
the hearts of the people, Fear not ye men of Judah, and ye Inhabitants of
Jerusalem. Put your trust in him, and ye shall prosper.

Secondly, 2 Samuel 5.23.
to ask first counsel of the Lord, as David did, when he was to go up against
the Phistines, Shall I go up against them. And to take heed, that there be no
Achan in the camp, for whose sake the Lord many times is provoked, to hinder
the success of his people, and suffer their enemies to prosper.

The Lord knows we have many Achans in our armies, that are so far from
seeking God, and begging a blessing upon their undertakings, that rather
Achan-like trouble the Army, by provoking Gods wrath against them.

And last of all, by this doubling of their petition, establish thou the work
of our hands upon us, Yea, the work of our hands establish thou it;

Moses herein shows, that he did not only crave Gods mercy, and protection,
for the present time, that God would bless their labor and enterprises; But
that he would keep a continual course in directing, and protecting them: for
unless the Lord did begin, continue and finish their work for them, it could
never come to perfection.

For if the Lord should have left them in the midst of their journey, what
had it been the better, unless he would bring them into Canaan, that good
land. So that they confess, that they were never able to persevere, and hold
on, in their course they had begun, unless the Lord would still direct them,
and prosper them in their journey. Hence we learn

That perseverance in any good duty is the grace, and gift of God; Perseverance
in any good is Gods.
and as the Lord must begin any good work, so he must continue it, and perfect
it or else it will fail; And hence is it that they double their petition
Direct thou. Even direct thou the work of our hands upon us. And this is no
other thing then what the Lord has promised. They that wait on the Lord shall
renew their strength as the Eagle, they shall run, and not be weary, they shall
walk and not faint. They shall be like the tree planted by the Rivers of
waters, whose leaves shall not fall

And this may yield matter of singular Comfort and consolation unto all the
faithful. Has the Lord begun in any of us the good work of grace, and put it
into our hearts to walk in the right way of his commandments, and to travail
toward the celestial Canaan, let us bless God for this mercy; And withal
all entreat the Lord, that he would still direct, and guide us and never le^ve
us, but even bring us to the end of our Journey; And never forsake us till he
has put us into the possession of that glorious inheritance prepared for us in
that heavenly Canaan; for if he direct us not by his grace and by his spirit it
cannot be that we shall hold out but must needs turn aside in the broad way to
destruction.

A Table of the principal Doctrines contained in this Book.
In the Title.
Doct. 1. TO doubt of Gods providence, and to question his power, a great sin
page 5 Doct. 2. The greatest Honor, is truly to be called a Servant of God
page 14 Doct. 3. Teachers of the people, should pray for the people Doct. 4.
Times of affliction, are times of prayer page 31
VERSE I.
Doct. 1. The very complaints of the godly are effectual prayers page 42 Doct.
2. When a Nation, or people decay in beauty and glory, it is high time to be
humbled page 51 Doct. 3. To plead Gods former mercies, a special motive to
move him to pity. page 56 Doct. 4. Gods Church and people have ever had a
Dwelling place page 62 Doct. 5. The Church of God is ever one and the same page
72
VERSE II.
Doct. 1. In times of distress, we are ready to question Gods power page 77
Doct. 2. The knowledge of Gods covenant, gives boldness in prayer page 84
Doct. 3. There was a time, when there was no earth, or world page 89 Doct. 4.
God was from all eternity page 95
VERSE III.
Doct. 1. The greatest comfort to the godly in suffering times, is to consider,
that their afflictions come from God page 101 Doct. 2. Our life and being here
uncertain. page 107 Doct. 3. All men at last shall rise again. page 118 Doct.
4. Man a piece of living Clay page 131
VERSE IV.
Doct. 1. Our life short, being compared to eternity page 138 Doct. 2. Man,
hardly convinced that his life is short page 142
VERSES V, VI.
Doct. 1. Death is unresistable page 147 Doct. 2. Death many times comes
suddenly as a flood page 153 Doct. 3. Death is as a sleep page 165 Doct. 4.
Life of a man so frail, as no example can express page 173
VERSE VII.
Doct. 1. Gods people should be humbled, when it fares worse with them then
with the wicked. page 185 Doct. 2. Though man's life be short, yet sin makes it
shorter page 190 Doct. 3. Extraordinary Judgments, signs of extraordinary sins
page 196 Doct. 4. Man's ignorance of God, great page 207 Doct. 5. Gods Anger
once kindled, Consumes to destruction page 110 Doct. 6. Sin most of all affects
the heart of the godly. page 120
VERSE VIII.
Doct. 1. Sight of sin, Ground of Humiliation for sin page 227 Doct. 2. Sin the
cause of all judgment upon a people 136 Doct. 3. Times of affliction discover
Corruption page 247 Doct. 4. A true penitent will be Humbled for his most
secret sins page 257 Doct. 5. Our most secret sins are done, God looking on
page 265
VERSE IX.
Doct. 1. The sufferings of the godly, sometimes exceed the wicked page 274
Doct. 2. Gods hand sometimes long upon his own people Ibid. Doct. 3. The effect
of Gods anger terrible page 285 Doct. 4. It is the sight of sin, and the sense
of Gods displeasure for sin, that is the ground of true Repentance page 293
VERSE X.
Doct. 1. Man's life but short page 305 Doct. 2. Misery of man, since the fall,
wondrous great page 313 Doct. 3. There is no age of man's life, but is full of
labor and sorrow page 316 Doct. 4. Sin many times causes sudden death. page
323 Doct. 5. Godly confess their own sins, as the sins of others page 325
VERSE XI.
Doct. 1. Few take notice of Gods Anger as they ought to do page 331 Doct. 2.
Gods anger most terrible page 337 Doct. 3. Men fear God no more because they
know not the power of his wrath page 340 Doct. 4. The best fail in the measure
of the fear of God. page 346
VERSE XII.
Doct. 1. No man can number his days aright, unless God teach him page 355
Doct. 2. We ought to esteem of every day as our last day page 361 Doct. 3. Men
are never truly wise, till then page 371 Doct. 4. True wisdom consists in
true obedience page 377
VERSE XIII.
Doct. 1. Men never seek to God for Reconciliation till they feel his
displeasure page 385 Doct. 2. In times of misery and distress, God only is to
be sought unto page 393 Doct. 3. Whilst God seems to be angry, there is no
peace page 405 Doct. 4. To mind the Lord of the Continuance of our affection, a
good motive to move him to pity page 411 Doct. 5. In regard of Gods gracious
presence, God may turn aside from his people for a time page 415 Doct. 6. To
plead Gods covenant, an excellent motive to move him to pity page 424
VERSE XIV.
Doct. 1. There can be no comfort to a distressed Soul' till it be reconciled
to God page 436 Doct. 2. Before we can be filled with mercy we must seek our
misery page 442 Doct. 3. We must labor for a plentiful sense of mercy page
446 Doct. 4. Only Gods favor refreshes a distressed Soul page 452 Doct. 5.
Gods mercyes should provoke to cheerfulness in his service page 457
Doct. 1. Reconciliation to God, the fountain of all true comfort. page 463
Doct. 2. Our condition here wondrous Changable page 470 Doct. 3. God will
never cast down his people so low, bur he will raise them up at last page 480
Doct. 4. Afflictions past, though long, seem short page 485 Doct. 5. We may
pray for mercy, answerable to our misery page 486
VERSE XVI.
Doct. 1. God is the protector of his people page 489 Doct. 2. Gods servants
may look for protection from him page 495 Doct. 3. No work more excellent,
then Gods protecting his Church page 501 Doct. 4. To plead Gods glory, a good
motive to move the Lord to help page 509 Doct. 5. We ought to take care of the
Church, after our days page 518 Doct. 6. Wicked cannot pray for themselves or
others, but repenting of their sins can both page 527
VERSE XVII.
Doct. 1. We are deformed till the beauty of Christ's Rigteousnesse be put upon
us page 427 Doct. 2. Nothing we do can prosper, without Gods blessing page 532
Doct. 3. Before War is to be taken in hand, God is to be Sought unto page 539
Doct. 4: Perseverance in any good, Gods gift. page 543
FINIS.

