June the 24. 1642.

The Last Joyful news from Ireland.

Wherein is Related, A most famous and victorious Battle between the
Protestants and the Rebels, at Kilrush in the County of Kildare: At which place
the English with 3000 foot and Horse, valiantly set upon the Enemies, being
12000 in Number, killed near upon 600 of them, took abundance of Arms and
Ammunition from them, and brought 3 heads of their Chief Commanders to Dublin.

Whereunto is added a Letter sent from the Right Honorable Earl of Ormond and
Ossory, to his much Honored Uncle, Sir Robert Poyntz,

Showing the true estate of the Kingdom of Ireland at this present, Received
June 21. 1642.

Also an Order of both Houses of Parliament, whereby Captain Burrell, Thomas
Lloyd, Gentleman, John Smith, and Francis Douet of London, Gentleman, are
appointed and approved of, to be Commissaries, to inroll and value the Horse
and Arms, to be raised according to the Propositions.

John Brown Cleric. Parliament.

London Printed for John Wright. 1642.

LAVS DEO. From DUBLIN the seventeenth of JUNE, 1642. Mr. Carswell;
MY kind love unto you remembered, hoping in God of your good health, as I was
at present thanks be to God for it: your letter dated the tenth of May I have
received, and of the 29 of March, sin^e which time I have not received any from
my Father, and your self, fearing two Letters are miscarried which you sent by
Post. As for the state and condition of this Kingdom it is very troublesome as
yet, and the wars are like to hold long, in regard the Rebels will never stand
long to Battle, but fly to the Mountains, Bogs, and Woods, we having not men
sufficient to meet them in several places, and to compass them in, and to
leave Garrisons in every Town of note. For my part I do continue in Sir
Charles Cootes Regiment, as Wagon Master to the Regiment. And w^ereas my
Father writes for me to come over, I cannot well get off as yet, and if I
should seek to get off, I should never get my pay which is due to me, having
received but 50 shillings this eight months, but I am promised to receive part
of it as soon as money comes over: business not agreeing well with the
Parliament of England, is a great hindrance to the proceedings here in Ireland,
and a discouraging of the Soldiers wanting their pay. I believe I shall hardly
get ^eave to come over as yet, in regard they want Englishmen to be guides to
the Army. I am Garrisoned at the Na^s. I have been in the Country for six or
seven weeks together, where the Lord has prospered us in all our proceedings:
the greatest number of the Rebels that I did see, was at a place called
Kilrush, in the County of Kildare, to the number of 12000. of them, we having
but 3000. Horse and Foot, besides they having an infinite number which lay
behind the Hill, lying upon advantage to divide the spoil, thinking to have
had the victory of us, crying and shouting, victory, victory, before they had
obtained it. It pleased God at very sight of our men being courageous (although
they had the Hill and Wind of us) our Commanders marching up toward them
daunted them: and at two or three shots at each other, the Rebels began to
retreat and fly, and to separate themselves, and fly over Bogs and Hills,
our Horse pursuing them, many of them were slain in an hour and a half
space, we killed near upon 600, of them, and took abundance of Arms and
Ammunition from them, and brought three heads of their chief Commanders to
Dublin. Thus Gods wonderful providence in delivering us from the hands of our
enemies, we having had but four or five men slain at that Battle; many
conflicts we have had with them since, and still we had good success thanks be
to God for it. I make no question but you have heard of the loss of our
Colonel Sir Charles Coote, that Noble Commander, who by accident of my Lord
Burlaces troops, was shot at Trime in pursuing the Rebels there, who came to
take Trim after he had recovered it from them, he having but 150. men,
discomfited 3000. of them, the loss of that man is much lamented among us all,
and especially true hearted Christians, for God did prosper and bless all his
proceedings. I am sure I have lost the best Master in Ireland, if he had lived
he had done much good for them that belonged to him, and other people that were
robbed, thousands will miss him: there was no man in Ireland did terrify the
Rebels so much as he, and if it had pleased God to have spared his life, he had
quickly subdued the^, the very name of him was a terror to them: the Earl of
Kildare has Sir Charles Cootes Regiment; how he will proceed against his
Countrymen I know not as yet, I pray God send my Lord Lieutenant safe over, for
we want him to settle businesses here; since my Colonels death things go on
but slowly.

I pray God bless and prosper the Parliament in their proceedings, and that
the King and they might agree, both for the good of the Church and Commonweal.

Yours Samuel Smith.

A Letter sent out of Ireland, from the Right Honorable the Earl of Ormond
and Ossory, to his much Honored Uncle, Sir Robert Poyntz,
Showing the true estate of the Kingdom of Ireland at this present time, and
delivered to his Uncle here the 21 of June, 1642.
THe last Letter that I received from you was of the 7 of April, by one Veele,
to whom I shall be very ready to give my assistance toward his preferment,
when I have rid my self of a few former engagements. We are now in so good
condition for matter of men, that I know it will be wondered that we do no
more with them, but when it shall be considered what men without money, Meat
or Clothes, are able to do, I hope we shall not be taxed with sloth, having
by many winter, and uncomfortable Journeyes, manifested our unwillingnesse to
lie still; it is true that our want of money, was then as great as now, but
then the Hagards Barnes, and Houses were full of all manner of Provision, which
now betwixt us and the Rebels are so wasted that the most fertile Country
affords nothing but penary and desolation, and the booty that heretofore gave
edge to the soldiers, and made them endure iudefatigably all manner of labor,
is for a great circuit about us, either already taken by our men, or removed
into inaccessable places by the Rebels, nor have we carriage (if there were
plenty o^ Victual in the store) to convey it with us, forth of those limits
already wasted, if we march in such numbers as to considerable service, and on
the otherside if we lie still, and eat^ upon the Magazin, we shall very
suddenly waste it, so that unless there be a speedy supply of at least
victual, and carriages, this army raised at so great charge to that Kingdom,
will be forced to dissolve or ruin of it self. I have given you this short,
and true account of the state we are in, because I hope you are at London,
where you may acquaint such of your friends as are of the Parliament with it,
as likewise that you might be able to say something in my excuse, in case the
blame of this dangerous loss of time should be laid on me; for th ugh all this
be much fullier represented to the Commissioners, appointed for the management
of this War, from the Lords Justices, and Council, yet many may be apt to
censure me, that will not be called to the reading of that.

When I know you are at London, you shall hear often, and more particularly
from me; on Monday next I take a journey to Conaught, where I will endeavor to
do some service before our provision he quite gone, from thence you shall
hear from me, in the mean time I rest.

Dublin, the 10 of June, 1642. Your most affectionate Nephew and Servant Ormond
Ossory.

Die Jovis, 16 Junii, 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That Captain
Burrell, Thomas Lloyd Gentleman, John Smith, and Francis Dowett of London,
Gentleman, are hereby appointed and approved of, to be Commissaries to inroll
and value the Horse and Arms to be raised according to the Propositions.

Joh. Brown, Cleric. Parliamen.

Die Lunae, 20 Junii, 1642.
THe Commissaries appointed for the inrolling and valuing of Horse and Arms,
according to the late Propositions (and the above Order) have resolved to
attend the said Service without Moor gate, under the City-Wall; where they will
be ready from Eight to Twelve every fore-noon, and from Two till Six every
afternoon daily, for the purposes before said, beginning on Tuesday the One and
twentieth of this instant June, 1642.

Robert Burrell. Thomas Lloyd. John Smith. Francis Dowett.


FINIS.

