The humble Petition of the Prisoners in the FLEET: As it was presented to his
Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, and his Honorable COUNCIL.

The 18th. day of MAY, 1655.

Remonstrating the Illegality of Outlaries, Arrests, and Imprisonments, in
Civil and Personal Actions.

With an Expedient for the satisfaction of all Debts for ever, without Arrests
or Imprisonment. June. 18

royal emblem of Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and Tudor rose

Printed by T. FORCET. 1655.

TO His Highness, OLIVER Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, and to his
Highness most Honorable COUNCIL.
The humble Petition of the Prisoners in the Fleet, in behalf of themselves
and all Honest men, that are willing to pay their Debts. Remonstrating the
Illegalitie of Outlaries, Arrests, and Imprisonments, in Civil and personal
Actions. With an Expedient for the satisfaction of all Debts for ever, without
Arrests or Imprisonment.
SHOWS:
Sir William Norberts case.
That at the Common Law (unless in special Cases) neither Lands nor Body,
were subject to Arrest or Execution in Debt, or damages recovered, but the
several proceedings was by Summons and distress Infinite, and after Judgment, a
Fieri facias and Levari facies, upon the Goods and Chattels, Cooks Instit. 2.
part. fol. 394.
and the profits growing upon the Lands were the remedies, and writs of
Executions the Law being so tender and savouring of Liberty, that all had
freedom not only to follow their own affairs but also to serve their Country
when need required, 53. Hen. 3, c^p. 23.
neither did it permit the taking away the Possession of any Lands, least the
following of Husbandry and Tillage; which is so beneficial to the
Commonwealth should be thereby hindered.

That the first Innovation upon this Law, Westminster 2. cap. 18.
was upon the Statute of Marlebridge, which gave a Monstravit de Compote,
against fugitive Accomptants, only to attach their Bodies, to bring them to
account, and afterward by the Statute of Westminster. the 2. Chap. 11. Process of
Outlary was given in account, and if the Accomptant was found in Arreares by
the Auditors assigned, then he was to be committed to the next Jail, and
their to live of his own.

That afterward, by the Statute of Westminster. 2 cap. 18. an Elegit was given for
the recovery of Debt or damage to extend half of such Lands, 25. Edw. 3. cap.
17.
as the Debtors had at the time of the Judgment obtained, if the Chattels were
not sufficient to pay the Debt, (and of all the Chattels) except the Oxen, and
the Horses belonging to the Plough, which was the first Statute that subjected
Lands to Execution.

That by the Statute of 25. 42. Edw 3. cap. 1.
Edw. 3. chap. 17. such Process was given in Debt and detinue as in Account,
but by the Statute of 42.th of the same King, Cap. 1. all Laws made contrary
to the great Charter were repealed, Cooks Instit. 2. part.
as appears by the Lord Cook in his Proeme to the 2d. part of his Institutes,
and by his Comment* upon the 29. th Chap. of Magna Carta. So as in good
construction that Statute of 25. Edw. 3. which first gave the Capias in debt
and detinue was repealed, as being contrary to the Great Charter, though the
contrary Practice has been since used, to the destruction of Millions of
Prisoners and their families.

That afterward by the Statute of Hen. 19 Hen 7. cap. 9.
7. like Process was given in Actions upon the Case, as in Action of trespass
and Debt, and by the Statute of Hen. 23. Hen 8. cap 14.
8. like Process was given in a Writ of Anuity, as in an action of Debt; all
which Statutes are as Void, as that of the 25. Magna Carta, Cap 24.
of Edw. 3. to which they have relation, in right construction of Law; 11. Edw.
1.
for they are not positive Laws, but relative to those former Statutes
repealed by that General law of 42. 13. Edw. 1.
of Ed. 3. as being contrary to the Great Charter, 27 Ed. 3 cap 9.
and how can that Law stand whose Foundation fails. 23 Hen. 8 cap. 6.


Now concerning the Arrests and Imprisonment of the Body, and Extent of all the
debtors Lands and goods for Satisfaction of debt; acknowledged according to the
Statute of Acton Burnell, and the other Statute de Mercatoribus made only
between Merchant and Merchant; as also the Statute of Hen. 8.th of the penalty
of such as shall acknowledge a Recognizance, in the nature of the Statute
Staple for Merchandise; It is true, that they who do Enter into such
Recognizance, do grant that the penalty in that Case provided, shall run
upon them; and give away their Liberty, by their own consent, and are willing
to be Enslaved and ruined by the Creditor, in which case the Maxim of Volenti
non fit Injuria, is a proper answer.

But for such as at this day are Outlawed, Arrested, and Imprisoned for Debt
by Capias Vtlegatum; the Capias in corporate Cities, and Boroughs, or by Bill
of Midalesex, or Latitat, before any Debt or Damage is recovered, there being
no positive Law now Extant, to warrant the same; seems to be utterly against
the Common Law, and an incroachment upon the Liberty of the Freeborn people of
England by ill Custom and use, which ought to be abolished. And although it be
regulary true; that where a Capias lies in Process, there a Capias ad
Satisfaciendum lies in Execution; yet that is intended in Actions, Vi et armis
only; for there a Capias did lie at the Common Law, before and after Judgment,
but not in Debt and detinue, before the Statute of Edw. 3. So as it is
manifest, that the Capias ad Satisfaciendum in Debt, was never given by any
Statute Law to take the Body in Execution, upon a recovery in any mere
Personal action, contrary to the Common Law.

That the Statute of Bankrupts were made against Merchants, and such as got
their living by Buying and Selling only, as may appear by all Cases adjudged
upon those Statutes; yet of late times, there was a particular Temporary-law
entitled an Act for relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners; that subjected
all Debtors that were in Prison, at or before the 20th of October, 1653. and
should not pay their Debts before the first of April following, to be
Bankrupts, and their Lands and Estates were to be sold by the Judges, in the
said Act nominated for the satisfaction of their Creditors; which Act for
weighty Reasons moving your Highness, was seasonably suspended by your Highness
and your Council, and since by the late Parliament, to the great comfort of
all Prisoners; For the proceedings of the late Judges therein, were so
arbitrary and destructive to the Prisoners and their Estates; that if the said
Act should have continued, or if any Ordinance of the like nature should
hereafter be Established (as some projecting Creditors are now busy and active
to obtain) it would be of such sad consequence, that all Prisoners now being,
and all Debtors which hereafter may be Prisoners, would be utterly ruined with
their Posterity also? For the particular Aim and Ends, of some cruel and
implacable Creditors only (who have gone as far as the Common practice will
permit, and that against their own Election; for after the Body is charged in
Execution, the Creditor cannot resort to the Goods or Lands of the Debtor
(while he lives) but the Prisoner is to enjoy what Estate he has without
farther molestation of the Creditor, at whose suit he is Imprisoned, and as it
is of sad consequence to the Prisoner, so it may in time prove to all the Free
people of the Nation; for that which befalls one may happen to all, and the
course of Out-lawing, and Arresting, being continued for Debt and detinue, and
other personal Actions against the Common Law, and personal Liberry of the
people; there is scarce any that lives but may be brought to the same condition
and Catigorie, who yet (though free) upon a bare pretense of Debt, may be
Outlawed, Arrested, and undone (as too many of us now are) upon mere vexatious
and feyned Actions; for which abuse he can have no reparation, although he
remains three Terms in prison, unless he can find sufficient Bail beyond
Exception of the adverse party.

Now if that long Expected year of Jubilee to the oppress^d Captives be come,
that they may be at last Delivered out of their more then Egyptian slavery and
bondage, and restored to their ancient Laws, and precious Liberty; we humbly
hope your Highness will manifest your Self the Vindicator of the ancient Laws
and Liberties of the people in general, and Conservator of the Great Charter;
and will be pleased to Answer all and whatsoever Innovators, with that
memorable Negative, of A nolumus mutare Leges Angliae; and restore the ancient
Law and proceedings for Recovery of Debts, and take away the Capias in all
Civil causes, which will be a most Honorable and just Ordinance, and
prejudicial to none; for the Ancient and laudable proceedings were more
remediall to Creditors then that barbarous Imprisonment of the Debtor is or can
be; for if the Debtor be worth nothing, it is against the Law of GOD, Nature,
and Nations, that he should live all his days in the grave of a Prison;
whereby he is deprived of Friends, and disabled for ever by any Industry in his
Calling to attain to any Estate, wherewith to make satisfaction to his
Creditors or prosecute for his own, but is forced to spend his time most
unprofitably in Prison, and waste what ever he has or can come by for his
necessary subsistence (in a very Woeful condition) which is well hoped, will
not only be pitied but remedied by the Mercy and Justice of your Highness.

And for a further Expedient, to take away this public Grievance occasioned
by the modern practice of Outlawries, Arrests, and Imprisonment of the Body,
in Civil causes, and to prevent the vast Expense of Debtors under the custody
of Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Sergeants at Mace, and Prison-Keepers, by excessive
Fees, usually extorted from poor prisoners in Gaoles and places (anciently
provided for Malefactors and criminous persons, and not for Debtors) many times
amounting to more then would pay the Debt, for which the prisoner is Arrested;
as also for a more speedy, safe and legal way, for the recovery of all just
debts and damages for the future, without Outlary, Arrest, Bail, or
Imprisonment of the Body; as also, to ease the Creditors of those vast Charges
and Expenses they are forced unto, before they can have their Debtors person
Arrested, their Lands extended, or their Goods levied in Execution, and their
Moneys raised by the same out of the Sheriffs hands.

May it please your Highness, and Honorable Council, to reflect upon these
Proposals humbly offered to your Honorable and prudent Considerations, in order
to the restoration of the Ancient Law, and proceedings for recovery of Debt and
damages, only aimed at by Your Petitioners.

1. IN the first place to take away Outlawries, and the Capias, both before and
after Judgment in civil causes, and to discharge all such Prisoners from their
present Imprisonment; except such as shall be justly indebted to the
Commonwealth, and have wherewith to pay. 2. And to indemnifie all Sheriffs,
the Warden of the Fleet, the Martial of the Vpper-Bench, and other Officers
and Keepers of Prisons from any Escapes in that behalf. 3. That all
Benevolenees, Pensions, and Annuities, formerly given toward the relief of
any Prisoners for debt, may be disposed of toward the relief of maimed
Soldiers. 4. That in case the great circumspection of your Highness and
Council shall think fit, to alter the course in the point of Meum and Tuum;
then to Empower the learned and reverend Judges of the four Courts of
Westminster, both in Terme-time, and Vacation; and also all Justices of Assise,
and Nisi prius in their several Circuits; and all Judges of Courts of Record
within their several Corporations. And that for the ease of the said Judges,
and more speedy execution of their said Commissions, That in every County,
City, and Corporation, there may be some persons of Fidelity, Honor, and
Quality nominated, to be ayding and assisting unto them, to hear and
determine all differences between all Creditors, and Debtors in a Summary way,
within their several Jurisdictions. 5. That the said Judges upon all Petitions
to them presented, either for Debt or other personal Actions whatsoever, may
have power to call all parties before them by Summons, and upon due proof made
of any Debt or damage, and of the debtors Estate, to order payment and
satisfaction, within some reasonable time after; and in default thereof to sell
either all or so much of the personal Estate of the Debtor, as shall pay the
same; and if that prove short, then to lease two Thirds of the Real estate of
the Debtor at the uttermost value (except the Mansion house) as will satisfy
the debt, for any term at such a rate as is ordinary for the time being,
between Buyer and Seller; so it exceed not XXI. years, which may be granted
upon the estate of all Debtors, who have any estates for life in Fee,
Fee-taile, or by Coppy-hold; as also of all Estates past in trust, or to uses,
wherein the debtor has any equitable Right, or otherwise; which Lease may be
good against him and his heirs; unless he pay his debt, or agree with his
Creditor within Six months after the making of any such Lease, and that this
course be universal in all causes, without Circuit of action or respect of
Infants; and the like power for such Damages, as by a Jury of twelve men shall
be given before the said Judge, in all other personal actions whatsoever. 6.
That these Judges may be also empowered to Examine and review the obtaining of
all Decrees, Judgments, Recognizances, Statutes, and Morgages, and the
original debt or contracts upon the same, and to Vacat and reverse the same,
upon payment of what shall appear to be justly due thereupon in Law or Equity,
unto the parties Interessed therein. And also to try any fradulent settlement
of any Lands or Goods made to defeat the Creditor, by a Jury of Twelve men, and
may be directed (if your Highness and Council think fit) to satisfy Creditors
their principal debt, with inte rest according to the priority of their debts,
and of their securities; which by Law are to be first satisfied, and also to
have power to qualify or take off Interest (with respect had to the late
War) as occasion shall require, and to give Damages to such who have been
wrongfully Imprisoned, or unlawfully vexed, either for Debts formerly
satisfied, or where men have layne in Prison three Terms, and no Declaration
filed against them. 7. That it may be ordained, that every Petitioner (except
Paupers) do pay in every Cause 6. s. 8. d. to the chief Clerk of every Court
where any suite is exhibited against the Debtor, before he have the Summons of
the Court against the Defendant, in full of all Fees and salaries to the end of
the Causes, to be divided amongst the Judges and Officers of the said Court, in
recompense of the Fees usually taken by them upon Trials of personal Actions.
By this course the Creditor will be sure of his just Debt in a short time,
with little Expense; also the Debtors Wife, and Children, of a House, and some
subsistence out of the Third part, the Debtors themselves of their Liberty, to
follow their business and to serve the Commonwealth in their several
stations, as occasion shall require; so shall Peace and much quiet redound to
the Public, when the power of Oppression, and the sting of the Law, which is
the Capias shall be taken away; so may the Sheriffs serve the Commonwealth
with much safety, being not subject to pay for Escapes of Prisoners,
Bloodshed, and Murder avoided; which often happens by Arresting of Debtors,
who many times rather hazard their Lives upon a rescue, then they will loose
their precious Liberty, and endure the miseries of a Prison. Also much Money
will be saved, which is commonly wasted in unnecessary and vexatious
Outlawries, Arrests, and Imprisonments, by malicious and male volent Creditors;
and every man will have their due from each other. Also by this course, Justice
can be no looser, when there is a general and equitable Law, for the mutual
good of Creditor and Debtor, now and hereafter. And the memorial of this
Ordinance, under your Highness Government in a Case of such Public
concerment, will be Honorable to future Ages.

And the Petitioners shall pray, etc. The Names of such Prisoners in the Fleet
as subscribed the Petition.
William Smith. Walter Roberts* William Roberts. William Rudyerd. Edward
Rumsey, Robert Row, William Gregory, Robert Whitwell, Morris Tuke, Thomas
Stevenson, Walter Salmon, Ambrose Fulsham, Thomas Nash, Henry Carverth, William
Carverth Robert Becket, Thomas Buck, Thomas Tracy, Edmund Hastings, Francis
Eure, Thomas Hyghton, William Bowyer, John Littlebury, William Pitts, William
Peacock, Richard Niclets, William Coals, Thomas Johnson, Roger Raven, Thomas
Walton, William Brown, Lyst^r Blu^e. M. Mary Rogers. Dorothy Arundell.
Cum multis aliis.




