OF THE CELEBRATION Of the KING'S Coronation-Day, In the famous CITY of BATHE.
A True Narrative in a Letter sent from thence to Dr. Charleton, Physician to
his MAJESTY.

VIVAT REX.

London, Printed April 29. 1661.

The manner of the Celebration of the KING'S Coronation-day in the City of Bath.
Honored Sir,
PArdon me, my business now is only to give you the true and plain relation of
our Celebrating the Coronation-Day of his Sacred Majesty, in our City of Bath,
which was as follows. Viz. The first onset was at the House of God, by the
Bells.

The next by Drums beating and Armed men in three Companies; the first the
Trained Band, commanded by Lieutenant Walter Gibbs; the second a Volunteer
Company, commanded by their Captain, the Loyal and much suffering Captain
Thomas Gibbs; the third a Volunteer Company of sixty men out of his Majesty's
Loyal and much suffering Parish of Weston, commanded by their Loyal Captain,
Captain John Sheppard.

These standing in order, made a Lane for these Persons following, ( viz.)
First, the Mayor, who declared his high Loyalty, and expressed himself with
much alacrity for the great honor which he lately received from his Majesty
in kissing his Royal hand, and his acquitting him of some Aspersions lately
cast upon him. He with the Aldermen in Scarlet Gowns; our Loyal, Faithful and
Learned Minister, Mr. James Masters; the Common Council, and other Officers in
black Gowns, according to Order, with many other Loyal Persons, went to our
great Church, and entering into the Churchyard were received by the Foot
Companies with God save the King, they expressing themselves, with Life and all
to serve his Majesty. The Mayor and his Company taking their places in the
Church, the Trained Bands keeping their stations, Mrs. Maioress, the Aldermens
Wives, with many other Gentlewomen enter the Churchyard, before whom marched
about Four hundred Virgins, most in white Wastcoats and green Petticoats, going
two and two, each two bearing aloft upon their hands gilded Crowns, Crowns made
of Flowers, and Wreathes made of Laurel mixed with Tulips, which I think were
those Lillies of which our Savior said, that Solomon in all his glory was not
clothed like one of these. These ushered Mrs. Maioresse to her seat in the
Church, and were ushered themselves by two young Champions, with Swords drawn,
all crying out, God save the King, and continued in the Church till Sermon was
ended, which was preached by our Learned Mr. Masters, the Text taken out of
Matthew 22. and ver. 21. The Sermon, if not put in Print, willl be much wrong
to his Majesty, and all his Subjects; wherefore you may do good service, if
you will desire his Majesty to command Mr. Masters to put it in Print. The
Sermon ended, Master Mayor, his Company, with the Foot Soldiers, marched to the
Conduit, there being presented out of the Conduit with a Health to the King in
Wine, which they all drank; the loud Music played before them. From thence they
went to the Guild Hall, and there drank another Health to the King, at which
time there were four Streamers bearing the Kings Arms, and the Royal Oak
mounted upon the four Pinacles of the Hall. All this while Mrs. Mayoress was
not idle; for she, her company, her Amazons and their Champions, marched to the
Conduit, and from thence to the Mayors house, as he himself had led the way
with his Train, who gave him a Volley of shot, as they had done before when he
came out of the Church, this last receiving much honor by the addition of the
Volunteer Troops of that most Loyal Knight Sir William Basset. The Mayor entered
his house, whom Mrs. Maioresse followed with all her Maiden guards, to all whom
was given Cake and Wine, drinking a Health to the King upon their Knees, which
was begun by Mr Mayor and Mrs. Mayoress. After which the Mayor and his Company
marched before the Soldiers through all the City, rendering Acclamations of
Joy. In like manner did Mrs. Mayoresse with her Female Royallists. And thus was
the whole day spent, and that with as much alacrity, as I think can scarce be
paralleled. The night being come, some hours were spent in Fireworks, after
which each Loyal Soul betook himself to his home, whom the Music of the Bells
brought to quiet rest.

And thus ended this joyful day, for which I shall daily pray to the Almighty
to continue us thankful hearts, and that his Sacred Majesty may have a long
and prosperous Reign, that his Friends may daily increase, and all his Enemies
may be confounded, concluding with the words of our Loyal Minister, God save
the King, and let all the people say Amen. These shall be the never ceasing
prayers of his Majesty's meanest, yet very loyal Subject till death;

Bath, April 24. 1661. William Smith.

Postscript.
Sir,
At the writing hereof, the Bells were ringing, the Drums beating, and Guns
shooting off, the Crowns and Wreaths on the Head of the Lion upon the Cross in
the King's Bath. But all this will end in short time, but our Loyalty not till
death.

Sir, Your very humble servant, William Smith.


