A SOLEMN LEAGUE AND COVENANT, FOR REFORMATION; AND Defense of Religion, the
Honor and Happiness of the KING, and the Peace and Safety of the three
Kingdoms. OF SCOTLAND, ENGLAND, and IRELAND.

Ier. 50.5. Come; let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant,
that shall not be forgotten.

Prove. 25.5. Take away the wicked from before the King: and his Throne shall
be established in righteousness.

2. Chron. 15.15. And all Judah rejoiced at ^he Oath: for they had sworn with
all their heart, and sought Him with their whole desire; and He was found of
them: and the LORD gave them rest round about.

ABERDENE, Imprinted by Edw: Raban: And are to be sold at his Shop, at the end
of the Broadgate. 1643.

Sess. XIV. AUGUST. 17. 1643.
The General Assemblies Approbation of the draught of the League and COVENANT
presented to them.
THE Assembly having recomended unto a Committee, appointed by them to join
with the Committee of the Honorable Convention of Estates, and the
Commissioners of the Honorable Houses of the Parliament of England, for
bringing the Kingdoms, to a more near conjunction and Union, received from the
aforesaid Committees, the Covenant after-mentioned, as the result of their
consultations: And having taken the same, as a matter of so public
concernment, and of so deep importance does require, unto their gravest
consideration, Did with all their hearts, and with the beginnings of the
feelings of that joy which they did find in so great measure upon the
renovation of the National Covenant of this Kirk and Kingdom, All with one
voice approve and embrace the same, as the most powerful mean, by the Blessing
of GOD, for settling and preserving the true Protestant Religion, with perfect
Peace in his Majesty's Dominions, and propagating the same to other Nations,
and for establishing his Majesty's Throne, to all Ages and Generations. And
therefore, with their best affections recommend the same to the Honorable
Convention of Estates; that being examined and approved by them, it may be
sent with all diligence, to the Kingdom of England; That being received and
approven there, the same may be with public humiliation, and all Religious
and answerable solemnity, sworn and subscribed by all true Professors of the
Reformed Religion, and all his Majesty's good Subjects in both Kingdoms.

A. Johnston.

The Convention of Estates their Approbation of the draught of the League and
COVENANT aforesaid, 17. AUGUST. 1643.
THE Noblemen, Commissioners of Shyres and Borrowes now conveaned, having
received the Covenant abouementioned from their Committee, as the result of
their Consultations with a Committee of the General Assembly, and the
Commissioners from both Houses of the Parliament of England; And having taken
that Covenant unto their gravest consideration, Did with all their hearts and
great expressions of joy and unanimity approve and embrace the same, as the
most powerful mean, by the Blessing of GOD, for settling and preserving the
true Protestant Religion, with a perfect Peace in all his Majesty's Dominions,
and propagating the same to other Nations, and for establishing his Majesty's
Throne to all ages. And being very confident that their Brethren in the
Kingdom of England, will heartily receive and approve the same: Therefore,
according to the earnest recommendation of that Venerable Assembly of this
Kirk now met, thinks it most necessary for the good ends aforesaid; that it
be sent into that Kingdom with all diligence, That being received and
approved by their Brethren there, the same may be with all Religious
Solemnities sworn, and subscribed by all true Professors of the Reformed
Religion, and all his Majesty's good Subjects in both Kingdoms.

Arch: Primerose, Cler. com.

EDINBURGH, 11 October. 1643.
Ordinance for the solemn receaving, swearing, and suscribing of the League and
Covenant.
THE Commissioners of the General Assembly, having received from their
Brethren sent unto the Kingdom of England, the solemn League and COVENANT
underwritten, as it was approven by the Honorable Houses of the PARLIAMENT of
ENGLAND, and the Assembly of Divines in that Kingdom, and solemnlie sworn and
subscribed there. After due examination thereof, did all in one voice most
heartily receive and embrace the same, as agreeing with the draught,
vnanimouslie and cheerfully approven and embraced by the late General
Assembly, and Convention of Estates. As the most powerful mean by the
Blessing of GOD, for settling and presetving the true Protestant Religion, with
perfect Peace in his Majesty's Dominions, and propagating the same to other
Nations, and for establishing his Majesty's Throne, to all ages and
generations: And therefore, according to the power given to them by the said
Assembly, Ordain this solemn Leauge and Covenant to be with public
humiliation, and all Religious solemnities received, sworn, and subscribed by
all Ministers and Professors within this Kirk: And, that this may be
universally performed, It is also ordained that this League and Covenant be
forthwith printed, and that the printed Copies, bound with some clean sheets
of paper, be sent unto the Ministry, And that every Minister upon the first
Lords Day, after the same shall come to his hands, read and explain it, and by
exhortation prepare the People to the swearing and subscribing thereof
solemnlie, the Lords Day next immediately following. And it is farther
Ordained, that Presbyteries take account of the performance hereof in their
several bounds; and that they proceed with the Censures of the Kirk, against
all such as shall refuse, or shift to swear and subscribe this League and
Covenant, as enemies to the preservation and propagation of Religion, And that
they notify their names, and make particular report of their own diligence
heereintill, to this Commission, or their Moderator, or Clerk to be delivered
to them. And the Commissioners think it very convenient, for good example, and
the better encouragement of others; that this Covenant be solemnlie sworn, and
subscribed by themselves now present, before the Congregation, in the East Kirk
upon Friday next, the 13 of this instant, after Sermon, and exhortation to be
made by Master Robert Douglas, Moderator; And that the Commissioners of the
Convention of Estates now in Town, and the Commissioners from the Parliament of
England, and the Divines of that Kingdom here present, be earnestly desired
to join with them in this solemn and Religious Action.

A. Ker.

At Edinburgh, the 12 of October, 1643.
THE Commissioners of the Convention of Estates, having received from the
Commissioners of the General Assembly, the solemn League and Covenant
underwritten approven and solemnlie sworn and subscribed, in the kingdom of
England. And having taken the same to their serious consideration, do
vnanimouslie and cheerfully receave, and embrace it, as agreeing with that
draught, approven by the late Convention of Estates, and General Assembly.
And therefore, ordains the same to be with all Religious solemnities sworn and
subscribed by all his Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom: And that under the
pain to such as shall postpone or refuse, to be esteemed and punished as
enemies to Religion, his Majesty's Honor, and Peace of their Kingdoms; And to
have their goods and rents confiscate for the use of the public, and that they
shall not bruik nor enjoy any benefit, place nor office within this Kingdom.
And als ordains all Sheriffs, Stuarts, and others his Majesty's Magistrates to
Burgh and Land, and Committees in the several Shires, To be assisting to
Ministers and Presbyteries, in procuring real obedience hereunto. And that
with all diligence they make report to the Committee of Estates, of the names
of all such persons, as shall postpone or refuse, to the effect course may be
taken with them as aforesaid. And that they may be cited to answer to the next
Parliament, as enemies to Religion, King and Kingdoms, and to receive what
further punishment his Majesty and Parliament shall inflict upon them. And
further ordains their presents to be printed with the former Act of the
Estates, and published at the Market Crosses of the head Burrowes of this
Kingdom; Wherethrough none pretend ignorance of the same.

Arch: Primerose, Cler. Com.

A SOLENM LEAGUE AND COVENANT, For REFORMATION, And Defense of Religion, The
Honor and Happiness of the King, and the Peace and Safety of the three
Kingdoms of Scotland, England, and Ireland.
WE, Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burges, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of Scotland, England, and
Ireland, by the Providence of GOD, living under one King; and being of one
reformed Religion; Having before our eyes the Glory of GOD, and the
advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Honor and
Happiness of the Kings Majesty, and his Posterity, and the true public
Liberty, Safety, and Peace of the Kingdoms; wherein every ones private
condition is included; And calling to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots,
conspiracies, attempts, and practices of the enemies of GOD, against the true
Religion, and Professors thereof in all places, especially in these three
Kingdoms ever since the Reformation of Religion, and how much their rage,
power and presumption are of late, and at this time increased and exercised;
whereof the deplorable state of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the
distressed estate of the Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous
estate of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland are present and public
testimonies; We have now at last (after other means of Supplicaton,
Remonstrance, Protestations and Sufferings) for the preservation of our selves
and our Religion from utter ruin and destruction, according to the commendable
practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and the example of GODS people, in
other Nations, After mature deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into
a mutual and solemn League and Covenant; Wherein we all subscribe, and each
one of us for himself, with our hands lifted up to the most high GOD do Swear:

I. THat we shall sincerely, reallie, and constantly through the Grace of
GOD, endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the
Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline
and Government, against our common Enemies, The Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, according to the Word of GOD, and the example of the best Reformed
Churches; And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of GOD in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and Uniformitie in Religion, Confession
of Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing;
That we and our posterity after us, may as Brethren, live in Faith and Love,
and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
Extirpation of popery, prelacie (that is, Church Government, by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours, and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall
be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; Lest
we partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues; And that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

3. We shall with the same sincerity, realitie, and constancy, in our
several vocations endeavor with our estates and lives mutuallie to preserve
the Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the
Kingdoms, And to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority,
in the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the
Kingdoms; That the world may bear witness with our consciences of our
Loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's
just power and greatness.

4. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of al such as
have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any faction, or parties amongst
the people contrary to this League and Covenant, That they may be brought to
public trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their offenses
shall require or deserve, or the supreme Iudicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge
convenient.

5. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms,
denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of GOD
granted unto us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both
Parliaments, We shall each one of us, according to our place and interest,
endeavor that they may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all
Posterity, And that Justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers thereof, in
manner expressed in the precedent Article.

6. We shall also according to our places and callings in this Common cause of
Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those
that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and persuing
thereof: And shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectlie by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and conjunction, whither to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency, or neutralitie in this
cause, which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms,
and honor of the King; But shall all the days of our lives zealouslie and
constantly continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same
according to our power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever; And, what
we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and
make known, that it may be timely prevented or removed: All which we shall
do as in the sight of GOD.

And, because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins, and provocations
against GOD, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present
distresses and dangers, the fruits thereof, We profess and declare before GOD
and the world, our vnfeygned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for
the sins of these Kingdoms: especially, that we have not, as we ought,
valued the inesteemable benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for
the Purity and power thereof: and that we have not endeavored to receive
Christ in our hearts; nor to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the
causes of other sins and transgressions so much abounding amongst us. And our
true and vnfeygned purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all
others under our power and charge, both in public and in privitie in all
duties we ow to GOD and Man, to amend our lives, and each man to go before
another in the example of a real Reformation: That the LORD may turn away his
wrath, and heavy indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms, in
Truth and Peace. And this COVENANT we make in the presence of ALL-MIGHTIE
GOD, the Searcher of all hearts; with a true intention to perform the same; As
we shall answer at that Great Day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be
disclosed; Most humbly beseeching the LORD, to strengthen us by His Holy
Spirit, for this end; And to bless our desires, and proceedings, with such
success, as may be deliverance and safety to his People, and encowragement to
other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of the yoke of
Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same, or like Association and Covenant;
To the Glory of GOD, the enlargement of the Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST, and the
Peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms, and Common Wealths.

FINIS.

