A Solemn PROTESTATION against George Keith 's Advertisment, Arbitrary Summons
and Proceedings against Certain Persons, and a Meeting of the People called
Quakers.
WHEREAS the said G. K. a Scotchman, has assumed to himself a Power and
Authority to Erect several Meetings of the Nature of some strange and new Court
of Judicature at Turners-Hall, London, one on the Eleventh of the Month called
June, 1696. and another on the 29th of this present Month called April, 1697.
(under pretense of having the Permission of the Civil Authority, that he is
further to Detect the Vile and Gross Errors and Heresies of certain Persons by
Name, and a Meeting of the People called Quakers) unto which he has Cited or
Summoned them, to hear themselves Re-charged, and Proved Guilty thereof, as
being Repugnant to the Great Fundamentals of the Christian Religion (which
Charges of his, as perversely Stated by him, are Expressly Denied by us) for
Proof thereof, Referring to his own Printed Advertisement and Narrative, which
have been largely Answered in Print, he having begun the Controversy with us,
by Printing diverse bitter Invectives against us, expressly Contrary to his own
former Testimonies in Print; and diverse of our Friends Books, in Answer to him,
still lie heavy upon him, unreply'd to. And seeing he cannot Effect his
Invidious Designs in Print, to make his Odious Character of Heresy, Spreading
Gangreen, and Contagion, etc. take Effect against us, he has Presumed to Erect
such an Arbitrary Course of Judicature, in a Confused Meeting at Turners-Hall,
and thereunto, in his own Name and Authority, to Summon the Persons and
Meeting, as aforesaid, without their Privity, Concurrence, Consent or Agreement
thereunto; either as to the Time, Place, Terms or Propositions, but he is the
Sole Imposer.

We therefore, who are Concerned in behalf of the Peaceable People called
Quakers, both as Freeborn Englishmen and Christians, do deny, and Solemnly
Testify against the Usurpation, Arbitrary and Irregular Proceedings of the
said G. K. and against his new Jurisdiction (assumed by him) for the same
Reasons, which were Exhibited in Print the last Year, Why the People called
Quakers Refused their Appearance at his Peremptory Summons (and therefore he
had no Reason to Expect their Appearance this Year, the more Insincere he, in
his new Summons) and more particularly,

1. Because he has no Legal Power to Erect any such new Court of Judicature,
and therein set himself up as Judge, and Publicly to Stage, Brand, and Condemn
Peaceable Protestant Subjects, and that in their Absence too (who are also
Freeborn Englishmen) as Heretics, etc. and thereby to Endeavor to Expose
them to the Scorn, Contempt and Rage of a mixed Multitude, who are unmeet to
Judge of Religious and Spiritual Matters, or Controversies.

2. We do not believe the Civil Authority, or any Concerned therein, on Due
Consideration, or Just Information, will Countenance or Permit such an Usurped
Authority, or Pernicious President, as the said G. K. has Assumed and Attempted
in this Case; tending, not only to Discord, Divisions, Heats, Animosities and
Tumults, but to Invade the just Liberties of Freeborn Englishmen (who are
Peaceable Protestant Subjects,) and to Gratify and Strengthen the Popish
Interest, that they may Glory in such Divisions and Disorders, made by
Turbulent Incendiaries.

We are not Unfensible, that some Officious and Envious Agents are in the
bottom of this Turbulent Attempt; who, although they may pretend to be Reformed
Protestants, yet savor too much of a Popish Persecuting Spirit, (Justly
Complained of by Protestants) and whose Work tends to bring an Odium upon the
Protestant Religion.

3. We presume the said G. K. can Produce no Legal Commission from the Civil
Authority, either by Act of Parliament, or under the Great Seal of England,
Annually to Erect and hold his said Court of Judicature, to Summon, Convict and
Condemn Quakers (so called) or any other Freeborn Englishmen, or Protestant
Subjects for Heresy or Heretics, who are Contrary wise Legally Recognized.

4. His feigned and false Pretense of Justly Desiring the Persons and Meeting
aforesaid to be present ( i. e. to hear themselves Recharged, Convicted and
Condemned of Vile and Gross Heresies, etc.) appears, not only a peremptory
Summons, but his Noise of Vile and Gross Errors, and Heresies, spreading
Gangreen and Contagion, Infecting many Thousands in these Three Nations, etc.
does much Resemble the Popish Clamours and Calumnies against Protestant
Martyrs, and then away with them, cut them off; and Fire and Faggot followed,
when the Writ de Haeretico Gomburendo, and the Six Bloody Articles were in
Force, 31. H. 8. Chapter 14. both which are justly and happily Repealed.

5. For the same Reasons, which the Parliament gave in the 16th Year of K.
Charles the First, against the Court of Star Chamber, and High-Commission-Court
(Chapter 9, 10.) and for taking away, and dissolving the same (though these had more
Face of Authority, than this of G. Keith's) we Oppose, Deny and Protest against
these his Irregular and Arbitrary Proceedings and his new Court of Judicature,
and Usurped Power and Authority therein, as (not only tending to Discord,
Disorder, and Persecution, and Endangering the Public Peace, but also)
Repugnant to the Great Charter, Fundamental Laws (and Liberties of England)
Providing that no Freeman shall be Condemned, or any way Destroyed without due
Order of Law; as well as expressly Contrary to the Intent and Tenor of the late
Act of Parliament, made in the 1st Year of the Reign of K. William and Q. Mary,
Entitled, An Act for Exempting their Majesty's Protestant Subjects Dissenting
from the Church of England, etc. made for the Ease of Scrupulous Consciences in
the Exercise of Religion, as an Effectual Means to Unite their Majesty's
Protestant Subjects in Interest and Affection. And the Meeting Places thereby
Permitted or Allowed and Recorded, being for RELIGIOUS WORSHIP, as in the said
Act is Expressed, Consequently, not for Division, Discord or Stages of
Contentention; and therefore we are not free, either as Men or Christians, to
Subject our selves to any such Irregular Summons, or Arbitrary Power and
Usurpation, as aforesaid.

6. Heresy having been made an High Crime in Law [ Mirror. Justices, p. 16.]
and highly Punishable, G. K.'s Publicly Staging and Branding us as Heretics,
appears both an High Defamation, and tending to Destroy us in our Reputations
and Liberties also, both Contrary to Law and Gosple, and to Introduce a new and
severe Persecution to Gratify his Envy. For his Turbulent, Persecuting Spirit
and Apostasy, from Christian Charity, Meekness and Moderation, and from that
Faith that Works by Love, sufficiently appear; also by his Earnest
Expostulation with the most Pious and Learned of the Church of England (as
Flatteringly he Terms them) to Incense both the Clergy and Civil Authority
against us, in his Printed Postscript to his Antichrists and Sadducees, and
therein Commending the Popish Watchmen of Rome, and Popish Countries, above
most among the Protestants, for their Zeal against such Antichristian Errors
and Heresies, as he there would make the World believe, Quakers hold much worse
than the worst of Popery (p. 40, 41.) and his Summoning and Condemning us as
Heretics, appears so much Resembling the Practice of some of his Countrymen
of the Presbytery, to Incense the Rabble or Mob against our Friends in
Scotland, as they have of late shamefully done, both in Glasgow and Edenbrough,
to the Great and Barbarous Abuse of our poor harmless Friends in those parts,
by their bitter Clamours and Aspersions against them, as Heretics, etc. That
we humbly hope, the Civil Protestant Government of England will never
Countenance or Permit such unwarrantable Usurpation, which is not to use only
Spiritual Weapons (as he pretends) but is of a contrary Nature and Tendence. We
having treated the said G. K. at many Select and Solemn Meetings, we have had
with him, in all Christian Patience and Tenderness on our parts; which were
Slighted and Rejected by him. Thus we have Answered his Advertisement and
Summons, ad hominem, as Peaceable, Freeborn Englishmen, whose present Liberty
ought not to be Invaded or Disquieted, either by any Arbitrary Usurpation, or
Contentious Irreligious Meetings, whose End is to Asperse and Abuse others: Nor
may such, with safety, be Imitated, Allowed or Abetted by any of different
Persuasions.

Now, let it be observed, whatever may happen to be the Effects or Consequence
of the said G. K.'s Disorderly and Unwarrantable Proceedings, or Meeting
aforesaid, we have given out this Solemn Protestation against the same, to
Manifest our own Innocence and Clearness therefrom.

London, the 26th Day of the 2d Month, 1697. Written, in Behalf of the People
called Quakers, by some of them Concerned.
FINIS.

