A Looking-glass FOR ENGLAND; Wherein is expressed, Several Passages, and
Remarkable Observations, concerning the uniting of the Kings most excellent
Majesty, and His Great Council, the High Court of Parliament.

TOGETHER, With diverse Heads or Motives, drawn up by Dr. George Snell, Dr. of
Divinity; Who being a Delinquent (formerly) has now taken the National
Covenant, and set forth these Reasons for his submitting to the KING and
PARLIAMENT.

Very useful in these Times, and necessary for all sorts of People to peruse.

Published by special Authority.

LONDON, Printed for ROBERT WOOD, April 3. 1646.

TO MY LOVING FRIEND, R. W.
SIR,
HEre enclosed are several Heads or Motives drawn up and delivered us by
Doctor Snell Dr. of Divinity, being called before us for his Delinquencie,
setting forth the reasons of his submission to the King and Parliament, and
taking of the National Covenant; so I rest

Chester the 23. of March, 1645. H. C.


This was occasioned by R. I. one of the Sequestrators at Chester, who having
straightly charged George Snell, Doctor of Divinity, the submitter; that he came
to wake his submission as a Temporizer, and without making conscience of his
Oath, etc. the submittent to testify, that he deserved no such hard censure,
did shortly afterward show to the Accusant these ensuing Motives. 1. THat he
was moved to submit not to the King only, but to the Parliament also; because
in the weighty affairs of the Kingdom, now in agitation, the most faithful,
and most wise Council of the Land ought to be used. II. Because the matters
now in variance between the King and Parliament, only seem to concern the
outward order of the Church and Common Weal the dispo^^tion of which is
conceived to pertain wholly to the Kings Majesty and unto the honorable Houses
who as holding the sup^eam Governance, next unto the Holy Ghost, and the sacred
Word, ever since Moses the Prophet, have as other State Assemblies, always
appointed the particularities of public Affairs. III. To the King and
Parliament because the most approved Students of the English Laws, do very
often in their Books affirm, that the Kings Majesty is so fully incorporate
into His Council, that His Majesty and His Council are evermore taken as
joint Agents in every business of moment, that does concern His Crown and
Kingdom; whence it is, that the King is never in any Court called to appear;
for that by the common intendment of the Law His Royal presence is always
understood to be virtually and vigorously present in all Seats of Justice; yea
though the King should be an Infant in the Cradle. IV. Because the King and his
Par^iament seem to be the only true Father and Mother and the Weal public to
be their true natural Child; and a^ when the Son falls sick the father, for
remedy does willingly commend him to the joint care of the tenderhearted
Mother until his wonted health be regained (...) even so at thi^ time the
great College of State-Physitians having discovered to the Royal Father, that
this Child of the Public State is taken with a dangerous disease His Majesty
according to the constant custom in such case has referred the cure to the
associate avd of that honorable Mother; so that ^uring this course of Physic,
that Sovereign Father seems to have suspended his sole regent Power, which
nevertheless, so soon as the Patient shall be made whole, that Mother in all
duty will humbly resign him to the former government of his Sovereign Parent;
and so in case of perilous Disease, the Mother may seem to rule jointly with
the Father. V. To His Majesty and to the Parliament, because it is thought that
the High Court of Parliament arises over the Realm of England even as the Sun
in the sphere of Heaven at whose appearance, all other Courts and Counsels of
this Land does totally vanish, as does the Stars before the Sun beams, saving
what influence those Inferiors may borrow from that Supreme Court. VI. Not
only to the King but to the Parliament likewise; for that as by the Customary
Law of England all Courts have power not only to defend their Authority; but
more, to make bylaws, and orders; to bind all that stand subject to their
jurisdiction and that so long and so far as it shall seem good to the Judge
of each Court: in like sort, it is verily believed that the high Senate of
Parliament of Right, has such power in the Superlative, while the Parliament
is continued, to make Edicts and Orders to further their designs, and that
with a Non obstante, of any Law enacted. VII. To the King and Parliament,
according to the Oath and Covenant, which is now required, the Oath requiring
nothing but what is due unto any protective Power, and the National Covenant,
for substance, being heretofore made implicitly in the Statute of uniting
England and Scotland: And were it not so yet seeing the highest Court of
Senators do exact nothing of us, but what they aver, and protest is lawful and
right: we that by the Laws must believe the verdict of a Jury of ordinary
persons is lawful and true; how much greater belief ought we to yield unto
the grand verdict of those many hundreds of ^urates, impar^el'd to pass upon
the life and liberty of all this Kingdom: we may well stand persuaded that
they have better foreseen, that the Oath, Covenant, and Obedience which they
require of the Kings Subjects, is not contrary unto that Oath and fealty, by
which we all stand bound to His Majesty then the wisest man alone is able to
fore-fee; and as the Lawyers say, opertet neminem esse sapientiorem legibus,
even so it is frenzy not only presumption, that any one should think himself
wiser then the whole Parliament of England. VIII. To the King, and to the
Parliament that now is, more then unto any Parliament yet held in England; not
only in reverent respect to that surpassing measure of knowledge, and wisdom,
which in this Age of Learning is far more excellent in the Members of the Two
Houses then in any Times of their Forefathers: but also, because to that
almost illimited Power which the Parliament naturally has, the Kings Majesty
has granted an illimited time: so that to this Senatorian Order, we ought to
be very specially faithful and loyal. IX. Unto both jointly; because of that
inseparable Union, which our Laws, and Law-Students do aver to hold insolubly
between the King and his Counsel, in regard of which incorporate union; They
say, Rex Anglia non p^test injustae agere, Rex Angliae nunquam existit in
minoritate. The King of England can do nothing unjustly: The King of England is
never under age: These, and many like honorable sayings are spoken concerning
the Kings of England: Yet as the Iurisprudents of this Land, do say, not in
relation to the Kings sole person; but as his Majesty stands incessantly
incorporate into his Council, from whence his legal abilities and
perfections, as from a living Fountain in a sort are derived. X. To the King
and Parliament now, if ever, for that to the extreme grief of all loyal
hearts, now they stand at such opposite distance, that the very foundations of
the Kingdom seem to be shaken; and now what true-born child of that Royal
Father, and most Honorable Mother does not quake and tremble to see his Father
in Arms against his Mother; and the Mother against that ever honored Father,
he is of a bastard-kind that wishes either to destroy the other, and of a more
bastard-generation is he that would have any foreign Enemy to conquer them
both; for it is evident the one of those public Parents cannot fall to ruin,
without the utter destruction of the other: And submission to both, without
opposition to either, is like to be the readiest way to reconciliation. XI.
Unto both; because, in arduis negotiis Regni, such as are now on foot the whole
State of the Kingdom, by the wisdom of our Elders has ever been submitted, to
the King conjoined to his Parliament: And now if ever we do need the true
Formalities and Roabs of an able Parliament, that by their predominant Power
transcendent Authority, and pious Wisdom, the present consuming mischiefs may
be restrained and extinguished. XII. Lastly, to the King and Parliament now;
because never any Parliament hitherto, that we know, has so much testified by
public Devotions to Almighty God, and by deep and often Protestations unto the
Kings Majesty, and to all his well-affected Subjects, that next after the glory
of God and the welfare of the true Religion, they do intend and endeavor
nothing so much as the safety of his Majesty's person, the augmentation of His
Majesty's Honor, and the peace and prosperity of all His Majesty's Kingdoms:
now seeing both Houses of Parliament, the most great and most Honorable
Council of England always have made, and still do persevere in making such
Prayers and Protestations; it seems not only an intolerable offense against
Charity, but an abuse inexpiable against common Humanity by obstinate
incredulity, to give the lie unto those most honorable Senators, and to all
the great Council of England; by cherishing any opinion or thought, that this
most honorable Assembly of Councillors do most wickedly conspire to ruin the
King, His Subjects, and Kingdoms.


FINIS.

