THE SOLDIERS DEMAND.

Showing Their PRESENT MISERY; And prescribing A PERFECT REMEDY.

Printed at Bristoll in the Year of intended Parity. 1649.

The SOLDIERS Demand.
Fellow Soldiers:
IT has pleased the Lord to open our eyes, and to let us see the wretched
conditions we are brought under; and our crying sins, which cry aloud in the
ears of God. Oh! the Ocean of blood that we are guilty of. Oh! the
intolerable oppression that we have laid upon our Brethren of England. Oh! how
these deadly sins of ours do torment our consciences? Oh! how are we able to
answer these pestilent acts of ours, at the dreadful bar of Gods divine
justice? Nay this is the most sharpest conflict to them, that we never
understood a true Cause, or just reason for the shedding of so much innocent
blood in our own Nation, nor why we have done such horrid oppression to our
own Contrymen.

Has not the dissembling and hypocritical Parliament gulled and deceived us by
their fair pretenses of reforming the Protestant Religion, of rectifying the
State, and reducing of the ancient Liberties of the People of England? Have ye
observed any thing less, or any thing more contrary, sit hence the Parliament
has been for these eight years past? We poor simple men did verily believe
that these had been the true Causes and Reasons (all this while) for which we
have fought thus eagerly one against another.

And ever since our Army did first enter into the great City of London, what
Declarations and specious promises have been set forth to the same effect? And
do ye not perceive, how they walk still in the same ways, yea far worse
every day than other? will you be any longer led by the noses by these
delusions and mockeries, and suffer your bodies and souls to be utterly
ruined? Oh, our worthy Companions, and Fellow Soldiers, be not any longer
misled by the dissembling shows of our Superiors (as we must call them) and
the wicked Instruments, their pretended Parliament, lest you be tortured in
your Consciences as we are, and make your selves the basest slaves in the whole
world, and eternal slaves in Hell hereafter.

Yet brave Soldiers let us give every body their due; has not brave Fa^rfax,
and gallant Crumwell, and we their dependents, made the English and Scottish
earth to tremble, wheresoever we have set our feet? and have not our hands
convinced all our foes and opposers? and brought gallant Fairfax and Crumwell
to this high pitch of honor, that they have da^^d to lay their Sovereigns
head under their feet, and many of his Nobles in the dust? and there is not a
Lord left, nor any of the gallantest men in the whole Kingdom, that dares to
budge against them: For if they do require any thing of them, they will rather
lick up the dust under their feet, than dare any manner of way to oppose them.
Nay further, have not they and we brought the Royal City, the great Metropolis
of this Kingdom, to that subjection and baseness, that we dare swear on
hundred of us (though there be a CM. and a CM. fighting men in it) would drive
them out of their Town, and make them to lie down at our seet like Spannels,
and suffer themselves to be bastinadoed, and give us whatsoever we would desire
of them, they do so dread a soldiers face, and tremble at the very sight of
one? And as for the Country poor slaves, we have so tained, awed, and
domineered over them, that we can make them like setting-doggs, to come when we
call, to do what we command, and to lie down when we bid them: And yet these
base peasants (for we can term them no better) though they are such milksops,
let any of them be entered into our society, and a little impudence put into
them, and after they are hardened therein, they will presently turn Lions;
such gallant spirits does the art of Arms many times put into base and ignoble
clownes. Oh, out upon these vain Fooleries; what would we give to have our
troubled consciences settled in peace? Oh, this blood and oppression does more
exasperate us than we are able to express: If the Lord be not pleased to show
us mercy, what will become of us, the most miserable of all men?

And will you not have discovered unto you the unworthiness of our base
General, and his subordinate Officers toward us, and their small esteem of
us, though we be the only means of their high advancement? Do they not now
reign and rule above Kings? Is it not by our valor? Is not their own will a
Law, to which every body must be subject? Or else are not we their strength and
power, to force and compel all opposers to their lusts and pleasures? Who
dares to affront them, that we do not presently subdue, and make obedient?
Have not they likewise (by the terror of us) set up a Council of State
(forsooth) as they call it, and a Parliament of Knaves, according to their own
humor, to act, force, and order whatsoever our Superiors will have them to
do, that under the name of a Parliament, all their villainies, oppressing and
cheating of the poor people, must be overshadowed, and varnished, as Taxes,
Excise, and other oppressive Acts, first ordered, and made by our Superiors,
but must bear the stamp and face of a Parliament: And is it not the terror of
us, that makes this base Parliament their Bawd and Pander?

And will you give leave to set forth unto you our base and vile usage from
these Caterpillars, and ungrateful villains, that very well know how they
dare not show their heads in any honest place but for us; it is our valor that
supports them, and if we decline from them, they will fall and consume like
smoke: And yet if we run not like slaves to fulfill their lusts, are we not
scorned and abused, and kicked like dogs by them, as if we were the very scumme
of the world in their esteem? Are we not unpaid our wages and hire by them, by
which we should live, and for want of it, are we not forced to get our bread by
force and rapine (else we must starve) from our poor Contrymen? Have we any
clothing but at their pleasure? so that for want many of us sundry times are
constrained to go to a hedge, or break into a house, or else to the Highway;
and if any of us be but taken in this misdemeanor, on what an high offense is
it? up we must to the gallows, and be condemned, or censured by our
Commanders, who are the only reason, by their unhonest and unjust retaining of
our wages in their own fingers, for want whereof we are many of us forced to
do that we ought not to do. Do they not upon any occasion quarrel against
us? if we be but absent, or do not instantly what they will have us, are we
not cudgelled, horsed, our Arms broken over our heads to our disgrace? Are we
not threatened upon every slight occasion to be cashiered, our Arreares to be
stopped? Have not many of us been hanged and shot at their pleasure? Must we
not go and run when they will have us, and whither they will send us? Must we
not lie at their doors day and night like dogs to watch and guard them; else,
are we not accounted mutinous, and Rebels, and that is a mighty thing with
them, and a great care they have to suppress it? Do they not make us worse
than the very Janissaries to the Great Turk? For are not they the greatest
enemies to their own Parents, to their own Religion, to their own Country?
so are not we their slaves to persecute our own Country, by killing and
fighting with our own brethren, against our natural Parents, and setting up
false Religions; by quartering upon them, in eating them up, and famishing of
many Families these hard times, by our wastfull charge and ^yot: when alas,
they like miscreants, withold our pay from us, and force us thus cruelly to
devour them and their children? Are not we their instruments to fetch in their
oppressive Taxes from the poor Country men? If any poor man has it not to
pay, yet we violently take it from him, with much advantage over besides to our
selves. Oh the bitter curses the poor people lay to our charge, anti our
Superiors that set us a-worke: We are afraid they reach up into the ears of
God against us; and for these unjust extortions upon his Children, we shall one
day receive a sharp censure. Are we not tossed too and fro over the earth at
their pleasure, or else we are Rebels against their Greatnesses, and so liable
to what punishment they will please to inflict upon us? Sometimes we must march
to London, by and by down to Barwicke to the West, to the North, to Scotland,
to Ireland, even whither they will; and if they do but hear of any of the
poor people but murmur against their oppression and cruelty, do they not
presently send us to see the matter, and to quail them? peradventure, if they
be resolute we must kill them, or be killed by them. Do we not expose our
selves to all danger and misery, to uphold these domineering Rascals in their
pomp and luxury? Do they not most insolently invassall us? Do they not
vilify us? How base and mean are we (in their conceit) to themselves? Do
they not keep our pay and hire from us, and thrust us upon the poor people to
shift for our selves? Do not they themselves pamper and feast their bodies
wheresoever they come with the best and choicest refreshments, at other men's
Tables? incouch themselves in the sumptuous lodgings and furniture? Do they
not live in all delicateness? Do they not oppress, and violently take away
every bodies Right, Inheritance, Possession goods, money, treasure, where and
from whom they please, under the color of Taxes, Assize, and opposition
against the State (as they call it?) Was there ever such a pack of Knaves in
the world, and such villainy acted as is by them, and all under such fair
pretenses? It is for the good of State, and the maintaining of the Army, yet
the Army must be paid as they in their discretion shall hold fit: For their
policy is to pay us short, that so we must depend upon their courtesy, and
crouch and bow down to them to pray for our own right, and out of our
necessity to impoverish the State, that we may make them as poor and base as
they do strive to make us to themselves; and we being all poor, and they
having gotten all into their own possession, we must repair to them as the
young Crows fly to the old ones for food, or else we must starve. This is
their drift and intent to bring us all to, that they may insult, and rule us at
their pleasure; and when they have it thus, then we must come at their beck,
and go when they send, or else cashiered, our Arreares confiscated, and then
what shall we do when we are turned out of their service? Is there any such
slavery as ours? You Fellow Soldiers do very well know these base affronts
continually, and always, have been put upon us, and you very well may perceive
how we have been requited for all our gallant service done for these our
ungrateful Masters. One thing more of their baseness toward us, let me put
you in mind of before I have done with them: Can they put a greater dishonor
upon a Soldier, than to make him a hangman, or an Executioner of his
Fellow-Souldier, as they have done many times, and nor very long since, to the
perpetual infamy of men of our noble Profession, that we should be hangmen or
executioners of one another, or Gaoller. That man whosoever has been an actor
in any of these courses, let us abhor and detest him, and count him not
worthy to be associated in our honorable Society, but cashiere him out of the
Army for a base infamous person, that would be the executioner of a noble
Soldier: Let him be shunned as a man of blood, and hateful to all men of our
Profession, and be a vagabond all his days. We need call but your own
experience, to bring these wrongs and indignities cast upon us into your
memories, by those that ought most to have honored us; we have undergone the
servitude of these hard Masters for these many years, yet hitherto we find no
amends, but rather worse and more insolency and tyranny every day than other.
But if you desire to be free from this base servitude (as gallant soldiers) we
lie under, and clear your Country from these oppressive villains, who by
their craft and treachery have mounted themselves into the Seats of Regality,
by our only fortitude and prowess, and gain the love of your native Nation,
be persuaded and ruled by us, and we will present you a way how to vindicate
our selves from these our inthrallers; so you will be constant and firm one to
another, and resolved in heart and unity of affections one with another, we
shall not only set our selves free from our cruel Taskmasters, but also enrich
our selves out of them, and make them our slaves, and the most basest abjects
upon the earth, howsoever they slant it now. Yet we have not done with our
Superiors (they do so hang in our teeth) yet not out of any malice to their
persons, but against their ignoble and discourteous dealing against their own
Soldiers, who have done so gallantly under their command, do we further set
them forth in their lively colors, before we come to our remedy. You may see
our slavish condition, that they cunningly and Masterfully endeavor to keep us
under, and to effect their designs by us their vassals, if we will be any
longer ruled by them: And likewise you may see the advancement we are like to
rise to (by what we have here truly set forth) the highest is to a pair of
gallows, if they can help us up the ladder, as we see their blessed good
meaning toward us, if they take us napping under their power. You had a
President, and a late and sad object of this kind lately presented before you
on a Gentleman Soldier of our Army, and many of his Comrades sent to Newgate:
but he poor Gentleman lost his life for a small matter too, as we have heard,
for not ebeying some of his Superiors Command. And though many of us under
their Commands (for want of understanding) have been so foolish to venture our
lives and limbs for their advancement and greatness; yea have not many of our
Army lost their lives and limbs to bring them to this glory, wherein they do
so provdly insult now over us, and their Country? but what reward have their
wives and children had from them, that have lost their lives for them? some of
them a poor pension of 2 s 6 d per week, and that not paid them neither. What
crying has been at the Parliament-doores for poor widows of soldiers? they
cried there till their throats were almost rent in sunder, but nothing could be
gotten but uncivil language and harsh speeches. And the poor Criple which
has lost his Legs and Arms, some ten greats or a Noble to carry him where he
was borne; We observe how Carts are loaded with them in the Highways, in
which they lie miserably distressed in every respect; and when he comes to the
place of his birth, or whether he is sent, we believe he finds but course
entertainment there, unless it be curses and imprecations upon his soul and
body, for the good service he has done his worthy Masters, and the money he had
will scarcely buy him a pair of crutches; Are not these brave rewards from our
Grandees to us, their Creators, makers, and preservers, as we have hitherto
been? and by these means the poor soldier is ever hereafter utterly unable
to help himself, and the poor widows and heplesse children left
comfortless and destitute of any livelihood for want of their husbands travel
and labor, but must necessarily turn beggar, and so must the poor criple
Soldier. Have we not yet set forth (to you) reasons sufficient, whose power is
in your own hands by your unvanquished swords, to unthrall your selves and make
these your cruel Masters to fall down at your feet, and compel them to pay
you your due rights, and wages, out of the money and treasure they have
abundantly accumulated and hoorded up, by their keeping from us our just and
merited wages, and by their robbing of the Country? Are our wages so great,
that the Army-Taxes could not discharge them? but it is thought that they would
do more then pay us; and we know that all these Taxes through the whole
Kingdom have been fully paid, and yet we unpaid. But suppose we had been paid,
and exactly too, what a poor thing is it for so much a day to kill men, yea
men of our own Country (and we know not for what neither, except it be to
satisfy the bloody and aspiring spirits of our Superiors) our own kindred,
our own brothers, paradventure our own fathers, our own friends? Could you
but imagine how we are excruciated in our tender consciences for this flood of
Crimson blood, that our hands are so deeply stained with, and the cruel and
hard usage whereby we have so oppressed our dear friends both in Country and
City, you would presently relent with us, and lay down your swords, and mourn
in dust and ashes all the days of your lives, and cry to God, and your
oppressed brethren, to pardon and forgive you; and if any of you have withal,
you would most willingly make restitution to those you have any ways wronged,
if your consciences were any ways touched as ours are. It may be God may be so
merciful to you as to touch your consciences, and open your understandings,
that you may before you depart this life see your bloody sins, and repent you
of them, and not suffer you to go out of this world unrepented of them. We
hope the Lord will in his good time do these by you, and not let you end your
days as Reprobates and Atheists. Thus we daily pray for you.

But we cannot leave these Canniball monsters, but we must needs present to
your further view the short Epitomie of them. They are false Hypocrites to
their God, mere Atheists, without natural affection, Murderers of their King
(God forgive us this great sin, we cannot absolutely clear our selves of his
Royal blood,) very bloud-suckers; for they care not how many they kill, so
they may be secured in their villainy: Let the whole world be ruined, so that
they may but enjoy their malicious ends, and evil gotten goods by betraying of
their own native Country; Absolute Tyrants (in respect they take and make
themselves absolute Governors of the Commonwealth, contrary to the will and
good liking of their Fellow Subjects and People) most extreme covetous, for
they have wracked the Commonwealth of all her treasure, and assumed it into
their own avaritious possession; Covenant-breakers, first with their God, with
their Sovereign, and the Parliament; Self-lovers, proud, and great boasters of
their own valor; but by our swords (ungrateful wretches to us their
instruments) by whose, only fortitude they are risen (from the dunghill) to
this greatness; Keepers back of the hirelings wages, a sin crying in the
ears of heaven against them; very imposters, and the very scumme of all
villainy upon the earth, and so let them pass for very rogues and vagadonds.
Now if any men that are not as they are can have any joy to serve such Masters,
we wish that shame, misery, infamy from the divine hand of Justice, at one time
or other may certainly fall upon them, and they be partakers of their Masters
wretchedness.

Well then, are not we their strength and power, that have made them thus
imperious? Are not we those that have made them thus dreadful to the whole
Kingdom of England, Scotland and Ireland? Why should we then be such sots,
that we should be like unto the mere brutes, that have strength and know it
not? Let us but leave them, how contemptible would they be? How would they be
jeared of all men? How soon would they be rooted and spued off from the face
and surface of the earth? Would not England rejoice to see her self rid of
these devouring Locusts, (they are so generally hated of God and all good
people.) Oh! what a blessing would descend from heaven upon the earth, if God
would be pleased to put this noble and gallant spirit in you all (our
Fellow Soldiers) to vindicate our miserable Nation from these devouring
vermin? Do you not observe how they endeavor to destroy you? Are they not
preparing for new Wars, to set you more by the ears than ever before, till
ye have devoured one another? Do they not lay heavier Taxes upon you more
than formerly? Do they not eat up your Corn on which you and yours should
feed, and be nourished with their Horses and Soldiers? Do they not devour
every manner of ways? How soon would this Commonwealth be settled in peace, by
Gods blessing, upon our deserting of them? What bloodshed would you keep off?
What cruel oppression? How would good men and women bless you, and children
even yet unborne? How would all future Ages write and speak of your
worthiness? If you would free your Country, your Parents, your wives and
children from these their enemies, who only seek yours and their destruction?
Would we be free our selves from their kicking, bastonadoing, horsing, whipping
hanging, shooting, and what not? Would you free your native Country from
foreign Invasion, cruel slaughter of innocent and harmless people, from
intolerable oppression, and perpetual slavery?

Then let us boldly like good Christians, loving Contrymen, and
Fellow Soldiers, unite our selves into one soul, and resolution to free our
selves and our Country from the miseries abovesaid, lest we be worse than the
very Turkish Janissaries; for they will be more excusable than we, for they
fighting against their own Country, natural Parents, and their true Religion
they were born under, is, because they were taken away, and pulled from their
Mothers breasts in their Infancy, when they could not rightly distinguish their
right hand from their left; but we in our Majority, and come to our discretion,
and educated and brought up to ripeness of Age, in the Christian Religion; And
for us (though we have been deceived by their fair pretenses) yet now God has
been pleased to discover unto us their hypocrisy, dissembling and falsenesse;
for us to be longer seduced by their dissimulation, and so sin against our
own knowledge, in joining with them in their falsities, and wickedness, What
a horrid shame will it be, not only to our own persons, but to the whole
Nation, that such Vipers should be fostered and nourished in her!

Let us boldly therefore demand of our General, and all his subordinate
Officers, our full wages and hire that is due to us; Let us not be daunted to
require our just and honest recompense for our hire and service, we have served
for, even to a mite; and if they refuse to pay it us, let us require it by the
peril of their blood; for we have spent our blood, yea many have lost their
lives and limbs to bring them to this greatness they are come to. They will
say they have not to satisfy, that is all one, let us do by them, as they
have forced us (for want of our pay) to make the Country and City to pay their
Taxes and Excise: we must have it, and will have it of them, neither will we be
so put off by them: For they, their Officers (take the Parliament Sitters, or
setters amongst them) have sufficient amongst them to pay us to our desires. We
are well assured of what we speak; The Taxes, Excize, Church-Land, Kings
Revenue, Composition, Customs, Forrest-Lands, the waste of Timber that they
have wasted and thrown dawne in this Kingdom (to their perpetual shame for
suffering of it) Irish-Taxes, Advancemoney, Pole Money, Proposition-money,
Theevish Plunder, Bribery; If all these vast sums could be Audited and
presented to the view of the eye, it would be a wonder to know the infinite
treasure they have grapled into their fingers and possession, and
notwithstanding all these, that the hired common Soldier should be in Arreares
in so great sums for our wages, and for want of it to put the poor Country
and City to such vast expenses by our quartering upon them. These things
rightly considered, it will make all honest men to stand amazed at their
knavery, and unhonesty for to cozen the common Soldier, and oppress the
Commonwealth. And nevertheless, that they have engrossed these vast sums,
and the Commonwealth thus racked and impoverished by them, yet the Soldiers
Arreares of his just pay should rise and amount to diverse 100000 pounds. Now
does it not appear to you our Fellowsouldiers, what notable cheating has been
amongst the Parliaments, their Officers, and the Commanders of the Army? And
what has made them thus false and impudent, but their presumption of our
fortitude and strength, as if we were the foundation for them to build all
their villainy, cousenage and oppression upon? Its no marvel that we have lost
the love of our Countrymen (as we have worthily deserved) and only by reason
of our unhonest Commanders, who unhonestly keep our money from us, and turn us
to feed upon the barren Commons of England. We hope your eyes and
understandings will be opened, and take these our writings into your
consideration, by whom all this while we have been thus wronged, misled, and
our just Rights kept from us, and how long we have lived, and still are likely
so to do, except we presently take-some speedy course to relieve our selves,
out of the moneys and means, and treasure, our wise Masters have grapled up to
themselves, or else we must be forced to oppress the Country still for food,
or by stealing and theevery to get us raiment to cloth our nakedness: but if
you will be but men of courage, and cement our selves soundly together, do not
fear or doubt, but we will have our dues out of them with a murrain, and make
the Cormorants disgorge their stomachs of all their rich treasure they have
swallowed; We will make them glad to lay it at our feet, and pray us to accept
of it. And by this course we shall pay our selves; for if this course be not
taken by us, we shall vever be paid, nor the Country eased of future Taxes and
Quartering: For they care not how immense the Arreares of the Army grows; for
thereby they purpose hereafter to raise infinite sums of money upon the
People, and put it into their pockets too; but we shall be never the better for
it neither, but still be fed on with a bit and a knock, as they do a
setting-dog; and to take of them, what they shall think fit to give us.

And we pray you all to observe their cunning fetch they have plotted to send
us into Ireland, only to find themselves matter for to set us a work, and keep
us from idleness, lest we should pry into their designs. First, what have we
to do with Ireland, to fight, and murder a People and Nation (for indeed they
are set upon cruelty, and murdering poor people, which is all they glory in)
which have done us no harm, only deeper to put our hands in (...) with their
own? we have waded too far in that crimson stream (already) of innocent and
Christian blood. Secondly, are they not afraid of us lest we should grow too
unweldy, and too great for them to govern, and unhappily (against their
desire) we should come to know their policy and knavery in managing their
devilish and murtherous plots? And if they could but get us once over into
Ireland (they think) they have us sure enough: either we shall have our
throats cut, or be famished, for they are sure we cannot get back again over
the great Pond. We that have been old Soldiers, and have tasted longest of
their barbarousnesse, its we they would be soonest rid of; for the new Novices,
they suppose they may a while lead them by the noses, as they have done us, by
suffering of them like idle rogues to ride a horseback up and down the
Country, and pill and powle the poor people, which may very well please them
for a time; but alas they will find little benefit that way, because we gave
skim'd it so clean over and over, that peradventure if the people should be
exasperated against them, as who can tell what necessity and want at last may
drive them to, perchance they may get that they unexpected: But it is us they
fear; for if we perish, then they think they are cock-sure, besides all our
Arreares (which they never mean to pay us) will fall into their own clutches.
If they withhold from us our moneys here in England, what will they do in
Ireland? when we cannot come to their faces to demand it, what hope is there
that we shall ever have it? And if we have no pay but what they think fit, how
shall we live? But in case we have money, what shall we do with money? we
cannot eat it (peradventure they hope to tempt us with a little ready money in
our hands) for victuals and clothing will be so difficult to be had there, that
(notwithstanding our money) we may be all starved; but they will make you
believe, that victuals and all other provision and necessaries, shall be
convayed out of England; let us be no longer gulled with that fopperie, for we
too too well know the scarcity of all things in England, that nothing can be
affoorded out of it; and if here it be not to be had, how is it possible to be
brought from hence thither? And have we not very well observed, how often this
poor State has been cheated with sending relief into Ireland, which never
went, but all converted into their grasping claws, and poor Ireland lost for
want of it, and now (at their pleasure) we must be sent to recover it? Besides,
are we not ey-witnesses how many poor Soldiers and other People come daily
from Ireland, and cry out they are starved, and want their pay worse than we
do? neither if we want our pay, can we find the free quarter we have here. So
in conclusion, we are like neither to get necessaries or money there; a fair
encouragement to make us go. But I hope by what is here set down, our
Brother-souldier will well consider before he goes, and first get in their
money that is already due, and then we will talk further upon this
undertaking-voyage. Neither will they find it so easy a matter to be so rid of
us, as they suppose to do by all their cunning and policy. But one more case
will we put you: suppose we had money to our desires, provision sufficient in
England to be sent us, Yet what danger and hazard will there be to conveigh it
over to us? for if it should be surprised, or cast away, or wind-bound, what
shall become of us, are we not in a lamentable case? And why must we go over
thither under all these hazards and danger of our own lives, only to kill the
people there, that our Tyrannical Masters may the easier rule over a few, and
poor sort of base people? and for this reason we must venture bodies, souls
and lives, to fulfill their wills and pleasures; surely we have great cause to
do it for them, they have been such gracious Masters to us. We hope these
reasons will make any sensible men advise with their pillow, before they will
voluntarily and rashly run themselves upon this Rock, and let Ireland be quiet;
except there may be better reasons readred, than we understand yet.

FINIS.

