A solemn League and Covenant, For Reformation and Defense of Religion, The
Honor and Happiness of the King, And the Peace and Safety of the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Jreland.
Together with a Preamble, made by a worthy Member of the House of COMMONS, to
invite all good Christians to the constant keeping of it.
COme, let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall
not be forgotten, JER. 50. 5.
Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be established
in righteousness, PROVE. 25. 5.
And all Judah rejoiced at the Oath, for they had sworn with all their heart,
and sought him with their whole desire, and he was found of them; and the Lord
gave them rest round about, 2 CHRONICLES. 15. 15.
The excellent Usefulness of this COVENANT.
Union with God, Conformity to God, and Unity of the three Kingdoms, are things
most desirable: In the first we are happy: In the second holy: In the third is
strength, peace, and safety. These are the kindly fruits of this Covenant, and
a Covenant that brings forth these, how gladly should it be embraced, and how
willingly received? They are lovely Bands that binds us to be happy, holy, and
safe. The heart of man is backsliding, and a Covenant is like a hedge or wall
to stop us from going back: it being a good and ready answer to a tempter or
tentation: How shall I do this, and break my Covenant? Surely we have been too
loose toward God, having almost lost a Religion, too loose in our lives, and
too disunited among our selves: and well it may be thought that a main end of
this Rod which now lies upon us, is to beat us into this Covenant; that thereby
we may be knit faster to God, to holiness, and each to other by this Band of
Unity. Yet the taking, is not the chief part of a Covenant, but the keeping.
The benefits of a Covenant are then sure and steadfast to us, when we are
steadfast in the Covenant: Now a main cause of unstedfastnesse in the Covenant,
is forgetfulness of it. To prevent this, the Covenant is presented in this
form, that being set up before us, it may be daily seen, and by seeing
remembered, and by remembering performed: And withal let us remember this; that
all the ways of God are mercy and truth to them that fear him, and keep his
Covenant. But because no man is strong in his own strength, let us seek
strength of Him who is both our strength and our Redeemer, that by Him we may
be enabled to keep our Covenant with him, that so he may delight to dwell with
us, to be called our God, and to call us his people; upon which happy
condition, attend Peace, Prosperity, and all blessings of Heaven and Earth,
temporal and eternal.

We Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of
the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the Providence of God living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of the Kings Majesty and His Posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety,
and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included,
and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts,
and Practices of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion, and professors
thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms ever since the
Reformation of Religion, and how much their rage, power and presumption, are of
late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable state of
the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and
Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and kingdom of
Scotland, are present and public Testimonies; We have now at last (after
other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings) for
the preservation of our selves and our Religion, from utter Ruin and
Destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former
times, and the Example of Gods people in other Nations; after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn League
and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with
our hands lifted up to the most high God, do swear:

I. THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government against our common Enemies, the reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches; And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Donfession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That
we and our Posterity after us, may as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
Extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecelesiasticall Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall
be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III. We shall with the same sincerity, reallity and constancy, in our several
vocations, endeavor with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms,
and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just power and
greatness.

IV. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such
as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one
of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or parties amongst the
people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their
offenses shall require or deserve, or the supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively, or others having power from that effect, shall judge convenient.

V. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms,
denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of GOD
granted unto us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both
Parliaments, we shall each one of us, according to our place and interest,
endeavor that they may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all
Posterity; And that Justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers thereof, in
manner expressed in the precedent Article.

VI. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or Neutrality in this cause,
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and honor
of the King; but shall all the days of our lives, zealously and constantly
continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same according to our
power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever; And what we are not able
our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it
may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in the sight of
God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof; We profess and declare before God and the world,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially, that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor to
walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
Transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; And our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power
and charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and
man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation,
and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Covenant
we make in the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of all hearts, with a
true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day when
the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; Most humbly beseeching the Lord
to strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people,
and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of
the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny; to join in the same, or like Association and
Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of JESUS Christ,
and the Peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and commonwealths.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Solemn League and Covenant be
forthwith printed and published, and read in all Churches:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husbands, November 16. 1643.


