SOME CONSIDERATIONS about the Nature of an Oath More particularly relating to
Our National Covenant.

Seriously propounded to all who truly fear God, and desire so to walk with
him, that they may enjoy Peace of Conscience.

Wherein this QUAERIE is Handled: Whether the said National Covenant has
those Requisites in it, which according to Gods Word ought to be in every OATH.

The Consideration whereof Is in this juncture of time the more seasonable, for
that the said Covenant is on the one hand too much adored by some, and on the
other hand by others esteemed scarce oblieging, even them who have Sworn it.

Qui facile jurat, facile perjurat.

Imprimatur Theodore Jennings Septem. 17. 1649.

London Printed for Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield near the Queens head Tavern,
October. 4. 1649.

Observations upon our National COVENANT.
HAving with much sorrow beheld how the divisions and troubles of this torn
and dis-joynted Kingdom, have been continued even when we had good hopes that
they were drawing to a period: Looking into the cause, this has been observed
to be none of the least, that all parties have labored to uphold their own
Interests, by endeavoring to weave in Religion and Conscience, with a design
which they were driving on.

This practice appears no where more then in the use that is made of the
National Covenant, which being a long Oath, and abounding with ambiguous
expressions, may, by any party in the Kingdom be easily construed to
countenance their undertakings.

The observation hereof has invited a search into this question, Whether this
National Covenant be agreeing for matter with those Covenants which we read of
in Scripture? or whether it have those qualifications which according to Gods
word ought to be in every Oath?

The Covenants which we read of in Scripture made by Asa, Nehemia and others,
were wholly or mostly for seeking God, for humbling their souls under the
sense of sin, and for a reformation of their lives. But look upon our
Covenant and (except a little at the latter end) it is stuffed with matter of
Polity! Government! Rights! Privileges! Liberties! and a many other matters,
savouring more of earth then heaven, and more likely to perplex the conscience
with doubts, then to strengthen and further a pious soul that seeks it is own
cleansing and reformation, and to close with the Lord Christ for strength and
assistance hereunto.

Hence it comes to pass (as was before said,) that all Parties have labored
to countenance their actions with this cloak, Their Covenant. In the late
invasion of the Scots under Duke Hamilton, what brought them in, but Their
Covenant? As you may see by their Declaration. The risings in several parts of
this Kingdom this last Summer 1648. It was (as they said) to pursue the ends
of their Covenant, And how many that have stood out against the Parliament,
have done it (as they said) in pursuance of their Covenant.

Let us therefore look into Gods word, and see what qualifications, we find
there required in every Oath that is pleasing to God: Let us consider what the
godly and learned have written on this subject, and then (without any
pretending to a new light) we shall easily discover how peccant this long Oath
is, against all Rules laid down by all Protestant writers old and new.

The ordinary qualifications of an Oath are these, that it be taken, in Truth,
in Judgment, in Righteousness, collected from Jeremiah, 4.2. Isay 48.1.

First in Truth, That is, of such things as we will perform, and are fully
resolved seriously to put in practice.

Secondly, Therefore we must swear in Judgment. We must well and thoroughly
understand what we swear unto, An Oath must not have ambiguous expressions in
it, for then how shall we swear in Judgment?

And thirdly, we must swear in Righteousness, that is, we must not bind our
selves to ought, but what is just and righteous, and may stand with the honor
of God, and the good of them that fear him.

Now examine the several Articles of our Covenant, and let him that takes it,
weigh the expressions he there meets withal, (as he ought to do before he
takes an Oath) and he shall soon see how disagreeing those Articles are with
these Rules.

Our first qualification is to swear in Truth, Then bring the fourth Article of
our National Covenant to this qualification, And I ask him that takes the
Covenant, whether he intend to complain of, or discover to some in Authority,
all MALIGNANTS, and all that shall be so (Those are the words of the Article.)
If he purpose seriously to do as he there swears, if he be one who frequents
much company, I dare assure him he may begin in January and hold on till
December and do no other business.

Besides, let the practice of our Covenanters speak for them, and I ask any
man who has sworn this Covenant how many Malignants he has discovered since
he took it? Is it because he never came in company of such, that he has
discovered few or none? He is one then that mewes himself up in his closet,
and avoids the sight of the most.

But here it is worth the time to observe what hard shifts they study up to
excuse the breach of their Oath. One says, that by Malignant is not
understood, he that railes or speaks evil of the Parliament, but he that
plots and contrives against them.

Answer, 1. Are not words the discovery of men's minds? 1 Answ.
And are not words punishable by all laws of God and man? Do not all
Common-Weals punish an offender in words? Nay even between private men, a wrong
in words requires satisfaction, much more words that are against the public
well-being of the State.

Answer, 2. 2 Answ.
If men are not to be discovered until they plot and act, it is then like that
it is too late to discover such, and indeed contrary to the intent of a
discovery, which is to prevent them that may plot and act, not to lay open them
that do act, for they have discovered themselves, therefore he that by his
speech declares himself Malignant, must be here comprehended.

A second Shift used to evade this Article, is, of some that run to the first
words of the Covenant. And say that this discovery is to be made of every one
in his place and calling, but (say they) it is not my place and calling,
therefore it concerns not me.

Answer, 1. 1 Answ.
Either it is every man's duty to make this discovery, (who takes this Oath) or
else no man's duty, if any man's duty, why not thine as well as another man's,
since thou have sworn to do it.

Answer, 2. If it belong not to thy place to do it, 2 Answ.
then thou swearest to an Impertinency, And so take the name of God in vain,
and breakest the third Commandment. As that reverend man M. Ley of Budworth a
member of the Assembly, has well observed in his book (against the Oath of the
new Cannon) called Defensive doubts. etc. Printed for G. Lathum 1641. Thus we
see how miserably we entangle our selves by swallowing such large promises as
these are. But to proceed.

Secondly, in relation still to this qualification of Truth in an Oath, I
demand of thee who take this Oath, if thou dare make so many promises to
any friend (especially thy Superior, and one with whom thou desire to keep
credit with) as thou make here to the great God! Dare thou make such a
friend so many promises as will fill a sheet of paper, and that of different
matters, heterogeneall? And will thou do so with God as thou dare not do
with man? Is it probable that this Oath should be sworn in truth?

By this one instance given in this one particular, in one Article you may
guess what may be said to the rest, if all the Articles and the several
expressions in them should be examined by these three qualifications, of Truth,
Judgment, and Righteousness. So that this tract would swell into a volume, if
instances should be given in the several particulars, but I shall leave that
to be done by those men in their privacy who make it a matter of Conscience, to
consider and weigh beforehand what they promise either to God or man, and
account it a sin to be rash with their mouth in uttering before God matters of
such difficulty (if not impossibility) to perform, as this long promissory
Oath contains. Observe well that of Eccles. 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

I shall therefore only give some hints to help the conscientious Christian in
bringing some other of the particulars in the Covenant to the Test, and so
pass over what might be further urged in this way.

Therefore for the second qualification of an Oath, viz. swearing in Judgment:
Let these expressions be examined, viz. Popery, Superstition, Heresy,
Schism,, Incendiaries, evil Instruments, etc. Art. 2. and 4. Has Authority
given us any definition of these? if not, how shall we swear in Judgment? If
any man conceive these expressions so clear and plain that they need no
further Declaration; he seems to me like him that received the money of the
Usurer without telling it, because he took no regard of re-payment; but he
which intends to perform, will weigh the particulars of his promise.

And to return to a book before mentioned, made by Mr. Ley (whom his writings
give me cause to esteem a conscientious man). I find there, words not so large
as these, and yet made an occasion of doubt, when we are to confirm it by
Oath, as Doubt. 4. pa. 32. the word Popish doctrine, which I am sure is not so
large as the word Popery in the second Article of the Covenant.

And indeed that book is a consutation of our Covenant, before the Covenant was
penned, and therefore thither I shall direct the conscientious Reader for his
fuller satisfaction, Muiato nomine de te fabula narratur; you will find enough
in that honest man's book to confute all or most of the Articles of our Covenant.

Indeed I have heard that good man has since endeavored in a later book of
his, to excuse our Protestation from those objections that were raised against
the Canonical oath, by showing a vast difference between those two, Real
differences, and Personal differences, etc. And it may be he may likewise be
as willing to excuse our Covenant that way, for I heard that he took it; but
though he show us a thousand substantial differences, if he cannot afford us
those three qualifications, which ought to be in every oath (though he may
excuse a tanto) I am sure he can never free it a toto, from the just charge of
being an unlawful Oath.

Let me here add one Argument which was hinted me in the large Remonstrance of
the Army of Novem. 16. 1648. at page 54. And it runs thus:

1. Argument; Such an Oath as heaps together several distinct interests, which
are, or may come to be inconsistent, is an unlawful oath.

But such is the National Covenant.

Ergo, Unlawful.

And a second Argument resulting from the matter preceding, which will run thus:

2. Arg. Such an Oath as cannot be taken in judgment, is unlawful:

Such is our Covenant. Ergo, Unlawful.

3. And so a third Arg. for Truth. And a fourth for Righteousness, all which
appear plain enough, and strong enough against our Covenant.

Object. But here some may Quaere, Object.
how such an Oath was passed (especially with such general approbation of the
godly party) if there were so much sin in it? How came it to pass that it
was not looked into, it passing so many hands, and being promoted by men so
religious, and so eminent, men of so able parts, so industrious, etc. as any
the Kingdom afforded.

1 Answer, That if it had come from, 1. Answ.
or been tendered by a suspected party; or had those promoted it who were no
friends to Piety (as in the former Oath, viz. that of the new Canons) it would
then have been questioned, and every word and sentence weighed; but coming out
of the house of our friends, and specially taking its rise from Scotland (as
was conceived) who were then looked upon as the greatest promoters of Piety, and
the Reformation in hand, and that Church esteemed one of the purest in the
world; hence it took with us so generally.

What esteem any thing from Scotland had with us at the beginning of this
Parliament, may appear by the confluence of such multitudes to their
Commissioners, and to all Sermons made before them. A Sermon before them by a
Scotch-man, procured more Auditors, then three Congregations of the ablest men
in London, had the place been capable of entertainment.

And how likely any thing wherein the Scots appeared, was to take with the
people, you may see by that order of Parliament of Septem. 25. 1643. wherein it
was ordered that Ministers should give notice to the people that the
Commissioners of Scotland now here did take this Covenant, implying (as it
seems to me) that this would be an inducement to the people to take it too.
This order is Printed with some copies of the Covenant.

And this I conceive to be one reason that it was swallowed so easily.

A second reason might be this, It is well known that the stream ran then so
violently, that no other construction would be admitted of any man's refusing
the Covenant, but Malignancy: Now they who had so long groaned under Episcopal
Tyranny abhorred the very suspicion of being a friend to that side, so stuck at
nothing that was offered as a medium to bring on the desired Reformation,
especially such an Oath as promised to lead directly thereto.

2. 2. Answ.
Answ. But yet secondly, the agreement was not so general as is supposed, for
it stuck, and found opposition, and was disputed against even in the Assembly
at Westminster, where it was first to pass, however the cry of those that were
for it was so loud (for reasons before mentioned) that they who looked into the
evil of it more then the rest did, could not be heard.

Dr. Burgess was the first man who openly desired and urged a Covenant to be
entered into, insomuch as he made a whole Sermon to bring it on, preached to the
House of Commons, Nov. 17. 1640. upon that text, Jer. 50.5. which is to be seen
in Print, yet when the good man came to see what a Covenant was rendered them
[all bestuft with self-ish interests, he was the first man that opposed it in
the Assembly; but this being taken very hainously, he and Mr. Price another of
this Assembly, were upon their refusal to take this Covenant, both suspended
the Assembly, and in all probability had been suspended their calling and
Ministry, had they persistent, so furiously was this business driven on at
that time: In the mean time they are looked upon as heinous offenders, and their
names transmitted into the Country in every scurrilous Mercury, as the only
enemies of so good a work. Being in this strait, they address themselves to
the Parliament, and make humble Petitions, but could not be heard, so that at
last, they give over contending, and upon their submission were readmitted to
fit in the Assembly.

Besides diverse godly men, seeing the snare, and no way to avoid it, withdrew
and obscured themselves for a time, for they knew no other way to avoid that
odious imputation of Mulignants, which they must needs contract by refusing,
and therefore gave place to that impetuous torrent for a time, according to
that counsel, curr^^ti cede Furori. They remembered there might come a time
wherein they might be useful to the Church of Christ, but for the present saw
little probability of prevailing against that popular stream, which in all
likelihood should they have opposed it, would have overborne them.

And the like violence was continued for a long time after, insomuch as no
Minister was suffered to pass the Assembly, unless he would take the
Covenant. Nay those that bare sway of the Presbyterian party endeavored to
bring it to this, That who ever would not swear that cast promissory Oath,
should have no employment in Church or Commonwealth; so zealot are many men,
that what they have swallowed themselves, should with out questioning be
received by all others.

Which rigid carriage of those of the Presbyterian party, what can it be styled
else, save a wicked Lording it over the consciences of their Brethren.

1 I do not charge this upon the Presbyterian Government, as having cause to
think well of it, for that the Churches of Christ have long thriven under that
Government, in many Kingdoms. But it is to be imputed to the uncharitableness
of some in place then acting, who were more zealous in promoting the inventions
of man, than the ways of God, and who could be content that a godly Minister,
though sound and Orthodox, should yet be deprived of the use of his Calling
(and consequently of subsistence for himself and family, and so be exposed to
beg) because he cannot submit to swear a long Oath of a sheet of paper, of
another man's pening: such an harshnesse as was not exceeded by the persecuting
Prelates.

2 Neither is it intended that what is here spoken against the Covenant should
weaken the endeavors of any who have taken the Covenant in laboring to perform
what they have sworn, that is, for so much of it as is feazible, and righteous,
for I conceive them bound by it, (and so in a snare,) and God will not be
mocked, Pay what thou have Vowed, Eccles. 5.4.

But the uses which I intend of this Tract, are these: 1 To show them that have
taken this Oath, their sinful rashness, to bind themselves to
impossibilities, 2 That those of my Brethren the Ministry, who are so fierce
in pressing the Covenant upon all occasions, (as Mr. Jenkin of Christ-Church
London, and diverse others) may be remembered, first, to take into consideration
what a snare they lead men into; and secondly, what they have done toward
Covenant-keeping themselves?


And however they and some others have studied up favorable Interpretations of
the Covenant, to still the obloquie of them that discern the evil of it, yet I
desire them to consider what the forementioned M. Ley says in his book of
DEFENSIVE Doubts page 99, 100, 101. That their labor to ease conscience, and
good intentions therein, we take kindly: and in good will to them again
request them to consider, that a private Interpretation of a public act, can
give no satisfaction, unless it be expressly or vertually allowed by the
highest Authority that does impose it, and then it is made public; But why
they should expect such an approbation of their private opinions we cannot
imagine, etc. And again, page: 100. For private men, though learned, if they
take upon them the interpretation of public dictates, may be more like to
light on mutual contradictions, then of the true and proper Construction of the
text they interpret, So did Vega and Soto, Soto and Catherinus, etc. commenting
on the Council of Trent.

A Third use of what has been here said, may be for Statists, That seek to
make Religion subservient to carnal policy, and to serve turns for the
present. And very plain it is that there has been many endeavors to make
this use of the Covenant: Let those know and consider how irreligious their
practice is, and has been herein, The Bloodiest wretch, and prophanest Varlet,
though come out of Ireland from the slaughter of our Protestant brethren there;
yet (as it is commonly reported) if he would Take the Covenant, he was then
looked upon as a friend, as one of Us, As if a long Oath had power to
metamorphize an Assasinate into a Saint.

But alas this carnal Policy always deceives them, Religion will not serve
Turn. This Net cat cheth none but Doves, Dat veniam Corvis, Those who shall
strike the blow and undermine them are men that will break these bands, such
Engines as these (let them be as wary as they can) are easily turned against
those that planted them for their own defense, as experience daily shows.

Fourthly, I wish what has been here said, concerning Oaths may be taken into
consideration by our brethren that fear God in the Kingdom of Scotland, who
not only are daily crying out OUR COVENANT! OUR COVENANT! (as they of old,
Templum Domini, Templum Domini,) but either have effected, or endeavored to
have it sworn over again. If what has been already spoken out of Gods word,
concerning the qualifications of an Oath; and how this Oath fails therein,
move them not, I hope their example shall not move them that fear God in this
Kingdom, And the less if it be true which is reported, That for the
generallity of that Nation, they are often forced to follow their Lords and
great men, be it right or wrong. And that if some of the chief Nobility enter
into a quarrel, their Tenants must engage with them therein. Where as in
England the meanest Subject has the liberty to Govern himself and, to make
his free choice of what he conceives good and upright, and is Protected by the
Common law (which is our birthright) against the most potent. I cannot affirm
that the Commonalty in Scotland do still remain in that servile condition
(having never been in Scotland,) but if it be so, their general Engaging in
this or any other course is the less to be heeded, as not being voluntary, but
forced. And for the great ones among them, the Lord give them repentance of
this sin of driving the people into such a snare as this is, which if they will
not see, let them know, that God can bring them down, an example whereof they
have in their Country man Duke Hamilton of late.

In the fist place this may be a remembrancer to our Parliament in England. It
may teach them to consider how great a sin they are guilty of, in leading this
Nation into such a snare, God has humbled the major part of them, let them now
that they have more leisure, look into this sin among others, how they have
forced many of their brethren into this temptation, Either swear, or expose
your selves to sufferings, in your estates, good name, etc. Let them pray that
the same lot befall not them, which by their means has befallen so many of
their brethren and Countrymen, it may please God that their timely repentance
may prevent this or the like punishment. And the Lord sanctify this admonition
to that end.

Sixthly and lastly. Let this be a word of Exhortation to the Parliam. now
sitting, to move them to cast away these wicked yokes, undo these heavy
burdens, Is. 58.6. Cast out al promissory Oaths, as of Judges, Constables,
Freemen of Corporations etc. They are not agreeing to these Rules of Truth,
Righteousness, Judgment. And other ways may be found to compel Officers to
do their duty. Make Laws to punish them if they fail, but uphold not an old
Custom which is found to disagree with Gods word, This acting for God will be
for your honor, and God will appear for you. But if you will not lay this to
heart, and what an affliction a Promissory Oath is to a tender Conscience, God
will in his own time find out men that will appear for him, And others shall
have the honor of this work Hest. 4.14.

There is of late a removal in part of some promissory Oaths, and a new Oath
appointed by a late Act of Parliament made Sep. 5. 1649. Yet is there one
clause in that new Oath which makes it very hard, if not impossible, viz. those
words at the end of it You shall execute the Office of Mayor according to the
best of your skill, knowledge and power, which I say no man does perform, for
we do not pray, or hear, according to the best of our power, nor is it possible
we should always be at the full and utmost extent of our skill and power in
performance of civil duties.

Christian Reader,

TAke notice that what is here said, is not the tenth part of what might be
urged against this long Oath, so that which is spoken of the multitude of words
Prove. 10.19. is truly verified of this Oath, which abounds in words: For a
conscientious man may justly quere:

1 How long shall I be bound by this Oath! Mr. Ley, pa. 86.
shall I make Median and Persian Oaths, that can never be recalled? surely a
wise man will never put his neck in such a snare.

Then secoadly, How prejudicial this Oath may be for the future, to all free
Parliaments and Assemblies in this Kingdom, pa. 80. and the like. Which must
be past over for brevities sake, and as much more, very material.

If Mr. Ley have compiled a Book of Doubts (about an Oath not one quarter so
long as this,) which yet is risen to above half a quire of paper, what might be
done in this which abounds in expressions no less ambiguous?

But for the present this shall suffice, for a taste to show the evil of it,
and may be a provocation to others to look more into it: The Lord give us
hearts so to walk with him, that we may preserve the peace of a good
conscience, and that we may neither for fear of man, or any other sinister
respect, enwrap our selves in such snares as these are.

In the 24th of Genesis When Abraham would swear his servant but to one particular
business, with what caution was it done? and the Servant puts the case what
might fall out about that business, 1. Concerning the woman's refusing to follow
him. 2. Concerning bringing Isaac to the land whence they came. But in this
long Covenant we swear to 20 particulars, and yet are not suffered to put any
case to any one of them.

1 We swear to maintain privileges of Parliament, but must not ask how many
those be, Nor do I hear any put forth such a case as this, what if Parliament
men will break them themselves? or have the breaking of them wincked at? 2 We
swear to endeavor to extirpate Heresy, and that without respect of persons;
Art. 2. But never put the case (with Abraham's servant) But how if our
Governors will neither assist nor countenance us in it? 3 We swear to discover
such as have been or shall be Malignants, but never put the case how long this
discovery is to last; and for how many years it is to bind us. Or how far
Malignancy is to extend. 4 We swear Art. 1. To endeavor the preservation of
Scotland in Doctrine and Discipline, but never put such a case as this, what if
the Inhabitants in Scotland shall think good to alter their Discipline, how
far shall I then be obliged? Abraham's servant would have said, Then will I be
clear from this my Oath.
FINIS.
September 17. 1649. Imprimatur, Theodore Jennings.


