A RELATION AND VINDICATION Of one William Smith, alias, Dowsing, a Soldier in
service of the State, against John Wilson, and Captain Edward Story, his
Adversaries.

Who surreptiously, and maliciously, by false Information, obtained a
Commission of Bankrupt against him in his absence.

And the Wisdom, Equity, and Impartiallity of the Right Honorable HENRY,
Earl of Kent; OLIVER, Earl of Bullingbrooke; and the other Commissioners for
the Custody of the great Seal of ENGLAND, in calling his Adversaries to
Account before them, and righting his wrong.

Summum jus summa injuria. Printed at London for John Grove, and are to be sold
at his Shop in Chancery Lane near the Rolls. 1644.

To the Right Honorable the Lords, and other Commissioners for the great Seal
of ENGLAND.
The humble PETITION of William Smith, alias, Dowsing, of Colchester in the
County of Essex, Linnendraper.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner about September last out of his affection to the public
good listed himself in the Parliament service wherein he has ever since
continued and performed his utmost endeavors: But so it is before and even at
the time of such his going in the State Service, he never absented himself
from his house nor shut up shop, nor was in any wise to be suspected a
Banckrupt, but lived in good repute and has sufficient to pay all his debts
with a good surplusage, and has lent and contributed upon the Propositions and
Assessements to the Parliament, as by the Certificate hereunto annexed, under
the hands of the Major, Aldermen and chief inhabitants of the said Town of
Colchester may appear, of which Certificate your Petitioner craveth your
honors audience.

Yet notwithstanding one Captain Edward Story with Master Plum, partners with
Master Turner have prosecuted the Statute of Banckrupt against your Petitioner,
pretending he became Banckrupt in December* last, and the Commissioners in the
Commission, have proclaimed your Petitioner Banckrupt, and taken all his wares
out of his shop, and threatened to take all his housholdstuffe and to sell his
Lands at such a rate as can now be gotten for them, your Petitioners Lands and
Timbers being sold to the value as formerly would have been given for them,
being worth one thousand pound, far exceeding his creditors demands.

And forasmuch as your Petitioner desires to pay every man, and so will do as
soon as he can sell his Lands for their true value, and the times settling,
intends to proceed in his trade.

Your Petitioners humble suit is that you would be pleased to take into
consideration the whole premises, and Superseding the said Commission to take
such further order for your Petitioner and his families preservation and a
timely vindication, as to your honors shall stand with equity and good
conscience.

And your Petitioner will daily pray, etc. February 9. 1643.
Upon the Certificate annexed, let the Commission and all proceedings thereupon
be Superseded.

Per Hen. Scobell, Deput. Regist.



WHereas Captain Story and some others of the Creditors of William Dowsing,
alias, Smith, of the Parish of Runwalls within the Town of Colchester, in the
County of Essex Linnendraper, have lately taken out, and have prosecuted the
Statute of Bankrupts against him, pretending the said Willliam Dowsing, alias,
Smith, became a Bankrupt in December last; and they with Robert Sparrow of the
same Tow^e Linnendraper, and some others named Commissioners in the said
Commission, did upon the xxvi. of January instant, proclaim him Bankrupt for
his nonappearance before them. Whereas the said William Dowsing, alias, Smith,
being a young man, and having kept shop about two years now past, and having
been very forward for the public good and service of the King and Parliament,
both in purse and person, as may appear by his lending upon the Propositions
of Parliament. And further, to manifest himself for the public, he (being a
man expert, and of strength and courage, did before the Feast of Saint Michael
the Archangel, last past, go into the actual service of the King and
Parliament, and so have continued ever since, as he has made appear to the
Major of this Town, by Certificate from his Captain, and as we know and
believe. Before which his going into the Parliaments service, he never absented
himself from his house, nor shut up shop, nor offered to compound with his
Creditours, nor lay in prison, nor was arrested, or troubled: But lived amongst
us in good repute, and as a man of a competent estate, and without any
suspicion of his being a Bankrupt; nor has any Action, or Actions, been
entered against him in all this Majors Majoralty of this Town: And he being
gone into the service as aforesaid, his wife being all alone, shut up the shop;
And fearing her husbands long stay in the Army, and that times for that Trade
were not likely to mend, did in his absence, and without her husbands
knowledge, or consent, as we believe, desire the said Captain Story, and the
other Chapmen he traded with in London, to take their wares again, and if any
thing wanted of their Debts, her husband should, and would pay them; and we
believe, that in land, and personal estate, the said William Dowsing, alias,
Smith, has sufficient to pay all his Debts, with a good surplusage. And
forasmuch as the Commissioners proceedings against him in this manner, may be
of ill consequence amongst us, and deter men of quality and ability to go
into the service, if not cause some to return that are already gone.

We have thought it fitting for his preservation, and a timely prevention of a
further ill, to certify thus much; we believing this to be the whole truth, we
being of the same Parish, and the Parishes near adjoining. And are confident
that some ill-affected to him have instigated his Creditours, to do this rather
out of some private ends, or revenge, then for any just cause. All which we
have thought sit to certify, as well wishers to the St^te, and public good,
and as a neighbourly respect to him who is ready to sacrifice his life for the
public) binds us.

Colchester 27. Sept. 1643. Ex. Thomas Lawrence, Major. Aldermen,
Henry Barrington, Thomas Wade, John Langley Captain* Robert Buxton, Ralph
Harrison, John Fruly, William Cook, John Iosceline Deputy Recorder, and many
others.


Per Hen. Scobell Deput. Regist.

CHARLES by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To Our Trusty and well beloved John Marsh, JohnNorburg Esquires, Richard
Hawkins; Henry Parker, Robert Sparrow Gentlemen, greeting;
Whereas we being heretofore informed that William Smith, alias, Dowsing late
of Colchester in the County of Essex, Mercer, using and exercising the trade of
Merchandise by way of bargaining, exchange, bartering, chevisance, seeking his
Trade of living by buying and selling, about the month of December now last
past, did become Banckrupt within the several Statutes lately made against
Banckrupts, to the intent to defraud and hinder John Wilson of London,
Ironmonger, and other his Creditors of their just debts and detyes due to them
due and owing; We thereupon minding the due execution of the several Statutes
lately made against Banckrupts did by our Commission under our great Seal of
England dated on or about the seventeenth day of January now last past, name,
assign, appoint, constitute and ordain you our special Commissioners; and
did thereby give full power and authority unto you four or three of you,
whereof you the said John Marsh or John Norburg should be one according to the
same Statutes and every of them not only concerning the said Banckrupt his
body lands, tenements, freeholds, and Customary goods, debts, and other things
whatsoever, but also concerning all other persons, which by concealment,
claim, or otherwise did or should offend touching the premises or any part
thereof, contrary to the intent and meaning of the same Statutes or any or
either of them, willing thereby and commanding you four or three of you,
whereof you the said John Marsh or John Norburg should be one to proceed to the
execution and accomplishment of the same Commission withal diligence and
effect, as our special trust was in you reposed, as by the said Commission,
remaining in the hands of you or some of you may appear: Now for diverse
reasons expressed in a Petition exhibited by the said William Dowsing, alias,
Smith, and a Certificate thereunto annexed unto the right honorable the Lords
and other Commissioners for the great Seal of England, which Certificate was
made by the Mayor, Aldermen* and oth^^2 of the Town of Colchester and according
to an Order of the nin^^ of this instant February made between Edward Story and
oth^^ Plantiffs, and the said William Smith Defendant: We will and require you,
and every of you by these presents, utterly to desist and surcease from allor
any your further proceedings in or about the execution of the same Commission,
but that you supersede the same, and that if you have attached the body of the
said William Smith, alias, Dowsing and committed him to custody, that you
presently cause him to be released and set at liberty; and also if you have by
virtue of the said Commission taken or seized any of the goods or estate of
him, the said William Smith, alias, Dowsing, you do forthwith cause the same to
be restored unto him, the said William Smith, alias, Dowsing, our said
Commission* or any thing therein contained to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding:

Witness Our Self at Westminster the tenth day of February in the nineteenth
year of our Reign. Latch and Ienyns.


Whereupon by the Council of friends the Defendants wife repaired to Mr.
William Arwaker of the society of Lincolnes Inn, and now an inhabitant of
Colchester, whose skill and constancy to do right (maugre the devil and all
beasts and birds) has made him famous, who delights more in truth then i^
praise; And he advised the course and drew the Certificate, did prosecute and
manage the whole business for which all good men and Soldiers ow^ him thanks,
for the having been a Soldier and approving himself every way for the public.

By all which it appears that no man shall be made a sufferer who labors or
ventures his life for the public good, and that neither any shall need to be
afraid to go into the public service, or enforced to return for any ^th^^
cause before spoken of, but may undoubtedly be encouraged to proceed in a work
so good and just, and to receive such recompense and provisions made for
themselves, wives and families, as by Ordnance of Parliament is provided; And
it were to be wished that before any such Commissions in these times he
granted, it might be examined whether the party against whom it shall be prayed
has been or is in the actual service of the King and Parliament.


