THE DOOM OF HERETICS: OR, A discovery of subtle Foxes, who were tied tail
to tail, and crept into the Church to do mischief.

As it was delivered in a Sermon at Wickham-Market in Suffolk, upon the Fast
day, being the 26 of May. 1647.

By Zeph: Smyth, Minister of Gods Word.

Take we the Foxes, the little Foxes, which destroy the vines, for our vines
have small grapes.

Cant. 2.15. For there are certain men crept in which before were of old
ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men they are, which turn the grace of
God into wantonness, and deny God the only Lord, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Jude ver. 4. Imprimatur, Ia: Cranford, August 22. 1648.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain in Paul's
churchyard. MDCXLVIII.

To the READER.
IT shall not need to seem strange to us if the truth meet with opposition;
nothing happens in this kind but what the Apostle did long ago foretell, That
in the last days should come perilous times, 2 Timothy 3.1. The times are
perilous when the truth is opposed, as verse the eighth, the Father of error
and lies, and his Ministers also, transform themselves into Angels of Light,
that craftily they might undermine the truth, and exalt error: Blessed is he
that now keeps his garments, ^ut woe be to them that God out of a just
judgment gives up to strong delusions, to believe lies, that they might be
damned which believe not the truth, 2 These. 2.11. because they received not the
truth in the love of it. It is not unknown to many what opposition this
ensuing Sermon met withal; at the preaching of it some scoffed, and the Sermon
being ended, a company which were at the High Constables house of the said
Town in the Sermon time came into the Congregation, who with some others that
heard the Sermon, which belong to them, made a disturbance in the Congregation,
calling the doctrine which was there delivered, a doctrine of devils; the said
High Constable also with diverse others in the Town, as I was credibly
informed, did scoff at this doctrine, saying, it was not fit to be preached,
and threatened it should be contradicted in print; and have ever since
endeavored to make the Author odious by inventing falsehoods, slanders, and
charging him with scandals falsely; but to pass by this, what was then opposed
is now made public; that ^s I have peace of conscience in that I then
delivered, so also all Orthodox Ministers and people that shall peruse it, may
judge whether it be con^^ary to Scripture, or the judgment of the learned as
Calvin, Ursinus, ^ucanus, Peter Martyr, Perkins, with diverse others, whose
labors the Lord has abundantly blessed, and made advantageous to the Church.
I calling to mind how duty binds me, and the Oath of God lies upon me to defend
the truth against heresies and schisms, and that I ought not to be ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. have
adventured to own my doctrine in a more public place then Wickham-market
Pulpit; beeng fully assured, that though men and devils should oppose the truth
what they can, yet at the length truth shall prevail; in the interim it is
good to pray and wait. It much behooves the Saints now, so many of them as
remain steadfast and established in the faith, which have not yet attained to
this learning, neither have known these depths of Satan, to hold fast that
which they have already, Rev. 2.24, 25. and to mourn for the sins of the times.
Did rivers of water run down David's eyes, because men kept not Gods laws, Ps.
119.136. and shall not we grieve to hear men deny the law, and say it ought
not to be preached? Did David grieve because the wicked kept not Gods word, Ps.
119.158. and shall not we grieve to hear men deny the Scripture to be the word
of God; and say it repents them they have fasted and prayed and mourned so much
for their sins? how little do these men and women consider, that though a
Christian should be out of all duty in respect of dependence, yet they should
be in all duty in respect of performance? Our differences are not merely about
things circumstantiall but substantial; and the effects are very sad; they
tend to the devouring of one another; to the making Religion odious to the
world; they keep off people from coming in to Jesus Christ; they either
discourage weak Christians, or pervert them; they hinder Christian communion,
and comfortable society one with another; in stead of fasting and praying, and
mourning, and seeking of God together, and edifying one another in their most
holy faith, there are contentions, strifes, janglings, and hatred, and is not
this cause of mourning? yea is not this one thing that provokes God to be at a
controversy with us? As if he should say to us as he did once to the Jews,
Shall I not visit for these things? In the day of the Lords wrath it is better
to be found mourners in Sion then sinners in Sion; therefore now should be the
Saints praying time, and morning-time, even to give the Lord no rest until he
compose our differences, and bring order out of our confusions, Who alone is
able to do it, and without he do it none else can, neither King nor Parliament,
nor Armies; it is he must reconcile his people to himself, and one to another.
The Lord is my witness, that I have not put forth this Sermon out of
bitterness of spirit against them that differ from me; or out of desire of
applause, having nothing to beast of my own, except it be of my nothingnesse;
but to let the world judge of that doctrine which people were so much taken off
from by the opposite party. It is possible the lines may be offensive to many;
partly because the matter comes abroad in a plain dress; and partly because
it is so contradictory to men's fantasies; to which I answer, if God in his word
cannot please all, I must not look to do it. I desire the Reader first to
read and then judge; if it may tell any a story of heaven, it satisfies him who
is yours in Christ Jesus,

Ze: Smyth.

A Discovery of the Churches Danger, by seeming Friends.
Jude 4. For there are certain men crept in which before were of old ordained
to this Gondemnation, ungodly men they are, which turn the grace of God into
wantonness, and deny God the only Lord, and the Lord Jesus Christ.


THe Apostle Saint Jude in this Epistle gives the saints warning to take heed
of seducers. Such were crept into the Church as would delude them unawares, who
would not only deny the truth themselves, and turn the grace of God into
wantonness, but they would do what in them lay to seduce others: as it has
always been the practice of heretics, when they have once engaged themselves
in the service of building up the kingdom of Satan, by denying the truth and
hearkening unto Satan's lies and delusions, to procure as many as they can by
subtilty and cunning craftiness deceive, to join with them in the work.

The Apostle likewise shows the danger of being seduced by them; and that is
drawn from the Judgments that will most certainly light upon them, not only
upon seducers, but upon the seduced; as in Rev. 2.22. God does not only
threaten to cast Iezabel into a bed of sorrow and great affliction, but them
also which commit fornication with her; so that those which are seduced are in
great danger, as well as they which seduce; and the certainty of their
judgments the Apostle proves from three examples of Gods judgments upon
others, viz. the judgment which he brought upon the murmuring Israelites, who
though God brought them out of the land of Egypt, yet destroyed them in the
wilderness: Secondly, of the Angels who were not spared, but thrown down
from heaven, and are reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the
judgment of the great day: Thirdly, the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah with
fire and brimstone from heaven, and the Cities about them. And what? did God so
severely plague them, and will he let these escape? No verily, as if the
Apostle should have said, as he has plagued them, so he will not let these
seducers go scorfree; and this he proves, verse 14. Enoch the seventh from
Adam, prophesied concerning such, Behold, the Lord comes with thousands of his
saints to give judgment against all men; and to rebuke the ungodly: and the
Apostle speaks of the same ungodly persons, that the text speaks of; and
therefore there will be no escaping of Gods judgments. If God come armed
against a people, who shall be able to stand against God? Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thy
heart endure, or can thy hands be strong in the day that I plead with thee? as
if the Lord should have said, thou can not endure it, but thy heart will
fail, and thy hands will be weak; so though seducers be audacious before men,
yet when God calls them to account, then they shall not be able to stand.

In the beginning of the Epistle, four things are considerable: First, the
person writing; Secondly, the persons to whom he writ; Thirdly, the salutation;
and Fourthly, that he intended in writing. From the person writing three things
are considerable, viz. his name, his office, and his kindred; his name, Jude;
his office, he was an Apostle, one of the twelve Apostles which our Savior
Christ chose to preach the Gospel; thirdly, his kindred, he was the brother of
James; of which Judas James brother we read was one of the twelve Apostles, who
is called by the Evangelist Saint Matthew in Chap. 10 3. Lebbeus Thaddeus, and
the same man which is here called Lebbeus Thaddeus, is called in Luke 6.16.
Judas James brother, and to distinguish him from Judas the Traitor, they are
named as two distinct persons in the same verse, which will be very clear if
you compare John 14.22. with Acts 1.31.

It is the judgment of reverend Divines, that this Apostle Saint Jude
outlived many of the other Apostles, even in the days of Domitian the
Emperor; at which time all sorts of people grew desperately wicked, corruption
did abound both in doctrine and manners, insomuch as many to whom the Apostles
had preached Christ, laying open the doctrine of free grace, they waxed wanton
and made it a doctrine of liberty, turning the grace of God into wantonness;
and this Apostle perceiving it very well, he is very zealous in admonishing the
Saints to take heed of them.

Secondly, the persons to whom he writ, and that is not to a particular person,
or Church, as Paul when he writ to Philemon, or as Saint John when he writ to
the elect Lady and to the beloved Gaius, but this is writ to all the Saints in
general, all them sanctified and called in Christ Jesus; the whole Church was
in danger by reason of seducers, and therefore the Apostle writes an Epistle of
very great concernment unto the whole Church.

The Third thing considerable is his salutation, in which the Apostle wishes
the increase of three things, viz. mercy, peace and love.

The fourth thing considerable is that the Apostle did intend in writing this
Epistle; which was to confirm the Sainis in the truth, and to keep them to
their principles they had learned, in such times as many did change their true
principles for false, and turned from the truth to fables; therefore in the 3
ver. When, says the Apostle, I gave all diligence to write to you about the
common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you that you should
earnestly contend for the maintenance of the faith which was once given unto
the Saints; here we must observe that salvation is called common in three
respects.

First, because it is generally offered both to the elect and reprobate; those
were invited to the supper of the King of Heaven Luke 14. who were rejected and
never tasted of it; none of those that were bidden shall taste of my Super; and
many are called, but few are chosen, Mat. 20.16. and of four sorts of hearers
which are spoken of Mat. 13. who are compared to the four sorts of ground,
three sorts get no good.

Secondly, because it is the way that all those walk in that are saved; there
is but one way truth and life, which is Christ Jesus; neither is there any
other name under heaven whereby a man can be saved. Act. 4.12. There is not one
way for the Jews and another way for the Gentiles, one way for the servant,
and another way for the son; but it is the common way that all have gone that
ever have been saved from the beginning of the world unto this day, they have
been saved by Jesus Christ who is the Author of eternal salvation, to all that
obey him. Heb. 5.9.

Thirdly, to confute the new fantastique ways which many go about to find
out to heaven; some have not been ashamed to say they have found out a broader
way to heaven then ever Jesus Christ knew of; for whereas Christ Jesus says,
Mat. 7.14. Strait is the way that leads to life, who knew the way very well,
and whither many or few should walk in it, he being the way himself, yet they
say all shall be saved; and to say some shall be damned they call it a doctrine
of Devils, not fit to be taught; I might instance many more who suppose they
have found a very good way to heaven, as the Civillian, the mere moral man,
the presumptuous, with others, which notwithstanding they have a good opinion
of their ways; yet their way is the broad road to hell; this is called the
common only way, to show the vanity of all other ways.

Next, that ye would contend for the faith once given to the Saints; in that
the Apostle exhorts the Saints to contend for the faith; I understand by faith
he means the true sincere doctrine of Christ which the Apostles had taught
the Saints, and which they did believe; sometimes in Scripture faith is put for
doctrine, as 1 Timothy 4.1. Many shall depart from the faith, that is, the doctrine
of the faith; for many in Saint Judes time forsook those wholesome truths that
the Apostles had taught them, and turned to fables, and made the doctrine of
Christ a doctrine of liberty, of which sort of persons the Apostle describes at
large in this Epistle: and this is the duty the Apostle exhorts the saints to
in the text, to contend for the truth, and stand up in the defense of it in
such evil and backsliding days as those were.

And the ground and reason why the saints should contend for the maintenance of
the faith once given to the Saints, is laid down in my Text, For there are
certain men crept in unawares which before were ordained to this condemnation;
by this time you may perceive who the Apostles means in the Text, Heretics,
and they are described by these five things.

First, by their number, There are certain men crept in, not one or two, but
many, Mat. 24.5. Many will come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall
deceive many, and therefore the danger is the greater.

Secondly, By their place, They are in the Church; therefore says the Apostle,
They are crept in amongst the saints; and in this regard the danger is the
greater; if the enemies have once invaded a land, that land is in the more
danger, it concerns the inhabitants to look about them; if the fire be
kindled in the thatch of the house, it concerns all within the house to make
haste to quench it: so when seducers are in the Church it concern all the
saints to contend for the truth, and to keep their garments.

Thirdly, they are described by their subtilty, They are crept in, they do not
come in the honest plain simple way, but by crafts and subtilties, and
therefore there is the more danger. If you have them that are crafty and subtle
about you, you will where ever you see them look to your selves; truly it were
good the saints would be as careful for their souls, there are crafty subtle
people abroad, therefore says the Apostle Ephesians. 4.14. be no more children
wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the deceit of men
and with craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive; it were good the
saints where ever they see them would look to Gods word and take heed of them.

Fourthly, They are described by their condition, They were of old ordained to
condemnation.

Fifthly, By their practices, They are ungodly, Secondly, They turn the grace
of God into wantonness. Thirdly, They deny God and the Lord Jesus Christ.

From the description of the persons by their number, Certain, and their
place, In the Church, they are crept in amongst the Saints and are accounted
saints, I may safely gather this point of doctrine,

That all are not true Saints that externally seem to be saints: my method in
handling of the doctrine shall, God assisting, be First to prove it; Secondly,
to make application.

For the confirmation of the point I shall endeavor to make it appear to be a
truth that all are not saints that externally seem to be such both amongst
teachers and hearers; first amongst teachers, all those teachers that
externally seem to be holy and sincere, are not so, the proof see in John
6.70. Have not I says Christ chosen twelve of you, and one of you is a devil,
now he spoke this of Judas says the Text; yet Judas it is like was very exact
to outward appearance, he could pray and preach, work miracles, cast out
devils; insomuch, as when our Savior Christ said one of you shall betray me,
they did all suspect themselves rather then Judas, one sais is it I? and
another, is it I? implying that Judas did walk so exactly that he was not
suspected; and further see, Mat. 7.15. Beware says Christ of false prophets,
which come to you in sheeps clothing, but are inwardly ravening wolves, they
externally seem holy and sincere, but the inside is naught; it is not all that
come in the name of Christ that are the true ministers of Christ; for seducers
come in the name of Christ, Mat. 24.5. Many shall come in my name, saying, I am
Christ, and deceive many; they deceive many, yea, if it were possible the very
elect, and yet come in the name of Christ, yea Satan's Ministers will come in
the name of Christ and under the notion of holiness. 26 or. 11.13. such false
Apostles are deceitful workers and transform themselves into the Apostles of
Jesus Christ: I pray mark, the false Apostles put on the shape of the true
ones, and I pray who are these false Apostles? Satan's ministers, as appears in
the next verse: no marvel for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of
light, and therefore no marvel if his ministers transform themselves; they
are satan's ministers, and yet looked upon as holy men, so you shall find 2 Timothy 3. such Chaplains as creep into houses, and lead simple women captive:
such as were proud, covetous, covenant violaters, and what not, yet they had a
form of godliness; so that you may see it is very plain, that all such
teachers as seem to be saints, are not true saints.

Secondly, as amongst teachers so amongst heaters, all are not true saints that
seem to be so, They went out from us: but they were not of us says the
Apostle. 1 Ioh 2.19 they seemed to be saints a great while, but were
hypocrites: we read of the stony ground Mat. 13.20 that it had a show of corn,
the seed sprung up, but came to nothing; yet the stony heaters went far, they
did not only hear the word, but receive it with joy, they were glorious
professors, and who would not but have taken such for saints, as did hear,
read, fast, pray, make such a glorious profession, ay but a winter of
affliction and persecution discovered them to be hypocrites, when a persecution
came, because of the word, they were offended: all are not true saints that
externally seem saints.

Use. Is for admonition to the people of God, take heed of them amongst your
selves, all that put on a visard of Saints are not true saints, there are many
teachers, many professors speak of God with their tongues, and deny him with
their lives, Tit. 1.16. they profess they know God but in works deny him, and
are abominable, and to every good work a reprobate: you know how corrupt those
heritiques were, 2 Timothy 3. and yet they had a form of godliness; if those
amongst the saints be such, the saints had need take heed of them: for the
Church is in great danger by reason of such: Christ was betrayed by a Judas one
of his twelve Apostles; the Church is in danger of being undermined by false
brethren Gal. 2 4. we read of false brethren who crept into the Church to spy
out their liberty and to bring them into bondage; there were some crept into
the Church to undermine the Church, and the Church is never worse undermined
then by such; a foreign enemy is dangerous, but a domesticke is more
dangerous; when a man's enemy are in his family, that man is in danger: so when
the Churches enemies are among themselves, under the vizard of saints, that is,
when men under pretense of setting up truth, undermine truth; under a pretense
of holiness, undermine holiness; under pretense of religion, undermine
religion; then the Church must needs be in great danger, Act. 20.29, 30. I know
says the Apostle, after my departure shall grievous wolves enter in amongst
you; yea, men amongst your selves shall arise, speaking perverse things, to
draw disciples after them; I pray mark, amongst your selves; the saints had
need take heed of those amongst themselves.

Obj. If the Church be in such danger by reason of such, Why does God permit
them in the Church?

Ans. For the good of the Church: First, That such as are approved may be
known, 1 Cor. 11.19. There must be heresies, that such as are approved may be
known; when heretics who are accounted saints a long time, go about to
undermine religion, by broaching corrupt doctrine, you shall soon see such as
wanted sound hearts, such as never received the truth in the love of it,
embrace corrupt doctrine; yea it may be, Arianisme, Arminianisme, Pelagianisme,
Familisme, and what not? I tell you these are accounted precious truths amongst
many heretics in these days, and God permits it that sound hearted Christians
might be discovered from those that are not so.

Secondly. God permits such in the Church, that the scriptures might be
fulfilled; Christ is a preclous stone to some, and a stone of stumbling unto
others, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. It was ordained says the Apostle, that some should
stumble at Jesus Christ; and the lying signs and wonders, and strange opinions
of heretics on the one side, and their hypocrisies cause many to stumble at
Jesus Christ; and thus they fulfill the scriptures, to their own destruction.

Thirdly, God permits it, that sound Christians might look to their own
hearts; when our Savior Christ said to his disciples, One of you shall betray
me, every one was ready to begin at home, Is it I Lord? and Peter said, Is it
I? So when the saints hear many amongst themselves in the Church seem to be
godly, and yet are not; many Judases, many stony hearers, many false brethren,
many that have knowledge and gifts and parts, that are naught, as Mat. 7.22.
Many will in that day say, Lord, Have we not in thy name prophesied, and in thy
name cast out devils? and yet Jesus Christ will say, depart, I never knew you,
this will put Christians on to enquiry, Is it I? Oh I pray God it may not be I.
And thus God permits it that sound Christians might look to their hearts, Pro.
4.23.

2 Use. Is for information. It informs us that a bare profession is not enough
to make a man a true Christian; a man may be a glorious professor of religion,
and yet be damned as well as Judas; yet it is very strange to see how people
do deceive themselves with this; what says one? I was baptized, I keep my
Church, and pay every man his own, and we live under the Ordinances, and can
cry, the Temple of the Lord, as Ier. 7. But let me tell thee, thou may do
all this, and more too, and yet be damned; those in Mat. that prayed, preached,
cast out devils, wrought miracles in the name of Christ, went further then
thus, and yet Jesus Christ will say to them, Depart, I know you not; Judas went
further then thus, and yet a damned wretch; therefore take heed ye rest not in
this, I was baptized, and I am a professor, I keep my Church, and pay every man
his own; many a man has gone further then so, and yet been damned; Abah was
humbled, and Herod heard John Baptist gladly; Nay, says our Savior Luke
13.24. Many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able; there may be many
in hell that it may be have prayed oftener then thou, been more exact in
performing of family duties then thou have been, that have took more pains
in the ways of God then thou have done, and yet have been damned, and
therefore take heed of resting in a bare profession of religion.

3. Use. Exhortation. Let us hence be exhorted, To make sure we be none of
those that are in the Church and yet are not of the Church; we hear of some
that seem to be saints, and yet are none; of many that have knowledge and
parts, and make a glorious profession, and yet may be damned; let it be our
care to make sure we be none of them; for their condition is worse then the
condition of others; for upon them shall these Scriptures be fulfilled; he that
increases knowledge, increases sorrow; how does he increase sorrow? by not
practicing what he knew; for it had been better never to have known the way
of God, then after to turn from the holy Commandment. 2 Pet. 2.21.

Obj. But if it be so, how shall I know I am none of these persons you speak
of who seem to be saints, and yet are not? and by what rule should I judge
another man to be a true child of God.

Ans. First, Examine the foundation thou have built upon; a true believer
builds upon Christ the Rock, and therefore the gates of hell shall not
prevail against him; there are a great many build upon their duties and
profession, and not upon Christ; some upon their sweet conceits and fancied
comforts in Christ, but not upon Christ indeed; but can thou say thou do
truly believe in Jesus Christ? that thou have such a faith as was not of thine
own fancying, but wrought by the mighty operation of the Holy Ghost? Col.
2.11. such a faith as purifies the heart? Act. 15.9. as works by love? Gal.
5.6. as is fruitful in good works? James 2.26. Tit. 3.8. this is a good sign
that thou art a true saint.

Secondly. If thy heart be upright, that is another good evidence; if thy care
be to approve thy heart to God, rather then to the world, thy conscience can
witness as in the presence of God to thee that thou desire that God might
see thy heart upright rather then man should think it is upright, and thou
can say with David, Psalm. 139. Examine my reins and my heart, and see if
there be any way of wickedness in me; then this is another good sign thou art
a true saint.

Thirdly. Do thou hold such sound principles as faints should do? as the
Apostle exhorts the saints in this Epistle, To contend for the truth; so do you
stand up in defense of the truth against heretics and heresies; and do you
lead such lives as faints should do, viz. to live holily, righteously and
soberly, Tit. 2.11. And can thou say so far as thou know thine own heart,
thou art at Gods command, to go when he bids thee go, and come when he bids
thee come? these are good evidences thou art a true saint.

Secondly. There are some notes of trial, whereby thou may persuade thy
self concerning another that he or she is a true saint.

First, when thou feast they are as careful to walk close with God in a
general and particular calling, at home as well as abroad; many are zealous
abroad amongst such as will observe them, who but they for religion, but if you
follow these men home, then (...) may be ye shall see they neither regard body
nor soul; are faithful neither in the duties of their general calling, nor
particular neither; truly if it be so, that man or woman's heart is very
suspicious.

Secondly. A gracious man is an humble man; That soul that God makes his
residence withal, is an humble soul; I dwell with the humble says the Lord,
Jsa. 57.15. and I will look to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit,
Isa. 66.2. When we see a soul walk humbly with God, Mich. 6.8. this may give
good evidence to others that such a one is godly; and on the contrary, it makes
such suspicious as are proud, self-conceited, esteem well of themselves, and
are ready to scorn others.

Thirdly. When we see men and women established in the truth, this gives good
evidence unto others of their uprightness, as says the Apostle, Col. 2 7.
Rooted and built up in him, and established in the faith: not like the wandering
stars Jude 13. which run from one error to another, until they have lost
all truth, but fixed stairs established in the truth, steadfast, unmovable,
and abundant in the work of the Lord. When we see them so established, as
nothing can remove them, but with Paul are willing to be bound and to dye for
the Lord Jesus; this man gives good evidence of an upright heart: it is the
expression of Solomon, Pro. 14.15. The fool believes every thing, but the
prudent man will consider his goings.

Fourthly. A man gives others good testimony of his uprightness, when he takes
reproves well; Give admonition to the wise, and he will be wiser says the
wise man, Prove. 9.9. When reproof is to him as Jewels of gold, and he ready to
say, blessed be God for this reproof, as David who said to Abigall, Blessed be
thou of the Lord, who met me to keep my hand from shedding of blood; and in
another place, Let the righteous smite me for it is a benefit; it is the
property of a godly man to take reproves well; and on the contrary, when a man
hates him that reproves in the gate, Amos 5.10. and counts him that reproves,
an enemy; and ready to say, Why does he reprove me? Is he not as bad himself,
and I could have charged him with as much as he charged me, and I know as much
by him as he does by me, these expressions savor of a bad heart.

Fifthly. A man gives others good evidence of his uprightness, when he is not
a respector of persons, but loves the meanest saint that bears the Image of
God, as well as the richest; my meaning is not that a godly man should not give
that civil respect to every one that their place calls for, Honor to whom
honor belongs; but that I mind you of is, that where there is true grace,
there will be a true love and respect to those saints that go in gray coats, ay
and threadbare coats too, such as go out to their day labor, such as live in a
poor cottage, as well as those that are arrayed in silks and sattins, and live
in stately houses; there is many a man loves so much as they see of the fashion
in another; and so much as they see of their opinions in another; but the godly
love whatsoever they see of God in another, Hereby, says our Savior, shall
all men know ye are my disciples, if ye love one another, John 13.35. The
saints love the Image of Christ wheresoever it is.

So that ye see beloved that though all that externally seem to be saints,
are not; yet there is a possibility for a man to know himself to be a true
saint, and to be persuaded that another is a true saint. We come in the next
place to that which follows; and here I might insist upon their coming into
the Church, which is subtily, They creep in unawares; but I intend not to
speak of that now, but to come to the point of doctrine, which arises from
their condition, Which were of old ordained to condemnation; for having the
doctrine of Reprobation held forth in the Text, I shall insist upon that, and
handle it somewhat more general then as it concerns the persons spoken of in
the Text; the doctrine therefore is this,

That God did of old ordain some unto condemnation. And because it is a
doctrine not often insisted upon, and at this time is denied, I intend to prove
it from Scripture. Secondly, To give you the reason. Thirdly, Answer
objections. Fourthly, Make application. But before I come to the proof of the
doctrine, it is very necessary that I should show you what Reprobation is.
Predestination has two parts, Election, and Reprobation; for it is Gods
eternal and unchangeable decree to save some of the lost race of Adam, by
Jesus Christ; and to pass by others, leaving them under sin in a state of
condemnation, as they were lest in Adam, without any possibility of mercy; so
that Reprobation is Gods eternal and unchangeable decree to pass by some of
the Iost race of Adam, leaving them in that condition they were lost in Adam,
without any possibility of recovering for ever.

First. It is Gods decree, you have the proof in the Text, They were of old
ordained to Condemnation, so 1 Peter 2.8. To which they were ordained, it was
ordained that they should stumble at Christ.

Secondly. To pass by some, Romans 9.11, 12, 13. For the Children not being yet
borne, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according
to Election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls; it was said
too here, The elder shall serve the younger; as it is written, Jacob have I
loved, Esau have I hated; here we see plainly God chose some, and passed by
others, not for foreseen works and merits; for God saw nothing in Jacob that
deserved his love, more then he saw in Esau; but he chose some and rejected
others, because it so pleased him; therefore says the Apostle That the purpose
of God might stand; so that it is plain, that it was Gods purpose to pass by
some of the lost race of Adam.

Thirdly. They are left without any possibility of recovering for ever, because
Gods decree to leave them under sin and condemdation, cannot be altered,
Psalm. 33.11. the counsel of the Lord shall stand for evermore, his purpose is
unchangeable, yea it is as impossible for the Reprobate to be saved, as it is
for God to change and alter his purpose; so that though Christ's death was
sufficient in it self, to ransom not only a world, but many thousands of
worlds; yet it was never intended by the Father in giving of his son to dye,
or by the Son in laying down his life, that the Reprobate should be saved,
or that Christ's derth should frustrate Gods decree; and therefore see how
ineffectuall all the Ordinances of God are to the Reprobate; the Lord has
ordained that by the foolishness of preaching he will save them that believe;
but the Word is a condemning letter to the Reprobate, the savor of death unto
death; it makes their hearts far; I pray see Job. 12.37, 38, 39. Though he did
many miracles before them, yet they believed not, that the saying of Isaias
might be fulfilled, Lord who has believed our report? they did not believe,
for Isaias says who has believed? there are some are come under Gods decree,
and come under such scriptures so as they cannot believe; they could not
believe, why so? they were come under this saying of Isaias, so that they could
not; there are some shall fulfill these Scriptures to their greater
destruction, and therefore in the 39. verse they could not believe, for Isaias
says, He has blinded their eyes and hardens their hearts; I pray mark,
they could not because Isaias says; now if you demand how God hardens their
hearts, and blindes their minds, I answer, By punishing sin with sin,
giving them up to the hardness of their hearts, and blindness of their minds,
leaving them to themselves to go on in the way to destruction.

Next, the causes of Reprobation are these; the efficient moveing cause is Gods
good will and pleasure, to leave the sinner in that miserable estate into which
he is fallen in Adam, Mat. 11.26. Thou do hide these things from the wise,
and understanding, why? for because it is his good will and pleasure, so Romans
9.18. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens, and verse
21. has not the Potter power of the clay to make of the same lump, one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? are we not all in the hands of
God, as the clay is in the hands of the Potter? may the Potter of the same
piece of clay make one vessel for honor, and another for dishonor, and may
not the Lord if he please? therefore says the Apostle in verse 22. What if God
will show his wrath? so that the efficient cause is the good pleasure of his
will.

Secondly. The final cause is the eternal glory of Gods Justice, Prove. 16.4.
He has created all things for his glory, and the wicked for the day of wrath;
for in inflicting eternal punishment upon the Reprobate, he does to eternity
show his severity against, and hatred of sin. And so I come in the next place
to the proof of the doctrine.

That God did of old ordain some to condemnation, it appears a truth in the
text, so in John 17.12. Of all that thou have given me have I lost none, but
the child of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled; I pray mark,
Iudases destruction was ordained; God had decreed it from eternity: so why did
those stumble at Christ? 1 Pet. 2.8. it was ordained they should do so; in
Isa. 30.33. Tophet is prepared of old, it was ordained of old that some should
perish, for in Mat. 25. he shall say to them on his left hand, Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire, prepared for you; Gods wrath is a prepared wrath it is
prepared for the wicked; now if wrath were prepared of old, then the wicked who
are the vessels of wrath were ordained to it of old, therefore says Job, The
wicked are kept unto the day of destruction, they shall be brought forth in the
day of wrath, Job 21.30. But here arises an Objection.

If God did ordain men to condemnation, he is the Author of it; but God did
ordain some to condemnation, ergo he is the Author of it.

Ans. Although condemnation be of God foreseen and ordained, yet none are
condemned, because God did foresee and appoint it, but because the Reprobates
themselves do such actions as procure damnation, and so by their wicked actions
they bring to pass the eternal counsel of God concerning their damnation,
Hosea 9.13. Oh Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help; as
if the Lord should have said, art thou destroyed? thou may thank thy self
for it; thou may say here is the effect of sin, this misery, and woe, and
damnation, my sin brings upon me; God at the first made man righteous, but he
sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7.31. I pray observe, man sought out; so
that it is men use such means as procure their condemnation, they are causes
of their own ruin.

Ay but you will say, God did did decree those actions as well as their
destruction for those Actions, for the Text says, God did ordain that the
wicked should stumble at Christ, and he being the author not only of the
punishment, but of the sin, also he is the Author of condemnation.

Ans. We must make a distinction between sin it self, and the permission
thereof; it is one thing to be the author of sin, and another thing to permit
sin; for as God did decree to pass by some of the lost race of Adam, he did
also decree to permit them to use such means as should bring to pass his
decree; so that Adams will was not forced by any violence of Gods purpose,
compelling him to consent; but he of a voluntary freewill, left God and
hearkened to the devil; so that it is true, God did decree the permission of
those actions, and they in doing of those actions bring to pass Gods decree,
concerning their damnation, and thus their destruction is of themselves.

Obj. But you will say, God could have prevented those actions that procure our
damnation, if he would.

Ans. First, God was not bound to prevent it: he was no more bound to keep Adam
in the estate of innocence, then he was bound to create him and set him in that
estate. Secondly, After he had destroyed himself, God was not bound to save
him, no more then he was bound to create him; and therefore it is no less then
blasphemy to say, God is the Author of sin and condemnation, because he permits
sin, and destroys the creature for sin, when he is not bound to prevent it,
and it stands with his Justice to punish it.

Again we must take notice that it is one thing to be the author of an action,
and another thing to be the Author of the evil of that action; it is true God
did decree that such actions should come to pass, viz. that he would permit
Adams fall, and all other wicked actions, but God is not the Author of the
evil of those actions, but the evil of these actions is from our selves, and
the misery that follows we bring upon our selves, according to the Scripture
expression, Thou have destroyed thy self, Hosea 9.13. and man suffers for his
sin, Lam. 3.39. Thus God did ordain some to condemnation, he did decree
likewise to permit them to destroy themselves, as did those who stumbled at
Christ, 1 Pe. 2.8. though God did ordain Cain, and Pharaoh, and Judas to
condemnation, yet through their sins they bring to pass Gods purpose; sain
his envy, murder, cruelty, and desperation, this brought his ruin and
destruction; and Pharaoh by his contempt of God, cruelty to his people;
obstinacy and hardness of heart, wrought out his ruin; so Judas his
covetousness, treachery, treason to his Lord and Master Jesus Christ,
desperation, procured his ruin; so heretics by their pride, vain glory,
selfe-conceitednesse, wickedness, deceiving, and being deceived, they ruin
themselves, and thus they themselves bring to pass Gods purpose.

Reason of the doctrine is, That he might magnify the glory of his justice, as
well as the glory of his mercy; the glory of his justice, in inflicting
punishments upon the vessels of wrath, and the glory of his mercy in saving
his people; he has created all things for his own glory, and the wicked for
the day of wrath, Prove. 16.4. For as the godly shall for ever set forth the
glory of his mercy, so the wicked shall for ever set forth the glory of his
justice.

We come in the next place to answer objections. May some say, If God has
ordained some to condemnation; how shall we know who they be, or how many
there be of them?

Ans. Secret things belong to God, but things revealed to us and our children,
Deuteronomy. 29.29. We have nothing to do to pry into Gods secrets, as whether so many
of a hundred, or so many of a thousand shall be saved, and the rest damned; or
whether this man or that woman be an elect vessel, or a reprobate, that is
only known unto God; the foundation of God stands sure and has his seal;
the Lord knows who are his, and the Lord knows who are not his, but we know
not, neither is it necessary that we should know; thus much we may know, that
God has elected some and rejected others; for this he has revealed in his
word, and that the number he has elected, is but a remnant in comparison of
the rest of the world, as in Romans 11.5. There is but a remnant according to the
election of grace; but how many in a town, or a kingdom, no man can
determine; it is not for the minister to say, so many in my parish are
reprobates, for the householder to say, so many in my family, such a son, or
such a daughter, or such a servant is a reprobate; we know not but God may let
the day of his power come upon them, and bring them in to Jesus Christ; it is
not for a particular man to determine concerning himself he is a reprobate, he
knows not but that God may show mercy to him; therefore we have nothing to do
to be so curious, as to pry into Gods secret counsel.

Object. This doctrine of reprobation is not fit to be preached, because it is
the next way to make people despair.

Ans. First, It is a part of Gods counsel, and therefore ought to be preached;
how can a Minister with Paul Act. 20. say, I have not ceased to make known to
you the whole counsel of God, if they do not with Paul teach the doctrine of
Reprobation?

Secondly. It is the doctrine of Christ, Mat. 20.16. Many are called, but few
are chosen; the doctrine of Paul, Romans 9, 10, 11. Chapters, in all three
chapters how does the Apostle insist upon Election and Reprobation, and Saint
Jude in the Text, Peter 1 Epistle 2.8. did Christ live now and the Apostles,
these men would tell them too, their doctrine were not fit to be preached.

Thirdly. When a fundamental truth comes to be questioned, the question is,
Whether because some suck poison, where they might suck honey, by stumbling at
religion, whether the truth should not be preached; seeing by the same rule we
may say, Christ is a stone of stumbling unto some? therefore Christ is not to
be preached; though the wicked by reason of the corruption in their hearts,
suck poison from this doctrine, yet the fault is not in the doctrine, but in
their wicked hearts; for the doctrine is rather a doctrine they might suck
honey from, if they would from hence give all diligence to make their calling
and clection sure.

But to this doctrine the Pelagians are adversaries also, for they deny the
doctrine of Reprobation, and affirm that Christ dyed for all, without
exception, alleging that text in 1 Ioh. 2.1. He is a propitiation for our
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

For answer to this, First, I pray observe how these men confound Election; for
if all be reconciled, where is Election? for to elect is to choose out some from
amongst the rest, as Ioh. 15.19. I have chosen you out of the world, that is,
from amongst the rest of the world; where I gather, some were chosen, and some
refused.

Secondly. I pray observe how they corrupt the true sense of the text, for the
world is fourfold in Scripture, there is the elementary world which God
created, Genesis 1.1. and which we read of, Heb. 11.3. Through faith we understand
that the world was framed by the word of God, so that the things that are seen
were not made of things which did appear.

Secondly. There is the reasonable world, and that is all mankind without
exception, To. 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so death went over all men, that is, all the world, in Adam all dye.

Thirdly. There is the Elect world, and this is spoken of in the text, He is a
propitiation for our fins, and not ours only, but also for the sins of the
whole world, that is, the whole world of believers, agreeing with 2 Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their sins
unto them; he does not speak of such a world as can possibly perish any one of
them; for if Christ have reconciled them, it is impossible any thing past,
present, or to come, should separate them from the love of God, Romans 8. latter
end of the Chap. but Christ does reconcile this world, he makes atonement for
them, he offered himself a sacrifice for them, he is a propitiation, not only
for their sins they did commit before conversion, but if after conversion
they sin through frailty and weakness, he is a propitiation for that too,
and none of their fins shall be laid to their charge; therefore says the text,
2 Cor. 5.19. Reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their sins to
them; and if he do not impute their sins to them, they shall all be saved;
but the Pelagians themselves do not affirm that all mankind shall be saved,
but acknowledge some of this world may perish; then let every godly man take
notice how they abuse this text of Scripture, to prove that Christ dyed for all
the world without exception; when both these texts speak of such a world as it
is impossible any of it should perish, that is, the world of the Elect; this
world of believers we read of, John. 3.17. Christ came into the world not to
condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved, that is, the
world of believers, as verse 16. That whosoever believe in him should not
perish.

Fourthly. There is the Reprobate world, Ioh. 17.9. I pray for these, I pray
not for the world; my kingdom is not of this world; and I have chosen you out
of this world, Jo. 15.19. and 1 Io. 5.19. We know says the Apostle we are of
God, and the whole world lies in wickedness; any understanding man may see
that this world spoken of in these texts of Scripture is not meant that world
which the other texts of scripture before alleged made mention of; but that
the other is the world of believers, and these of the reprobate world.

Object. 1 Timothy 2.4. Who will that all men should be saved.

Ans. To expound a text of Scripture in opposition to another, is the original
of many absurdities; of what dangerous consequence would it be to delude poor
souls, and tell them Christ died for all; for God would that all men should be
saved, and Christ gave himself a ransom for all? in opposition to Romans 9 18.
Whom he will he hardens, and verse 22. What if God will show his wrath? and
in Ioh. 12.39. They could not believe, for Esaias says, He has blinded their
eyes and hardened their hearts, and Mat 20.16. Many are called but few chosen,
so that if we compare this with Rom 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will, it is
plain he will all men should be saved, that is of all sorts; not only Jews,
but Gentiles; not only rich but poor; he will all should be saved, that is,
all the Elect, for, As I live, says the Lord, I delight not in the death of a
sinner, as in Eze. 18.23 32. But he will not all to be saved in respect of the
force and efficacy of calling and justifying them; this the Elect obtain, and
the rest are hardened. Romans 11.7. And God is not bound to give grace unto them,
and enable them to believe, he may say I made you able at the first to do what
I required of you and he may justly destroy the creature, if it do not that
which he made it able to do at the first.

Obj. But the promise of grare is universal.

An. To say that the promise of grace is universal, is false, yea contrary to
Scripture, Ge. 3.15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between
thy seed and her seed, speaking of the seed of the serpent the wicked, and the
seed of the woman the godly, there is a promise of Christ to the godly, but not
to the wicked; so see Gal 3.22. the Scripture has concluded all under sin,
that the promise of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe; if only
to them that believe, then the promise of grace is not universal without
exception.

Ob. To. 11.32. God has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all.

Ans. That is both Jews and Gentiles, the Scripture has concluded all under
sin, that he might have mercy upon all; that is not only upon the Jews, but
upon the Gentiles, but his meaning is not that all shall be saved, for then he
must contradict himself, in verse the 5. ver. 7. ver. 8. and in Chap. 9. and
Gal. 3.22. But will have mercy upon all, that is, all the Elect, for we must
not set this Scripture in opposition to others; the word All in Scripture does
not always mean the whole world, all mankind without exception; for to take
the word all so general in Scripture, we may from other texts of Scripture
prove that all shall be damned, as easily as any can prove from this, that all
shall be saved, as Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall turn into hell, and all nations
that forget God, take the word all generally, and we may conclude all shall be
damned, for all have forgotten God, and the text says, The wicked shall turn
into hell, and all nations that forget God; so Mark 16.16 He that believes
shall not be damned; but this text Romans 11 32. shows that all are shut up in
unbelief, therefore according to that text in Mark all shall be damned; so
whereas he says, That he might have mercy upon all, in Pro. 1.26. he says,
That he will rejoice at the destruction of the wicked, not that God rejoices at
their ruin as it is a torment and vexation to his creature, but as it is an
execution of his justice; can God save all and yet rejoice at the destruction
of the wicked, therefore of necessity we must understand it, that he might have
mercy upon all, that is upon all the Elect.

Obj. He that takes a sufficient ransom for all, and yet does not save all,
is unjust; but God takes a sufficient ransom for all, and get does not save
all. Ergo

Ans. The sufficiency of the ransom does not bind God to apply it to all; Show
me either where God is bound to it, or has engaged himself in such a bond;
Suppose a thousand men were sold for bondslaves, and ten thousand pounds
demanded for their ransom out of Captivity, and suppose one man should go,
and ransom five of that thousand men; and where as 10000. pounds is demanded
for all, he go and pay a thousand times as much for the ransom of five as
would have ransomed them all; and his intent in paying such a vast sum of
money above what was demanded, was but the ransom of five; and the intent of
him that receives the money is to release but five; Does the sufficiency of
this ransom bind nim that receives it to release all the rest? no verily.

So it is in this case, all were lost in Adam, and became bondslaves to sin
and Satan; in such spiritual bondage and Captivity, as no finite creature is
able to pay the ransom; Gods Law must be fulfilled, and his Justice satisfied;
None in Heaven or Earth could be found able to ransom lost mankind; The Father
he gave his Son to purchase a Ransom; the Son of God he paid a ransom, and he
paid a Ransom so much greater then the offense, that he paid that for a few,
that had been sufficient, if it had been the will of God, to have Ransomed not
only a World, but a thousand Worlds, and the Sons paying of it, and the
Fathers receiving of it was but for a few; Does the sufficiency of this Ransom
bind God to apply it to those for whom he did not receive it, no, it cannot be;
If a man that has many debtors will forgive one, is he bound to forgive all;
God he pays the Ransom himself; and is not bound to pay it for all, nor to
apply it to all.

Object. If Christ have not redeemed all, why do you Ministers offer Christ to
all?

Answ. Because it is unknown to us who they be that God has rejected; they
are known to God, but they are not known to us; And therefore in Christ's
stead we beseech poor souls to be reconciled, and offer Christ to all that
will accept him upon Gospel terms; but yet we propound Christ upon such
conditions as all have not, viz. To the humble soul, the hungry and thirsty
soul, Mal. 3.1. Ioh 7.37. And the weary and heavy laden soul, Matthew. 11.28.

Use. Did God of old ordain some to condemnation? This serves to condemn the
general Doctrine of the Prelates of late, who when they had come in the
Pulpit, would say that we are all sinners, but God in mercy has given us a
Savior, and so leave it; but they would seldom come to a search of the
conditions of their flocks; by laying open their misery out of Christ, and
showing them the absolute necessity of a Christ; and acquaint them with the
many rocks and dangers in the way to Heaven; and cry down their sins, their
Swearing, drunkenness, uncleanness, Sabbath profanation, as the Prophet
Isaias commands, Isaah 8.1. Cry aloud spare not, lift up thy voice like a
Trumpet, show my people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their
sins; Nay, did they not inhibit the Doctrine of Predestination to be taught
in Churches, under a pretext of driving men to despair; Seldom did we bear
them reprove, rebuke, and exhort, as 2 Timothy 4.2 It they did reprove, and
rebuke, it was the people of God, because they did not join with them in their
wicked Designs; And thus they would sad the hearts of the righteous, and
strengthen the hands of the wicked; whereas, it is the duty of a Minister to put
a difference betwixt the holy and profane, at Ezekiel: 44.23. And they shall
teach my people the difference between the holy and profane, and cause them to
discern between the unclean and the clean; they ought to make such a
difference as the people may discern between the good and the bad; to give to
every one their portion, comfort to whom it belongs, and terror to whom it
belongs; that they may show themselves approved of God, workmen that needs
not to be ashamed, dividing the word of truth aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. But alas,
whereas Ministers of the word should ^o burning and shining lights, Ioh. 5.35.
How many might we look upon in England that neither burn in Doctrine, nor
shine in their conversation; but are scandalous in their lives; In stead of
roproving sin, they would swear and be drunk, and unclean; And who set
worse examples in many Parishes then their Minister; and when the Lordsday
comes, if they did preach, it was to daube people with untempered mortar,
crying Peace, Peace, when they should have cried sudgement and damnation; but
oh! How sad will their account be at the great day, where the blood of their
flocks shall be required at their hands.

2. Use. Did God of old ordain men to condemnation? This dashes the opinion of
Pelagians, who hold universal grace, universal redemption, and universal
pardon; A Doctrine condemned by all reformed Churches, yea, such as once
pretended a tender Conscience; their Consciences are now grown so seared, as
they can join with the Prelates in this particuser; They would have smooth
things taught, and sweet notions; but take heed ye do not reprove sin, nor
admonish to duty, for you shall soon hear of us then; and why so? Christ died
for all. I find in Scripture that Christ dyed for his people; but I cannot find
in Scripture that Christ died for the Reprobate; that he died for his people,
is plain, Math. 1.21. He shall save his people from their sins, his people,
not the Reprobate, Ephesians 5.25. Christ loved his Church and gave himself for
it, that he might sanctify it and cleanse it; Mark, he gave himself for his
Church, and in the 10th. of John he says, he lays down his life for his
sheep, but he does not say he laid down his life for them that are not his
sheep; so in Esaias 53. For the transgressions of my people was he plagued; and
diverse other texts of Scripture I might allege, which plainly proves that
Christ dyed for his people, but they do not prove that he dyed for the
Reprobate; What a strange Doctrine is it that some broach, that Christ dyed for
the damned in hell, grounding it upon 2 Pet. 2. They deny the Lord that bought
them; which will appear very absurd, if we consider how they were bought.
They were bought externally, but that they were bought with the blood of Christ
cannot appear in the text. The Scripture shows that God does buy a people two
ways, either externally, when he brings them into the bond of an outward
Covenant, as he bought the Jews, Hoset 3.2. So I bought here to me for
fifteen pieces of silver, and a homer and a half of Barley. And God is said
to buy his people with the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18. These, which denied
the Lord that bought them were externally bought; They looked upon themselves
as bought, and others looked upon them as bought, but if they had been bought
with the blood of Christ, it had been impossible that they should perish; for
Christ says in Ioh. 10th I lay down my life for my sheep, and I give them
eternal life, and they shall never perish; And John 17.12. Of all that thou
have given me, I have lost none but the child of Perisition: From the word but
the child of Perdition, the Pelagians object, that Judas was given to Christ,
as well as the rest. I answer, that Judas was externally given to Christ as an
Apostle; but I deny that ever it was the intent of the Father in giving his Son
to dye, or the intent of the Son in laying down his life to shed his blood
for Judas, or that ever Judas was given to Christ as an elect vessel; for if
Christ had shed his blood for him, and he had been given to Christ as an elect
vessel, he could not have perished; for verse the second of this Chapter, We
read, the Father has given the Son power over all flesh, that he should
give eternal life to as many as he gave him; And seeng it was the Design of
the Father and the Son, to give eternal life to them that were given to
Christ. Had Judas been redeemed by the blood of Christ, and given to Christ as
an elect vessel, he could not have perished; Nay, had Judas been given to
Christ as an elect vessel, Jesus Christ would not have lost him; for so says
the text, I have lost none but the child of Perdition; so John 6.37. All that
the Father has given me shall come to me, And he that comes to me I cast
not away. Had Judas been given to Christ as an elect vessel, Jesus Christ
would not have cast him off; for all them that Christ did redeem shall be
saved, as Isaiah 53 10, 11. When he shall make his soul an offering for
sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the will of the
Lord shall prosper in his hand, he shall see the travail of his soul and
shall be satisfied; so Job, 3.24 He will mercy on him, and say, deliver him
that he go not down into the pit, for I have received a Ransom for him; If
the Father has received a Ransom, he will most certainly deliver such, that
they go not down into the pit; So, that if Christ had ransomed all, as the
Pelagians affirm, then all must be saved, but it is plain in Scripture, that
but a few are saved; and as plain, that Christ ransomed only the elect, and
that only the elect shall be saved by Christ, as Romans 8.30. Whom he
predestined, that is, them whom he predestined to life, them he called,
and whom he calls, he justifies, and whom he justifies, them he also
glorifies.

3. Use. Is for examination; Did God of old ordain men to condemnation; then
we should every one of us examine, whether we be in an estate of salvation:
When we hear some shall perish, me thinks every one should put it to the
question, whether I am one of then. When Christ said, one of you shall betray
me, every one began to question, is it I, so when you hear some shall perish,
me thinks every one should be ready to ^^y, is it I, oh! I pray God it may not
be I. How should this put you on, to give all diligence to make your calling
and election sure? 2 Pet. 1.10.

Object. But how shall I know I am none of those that God did ordain to
condemnation?

Answ. Whom God has elected and whom he has rejected we know not, as I told
you b^^^^e, neither is it necessary that we should know; but yet thou may
know for thy own particu^er, that God has predestined thee to life; First,
by thy effectual (...), those that he predestined to life them he called; I
mean not a bare outward call, but an inward call by the word and Spirit: When
God does not only by his word say to a poor soul as Christ did to Matthew,
when he sat at the receipt of the cusion^^, but inables the soul to arise and
follow him, as Matthew arose and followed Christ, Matthew 9.9.

It is a calling the soul from sin, from amongst the rest of the world unto
Jesus Christ, and inables the soul to follow Christ, examine thy self, Has
the Lord thus effectually called thee, that thou have left all to follow
Christ; this is a sign thou were predestined, for whom he predestinateth,
them he also calls, Romans 8.30.

Secondly, have thou true saving faith, justifying faith, whom he predestined
to life, he works faith in them, Acts 13.48. So many as were ordained to
eternal life believed. When God has a people to call home to himself, he
either brings them to the means, or the means to them; and those that do
belong to the election of grace believe, and the rest are hardened; Have thou
this saving faith, not a fancied faith, a dead faith, an easy faith; but
saving faith, such a faith as was wrought in thee by the word and Spirit with
power; such a faith as was not in the power to give, nor in thy power to
receive, until God enabled thee by his Spirit; then thy faith does evidence to
thee that thou art ordained to life; for whom he calls, he justifies, Rom 8.30.
And we are justified by faith, Romans 5.1. Not that the essence of faith
justifies; for it is the righteousness of Christ justifies, but faith
justifies instrumentally, in that it lays hold upon that which justifies the
righteousness of Christ.

3. Whom he predestinates to li^e, as he calls them and justifies them, so he
sanctifies and glorifies them, this sanctification is begun in this life; God
predestinates his people unto holiness; He chose us in Christ before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him,
Ephesians. 1.4. This sanctification is begun here, and shall be perfect in glory;
examine, have thou this evidence of thy election, thy sanctification? Art thou
holy? Is thy life holy? Do thou walk exactly, as the grace of God which
brings Salvation teaches, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
holily, righteously, and soberly in this present world, Tit. 2.11. This is
another evidence of thy election.

4. Use. Is Consolation to all such as find upon examination, that they have
good evidence of their election, all such as God have let read their names in
the the Book of life, you may go home and rejoice, and take strong
consolation, because God has predestined you to life, and your names are
written in Heaven: and if he has predestined you to life, and writ your
names in Heaven; Who shall be able to blot them out again? None in Heaven or
Earth shall ever be able to blot out thy name out of the Book of life;
therefore let us say with Paul, What shall separate us from the love of God?
Romans 8.35. All that men and Devils can do, cannot separate thee from Gods
love, nothing that ever has been, is, or shall be that can separate thee from
Gods love. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.
God has decreed thy salvation, and Gods decree shall stand, let men and Devils
say what they will to the contrary, Psalm. 33.11. The Counsel of the Lord shall
stand for evermore. It is as possible for God to deny himself, as it is
possible for thee to perish; for, We are kept says the Apostle, by the power
of God through faith to salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. And therefore as our Savior
Christ said to the seventie, Luke 10.20. Rojoyce not that the Spirits are
subdued unto you, but rather rejoice that your names are written in Heaven. So
say I, and more, rejoice not only that your names are written in Heaven; but
rejoice that your names are written in Heaven, and can never be blotted out
again.

Secondly, as I would have you rejoice, so I would have you also humble; Why
did God predestinate thee to life? what, because he saw thee better then
others, or because of unseen m^rits or works? no surely; before Jacob and Esau
had done good or evil says the Lord, Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated;
They were two in one womb, and God chose the one, and refused the other, to
show to us, that it is of his free mercy and grace, according to his good
pleasure; I knew says the Lord thou would transgress from the womb, Isay
48.8. And I called thee a transgressour from the womb; And Amos the 9.7. Were
ye not as the Ethiopians unto me, says the Lord; So, May not the Lord say of
thee, thou art a damned Creature, it was I that saved thee, thou were a lost
Creature, it was I found thee; thou had destroyed thy self, it was I said
Thy help in is me; thou layest in thy blood and filthiness, and no eye pitied
thee; it was I spread my skirt over thee, and washed thee from thy filthiness,
and entered into a Covenant with thee, It was of his free grace to predestinate
thee to life, and therefore be humble, and give him the glory of his free grace.

Thirdly, as it is your duty to rejoice, and to be humble, so also to be
thankful, that God should look upon you, and predestinate you to life: When
he passes by so many on the right hand, and the left, as the Scripture
expression is. There is but a remnant according to the election of grace, Romans
11.5. And that I should be one of them would the soul say, such a vild and
sinful wretched creature as I; Was there ever the like love? was there ever
the like mercy? May not Heaven and Earth stand amazed at it? Oh! what shall I
do to be thankful enough to this God? oh! you know your Interest is in
Christ, study praises and thankfulness, not a verbal thankfulness but a
real thankfulness, show it by your obedience, by your holy conversation; by
your walking suitable to your place, as in 1. Pet. 2 9. Ye are a chosen
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people, that ye
should show forth the virtues of him which has called you out of darkness
unto his mavelous light; so should Christians walk according to their place;
that God may be glorified by their holy conversation; God has chosen the
Saints to be holy, and called them to holiness, and commanded them, be ye
holy, for I am holy, and therefore the Saints should study holiness, and show
their thankfulness in a holy obedience.

5. Use: If God has of old ordained some to condemnation: then hence be you
exhorted, as you would be glad to know you are none of them, to give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet: 1.10. Not but that it
is sure in respect of God, but the meaning is, to use all means to make it
sure to our souls and Consciences.

But it may be you will say, why should I use the means, if God have decreed
I shall be saved, I shall, if he have decreed that I shall perish, I shall,
do I what I can, and use what means I can.

I answer, What have thou to do to pry into Gods secret Counsel concerning
thy election; though God has decreed to pass by some, yet he does not name
thee for one; but have appointed the use of the means, and call upon thee to
make thy election sure; so that it is thy duty to use the means, and leave
secres things to God; for God has appointed how long every man shall live, and
they cannot pass that time that God has appointed them, Job 14.5. He has see
his bounds that he can not pass; but withal as he has appointed how long
everyone should live; so he has appointed the use of the means for the
preservation and maintenance of life to such a time, as to dwell in houses,
wear clothes, eat and drink; will any man say, God has appointed my time
and I shall live that time whether I use the means or no; no surely, but will
use the means God has appointed; so God has appointed the use of I means
for the attaining the Knowledge of our election? Would we make it ture then,
we must use the means.

6. Use. I might use many motives to put you upon the use of the means, I
intend to speak but of one or two.

First, consider there is a possibility of making thy Calling and Election
sure; Why should the Apostle exhort to it, if it were not possible, 2 Cor.
13.5. Examine your selves faith the Apostle, whether you be in the Faith,
prove your selves, know you not your own selves Jesus Christ is in you, except
ye be Reprobates. Why should the Apostle exhort to try, prove, and examine
our selves, if it were not possible to know that our Calling and Election is
sure.

Secondly, consider thou can have no comfort in the neglect of the use of the
means but rather terror; because thy perseveting in the neglect of the use of
the means will rather evidence to thee, that thou art not Elected; for you see
Romans 8.30. Those he Predestined he called; that is those that God
predestined to life, he calls in his due time, and therefore we must look
for a call or not look to come into the Kingdom of Heaven; does God let thee
sit still in security in thy carnal condition under the means, many a hard
heart have been softened and many a blind mind enlightened, many a unbeleeving
soul have got faith in Christ in the use of means; and thou art a
hard-hearted Sinner still, have a blind mind still, lie in unbelief still, lie
frozen in the dregs of security. I tell thee if thou go on and die in this
condition, thou must be sure to perish, for thy persevering in this estate is
a sign that God did not decree to save thee. It will appear if thou compare
Acts 15.38. with John 10.26. in Acts. 13.58. So many as were ordained to
Eternal life believed thus, That whom God did Predestinate to eternal life,
he did predestinate to faith to believe in Christ And therefore in time the
Lord either sends the means to them or them to the means, and calls them and
works Faith in them; and on the contrary, when the Word proves a hardening, a
condemning letter to the hearers, when it is not a word of Faith to them: It is
a sign that God did not Predestinate them to life; for in the other text of
Scripture, John 10.16. Ye believe not says Christ, because ye are not of my
Sheep; this is the Reason they were none of Christ's sheep, and therefore
could not believe. And therefore take heed of neglecting the use of the means,
and rocking thy self asleep with this, If God have decreed I shall be saved I
shall; I tell you many have stumbled and fallen upon his Rock, and so may
thou if the Lord be not merciful to thee, Me thinks this should make such
tremble as are in the state of unbeleefe and impenitencie, and
hard-heartednesse under the means; how should thou tremble ever when thou
see any of thy Companions brought in to Jesus Christ, such a fellow Drunkard,
such a fellow Sweater, such a vild wretch the Lord brought home; and I am yet
lefe in sin, I am yet uncalled, unjustified, unsanctified, and yet I must be
called or he damned; for tall those that God predestinates to life, he calls
them in his due time; I me thinks, I fear God has not predestined me to
life, that he lets me alone in sin, oh Brethren! that you would consider of
these things; thou that art a husband, and look upon thy wife that is godly,
and thou act ungodly still; With what sad thoughts may thou think of this;
Oh! God has called my wife, and manifested his love to her, she has left her
former sins, and she walks close with God; but I am uncalled still, and I go
on in the ways of sin still; Oh! had God intended good to me, surely he
would call me, and give me a new heart; and with the like sad ^^^^ghts may
ungodly Wives look upon their godly Husbands; And ungodly companions, who it
may be have many a time scoffed and jeered at others of their companions,
because they have left their former sins, and walk more close with God, out
oh! they might look upon them with weeping eyes, it they would consider this,
that those that God predestinates to life, them he calls, and them he
justifies, them he gives faith too, As many as were ordained to eternal life
believed; and yet he has to this day let them alone in their sins to go on
after the hardness of their hearts: as if the Lord should say to them as to
Ephraim, Hosea 4.17. He is joined to Idols, let him alone, let them go on in
their sins, and perish in their sins, if they will die ungodly men and
women. Consider of this; They could not but mourn and lament their conditions;
and therefore let this Doctrine be rather an encouragement, to put you on, to
give all diligence to make your calling and election sure; then a ground of
presumption or despair.

FINIS.

