The PICTURE of a New COVRTIER drawn in a Conference, between, Mr. Timeserver,
and Mr. Plain-heart.

In which is discovered the abominable Practices and horrid Hypocrisies of the
Usurper, and his timeserving Parasites.

In which a PROTECTOR having been in part unvailed, may see himself discovered
by I. S. a Lover of Englands dear bought Freedoms.

Ezekiel. 28.15. Thou wast perfect in the ways from the day that thou wast
created, till iniquity was found in thee.

Prove. 24.24. He that says unto the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the
people curse, and Nations shall abhor him.

Psalm. 10.9, 10, 11. He lies in wait secretly as a Lion in his den, he lies
in wait to catch the poor, he does catch the poor, when he draws him into
his net. He croucheth and humbles himself, that the poor may fall by his
strong ones. He has said in his heart, God has forgotten, he hides his face,
he will never see it.

Printed in the year of Englands great touble and slavery, and are to be found
at the sign of the peoples Liberties, right opposite to the Usurpers Court,
1656.

A Conference between Mr. Time-server, and Mr. Plain-heart.
MY dear Friend, how is it with you? me thinks you look somewhat sad and
dejected, as if all were not well?

Plain-heart, Sir, I suppose I am a stranger to you, and therefore I wonder you
should salute me as your friend, or take notice of my sad looks: Indeed Sir, I
know you not; I am bold therefore to crave your Name?


Time ser. My name is Time-server; I was very well acquainted with you some
years ago.


Pl. h. I pray you sir, where?


Tim. Sir, in the Army, when the Engagement was made at Triplo heath, and the
Remonstrance at St. Albans; and at the signing of the Engagement to be true to
the Commonwealth, as established without King or House of Lords; then was I
intimately acquainted with you, and your Brother Sincerity, and all the rest of
those good souls, which endeavored Englands freedom; then I was as forward as
any to propose good things to make the Nation happy, and to secure the
Liberties of every English man: and to root out Monarchy, root and branch, and
settle the government by way of a Free State.


Pl.h. I perceive by what you have said, that heretofore you and I have been
acquainted: what is the reason we are not so still?


Tim. Indeed sir, the reason is, because the times are altered, for my care is
to comply with great men's actions, be they good or bad: When they were for good
things, then I like a son of thunder, cried down Oppression, whether it lay
upon the Conscience or the bodies of men? but especially that grievous burden
of Tithes, which the people were forced to pay to the National Ministry, that
I may seemed to hate with a perfect hatred, and made that an argument, why the
Old Parliament should be broken, because they had not removed that
insupportable burden: but when I perceived the General had changed his mind,
then I altered my course in the twinkling of an eye, and presently, that I
might keep pace with the times; I commended the thing that I once dispraised
and justified, that which I once condemned: so that having changed my
principles, and the place of my aboade, I am somewhat grown out of your
knowledge.


Pl.h. I pray sir, where is the place of your abode?


Tim. Sir, I am at present a Courtier, and dwell at White Hall.


Pla. Indeed that is a place which I have not been at great while, for I was
banished from thence, at the first errecting of the new Court: for none of my
name, viz. Plain-heart could abide there any longer, without making Shipwreck
of Faith and a good Conscience, in conniving at the great man's wickedness,
which is grown to that magnitude, that it may be descerned with out any
Spectacles. And more then this, I could tell you, which would make your great
Masters ears tingle, and you blush if there were but a dram of honesty in
either of you.


Tim. I pray you go on, and speak your mind freely, and I shall consider what
you shall say?


Pla. But sir, there is no wisdom in that, unless I were sure you are not a
Spy, or an Emisary, employed by his Tallness to ensnare the plain-hearted, for
he keeps a great herd of such beasts, who are to feign themselves just-men,
though when the plain-hearted cast their Pearls before them, they may turn
again and rent them; and therefore I am not free to discourse, unless you give
me assurance you will not betray me.


Tim. Sir, I can give you no assurance, but my promise and my oath that I am no
Spy, and if that will not serve, you may do as you please.


Pla. And that is not in my account worth two straws, for did not you Swear and
Vow, Covenant and Promise against those very things, that are now done by you,
and this accompanied with Prayers, Fastings and appeals to heaven, that God
would give Testimony to the sincerity of your intentions; and yet for all this,
you have dissembled with God and men, as thousands of this Nation can witness
and do with grief of heart, and sadness of Spirit; and therefore, why may you
not forswear your self and deceive me?


Tim. Sir, I can excuse my self very well from being a Covenant breaker,
although I have acted contrary to my former engagements, I being necessitated
to do as I have done: but it may be you will say the necessity was of our own
making, but leaving that I desire you to resolve me these ensuing questions,
which I shall propose for no other end then satisfaction.


Plain. If your Questions be of public concernment, I shall endeavor to
resolve them, come on it what will.


Tim. They are of such concernment, that they reach him which sits upon the
Throne, and the poorest Peasant in the three Nations.


Plain. Then go on and speak your mind freely, and though I have cause to
suspect your intentions, yet seeing we shall confer of matters relating to the
good of my generation, I am the more willing to proceed.


Time. Whether the General since he assumed the government of the three
Nations, or took on him that Protectoral Office, do in any way, in your
judgment differ from the King (except in name:) or the things so long
practiced by him.


Plain To which I answer, the difference that is lies only in this, that his
little finger is thicker than the Kings loins, as will appear by these
considerations. First, his imprisoning of men contrary to law, at his own will
and pleasure; yea, many of the Commonwealths best friends, and have kept them
in prison many months together without seeing the face of any accuser or
coming to any trial at law, the truth of which may be evinced by many
instances, viz Major Genesis Harrison, Major Genesis Ov^rton, Lievt. Genesis Ludlow,
Quartermaster General Courtu^y, Coll. Rich, Coll. Aldered, Coll. Burch, Lievt.
Coll. Lilburn, Major Wildman, Mr. Carry, Mr. Feake, Mr. Rogers, Mr.
Spittlehouse, Mr. Stirgion, and others, which I shall not name at present, that
are forced to drink of the same cup of his Will and Pleasure: so that we may
say, the King chastised us with Whips, but Cromwell chastises us with
Scorpions: Secondly, the King assumed a power to levy money upon the people
without their consent in Parliament, and in this Cromwell is not wanting; for
where the King raised a shilling without consent in Parliament, he raises ten
to maintain himself and family, and his Allies in pride pomp and pleasure; so
that he outstripeth him that dwelt in White hall before, in doing that the King
durst never do. Thirdly, The King dissolved but two Parliaments in 20 years,
but this strange Monster have destroyed 3. in less then 3 years, the first of
which raised him from a poor mean fortune, to be first the Captain of a Troop,
and then a Coll. and at last to be their General, who most unworthily turned
his batteries upon his Masters, by which act of his, the old proverb is
verified, That some bring up a Bird to pick out their own eyes. Fourthly, The
King sent out Fleets and Armies, with out consent in Parliament, as appears
by the business of Rochel and the Isle of Ree, for all which he was judged an
Offender, and lost his head as a Traitor to the Commonwealth: But in this,
O.P. is not behind his Predecessor (except in the punishment) who sent a Fleet
of ships to Hispaniola, to fetch some Spanish gold and silver, which was most
shamefully beaten by a few Cow-killers, and many of them slain if not all
perished, whose blood I believe wil^ly at Cromwels door. Fifthly, The King
stoped the free course of Law, that so his tyranny and Oppression might be the
better hid from the eyes of men; and in this O. P. has kept pace with the
King, for he put three Counselors into the Tower for pleading in Mr. Conys
Cause, that so he might not only stop the free course of the law, but also
fright the people from seeking any redress that way.


Tim. Indeed you have spoken plainly to the question, and doubtless, there is
some truth in what you have said? but his Highness having fixed a pair of
silver Spectacles upon my Nose, through which I discern his actions to be of a
better complexion then you have presented them: but my desire is to go on to
the next question?


Plain. Indeed sir, you are like to Pilates Soldiers, who although they were
convinced of the truth of Christ's resurrection; yet larg money made them say
the contrary: yet go on and propound your question?


Tim. The question is, whether his Highness have not sufficient warrant in the
scripture to justify him in the things he has done?


Plain. To which I answer, doubtless the scripture is so far from owning his
actions, or the things he has done, that they do condemn him for so doing; as
appears, Deuteronomy. 17.16. and 20. verse. contrary to which he has acted in three
things: First, he multiplyeth great revenues to himself: Secondly, he causes
the people to return to their old Egyptian bondage, ( viz.) the will of a
single person: Thirdly, He has exalted himself above his brethren; yea, above
his Masters. And in 2 Samuel 23.3. to which he is unsuitable in two things, for
says the Text, He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of
God, which he has not in all the forementioned things done; for had he feared
God, he would not have cast away his good old Cause and the interest of Gods
people. Secondly, nor have done so many unjust things as he has done.


Tim. I pray you sir, resolve me this question, whether the known or good laws
of England will not justify his Highness in assuming the government, and in
the things he has done for the maintaining of the same?


Plain. Sir, you may have an answer to this question, and fully satisfy your
self in four Which acts make it high treason to proclaim Charles Stuart, or to
set up any one man in the supreme Magistracy.
acts of Parliament, the one made in Jan. 30 An. 48. another in March
following, the third act in May 1649 the other in July 17. An. 49. besides the
body of the ancient laws of England for the violating of which Strafford,
Canterbury, and the very King of England suffered death; all which laws cry out
against your Master and say, that he had no encouragement from them to do, as
he has done: for they which made those laws did appoint them to stand in the
Gap, to keep out all such intruders, but he has trodden them down like mire in
the (...) if they were not longer useful, and they are so far from owning his
actions, or the things he has done, that they say he is a traitor for sodoing.


Tim. If neither the word of God or the laws of the Land will own his actions,
I pray sir, what will?


Plain. Sir, the Earl of Straffords instructions to the King, that grand piece
of state policy or machivils Prince will own his Lordships actions; they being
the fruits of none other, but such corrupt Trees; and doubtless his tallness
has consulted with them once and again, how he should manage his affairs, and
carry on his designs to enslave the people, and to make them vassals to his own
Will, Lust and Pleasure; and from them he has received more counsel then from
any divine Oracle; so that if Strafford were now alive, he must needs salute
your Master as his elder brother; for he has sucked the breasts of his mother,
and been baptized into the same spirit, even the spirit of oppression: but it
may be you will call for proof of this? To which, I answer, three things:
First, There is a Bookseller as I am informed, that bound up Straffords
Instructions for your great Masters use. Secondly, he was commanded to keep it
very secret, which intimates that he intends to draw the water of state
policy out of Straffords Wels: Thirdly, the actions he does and the measures he
makes to the people, do fully declare, that he measures by Straffords rule;
and there is a maxim in Muchivel, that he which knows not how to dissemble,
knows not how to rule: but your Master is excellently accomplished for the
business of dissembling; for he has the most excellent art of equivocation,
and can lie most misteriously; he can invent Engagements for the people, and
dispense with them when he pleases; swear and forswear as the wind turns for
his own advantage: he can turn up his eyes, and lift up his hands, and appeal
to heaven for God to witness to the sincerity of his intentions, and use sweet
and Saint-like expressions, as if his words were tempered with nothing but
Oil, Butter, and Honey, and cry aloud for the Cause of God, and the good of the
people; and all this to make himself great; and by good words and fair speeches
deceive the hearts of the simple: an excellent man to make a Prince according
to machivels rule: thus you have my persuasions concerning the last thing you
proposed.


Tim. I shall consider of what you have said, and if I find that I may be of
your mind, and keep my honor, and profit, and place, under his Highness; and
let me tell you privately, that I could say Amen to what you have said, were it
not that I love the honor and praise of men more then the honor and praise of
God. But I pray sir, resolve me this question: Whether his Highness may not
expect better success in these his late undertakings then that which befell
Strafford and the King?


Plain. To this I answer, that his success will be the same or worse if worse
can be, as will appear by these following considerations: First, he that walks
in Jeroboams sins, shall partake of Jeroboams plagues: secondly, he knowing the
judgments of God, that they which do such things are worthy of death, does
not only the same, but have pleasure in them which do them; therefore his
success will be the same, Rom 1.32. Thirdly, He that judges and condemns an
other for doing unrighteous things, and he himself do the same, doubtless he
shall not escape the judgment of God. Romans 23. Fourthly, if Strafford the grand
master of state policy could not keep his own head upon his shoulders, nor
escape the hand of vengeance, that God has stretched out against Oppressors:
Then doubtless the Scholar will not go free. Fifthly, If the King which was a
great student in the politics, yet could not keep himself from bowing down to
the block of destruction, that just reward for his unrighteous deeds; from all
which, I conclude your Masters portion will be the same, if not prevented by
timely repentance.


Tim. Sir, as to these thing, I will say more when the times are altered, for
you know my manner is to be for any thing that is profitable, although its
contrary to equity and justice, but we will pass to the next question. Whether
his Highness did not speak like a gracious man in reproving the last
Parliament for putting their finger on their brothers conscience?


Plain. To this I answer, his tongue was like a good Samaritan, but his heart
like a Jew, which have nothing to do with one another; he spoke like a Saint,
but acted like a Serpent, as appears in that, the same man which the Parliament
imprisoned for his conscience, has he imprisoned since for the same, and after
ten or twelve weeks restraint commanded him to be carried by his mercenarie
fouldiers to Portsmouth, and there snipt him and sent him to a remore Island to
be kept in straight and close imprisonment; and yet could reprove the
Parliament as confidently, as if they had committed the greatest abomination
in putting their finger, on their brothers conscience; although he can thrust
in his whole hand.


Tim. Sir, but what end should his Highness have in reproving the Parliament,
for that which I confess he himself has done since?


Plain. To this I answer, first ingenerall that his own Advantage was his end
more then any good to the freedom of men's consciences. 2. More particularly,
first, he knew he had dissatisfied many honest men by his first Speech, and
that there was none other way to draw them in, but putting on his old veil of
godly pretenses in speaking for liberty of Conscience, and reproving them which
would have infringed it. Secondly, that he might commend himself to the people,
as one that was tender of their consciences, and that his large hollow heart
could hold all that were godly, though differing in judgment, and that they
need not fear to put their trust under the shadow of his wings, for he was
willing to be their servant for their goods. Thirdly, that he might the better
persuade the people that Parliaments were of little use, as they might see by
the actions of the last, who spent their time about errors in Religion, and
neglected the taking away the great error in the state. Thus you have my
persuasions to the last question.


Tim. Sir, I see you are like your name, viz. Plain hearted, and that you are
not afraid to turn your inside outward, which is a thing that my soul dreads,
because all my beauty lies in the outside, you would hardly believe how the
news of the Protector being unvailed, made my very heart shake; also I must
tell you, I am more free to discourse in private than in public; therefore I
pray at this time resolve me this question: What the reason is, his Highness
put in execution that bloody Ordinance, which was made in 48 against the things
they call blasphemy and heresy?


Plain. Doubtless you are not ignorant of the great service this Ordinance
might do your Master, for it concludes a man to be an heretic, which holds
that a man is not to believe more than his reason can comprehend: Now this is
of singular use for your Master, for he that believes God called him to the
government, must believe more then his reason can apprehend. Secondly, he that
believes there is a spark of honesty or christian goodness in the great man
before mentioned, must believe more than his reason can comprehend. Thirdly, He
that believes that O.P. intends any good to these three Nations, he must
believe more than his reason can comprehend. Fourthly, He that believes England
is in a better condition, then it was in the days of the long Parliament, he
must believe more than his reason can comprehend. Fifthly, He that believes
himself and his posterity are any better than slaves, and mere vassals to the
will of O.P. he does believe that which he has no reason, for as you may
perceive by that which fell from his own lips, viz. That he had an unlimitted
power till he was pleased to limmit himself, in the paper which he calls the
Government: which puts me in mind of an old Maxim, that he which binds may
loose, and he that has power to loose can bind; from which you may easily
discern, that our Lives, Estates and Liberties depend upon his will and grace.
therefore he that believ^s we are any better than slaves, believes more than
his reason can comprehend; and therefore O. P. had need to make this Ordinance
pass for good law, that the people may be bound to stretch their faith beyond
their reason, that in so doing they may believe Cromwell to be that which indeed
he is not, an honest man.


Tim. Sir, I have a word to speak on my Masters behalf, and that is, he is
bound by his Oath to maintain all the Laws, Statutes and Ordinances as well as
any one of them; and therefore he must maintain this before mentioned.


Plain. Suppose that which you have said were true, yet you have not acquitted
your Master from being a transgressor for the act of Parliament, that
establishes two shillings six pence a day for the Horsemen, and ten pence a
day for the foot is already broken: and this is as good law as that before
mentioned (if not a great dealt better) yet your Master can dispense with his
Oath at this turn, and reduce the Horse to two and three pence a day, and the
foot to nine pence.


Tim. Sir, you endeavor to insinuate that my dear Master is partial in the
law, which is a thing that must not be admitted, for I can show you good
reasons of State, why the soldiers pay should be reduced.


Plain. Let me hear them, and I will consider them?


Tim. First, The soldiers being insensible of the grievous burden of Tithes
that the Countryman lies under; his Highness to make them, if not sensible,
yet conformable to the rest of their neighbors, thought good to take one penny
off ten out of the soldiers pay; that so they may, if they please, tell their
country landlords, we are become like you, for now we also pay Tithes.
Secondly, His Highness being necessitated to raise money to maintain his Court
in that splendour which becomes a Prince of his extraction; and in some
measure to be like the Kings of other nations; and let me tell you a Protectors
necessity is above law. Thirdly, There being many of the old soldiers which
served the Parliament against the interest of a single person, which now serve
him only for a present livelihood, which his Highness well enough perceiving,
took away part of that, that so he might be rid of them. Fourthly, That he
might ingratiate himself in the affections of the people, that rather than he
will oppress them, he will pinch a penny a day out of the bellies of the poor
foot soldiers; and if they will take care to keep themselves honest, he will
keep them poor; thus I have given you my reasons of State, to justify my
Master in taking off a part of the soldiers pay.


Plain. Let me tell you that you speak very much like a Courtier in what you
have said: and truly neither I nor my brother Sincerity, nor any of the good
honest souls that engaged with us in the late war, did ever think to have been
so absolutely cheated by you till we saw all your Prayers, Fastings, and
Appeals to heaven, turned into an Engine of State policy; and if these be your
Court tricks, I hope my soul shall never enter into your secrets; and truly my
bowels yerns for the poor soldiers, who have run so many hazzards, and fought
so many famous battles, stormed so many towns, waded through so many Rivers,
with the loss of limbs and blood; besides all the hunger and cold, and lodging
on the ground, which they have gone through, doing summer service in winter
season; and after all this, to have the tenth part of their pay taken away, and
spent upon your new Court, that the Gentlemen Ushers, and Gentlemen Waiters,
the Grooms of the Stool, Gentlemen Sewers, beside the Fiddlers, and others that
I could name, which shine in their gold and silver; and that this might be
maintained, the poor foot soldiers must contribute a penny a day, toward the
deffraying of this charge: but time calling me away, if you have not else to
say, I will be gone.


Tim I would have you resolve me this question, whether or not, it had been
more just and honest for his Highness to have reduced some of the great
Officers (which some think might be very well spared) and some of the pay of
them that remain, then to have taken three pence a day from the Horse and a
penny from the Foot.


Plain. To which I answer, it had been more just and honest so to have done,
but it would not have conduced so much to the settlement of his greatness,
which is a thing that must be prized and preferred before all the justice and
equity in the world: as appears, First, the Officers have taken a great deal
of pains and care to exalt him, and therefore he must take heed he does not
displease them, for fear they which did ex^lt should abase. Secondly, they are
content that he should have 200000. pound a year; and therefore he must let
them have good round sums. Thirdly, The loss of one Officer may be more
detriment to him and his affairs, then the loss of a hundred private men.
Fourthly, the private soldiers never found the sweetness of great revenue as
the Officers have done; and therefore they may part with their tenths with the
less grief: Thus I have given you my resolve as to that question.


Tim. Sir, I see you have some Inspection into our actions at Court, which
makes me the more willing to confer with you; and I desire you to resolve me
this question, which depends upon a saying of my Master to the godly people,
which petitioned him to make void the Ordinance of Blasphemy and Heresy; the
words were these, That if they took care to cleanse the Churches by
Excommunication, he must take the like care of the Commonwealth: My desire is
to know of you what you think his Highness will cleanse the Commonwealth of?


Plain. Truly Sir, you have put me to a stand, for I cannot imagine what he
should intend in that saying, for if he should cleanse the Commonwealth of
Hypocrites, then there would be one less at White Hall. Secondly, if he should
cleanse the Commonwealth of Oppressors, then the Broom would sweep it self
away. Thirdly, If the Commonwealth should be cleansed of Covenant-breakers,
then where would he find a habitation? Fourthly, if of such as devour the man
that is more righteous then himself, then our new Monarchy would receive a
blow? Fifthly, if the Commonwealth should be cleansed of such a fast and pray,
and under that pretense devour Widows houses, then it is to be feared, we
shall loose him? so that I shall lay down no resolve to this question; but
leave it for you to enquire of your great Master, what the Com-wealth shall be
cleansed of?


Tim. Sir, I could have given a better answer my self then this which you have
given?


Plain. I pray you Sir do, and I will consider it?


Tim. Sir, first, His Highness will cleanse the Commonwealth of her money,
the love of which is the root of all evil: secondly, he will cleanse her of
super fluons members, and send them to Hispaniola, either to be killed by the
Spaniards, or else to starve there for want of bread: thirdly, he will cleanse
the Commonwealth of Justice, that it shall be no more heard in our land:
fourthly, of the greatness of T^ade by letting in the French upon our Merchants
and Manufactors, that the French by having a free-trade may reduce the English
men to like poverty; and consequently to like vassellage with themselves: and
without doubt, the people being brought low, will be the easierly ruled:
Fifthly, he will cleanse it of the benefit of her known law, especially, that
which provideth against paying of Taxes and illegal imprisonments; witness his
dealing with the Lord Gray of Grooby. Sixthly, He will cleanse the
Commonwealth of Parliamentary Privileges, that they may be no more a burden
to him: and now I will proceed to may last question, whether or not you think
his Highness Kingdom will continue long?


Plain. To this I answer, his Kingdom is like to a man that is born of a
woman, which continues but a few days and is full of trouble, it came up like
a flower and will vanish like a shadow, and my reasons why I think so, are
these: First, because the Spanyard will not part with his Mines in the
West Indies, which was intended to be obtained for the support of this kingdom
of his. Secondly, General Blake is come home without his Plate-Fleet. Thirdly,
The City is not willing to part with much money upon trust, except the East
Indian Merchants have some more money in Controversy, which they are willing
to deposite in his hands, till they have wit to agree about it. Fourthly, The
peoples eyes begin to be open, and they can now see and do say there is no law
that requires Taxes to be paid. And upon that account many do refuse as justly
they may. 5. The soldiers grumble for the loss of the tenth part of their pay,
and are ready to serve a better Master if occasion be. 6. His own fears are
such, that he is a terror to himself, and dare not go forth without strong
guards to defend him; and as his fears increase, and his hopes fail, his
guards are strengthened; and doubtless if this new Government were of God,
there would not be all this stir to support it. Seventhly, Many of the Officers
and soldiers are so convinced in their Consciences that this kingdom is quite
contrary to the things they engaged for; that there is not one in five, that
will strike a blow to maintain it, if it should be put to a decision that way;
so that I am persuaded it is very crasie and will not continue long.


Tim. I must confess that when I consider of these things, it puts me into a
grievous agony, so that my bowels are pained, and my heart trembles, and my
bones shake at the very thoughts of an alteration: Alas, alas! what will become
of my dear Master, when his Kingdom is weighed in the Balance and found to
light? who will have the fine Houses, the brave Parkes, the pleasant Fields and
delightful gardens, that we have possessed without any right, and built at
other men's cost, who shall enjoy the delight of the new Rivers and Ponds at
Hampton Court, whose making cost vast sums of money, and who shall chase the
game in the Hara-warren, that my dear Master has enclosed for his own use, and
for ours also that are time-servers? Oh how shall we be able to see our
pleasant things taken from us, to be employed to better uses and all our
pleasant^ songs turned into mourning, and in Whitehall shall sound no more the
Trumpet, Harp, Lute and Organ, besides other instruments of Music in which we
took much delight; those will then be taken from us, and our brave Vellory of
singing Birds will be despised amongst the Commons; because it was built at
their great charges, and all our male dear Does and Prickets will then be meat
for Velder mouths; What cause shall we have to curse our Court Chaplines, which
sewed pillows of security under our arms, as if we should never be moved? who
made us believe that God had made an everlasting Covenant with us ordered in
all things and sure: and that our exaltation was no humane contrivance, but the
good pleasure of God, which said they brought us to this dignity, and that no
instrument formed against us should prosper, but we should long en^^y the works
of our hands, and always rancked us amongst the Saints, as if we had been
really godly; and as they tickled our ears with these sayings, even so the
Confectioners with their sweet meats, and delicious Wines did please our
pallates; besides all our other dainty dishes, fitly composed for carrousing
gallants, and dainty Ladies: Oh what will become of this courtly brood, when a
Commonwealth will be in fashion? and a Parliament to call all our actions into
question? how shall we answer one action of a thousand? Oh, misery to think!
and grief to consider our condition: the earth will shake at the sound of our
fall, and few will bewail our sad disaster, and one thing that troubles me
more than all the rest, which is this, that if I should alter my course, and
change my name from Time-server to Rofermation, yet none will believe me,
because I have betrayed the dear purchased liberties of my Country, into the
hand of an Usurper; and broke all my Engagements, performed none of my
promises; and when good men were sent to prison, I have given my voice against
them; so that I am exceedingly afraid, that all my feigned tears and long
prayers, frequent Fastings, solemn Oaths, large promises will signify but very
little; because we Time-servers gilded over all our unrighteous actions with
such lovely things, by which we have (...) deceived the good meaning people; so
that being once discovered we are quite undone; for doubtless the same measure
that we have made to others, will be made to us, even to be cut up from
cumb^ing the ground: And thus I have discovered my fears to you, and I pray
make a good construction.


Plain. Sir, you have made a very large complaint, and I must tell you, the
thing you fear will doubtless come upon you; for the wicked will be snared in
the works of their own hands, Psalm. 9.16. and taken in their own counsels, and
the cup which they have filled to others shall be doubled to them, to the
exceeding joy of the righteous, the very thoughts whereof makes my heart to
leap for joy, that the house of the wicked shall be overthrown, but the
tabernacle of the upright shall flourish, Prove. 14.11. and then shall I and my
brother Sincerity have our mouths filled with praise; when the captives shall
be released with honor, even them which suffer for bearing testimony against
your great Masters wickedness: Oh, the sweet peace of a good conscience, which
is a continual feast, its liberty in prison, its joy in adversity, life in
death; therefore lift up your heads you prisoners of hope, for the day of
Redemption is near, and then shall that word be verified, that the rod of the
wicked shall not always rest upon the back of the righteous; and though your
great Master may oppress for a time, yet he shall come to his end and none
shall help him: This is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage
of oppressors, which they shall receive of the almighty, if his children be
multiplied, it is for the sword, and his off spring shall not be satisfied with
bread, though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay:
he may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall devide
the silver: Men shall clap their hands at him, and hiss him out of his place,
Job 27.13. to the 23. The righteous shall see this and be glad, but the wicked
shall tremble and quake, when this great man's hypocrisy shall be fully laid
open and detected, and his secret disignes and his subtle contrivances to
vassellize the people shall be obvious to every eye, and every foul shall call
for his feather, which he has plucked from them by violence, to adorn that
despicable brood of vain Courtiers: and then all the time-servers will mourn,
weep and howl, for anguish of spirit, when they shall fall under
sequestration; glory be to Jehovah, that will bring down the mighty from their
seats, and exalt the humble and meek, even so let all thine enemies perish oh
God.


Tim. Sir, I can no longer stay, for my heart is sick, and my head is heavy
with the thoughts of these things; and I have nothing to comfort me but this
hope, that I shall go to my grave in peace before the evil day come, and so
farewell.


Plain. If you or your Master go to your grave in peace, then God has not
spoken by me: And so I take my leave, and remain an enemy to your Court, but a
friend to the Commonwealth.


Finis.
POSTCRIT.
Let none take an offense because the word Highness is used in this short
Tract, for it only is when Time-server speaks, whose proper phrase of speech
it is, and only such do delight to give flattering Tittles to men. And this
may suffice to satisfy the impartial Reader.

An Apendix to the proceeding Treatise, by which the Nation may see what they
expect from their new Courtiers: For doubtless, the disease which is begun in
the remote parts of this great body, will in time spread it self into the very
Heart and Head of the Commonwealth or Nation; for so it was not long since in
the West of England.

First, that an honest man being at law with one for a just debt, to the value
of sixscore pounds, his Adversary making application to major Genesis Disborrow,
the said Major Genesis sent for the Plaintive, who when he came was commanded to
desist his suit; the honest man replied, he could not do it, without wronging
himself and family; to whom the Major Genesis said, that he was a perverse fellow;
and he should go on with his suit this seven year if he would, but he would
promise him, he should never do good in it: and forthwith demanded a particular
of his Estate, notwithstanding the man was not within the qualifications of his
Instructions, nor was ever an enemy to the Parliament; and although his estate
was not above 40 l. per an. yet this Disborow was so merciless, as to Fine him
ten pound by the year to the Protector (so called) his use; a Commissioner
which sat with Disborow, being asked whether this was justice? he replied it
was hard measure; and if the poor man would refer it, he would undertake to
get off his Fine, which the poor man was forced to consent unto, though to his
great damage.

Another piece of injustice, as bad as the former, was; That there being one of
the late Kings party called before this Disborow, the man was asked, whether he
would desist a suit which he had in law against one who had made Disborow his
friend, which suit was for the value of four or five hundred pound? the man
said, that they might, if they would, by the same rule, take all that he had;
upon which saying without any more ado, this Disborow with the rest of these
new made Commissioners, Fined the man 30 l. by the year to the Protect. though
the man's estate was not 100 l. by the year: the man being astonished at this
tyrannical decree, and not being able to discharge his Fine, was forced to
desist his suit, and then his Lordship took him off 20. pound by the year, of
his Fine; and now he pays but ten. A third piece of this new kind of justice,
that the said Disborow did, was, That a certain man, whom I could name, had a
suit at law, for a sum of money lent out of his purse, was at the instance of
his Adversary sent for before Disborow, and forcibly brought by the mercenary
soldiers, and was kept in custody till he had condescended to their
unreasonble determinations, which was (...) take only his (...) money, with
the lose of the use and charges, which was much, by reason of the long
forbearance, and a chargable suit at law; but the man at first refusing to
submit to their corrupt wills: Disborow against the poor man's will granted the
defendant a reference, and put it two Gentlemen to determine the business,
which determination was this, either to take the old debt without use or
charges, or be sent beyond the seas, either to Jamaco or some other place: the
poor man being unwilling to be banished his native Country, was forced to
abide their Award. A fourth piece of the new justice which Disborow did, was
upon a Gentleman in the West, who being summoned before the Court creatures, or
new created Commissioners in the west parts, who being forced before them, he
was bold to ask them by what statute they did what they did to him? and was for
but asking that honest question, fined 200 l. by the year; but upon his
submission had all taken off, except 60 l. by the year, which the poor
Gentleman must pay, to maintain a Militia force to to make himself and his
country slaves: by all which instead of many more like instance of tyranny; you
may see now the poor people of England are fairly delivered from being
subject to a Parliament of their own choosing, to be slaves to Cromwell and his
creatures, which God nor man did never set over this Nation.

Finis.

