THE Conspiracy of the Wicked against the Just. LAID OPEN IN A SERMON PREACHED
At Eyke in Suffolk, Jan. 23. Anno Dom. 1647.

BY ZEPH. SMYTH.

Preached and published, to set forth the grounds why the wicked lay such
Crimes to the charge of Gods people, as they are clear of.

And they said, Come let us imagine some device against Jeremiah; for Law shall
not perish from the Priest, nor Counsel from the wise, nor the word from the
Prophet; Come, Let us smite him with the tongue, Jer. 18.12. And also they
being idle, they learn to go about from house to house, yea, they are not
only idle, but pratlers and busy bodies, speaking things which are not
comely, 1. Tim. 5.13. For they encourage themselves in a wicked purpose, they
commune of laying snares privily, and say who shall see them; they search out
Iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search, the inward thought of every one
of them and the heart is deep; but God will shoot an arrow at them suddenly,
their stroke shall be at once: they shall cause their own tongues to fall upon
them. Psalm. 64.5, 6, 7, 8. London, Printed by THO: FORCET for John Rothwell,
living in Pauls-Church-yard, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the
Sun and Fountain, in the year, 1648.

To all the Orthodox Christians, that are followers of the Lord Jesus Christ in
sinceririty, of the Town of Wickam-Market, in Suffolk; ZEPH: SMYTH wishes the
increase of grace here, and the fruition of glory hereafter.
FRiends, the most wise God, who knows what is best for his people, has so
ordered, that his people shall undergo bad report as well as good: for the
Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Members above the Head; It was the
Portion of Jesus Christ, and therefore well may befall his followers; I he
wicked will watch for occasions against the godly to make them odious; hoping
to justify themselves by charging others with such crimes, as they are guilty
of themselves. If they have any just occasion given them, through the failings
of any of Gods people, or the discovery of any false hearted Hypocrite, How do
they joy at it; If they have not just occasion: they will charge them with
things that they are clear of; The grounds why they do it, you may please to
read in the ensuing Sermon; which though I have passed the bounds of modesty,
to make thus public in these Times, in which the stomachs of men are so full,
that they loath the honey-combe, and the word of the Lord as a reproach and
derision daily; yet I have diverse Reasons for it, which I crave leave to
conceal; Sure I am, it is a Doctrine suitable to the times, to be both Preached
and printed; It concerns that sin which cries to Heaven for vengeance; and
is a great cause of our Lands trouble; It is true, I have put it forth
unpolished, as it was delivered unto a plain Auditorie; and though not so
large as it was delivered publicly; yet here is the sum of it in brief; if
any in the perusing of it expect high strains, and strong lines, and the words
which man's wisdom teaches, for such I have labored in vain; If it find
hard entertainment amongst them which have curious Pallets; If I should please
men, I were not the servant of Christ; if it be hated amongst liars and
slanderours, it is no wonder; For he that does evil hates the light, Ioh.
3.20. If any mislike Jesus Christ or his followers the worse, because they are
reproached in the world; Such as refuse Christ Jesus, because of a face
buffetted and spit upon, may want of a Savior and perish miserable; For all
that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. And
through many tribulations enter into the Kingdom of God. But if this plain
Sermon may but learn any poor soul a piece of Heaven, even any thing of the
good old way I am satisfied; I commit the success to God, and present these
lines to you, with my earnest desire and prayer to God for you, that you may be
saved, though the weakest, and most unworthy of all the servants of Jesus
Christ.

ZEPH. SMYTH.

The Malignants Plot. OR, The Conspiracy of the Wicked against the Just.
PSALM. 35. part 11.th verse. They laid to my Charge things that I knew not.
THis Psalm was a Psalm of David whom though he were a man according to Gods
own heart and walked close with God; yet he was a man of much troubles in
this life and often in great dangers; and as Gods providence does not free his
People from trouble but preserves them in all their troubles; so did God
preserve this servant of his in the midst of all his troubles; and as God will
be sought for that which he promises unto his people; so the Prophet David
does not in his trouble sit still and neglect the use of the means, saying,
GOD has promised deliverance and he will deliver whether I use the means or
no; but the Prophet uses the means, he seeks unto God in his troubles; the
Prophet was in great straites at this time when he put up this Prayer unto God,
expressed in this Psalm, by reason of Saul and all that took part with him, did
furiously persecute David, digging Pits and laying snares for him without a
cause; and the Prophet in this Psalm makes his cause known to God entreating
the Lord to plead his Cause and let his enemies fall into the Pit they dug
for him.

And the Prophet in making his moan to God, complains to God of their Cruelty
in seeking his woe by bearing false witness against him, as does appear in
the Text, False witnesses did rise up against me they laid to my charge thing
that J knew not.

Whether we read the words, They asked of me things I knew not; or according
to the translation, They laid to my charge, it bears all one sense, and
therefore I intend not to spend time about that but hasten to the matter -- The
words bear this sense, David's enemies did out of cruelty and malice against
him intending him mischief, charge him with such things as he never did,
things that he was clear of; the words then holding forth a Crime charged upon
the Prophet they afford these Considerations; First, the person charged with
the Crime, David. Secondly, the persons charging him, Cruel witnesses, false
witnesses. Thirdly, the Crime, though it is not specified what things in
particular but in general, things which imply several though such things as
they thought to have prevailed with against David. Fourthly, David's innocence,
things that I knew not.

My Doctrine I intend to insist upon from the words for the present, is this;

Doct. That it is many times the portion of the godly in this life to have such
Crimes laid to their charge by their Enemies as they are clear of.

My method in handling of the Doctrine, God assisting, shall be this. First, to
prove the truth of the Doctrine by Scripture. Secondly, to show you the grounds
from whence it arises. Thirdly, why God does permit it; and fourthly, make
application.

The truth of the Doctrine you see plain in the Text, and as in the text so
the Prophet has many expressions to this purpose in the Psalms, see Psalm. 41.
Fifthly, my enemies speak evil of me, saying, When shall be dye and his name
perish, David's enemies were so bitter against him, that they spoke evil of him
with the tongue, and nothing would satisfy them but his life; when shall he
dye end his name perish. Verse. 6. If he come to speak with me he flatters but
in his heart, he heapoth Iniquity, and when he comes abroad he tells it forth;
when they come to the Prophet, then they flatter as if they would comfort him
and bemono his Condition; but hated him in the heart, and look what they in
their hearts did imagine of the Prophet that they tell abroad for truth; so see
Psalm. 109.3. They compassed me about, says the Prophet, with words of hatred,
and fought against me without a Cause, what words were these living words as
appear, verse. 2. There was malice in the heart and it vented at the Tongue;
when their is malice in the heart of a Man or Woman, then they plot which way
to make their neighbor odious, though without cause; And as this was David's
Portion, so it was Jobs also when his three Friends came to comfort him, in
stead of Comforting of him, they Judge him and Charge him of that which he was
clear of, as Job 22.5. Is not thine Iniquity great, say they, as if they
should have said, Thou are a great sinner and now God has met with thee, it is
thy Sin have brought this upon thee and now God lays open thy hypocrisy,
But they Charged him falsely, for God did it to him; and as it was Jobs Portion,
so Jeremiah goes not Scot-free, so Ierem. 18.18. Then they said, come let us
imagine some device against Jeremiah. The Lord by the Prophet prefigures the
ruin of the People, under the parable of the Potters broken vessel; and the
Lord threatens to depopulate them, and to take away his Ordinances from them,
if they did persist in doing evil in his sight; They were so miraged against
the Prophet for this, that they are resolved they will be reveaged on him;
then said they, Come let us imagine some device against Jeremiah, for the law
shall not perish from the Priest, nor counsel from the Wise, nor the Word from
the Prophet, Come let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed
unto any of his words; as if they should have said, What does he threaten us,
Come we will make him as bad as we are, let us slander him, let us falsely
accuse him, we are men of credit, and shall be believed whatsoever we say of
him, let us smite him with the Tongue, and what followed you may find in
Chapter the 20th. And it has not only been the Saints portion to have such
things laid to their Charge as they are clear of; but it befell our Savior
Christ when he was here upon earth, in Matthew 8. in verse 3. He was called a
Blasphemer in verse 11. He was called a friend of Publicans and Sinners, and in
verse 34. He was called a Conjurer; and if the head do not escape what can
the members go free, no the Disciple says CHRIST is not above his Master, did
they not call John Baptist a Devil, Math. 11.18. I pray see what the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 6.8. We says the Apostle approve our selves to be the Ministers
of Jesus Christ by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as
deceivers and yet true; in patiently bearing bad report as well as good report,
which show it is the portion of the godly Ministers as well as People to
undergo bad report as well as good, you see the truth of the Doctrine is
clear to me in the next place to show you from what grounds this arise, that
the Enemies of the godly should Charge them with things they are clear of.

1. Reason. It arises from the godly man's avoiding the way of the Wicked;
because others are not as bad as themselves and walk in the same way of
Iniquity, that they themselves do walk in, therefore they are offended at
them; this you may see 1 Pet. 4.4. They think it strange says the Apostle,
that ye manne not with them to the same excess of Riot; therefore speak they
evil of you, that is the ground from whence it ariset; it is a wonder to them,
they think it strange, as if they should say, What shall none be saved but
such as pray, and read and run after Sermons, and are so exact in their lives
as such and such are; What not allow us now and then to swear an Oath, now and
then to tell a lie, now and then to be Drunk, now and then to play the good
fellow; nay are they so stricke we will smite them with the Tongue; we are
resolved we will make them more odious then they make us; and the ground of it
is, because they have the way of a godly man. The Prophet David's expression is,
They that reward me evil for good are my Adversaries; because I follow
goodness, Psalm. 38.20. That it the ground whence it arises, because I follow
goodness the wicked does not so much hate the sin that they see in a godly
man; for they will approve of the same sin in their Companions; but they are
glad if they see any misdemeanour in a child of God that they might reproach
them, because they labor after that which it good. And hence it comes to
pass, if they see no just cause why they should reproach a child of God, that
they will invent something against them; their hearts are so bitter against
that of God that they see in them.

A second ground from whence it arises, it the Hipocrifie in the heart; there
is so much hypocrisy in the hearts of men and women, that they think all is
well with themselves, they have no need of Repentance of Reformation of life,
they are good Men and Women, and have hearts as good as the best; like the
Pharisees, justify themselves before men, Luke 16.15. but they are soon ready
to judge others, to be very wicked and in a bad case; The ground of their
judgeing and condemning of others is the hypocrifie, in their hearts they judge
not themselves; the Pharisee had a good opinion of themselves, and therefore
condemned Christ and his Apostles; this is the Reason why people many times
spic a fault in another, it may be where none is, because they cannot spy out
their own, as our Savior Christ says, Mat. 7.11. Why see thou a moate in
thy brothers eye and perceivest not a beam in thy own; for truly if people
would search at home, they would not be so ready to condemn others and
justify themselves.

A third ground from whence it arises, is the malice and envy in the hearts of
people against the godly, if envy be in the hearts of men, unless God
qualify them with grace it will vent out; Saul envied David, and see what
plotting there was against him, how was David hunted up and down from place to
place; the Pharisces envied Christ, and see how it breaks out into action, how
did they reproach him, and how often did they seek occasion against him; the
Devil after he was fallen did envy man's happiness, and never left tempting
till he had destroyed the whole race of Mankind; the envious man is not
satisfied, unless he see his neighbor fall, the Jews envied the Prophet,
Ier. 18.18. and they say, Come let us smite him with the tongue; hence it comes
to pass, if the Minister of the word touch the Conscience of a natural man,
and touch where it is galled a little, the envy in the man's heart will break
out one way or other.

A fourth ground from whence it arises, is their judging of the godly to be as
bad as themselves, there is many in the world like the Devil, measures every
bodies corn by their own bushel. You may remember in the first of Job, when
the Lord said unto Satan, have thou not considered my servant Job, there is
none like him on the earth, a just and upright man, one that fears God and
escheweth evil; says Satan: What does Job fear God for naught, have not thou
blessed him with substance, but touch his body and goods and see then if he
blaspheme thee not to thy face, the Devil knew he was so wicked that he would
have done it; and he judges Job to be as bad as himself; Saul he did envy
David in his heart and sought his life, and he judged the same of David, called
him his enemy, and thought he had sought his life; for many in the world are so
^^lde, that if they have occasions of sin offered they do not resist, and
measuring other folks cloth by their own yard, they think others will do so
likewise; hence it comes to pass, that those that are Adulterers and
Fornicators themselves, will soonest charge others with it, that are clear of
it, and most commonly they that are most suspicious of the chastity of others
are naught themselves, this is one ground of the wickeds charging of the godly
with such things as they are clear of, their judging others to be as bad as
themselves.

A fifth ground from whence it arises, is the godlies refusing to consent to
do those wicked actions, to which the wicked tempt them, this we may see in
Joseph, Genesis 49. 7th. Joseph, Mistress intices him to commit filthiness with
her, in the 8th. verse, we have Joseph's refusal, alleging this reason, How
can I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God, a gracious
expression, and without all question this Joseph had the fear of God before
his eyes, but what did follow, you may see in the following part of the
Chapter, she would violently have urged Joseph to commit wickedness with her,
gat hold of his garment; but he having the fear of God before his eyes
refused, and because he would not fulfill her wicked desires, she tells her
husband, that Joseph came in to lie with her, and she lift up her voice and
then he fled and got him out; she charged him with that which he was clear of
because he did not do the wicked act to which she tempted him; so the wicked
charge the godly many times with such crimes as they are clear of, because
they consent not to do that to which they are tempted; hence it comes to
pass, if a man refuse to be drunk with a company of drunkards, they out of
malice will be ready to charge him with drunkenness; so if he refuse bad
company, and frequent the company of the godly, they will be ready either to
charge him with keeping bad company, or gibe at him for holiness, only upon
this ground the not consenting to those wicked actions to which they are
tempted.

A sixth ground from whence it arises, is the desire of wicked persons to have
it so, the wicked joy at the falls of Gods people, and they desire such
occasions to triumph over them; Let them not says the Prophet, ah so would we
have it, Ps. 35.25. What would they have they would have occasion to rejoice
over him, they would have had that true which they did falsely charge the
Prophet with in the Text; the wicked when they falsely accuse the godly, they
show what they would have; and out of their desire to have it so they watch the
steps of the just; the wicked watches the just and seeks to slay him, Psa.
37.32. That is the end why they watch the steps of the just, that if it be
possible they might slay him, and therefore the Prophet prays, verse the 19.
of this 35. Psalm. Let not them that are my enemies unjustly rejoice over me;
Let them not joy over me, as if I were guilty of that which they charge me
with; It implies that the wicked will joy if they have occasion given them; and
they are so impudent that they will rejoice without also, as if they had a
cause given them; therefore it much behooves a gracious spirit to walk so
exact, as the wicked may not have just occasion to rejoice over them; and to
desire of God so to direct them in his way, as they might not occasion the
wicked to triumph, in Psalm. 38.12. says the Prophet, They that intend me
evil talk wicked things and imagine deceit continually, and in verse the 16.
Hear me speedily least they rejoice over me; for when my foot slipeth they
magnify themselves, as if they had said, Lord if thou now do delay to help,
then my enemies will triumph as if thou had forsaken me; for it is their
joy, if they see me halt, and to this purpose the Prophet prays, Psalm. 127.
verse 11th. Teach me thy way oh Lord, and lead me in a right path; because of
my observers, who were those observers the Prophets enemies, such as charged
him with such things as he knew not, as verse 12. give me not unto the lusts
of my adversaries, for there are false witnesses risen up against me, and such
as speak cruelly. And truly Gods people had need pray with David, That God
would lead them in a right path; for the wicked joy if they do stumble, and if
they do not stumble and give offense; then because they would have it so they
will bear false witness against them, as if they should say, we would have
it thus, come let us tell it for a truth, whether it be so or no; so that you
see one ground from whence it arises, that the godly are charged with things
which they know not is the desire of the wicked to have it so.

A seventh ground whence it arises, is the malice of Satan against the godly,
he will falsely accuse the godly himself, and he has not lived five thousand
and odd years for nothing, but that by this time, nay long ago he taught his
scholars some of his cunning; and they through the corruption of their hearts
are so tractable to learn the Devils art, that they are very exact in this
piece of service to accuse the godly, and charge them with things that they
knew not.

A eighth ground from whence it arises, is rash judgment, the wicked judge all
to be as bad as some, and hence it comes to pass if a professor fall into a
sin, they are ready to say of all that profess Christ they are all alike;
when David fell, the enemies of God blasphemed not that wicked people hate the
sin, for they can allow the same sin in themselves they condemn in others;
but they are enemies to true Religion, and are glad of any occasion to speak
against Religion, saying, this is your Religion and this is your profession;
but let me tell such thus much, that religion that teach men to be wicked is
naught, and to be cried down; and in some causes a man may justly charge the
failings of people upon their religion, as to instance, if I see a Antinomian
that denies the moral Law to be a rule of life to a believer, swear, lie,
slander, neglect holy duties, I may justly say to such, this is your Religion;
for if they take away that Law that forbids swearing, and lying, false witness
bearing, and command the true worship of God; then by what Rule shall such
people lead their lives; for it is true, the Law is ended to a believer, as a
Covenant of works to seek righteousness and salvation by the doing of it;
but it is not endad as a rule of direction for the well ordering of our lives;
so that when such as deny the Law to be a Rule of life live contrary to the
Law; I may justly say such a religion, such actions; and thus I might instance
concerning diverse other Religions; but when a man's religion teaches him nothing
but holiness, to give himself only to God, and cry down all appearance
whatsoever, if such a one fall into sin take heed of charging it upon his
religion, for God will not put it up at thy hands; Ezekiel. 36.23. I will
sanctify my great name amongst the heathen whom ye have polluted; The heathen
charged all the wickedness they see amongst the Jews upon their God and
religion; as if they should have said, I warrant they have a good God, and a
good religion that they are so wicked; well says the Lord, are ye so ready to
charge all upon me, and upon religion, I will be even with you, I will before
I have done with you make you to know I am the Lord, and that religion teach my
people no such things; so say I, you that charge all the falls of professors
upon God and upon religion, God will be even with you; and he will make you
know before he have done with you, that the fault is to be charged upon the
wickedness in their hearts and not upon religion; -- Suppose God does now or
then discover a hypocrite, or now and then let a dear child of his fall into a
sin, this is not a sufficient argument to fall upon religion, and say, who
would be of such a religion, except their religion do allow them in such
actions; then we must know that all that profess religion are not truly
religious; for there are many that preach Christ, and profess Christ, that
Jesus Christ will not own at the last day, Matthew. 7.^1. The stony ground made
glorious shows, and yet came to nothing, Math. 13. And many says Christ shall
seek to enter in and shall not be able, Luke 13.24. therefore the backslidings
of some and falls of some is no argument to prove all are such; for there are
some God will keep by his power through faith to salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

Objection. But you will say why does God permit wicked people to lay to the
charge of the godly such things as they are clear of, God if he pleased he
could prevent it, and stop the mouths of the wicked; that they should not be
able to speak against his children.

Answer. As all things work for the best to them that love God, so this works
for the good of Gods people; God does permit it for the good of his people, and
thus he frustrates the hopes of the wicked, they intend evil against the
godly, and God disposes of it for good; as Joseph said to his brethren, you
intended evil against me and God disposed of it for good; So may we say to
such as falsely slander Gods people, you intended evil against the people of
God, but God disposes of it for good; there is a five fold good that God brings
out of it to his people.

First, God does by this means humble them, and brings them to examine what is
amiss; so that though they be clear of that crime laid to their charge, yet
they will then examine whether there be nothing else amiss betwixt God and
them, they will search their hearts and walk more humble, and cleave more
close to the Lord. Secondly, God does by this means bring tthem the oftener
upon their knees, to seek unto him, to plead their cause, and to clear their
innocence; how often did the Prophet seek unto God when the wicked did falsely
accuse him; how do he make his moan at the throne of grace unto God,
beseeching him to plead his cause; and to keep him close in his way, that the
wicked might not rejoice at his downfall; so when Gods people sees that it is
that which the wicked would have; that which is their joy to see the godly fall
into such and such a sin; then the godly will pray more earnestly with David,
Lord lead me in a right path because of my observers; then they will be
earnest with God to keep them from falsing into that sin that the wicked
desire they might fall into, and this is a second good that comes of it.
Thirdly, God does use the teproach of the wicked as a preventing medicine
against that crime which the wicked lay to their charge, the godly have
unrenued nature as well as renewed, and if God should leave them never so little
to themselves, they are not their own keepers, they might fall into that sin
which the wicked lays to their charge, and every godly man and woman may say
when they are falsely accused, it is Gods mercy that I did not fall into that
sin they lay to their charge; had God left me to my self I might have been
guilty of that crime they lay to my charge; and God does use wicked peoples
tongues as a warning against such a sin; that when they see how the wicked
joy at a brat of their own hatching; then they consider, if the wicked thus
joy without a cause, what would they do if they had just cause; well, by the
help of God this shall be a warning to me for ever to watch against that
sin; for the time to come I will pray more against that particular sin then
I have done, and watch more against that sin then I have done, through Gods
help they shall never have occasion to rejoice over me in that kind; truly I
verily believe many a child of God can say by experience, I should never have
prayed and watched against such a sin so much, had not God used the tongues
of the wicked as preventing Physic; I know not my own heart, but that I might
have fallen into such and such a finne, had not God by this means hedged up my
way with thorns, and this is a third good comes of it. Fourthly, God does by
this means exercise the graces in his people by letting them undergo bad
report as well as good report; he tries whether they will cleave close to him
in all conditions, as Psalm. 44.15, 16, 17. Confusion is daily before me, shame
has covered my face for the voice of the slanderer and rebuker, though all
this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, not dealt falsely
concerning thy Covenants. Fifthly, God does by this means teach them how to
judge of others, when they are falsely accused for the time to come, they will
not receive a false report against their neighbor, they will know the truth of
a thing before they believe it, and they know how to comfort others in the like
condition; and thus God disposes of it for good, and thus God makes the wicked
the servants of his people, in that very thing which the wicked think to wrong
them most in; for he uses the wicked as the rod and wisp, to scour off the
rust of their graces, and to correct their security, and when the rod has
done its office then it is thrown into the fire; and thus you see how God
disposes of the wickeds false accusations of his people for good.
1 Use, It then informs us, that it is no new thing for the people of God to
be falsely accused; It was the device of the Devil! long ago to accuse falsely
as soon as there was a World, and man was created and placed in Paradise, he
accuses God to man by possessing our first parents, that God had not dealt well
with them in denying them to cate of the tree of Knowledge, of good and evil;
and truly the devil has not lived five thousand and odd hundred years for
nothing; but the same devil that at first accused God to man can do so still,
and if he will accuse God falsely, no marvel if he teach his scholars to
accuse Gods people falsely; We find it was David's portion, Christ's portion, the
Apostles portion; and what do you think as the devil grows old he grows
childish, and forgets how to teach his scholars the same lessons now he did a
great while ago; no surely, as false accusations have been the portion of Gods
people formerly so it may be still, and therefore if such a thing happen, let
not Gods people carry themselves so, as if some strange thing happened to them.

2. Use, It informs us what desperate wickedness and malice is in the hearts
of wicked people against the godly, which appears by their desire to rejoice
over the godly for their infirmiries, they watch for occasions, and if they
cannot find occasion, then they will invent something against them; charging
them with things which they knew not, but I leave this and come to a use of
instruction, which concern both the accuser and accused.

First, if it be so that Gods people may be falsely accused, this should teach
the people of God these lessons; first, take heed that ye give not the wicked
just occasion to rejoice by not walking as children of the light; for if they
watch for occasion, and will falsely accuse without a cause, what would they do
if they had a cause; seeing they wait for a opportunity, how does it behoove
Gods people to walk exactly, as Goll. 4.5. Walk wisely toward those that are
without and Ephesians. 5.15. Take heed ye walk circumspectly what ever others do,
Ye that are children of the light, ye that are the Lords redeemed ones, take
heed that ye walk circumspectly, walk so as ye may not give just occasion
to the wicked to open their mouths against religion.

But may some say, though the people of God walk never so exactly, yet the
wicked will charge them with things which they know not.

Then first consider, though they do, yet it will afford the peace of
Conscience when the enemy falsely accuse thee; truly it will be very
comfortable for a poor soul to say in such a condition? Well, they lay to my
charge things that I knew not of.

Secondly, consider it will shame your enemies in time when you walk thus
exactly; when they are found liars and slanderers, and backbiters, then they
will be ashamed; and again thirdly, Such exact walking will in time stop the
mouths of wicked people whether they will or no; they shall in time be driven
to confess, well, we made account to have triumphed over such a one, but now
we see we are mistaken, as 1 Pet. 2.15. By well doing ye put to filence the
foolish people; so the people of God by exact walking will in time silence the
wicked.

The second thing that this Doctrine should teach the people of God, is how to
carry themselves as they ought under false reports; but you will say, How
should a child of God carry himself under false reports, so as he may not
dishonor God in that condition.

I answer, First Gods people should bear reproach patiently, Jesus Christ is a
very good pattern for the Saints to imitate in this particular, he did no
wickedness, neither was there any guile found in his mouth, and yet the text
says, Matthew 8. That he was called a blasphemer, and a friend of Publicans and
sinners, and a Conjurer, and one that casts out Devils by the help of the
Devil; and yet our Savior Christ we cannot find he answered one word again;
the text says, When he was reviled he reviled not again, when he suffered,
he threatened not but committed it to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet.
2.23. Herod delivered him up, Judas betrayed him, Pilate condemned him, they
spit upon him, crowned him with thorns, bare false witness against him, put
him to death, and yes he prays, Father forgive them they know not what they
do; So the like we see in Stephen, in Acts the sixth, There rose up false
witness against him; and said they heard him speak blasphemous words against
Moses, and against God, and yet for all this they bear false witness against
him, and in justly condemned him to death, and stoned him with stones; He
prayed, Lord lay not this sin to their charge, Acts 7.59. These are good
patterns for the Saints to follow in all their reproaches from the wicked; and
there are diverse motives may be to the godly as encouragements to this duty of
bearing the reproaches of the wicked patiently.

First, no false reports of men can take away Gods love from them, when the
wicked have villified them what they can, spoke all manner of evil of them to
make them odious to others; yet still God loves them, still God says, He that
touches you, touches the Apple of his eye, Zech 2.8. And since thou were
precious in my sight thou were honorable, and I have loved thee, Esaias 43 4.
What a comfort is this unto a child of God, when the wicked have done against
them what they can, though they should study which way to make them as odious
as they can, yet all their plotting against them cannot take them out of Gods
heart. Secondly, consider this is a less affliction then God may lay upon
them, God may try them with other manner of sufferings then these; as the
Apostle says, Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin;
God may call his people to lay down their lives for Christ's sake, and to
forsake all enjoyments under Christ, and grace for Christ's sake, and the
testimony of a good Conscience, and it a godly man cannot bear these less
afflictions patiently, how shall they bear greater afflictions patiently; as
Ier. 12.5. If thou have run with the foot men, and they have wearied thee,
how shall thou match thy self with horses; So if thou can not bear less
afflictions patiently, how will thou bear greater afflictions patiently. When
they bare false witness against Stephen, he did not say as many a rust an
will do if they be angered, well, I will be revenged of such a one, I will
have his blood for this; no, he prays, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge; Did he bear false accusation, and death it self so patiently, and
shall not the godly bear the lesser patiently.
Thirdly, let the godly bear the reproaches of the wicked patiently; because
God will one day clear their innocence, if not in this life yet at the day of
Judgment, at the furthest, God will not leave them in the hands of the wicked,
nor condemn them when the wicked judge them, as Psalm. 37.33. Then the godly
shall stand and the wicked shall not be able to stand; these considerations may
provoke the people of God to bear reproaches patiently.

Secondly, such as would carry themselves aright under false reports must walk
humbly; It does not become a gracious spirit to be proud though they be clear
of that which is laid to their charge, least God should give them up to the
will of their enemies; God he teaches the humble, guides the humble, dwells
with the humble, and in all conditions it becomes Saints to be humble, and
especially when they lie under reproach.

Thirdly, as humbly, so watchfully; It becomes the godly to make the false
accusations of the wicked their warnings. Oh may the soul say! I see what they
would have; I see what they would do if they had just cause; well, I will be
more watchful against that particular sin.

Fourthly, as watchfully so thankefully; thankefully will you say? What shall I
bless God that I am falsely accused. I answer, thou have cause to be thankful
in a twofold respect, First, that God has kept thee from that sin they lay
to thy charge; alas, if God should leave us never so little to our selves we
do not know our own hearts, we might be as bad as the worst of all.
Secondly, there is cause of much thankfulness that God makes the mouths of
the wicked as a warning against such, and such a sin.

Secondly, it is for Instruction to all those that are so ready to charge the
people of God with things which they are clear of. Let it teach them to take
heed how they falsely accuse any of Gods people; First, consider what a great
sin it is, a sin against the 9th. Commandment; Thou shall not bear false
witness against thy neighbor. It is a sin makes a man resemble the Devil,
the Devil is called the accuser of the Brethren, this sin argues a divellish
nature, it is such a sin as plainly discovers there is Murder in the heart.

And know thus much, that God hears all thy reviling of his people, all the
secret malice in the heart, and all thy secret speeches against any of Gods
children; all is known to him, thou would be loath to speak that of thy
Neighbor if he were present, that thou do speak behind his back; but God
heard it though thy neighbor did not, and God knows of all the malice of thy
heart, and will one day bring it to light.

And as God knows it, so he takes it as done to himself: Jesus Christ is a
fellow sufferer with his people in all their wrongs, in all their afflictions
he is afflicted, Isaiah 63.9. And he that touches you touches the apple of
his eye, Zech. 2.8. And if God take the wrongs done to his people as done to
himself, woe to them that wrong his people.

Secondly, as consider what a great sin it is, so consider what shame will
follow when God cleares the Innocence of his servants; What a shame it will be
for people to say, now we see such and such are liars, slanderers, backbiters,
and who would trust them.

Thirdly, consider God will never put it up at your hands, your false accusing
of his people, Psa. 101.5. Him that privily slandereth his Neighbor will I
destroy. God will be even with them, if they seek to destroy their Neighbor
and God he will destroy them.

But may some say; ay, but sometimes we may speak the truth as well as slander
them, and what then, shall we hold our peace.

I answer, First it is a great sin to accuse falsely; and as it is a great
sin to accuse falsely, so in some respect it is a great sin to speak evil
of them, though the things be true they speak of.

As in case the party they speak of be absent, and yet they will speak evil
of a man, this is, though the thing be true, backbiting; and see what shall
become of such, Psalm. 140.11. The backbiter shall not be established upon the
earth, such a one may think to get up by his neighbors ruins but it will not
do; God has threatened he shall not be established upon the earth.

Secondly, in case though the thing be true, yet if the parties have been
deeply humbled for it, judge themselves for it, lie upon the rack pleading for
mercy, and groaning under the burden of it; and is left in a wilderness of
sorrow, at such a time to revile them, and abuse them for that which is true,
it is a sin with a witness, this is to add affliction to the afflicted, as
Psalm. 69.26. They do persecute him whom thou have smitten, and add sorrows
to him whom thou have wounded; at such a time to speak to the disgrace of
another is a sin with a witness.

Thirdly, in case it be a near friend that they revile, as Psalm. 41.9. My
familiar friend whom I trusted, which did eat at my table has lifted up the
heel against me, though the thing should be true, yet when one pretends
friendship and flatter to a man's face, that they might revile him behind his
back without suspicion, this discovers the envy in the heart, and aggravates
the sin.

Object. But some may say, we may speak any thing, that is true; Shall your
precise people do what they list, and no body shall control them.

I answer, in some causes a man may not speak of the failings of a child of
God, and in some causes they may speak of their failings?

First, a man has no ground to speak evil of those things which he knows
not, in things that we do not know are true, and in things that we do not
know whether ever there were any such thing intended by the parties or no, we
have nothing to do to condemn them for. I would feign know by what rule,
either from the light of nature or grace, a man is to be condemned for things
that he knows not; this is to take Gods place to judge the heart of another,
it is God only that searches the heart; and he has reserved it to himself
to judge the heart; therefore says Christ, Judge not that ye be not judged,
Matthew 7.1. And God does severely punish such as take his work out of his
hand; for with what Judgment ye judge says Christ, ye shall be judged, and
with what measure ye meet it shall be measured to you again. God bids us
look to our own hearts, but he forbids us judging the hearts of others; 1
Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time until the Lord come who will lighten
things that are had in darkness, and if God will do it, what have any to do
to take his work out of his hands. Secondly, the godly are not to be evil
spoken of for mere frailties, and infirmities, which either they take little
notice of, or else they groan under the burth^n of, to speak evil of them,
or bring a odium upon them for such things, it argues that there is malice in
the heart. Thirdly, the godly are not to be evil spoken of publicly by
discovering a secret, when the revealing of it can no way make for Gods glory
or the good of others, but rather bring dishonor to God; it does argue that
that man or woman which discovers it, is a slanderer, and malicious in heart
against the other party; for says the wise man, He that goes about as a
slanderer discovers a secret, but he that is of a faithful heart concealeth a
matter, Prove. 11.13. So they are branded out to be malicious slanderers,
unfaithful; It is a sign of a wicked heart when people are glad of any thing
to set upon the stage against a child of God. Fourthly, the godly are not to be
evil spoken of behind their back, for as I told you before, God will not put
it up at their hands, the backbiter shall not be established upon the earth.
Fifthly, the godly are not to be evil spoken of for their goodness, their
exact walking with God; but this I have spoken of already, and therefore I come
to show you in what causes the failing of Gods people may be spoken of.
First, when private admonition will do no good, but they remain obstinate
still, the Lord Jesus Christ says, Matt. 18.15. Tell thy brother his fault
between him and thee, and if he hear thee thou have won thy brother, if
hear thee not tell it to two or three; and if he be obstinate still tell it to
the Church, I pray you mark the words, our Savior does not bid them go and
tell scoffers and jeerers at holiness of it, that will endeavor thereby to
make God and Religion odious, but tell it to the Church that they might come
under the Censure of Excommunication, until such time as they acknowledge
their fault, and give satisfaction to the godly concerning the crime; for let a
thing be never so true of a child of God; they that will speak of it so, as to
set upon the Stage to Gods dishonor, the disgrace of the Gospel, and the
prejudice of Religion; truly it is a sign they never yet truly learned what
belongs to religion or humanity either.

Secondly, in things that are too apparently evil, that is, things that are so
open and manife^t, that all the Country takes notice of it, then they are to
be reproved openly.

Or thirdly, when the speaking of their failings make for Gods glory, and the
good of Religion; In these causes the failings of the Godly may be spoken of,
so as those that speak of them observe these cautions; First, that the ground
(...) his speaking of his neighbor be nor revenge, and a desire to disgrace
the other party; for if these be the grounds, though the thing they speak be
true, yet their end is evil, and God will find it out and punish it, I pray
see Prove. 24.17. Be not thou glad when thy Enemy falls, let not thy heart joy
when he stumbles; least the Lord see it and be wrath, and turn his wrath from
him to thee, if God will bring that plague upon thee that should have come upon
thy Enemy, if thou had not joyed at his downfall; What do thou think
God will bring upon such, as joy at the downfall of such as are no Enemies.

Secondly, It must be spoken at a fit and convenient time, Prove. 29.11. A fool
poures out all his mind at once, but a prudent man keeps it until
afterward, that is, until a convenient time, until his speech may be
seasonable; Words in season are as Apples of Gold in pictures of silver; and
truly, such in the text, are branded with folly as not seasonable in their
talk of the failings of the Godly; but every body with them is alike, and all
times alike for to speak of the failings of the godly; A fool poures out all
his mind at once.

A fourth Use, is for exhortation; First to those that falsely accuse the people
of God, my exhortation to you is to repent of this your wickedness in time,
least you repent too late, Consider what great bills of indictment, the great
God of Heaven and Earth will bring against you at the great day, when every
secret Plot shall be discovered, Eccles. 12. verse the last, God will bring
every work to Judgment with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil,
how will you be able to stand then when the Lord shall judge between thee and
thy neighbor? for this Judge he will judge according to knowledge, and
righteously. Magistrates may be so corrupt as they may justify the wicked and
condemn the Just; and take part with the wicked against the people of God; but
God will be a upright Judge, he will judge according to righteousness between
man and man, yea, he that inhibits Kings to wrong his people, Psalm. 105.15. He
then will Judge between Magistrates and his people.

Secondly, be exhorted to repent of it, so to forsake it, and because it is so
bewitching a sin, as that when a man or woman is once accustomed to it, it is
a hard matter to refrain it, I shall propound to you the means you are to
use, as ever you would avoid this sin of slandering your Neighbor.

The first badge of God to show thee the vileness of thy heart in this
particular sin; It is such a sin as makes a man like the Devil; a sin
that brands a man or woman to be wicked, a sin not only against the Moral
Law, but against the Law of nature; Such show the nature of Devils, and wild
beasts, rather them the nature of men, that will falsely accuse their Neighbor
and secke the blood of their neighbor; and yet it is a strange thing to see
how common this sin is in our days, people do not account it as a sin;
and therefore there is great need to beg of God to convince thee of the
vildnesse of it.

Secondly, deal by your neighbor as you would be glad he should deal by
you, Matthew. 7.12. Consider thus with thy self, would I be glad my neighbor
should have dealt by me as I have dealt by him? would I have been glad that he
upon no better grounds then I have accused him of a crime, he should have
accused me of the same crime.

Thirdly, another means to avoid this sin, is to avoid idleness; for
Idleness is the root of this and many other gross sins; The idle person is
at leisure to attend the Devils business; and hence it comes to pass there is
so much running from house to house with tales and false reports as there is;
because there are so many idle persons that are at leisure to attend upon the
Devils business. And truly I think there is small reason, why any should
credit what the Idle person speaks, when the Apostle exhorts the Saints, 2
Thessal. 3.6. To withdraw themselves from them, and in the 10th. verse flatly
commands, That if there be any will not work that they should not eat; and
verse 11th. For we hear there are some work not at all but are busy bodies,
busy in meddling with other folks matters, as 1 Timothy 5.13: They being Idle
learn to go from house to house, yea, they are not only idle but pratlers,
busy bodies; These are the fruits of idleness running about with tales and
lies, and flanders, and therefore the way to avoid it is to avoid idleness.

The fourth and last means is, if thou would not falsisie or unjustly any
way accuse thy Neighbor, then search thy own heart first, and see what is
there; and so I come to the use of Exhortation in general, as it concerns
both the godly and wicked, be all hence exhorted to take heed how you receive
false reports of the godly; For we must know, it is as great sin to receive
false reports as to devise them, and tell them forth, Exodus 23.1. Thou shall
not receive a false tale nor put thy hand with the wicked to be a false
witness. God have forbidden the receiving of a false tale, as well as the
telling of it; we use to say of thieves that the receiver is as bad as the
thief; so the talebearer is as bad as the tale teller, nay worse, for a man
may be a thief without a receiver, but there can be no talebearer without a
receiver; the hearing of false tales as well as the telling of them is
abominable unto the Lord, and it is a sign that such men and women are liers
and dissemblers themselves that receive false tales, Prove. 17.4. The wicked
heed false lips, and the liar hearkens to false lips, I pray mark who they be
are so ready to receive false tales, the wicked, the liar; and on the contrary
it is a mark of a child of God, Psalm. 15.3. He that slandereth not with his
tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor nor receives a false report against his
neighbor, he that does so and so shall be a Citizen of Sion; and one thing is
not to slander or receive a slander; and on the contrary they that tell false
tales, and they that delight in hearing them shall be excluded this City of
Syon, Revel. 22.15. Without shall be dogs, inchanters, whoremongers,
murderers, Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes lies, I pray mark, not
only those that make them, or those that devise them, but those that love to
hear them told forth.

Truly I hope I shall need no other argument to Gods people but these two to
avoid talebearers, the first is, consider such people are very destructive to a
Kingdom, a Town, or a person to a Kingdom, Ezech. 22.9. You find it one of
the great sins set down in the Catalogue, for which God would take vengeance
upon them. In the one, they, says the Lord that carry tales to shed blood,
and as to a Kingdom so to a Town, Prove. 26.20. Where there is no talebearer
strife cease; It implies thus much, that where there is talebearers there is
strife, strife between man and man, and many times a whole Town at variance,
and as to a Town, so to a person, Levit. 19.16. Thou shall not go about with
tales among thy people, nor stand against the blood of thy neighbor; so that
in that it seckes the blood of another, it is destructive to a person.

My second motive is, Consider what a sad fight it would be to see a child of
God in a Devils habit; but you will say, how shall we avoid hearing of tales;
I answer, Solomon tells you how, Prove. 25.23. As the North wind drives away
rain, so does the angry countenance the slanderous tongue; if you sharply
reprove them and not hearken to them; they will soon be weary of the trade,
it they can no longer utter their ware, and the reason why there is so many of
that trade, is, because they have so many merchants to put off their ware to.

I might here, it time did permit show how this concerns Magistrates, if Gods
people may be falsely accused, it concerns them to take heed how they join
with the wicked against the people of God; Magistrates are to justify the
righteous and condemn the wicked, Deuteronomy. 25.1. They ought to imitate God in
Judgment, to judge according to righteousness, and not for favor and
affection; but I leave this and conclude with this word of consolation to all
those that are falsely accused, James 5.9. Behold the Judge stands at the
door; Take my brethren the Prophets for a example of suffering adversity, and
of long patience which have spoken in the name of the Lord, and Matthew. 5. 11th.
Blessed shall ye be when men revile you and persecute you, and say all manner
of evil against you for my sake falsely, rejoice and be glad, for great is your
reward in Heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.

FINIS.
THE Skillfull Teacher.

IN A SERMON PRECAED At CHILISFORD in Suffolk, July the 16. Anno 1648.

BY ZEPH. SMITH.

2 TIMOTHY 2.15. Study to show thy self approved of God, a worke-man that
needs not to be ashamed, dividing the word of truth aright. LUKE 22.32. When
thou art Converted, strgenthen thy Brethren. LONDON, Printed by THO: FORCET for
John Rothwell, living in Pauls-Church-yard, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the sign of the Sun and the Fountain, in the year, 1648.

THE Skillful Teacher.
PSALM. 51.13. Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked.
THis Psalm is David's penitential Psalm, in which after Nathan came to him
and reproved him for his sin of murder and adultery; he confesses his sin
and petitions to God for mercy for himself and the Church; for himself to
verse 18. And for the Church to the end of the Psalm; In the first part of the
Psalm we have his confession of his sin, and his Petition for pardon to the
8th. verse; In which we may take notice of the Prophets disease; viz. A
wounded spirit for sin. Secondly, that he seek for as a special remedy to
cure this disease, Is sin pardoning mercy, loving kindness, and multitude of
mercies; The Prophet knew his sin was great and acknowledged it to be so, and
therefore he calls for much sin-pardoning mercy, entreating the Lord to wash
him thoroughly from all his sins, and especially from these foul sins of
murder and adultery.

God does not only wound the Spirits of his people for sin at their first
Conversion; but also if afterward they fall into sin as did David, he brings
them back again through a wilderness of sorrow to comfort. Peter denied his
Master after Conversion; God brings him to his comfort through the rivers of
bitter tears, he wept bitterly; and do we not see the like in David; I do
not say their sins after Conversion seperates them from the Love of God, for
nothing can separate true belcevers from the love of God, Rom 8.38. But though
their sins cannot separate them from Gods love, yet they may deprive them of
the comfortable enjoyment of the light of Gods countenance, and God ordinarily
brings them through a wilderness of sorrow to the sight of it again; it cost
them many a prayer and tear, many a sigh out of bitterness of Spirit. As
David, who pleads for pardon of sin, and earnestly desires God would assure
him of his pardon of his sin before he had the comfort of it; for though
Nathan said to him when he tried out I have sinned; thy sin as pur away from
thee, thou shall not die; yet the Prophet cried out of the bitterness of his
soul, and went up and down with a heavy heart a long time before he had the
comfort of it; as appears by his prayer, verse the 8th. Make me to hear of
joy and gladness that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice; David's
sinful carnal joy proved the breaking of his bones, at last though sin be
sweet at the committing, yet the lash that follows will be as bitter as gall
and wormwood; Well might the Prophet have said, Oh! accursed be that pleasure
that ends in such pain, that procures such sorrow, and hinders me of such joy,
as now a drop of it would be better to me then a whole World; though sin has
broke my bones, yet a drop of that Joy would cause them to rejoice -- and in
the 10th. verse, The Prophet prays for sanctifying grace, he does not only
pray for pardoning grace but purging grace; Create in me a clean heart, a
sincere Convert will not only desire to be justified but to be sanctified; to
be holy as well as happy, to have the power of godliness as well as the form,
As if the Prophet should have said, Lord, I do not only desire to have my
sins pardoned but my heart purged; my heart is filthy and polluted; Oh create
in me a clean heart; -- In the 11th verse, He petitions for deliverance from
that Judgment that fell upon Saul; viz. Rejection, Cast me not away from thy
presence; as if he should have said, Lord, my predecessor Saul; he sinned
against thee and thou did reject him for a King; and if thou should reject
me, and say; because that David has done this I will reject him, he shall be
King no longer; he shall rule the people no longer, thou wort just and
righteous, but oh-cast me not away from thy presence, -- then in the 12th.
verse, He prays for that ancient comfort he once enjoyed; Restore to me the
joy of thy Salvation, the word Restore to me does implie, that the Prophet
once had it and now had lost it; whence we may observe, that though sin do
not deprive the godly of Heaven, yet it will deprive them of their joy for a
time; Sin will bring a child of light to walk in darkness and to see no
light of comfort, as the soul shall be constrained to say, What have I to do
any more with Idols, Hosea 14.9. If these sorrowe^ and afflictions and horrors
be the effects of sinful joy, What have I to do with sin, I will return
to my first husband, for at that time was I better then now; Oh restore to me
the joy of thy salvation, and establish me with thy free Spirit.

Secondly, hence we may observe, that when a soul is sensible of the absence
of the light of Gods countenance, it is restless until God speak peace; how
restless was the Spouse in seeking after Christ, Cant. 3. How restless was
the man, Psalm. 88. How restless was David in the absence of the light of Gods
Countenance, he washes his couch with his tears, his moisture was turned into
the drought of Summer, he roared all the day, he bewailes his sin, he cries
out; Make me to hear of joy and gladness, restore to me the joy of thy
Salvation; He sets a high price upon it and accounts it better then life,
Psalm. 63.3. He promises that if ever God will speak peace to him he will
walk more exactly for the future, as in the text, Then will I teach
transgressors thy ways; as much as if he should have said, Lord, if ever
thou will speak peace to my soul, if ever thou will bring me out of these
straites my sins have brought me into, Lord if ever thou will pardon my
sin and receive me into favor, then I shall be able to teach and instruct
others experimentally, I shall be a fair warning to others to avoid the like
sins I have committed; and I should be able to comfort others in the like
distress I am in.

Then shall I teach, The Scripture makes mention of the teaching of God, the
teaching of Christ, and the teachings of the Spirit, both ordinary and
extraordinary; so of the teachings of men, such as are good or bad, such as
teach the word of the Lord faithfully, and such as teach fantasies of their
own brain and lies, and delusions; Amongst men there are two sorts of
Teachers, such as are publich Teachers; and Private, that is, such as instruct
their Families and Neighbors, as occasion is offered in the ways of God,
though not in a public Ministerial way, as they, that are set apart for the
public Ministry. I find not in Scripture that David took upon him the
Office of the Priest or Levites, and taught publickely as those set apart for
the work; Then the Question is, what he means by teaching here, when he
says, Then will I teach. I answer, The Prophet David taught in his Family, 2 Samuel 6.20. He returned from dancing before the Arc to bless his house, that
was, to pray with them and instruct them; Secondly, as a King, occasionally by
instructing his Subjects as occasion was offered, Psalm. 40.9. I have declared
thy righteousness in the great Congregation; and thirdly, He taught as a
Prophet, infallibly inspired and moved by the holy Ghost to pen part of the
holy Scripture. The duty of teaching lies upon every Master of a Family to pray
with them, and Catechize them, and instruct them in Gods ways, according to
that ability God has given them; though not the like duty as a King, as David
did, or as one infallibly inspired now as David was then; Neither does this
text prove as some grossly imagine, that all believers may teach in a public
Ministerial way; for if all be Teachers, Who shall be taught? But the sense of
the text runs thus; then, if God will restore to me the joy of his Salvation,
and bring me out of these straites, then I shall according to my place
experimentally show to others how bitter sin is, and how good God is in
pardoning sinners, according to the expression of the Prophet, Psalm. 66. Come
all ye that fear the Lord, and I will tell you what he has done for my soul.

In the text we have David's promise, and David's Prophocie; his Promise, then
will I teach; his Prophecy, and sinners shall be converted unto thee; or here
is the duty he binds himself to perform, and the success he promises to
himself, that which we are to insist upon, is the duty which the Prophet
binds himself to perform, in which consider first that it was, -- Teach.

Secondly, the Doctrine, he will teach -- the ways, that is, Gods ways.

Thirdly, the persons he will teach, -- the wicked.

Fourthly, the time when he will teach, -- then will I teach; that is, when
God speaks peace to him, and restores to him the joy of his Salvation, then
he will teach others; from whence in the first place we learn this point of
Doctrine, That those persons whose spirits God have wounded for sin, and
afterward restored to comfort are best able to teach and instruct others: Then
will I teach; as it he had said, then shall I be able to teach from my own
experience. It is those that are taught themselves are best able to teach
others; Thou that teach another says the Apostle, teach thou not thy
self? A man that is not might himself, nor able to teach himself is not fit
to teach others: When thou art converted says Christ to Peter, strengthen thy
Brethren, Luke 22.32. As if he should have said, Peter, when thou have
experience of Gods goodness thy self, thou will be able to teach others; then
strengthen thy weak Brethren. Those that God has brought under the terrors
of Conscience, they knowing the terror of the Lord will from their own
experience acquaint others with it, 2 Cor. 5.11. And they having comfort from
God are best able to comfort others; Who comfort us says the Apostle in all
our tribulations, that we might be able to comfort others, 2 Cor. 1.4. As much
as if he should have said, until a man have experience of Gods goodness
himself, he will not be able to comfort another; and the experience of Gods
goodness makes a man able from experience to comfort others; therefore God
comforts his in all their tribulations that they might be able to comfort
others.

1. Reason of the point is, because such can teach others experimentally; for
the Lord having opened their own eyes, and showed them the horrible
filthiness of sin; what Monsters they are, how by nature they are children
of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. That they have defaced the Image of God, and have the Image
of Satan; that they lie in their blood and filthiness, Ezechiell 16.8. And
showed them the fountain of Christ's blood, Zechariah 13.1. In that day there
shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem to wash in, for sin and for uncleanness; and made them tun to
this fountain with David, Purge me, wash me; they can experimentally declare
this to others.

Secondly, they know by experience what folly and madness it is to run on in
the ways of sin, and they can inform others of it; Paul he had found the
service of sin a fruitless service himself, and he appeals to others,
whether they had not found it so also, as Romans 6.21. What fruit found ye in
those things whereof ye are now ashamed; Those that know the folly, and
madness, and fruitlessenesse in the service of sin, they can experimentally
inform others.

Thirdly, they have felt the burden of sin themselves, and they can declare
to others what a pressing burden sin is; sin is such a burden as will sink
the soul if it be not disburdened; When the weight of sin oppressed David's
Conscience, he cried out, My iniquities are gone over my head, they are a
burden too heavy for me to bear, Psalm. 38.4. When the Lord intends good to
the foul, he lays the burden of sin upon the Conscience, that it might
run to Christ who only can ease it; Who also invites such to come to him,
Math. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
ease you. Ye that labor under the burden of sin, and cry help, I sink, I
perish, I perish, them Christ eases, and then they can tell their friends and
Neighbors experimentally sin will press the sinner, if ever God intend good
to the soul here; for though some are pressed with the burden of it more then
others, yet all feel the burden of it in some measure; and if they feel not
the pressing burden of sin here for their good, it will press them to hell
for ever without hope of recovery; and therefore, woe to those men and women
that Jesus Christ eases not of this burden.

Fourthly, they have been made sensible of their spiritual bondage, and
servitude to sin and Satan; A man that has been in Captivity, and made a
slave to his Enemies, can tell by experience whet bondage and captivity is. We
are all by nature bondslaves to sin and Satan; we were borne slaves and have
lived slaves, a worse slavery then the Turks or any other Nations slavery; but
natural people are not sensible of it; It is those that have been made
sensible of it that can best inform others about it.

Fifthly, they have tasted the bitterness of sin, and they can declare to
others what bitters fruits sin brings forth; though sin be in the mouth as
sweet as honey, yet in the belly it will be bitter; afterward it brings
bitterness; David found it true by experience, when he cried out, my sin is
ever before me; Ever when I lie down and when I rise up, where ever I am, or
what ever I do, my sin is ever before me, my Conscience always accuses me.
Job found sin bitter also, Job 13.26. Thou writest bitter things against me,
and causest me to possess the sins of my youth; God brought his sin to
remembrance, and his Conscience accuses him, this was bitter; thou writest
bitter things against me; Sin will end in bitterness; Behold! it is an
evil thing and bitter to forsake the Lord, Ier. 2.19. It will make the sinner
to mourn in bitterness, Zech. 12 10. They shall mourn for him and be in
bitterness, they may pray in bitterness, hear the word in bitterness, not
find one word of comfort in the Ordinances; they may think upon God in
bitterness; says David, I thought upon God and was troubled, I prayed and my
spirit was full of anguish, Psalm. 77.3. Though he thought upon God and prayed
to him, who is the souls life, comfort, joy, all in all, yet he was troubled;
So the poor sinner may pray and be troubled, hear and be troubled, read and
be troubled, look up to Heaven and be troubled, think upon God and be
troubled; Like a Mariner in a storm, when hope fails of safety he cries out,
What shall I do? I sink, I perish. So says the soul in the bitterness of
spirit, I sink and perish, I am damned, my Conscience that is a roll, wherein
is written Lamentations, and mourning, and woe; Now I see by experience, it is
an evil thing and bitter to forsake the Lord. Now that soul that has tasted
the bitterness of sin can experimentally teach others how bitter sin is; A
man that has endured imprisonment, or that has endured sickness can best
tell what it is; A man that has had the Pox or the Plague, and recovered it,
can experimentally tell what it is. So they that have seen the plague of a hard
heart, the plague sore of sin, they can best declare to others the
bitterness of it.

6. They have tasted of Gods goodness also, and they can experimentally show
to others how gracious the Lord is, how gracious the Lord has been to them in
restoring peace to them; as they have been acquainted with the bitterness of
sin; So with the Lords coming into the soul with comfort; they can
experimentally tell others God does not always hide his face; though for a time
the soul may look up to the Lord that hides his face, Esa 8.17. Yet he will
not hide his face always, though the Spouse mourn a long time after him whom
her soul loves, yet at the length she finds him. Cant. 3. For a moment, in my
anger says the Lord, I hid my face, Esa. 54.8. But with everlasting kindness
will I have compassion on thee; and they can declare to others how the Lord
returned in mercy to them, when they were ready to sink, when hope failed, and
they were ready to despair, ^^ the Prophet says in the fatherless find
mercy, H^sea 14.4. I was says the soul as on fatherless, and motherlesse,
and friendlesse, and harbourlesse, I apprehended my self sinking down to hell
without hope or help; I see I had nothing, nor had done nothing that would
commend me to God, and yet in my dispairing condition, when I said I am cast
off, the Lord of his free grace found me a lost sheep; A prodigal child that
fed upon husks until my soul was starved; and the Lord drew me to Christ, and
commanded his loving kindness to take hold upon me, he overcame me and made
sick of love to lesus Christ. And now I see that Christ is all in all; the
sight of God as a reconciled Father in Jesus Christ, that is, soule-satisfying
comfort; one smile from the Father in Jesus Christ countervailes all the
bitterness I have undergone; Now I think I should be able to comfort others
in the like distress, and this is the first reason; they can teach others
experimentally.

The second Reason is, because they are most skillful to minister a word in
season to a drooping soul; If a man inquire the way to a place, he that has
been at that place is more skillful to direct him then one that either knows
it by hearsay, or by the Map; They can speak as they have heard or read, but
he that has been there he speaks according to knowledge, he speaks that he
has seen; A man may teach many profitable truths to others, and yet never
found the power of them himself. I beat down my body says the Apostle, and
bring it into subjection, least, while I preach to others I my self should be
a castaway. Is it possible for a man to teach others and yet not be taught
himself; A man may preach of the Doctrine of Faith, and Repentance, and
Obedience to others; As the man that directs the other the way by the Map; but
he that has found Faith and Repentance, and walks with God, he can teach
others experimentally. They that walk in the way to Heaven are more skillful
to direct another the way, then they that direct them by hearsay; The Saints
knows what enemies and tocks and dangers are in the way to heaven, and they
can acquaint others with them.

Use of the point is to inform us, that it is very necessary, that they that
teach others be taught themselves. Thou that teach another says the
Apostle, teach thou not thy self, Romans 2.21. It is that man that has
groaned under the burden of his own lusts and corruptions, and overcomes them,
that is best able to teach another how to overcome his lusts and corruptions;
Truly a man is not fit to teach as a Minister until he be taught himself to
know God, and Christ savingly; nor fit to advise as a Christian until he be
taught in the School of Christ; Were a man taught all the Arts and Sciences
under Heaven, were he able to speak with such acuteness and Elequence as
should cause admiration in the hearers; yet all this is nothing to the saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ. Paul had as good bringing up as another, yet he
counted all as dross and dung in comparison of the excellent knowledge of
Christ; Arts and Sciences, and parts are necessary, but the saving knowledge of
Jesus Christ is the unicum necessarium for a Teacher; therefore it is very
necessary that they that teach others be taught savingly the knowledge of
Christ, as well as literally your knowledge of the Letter.

Secondly, it informs us, that if those that are converted themselves be
fittest Instruments to convert others: then how unfit are such for the work of
the Ministry as are enemies to Conversion: Such as daube people with untempered
mortar, and teach lies for truth, and cry peace, peace, when there is no
peace; Such as discourage people rather then encourage them in the ways of
God, and also as bad in their let examples of drunkenness, Sabbath
profanation, uncleanness, Idleness, swearing, and these yet are the men
cried up, and highly esteemed in the world; aye, but if God account them unfit
Ministers, it mattert not what account the world has of them; they must needs
be very unfit to direct poor souls the way to Heaven that are themselves
walking in the way to Hell; and enemies to those that walk to Heaven; Such as
refuse to walk in the ways of God themselves, and hinder as many as they can
from walking in them, surely these are unfit to teach others his ways.

Thirdly, if those whose spirits God wounds for sin, and after restores to
comfort be best able to teach others, it informs us that God does bring those
souls he intends good o through a wilderness of terror to comfort, I will
allure her and bring her into the wilderness, and speak friendly to her,
Hosea 2.14. The Spouse comes out of the wilderness leaning upon her well
beloved, Can: 8.5. Therefore in the next place it is for a use of direction to
such as would seek unto others in their straites; to make choice of such
Teachers as are best able to advise them as near as they can, such as can
advise them experimentally. The sick man will go to such a Physician as he is
persuaded is skillful, and experienced; We should be as careful for our
souls, to make choice of such spiritual Physicians as are skillful
experienced men; And it renders a man or woman suspicious, when in their
troubles they go to such as will daube them up, and flatter them in their
sin, such as will prophecy peace when there is no peace; and cannot endure
them that deal faithfully with them. First, consider, an unskilful
unexperienced Physician may instead of recovering the patient make the disease
more dangerous, if this be thy souls condition it is very sad.

Secondly, consider when the Patients life or death depends upon the Physicians
skill, if the Physician want skill the patient dies: When thy soul is sic^
thou stand upon the brinke of eternity, if thou go to unskilful
Physicians thou may perish for ever. Jesus Christ is the souls best
Physician, the way to be healed is to go to him; and to ask Counsel of such
Physicians as have been healed by him, and have learned their skill of him.

Secondly, as I would advise such as are in distress to seek to a skillful
Teacher, so also as near as they can to one that is faithful; If a Physician
have never so much skill, if he be unfaithful, he may do hurt as well as
good with his skill; then above all make sure of a faithful Physician for the
soul, one that will faithfully apply the word to thy soul suitable to thy
condition, whether it makes for thee or against thee; one that will be
faithful in keeping secrets, It becomes not a faithful Minister to disclose
those secrets that wounded spirits reiate to them, but rather to pity them,
and pray for them, and advise them; this is the duty of a Physician that is
faithful, and such Physicians sick souls should seek unto for advice. I Now
come to the second Doctrine: Then shall I teach. Whence we learn that when a
man is once converted himself, he will endeavor the conversion of others; If
he be a Minister, when he is converted himself, what pains will he take to
convert others; he will pray and study, and sweat, preaching the Word in
s^ason and out of leason, he will consider Christ have died to bring home
souls to God; and shall not I whom he has set as a watchman over souls,
study, and sweat and travel in birth, till Christ be formed in them, yea,
and beseech them in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.20.

What mean the faithful Ministers preaching the word in season, and out of
season, their reproving, rebuking, exhorting; not as carnal people say the
Minister bear us ill will, and therefore he reproves us and threatens us with
damnation and Judgment; no, but because they would feign bring home souls to
God; they are converted themselves, and they desire the Conversion of others;
so private Christians, when God has once converted them, they will take pains
to convert others. When Christ told the woman in John 4. I hat he was the
Messiah, she left her waterpot and water to go call others to see Christ;
When God has converted the husband, he will endeavor the Conversion of his
wife, he will pray for her and instruct her in the ways of God, So when God
has converted the wife, she will endeavor the Conversion of her husband. So
converted Parents will pray for their Children, and instruct them, and
endeavor their Conversion, and wish, oh! that the Lord would grant that my
son or daughter might live in his fight; and they will endeavor the
Conversion of their friends and Neighbors, they will pray for them, and advise
and counsel them, and mourn over them, and entice them to that which is good.

The Reason is, because saving grace will not be Idle, it will act; goodness
is of a spreading nature; Paul, when he was converted himself, see what
pains he takes to convert others; he will withold nothing that is
profitable for the good of souls. When Agrippa said to him, Acts 26.29. Almost
thou perswadest me to be a Christian, he said, I would to God that not only
thou, but all that hear me this day were not almost but altogether such as I
am, except bonds; his desire was, that all that heard him might be truly
converted, yea, be did so earnestly desire the Conversion and Salvation of his
Brethren, and Countrymen, that Romans 9.2. He could have wistred himself
accursed from Christ, that they might have been saved. So Joshua, he was
converted and followed God constantly himself, and he resolves with his
Family to serve the Lord: So Abraham will teach his Children after him the way
of the Lord, Genesis 18, 19. I know Abraham says the Lord, that he will teach
his children, and his household after him to keep the way of the Lord. What is
the Reason goodness is of a spreading nature? True grace cannot in this sense
be hid; Though all be not Gold that glisters, yet true Gold will glister Ye
are faith Christ, the light of the World. A City set on a hill cannot be hid;
True grace where it is will discover it self.

1. Use. Is it so that such as are converted themselves will endeavor the
Conversion of others; then what an evident sign is it, such are not converted
themselves as endeavor not the Conversion of others, but rather intise them to
sin; to Swearing, Drunkenness, Sabbath profanation, lying, slandering; Yea,
What shall we think of such as are Enemies to Conversion^ such as scoff and
steer at Converted people; Surely such are far from saving Conversion. To
enter into particulars, Do we see Majestrates instead of punishing sin, and
standing up for sin; neglect to reform themselves, and neglect to reform in
their Families; but suffer their children and servants to lie often, and slander
and abuse the people of God; yea, it may be to scoff at them behind the
door; Do we see them instead of setting good examples fet bad examples;
instead of standing up for the furtherance or the Gospel hinder it what they
can, by opposing godly Ministers; and pleading for ignorant sottish scandalous
Ministers, swearers, pot companions, drawers on of others to sin with
greediness; Whatsoever their pretext is, if according to the words of our
Savior Christ, we may judge of the tree by the fruit, it is evident such
Magistrates are not sincere Converts.

So such Ministers as daube people with untempered mortar, flatter them in
their sins, sad the hearts of the righteous, and strengthen the hands of the
wicked; teach not the people the difference betwixt the holy and profane,
according to Ezekiel 44.23. Persecute the faithful Manisters of the word; and
instead of exhorting people to pray in their Families, and to read the word,
scoff and deride at them that do; sure such Ministers are not sincere
Converts, for if they were converted themselves they would endeavor the
Conversion of others. -- So such private persons as neglect prayer in their
Family, reading of the word, instructing the souls committed to their charge
in the ways of God, are content to venture their own souls, their Childrens
souls, and servants souls under a soule-starving Minister. It is evident
these are not sincere Converts; for if they were truly converted themselves,
they would set up the worship of God in their Families, they would desire the
Ordinances of God in the purity; As newborn babes they would desire the
sincere milk of the word, that they might grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. They would
inquire where Christ feeds his flocks at noone time, Cant. 1.7. They would cry
with David, How amiable are thy Tabernacles oh Lord God of Hosts, my soul
longs, yea, and faints for the Courts of the Lord, my heart and my flesh
cries our for the living God; And I had rather be a door keeps in the house
of God then to dwell in the tents of the wicked, Psalm. 84. They would be
careful of their owns souls, and the souls of their Family.

2. Use, If converted persons will endeavor the Conversion of others, it
informs us that there is very few converted now adays; Where shall we find
them that endeavor the Conversion of others. Look amongst great men, such as
are in eminent places; Do not the Scripture say, Not many high, not many
mighty, not many noble are called; And does not our Savior say, The Mysteries
of the Gospel are hid from the wise, and understanding in the world, Matthew.
11.25. And is it not written, that builders laid aside Christ the corner stone,
Acts 4.11. How few men in eminent places stand up for God. Where shall we find
converted Magistrates, and converted Gentlemen now adays? If this be their
Character to seek the Conversion of others. So how few Converts shall we find
amongst Ministers now adays. Where are they that pray and study, and preach,
and sweat to convert souls? And that mourn for the obstinacy of the people,
when they see their Ministry convere not souls to God, as Ierem^ah did. Ier.
13.17. It for all this ye will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret for
your pride: And my eyes shall run down tears, because the Lords flock is
carried away captive; Whether they would hear or no, the Prophet will mourn
for their obstinacy and hardness of heart; So when a faithful Minister is
diligent to preach the word in season, and out of season, dividing the word of
truth aright, with a desire to bring home souls to God; And yet the word
proves a hardening letter; It makes them go up and down mourning with the
Prophet, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength in vain, the
bellows are burnt, and the lead is consumed in the fire, and the Founder
melts in vain; for the wicked are not taken away, reprobate silver shall men
call them; because the Lord has rejected them; But where shall we find such
Ministers; Now we may find many, pervert people; Some with their corrupt
Doctrine; some with their flatteries and profaneness; but where shall we
find such as go about the work in good earnest, to endeavor to convert
souls to God. Truly, when we look abroad amongst the watchmen of our time, I
fear we shall find but few such. Some few there are I am persuaded, make it
their endeavor to convert souls, that study to approve themselves to God,
workmen that needs not to be ashamed; These are so far I am confident from
taking offense at what I say now, that they rather groan under their burden,
and mourn for the lukewarmenesse and profaneness of many of the watchmen of
our time; for if this be a Character of a sincere Convert, to endeavor the
Conversion of others. How few of the watchmen of our time are sincere Converts.
So, amongst the ordinary sort of people, where shall we find sincere Converts?
As for the most part of people, they scarce have a form of godliness; but are
such as lie in gross profaneness, or such as are but mere gross Civilians.
And to come to professors, the Scripture says, many of them have a form of
godliness and deny the power: Me thinks my heart has lain like a stone in
me; many times when I have took notice of such as have been glorious
Professors, yea, eminent bright stars to the view of the World: When I have
taken notice how little Religion they have had in their Families, how little
reading the word, or praying in their Families at any time; Some neglecting
morning duties; some neglecting morning and evening both; and done no more for
their Children and servants then they have done for their beasts, provides for
their bodies for the day, and let their souls sink or swim; It has often
made me think of the Prophet David, how he has cried out in Psalm. 12. Help
Lord, for there is not a godly man left; A faithful man who can find says the
wise man. How few are there set up the worship of God in their Families? Where
shall we find Husbands mourning over their unconverted Wives, and wives
mourning over their unconverted husbands? and parents mourning over their
Children, and servants that miscarrie; as David did for Absolon, when he cried
out, Oh! my son Absolon, my son, my son, Absolon; Would God I had died for
thee my son, my son; Where there is true Conversion, there will be an
endeavor to convert others: and therefore it is to be feared there is but a
few sincere Converts now a days.

3. Use, is for examination, Let us try our selves, whether or no woe be
converted our selves; Do we endeavor the conversion of others? How does it
concern all sorts of people to come and weigh themselves in the balance of
the Sanctuary, and inquire into their conditions; What fruits of Conversion
appears in me as a Magistrate, as a Minister, as a Master of a Family? How
do I endeavor the Conversion of others? what care have I of my own soul? my
Childrens souls, and Neighbors souls; and how do I mourn for them that
remain obstinate? Do I with Lot vex for the abominations of the place where I
live; And complain with David, Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in
Mesech, and inhabit in the rents of Kedar; If thou be a true Convert thus it
will be with thee; It is very remarkable, the example of the Thief upon the
Cross, he was converted at the last hour, and that very hour, or part of an
hour, his grace discovered it self, he sought the Conversion of the other
thief, as you may see in Luke 23.40. And the truth is, true grace will
discover it self. When a soul has once tasted of Gods goodness, and free
grace in Jesus Christ, it cannot but desire that others might taste it. Oh!
that my husband, my wife, my son, my daughter, my Neighbors; oh! that their
souls might live; Let us examine our selves, is it thus with us.

Secondly, if we be converted our selves, we rejoice as the Conversion of
others. The converted Magistrate will joy to see the Gospel flourish, and the
Kingdoms of Heaven suffer violence; The converted Minister will rejoice to see
Christ formed in his Auditors, and to see them walk in the ways of the Lord;
The wife will rejoice at the husbands Conversion, and the husband at the wives,
and Parents at their Childrens Conversion; there is joy in Heaven for one
sinner that is converted, Luke 15. But if we be such as never regard our own
souls, nor the souls of others; Such, as instead of endeavoring the
Conversion of others, pervert them; do what in us lie to hinder it; are ready
to envy any look Heaven ward; Do what in us lie to nip the buddings of grace
in the head at its first blossoming in others; or are we such as regard not
the souls of others, let them sink or swim. I proclaim from the God of
Heaven this day, be they what they will, either Magistrate, or Minister, or
Governor of a Family; they are not sincere Converts, and dying in this
condition, they must expect nothing but damnation; for, except they be
converted they shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, as our Savior
Christ faith, Matthew. 18.3. Except a man be converted, and become as a little
child, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; So that we must look
for a change, or never look to come in the Kingdom of Heaven. Me thinks the
hea^ing of this Doctrine should make our blood run cool in our veins, th^^
have never yet to this day regarded our own souls, nor the souls of others;
that if we were true Converte our selves, we would endeavor the Conversion
of others; but I hasten to a use of exhortation.

Is it so, that converted Christians will endeavor to convert others; Then all
you that have tasted of Gods goodness in this particular, in whom the Lord
has wrought this work of saving Conversion; Do you wonder at the free grace
of God in working this work of new Creation in you, and give him the glory of
it.

Secondly, from hence take comfort, that God that squares sinners for his ^wne
use, did not square thee to cast thee away; but to bring thee to be useful
for his glory here; and to glorify thee hereafter.

Thirdly, walk as a changed people. And fourthly, endeavor the Conversion of
others, as Christ said to Peter, When thou art converted, strengthen thy
Brethren. Endeavor the Conversion of your new relations, and your Neighbors
by praying for them, and mourning over them, and instructing of them, though it
be not in thy power to change the heart, yet that God that ordinarily works by
means, and is found in the use of the means, he may be found othee in such a
way; He can carry home thy instructions with power to the soul of him, or her
thou do instruct, and make the means effectual; and though thou can do
it but weakly, yet, Who has despised the day of small thing. God can work by
the weakest means; Discharge thou thy duty, and leave the success to God, and
thou will find much comfort, and peace of Conscience in it.

FINIS.

