SOBER ADVICE TO MOCKERS: Showing the Unspeakable Danger of SCOFFING at any of
Christ's Faithful Ministers.
I WOULD have you, which too often do come here
To Laugh, and at Christ's Minister to Jeer;
Know, that it is Luke 10. ^6.
God and Christ which you despise,
Who shortly will hide all Grace from your Eyes.
Of Scoffing, you will find little cause to Boast;
When Death and Judgment does your Souls Accost.
The Devil then and Conscience will Agree,
To show you Sin in its Deformity:
And when you see your Sins without Disguise,
Your Guilty Souls with Horror they will Surprise:
And then those Fools that make a Mock at Sin,
Will find, the Great God's Mocking-time begin.
When you are distressed, and for his Mercy Cry,
He Will Prove. 1. ^6, 27.
Laugh, and Mock at your Calamity.
Now you God's Counsels and Reproofs will not hear;
And then he will your Angry Judge appear.
Though God forbear long, he has set a Day,
In which he will Vengeance to all Scoffers Pay.
Don't God Provoke, in whose hand is your Breath;
Lest whilst you're Scoffing, he strike you with Death.
Forty two Children were destroyed all,
That only did God's Prophet 2 King. ^ 23, 24.
Bald-head call;
And how much sorer Punishment do you
Deserve, that know much better what you do?
When God calls you at Judgment to Account,
You Will find your Sins the Sodomites surmount;
And that it will Matthew. the 11th, from the 20 to the 25th.
more tolerable be
For Tire and Sidon, in that day, than thee:
They never Sinned against the Gospel Light,
Nor did the Offers of a Savior slight,
As you have done; And pray consider well,
How you can with eternal Burnings dwell?
If any Place in Hell be Hotter, sure
Slighters of Gospel Grace must it endure:
Believe and Tremble, and no longer dare
Contempts of Christ so boldly to declare;
But be Advised Sincerely to Repent,
Lest you in Hell Eternally Lament.
For you will find, that Heaven is too High,
To reach, with Lord have Mercy, when you Die.
If you Affect to be esteemed Sententious,
Find other Theams, and do not be Contentious.
With Divine Truths; you will find they are Edge-tools,
That none dare Trifle with, but Satan's Fools.
If you have Parts without Truce Saving Grace;
They will but add Confusion to your Face.
These Advertisements cannot prove in vain;
They must Reform you, or Augment your Pain.
If they don't prove Effectual to Persuade;
You Will find in Hell your Conscience they will Upbraid.
Weigh these Truths with the Reason of a Man;
And then Persist in Scoffing, if you can.
I Will Sum up all, with this Request; I Pray,
If you will not be Attentive, keep away.
We hither come, desiring to draw near
The Great God, and to Worship him with Fear:
Through Christ to Praise him, and his Grace Implore;
T'accept his Mercy, and his Love Adore.
These are the Ends for which we here Attend;
And doubtless Satan does you hither send,
On purpose, to Disturb and hinder those,
That he fears will with Gospel-Offers close;
But still Remember, it is Christ you Oppose:
And in his Name, once more, I you desire,
Not to Forget, Heb: 12. 29.
God's a Consuming Fire, etc.
FINIS.
London, Printed for T. Snowden. 1692.


