Fames Genius. OR, A PANEGYRIC Upon His Excellency the Lord General MONCK.
At VINTNERS-HALL Thursday the 12th of April 1660.
AMongst the rest, the Muses gave Consent
That I, this worthless form might now present
To the Worlds view: The Subject seems too high,
To be comprised in an Epitomy,
Confessed indeed: but I have strein'd my Quill,
Died in the Sable wave to'ts utmost skill;
And in Enchiridion, spread his Fame,
Whose Merits floats, whilst others sink with shame:
Not to unmantle Self-end subtilty?
But the true Portraicture of honesty
( MONCK it is I mean) at a far easier Rate,
Then Bloodshed: purchased freedom in our State,
When as the Nation groaned, to tur'd with pain
Of a Confusion, steept within her Brain.
What sad Distempers did she undergo?
Lulled up, and down, by Heresy, tossed to and fro,
By Frantic Policy, Self-interest, and what Art
Not to abate, but to augment her smart.
Some Empericks did pretend to give her ease,
In this her giddy, languishing Disease:
But through mistaken apprehension used
Applied wrong Remedies, and were confused.
Then others thought, to take the State in hand.
Finding their purpose fail were at a stand.
The rest of this wise Consultation
Concluded ruin, for an application;
Thus thrown from hand to hand, her Lethargy*
Was almost grown, to a disparity.
A Lethargy indeed, Censured to be
By so long sleeping, in her misery:
At last awaked, and when awaked she Cried
Liberty, smothered for want of Liberty but denied,
Deemed as an unfit Salve; yet in fine proved
To be the self same thing as it behooved.
Then from the North That grand Adjutator came,
Whose approbation gave him the best name:
Within whose Breast contracted seem to be
Valor with Wisdom, and honest Policy;
These three united were the means, that wrought
Our Nations Cure, which so long we sought.
Pax sine Bello.
Mars himself yielded, and not usually
Restrein'd his Arms from wonted Cruelty,
His angry Brow seemed vayld with Modesty
When thus perceiving ( MONCK) his Prudency,
Now the Scene's altered the Oppressor's gone,
Each Actor strive to quit his action;
It Was but a Dream, when they played, aim at all,
To sore too high, is but to have a fall,
To themselves Sophisters, our discontent
Recoyls again: Heaven relief has sent,
Now the Black Cloud's withdrawn the bloody Veil
Is rent in sunder, by a Northern Gale:
The Gloomy night is past, Awake, behold
Aurora dos her Majesty unfold.
The ravenous Lion dreading the sight of fire
Couches: or usual dos to his Den retire:
So, when this Blazing Comet did appear,
Our Prey-seekers, were possessed with fear,
Affrighted with their own Conscience terrified
With Its black dismal Aspect, slunke aside,
Why may not Exild Justice transport make
Now to Its Mantion, and possession take
Rise from Despair, here is our hope arrived,
Brave George's at hand, and bids us be revived.
ENGLAND'S content, persist, thy work begun
Gives more, then much ease, to the Nation,
Proceed Great General, Honor is thine own,
In doing what thou have already done:
But if thy Inclination points to more,
As seldom Heroes rest, on such a score
Twere not amiss, but meet to contrive
Thy fainting Patient, a Restorative
To what affection Bends, as commonly
We find most Sovereign is sympathy,
And as experience approves, the best thing
Does best agree, called by the name of KING,
C. SOUTHAICK.

Carmina quam scribunt fama perenniteat.
LONDON, Printed for J. Jones, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhil, 1660.


