THE SOVNDHEADS DESCRIPTION OF THE ROVNDHEAD.

OR THE ROVNDHEAD Exactly Anatomized in his Integralls and Excrementalls, by
the untwisting a threefold Knott.

1. Who the Roundheads be, or what a Roundhead is in rerum natura, and his
Pedigree. 2. The real Causes producing a Roundhead. 3. The properties and
peculiarities of a Roundhead.
Now published to satisfy the whole world in the resolution of this monstrous
Beast, who and what he is, and by what marks he may be known and seen.

Printed at the request of Gregory Scotch-marke (or thirteen-pence-half penny)
inhabiting in Barber-Surgeons Alley, at the sign of the new fashioned
Perriwigg: In the year of the Roundhead his hopes confounded, 1642.

LONDON Printed in the year 1642. for I. B.

To the judicious Reader.
AMongst those infinite number of Pamphlets and Libells, wherewith this knowing
Island, to wit, the City and Country is pestered, and the air thereof
infected and poisoned with the sulphurous breathings of their vanity,
profaneness and lies, every hour producing something new, something wicked,
something foolish, little true: according to the several constitutions and
dispositions of the Climactericall men of this age, from those hourly events
and occurrences of persons, things and times: There is one ignorant foolish
wicked Pamphlet or Libell of the Roundheads lately Printed, receiving its
monstrous prodigious and untimely birth from the womb of an ignoramus. And the
which Pamphlet or Libell, is as full of lies and folly, as a beggar of lice and
a dog of fleas: being the most false, foolish, and ignorant description of the
Roundheads: And has occasioned this short discourse following (in its due and
full season) to step forth in the clothing of a Pamphlet, to meet with fools
in their folly, And by good skill and strength of arms to bray him in a
Mortar, till this ignoramus and his Proselytes be convinced and disarmed of
their sordid, senseless, and gross ignorance, in framing so false and silly a
description, and applying the term Roundhead to those persons whom there is
not the least show of reason or honesty to evince it.

The judicious Reader, is requested to behold really as in a glass the real
and true description of a Roundhead indeed, and to whom it may properly with
sound and undeniable grounds and reasons be applied unto, according to the
Inscription or Title of this short discourse: referring the whole matter in
hand to thy wisdom, judgment, and conscience, ever resting a real Servant to
all virtuous Readers,

THE SOVNDHEADS DESCRIPTION OF THE ROVNDHEAD, OR A Roundhead Anatomized in his
Integralls or Excrementalls.
A Roundhead, according to the title or inscription of this Discourse (being
the untying the first knot) may be defined or expressed in these twelve
several Expressions or Definitions.

There be these twelve several Definitions of a Roundhead, whereby all men may
both know and see what and who he is.

A Roundhead in Rerum Natura is.
1. A white bald smooth pate, under a Perriwigg of the newest fashion. 2. A
smooth round bowl, kissing his Mistress in a long covered Bowling-alley. 3. A
very tender thing, for it must at noonday wear a long furred Night cap. 4.
That which only appears in the night in bed-chambers like a Ghost, or
Hobgoblin. 5. An Owl in an Ivie-bush, who cannot endure the light and sight of
truth and honesty, as the Owl cannot behold the Sun in the midday. 6. In a
Circular motion all the day time, tossed up and down like a Tennis-ball by the
Racket of every fool, from one hazard to another, till it has worn out all
its bowels: That is, It is a Roundheaded Gentleman in his new Periwigg, his
head and his wits running round, led and carried up and down by every fool
from one mischief to another, till he has worn out and lost all his wits and
his money. 7. Is a Civit-catt with a long tail, who is a perfumed odoriferous
Perriwigd Roundhead. 8. A sweetfac'd Puppy curled and crisped. 9. The
Counterfeit of a Holland Cheese with a Map on his head. 10. A living skull
wrapped up in a winding sheet of dead men's excrements. 11. A strange homebred
Monster, carried up and down in a little house one story high (by the learned
called a Sedan) to a Playhouse, where any man may see him for twelve pence a
piece upon the Stage. 12 One covered with a narrow brimmd hatt.
With a top-top-gallant crown very flatt.
And a round block under that.
Well bushed and shagg'd down to his back.
And strongly perfumed with Sack.
While his brains do ache and crack.
And his tongue does swear and chatt.
And curse his Brother Roundheads that.
Turned him into a Counter Ratt.

These Twelve Definitions of a Roundhead, anatomize the Monster to be one who
would be thought and called a Gentleman, when indeed he is one of the Raskally
witles generation, or a bladder preposterously blown up by the stinking breath
of some windy brained fool, with a Peacocks feather in his hatt, vapouring and
flourishing in the circle of his own conceit, that he is a natural Gentleman
borne, when he is but an artificial Woodstreet or Poultrey-Counter-feit
Gentleman at his best. This Superlative, admirable wonder (among children and
fools) is one that (par la fortune de la guerre) has lost his natural hair
from his natural head: and thereupon he is deprived of his natural wits: his
hair being newly gone, his wits went presently after a wooll-gathering, and
along while scattered as fast as they gathered, till at length meeting with a
dear and near friend of his Gregory Scotch-mark, a mile beyond Holborne-hill,
(a notable Mountebanke of approved skill in the cures of all diseases) who
advises him to some artificialists, whom he furnishes with all the dead men
and women's wool of their heads, which comes under the shaying of his hands
every Sessions, who being of notable skill in the excrementall art, do at the
proper cost and charges of this distressed Gentleman, so compose, contract, and
weave this wool, that it is made an excellent covering to hang about his
noddle, and then he becomes immediately at the first putting on, and so
forwards, an artificial Gentleman Roundhead. And they pass and are esteemed
by many for Squires and Gentlemen, of no little wit, and furnish the
Arithmeticians of the age with figures and ciphers, whereby in the
Arithmeticians account, they are reckoned and cast up in hair infinite, but in
wit mere Ciphers.

2. The real Causes producing this Roundhead.
There are several causes in Nature, natural causes, therefore according to
our description in the Title, we must anatomize this Roundhead in his
integralls and excrementalls, from his Round head to his round heel; the
discussion whereof will complete the causes producing this Roundhead.

For his Integralls in general.
His soul and body throughout, in all and every part, his whole natural frame
and constitution (is for the present) a rude, vast, unpolished Chaos of sin and
iniquity, a person who is sold under sin, a slave and vassal to sin, the
Devil, the world, the flesh, full of all darkness, corruption, and filth:
being most contrary and abominable to all beauty, light, goodness, liberty, and
sweetness: So that where there is so universal a contagion and confusion,
such a leprosy of iniquity, throughout and all over, it must needs follow
undeniably, that here is sufficient matter for the producing of this
round-headed Monster. As will more conspicuously appear in the particular
anatomizing, or embowelling of this Monster in his Integralls.

First, He is a person whose heart is filled with all manner of profaneness,
baseness, and wickedness, as pride, uncleanness, adultery, fornication,
idolatry, superstition, atheism, hardness of heart, hatred, envy, full of all
deceitfulness, lves, falsehood, evil thoughts, purposes, intents full of
treasons and conspiracies, against all that is pure good, holy, heavenly, and
spiritual, witness the very consciences of the Roundheads themselves, if they
will look into them, and but hear and suffer them to speak.

Secondly, He is a person whose mind and intellectual part is full of
blindness, darkness, simplicity and gross ignorance, yea palpable gross
thick darkness, that may be felt, yea wilful blindness: knowing nothing in
any distinct manner of God, or of goodness, of virtue, or themselves, but yet
strongly persuaded and conceited in the imagination of their own evil heart
(formerly described) of their own wisdom, goodness, and virtue: And for the
proof of this, witness all their Pamphlets, all their discourses, all their
railings, cursings and slanders, from day to day. Their Pamphlets, filld with
nothing but profane, foolish, unclean words and expressions, there being
nothing substantial or wise according to truth in them: Their discourses being
irrational, simple, shallow, blind, yea sottishly ignorant, professing
themselves wise, and yet knowing nothing (at least wise as they ought to know)
as the Wise man in the Proverbs 28 Chap. 5. ver. proves in these words; Evil
men understand not judgment, but they that seek the Lord understand all
things: They are foolishly and wickedly ignorant: They in their discourses brag
of learning, parts, wits, knowledge, but they are ignorant and understand not
Religion, virtue, manners: It has been as often proved as there be hours in
the day, minutes in each hour: That these Roundheads (according to the former
description, who are the Roundheads indeed in rerum natura) when they have been
in dispute and reasoning with those whom they and their proselytes formerly
falsely called by the name of Roundheads, who are indeed those whom the Wise man
in the place aforecited, called Seekers of God, and who understand all things:
I say, they have not been able to make a rational or true answer to Questions
demanded them, nor defend any argument of their own from being torn in
pieces, or vanishing into smoke and air; but they have been forced like
Ignoramus himself, to hold their peace and learn wit: or if shame and
disgrace troubled them, then when they wanted wit to make a rational answer,
then to be sure their graceless hearts and tongues did not want curses, lies,
oaths, slanders and railing.

3. For his body, both integralls and excrementalls, see the causes producing a
Roundhead:

He is one whose head and brains is elevated with Sack, strong drink, and
Tobacco, whose eyes are full of adultery, his face with patches and plasters,
or some of his Ladies favour-sports: his whole body is embalmed to preserve his
rotten carkase from offending the nostrills of his friends and companions; or
else his face is full of skarrs, cuts and wounds, in quarrels with brothers of
his own Tribe, when they cannot agree in swearing and lying.

His nose if not fallen down flat dead on his face already, yet it is to be
feared, it cannot stand upright long.

His tongue may be compared to the Devil, yea hell it self, breathing forth
nothing but oaths, curses, railings, bawdry every moment.

His hands and feet ever in one quarrel or other, or employed in some
brothell-house in the lustful embraces and hellish claspings of some of his
filthy and unclean Mistresses, and whorish Ladies, till he returns home lame
full of the heavy disease by the vulgar sort called the Pox. And thus you have
the Integralls of this Roundhead described, from the particular causes
producing a Roundhead, which in plain terms and few words is this: The evil
heart and manners of these men bring them to the Pox, the Pox eats of their
natural hair, and so they become Roundheads.

And thus went the hair away, the Gentleman becomes bald, his wits here going
first away, and a very little returning to him (upon the cure in part wrought)
he consults with the artificialists and excrementallists of the time, that he
may bring up a new fashion to make Perriwigd Gentlemen.

And so we pass to the untying of the third knot, which is,

3. The real properties and peculiarities of a Roundhead, whereby he may be
notoriously known and seen by any judicious observant eye.
And these properties are not a few, but so many as we shall really collect and
comprise within the compass of this short Discourse, we shall endeavor to
give the world information of.

The Gentleman Roundhead being now created and formed by those former producing
causes; now you shall see him fashioned in all his excrementall perfections.

The which, I will comprise under these five heads, and so finish the Discourse.

He may be described 1. By his clothing. 2. By his posture. 3. By his
discourse or language. 4. By his associates, and his bastard brood. 5. By his
actions.

First, for his clothing, a singular property, he loves rich clothing, and
borrowes of all Nations a several dress and attire, he has infinite mind for
change of raiment, as the hairs of his Perriwig be infinite and past numbering.

Therefore we must begin to reckon from the first artificial hair in his
Perriwig, to the last artificial stitch in the soale of his Boots: hold,
hold, hold, what have we said, we must begin there, we must give our selves a
just correction, we do take a cubit from his stature at least, and detract
from one of his greatest perfections, by making a dwarf of a proper Gentleman.
And our mistake would have been so gross, (if we had not speedily collected
and corrected our thoughts) as to have undertaken to have given the description
of the height of Paul's only by relating the height of the Church, when we
should describe the height of Paul's by the Steeple: But having timely corrected
our thoughts we shall endeavor to begin at the height and top of this
Roundheaded Gentleman's perfection: (Only a little by the way observe it as one
of his chiefest properties, that he loves and prides to be clothed with the
newest fashion. And therefore he is full of invention, and his thoughts
multiplicious and fruitful, how he may have change of attire and fashion: yea
rather then he will want any one fashion, he will so contrive by the advice of
his grand and little and nimble council, the professors of the crosselegd art,
who are very dexterous in the composure of all fashions contracted and united
in one, that this Roundhead being clothed in his new trappings, he is made the
representative body of all kindreds, tongues, and nations, his Roundhead
confining his brains in such a circle, that they run round about the Globed
Center for every new strange fashion.)

First therefore for his hatt, it is fashioned like the block on which it was
squared, being flat crowned, and not made fit to his head, but to his
Perriwigg, and therefore it sets to his Perriwigg as loose, as his Perriwigg to
his bald pate, (unless it be tied) ready to fall off to the right hand or to
the left, to salute his brother Roundhead when he meets him: And we know the
reason of this fashion, because these Gallants desire and love to have their
wits and heads at liberty, and cannot endure to have their brains bound too
fast, or confined in their noddles.

Next, their hatt is narrow-brimd, and they have a good reason for that, for
whereas the ignorant sort object against it, as unprofitable, yea prejudicial,
for it exposes their bodies to the weather, They give a sudden answer to this
Objection, and prove the contrary, That a good bush does shelter them better
from the weather, with which they are largely furnished. But that we may not
forget to hang forth our Colors on the Flag-staffe before we come down from
the maine top, we must therefore set out a very fair feather, tied fast with
Ribbins of all colors in the Rainebow. He is no true Gentleman without a
feather in his cap, and he is no man of war without his colors. Therefore
that he may have and claim the property both of Soldier and Gentleman, he
will be well feathered.

And yet
What is lighter then a feather?
What is heavier then Lead?
A braineles Perriwigged Cavalier,
That is a true Roundhead.
For his Perriwigg the chiefest jewel about him, being artificially woven and
bound together, strongly perfumed, a right color to a hair it is, which he
borrowes from several dead men and women, a hair from one, and a hair from a
second, and so forward, that he is exceedingly engaged to them for every hair
of his head. As for the rest of his clothing downwards, To wit, his Band with
buttons and loopes under his chin, to the confusion of all Band-string-makers,
with his short wasted dublet, long sword, and long breeches, short boots and
thundering spurs, being all composed according to the Rules of are and
reason, for every stitch of him: The particulars of the recital, would be too
tedious and prolixe for this short Discourse, and therefore is purposely
omitted at present: Because we desire to proceed to the next property of this
Roundhead.

2. By his Posture: An admirable posture he has, he always in stead of
standing in a posture of defense, is ever in a posture of offense, he barks
and bites, and snaps every one that comes near him, that are not of his own
constitution. His very looks strike fools with terror and amazement, his
patches and spotts on his face, are the ensign that he is a Soldier and a man
of offense every inch and stitch of him: His looks are so big and terrible,
having such a Majesty in them as is able to make children run away, as if some
strange apparition appeared to them of Jack a Dandy, or as if some Bullbeggar,
or Buggbeare were ready to eat them up: And indeed their long Perriwigs are
like so many vissards of ugly shapes and representations, to skare and fright
children and fools into good manners: And is not this now a singular property
and virtue in them, that they are able by the very Majesty and dreadfulnesse
of their aspect, to work such cures as that children and fools should stand
in fear of them, and be ruled and skared into wit and manners. For their
valor and magnanimity of spirit, it is beyond expression, for upon the least
motion of their head and eyes, they in their imagination apprehend that they
drive the whole world before them.

The posture of his head, according to the rules of art, knows both his motion
in all its severalls, and the time thereof, for the most part moving it very
stately, deceiving the world thereby with a persuasion that he is as wise and
stately as some of the Lord Majors of London, but to be sure as wise and
stately as some of your potentiall Aldermen in their foot motion through the
City, or when they sit in their Court at Guild Hall And likewise that they
have as much Majesty, learning, gravitie, justice, as is in the smooth-chind
Judges in Term time in Westminster Hall. But how infinitely these graceles
fellows fall short of these honorable men's perfections, let the City of
London judge for the one, and the Plaintiffes and Defendants for the other. For
the humility of their bodies they excel the whole world, being full of
courteous embraces and Court-salutations, their hands and feet ready servants
to them at their first command, to act the real dissimulation of their hearts
to every one they meet with, what an infinite number of complements and
salutes, do all the rest of their brother Roundheads meet with in a day from
these artificial Roundheads: They seldom fight, except they be drunk, and
then they are madmen, nothing can appease them, but then all blood and wounds
one toward another: They are as swift in the motion of their feet, as the
Bears that are led musselled through the City, their legs being so packt up
in their great boots, and they forced to straddle in their steps, and walk
gingerly, because all is not well with them in their breeches.

3. For their discourse and language, which is their third property: among
their own Tribe, nothing but all manner of profane and filthy language of
whores and drink, mixed with a thousand oaths and lies, to make themselves
merry-like fools who make a sport of sin: And if not in this discourse, then
they are relating some false report of the innocent, and such as fear an oath,
or else railing and cursing all such as do not observe and follow their
humors in their gnorance, profaneness and baseness.

4. For their associates, or bastard brood, Their associates are ever their
fellow- Roundheads who are of the same constitution and follow them in all
their humors and wickedness: Or else all ignorant profane and senseless
doultheads, that know not their right hand from their left in any thing that is
good and religious, such whom we call their bastards, they are so like them in
conditions and manners: who although they are not of the Gentile sort of
Roundheads, and so not Perriwigged and accoutred in their trappings, like these
Roundheaded Gallants, yet for conditions and manners they are the natural
fools of artificial fools, for profaneness, simplicity, ignorance, and
evil manners, they may be very well termed natural Roundheads. Such who are
the braineles generation of ignorant persons, That believes as the Church
believes, and will rail against and curse that and those which they understand
not nor know not. It being ever the property of profane fools to speak
evil of that which is good, and of them that profess goodness, through their
monstrous ignorance: And they are driven like calves by every ass to the
shambles of their own destruction.

5. Their actions is the next property, and these are infinite innumber, and
all evil like themselves, they are full of all manner of iniquitie-without
measure themselves, and they act all manner of iniquity,

Against God, goodness, Religion, and manners. Their King and Country in
general. The true worshippers and fearers of God.

First, against God himself, continually in rebellion against him, yea open
manifest rebellion, refusing to be ruled and governed by his holy Law, or to
believe his heavenly Gospel, but despising the one, and slighting the other,
do give themselves up to all manner of licentiousness committing iniquity
with greediness, by their profaneness, oaths, uncleanenesse, etc. Against
goodness, ever railing, hating, mocking at goodness, preciseness, or
holiness: Against Religion, Therefore are they so zealous for all false
impure, mixed, popish worship and ceremonies (As for the Common Prayer Book,
which is a thing first invented and composed by the enemy of God, and of
Christ, To wit, Antichrist the Pope being extracted out of the Masse-Booke, a
mere compound of errors, confusion, additions, and substractions to and from
the Scriptures, man's invention, and yet this offered to God as his worship,
against his express command, That whosoever adds to his Word or takes from it,
shall have his name blotted out of the book of life: And that it is a vain
worship of God to worship him after, or by the traditions of men, against his
express will, who will have his worship both for matter and manner pure,
without mixture, spiritual with out earthly invention or composute, (...) set
down his whole mind and will, how he will be worshipped and at what manner in
his Word and Testament. But a reason may be given why they are so zealous for
their ignorant devotion in the Common Prayer Book is, because they are
furnished from the Letany with oaths, as, by thy wounds and blood, by thy
agony, by thy death: And from the Apocrypha Chapters in the Service-booke with
lies: so they learn to swear and lie, for not any of them are converted to
leave off swearing and lying, but they are nourished and strengthened in their
ignorance and superstition and profaneness by it:) and so for Bishops,
Altars, Crosses, and what not. Against all good manners and honest
conversation, by their riotous, drunken, and profane actions.

Secondly, They are against the King and Country in general, The only
disturbers, traitors, and rebels in the State, sowing discord and division in
the hearts of all they can infect with their traiterous counsels, possessing
the King with evil thoughts of the Parliament, practicing daily mischief
against the honest and faithful and loyal endeavors of this ever honored
and religious Parliament; but great hope is, their mischief shall return upon
their own pate, by the wisdom and innocence, and integrity of that gracious
Assembly.

Thirdly, Against the true worshippers and fearers of God, by malicious lies
and slanders of them, terming them fools, Roundheads, Preachers in tubbs, and
by their execrations and curses of them; But the curse that is causeless shall
not come, nor the terms that are groundless shall not remain upon good men:
But shall return upon the pates of the first inventers. And thus you have the
Soundheads description of the Roundheads fully Anatomized.

FINIS.

