A Treatise OF GAVELKIND, Both Name and Thing. Showing the true Etymology and
Derivation of the one, the Nature, Antiquity, and Original of the other. With
sundry emergent Observations, both pleasant and profitable to be known of
Kentish-men and others, especially such as are studious, either of the ancient
Custom, or the Common Law of this Kingdom.

By (A well-willer to both) William Somner.

Virg. 2. Georg. Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.
Cranz. lib. 2. Metrop. 9. Nemo sibi blandiatur de auctoritate veterum, quibus
etsi fabulae displicuerunt, non tamen habebant unde falsitatem earum coarguere
possent. Sed nostra aetate crebrescentibus literarum monumentis, inexcusabilis
torpor est in fabulis scientes, prudentesque permanere.

LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for the Author, and are to be sold by
John Crook at the Ship, and Daniel White at the Seven Stars in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1666.

THE PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
IT is now full eighteen years since, by solemn promise, I became engaged to
my Contrymen, upon their good acceptance of certain of my labors, in behalf
of our City, wherewith I then presented them, to proceed to the same, or some
other such like undertaking for the County; a thing, which as I then really
intended, so have I not since wanted that encouragement for it from the better
sort (expressed by their courteous acceptance of those my former labors)
which I could expect. But being soon after (proh dolor!) overtaken by that
impetuous storm (of civil war) not yet quite blown over, causing the
distraction, and threatening the destruction of this once renowned Kingdom, I
was necessitated to betake my self to other thoughts, chiefly how I might
secure my self against the fury, in warding off the danger, of the present
storm; being not able, I confess, to reach to that high pitch of sedulity and
magnanimity, both in this kind to which the Grecian Socrates is said to have
atteined, whose thoughts were ever running on his book; insomuch, as but the
very next night before he was to suffer death, (regardlesse of his so near
approaching danger, able to indispose the mind, discourage the industry, and
shake the constancy of any common spirit) he was desirous to learn Music,
because (says the Story) he would die still learning somewhat. Being therefore
thus diverted, and utterly for the time discomposed for the performance of my
promise, I hope not only to be excused of my Countrymen for (what had not else
been hitherto delayed) my County-undertaking, but also to obtein of them yet
further respit, in hope of a better opportunity, for the discharge of that
debt. For my more easy purchasing whereof at their hands, and that they and
others may perceive, that I have not been altogether idle all this while;
pitching in my thoughts upon our Kentish Custom of Gavelkynd, and being not
unfurnished of matter in the progress of my studies gleaned and gathered from
old Records, enabling me, with the help of that little skill I have atteined in
the Saxon tongue (to the study whereof I was encouraged by my precious friend
and ever-honoured Mecoenas, Dr. Casaubon, as is elsewhere by himself truly
averred) to some more than vulgar discourse thereof; as a specimen and earnest
of my further intentions for the County, I betook my self at spare hours to the
perusal, resolving on the publication, of those collected notes and notions,
disposing them so, that as they have to satisfaction informed me in the points
proposed, so they may be of like use to others, willing to bestow their pains,
and lay aside all prejudice in the perusal of them.

Kent, I considered, had been far and near long celebrated for her Gavelkynd,
though not so known either at home or abroad, whether in point of etymology,
or properties, (that especially of Partition, rendering it so incomparably
famous throughout the Kingdom) as truth would. To wipe off therefore that dust
of error, which time especially (that parent of corruption) has contracted to
it, I have in the present discourse labored chiefly to assert w^t I conceive
to be the true sense and de^vation of the term, for the understanding of the
Nomina si n^scis perit and cognitio rerum. Isid. O^ig. l. 1. cap. 7.
name; whence the properties, that especially here instanced, do proceed, for
the better judging of the nature of it, according to that end propounded to my
self in all my researches, which is to know things, not so much in their
present as primitive state, more in their causes than effects* Tun^ enim (says
the (b) Philosopher) unum quodque Arist. 1. Phys. and 2. Metaphys.
scire arbitramur, cum ejus cau^as and principia cognoscimus.

By the process and prosecution of the argument, having a fair and pertinent
inducement, if not to treat, yet at least to touch upon, and ^^k^ notice, as of
the Saxons Bo^land and Folcland, so of the Feudists Fe^d^m and Allodium, (a
pair of vocables, the l^tter, that have long and much perplexed many prime men's
fancies to disq^i^^ and find out their true and proper deriva^ion^, to the
occasion of great varieties in the point, each man abounding in his own, and
that, for the most part, a different and singular sense) I thought it not
amiss to make one in the number of such Etymologists, and although with
singularity, I confess, and dissent from all the rest, yet perhaps so much to
the purpose (absit jactantia dictis!) as, if not to hit the mark, yet at least
to come so near it as few before have done. Alike singular, as both here, and
before in the derivation of Gavelkynd, so afterward I may be found in that of
Socage, yet I trust with so much truth, and that so fully evidenced, as will
serve, I hope, to render me with the sober and ingenuous, worthy, if not of
thanks, yet of excuse and pardon, if they differ in opinion from me.

Here also (good Reader) be advertised, that whereas, by occasion of our
discourse in the third Proposition, concerning the Partition-property in
Gavelkynd, I had obiter, or incidently, made some mention of the Writ, De
rationabili part bonorum, sometime (by means of that partition mentioned in
the old Kentish Custumal) obteining, and now again (if the endeavors of some
may take effect) reviving in this County; it came afterward into my mind to
think it would not be impertinent to the present Discourse, somewhat further to
enlarge in that particular: that by enquiry made into the Antiquity, and
tracing the progress of the Partition intended by this Writ from its first
birth until its full growth, we might be the better able to give judgment, and
make the more probable conjecture of the present validity or invalidity
thereof. My discoveries therefore being made and communicated to some judicious
friends, not without their acceptance and my encouragement for publication, I
have adventured to add them at the end of that third Proposition, page 91.

As for my thwarting the common opinion, concerning our composition with the
Norman Conqueror, and the consequents of it, I offer no Apology here, as
having already made it in the proper place, and that, I also trust, so fully,
as I may well expect to be excused of it here. In sum, loving truth (the end of
all Science) for it self, and altogether unbyassed with any by-respects,
whether of vain glory, singularity, or the like, I have made it my constant
endeavor in what is here proposed and published, that Truth alone (than which
says the Philosopher, nothing Idem 2* Metaphys.
is sweeter, nothing more precious) might triumph over Falsehood, Antiquity over
Novelty. If hereby I have done either of them any right, or any friends any
pleasure, as the chiefest reward I expect for all, I shall desire that such a
measure of respect may be vouchsafed, as to those old Records from whence the
chief materials in this structure have been taken, so to that ancient learning
which has contributed fitting tools wherewith to work the same materials, and
fit them for that use, as may secure and rescue both (incapable of other
recompense) from that scorn, neglect and contempt in the days of so much
novelty so freely cast upon them, since by falling into some hands, so good an
improvement may be made of them for the public.

I may perchance (at first sight, at least) be thought too bold with the common
Lawyers, too busy in their Commonwealth, too much meddling in matters of their
peculiar Science; yet no otherwise, I hope, than that they and their friends
may be willing to excuse me. I am one that honor their profession, and have
here done or said nothing out of opposition; my intent being only in my way to
do them service, and their profession right, by holding forth to public view
some Antiquities tending at once to the satisfaction of the one, and
illustration of the other. For which purpose I have by me some other things in
a readiness for the public, and which shall not (God willing) much longer be
retarded, in case these my present endeavors (as my past have done) meet with
any proportionable encouragement, and the times permit, by the continuance of
our Counties peace, (Peace, I say, that mother of Arts:) which with an
enlargement and establishment of that blessing throughout the three Kingdoms,
is a chief subject (courteous Reader) in the daily devotions of

Thine humble Servant, William Somner.

The Postscript.
THe Reader is here further to be advertised, that both this Preface and the
following Treatise were first written more than twelve years agone, have lien
by the Author ever since, and had not now come forth, but upon the
encouragement of some worthy and judicious friends. If therefore any thimg
(whether for language or otherwise) in either the one or the other, seem
improper, uncouth, or unsuitable to the present times, his patience and pardon
is humbly craved and expected.

To expedite such (in their perusal of this work) as are ignorant, but
studious, of the Saxon Language, the Author (although he have but lately set
forth a Saxon Dictionary) has thought it very fit here to prefix the Saxon
Alphabet and Abbreviations.

a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z. a b c (...) e (...) (...) h
(...) k l m n o p q (...) (...) (...) u (...) x y z.

th th that and (...) (...) (...) (...)

Errata.
Page 4. lin. 21. and customary. lin. 22. yielded it. p. 18. l. 8. Bians. p.
21. l. 1. after Consuetudo. l. 18. Snave. l. 27. Shorham. p. 24. l. 18.
Oale-gavel. p. 25. l. 2. Clyve. l. 16. Chartham. p. 26. l. 20. of it in that
composition. p. 27. l. 5. rents and services. p. 29. l. 7. find it in. l. 28.
to the Tenant, better. l. 31. Fremfeld. p. 30. l. 27. not alienable. p. 31. l.
21. Gam^lle^um. l. 25. Hervicus. p. 34. l. 10. rather say. l. 14. ma^am. l. 18.
firmam. l. 20. construe. p. 36. l. 2. Counties. p. 37. l. 9. the which word. p.
38. l. 18. (...). ibid. (...). l. 27. of former times. p. 39. l. 13.
Herlewinum. p. 55. l. 21. of times. p. 58. l. 14. aequ* valentem. p. 72. l. 4.
retained. p. 83. l. ult. construe it thus. p. 96. l. 2. Salvo. p. 117. l. 4.
Drofmannus. p. 119. l. 8. Demesne. p. 123. l. 6. those and succeeding. p. 142.
in marg. L. 1. ff. si ag. p. 162. l. 24. And as it is. p. 175. l. 1. priori.
ibid. in marg. Burgor. apud Scotos.

Some literal and such like other smaller faults there are, besides
mis-pointings: which being as easily amended as observed, are therefore here
pretermitted.

GAVELKYND.
AMong the many singularities of Kent, that of so much note, both at home and
abroad, commonly called Gavelkynd, may seem to bear away the bell from all the
rest, as being indeed a property of that eminent singularity in the Kentishmens
possessions, so generally in a manner, from great antiquity, over-spreading
that County, as England at this day cannot show her fellow in that particular;
yet so unhappy the whilst are both Kentish-men and others, in the right
understanding both of name and thing, that although it be the daily subject of
every man's discourse, even of all professions, yet remains it hitherto, both in
the one respect and in the other, so obscure, and in so much want of further
illustration to make it known, as if never yet by any seriously considered of.
Purposing therefore to contribute my best assistance toward a right and full
discovery; in order thereunto, and for my more methodical proceeding, I shall
branch out my discourse into these five following heads or propositions: viz.

1. The true etymology and derivation of the name, including a plain
confutation of that which is commonly received. 2. The nature of Gavelkynd*
land in point of partition. 3. The antiquity of Gavelkynd* custom, in point
especially of partition, and why more general in Kent than elsewhere. 4. Whether
Gavelkynd be properly a Tenure, or a Custom; and if a Custom, whether
inherent in the land or not. 5. Whether before the Statute of Wills (32 and 34
Hen. 8.) Gavelkynd* land in Kent were deviseable, or not.
PROPOSITION I.
The true etymology and derivation of the name, including a plain confutation
of that which is commonly received.

TO begin with the first: (the true Etymology and derivation of the name,
etc.) By the common and received opinion of these days, obvious and easy to
be found, both in the writings and discourses of Kentish-men and others, this
Custom (as commonly called) owes its name and original to the nature of the
land in point of descent. To consult (for instance) a few of the multitude of
printed opinions looking that way, collected from the most eminent of our
modern and late Writers, as well Antiquaries as Lawyers, and intending to steer
a retrograde course in this re-search, I shall begin with one of the latest,
Sir Edward Coke, who in his Notes, or Illustrations upon Littleton, tit.
Villenage, Sect. 210. verb. en Gavelkinde, glosseth the text thus: Gave all
kind: for (says he) this Custom gives to all the sons alike. Not long before
him, another learned Sir Hen. Spelman, in voce* Gaveletum.
Knight and famous Antiquary, taking the word to expound in his Glossary of
antiquated words, says, that it is termed Gavelkynd, either, Quasi debitum vel
tributum soboli, pueris, generi, i. e. as it were of right belonging and given
(intimated in the two first syllables, (...), or (...):) to the issue,
children, or kind, (signified by the last, (...), or (...):) Or else secondly
(says he) from (...), i. e. given to all the next in kindred. Verstegan (to
ascend in our g^adation one step higher) c^nsureth the word of corruption,
saying, that it is corruptly termed Gavelkynd, for Give all kind, which after
him is as much to say, as, Give each child his part. From whom Mr. Cambden
differs Britannia, in Kent.
as little in time, as in opinion, when he says it is called Gavelkynd, that
is, says he, give all kynne. Before all these, Mr. Lambard, (the first that
undertook the etymology, and whom, beside the former, The English Lawyer, p.
73.
Judge Dodderidge, Interpreter, in voce.
Dr. Cowell, the Author of the New Terms of Law, and many more, longo agmine,
a^e known to follow) in his explication of Saxon words prefixed to his
Archaion, verb. Terra ex scripto, is clear for the derivation of the word from
the Saxon (...): Credo (says he) ut terra illa Gavelkyn, quasi (...), idest,
omnibus cognatione proximis data, dicatur. But afterward, (as if upon second
thoughts altered in his Perambul. p. 528.
opinion) he coupleth this derivation with a second, and so at length is found
to share his opinion of the words original between two conjectures, grounded
both upon the nature of the land; the one in point of Descent, the other of
Rent and Services. In reference to the former of which, he says, that,
Therefore the land was called either Gavelkyn, in meaning, give all kyn,
because it was given to all the next in one line of kindred; or, give all kind,
that is, to all the male children: for kind (says he) in Dutch signifies yet
a male child. And in relation to the latter, he says, that, It is well known,
that as Knights-Service land required the presence of the Tenant in warfare,
and battle abroad: so this land (being of Socage tenure) commanded his
attendance at the plough, and other the Lords affairs of husbandry at home: the
one by manhood defending the Lords life and person, the other by industry
maintaining with rent, corn and victual his estate and family. This rent (as
there he adds) ni a customary payment of works, the Saxons called (...), and
thereof (as I think) they named the land that yeeldod (...) or (...), that is
to say, Land letten for rent, or of the kind to yield rent, etc. The Author (I
confess) modestly leaves it free to the Reader to receive either of these
conjectures, or to refuse both, as it shall best like him: but the former of
the two, being prima facie, of a more plausible sound and allusion than the
other, (an advantage very considerable with most men, whose guidance
notwithstanding is not always to be followed:) and that having gotten the
start of her fellow in time, has not failed to keep it ever since, having
proved the more acceptable of the twain, and by this time found so many
followers, and those, like the first Author, of so great credit, as that
whosoever shall contradict the one, or dispute the other, can do neither
without exceeding prejudice; so difficult a lesson it is with some to unlearn,
See the addition to Dr. Casaubons Treatise of Use and Custom.
whose minds are as hardly weaned from an opinion which their fancy has once
approved, as others are from an habit or a custom, which if inveterate and
long* settled, though* corrupt and vicious, is very hardly left off, and laid
aside. Yet, as the Common Law See Sir Ed. Coke, Instit. part. 1. fol. 115. a.
determines of a Custom, that if the rise, the original thereof can so be
traced, as it can appear that it first began within time of memory, it is no
Custom, nor shall obtain or prevail as a Custom; so in case, by tracing the
present derivation to the wellhead, I shall show, together with the time, the
error of its first original, not to be salv'd by long tract of time, (for,
Quod ab initio non ff* de Reg. Jur. l. quod ab initio.
valuit, tractu temporis non convalescit:) I trust I shall not fail, nor fall
short of what mine endeavors drive at in this matter; the weaning (I mean) of
sober and judicious minds from an opinion so erroneous and ungrounded as this,
I doubt not, upon trial, shall appear to be, though thus long continued, and in
it self specious and plausible enough. However, being convinced in mine own
judgment of the error, that I may not seem to swallow it for company, to the
prejudice of truth, for that (I say) if for no other reason, I have resolved to
protest against it: and yet, not to seem singularly affected without a cause, I
shall not do it by a bare denial or dissent, as he that thought it sufficient
for Bellarmines confutation to give him the lie, but by representing withal my
inducements thereunto, I hope to put the matter out of doubt, that I have
studied the Readers satisfaction herein as well ^s my own, by a learned man's
Duarenus, Commen^* in Tit. de Pactis, p. 49. ^.
example, who^e words in a like case, as very apposite in this, I shall here
borrow for the close of my Apology: Etsi m^ non lateat, (says he) quam
lubrica, plenaque discrim^nis res sit, quae per tot secula, tot homines eruditi
uno consens^ proba^unt, rejicere velle, rations tamen eas in medium adducere
visum est, quibus adductis hanc interpretationem damnare ausus sum. Nor is this
(I take it) magno conatu nugas agere; the discovery and refutation of popular
errors having been a task for many worthy pens, in cases of as small
concerment as this perhaps may seem to be* To the matter then.

Whether the name of Gavelkynd was at first imposed with, or in respect to the
nature of the land, in point of descent, or not, is indeed the matter in
question. The common opinion (I confess) affirms it, wherewith joining issue
in the negative, I shall endeavor to refute it by a double proposition; one
negative, showing that this is a wrong, and mistaken; the other positive, or
affirmative, declaring what is the right and genuine construction of the term.

As for the former, though it carry with it a seeming allusion to Gavelkynd in
sound, yet if we look advisedly into the true nature of it, we may, and
peradventure must, conclude the etymology from Giveall cyn, Give-all-kynd, or
the like, unnatural at the least, and far fetched, if not violently forced. For
first, admitting Kind to signify a male-child in the Dutch or Belgic tongue,
as it does not more than a female, being a word common to children of either
Sex ( Knecht indeed with them, as Cniht with our Ancestors, the
English-Saxons, is of that See Kilianus Diction. verb. Knecht.
signification:) yet is not this kind of land so restrained in point of descent
only to the males, but that (as in the case of land descendible at the Common
Law) the females in their default, that is, where the males are wanting, are
capable of succession to it, and in the same way of partition with the males.
Nay, is any of the sons dead in the fathers life time, leaving a daughter
behind him, such daughter shall divide with her uncles in this Lamb. Peramb. p.
547.
land. What then? shall we admit kind to signify the issue, be it male or
female? as indeed it does either, coming of the Saxon, or old English, cennan,
or Vid. Dictionar. nostr. Anglo-Sax. i^ voc^.
cennian, parere, to bring forth, whence with them the word or participle
(...), for the first-begotten, or firstborn, (...), for the only begotten,
(...), terrigena, one that is born, or bred of the earth; yet is not this land
so tied to the issue, but that in default thereof, i. e. where that is wanting,
such as be in the transversal or collateral line (as in other lands descendible
at the Common Law) may and do inherit it: as (for instance) when one brother
dies without issue, all the other brethren may and do inherit, as does their
respective issue too, in case of their default, jure repraesentationis, but
with this restriction in the nephews case succeeding with their uncle, viz.
that the descent is then in stirpes, not in capita. Nevertheless, it goes not
as the Irish Davies Reports, Le I^ish Cust de Gavelkind, fol. 49.
Gavelkynd, to all the males of the same lineage, (for in this, as in other
inheritances, propinquior excludit ^racton de acq^iren. rer* dominio, fol. ^4 a.
propinquum) nor yet neither to all the next in one line of kindred, as they
pretend that are for (...), taking cyn to signify kindred, as indeed it does,
for then brothers and sisters both, being alike near in degree, should equally
inherit, (a thing it seems allowed by the old German custom, witness what we
have from De morib. Germanor.
Tacitus; Haeredes successoresque sui cuique liberi, etc. not restraining the
succession to the male* issue, as neither does the l. inter filios. l. famil.
hercis. l. si quis a liberis. ^f. de l^b. agnos^. l. si major. in si. l.
communi divid.
Civil Law:) whereas we know, that as by the Lib. 1. Feud. tit 6. Parag. 2. and
ibi Ho^om.
Feudal Customs abroad, where males are, the females are excluded from
succession, so by the Common Law of Li. Hen. 1. c. 70. Glanvil. li. 7. c. 3.
Bracton, fol 65. a.
England, women (or females) shall not partake with males, according to that
rule laid down in the Statute called Praerogativa Regis, cap. 16. Foeminae non
participabunt cum masculis, which (by the way) is understood only of such as
are in equal degree. But does ^yn or kind here intend and denote a man's issue,
the Gavelkynders children? What may we say then to a conveyance of land in
Gavelkynd to a Guild, or Corporation, aggregate of many, suppose an Hospital;
(as an instance of that nature shall be produced And another in the Appendix,
Scripture 9
by and by:) they are a dead hand, how then is the etymology in that case
justified? Where Is the kind, the parties issue here, to make good the
derivation? But since, by occasion, mention is made of such a gift, or
conveyance, to strangers from the proper issue or heirs, let me thus far
further add, that in case it be called Gavelkynd, from debitum vel tributum
soboli, i. e. due, or given to the issue, as some are of opinion, how comes it
then to pass, that, as before the Statute of Wills, Gavelkynd* land might by
deed, or other lawful conveyance (and that Domin^, in this case inconsulto, and
invito too, contrary to the nature of what with the Feudists is properly termed
See Vulteius, de Feud. li. 1. c 8. nu. 37. p. 341.
Fe^:) be freely given, or sold away from the heir by the custom to a mere
stranger, (contrary to the old Common Law of Glanvil. lib. 7. cap. 1.
England, except in some few cases, as in Frankalmoigne, or in marriage with a
man's daughter, a reasonable part might be given, with some limitations and
distinctions between Land of Inheritance and Purchase:) as now since the
Statute of Wills, (if not before, as some of late seek to persuade us, a matter
which I shall reserve See the ^ Proposition.
al^iori indagini:) it may be, and daily is by devise of will and testament;
How is the next heirs right to this land preserved, when there is that freedom
of giving, or devising it away? Or how can this liberty and that etymology
consist? Yet further, does not Mr. Lambard somewhere Perambu^. p. 544*
say, that no Gavelkynd partition could be challenged, but only where the
custom of division had prevailed, and that Gavelkynd was not tried by the
manner of Socage-services, but only by the touch of some former partition? If
^o, no land then could properly be called Gavelkynd, wherein this custom of
partition had not yet obtained: what shall then be thought of those new created
Tenures in Gavelkynd, whereof until the Statute of Anno 18* Edw. 1.
Quia emptores terrarum, examples are very obvious and frequent in the old
Records both of the Cathedral at Canterbury, and of the neighbor Abbey of St.
Augustines, and elsewhere, affording many ancient grants of land in Gavelkynd?
to what original shall the name there be referred? to any customable partition?
nothing less: for where can that be found in Gavelkynd-land of novel Tenure,
for want of that competencie of precursory time of them necessarily presupposed
(to frame the custom in) who conceive the name taken from such accustomable
partition? Moreover, if partition were the thing that gave name to Gavelkynd,
then should all partible land wheresoever be so called: but there is in parts
abroad (out of Kent) partible land not called Gavelkynd. Ergo, etc. For the
assumption see the Stat. 32. Hen. 8. cap. 29. purposely made to change the
customary descent of the land of Osweldbeck Soke or Lordship in
Nottingham-shire. And what does Lib. 3. ^^l. 374. a.
Bracton intimate less in his sicut de Gavelkynd, vel alibi ubi terra ^st
partibbilis ratione terrae? Add hereunto* that the word, as to the main part
of it* Gavel, frequently occurs in the old records of some manours out of Kent,
sometimes simply, but for the most in composition; for example, Gavel-erth,
Gavelate, Gavel-lond, Gavel-man, Gavel-swine, Gavel-wood, Gavel-rod, etc. (of
which more anon.) And shall the same thing, (contrary to that rule of Law, ^.
1. ff. De rerum permutatione) diverso jure censeri? For I suppose none will
render it there (being out of Kent, and where no Gavelkynd partition takes
place) Gife-eal* Nor will this derivation any better stand with Gavel, where it
helps to the composition of some words here used in Kent, in former times at
least, besides that of Gavelkynd, such as are all or most part of those
aforeremembred, to which I may add Gavel-rip, Gavelote, Gavel-sester,
Gavel-bred, Gavel-bord, Gavel-timber, Gavel-corn, Gavel-re^ter, etc. whereof
also I shall entreat further by and by. Is it then (lastly) to be supposed*
that the lands mere descent in this kind to all the heirs alike, supposing a
plurality of heirs, was all the regard those Ancestors of ours had to sway and
regulate their judgment by, to whom the name, the term, does owe its first
original? Was that in probability ground enough to satisfy them of the
congruity and sutablenesse of the name to and with the nature of the thing
named, as names we know should Convenient rebus nomin^ saepe suis.
be? Vix credo. I doubt it for my part.

In brief then, to recollect what has been said: 1. If females are capable of
this succession as well as males, where the male issue fails. 2. If
collateral kindred are capable thereof as well as those in the descendent line,
where such heirs are wanting, (in both which kinds Gavelkynd land differs not
from that at the Common Law:) 3. If Corporations may hold land in Gavelkynd. 4.
If such land may be passed away to mere strangers from the right heirs. 5. If
none may properly be called Gavelkynd-land, where an accustomable partition
has not made way for it. 6. If there be partible land elsewhere (out of Kent)
that is not called Gavelkynd. 7. If Gavel (the forepart of the word) found in
some Records of land out of Kent, and of others in Kent, will not bear the
derivation of it from Gife-eal, without absurdity. 8. And lastly, if names are
to be imposed with respect to the nature of what is Nominae cum re consentiant,
Plat^ de Sapient.
named, then is Gavelkynd, after these men's premised derivation, in some sort a
very scant, narrow, and partial, in other a most incongruous and improper term
to express the nature of the land by. Surely, there was somewhat more peculiar
to Gavelkynd-land, and of more note and eminency in it, better serving to
distinguish it from other kind of land, than this derivation of theirs seems to
intimate, and which first gave occasion to the imposition of that name upon it,
which leads me to my other, the positive, or affirmative proposition, asserting
the true sense and construction of the term, and showing whence it was at first
imposed, and afterward continued.

Wherein I must confess, Mr. Lambard was as happy Gafol, what signifying.
to go right in the latter of his two conjectures, as he was before unluckie to
miss of the right in his former, yet in this passively unhappy though, that
the former, through the advantages aforementioned, wholly took, and was
accepted of all, whilst the latter was received and embraced of none: but no
great marvel, since, whilst some, through ignorance could not judge of, others
happily for company, would not question so plausible a derivation. But to the
purpose.

To such as are any thing versed* in Saxon monuments, Gafol is a word very
obvious, but varied sometimes in the Dialect, as being written now (...), anon
(...), here (...), there (...). I shall give you a few instances where it
occurrs, and in what sense. Tribute mentioned in the 17 of St. Matthews Gospel,
verses 24, and 25, as also in the 22 of the same Evangelist, verses 17 and 19,
is in the Saxon Translation of the Gospels, turned (...). In the 25 chapter of
the same Gospel, at the 27 verse, it serves to express what there in our
modern English Translation is called, in some books, advantage, in other,
usury, agreeable to that in the Saxon Psalter, Psalm. 54. verse. 11. where usura
in the Latin, in the marginal version or reading of the word, is rendered
(...). (...) occurring in the first of King Withreds Laws of Sir Henry Spelmans
Edition, in the first Volume of the Councils, page 194. is of that* learned
Knight expounded to us by Redditus vel Pensiones, as it is again in his Latin
Version of Pope Agatho's decretal Epistle, page 164. of the same Councils, by
Redditus. In an old Sanction of King Edgars, recited by Mr. Seldom in his Notes
upon Aedmerus, page 153. what is there in the Latin read solitus census, in
the Interlineary Saxon Version we find rendered there (...). Hereunto I might
add heaps of instances taken from the Saxon Laws, the Mare clausum* and
elsewhere, but I forbear to exspatiate: and to be short, Gafol is a word, which,
as Gablum in Doomsday-book, the skilful in the Saxon tongue, with Sir Hen.
Spelman elsewhere, turn by what Gabella is expounded Glossar. verb. Gabell^.
abroad, viz. Vectigal, Portorium, Tributum, Exactio, Census, in Latin, but in
English, with Verstegan, Tribute, Tax, or Custom, to which with Peramb. p. 529.
Mr. Lambard, and Instit. p. 1. fol. 142. 2.
Sr. Edw. Coke, let me add, Rent: witness, besides the former quotations,
what occurrs in an ancient will or deed In Archiv. Eccles. Cant.
of one Athelwird, the Donor of certain land at Ickham in Kent to the Cathedral
at Canterbury, in the year of man's redemption 958. where you may read: (...)
forte he^e^*
(...), etc. And anon after again: (...), etc. The former of which passages,
under favor of the skilful in that language, I shall render thus in our modern
English: After his days, (or death) Eadrith, if he live, shall enjoy (or use)
it, yiedling that rent which is imposed on it* that is, v. pounds, and every
year (or yearly) one days farm (or victual) unto the Covent, that is, xl
(measures called) Sextaries of ale, Containing four gallons, so Fleta lib. 2.
cap. 12.
etc. And the latter thus: With the same (or like) Rent that herein is
appointed. Let me add what in another like Record, both for time and place,
occurrs thus* (...). That is, And after both their days (or deaths) let
Eadsith the Archbishop, if he survive them, have (or take) these lands, or
else his Successor for the time being, unless some friend of theirs, by (or
with) the Archbishops favor, may continue to hold that land at (or upon) the
accustomed rent, ur upon what other contract (or condition) may be had (or
made) with the Archbishop then living, (or, for the time being.) I shall add
but one instance more from the grant of Bocking (a known place in Essex) to the
same Cathedral* by one Ethelrich, in the year of Christ 997. (...). That is:
And I also give those two hides (of land) that Eadrith renteth (or hireth)
yearly for half a pound. So that to me it seems clear, that ponere terram ad
gablum, is as much as to hire, or let out land by or for rent or farm, and by
consequence, terra ad gablum posita, taken in its proper and genuine acception,
is land hired, or letten out to farm, or for rent. In the latitude of the word
it comprehends besides* all censual, or tributary land, as also what we call
customary land, (in that sense wherein Consuetudines, Customs, denote Coke,
Instit. p. 2. p. 58.
Services) and so takes in all Rent-service land, which with our Saxon
Ancestors, who called the rent or service paid or done for such land, Spelm.
Gloss. in voce*
(...), and (...), was, by a transposition of the syllables, called and known
by the name of (...), or the like: Lamb. Archaion, fol. 45. cap. 2.
(...). i. e. Except the Churl (or Countryman) that occupies censual land,
as one would say now, Except the Country Fermor, or the like. He seems by this
to be properly (...), i. e. one that had no land of his own, such a one as had,
being called (...), i. e. terrae propriet^rius, a landed man, as the word is (I
take it) to be rendered, not Viator, a wayfaring man, or the like, as some
Spelm. Gloss. in voce.
have guessed. But to keep us to our Gafol, within and under which term and
notion, not only the generality of rent and customary, whether payments or
services, was comprehended and comprised, simply; but what we at this day call
Rent-corn, Rent-honey, Rent-barley, and the like, the special and particular
rents and services, I mean, by the custom of some manors yielded by the
Tenants to the Lords thereof, though now for the most part turned into moneys,
were in elder times, in composition, called Corn-gavel, Hunig-gavel,
Bere-gafol, etc. Without impertinencie I hope, I shall here present the Reader
with a list of as many of them, as with much content to my self, I have
ransacked old Records to find out for this purpose, with an assay of mine own
at their several expositions, and they are divisible into two sorts, the one
beginning, the other ending with Gavel. Both of them follow.

Gavel-corne. Gavel-erth. Gavel-rip. Gavel-med. Gavel-ote. Gavel-dung.
Gavel-rod. Gavel-tymber. Gavel-refter. Gavel-bord. Gavel-swine. Gavel-wood.
Gavel-sester. Gavel-werk. Gavel-noht. Gavel-fother. Gavel-bred.
Wood- Gavel. Work- Gavel. Swine- Gavel. Corn- Gavel. Penny- Gavel. Malt-
Gavel. Les- Gavel. Leaf- Gavel. Hunig- Gavel. Were- Gavel. Twy- Gavel. Bear-
Gavel. For- Gavel.
In the list of the Rents and Services reckoned up in ^avel-^orn.
a Lieger-book of the Church of Canterbury, as charged upon that Churches
manor of Adesham in Kent, this in particular thus occurrs: Item de Gavel-corn
66. sum. Doubtless it is the same with that in a composition made between the
Abbot and Covent of St. Augustines at Canterbury, and their Tenants of Minster
and Hengrove in Thanet, anno 19. Hen. 6. called Corn-gavel, and there thus
described: Et quod quatuor Corn-gavel.
Swillingae and dimidia, and quarta pars unius Swillingae residuae tenebantur
and tenentur de praedictis Abbate and Conventu per fidelitatem and relevium,
and per redditum and servitium vocatum Corn-gavel, viz. reddendo eisdem Abbati
and Conventu^, and successoribus suis annuatim, in festo S. Michaelis
Archangeli, de qualibet Swillinga earundem 4. Swillingar. Quindecim quarteria
and quinque buschellos ordei palmalis, and 15 quarteria and 5 buschellos
avenarum, and de praedicta medietate and quarta part unius swillingae secundum
ratam portionis ordei and avenarum illas medietatem and quartam partem
contingentis, defeernd. and cariand. ad costas and expensas praedictorum
tenentium usque ad granarium dictorum Abbatis and conventus infra monasterium
S. Augustini praedictum, vel per servitium reddendi pro qualibet acra dictarum
quatuor swillingarum in ^od. festo S. Michaelis octo denarios, and pro dictis
medietate and quarta part unius swilling^ secundum ratam portionis illas
medietatem and quartam partem unius swillingae de praedictis ordeo and avena
contingentis, in casu quo praedicti tenentes praedictum or deum and avenam in
eod^m festo in forma praedicta non solverint. Thus the composition, whereby it
is apparent what Gavel-corn signifies, namely (as before was intimated)
Rent-corn.

In an Accompt-roll of the Archbishop of Canterburies Cavel-erth.
manor of Reculver in Kent, anno 29. Edw. 1. this service, under the title of
Arura, occurrs thus: Item respondet de xxxv. acris de consuetudine arandi
Gavelherthe. In an old Customal In Archiv. Archiep. Cant.
of Gillingham manor in Kent, of about that age, I read thus: Item sunt ibi
quinque juga, quodlibet arabit unam dimidiam acram ad semen frumenti, and
seminabit, and herciabit, and dimidiam acram ad semen ordei, and herciabit, and
unam virgatam ad avenam and herciabit and warectabit, dimidiam acram ad ordeum,
and nihil recipient, and vocatur istud opus Gavelerth. This then (it seems) is
a certain Tillage-service, like the arura in Bracton, fol. 35. b. due by the
Tenant holding his land upon terms of plowing, etc. a certain quantity (more or
less) of his Lords Demesnes, not always performed in kind, but bought out and
redeemed sometimes with money. Et de 10. sol. de 10. acris de Gavelerth
relaxato hoc anno, quoth an old Rental sans date of the Archbishops foresaid
manor of Reculver. It was of some affinity, as with the French Poictovines
Biaus, so also with that which Biaus. Benerth.
Mr. Lambard calling Benerth, expounds by service which the Tenant does with
his cart and plough. With his plough indeed, and also with his harrow, but not
(that I find) with his cart, it being a mere tillageservice, as Gavelerth is,
and always performed precario, as the Frenchman says, precairement, upon
request and summons, (in aid, and for the help and ease, when need was, of
other Tenants bound to do the like de gablo, i. e. as I conceive, ex debito,
and without summons:) and with allowance of (more than regularly was afforded
in the other Et omnes tenentes de isto jugo debent a rare, herciare, seminare,
de semine Archiep. unam acram sine cibo, quia Gavelerth. Custumal of Tenham
manor.
service) a coredy, i. e. diet, or victual, (fometime called Benebred) during
the employment. Glanvils precarias carucarum forinsecarum, lib. 8. cap. 3. may
hence be understood. Matthew Paris in his History of England, page 895. of the
last Edition, making mention of a Breve inauditum, (as he there calls it) i. e.
an unheard of Writ, issued by Hen. 3. recites this as a part of it: Similiter
inquiratur de carucis precariis, which by the learned Author of the Glossary,
at the end of the work, is thus illustrated: Erant and precariae (says he,
speaking of several sorts of Ploughs) quas scilicet in necessitate aliqua
eminentiori, colonus uaus a proximo Should he not rather have said, Dominus ab
hominibus suis?
precario mutuabatur. Hence the phrase in many old Custumals and Rentals of
plowing this or that quantity of the Lords land by his Tenant, de prece, de
precaria, ad precariam, and the like. In precariis carucacum and in auxilio
herciandi vj. sol. viij. den. says an old Accompt-roll In Archiv. memorat.
of Saltwood manor. The meaning of such passages in records of that kind as
this: arant preces semel ad conredium Custumal of Monkton manor in Thanet.
Curiae, etc. and the like may hence be picked out. It took name (this of
Benerth) I conceive, of the Saxon been, postulatio, as Mr. Lambard, and before
him Jornadensis, translating the Saxon Laws, turn the word occurring in the
title of the eighth of King Ina's Laws, as Sir Hen. Spelman does by Rogatis,
Council. tom. 1. page 583. Whence (probably) Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 84. speaking of
those Ploughs, calls them Carucas rogatas.

A certain Service (the same, I take it, with Bractons Gavel-rip.
messura, fol. 35. b.) undergone by the Tenants of some manours tied to reap
their Lords corn for him, which if redeemed, or taken in money, was usually
termed Rip-silver. Of the former, in the Custumal In Armat. Eccles Cant.
of Westwell manor in Kent, I read: De consuetudiue metendi xl. acras and
dimid. de Gavel-rip in autumpno xl. s. vj. d. And in another like record, I
meet with the latter thus explained to our hand: De sulinga de Ripsilver.
Witstable xvj. de Ripsilver, quia homines de Witstable solebant antiquitus
metere apud Bertonam. And as in Tillage-service, certain Tenants were bound to
it de gablo, others de prece; and thence the one service called Gavelerth, the
other Benerth; so for reaping also, there were some that held by
Gavelrip-service, other by Bedrip-service, (the old Glossary at the end of
Bedrip. Benrip.
Hen. 1. Laws has it Benripe:) that done de gablo, without any bidding or
summons, and for the most part without coredy; this de prece, upon bidding or
summons, and regularly with coredy: In villa de Ickham (says the old Custumal
of that manor of Christ-Church) sunt xvj. Cotarii, quorum quilibet habet v.
acras, and hae sunt earum consuetudines: Ducunt brasium, etc. and quilibet tres
preces, i. e. (says the old marginal Gloss there) quando rogantur per
servientem Curiae, debent metere, sive aliud facere quod expedit Domino per
tres dies, and si noluerint facere, possint artari, etc. As I gave you some
instances before of Gavelrip, so I might also of Bedrip* but, for brevity sake,
I will only refer you to that in Sir Hen. Spelmans Glossary, verbo Bidripa,
which being barely mentioned there Bidrip.
without exposition, may hence be understood. And as Been in Benerth is of a
Saxon original, so likewise Bid here in Bedrip; and indeed they are univocal,
drawn (this) from the Saxon (...), petere, rogare, and applied to this service
upon the same ground that (...), to a Crier, Beadle, Summoner, Bailiffe, so
called See Spelm. Glossa. in Bedellus.
from his office, which is to warn, summon, give notice, etc. as these Tenants
were to be warned, summoned, in a word, bidden, to come and perform this
service: Et de Cxcix. operibus magnae precariae provenien. de omnib. tenentibus
Domini, tam liberis, quam nativis, infra dominium Domini, quorum quilibet domum
habens de quo fumus exiit, inveniet unum hominem ad magnam precariam, si ad hoc
summonitus fuerit, etc. as it is in Account In Archiv. Archiep. Cant. Gavel-med.
of the manor of Harwe, now called Harrow in Middlesex, anno 21. Rich. 2.

A service of much affinity with the former. In an Accompt-roll In Archiv.
memorat.
of Terring manor in Sussex, anno 11. Edw. 1. it occurs thus: Consuetudo
metendi quae vocatur Gavelrip, follows Consuetudo falcandi quae vocatur
Gavelmed. And anon after: Et pro una septimana dum falcatur stipula quae
vocatur Gavelmed. It needs no further opening.

A certain proportion of Rent-oats served in sometime Gavel-ore.
in kind, other while by composition redeemed with money. As to the former,
(its payment in kind) I read thus in an In Archiv. memorat.
old Custumal, ( sans date) of Southmalling manor in Sussex: Borga de
Wellingham. Operarii. Omnes isti operarii de W. debent reddere annuatim de
qualibet virgata unum quarterium avenae, quod dicitur Gavelote in xlma. In an
Accompt-roll of the same manor, I find a charge suitable: Idem respondet de
octo quarteriis, quatuor bush. avenae receptis de gabulo Custumariorum de
Wellingham. And for the redeeming it with money, an old Ubi sup.
Account, ( sans date) of the Abbey of St. Augustines manours of Swane and
Borewaremersh in Rumney mersh, furnish us with an instance of it thus: Et de
avena de gablo vendita iij. s. Like to that in old Ubi sup.
Accompt-roll of Gillingham manor by Rochester: Et de x. s. vj. d. de quinque
quarteriis, duob. bush. de Gavelote de redditu venditis.

A service (like to that spoken of by Littleton, under Gavel-dung.
the title of Villenage) to carry the Lords dung out of the site of the manor,
unto the land of his Lord, etc. whereof in an Ubi sup.
Accompt-roll of Storham manor in Sussex, of about Edw. 1. time, under the
title of Consuetudines and servitia de omnibus Borghis extra boscum praeter
Suthram, I read in the Accomptants charge as follows: Idem respondet de
consuetudine extrahendi fimum debita per Custumarios tenentes xxvij. virgatas,
dimid. and j. ferling. in Borgh de Got, Middelham, Astone, Northlington, and
Wellingham in una septiman^ post festum S. Michaelis cum auxilio Molmannorum,
quod servitium vocatur Gaveldung. See the Grand Custumier of Normandy, cap. 53.
in fine.

What service this was, the place it self where it occurs Gavel-rod.
sufficiently explaines unto us, and that is an old Ubi supra.
Extent of the manor of Terring in Sussex, anno 5. Edw. 1. where under the
title of Virgatarii operarii de Wadeherst, we have it thus: In borga de
Wadeherst sunt xv. virgatae, dimid, and j. firling terrae nativae, quarum
quaelibet debet claudere unam perticatam sepis circa curiam de Malling, and
debet pro pollis and claustura quam facere solebat ad Natalem beati Johannis
Baptistae annuatim reddere j. d. ob. quod dicitur Gavelrod and Burghard, etc.
Burgh-yard.


Certain Rent-timber to be used in repairing the Gavel timber.
Lords mansion house, or some apperteining Edifice, and as some Records do
specify it, Rafters. Whence in an Ubi sup.
Accompt-roll of Norbourne manor in East Kent, anno 31. Edw. 3. as a part of
the Accomptants charge there, I read thus: Et de C C. refters de Gavel-tymber,
de redditu, quilibet de longitudine xiij. ped. de quibus proveniunt de
tenemento de Borewaresyle C. and de tenemento de Monynden C. Another like Roll
of the same manor calls it Gavel refter. And much of Gavel-refter.
the same nature was the next called Gavel-bord, whereof Gavel-bord.
in the last cited roll mention is thus made. Et de C C C. Gavelbordis de
redditu, quilibet de longitudine iij. ped. dimid. unde, etc. These rents and
services were wont to be charged upon their Wealdish Tenants, such as occupied
their Wood-lands. And so was the next.

And by an inversion of the syllables, Swine-gavel. Gavel-swine.
A wealdish service (I say) signifying Rent-hogs, or Rent-swine, so called when
paid in kind, ( Et de vij. s. x. d de iij. porcis de gablo venditis ad parocum
de Maghefeld, etc. As it is in a roll Ubi sup.
of accounts of Mayfield manor in Sussex, anno 11. Edw. 3.) otherwise
Swinepaneges, Swine-paneges. Swine-money
and Swine-money, and the like, when namely they were redeemed with the penny, or
with money, which was usually paid at Paroc-time, that is, when the Lord, or
his Bailiffe and Tenants met upon the place in the Weald, to hold a Paroc, a
Court-like kind Paroc.
of meeting, (whereof I have by me a record of some kept about Edw. 1. time)
not much unlike the Forest Swaine-mote, where ( inter alia) and account was
taken of this service in particular, and generally of what hogs or swine had
been taken in to feed and fatten the year past, or the last Pawnage or
masting-time, and rent accordingly paid and received for the same. Hence I take
it (from Paroc, I mean,) the name of that place by Bleane-wood near Canterbury,
which we at this day call the Paddock, for the Paroc.

Sometimes written and called Wood-lode, Wald lode, Gavel-wood.
and other while, by an inversion of the syllables, Woodgavel: a custom or
service incident to some Tenants, to carry home their Lords wood for him. An
old Ubi sup.
Accompt-roll ( sans date) of the Archbishop of Canterburies manours, in
South-malling, has this mention of it in the Accomptants charge: Et de xviij.
s. iij. d. ob. de fine cariandi Gavelwood de consuetudine. It often occurs in
like records of diverse other manours, under that diversity of names.

A certain measure of Rent-ale. Among the articles Gavel-sester.
to be charged upon the Stewards and Bailives of the Church of Canterburies
manours infra Cantiam, according to which they were to be accomptable, this was
wont to be one: De Gavelsester cujuslibet bracini braciati infra libertatem
maneriorum, viz. unam lagenam and dimidium cervisiae. Another old Record calls
it Tolsester in these words: De Tolsester cervis. hoc est de Tol-sester.
quolibet bracino per annum unam lagenam de cervis. as it is in an old book of
the same Cathedral, amongst the rents of Assise of Halton manor in being
undoubtedly the same, in lieu whereof the Abbot of Abbington was wont of
custom to receive that penny mentioned by Mr. Seldom, in his learned
Dissertation annexed unto Fleta, newly published, cap. 8. number. 3. and there (by
some mistake, happily of the Printer) termed Colcester penny, for Tolsester penny.
Nor differs it (I take it) from what in the Glossary at the end of Hen. 1. Laws
is called Oate-gavel. Oate-gavel.


A service charged upon Tenants, for example; In Gavel-werk.
Charing manor in Kent, an old Ubi sup.
Rental whereof of Edw. 1. time has it thus: Grenehelle Eadmundus filius
Thomae de Grenehelle de uno jugo debet, etc. -- arabit unam acram 6. pedes, and
metet unam acram, dimid. and 9. pedes, de Gavelwerk. This admitting also of a
transposition of the syllables, is sometimes found written Werk-gavel, in
barbarous Latin, Werkgabulum, as in an Ubi sup.
Accompt-roll of the Archbishops manor of Tunebrugge (now called Tunbridge)
of Hen. 3. time, and signified Rent-work, which was of two sorts, the one
personal, by the Tenants person, which they called Manuopera; the other by his
carriages, thence termed Manuopera.
Carropera, and they both met (I take it) in Villeins called Carropera.
Gaigneurs.

In an old Custumal of our Cathedral at Canterburies Gavel-noht. Gavel-fother.
manor of Clyne in Kent, I find them thus coupled: De Gavelnoht vel
Gavelfother de Ostreland. The latter seems to expound the former, showing
them both to import what at this day we call Rentfodder: the latter word in
which composition comes (as I suppose) of the Teutonick Voeder, or the German
Fodrum.
Futer, which we at this day pronounce Fodder. Of the Feudists it is called
Fodrum, to whom I refer such as desire a further explanation of the term,
wherein the learned Hotoman (I take it) is more copious than the rest, in his
Commentary De verbis feudalibus, in voce. Let them also have recourse to our
learned Glossarist, in verbo Fodrum.

In the Custumal of the same Churches manor of Gavel-bred.
Chatham in Kent, it occurs thus: Allocantur per annum pro Gavelbred ad
herdemet. iij. sum. dimid. It is the same (I take it) which I find elsewhere
thus expressed: In pane ad Gavelbred, de consuetudine arantium and metentium,
ij. sum. So an Accompt-roll Ubi sup.
of Charing manor in Edw. 1. time. Nor is it probably any other than what in
the Custumal In Archiv. Eccles. Cant. Averbred.
of West-Farlegh manor in Kent is termed Averbred. Allocantur per annum pro
averbred, iij. s. ij. d. It seems to be a proportion of food or victual allowed
to the baser sort of Tenants, such as the Custumarii, Cotarii, Villani, and the
like (the Gaigneurs) toward their coredy, or sustentation, Gaigneur^.
during their employments in the Villein-services of their Lords, such as those
reckoned up by the Author of the Mirroir, chap. 2. sect. 28. where he says:
Et ascuns per villeins customs d' arrer, ower, charrier, sarclir, fauchir,
scier, tasser, batre, ou tielx autres manners d' services, which were not
always attended with such allowance; whence my Author goes on, adding, and
ascun foits sans reprise d' manger. And thus far of the particular rents and
services, whose names begin with Gavel, to which I might add that of (...),
occurring in the Laws of King Ina, cap. 44. Now to proceed to those ending with
it.

Of which the first four, (Wood-gavel, Werk-gavel, Wood-gavel. Werk gavel.
Swine-gavel. Corn-gavel.
Swine-gavel, Corn-gavel) having their several expositions in their proper
places, viz. in the former list of services, whose names begin with Gavel, I
pass from them to the rest of like termination.

In the Conquerours, and some succeeding Kings Peny-gavel.
Charters, made to St. Augustines Abbey at Canterbury, the present service
occurrs by the name of Gabulum denariorum, the tithe whereof here excepted from
these, was elsewhere granted unto other Monks, whereof see Mr. Seldens History
of Tithes, page 321, 330, 331. It was a rent usually reserved and paid in
money, witness the mention and description of it without composition, between
the Abbat and Covent of St. Augustines and the men of Thanet, whereof before in
Gavel-corn, and speaks thus: -- Tenentur de praedictis Abbate and Coventu and
Praedecessoribus suis per fidelitatem and relevium, and per redditum and
servitium vocatum Penny gavel, viz. reddendo annuatim eisdem Abbati and Coventui
and eorum Successoribus de qualibet swillinga dictarum xlij. swillingarum in
festo S. Martini in hyeme december and novem solidos and octo denarios, and de
praedicta quarta part unius Swillingae in eodem festo annuatim quatuor solidos
and undecim denarios, and pro qualibit acra dictarum xxxviij. acrarum terrae de
Swillingland in eodem festo secundum ratam portionis redditus easdem xxxviij.
acras terrae contingentes, etc.

In the Custumal of the Church of Canterburies Malt-gavel.
manor of Mepham in Kent, amongst the rest of the rents services there, this
occurs for one: De xxj sum. iiij. bush. de Maltgavel, etc. It signifies
Rent-malt, and is the same (I take it) that in another like Record (an old
Rental of Eastry manor in Kent) is called Malt shot, and thus expressed there.
De Malt shot termino Malt shot.
circumcisionis Domini xx. d. But so called, I trow, when compounded for in
money; otherwise, upon the same ground, Malt-peny, as the old Customal of the
Malt-peny.
same manor frequently names it.

So called, peradventure, in relation to some greater Les-gavel.
rent or service arising and paid out of the same land, that this, at some
other part or season of the year (I guess hereat by an old In Archiv. Archiep.
Cant.
Customal of Charing manor, where indeed I found it so:) and so Les-gavel,
quasi Lesle-rent, or Lesle-service. I take it to be the same that in the
Customals and Rentals of some other manours, I find written Lesyeld, and
Lesgeld; unless Les-yeld, Les-geld. Leaf-gavel.
it be mistaken for the next, Leaf-gavel, thus occurring in an old Accompt-roll
of the Church of Canterbury: Et de xii. l. iij. d. ob. de annuo redditu assis
cum Leafgabulo ad terminum S. Martini; which I conceive to be the same with
what in a like Record of Hathewolden (now Halden) manor in Kent, is called
Lef-silver: Les-silyer.
Et de xviij. d. de Lef-silver in Hathewoldum. The old Custumal of Tenham
manor in Kent, calling it Lyefyield, Lyef-yeild.
thus explains it: Tenentes de Waldis non possunt arare terras suas ab
equinoctio autumpnali usque festum beati Martini sine licentia. Et ideo,
reddunt annuatim dimidiam marcam ad festum S. Martini, sive fuerit Pessona,
sive non. Et vocatur Lyes-yeld. Whereby it seems to be a tribute paid by
certain Wealdish Tenants, for liberty to plow their grounds during a certain
season of the year, viz. tempore Pessonae, which, because of some prejudice
that might thereby redound to the Lord in his Pawnage, was not permitted
without his leave.

Gabulum mellis, as the old Ubi sup.
Rentals of Chistlet Hunig-gavel.
manor in Kent seem to term what some ancient Accompt-rolls Ubi sup.
of Otteford and other manours call Hunigaved, both one and the other signifying
Renthoney.

Item de Weregavel vj. d. aliquando tamen plus, aliquando Were-gavel.
minus. Thus in the In Archiv. Eccles. Cant.
Custumal of the Canterbury Cathedrals manor of Leisdowne in the Isle of
Shepey. It seems to be a rent paid in respect of Wears or Kiddels, to catch
fish withal, pitched and placed by the Seacoasts, and, until Magna Charta
forbade it, in some rivers too, whereof see further in Sir Hen. Spelmans
Glossary, verbo Kidellus; and in Sir Edw. Cokes Institutes, part 2. page 38.
and elsewhere.

In an In Archiv. Archiep. Cant.
Accompt-roll of the manor of Reculver Twy^gavel.
in Kent, anno 16. Edw. 3. this service, in the charge there, thus occurrs:
Idem respondet de 814 and dimid. ped. clausur. hayag. fac. circa manerium, ex
consuetudine, unde de Twygavel 200. I meet with it elsewhere also, but with
explanation no where. Taking liberty of conjecture, I conceive it to be some
double kind of service by the Twy preposed, as elsewhere Twysket (an Twy^sket.
imposition upon the Tenants of Aldington manor by Romney mersh, for
maintaining the Seacoasts there, and other like defenses against inundations:)
is termed Duplum, as thus: Computus de duplo Wallae, quod vocatur Twysket. So
the Accompt-roll of that manor in the sixth year of St. Edmunds Archbishopric.

Is termed of our learned Glossarist, verb. Berewica, Bere-gafol*
by Tributum hordeaceum: elsewhere, viz. verb. Gabella, by Redditus hordeaceus.
You shall find in the 60th. of King Ina's Laws, in Mr. Lambards Archaion. If
it were not Rent-barley, I should take it for the Drincelean, Drincelean.
occurring, as in the last chapter of the Leges Presbyterorum Northumbrensium,
in Sir Hen. Spelmans Councils, page 502. So also in the 87th of King Cnutes
Laws in the Archaion, and in this latter place rendered in the old Version in
Brampton, (just as Oryncelan, mistaken for Drincelan, in the old Glossary at
the end of Hen. 1. Laws) by Retributio potus. If so, it seems to be the same
with what was afterward called Scot-ale, whereof Scot-ale*
you may read in Matthew. Paris, the Charter of the Forest, Bracton, the Mirroir,
and elsewhere. King Hen. 2. in his charter to the citizens of Canterbury,
acquits them of it: Ita quod (says he) Vicecomes meus Cantuar. vel aliquis
alius Ballivus Scotalam non faciet. It Is sometimes called Potura, and was a
contribution Potura.
by the men and Tenants toward a Potation, i. e. a Drinking, or (as some yet
speak) an Ale, provided to entertain the Lord or his Bailiffe withal, coming
to keep Court, or the like, raised by a proportion or rate (more or less)
according to the better or meaner condition. In an old In Archiv* memorat*
Custumal of Southmalling manor in Sussex, in that part of it entitled,
Bortha de feld, I read as follows: Item si Dominus Archiepiscopus fecerit
Scotall. infra boscum, quilibet terram tenens dabit ibi pro se and uxore sua
iij. ob. and vidua vel Kotarius j. d. In the Ubi sup.
Extent of the manor of Terring (to give you another instance) anno 5. Edw. 1.
this Scotale service is thus remembered: Jews. Memorandum quod praedicti
tenentes debent de consuetudine inter eas facere Scotalium de xvj. d. and ob.
ita quod de singulis sex denar. detur j. d. ob. ad potandum Bedello Domini
Archiepiscopi super praedictum feodum. Bracton says, It is sometimes called
Filctale (sol. 117. b.) which our learned Filctale. Fildale.
Glossarist, in voce; correcting, reads Fildale, and is in some sort followed
by Sir Edw. Coke, Institut. part 4. page 307. With the Varia lectio before
Bracton, I should rather read it Gildale, and then indeed, as it Gild-ale.
comes nearer the other Scot-ale, so with that better answers to our present
Bere-gafol; Gild, Gafol and Scot, being as it were Synonyma, and univocal.

Observed to be always paid by the Tenant per For-gavel.
avail to the mesne Lord, not to the chief, and thence called in some old
records and deeds, Foris-gabulum, quasi extra (vel praeter) gabulum quod Domino
capitali debetur: just like the French man's Surcens. Will you have an example?
John then the son of Richard at Horsfald, by his In Archiv. Eccles. Cant.
deed, dated anno 1242. gives to Warin of Stablegate, a parcel of land, to be
holden to him and his heirs, or to whomsoever he shall give, sell, or assign
it, (a clause without which, by the account of those elder times, land was not
alienated from the proper See the Mirroir, p. 16.
heirs:) paying to the Prior and Covent of Christ-church Canterbury (Lords, it
seems, of the Fee) certain annal rent and hens, and to the Feossor and his
heirs j. d. yearly, de forgabulo, etc. Some other instances of this kind might
be added, but I must contract, passing over Metegavel, whereof mention is Mete
gavel.
made in the old Glossary, at the end of Hen. 1. Laws, and there in Latin
rendered Cibi gablum. Now a word or two of Gavelet.

This, I must tell you, was no Rent or Service, but Gavelet. Gavelate.
betokens a rent or service withheld, denied or detained, causing the
tenements forfeiture to the Lord; whence those words of Fleta, reciting the
Statute De Gavelleto: Et ex tunc vocentur tenementa illa (not Forschoke, as in
Tottells Edition of the Statute, followed by Cowell in his Interpreter, but)
Forisfacta. See Fleta, page 119. It is taken (I confess) of some for a
Synonymy with Gavelkynd, and to import land letten for rent, or the like; and
per me licet; the acception shall pass for me, as warrantable enough from the
latitude of the term; but in the sense wherein the Statute (10. Edw. 2.) and
other ancient records (all that I have ever viewed) do take it up, it seems to
carry no other meaning than the deteinment of rent or service, whence that of
Instit. par. 2. page 204.
Sir Edw. Coke: Gaveletum (says he; I adventure to correct it so, as supposing
it corruptly printed Gavelletum) is as much to say, as to cease, or let to pay
the rent. Breve de Gavelleto in London est breve de Cessavit in biennium, etc.
pro redditu ibidem, quia tenementa fuerunt indistringibilia. Thus he. In the
Kentish Air of Hervicres de Stanton, recorded in a Manuscript of St. Austins
at Canterbury, among the Pleas there concerning the Abbat and Covent, page 106.
it occurrs thus: Et postea per quandam consuetudinem quae vocatur Gavelate
usitatam in comitatu isto de terris and tenementis de Gavelkinde, pro
redditibus and servitiis quae a retro fuerint de eisdem per plures annos
devenerunt eaedem terrae in manus cujusdam Abbatis, etc. I have often met with
the word in old Accounts of the Archbishops manours, from which I could
present you with a cloud of instances, but for brevity sake, I shall trouble
you but with one, and that taken from a In Archiv. Archiep. Cant.
Roll of Ringemere in Sussex, in Edw. 3. time. Item (says the Roll) de defectu
redditus cujusdam curtilagii jacentis Gavellate quod fuit Aliciae Hammerii, per
annum in manu Domini iiij. d. The sense, I trow, which I gave you of Gavelet,
is by this time sufficiently asserted, which, if compared with the term it
self, will appear very natural, being derived and compounded of Gavel and let,
or late; a word (this latter) fetched at first (if I mistake not) from the
Teutonick Laeten, signifying, as we are taught by Kilianus in his Etymologick
Dictionary, linquere, relinquere, omittere, dimittere, just (I take it) as our
old Saxon (...) seems to do. The Germans have it Lassen, the French Laisser, we
at this day Let. The termination is found in some other words now antiquated
and obsolete as well as this: for example, in Hereslit, which by the common
opinion of Expositours, sounds as much as armorum depositio, or exercitus
desertio, coming from Her, (says Lindenbrog in his Glossary) exercitus, and
lassen, deserere. Sir Hen. Spelman (I confess) as to this latter syllable, is
of another mind, writing it slit, and slite, and construing it by fissura,
diruptio, separatio, and so will have Hereslit to signify diruptionem
exercitus. Hereslit.
For my part, under favor, I conceive, that between the latter syllable in
Hereslit, and the latter syllables in Laghslite, Manslihte, Theofslihte, and
the like, there is this difference to be observed, that namely in the former,
Hereslit, the latter syllable is lit, (the s. being here a note of the Sea
Butlers English Grammar, page 19, 34, and 35.
Genitive case, and perteining to the former syllable:) signifying desertio,
derelictio; in the other, slihte, slyhte, or slite, betokening, ruptio,
violatio, etc.

As Rent and Service in general was understood by Gavel-man.
Gable, Gavel, etc. simply, and particular rents and services denoted by an
application of it to particulars, as in the former compounds, so the man, the
Tenant that paid the one, and performed the other, was sutably called of old,
as in the 6th. and 22th, of King Ina's Laws, (...), more of late, Gavelman:
whence Gafol-gylda.
(for example) that passage in an In Archiv. Archiep. Cant.
Accompt-roll of Terring manor in sussex, anno 11. Edw. 1. Et de iij. s. vj.
d. de incremento redditus de Simone Theodulsi, de una virgata and dimid. cum
uno messuagio in Salwenton -- traditis eidem Simoni hoc anno in servitium de
Gavelman, quantum Gavelman debet de tanto tenemento. He was one of those (I
conceive) that in a forecited Extent of the same manor, are thus differenced
and distinguished from other sorts of Villeins: Villani de Terring qui vocantur
Gavelmanni. By an endorsement upon an old Ub sup.
Custumal of Charing manor, I find that Otteford manor had its Gavelmanni.
And amongst the then Tenants of Charing manor, and the services charged upon
them in that Custumal, I read of some there termed in one place Gavelikendeyes,
in another Gavelikendeys.
Gavelmanni. The term, I conceive, may properly be given and applied to our
Kentish Tenants in Gavelkynd.

One thing more I have to note, before I leave Gable, Gavel, etc. viz. that
where it comes into mention (as it often does, in the Reddendum of deeds, or
feoffments) with Mala, it there properly signifies, and is Mala.
strictly to be taken for Services or Customs; as on the other side, Mala,
there as properly betokens Rent, or Ferm, which being chiefly twofold, was
distinguished White-rents, Blanc ferm. Black-rents, Black maile.
into White-Rents ( Redditus albi, Blanc ferm) and Black-Rents, ( Redditus
nigri, Black maile:) that, paid regularly in pecuniis, in silver, and therefore
called White; this, Black, because, for the most part paid in pecude, or the
like, say See Spelm. Glossary, verb. Ferma alba. Coke, Instit. part 2. 19. and
44.
some: if I might add an expression, I should rather in blado, or, if that be
not full enough, in annona, comprehending all sorts of provision, wherewith the
Lords table was furnished, and himself and family fed. And consequently, where
I meet with a Tenant holding per gablum and malum, as there were many such of
old, and I could instance in some, as in Charing, Monkton, Reculver, Broke, and
other manours in Kent, I should, if I were to play the Expositour, render it
per servitium and fermam, velredditum. The tenure continues to this day in
Scotland, whence they Skenaeus de verbor. signify. verbo Firmarius.
conserve Firmarius by a Mail-payer, a Mailer, or Mailman. The word (as I
conceive) is originally British, coming of their Mael, which in the Welsh
Vocab* is in Latin rendered Luerum, emolumentum, quaestus, as Maelio, the verb,
Lucrari, quaestum facere. The Saxons used it in the same sense as with the
Latins, vectigal, stipendium; whence this in the Chronicle of Abbingdon, anno*
M L. (...). Which the Latin Chronicle of Flor. of Worcester, and others give
thus: 1051. Rex Eadwardus absolvit Anglos a gravi vectigali, etc. Hence also
thus in the same Chro. Mlv. (...) (...). 1. (according to the same Latin
Histories) Classis Algari Comitis Leogecestram devecta, stipendium, quod eis
promiserat, ibi expectavit.

By this time, the Reader is satisfied (I hope) touching the true construction
of Gavel, Gafol, Gable, or however else he shall chance to find it written,
both as the word is taken simply, and as it is used besides in composition, in
each importing Cens, i. e. Rent, either in money, provision, or works. And
being thus far advanced in the dispatch of our positive Proposition (what is
the true sense of Gavelkynd) I must now desire the Reader, in the next place to
observe and consider Land Censual. Land not Censual.
with me, that, as there are diverse sorts of land to be found, both in this
County and elsewhere, by the nature of their Tenure not Censive, or Censual, nor
of the kind to pay or yield Gavel (that is, such Rent, or Rentservice, whether
in money, provision, or works, as arises from ignoble, base, and plebeian
Tenures, in which only Gavel is conversant) to those of whom such lands are
holden, those namely holden in Alodio, in Frankalmoigne, (or Mortmaine, as
called Hotoman. de verb. Feudal in verb. Manus mortua.
also abroad, because yiedling the Lord no profit, as being in a dead hand) in
Knights-service, in Frank fee, and the like; so is there also, such as that
holden in Socage, or Burgage Tenures, or the like, (though free) which
contrariwise is Censual, liable to Rent, in some one or more of the kinds
premised. To distinguish therefore, if not generally what land is, from what is
not, of Gafol gilden nature, or of the kind to yield or pay Cens, yet specially
to put a difference between (what alone is properly and anciently called See
Spelm. Glossary, verb. Feudum scutiferum, and Feudum ignobile.
Fee) Knight Service land and it, under which double head is comprised the
generality of our whole Countries lands, answering, as to that dichotomy of
Chivalry and Socage Tenures, whereunto all the land in England in the hands of
common persons is Cowels Interpreter, verb. Chivalry.
referred, so also to that known distinction of their lands in Normandy (from
whence, as some Lamb. Peramb. p. 545.
surmise, we received our Gavelkynd, whereof more hereafter) unto Fief de
Haubert, and Fief de Roturier (that is the Noblemans Fee, and the Husbandman or
Ploughmans Fee:) for distinction sake, I say, of Censual or rented land, or
Rent-service land, from what, like Fee properly so called, being holden per
liberum servitium armorum, yielded no Cens, Rent, or Service, whether in money,
provision, or works; the former of the twain was called Gavelkynd, that is, (as
Mr. Lambard rightly in the second of his forementioned conjectures) of the
kind, or nature to pay or yield rent, or land holden, not properly in Fee; but
as the Feudists are wont in this case to distinguish contractu censuali, as
being letten out with, or under condition, to pay Cens or Rent, or with a
reservation of Cens or Rent, like unto those in the charters of the Conqueror,
and (his son) Hen. 1. the one to Battle, the other to Reading Abbeys, expressly
called Terrae censuales, and there opposed to Fee, Terrae censuales.
witness this provision occurring in each charter: Terras censuales nec ad
feudum donet, nec milites, nisi in sacra vest Christi faciat, nec de
possessionibus Ecclesiae quisquam teneat aliquid feudaliter absolutum, sed ad
censum annuum and servitium Abbati and monachis debitum. See Clement Reyners
Apostolatus Benedictinor* in Anglia, tract. 2. page 137, and 154.

It is no simple word ( Gavelkynd) but a compound Kind (in Gavelkynd) what
signifying.
of Gavel and kind: the latter syllable whereof (to proceed on to that) comes
and is contracted of the Saxon (...), a word frequently occurring in the Saxon
Sermon set forth and published by Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments, and again
of late by Mr. Lisle, as an Appendix to another Saxon piece, a Treatise of the
old and new Testament; in the version or translation of the word they both
concur, rendering it in our modern English As does also Mr. Wheloc in his Latin
version thereof in his Bid, page 471.
Nature. To give an instance or two: (...), i. e. after true nature. (...), i.
e. it is naturally, and the like. I^ will peradventure be objected, that Mr.
Lambard, in his Perambulation, page 495. meeting with the word several times in
the Saxon will of Byrhtric of Mepham, in this often repeated passage there:
(...), always translates it, (after the old Latin version in Textus
Roffensis) within that kindred, and in a marginal note against it, calls it, a
kind of gift in tail. Gecynd misconstiued by Mr. Lambard.
But, for reply, if I may have leave freely to deliver my sense, that version
is not good: for, under favor, (...) there imports not (as that Translation
would) kindred, but rather kind, nature, sort, quality or condition, and
consequently (...) there, if rightly, is thus (I take it) and not otherwise, to
be Englished, viz in that kind, or, after that nature, or, upon the same terms,
or, with the same condition, having relation (if you mark it) to the tie upon
the next precedent legacies, gifts or devises of other land, charged either
with alms, or with rent, in way of alms, payable thereout by the Legataries or
Devisees, for the Devisor or Testator his souls health. Had it been
otherwise,(...) ted books) the following passage in a Charter recorded in a
Lieger of the often alleged Cathedral at Canterbury of certain land (all which
the party had) in Southwe^k, given to that Church by Norman le Wautier, in the
year of Christ 1204* which thus speaks: Et quia praedicta terra de libero
catallo, and proprio perquisito meo fuit, and non de aliqua hereditate parentum
meorum, ideo De^minde and S. Thomam Martyrem, and Sanctos Cantuariensis
Ecclesiae, and conventum monachorum ejusdem, heredem* This seems to thwart
Glanvil. lib. 7. c. 1. fol. 46. ^. Potest itaque quilibet, etc. and Bracton,
^ol. 6^. b.
meum legitimum inscribo, and hac mea carta in perpetuum constituo. To which
many more such like might easily be added from the same Promptuarium. The
F^udists in this case distinguish between Feudum novum and antiquum, as may be
seen in Vulteius, de Feudis, lib. 1. cap. 10. number. 73. In the next place, the
Reader may please to observe with me, that as Cap. 66. ^ol. 164. b.
Britton distinguishes of a double tenure in Mortmaine, the one called
Almoigne, or Aumone, simply, the other Frankalmoigne, describing the former to
be a gift in alms, but not free alms, because (says he) a certain service is
retained or reserved to the Feoffor, cap. 66. fol. 164. ^. so this in hand is
no alienation in Frankalmoigne: the F^offers (it seems) not intending to give
the land in that absolute manner; but, in token of Seigniory, to reserve
something of service to themselves, phrase* their gift, not in puram
eleemosynam, or in liberam eleemosynam, (one of which words, viz. either pura
or libera, is (some say, others say Bracton, l. 2. c* 10. fol. 27. b. Coke,
Instit. part 1. ^ol. 94. b.
both) essential to the making it a tenure in Frankalmoigne, and to the
excusing it from service) with which the next following words (and to
Gavelkynd) could not have consisted; pure alms, or Frankalmoigne, excluding the
return of all but divine services and burdens; they phrase it not therefore, I
say, in puram, or liberam ele^mosynam, but only in perpetuam ele^mosynam, and
to Gavelkynd; by the former of these words, investing the Hospital with an
estate in perpetuity; by the latter, and the Reddendo following, saving and
reserving to themselves a quit-rent, as it were, in signum dominii; that is,
they reserved to themselves the service, and granted to the Hospital the usum
fructum: or they granted the utile dominium to the Hospital, and reserved the
directum to themselves. So that whereas Bracton and Lib. ^. c. 19. fol. 4^. b.
Item l. 4. fol. 263. b. Coke, Instit. part. 1. fol. 1. b. verb* Fee simple.
Fleta, lib. 5. c. 5. parag 26.
others make mention of a tenure in feodo quoad servitia, and non in dominico,
referring to the chief Lord; and of another in feodo and dominico, and non in
servitio, relating to the Freeholder, the former may here be referred to the
Feoffors, the latter to the Feoffees in this deed. But this Parergon. And now
to wind up all (concerning this first Proposition) and not to enlarge with any
further instances (wherein I might be infinite) for asserting this truth of our
Gavelkynds derivation: Gavelkynd, we see, is the lands right name, whose
Etymology was never wrested to Gife-eal-cyn, whose signification of Censual,
Rented, land, or Rentservice land, was never questioned till that within our
fathers memories, one and all, by a kind of error, jure veluti successionis,
transmitted to them, run a head in a wrong and mistaken derivation.

PROPOSITION II.
The Nature of Gavelkynd-land in point of Partition.

DIsallowing then Gavelkynd (as to the name of it) to be derivative from
Partition, our next enquiry shall be, if (on the contrary) Partition ow it self
to Gavelkynd, or to what other cause. Before I further enter into which
research, or offer any resolution to the Quaere, give me leave to preface it
with certain rules, grounds and principles, in this case fit to be premised.
You are then desired to take notice, that here in England, we acknowledge no
land (no inheritance) partible Partible land, and Parceners twofold.
or divisible, but what is so either (first by Law, as in the case of Females,
succeeding for lack of Males, whether in Knight Service land or Socage, which
in this point differ not, or what (secondly) is so by Custom, as in our
present case of Gavelkynd, and such like? no parceners of land (I say) in point
of inheritance or succession, but either according to the course of the Common
Law, or by Custom, as termed by Littleton, and our more modern books, the same
in effect with what of elder time, in Bractons Fol. 278, 374, 418.
language, are called, 1 Ratione personarum, 2 Ratione rei vel terrae. In the
next place, let me adjoyn what in this point of Partition is delivered by those
two ancient and famous Sages of our Law, Glanvill, and Bracton, whereof the
former Lib. 7. cap. 3.
speaks thus: Cum quis ergo hereditatem habens moriatur, si unicum filium
heredem habuerit, indistincte verum est, quod filius ille patri suo succedit in
toto. Si plures reliquerit fili^s, tunc distinguitur utrum ille fuerit miles,
sive per feodum militare tenens, aut liber Sokemannus: quia si miles fuerit vel
per militiam tenens, secundum jus regni Angliae primogenitus filius patri
succedit in totum, ita quod nullus fratrum suorum partem inde de jure petere
potest. Si vero fuerit liber Sokemannus, tunc quidem dividetur hereditas inter
omnes filios quotquot sunt per parts aequales* The S^^t^^sh reading i^, si
fueri^ Socegium ill ud an ^qui^u^ divisum. See Reg. Majest. lib. 2. c. ^7.
si fuerit Socagium, and id antiquitus divisum: salvo tamen capitali messuagio
primogenito filio pro dignit^te a^sneciae suae; ita tamen quod in aliis rebus
satisfaci^t aliis ad valentiam. Si vero non fuerit antiquitus divisum, tunc
primo* genitus, secundum quorundam consuetudinem, totam hereditatem obtinebit;
secundum autem quorundam consuetudinem, postnatus filius here is est. Item si
filiam tantum unam reliquerit quis heredem, tunc id obtinet indistincte quod ^e
filio dictum est. Sin autem plures filias, tunc quidem indistincte inter ipsas
dividetur hereditas, sive fuerit Miles, sive Sokemannus pater earum, salvo
tamen primogenitae filiae capitali messuagio sub forma praescript^, etc. Thus
Glanvill, harmoniously followed, and almost verbatim of Li. 2. c. 34. ^ol. 76.
^. Vid. Flet. l 5. c 9. Parag. 15.
Bracton, whose words on this argument are these: Si liber Sockmannus moriatur
pluribus relictis haeredibus, and participibus, si haereditas partibilis ^it
and ab antiquo divisa, haeredes (quotquot erunt) habeant parts suas aequales,
and si unicum fuerit messuagium, illud integre remaneat primogenito, ita tamen
quod alii habeant ad valentiam de communi. Si autem non fuerit hereditas divisa
ab antiquo, tunc tota remaneat primogenito. Si autem fuerit Sockagium villanum,
tunc consuetudo loci erit observanda. Est enim consuetudo in quibusdam
partibus, quod postnatus praefertur primogenito, and e contrario, etc. Hereunto
let me subjoyn in the third and last place, that common principle amongst us,
and obvious in our books, viz. that prescription in Gavelkynd-land, as it is
not Lamb. Peramb page 538. Coke, upon Littl. Sect. ^65.
needful, so neither is it good. The reason is, whereof I pray take notice with
me, that (as Mr. Lambard has it) the custom of Gavelkynd is general, spreading
it self throughcut the whole Shire, into all lands subject by ancient Tenure
unto the same, such places only excepted, where it is altered by Act of
Parliament, and therefore 5. Edw. 4. 8. and 14. Hen. 4. 8. it is said, that the
Custom of Gavelkynd is (as it were) a Common Law in Kent.

Having thus premised, I shall now make it my endeavor to shape such a
resolution or answer to the propounded Quaere, as may consist with these
principles. And briefly, my answer here is negative, viz. that Partition does
not owe it self barely to Gavelkynd, either ex vi termini, by reason or force
of that denomination, or ratione rei, from the nature or condition of the land;
that property alone of the lands being Gavelkynd, or so called, not sufficing
to render it partible. First, as for the name, the term, that that will in no
wise bear it, is (I conceive) a thing sufficiently cleared in our Discourse
upon the first Proposition, wherein the term is vindicated from that mistaken
construction, by the error of latter times obtruded on it, nor can such a
derivation any way consist with the premised principles, Partition in
Gavelkynd-land, from the term or denomination of it, being reducible to none of
the there assigned causes of Partition. As inconsistent also with those causes
and grounds of partition (that dichotomy or bipartite distinction of partible
land into, 1 that by Law, and 2 that by Custom) is the attributing that
property of partition in Gavelkynd, to the nature or condition of the land,
there being no mention of any such third sort of partible land to be found in
our Books. If it be replied, Yes surely; for Objection.
Bracton is express for a partition ratione re^ vel terrae, in the places
above quoted, that especially where he says (as fol. 374. a.) sicut de
Gavelkind, vel alibi ubi terra partibilis est ratione terrae. Such indeed are
his Solution.
words, and withal it is not to be denied, that such is the nature and
condition of Gavelkynd-land, being not only subject and liable to what the
Civilians in their phrase are wont to call, Judicium, or Actio familiae
herciscundae; De communi See Fulberts Dialog. part 2. cap. 6. Of Pa^ceners.
dividundo, the Feudists, Adaequatio, Paragium, we in our language term it
Coparce^ary, Land-shifting, and the like; but withal so subject to it, as that
partition does always accompany land of that nature* and is indeed as
inseparable from it as the contrary from Knight Service land. Whence then is
it? Before I answer, observe first with me for an answer to these passages in
Bracton, that as before each of them, in one Fol. 76. ^.
place, we have his si haere^itas partibilis sit, and ab antiquo divisa, so
likewise after them, in another Fo. 428. ^. quem sequitur Fleta, lib. 6. c. 48.
parag. 2.
place, his tenementum partibile inter plures cohaeredes -- and sempe^ solet
dividi ab antiquo. Whereby (conferring place with place, for reconciling
Bracton to himself) we may plainly understand what is meant by those two me^ne
or intervening passages in Bracton, namely, that not the bare nature of the
land, but ancient customs joyn^ concurrence with it, is intended, and of him
implied in each place, though not expressed, to render the land or inheritance
partible. The like help, under favor, must be allowed Glanvill, to reconcile
his, Sciendum autem quod si quis liberum habens Socagium plures habuerit filios
qui omnes ad hereditatem equaliter pro equalibus proportionibus sunt
admittendi, lib. 7. cap. 1. fol. 46. a. to his, Si vero fuerit liber
Sokemannus, tunc quidem dividetur hereditas inter omnes filios, quotquot sunt
per parts equales, si fuerit Socagium and id antiquitus divisum, eod. lib.
cap. 3. fol. 49. a. Briefly, were it so that Gavelkind-land were partible by
virtue either of the name or nature of it, without accession and concurrence of
Custom, then all lands as soon as granted out in Gavelkynd, whereof examples
are obvious, and till the Anno 18. dw. 1.
Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, frequent, were ipso facto partible,
contrary to that common and received ground, whereof before, that none are
such, i. e. partible with us, (except that descending for want of males to
females) but what are so by custom. As then not to the name, so neither to the
nature of Gavelkynd-land alone, is such partition owing.

And is it then to Custom or Prescription? For the latter, it is clearly
repugnant to what is before laid down by way of grounds or principles, it being
a known rule in our Law, and obvious in our books, that Prescription in our
Kentish Gavelkynd, as it is not wanted, so neither is it admitted to come in
plea. What say we then to Custom? Surely, since neither to the name or nature
of the land, nor to Prescription, nor yet (neither) to the Common Law so
diametrically opposite to it; to that, I mean to Custom, it is, or I know not
else to what, that this partition mainly owes it self. Agreeable whereto is
that of Perambul. fol. 5^4.
Mr. Lambard, where he says, that no Gavelkynd partition could be challenged,
but only where the custom of division had prevailed, and that, Gavelkynd was
not tried by the manner of the Socage services, but only by the touch of some
former partition. But if so, then an objection here meets us resolved into a
question thus, What shall then be said to Gavelkynd land of novel Tenure, upon
the grant of lands, ^ill then happily holden in Demesne, to one or more persons
in Gavelkynd, as was usual before that Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, and
until when a man might create in his land what Tenure he pleased, granting out
(as Fol 36. ^. and fol. 4^. ^.
Bracton has it) in Socage, what he held in Knight Service, and e converso?
what, I say, shall we resolve concerning the point of partition here? since no
particular custom or usage of partition had ever took place, to give to such
division either foundation or precedent. We are here (me thinks) threatened with
a Dilemma: for either the land was not partible, Dilemma.
and why then called Gavelkynd? or, if partible, yet not by custom, being but
newly turned from some other* Tenure into Gavelkynd, and wanting both Time and
(the daughter of it) Usage, (the Coke, Instit. part 1. ^ol 110. b. and fol.
113. b.
essentials of a custom) to render it partible that way. Here then is work for
an Oedipus, but the resolution of the main doubt, to which I will now more
closely apply my style, will at once clear both.

Truth is then, that it is neither from Custom alone, nor yet from the nature
of Gavelkynd-land alone, that this partition springs, but partly from the one,
partly from the other, and so from both together. It must be granted that
Gavelkynd land, ex sui natura, is partible thus far, and in this sense, that by
an inherent quality, it is capable of partition by Custom; that indeed may and
does render it partible, as Knight Service land properly it cannot, by reason
of a repugnancie thereto in the nature thereof: but in this respect it differs
not from Socage land in general, which by the nature of it, is capable of
partition, and by Custom may be, and in many places extra Cantium is partible,
where the plea (I take it) ought to run, quod terra illa a toto tempore, etc.
partibilis fuit, and partita, agreeable with that of Glanvill, si fuerit
Socagium, and id antiquitus divisum, which Bracton seems somewhat more fully
to explain by his, si haereditas partibilis sit, and ab antiquo divisa. Now
then, reddendo singula singulis, that such land is partibilis, i* e. partible,
(the former part of plea) is, in Kent, from Gavelkynd, elsewhere, (in particular
manours at least) from Socage; that it is, or rather was antiquitus partita, i.
e. anciently parted (the pleas latter part) is from Custom or Prescription:
Partition in the mean while in our Gavelkynd, being but a single property or
branch thereof induced by Custom; the term in its full latitude comprehending
all other properties accompanying land of that nature and tenure, such as Dower
of the moiety, Suffering for felony without forfeiture of estate, and the rest
contained in the Kentish Custumal, as properly depending of Gavelkynd as
partition does, and in respect whereof the land may as well be called
Gavelkynd, as because of Partition.

But admitting Socage-land to be generally, by the Objection.
nature of it, consuetudine mediante, capable of partition, as well a
Gavelkynd, how comes it then to pass (will some say) that this
partition-property is more appropriate to it than Socage-land in general, and
that they so much differ in their terms? From the agreement of the Kentish-men
with the Conqueror, ^aith the common opinion. I shall answer that anon. In the
mean time, said we not but now, that Custom is the thing whereto we ow this
partition? And if so, why then seek we any further after its original?
Customs, we know, cease to be Customs, when once they can be traced to their
first beginnings, it being the main essential part of a Custom to be of an
unknown rise. But be it so, that Custom carries such a stroke Objection.
here, what kind of Custom is it, or how shall we find such a Custom for it,
as may consist with Gavelkynd-land of novel Tenure, whereof before so often?
Hic la^or, hoc opus est, here is the point indeed. Why, in Solution.
short it is no other than a custom generally spreading it self throughout the
whole Country in land of that nature. What elsewhere, I mean in other Shires
and Counties, they properly call by the name of Socage, whether free or base,
we here in Kent are wont to call by the name of Gavelkynd: or if you please (in
Peramb. p. 545.
Mr. Lambards expression) all Socage* service here properly so called, is
clothed with the apparel of Gavelkynd, and under it, in a large acception, is
understood all such land within the County, as is not Knights-fee, or
Knights-service land, the term serving here, as that of Socage elsewhere, to
contradistinguish i^ from Knightservice land, as Fief Roturier, or rather
^nheritence Roturier (all other being improperly and corruptly called Fief, or
Fee, that is not holden militiae gratia, the ground of all Hotom de (...) l. 2
tit. 5^. p^ ag. ^. Item Disput. c. 5. Spelm. Gloss i^ Feud. scuti^ero, p. 260.
Fees) is used in Normandy to difference that from Fief de Haubert, or Noble
Fief. Now into all land of this kind, by a general or universal custom of the
whole County, has this property of partition been introduced; insomuch, as
what land was granted out in Gavelkynd, by such as before held it in D^mesne or
the like; as, for want of time and usage, it had no particular custom
introductive of that property of partition, so neither did it want the same,
the generality of the Custom extending it self to all Censual land, or land
letten out for Cens, and sufficing to render it partible, as occasion should be
offered, though but newly dimised. To this purpose Peramb. page 536.
Mr. Lambard: Although (says he) i^ were so that the land were never departed
in deed, yet if it remain partible in nature, it may be departed whenever
occasion shall be ministered. Granted out, I say, and holden in terms for Cens,
conceiving a necessity of that or the like expression in the Habend^m, or other
part of the grant, to make it capable of this and the other properties incident
to Gavelkynd, not intending here the very numerical word or term ( Gavelkynd)
but that or some other of equivalent sense and signification with it, for
example, Reddendo such or such a sum de gablo, de censu, and the like (whereof,
for illustration sake, expect some copies of old grants in the Scriptu. 1, 2, 3.
Appendix to this Discourse.) These indeed, and such as these, were the more
usual expressions in elder grants, that of Tenendum in Gavelkynd, and the like,
being sought of me in vain before H. 2. days, nor afore-time does the term
occurr in any writing or monument whatsoever, save only in this passage in
Spot (St. Austins Monk and Chronicler at Canterbury) who ^aith, that anno 1063.
(Abbas) tradidit terram de Dene in Gavelkende Blakemanno and Athelredo ^iliis
Brithm^^i. But from Hen. 2. days downwards, it is obvious in many grants of
land recorded and extant in the Liegers of Christ-church Canterbury, the la^e
Abbey of St. Austins there, and many other of the Kentish religious houses,
until about the time of that Anno 1^. Edw. 1.
S^at^te, Quia emptores terrarum, which forbidding the letting out of land by
any man to be holden of himself, and consequently cutting off all new Tenures,
and the creation thereof, stopped the current of all such grants of land in
Gavelkynd for the future.

That such an expression, as Tenendum in (or ad) Gavelkynd, or the like, was
necessary to render the granted land partible, after the custom of Gavelkynd,
without the help of Prescription requisite in partible land elsewhere out of
Kent, may in part appear by a Record of a controversy happening now full 400
years agone, between one Burga, sometime the wife of Peter de Bending
Plaintiff, and the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church Canterbury, Deforciant or
Defendant, touching the moiety of the manor of Well, by them granted to her
said husband ad feodi firmam, challenged by her See Bracton, lib. ^. tract. 6.
c. 13. which laid to chap. 15. ^od. tract. the instance there seems to be a
Kentish case concerning a widow of Graven^y (anciently written Grav^nel) by
Feversham.
tanquam francus bancus suus, which controversy was debated and decided in
Eire, and is recorded in the Liegers of that Church, from whence I shall
present the Reader with a copy of it, not unworthy his perusal in the
fore-remembred Appendix, Scriptura 5. Nevertheless, it will here I think be
necessary, that we distinguish times: for what at first in Kent was only
partible, because of the Tenure in Gavelkynd, I persuade my self was
afterward, in tract of time, partible, and did communicate with Gavelkynd-land
in that property, by being Socage land, though not expressly holden in
Gavelkynd, it sufficing at length to show (as P^r^mb. page 538.
Mr. Lambard has it) the Custom at large, and to say, that the land lies in
Kent, and that all the lands there be of the nature of Gavelkynd. By what means
this was wrought, or by what degrees our Socage land arrived at this
universality of partiblenesse, is not so easily discovered* That the sundry
favors of Gavelkynd* custom should iutice many to creep into it, and by one
and one (upon occasion of the intestine troubles that ensued the deprivation of
King Richard the second) to shroud and cover themselves under the safety and
shadow of the privileges that do wait upon it; is an opinion of some,
whereunto I cannot subscribe, as conceiving no Tenures in Gavelkynd to be so
late as Rich 2. days, which this opinion would infer; with what consistencie
with the Anno 18. Edw. 1.
Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, made so long before, and prohibiting the
creation of new Tenures, I cannot see. But to let the manner pass, the thing
(the over-spreading the Country in process of time with this Tenure) is very
obvious and apparent, witness an ancient Statute (made anno 18. Hen. 6. cap.
2) taking knowledge, that There were not at that day within the Shire above xl.
persons, which had lands to the yearly value of xx. pounds, without the Tenure
of Gavelkynde; and the greater part of this County, or well nigh all, was then
within this Tenure.

To proceed, ascribing this property of partition in Gavelkynd-land to the
custom of the Country, what shall be said then to the partible land (more or
less) abroad in other Counties ^ is such Gavelkynd-land, and so to be called,
or not? or is it from Gavelkynd that such partition there obteins? I conceive
not. For first, our Kentish Gavelkynd Custom, considered collectively, with
respect to all its branches, is not to be restrained to this one particular
property, but (as before is intimated) consists of many other as singular
properties besides, and which may as well challenge a share and right in the
Customs name, as may that of Partition, such as is Dower of the Moiety, not to
forfeit lands for Felony, and the like; and though in point of Partition it may
be like ours in Kent, yet in other properties incident to our Gavelkynd, it
might, and no doubt but does differ from it. Besides, that such partible land
elsewhere should be called Gavelkynd, will not stand with out premised grounds,
excluding* Prescription in Gavelkynd land, whereas in such places abroad,
though happily not in whole Counties, yet in particular Manours, I conceive it is
necessary, even in their Gavellonds, whereof I find mention made in several
manours out of Kent, as some in Kent, to show, quod terra illa a toto tempore,
etc. partibilis fuit and partita, the accustomable actual partition of it being
there as necessary to be pleaded and proved, as its capability of such a
property. Add hereunto, that if all partible land were Gavelkynd (rendered such
by partition alone) then were Fol. 374 ^^
Bractons, Sicut de Gavelkynd vel alibi ubi terra est partibilis ratione
terrae, an improper expression. We are told that this Custom of Gavelkynd
partition takes place, (has done at least) in other countries, or counties
besides Kent, and Littleton instanceth in North Wales. But what custom, I
pray? a custom indeed, like to that in the Scottish Skenaei Annot. in Reg.
Majest. lib. 2. cap. 21, and 27.
Socage land, of partition; that is true, and testimonies of it are obvious,
such as, besides that of Littleton, Statutum Walliae, the Welsh History, and
some Acts of See 21. Edw. 1. 34. Hen. 8 26. and Girald. Cambrens. Itinerar.
Camb. lib. 1. cap. 7. By the way, how do our Britains claim descent from the
Trojans? since with them the eldest son, by prerogative of primogeniture,
monopolized the whole inheritance. Whereof see Mr. Seld. Jan. Angl. lib 1. page
24. Vit. Basinstoch. Hist. lib. 3. page 207.
Parliament. But still, I say, no Gavelkynd-custome, taken in its true, plenary
and complete acception, comprising all the properties of it obvious in the
Custumal. As then for other Countrey-mens communicating with us of Kent in the
Tenure, I conceive it first came up, by way of imitation of our example, in
Ireland especially, and amongst the Welch-men, in whose Vocabulary or
Dictionary the word is sought in vain, as it is also in that old Statute which
concerns them, ( Statutum Walliae.) where though mention may be found of a
custom there obteining of partition of their lands, like to that of our
Kentish Gavelkynd, yet without any one word of Gavelkynd. And if perhaps it may
be found in their deeds, charters, or other records, yet (as one Rover.
Illustrat. Hist. Monast. S. Jo. Reom^en. p 6. 18. number. 168.
says in a case not much unlike conditioned to this of ours, whose words with
very little variation I shall therefore take up here:) Suspicari licet hanc
vo^em pluribus illorum chartis actisque publicis, n^n tam illorum quam
pragmaticorum usu ac instituto invectam. i. e. it is to be suspected that it had
its imposition, and was first transmitted hither by our Lawyers, who borrowed
the term to make use of it for illustration sake, like as of late (I am
persuaded) the Parliament did in that Stat. 34. Hen. 8 cap. 26. where the term
of Gavelkynd happily is but borrowed, to help describe and illustrate that
partible quality there mentioned of the lands in Wales, which I am the more
induced to conceive, because in a former Statute concerning Wales, namely that
of the 27th of the same King, cap. 26. making mention of this partition,
Gavelkynd is not at all remembered. In imitation then (as I conceive) of the
Kentish-men, the generality of whose partible land of long time has
notoriously been known by that title, and whose lands alone of all the Counties
of England at this day be of the nature of Gavelkynd of common Coke, Instit
part 1. fol. 140. ^*
right, this name or term of Gavelkynd in lands elsewhere of like condition in
matter of descent, has been taken up and is retained.

By that which has been said, I may be thought to Objection.
incline to their opinion, who hold that Socage and Gavelkynd are Synonyma,
terms identical, and of one and the same signification here in Kent, and that
consequently what land here is of Gavelkynd-nature, is of Socage-tenure; as on
the other side, what land is of Socage-tenure is of Gavelkynd-nature. I answer,
No: Solution.
for I require in this case, I mean to make Socage land here in Kent ipso facto
partible, after the custom of Gavelkynd, that it be granted out and holden in
Gavelkynd As in the Appendix, Scriptu. 4, 6, 7, 8, 9.
expressly, or in terms equivalent, as I said before, yet with that
distinction oftimes wherewith I there qualified it. Notwithstanding, I am not
of their mind, who distinguishing between free and base Socage in Kent, make
the natures of their descents diverse; the free Socage (say they) descending to
the eldest alone, the base falling in division between him and all his
brethren. Thus Peramb. page 593.
Mr. Lambard in the person of others; to help justify whose distinction, with
the inference upon it, he there exhibits an Inquisition taken after the death
of one Walter Culpepper, making mention of diverse parcels of land and annual
rents holden by the deceased at his death, some in liberum feodum, others in
Gavelkynd; the former of which, by the verdict of the Jury, was to go to the
deceaseds eldest son In which respect Free Socage is not likely to be here
intended, since Glanvill never mentions Free Socage, but under the notion of
partible land, as l. 7. c. 1. and l. 13. c. 11.
alone; the latter, in common amongst him and the rest of his brethren. Thus
the Inquisition, which (as Mr. Lambard there follows it) clearly distinguishes
free Socage from the Gavelkynd, interpreting, it seems, liberum feodum there by
Free Socage, and it may be rightly; however I crave leave of dissent, and (as
it is but fit) shall give my reasons: For my part, I never found Free Socage
any where expressed by that term, or in Latin rendered Liberum feodum, nor
perhaps to those of more diligence, and more conversant with our Law-records
than my self, has it ever occurred under that notion. Nor have I met with any
Free Socage, as this here, not subject to the rendering of some kind of service,
either in denari^s, or otherwise. By Liberum feodum, I understand sometime
Liberum feodum.
Feodum militare, which is often in old Records called Liberum feodum. In a
very ancient In Archiv. Archiep. Cant.
Rental of Southmalling manor in Sussex, we have this title: Liberi feodi, and
under it: Godefridus Walensis tenet 111 feodos milit. in tenemento de Malling,
and quartam partem unius feodi apud Terring per liberum servitium armorum
suorum. Willmus de Bransa tenuit apud Adburton unum feodum militis, per liberum
servitium armorum suorum. And so some others. Apposite here is that of Lib. 5.
fol. 329. ^.
Bracton: Notandum (says he) quod in servitio militari non dicitur per liberum
servitium, and ideo quiaconstat, quod feodum tale liberum est, etc. Sometime
also by Liberum feodum, I understand (what I conceive it does principally
denote unto us) Frank Fee, that is, by the Feudists definition, such pr^ qu^
nullum omnin^ servitium Vulteius de Feudis, lib. 1. cap. ^. page 353.
praestatur, and therefore is of them reckoned inter Feudastra, or Feuda
impropria. And such as this seems to be meant by Liberum fe^dum in that
Inquisition, because it is there in terminis expressed to be holden (just after
the manner of Frank Fee, by the precedent definition of it) absque aliquo
servitio inde faciendo. And if Frank Fee, then in probability not Socage: for
as all the land in the Realm (say our Books) is either Ancient Demesne, or
Frank Fee, so none (say they) is to be accounted Ancient Demesne, but such as
is holden in Cowell Interpreter, verb. Ancient Demesne, from Fitzherbert.
Socage. Frank Fee then being opposed to Ancient Demesne, which is Socage,
cannot it self be Socage. Nor will Bractons distinction of Socage into liberum
and villanum, applied to that difference in Mr. Lambard, of free and base
Socage, by which the one should consist of money, and the other of base
services, be warranted (as himself there observes) from the ensuing
Inquisition, some lands being therein denoted to be of Gavelkynd-nature, which
nevertheless do yield none other but money alone, and none there of that
nature charged with works, besides that of Suit of Court, improperly called
Works, as not coming under the notion either of Manuopera, or Carropera, to
which double head all works of this kind are wont to be referred.

Hence let none persuade themselves, that Gavelkynd-land was not, or by its
nature is not liable to Works: for albeit that 66. of King Ina's Laws in the
Archaion, seems to counter-distinguish Gaf^l, and W^rk; and though moreover
Gafolland and Werkland Gasolland. Werkland.
occurr in some manours out of Kent, as of a distinct and different nature,
(yet both servile, and opposed to what there is called terra libera, denoting,
I suppose, Free Socage) yet most certain it is, that both Gablum and Opera do
often meet, and are found in Gavelkynd-land. Witness the old Custumal of
Monkton manor in Thanet, belonging to the Church of Canterbury, mentioning the
particulars of what servile works the Tenants there stood charged with for the
18 Swolings (so many plough-lands, I take -- terram trium aratrorum, quam
Cantiani Anglice dicunt three Swolinges, etc. as in the Charter of K. Offa, in
the Antiquities of Canterbury, p. 211.
it) holden of the Monks in Gavelkynd. Witness also this passage in King John's
Charter made to Hubert the Archbishop, for the changing Gavelkynd-land into
Knights-Fee, at large exemplified by Mr. Lambard, Peramb. page 531. Xenia,
Averagia, and alia opera quae fiebant de terris iisdem convertantur in redditum
denariorum aequivalentur. Witness in the third and last place (not to multiply
instances in a case so clear) an Inquisition found after the death of Isabella
de monte alto, widow, sometime of Orpington, recorded in a Lieger of that
Cathedral, whereof expect a copy in the Appendix, Scriptura 10. It Is true
indeed at this day, and time out of mind (happily from Richard the seconds See
Spelmans Gl^ssary, verbo Lazzi*
time) such servile works (properly called Villein-services) have been, as they
still are, intermitted, or rather quite ceased; insomuch as all our
Gavelkynd-land, in point of service, now differs nothing from Free Socage, as
it stands described and defined of Bracton; being such ubi fit servitium in
denariis, (to use his own words) all the Tenants burden, his whole service,
being only servitium crumenae, pecuniary, such as payment of money for rent,
suit of Court, and such like; nay, in many grants of land in Gavelkynd that I
have seen, I find no tie at all upon the Tenant, no covenant or contract
between his Lord and him, to require of him any such base services, there being
ut communiter, and regularly, a reservation only of rent in money, suit to his
Court, or the like: yet I must tell you (as a reason hereof, in my judgment)
that, though Gavelkynd, in the genuine sense, sound land letten for gable,
cens, or rent, consisting chiefly in denariis, (whence in an old In Archiv.
Eccles. Cant.
Custumal of Eastry manor in Kent, I read: In eodem manerio mutati sunt octo
Cotarii pro Gavelkende. Medlef^rm tenet unum messuagium, tres acras, quae
solent esse Cotar. modo reddit xl. d. de gablo, and so diverse more, which happily
will be better understood, if I add what occurrs in an old Accompt-roll of the
Archbishops manours for the year 1230. in Charing Bailives receipt: Et de xiij.
s. iiij. d. de fine Cotariorum, ut Coteriae suae ponerentur ad redditum:) yet
commonly upon such grants in Gavelkynd, the Tenant pare^d with such a sum of
money to his Lord, in gersumam, i. e. in consideration of Gersuma.
that grant, and by way of Fine, as may seem equivalent to the base services
otherwise imposeable and to have been charged upon that land, and upon the
Tenant in respect thereof; or if not, probably, (as in Gavelkynd-land, by
virtue of King John's forementioned Charter, turned into Knights-fee) he had
his rent inhanced and augmented to an equivalent value of his services to be
redeemed; the cause in chief of the excuse of Gavelkynd-men from base services
of latter times, and at this day, being (I conceive) no other than the Tenants
buying them out, and consequently the change of the same (as Littleton has it
of Socage in general) into money, by the mutual consent of Lord and Tenant,
whereof expect some examples to be presented in the Appendix, Scriptur. 11, and
12. In the mean time have here an instance or two taken from some old
Accompt-rolls of the Archbishops manours of this and that sum paid and
received for enfranchising the land from customs and services, and changing it
into Knights-fee, whereof in the last-remembred Accomptroll, and in the receipt
of Ce^ring (now called Charing) manor there: Et de ij. s. ix. d. ob. de
incremento redditus Thomae de Bernfeuld de termino Sancti Johannis, ut terra
sua de caetero sit libera de consuetudinibus per feodum militis. Et de xiiij.
d. quad. de incremento redditus Thomae de Bending, ut terra sua sit libera per
feodum militis, de termino S. Johannis. And so some others there, as also in
Maidstone and other Archiepiscopal manours, and such may well be reckoned among
lands of that sort, which in a copy of the book of Aid, cited by Peramb. page
533.
Mr Lambard, are noted to be holden in Knightsservice, per novam licentiam
Archiepiscopi. But to return to our Gavelkynd, which if not extensive to Free
Socage, they may seem to stand in need at this day of some other character (to
keep them unconfounded) than Bracton in the definition and description of the
latter does propose, in regard the service of both equally consists in money.

To recapitulate now what has been delivered concerning partition in Kentish
Gavelkynd-land: It is (as has been showed) neither from the name, nor from the
nature of the land alone, nor from prescription, nor yet from any particular
custom, that this property there proceeds; but partly from the nature of the
land, and partly from custom, not (I say) a particular one, but a general
custom extended throughout the whole County in censual land, or land letten
for Cens, or (what is all one with it) Gavel, or Gafol, to say, holden in F^ef
(or Inheritance) Roturier, as called in Normandy, and other parts of France;
the Antiquity whereof, and how beginning in Kent, and why more general there
than elsewhere, shall be the argument of our next Discourse.

PROPOSITION III.
The Antiquity of Gavelkynd-custome, (in point especially of Partition) and why
more general in Kent than elsewhere.

MAster Lambard Peramb. page 545.
inclines in his opinion to conceive this custom brought hither out of
Normandy by Odo (Earl of Kent, and bastard brother to King William the
Conqueror) and that we received it thence by his delivery; an opinion
inconsistent with the Custumal it self of his own Edition, the very close
whereof (if it may be credited) lays challenge to the custom before the
Conquest. For my part I conceive it may carry an Antiquity far greater than the
time of the Norman conquest, being probably as old (in the name I mean, I will
not say in all the properties of it, though happily I may in point of
Partition) as Gafolland it self, from which (if considered in the term) it as
little differs in sense as in syllables; to what our Saxon Ancestors called
Gafolland, their Successors, and we at this day (for a fuller expression of
the nature of it) having added one syllable, and so calling it Gavelkyndland.
Yet I would not be thought of his Spot, in the lives of the Abbats of S.
Augustine at Canterbury, cited by Mr. Lambard, both in his Glossary before his
A^chaion, verb. Terra ex scripto, and in his Perambul. page 28.
opinion, who would bear the world in hand, that the Commons of Kent continue
their privileges by means of a composition entered with the Conqueror at
Swanscomb. No, under favor, we ow them not to that, or any other such like
specious stratagem, nor are beholding either to Stigand the Archbishop, or
Egelsine the Abbats policy to contrive, or to their and our Countrey-mens
valor to compass, their continuance for us in such a way. I am not so
prodigal of my historical faith, as to cast or squander it away upon
commentitious fables: for I account this no better, however swallowed of the
vulgar, whom I dare not to encounter in any dispute about it, as despairing of
success, though using never so effectual convincing arguments to dis-ingage
them in the belief of it; and therefore appealing from them, I shall apply my
self to the more literate and judicious, by intendment not so tenacious of a
specious tradition, but that they can with patience both hear it questioned,
and, if occasion be, refuted; not unwilling to desert it, if, upon trial, it
may prove unsound and spurious, and accounting it as thank-worthy to discover
an old error, as to deliver a new truth, especially To discover an old error
as acceptable, as to deliver a new truth.
since truth is not more often, nor more easily, lost by too much altercation,
than error is contracted and continued by too little. I will not undertake,
nor do I mean to make it my task here, to show how it came to pass, that
Gavelkynd is in a manner proper, and Villenage improper only to Kent, no other
County partaking with it, either in that degree of commonnesse and universality
wherewith Kent is overspread of the former, or in the immunity it enjoyes from
the latter; the finding out the true cause whereof has not escaped my
diligence, although my skill I confess it has. But, be that as it will, and
albeit I cannot in the affirmative show what was, yet in the negative, that
this was not the means whereto we ow the continuance of our Gavelkynd-customes
at and since the Conquest, shall be my next assay to prove, and that by showing
what more than suspicion of error this Monkish relation (for such it is)
deserves to fall under with men of unbiassed and dis-ingaged judgments. But
first, will it please you to hear the story it self, as it is already Englished
by the illustrious Author of the Illustrations upon the Poly-olbion, page 302.
who there suspects the same as not of clear credit.

When the Norman Conqueror had the day, he took his journey toward Dover
Castle, that he might with the same subdue Kent also; wherefore Stigand
Archbishop, and Egelsin Abbat, as the chief of that Shire, observing that now
whereas heretofore no Villeins had been in England, they should be now all in
bondage to the Normans, they assembled all the County, and showed the imminent
dangers, the insolence of the Normans, and the hard condition of Villenage:
They resolving all rather to die, than lose their freedom, purpose to
encounter with the Duke for their Countries liberties. Their Captains are the
Archbishop and the Abbat. Upon an appointed day they meet all at Swanescomb,
and harboring themselves in the woods, with Green boughs, as Mr. Lambard has
it: a likely matter, at that time of the year, being about November.
boughs in every man's hand, they incompasse his way. The next day the Duke
coming by Swanescomb, seemed to see with amazement, as it were a wood
approaching toward him, the Kentish men at the sound of a trumpet take
themselves to arms, when presently the Archbishop and Abbat were sent to the
Duke, and saluted him with these words: Behold, Sir Duke, the Kentish men come
to meet you, willing to receive you as their Liege Lord, upon that condition,
that they may for ever enjoy their ancient Liberties and Laws used among their
Ancestors, otherwise presently offering war; being ready rather to die, than
undergo a yoke of bondage, and lose their ancient Laws. The Norman in this
narrow pinch, not so willingly as wisely, granted the desire: and Hostages
given on both sides, the Kentish men direct the Normans to Rochester, and
deliver them the County, and the Castle of Dover.

Thus Spot, St. Austins Chronicler at Canterbury, living under Edw. 1. he, I
say, and only he, and such others as of latter times write after his copy: for
before him, and in that Interim of more than 200 years, between the Conquest
and the time he wrote, no published Story, no Chronicle, no Record of any kind,
Kentish or other, may be found to warrant the Sea Cambdens Britann. in Kent.
relation; a matter the whilst so remarkable, as, if true, not likely to
escape all our Historians pens that were before him, those especially about the
Conquest. Amongst which Hist. of Croyland Abbey.
Ingulphus silence is the more remarkable, since he is so particular and
punctual in relating and recounting the Conquerours oppugners, and their
proceedings. When afterward Rochester Castle, kept by Odo the Conquerours
brother, against William Rufus in the year 1088, was by him besieged (a thing
of as small moment at least as this) why, all the Stories with one consent were
full of it, particularly Malmesbury and Paris (amongst other occurrences) tell
of a much declined nickname, wherewith those were threatened that should refuse
to come to the Kings assistance in that action, which the former has Nidering,
the latter, Nithing, quod Latin nequam sonat, say both, and rightly, if it
come, as I conceive it may, from the Saxon (...), i. e. nequitia, malitia, as
it is in several places found in their Psalm. 54. 17 Psalm 51. 1. in marg. Psalm.
72. 8. in marg.
Psalter; a nickname this, of such infamy, as fastened upon the most detestable
and barbarous Villeins, such as were guilty of despoiling and rifling the dead,
which the 83. of Hen. 1. Laws calls Weilreif, a term (identical, I take it,
with Walaraupa in the Legis Boior. tit. 18. cap. 3. parag. 1.) which Textus
Roffensis thus illustrates in a place: (...). i. e. (according to the Latin
version in Jornalensis, where this Law occurrs, as the 2^th of those of King
Ethelred, at Vaneting:) Wealreaf. 1. mortuum refare est opus nithingi: si quis
hoc negare velit, faciat cum xlviij. Thaynis plene nobilibus. This (of (...))
is that surely which the old Glossary (new set forth) at the end of Hen. 1.
aforesaid Laws, harps upon, in the word Refare, and is there glossed by opus
nithingi, as also in the word Wealreaf. But to return to our Story, that I mean
of the siege laid to Rochester-castle, which though of as small, if not less,
concernment than the other here in question, could find many Chroniclers to
record it, and must this needs escape them all, till Spot had got it by the
end? Besides, observe with me (what Mr. Seldom there, and Mr. Lambard before
him both note) his commixture of Testis falsus in uno, redditur suspectus in
omnib. Farinac. de tes^^b. q. 67. n. 3.
a falsity about Villenage, affirming it was not in England before that time,
which is apparently false by choice of testimonies, both from our Laws and
other Saxon monuments, so obvious as I will spare to repeat them, setting that
aside until I have dispatched the main matter of the Story, the composition, I
mean, between the Conqueror and the men of Kent, with the occasion of it,
which as it wants the warrant of confirmation by other elder Historians, not
only silent of it, but agreeing in asserting an universal conquest, so in ^lat
contradiction of it, we find clear testimony in Florentius Wigorniensis and
Roger Hoveden, of our Counties fellow-suffering with Kent conquered by the
Normans.
her near and more remote neighbors of Sussex, Surrey, Hampshire, Middlesex,
etc. in the devastations, depredations, and other miseries of a country
invaded, subdued, and (at least in some parts) harried by the Norman
Conqueror, immediately upon that signal victory of his over the English, at
the place where afterward he founded that Abbey, from the Battle there fought,
called Battel-Abbey in Sussex. You shall have my Authors own words: Interea
(say they, Flor. Wigorn. an. 1066. Rog. Hoveden, fol. 258. ^.
having but newly told the Story of that fatal battle:) Comes Gulielmus
Suthsaxoniam, Cantiam, Suthamtunensem provinciam, Suthregiam, Middelsaxoniam,
Herefordensem provinciam devastabat, and villas cr^mare, hominesque interficere
non cessabat, donec ad villam quae Beorcham nominatur, veniret: etc. To this
let me add a passage from the Story of the same Spot, where, after mention made
of an Annuity, or Rentcharge given to his Abbey, by one Sulburga, the Lady of
Brabourne, about the year 861, he subjoyns this: Istum redditum (says he) and
jugum terrae apud Horton, and terram de Hengestehell juxta Wivelesburgum, Hugo
de Monford abstulit, cui and Episcopo Baiocensi Willi^lmus Bastardus fere omnes
terras Cantiae contulit, contradicentibus monachis, sed minime praevalentibus.
Now if the Conqueror seized almost all the Kentish lands, and gave them to his
brother, the Bishop See Order* Vital. ann. 1070.
of Bayeux, and Hugh Monfort, (as you may find further verified by Domesday
book, with clear evidence of the like distribution generally throughout the
Kingdom, whence that of Hist. Croyl. fol. 512. b. See also Eadm. Hist. page 6.
Vsus ergo, etc.
Inguiphus: Deinceps ergo comitatus and baronias, episcopatus and praelatias
totius terrae suis Normannis Rex distribuit, and vix aliquem Anglicum ad
honoris statum, vel alicujus dominii principatum, ascendere permisit:) how is
it likely that Kent should escape or speed so well, as by that specious Story
of the Swanescomb encounter and accord, the Monk would bear the world in hand?
Truth is, by the way, the Harpies of those rapacious times (the Conquerours
kinsmen and contrymen) laid about them notably for the fattest morsels they
could find in most places, out of Church Lands See the Epistle in the Appendix,
Scriptur. 21.
especially: ( tempore autem praedicto Normannorum, quo Dux Willmus cum suis
armatis copiis Angliam intravit, vastavit, penitus and subegit, omnia in
praedam data sunt, etc. quoth Gervase the Monk of Canterbury) and what with
force on the one hand; and flattery on the other, obtained so many, as at
length the pressure gave occasion to the Religious of those times for a general
complaint thereof unto the Conqueror, with petition for redress, and amongst
the rest, the Monks both of St. Austins, and of the Cathedral at Canterbury,
particularly seem to join in the Remonstrance; whereupon (for the former) the
Conqueror directs a writ, brief, or charter to Lanfrank the Archbishop, etc.
for redress of what wrong in that kind had betided the place, of such tenor as
you shall find in the Appendix, Scriptura 13. And for the Cathedral, besides a
particular charter granted by the Conqueror to the Monks there, Ut praedicti
monachi potestatem habeant terras suas dandi and tollendi ubicunque eis melius
visum fuerit, quicunque tas teneat: etc. they show a general writ of his to
Archbishop Lanfrank and others, for the restitution and reseizing of whatsoever
had been taken from the Bishoprics and Abbeys all the Kingdom over, whereof
it seems they had particular occasion to make use, both by their care to record
it, (as an evidence much concerning them) in their Leigers, as also by the
record they likewise there keep of the plea between their said Archbishop, and
the foresaid Odo, at Pinenden, whereof, from the Records of the Church of
Rochester, which it equally concerned, Mr. Seldom in his Notes upon Eadmerus,
page 19. has given us a copy; a pregnant evidence for our present purpose in
many respects. This last named Charter, because it may be the first that ere
you saw of this nature in print, and may conduce to a right judgment of Spots
Story, I shall advisedly recite at large in the Appendix, where you shall find
it, Scriptura 14. But (no longer to digress) be further advertised (good
Reader) that whereas by Spots relation, the Conqueror was opposed by the
Kentish men, in his march through West Kent toward Dover, and after
composition with them at Swanescomb, was by them conducted to Rochester, and
put in possession of the County, together with the castle of Dover; the very
truth is, by the more credible relation of Gesta Gul^^l. Duc^^, etc. page 204.
Gulielmus Pictavensis (a writer of the same time, and the Conquerours own
Chaplain, followed by Hist. Eccles. lib. 3 page 502.
Ordericus Vital^s) the Conqueror, after his victory near Hastings, made not
first to London, and then to Kent, but after fe^ling his affairs about
Hastings, presently took his journey toward Dover Herewith concurreth
Malmesbury, fol. 116. b. where he says, Qui cum and b^lli Hastingensis
victori^, and Cast^lli Do^r^rsis deditione terrorem sui nominis spars^sset,
(Conquaestor) Londonium peti^, etc.
by the way of Romney, where having avenged himself of the savage kind of
Inhabitants, for the slaughter of certain of his men, by some mistake landing
at that place, (of Pictavensis called Romanaerium for Romaneium, as of
Ordericus rightly named) he thence advanced on to Dover; whither, though a
numberless multitude of people had betaken themselves, as to a place, by
reason of the castle, inexpugnable, yet dismayed with the Conquerours approach,
the place with all readiness submitted to him, who, after eight days
fortification of it, marching from thence, at a place not far from Dover, the
Kentish men of their own accord came in to him, swear him ^ealty, and gave
hostages for performance. Marching then onward, and understanding where Stigand
the Archbishop, with the Earls Edwin and Morcar, and other English Nobles (who
conspired to set up Edgar Etheling, King) were assembled, he made toward them
with a strong power, and sat down not far from London; whence certain
companies issuing out against him, he, with 500 of his Horsemen soon repelled
them, forcing their retreat back into the city, not without the slaughter of
diverse by the way. This action was followed with the firing of all buildings
whatsoever behither the river (of Thames.) Passing over which, the Conqueror
removed to Wallingford, whither Archbishop Stigand, and other of the English
Nobility followed him, and deserting young Edgar, made their peace with the
Conqueror, receiving him as their Sovereigne: whose example the Londoners soon
following, rendered themselves also to the Conqueror, and (as the Kentish men
had done) delivered him hostages; such, both for number and quality, as he
required. Thus Gulielmus Pictavensis followed (as I said) by Ordericus Vitalis,
a writer of, as it were, the same time. By which relation it is evident, that
the Conqueror intending for Kent, did not set out (as Spot insinuates) from
London or those parts, but on the contrary ere he went to London, made himself
sure of Kent, by taking Dover castle, (the Lock and Key, as one Matthew. Paris,
Hist. in Hen. 3.
calls it, of all the Kingdom) and from thence, after the Kentish men's
voluntary submission to him, marches toward London. Now, from the silent
passing over most of these particulars in other writers, of and about this
Authors time, all save only Ordericus Vitalis, let none call the truth of
them in question, since their undertakings were for compiling a more general
Story, than that of the Conqueror alone, who therefore were more succinct and
summary in their relations, advisedly (by their own confession) pretermitting
many particular passages. Ingulphus, after a summary relation of the
Conquerours acts at his first coming in, excuses his brevity thus: Summatim
namque ac carptim victoriosissimi Regis gesta narro, quia secum sequi annuatim,
passimque scribere gressus suos non sufficio. Whereas, on the contrary, this
Author ( Pictavensis) undertaking only the acts and life of the Conqueror,
(whose Chaplain he was) sat himself to exspatiate in all memorable occurrences.
Besides, (which I cannot but observe, as tending much to the credit both of our
Author and his relation) although Gemeticensis (a writer of the same time)
balk the most of these passages; yet excusing himself also for his studied
brevity, he refers the Reader to our Author, for fuller intelligence, making
mention of his Story (like as Ordericus Vitalis also does) with great applause,
in these words: Lib 7. ^4^.
His per anticipationem breviter intimatis, ad finem gestorum Willelmi Regis
Anglorum, and Ducis Normannorum, de quibus fastidio Lectorum compendiose
consulentes, quaedam pers^rinximus, veniamus. Si quis vero before illa nosse
desiderat, librum Willelmi Pictavensis, Luxoviorum Archidiaconi, eadem gesta
sicut copiose, ita eloquenti sermon affatim continentem, legate. Of whom
Ordericus Vitalis Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. prope sin.
further thus: Ipse siquidem praedicti Regis Capellanus longo tempore extitit,
and ea quae oculis suis viderit, and quibus interfuerit, longo relatu vel
copioso indubitanter enucleare studuit.

Thus far then in way of refutation of Spots Story in gross, or in the
general; a mere Monkish sigment, I conceive, politikely devised, and with a
design to bring a perpetual obligation on the Kentish men to his own Abbey, as
owing (forsooth) the continuance of their ancient liberties partly to a quondam
Abbot of the place: even much such another, as that of the Devils attempt upon
S. Pancras chapel to overturn it (whereof in the Antiquities of Canterbury,
page 61) smelling too much of the Legend, and invented doubtless for the
greater glory of the Abbey.

Now descend we to the result of the Story, and the inference upon that
meeting, made by Spot and Lamb. Peramb page 30. Author Antiquit. Britan. ^n
vita Stiga^d^ Archiep.
his followers, which in short is, that hence, or hereupon Kent received her
pristine privileges, instancing (some of them) in Gavelkynd for one, and
particularly that hence, as formerly Kent (participating in common with the
whole Kingdom in that point) had no Villeins, so by that means from henceforth
(by a singular privilege above other counties) it never had any. Indeed,
(which I note as adminicular to this assertion) among the articles by which the
Auditors of our Cathedral were to take accounts of the Bailives of that
Churches manours out of Kent, recorded in an old Lieger there, these are some:
1. De Cens^riis Nativorum quod possint exire tenuram Domini ad laborandum and
operandum extra, and statim post operaredire. 2. De finibus Nativor.
profiliabus suis maritandis infra tenuram Domini. 3. De finibus Nativor.
postmortem patrum suorum, quod possint habere terras quas p^tres habuerunt,
tenendas ad voluntatem Domini, secundum consuetudinem maneri^rum: Whereas in
the like articles for the manours in Kent, not one of these occurr; but, as if
improper for the manours of that county, all are quite omitted, to the manifest
confirmation of Spots acquitting Kent of Villeins and Villenage. True, I
confess, nor can it be denied as to those days, the time I mean when those
Articles were set on foot, which, judging of their age by their character,
seems to be about Edw. 2. days: but that there were none at, or after the
Conquest (the point in issue) is under favor an assertion little truer, if not
fully as false, as that other of his concerning the composition with the
Conqueror. For proof whereof, to say nothing of Hubert (the Archbishop of
Canterbury Villani in Kent.
in King John's time) his acquitting both his own and the Monks possessions,
amongst other burdens, from that of Godwin, C^tal* of ^^. in the life of
Hubert.
Villenage, because possibly this privilege might concern their possessions
elsewhere, and not in Kent: I appeal to a writ of King Edw. 2. anno regni sui
septimo, to the Assesso^s of a Tenth and Fifteenth in the county of Kent, in
the behalf of the Abbat of Spots own Abbey (St. Austins) and his Villeins,
whereof you may find a copy in the Appendix here, Scriptur. 15. followed with
another of a very rare deed or charter of about H. 3. time, taken from an
ancient Manuscript Chartulary of the very same Abbey, now remaining with Sir
Thomas Cotton, which I must confess to ow to the cour^es^e of my late learned
friend Sir Simonds D'ewes, clearly showing Villenage to have obtained and taken
place in Kent, and even in our Gavelkynd; a Tenant to that Abbey of certain
land in Gavelkynd doing homage to the Abbat there for the same, expressly as
for Villenage, and covenanting to perform as much service to his Lord, as to
the same Villenage apperteined, as by the deed (which whether I should more
value for it self, or for the hands sake that reached it to me, is with me some
question) more fully may appear, Scriptur. 16. Add hereunto, that the Laws of
Hen. 1. cap. 76. make mention of Villani in Kent: Differentia tamen Weregildi
multa est in Cantia Villanorum and Baronum. So that chapter is concluded. To
ascend yet higher, in Domesday-book, and in the Kentish Survey there, Villani
frequently occurr, by which, if, after the common opinion of modern and some
elder Lawyers, Bondmen (such as of latter times and at this day we call
Villeins) are not to be understood, but rather (after the Cap. 2. Sect. 28.
page 169.
Mirroir) Cultivers de fief demorants en villages uplande; car de vill est dit
villein, etc. or, in Fitzherberts expression: Base tenant, qui fesoit villein
service, mes ne fuit pas villein. i* e. A base Tenant, that does Villein
service, but nevertheless is no Villein; then, to put the matter out of all
^oubt, know that besides Villani, you may withal find, and that in diverse
several manours too in that Kentish Survey (particularly in the Bishop and
Church of Rochesters manours of Southfleet, Stone, Falkham, Woldham,
Trottesclyve, Snodeland, Halling, Frend^bery, etc.) express mention of Servi,
which of all ^ervi in Kent.
hands is confessed to denote men of servile condition, bondmen, or
bondslaves, Villeins. And take along with you this note by the way, that the
pretended composition in Spot, by which he will have Kent for the future
conserved in her immunity from Villenage, did for many years antedate the time
of this Survey; that, pretending to the Conquerours first coming in* this, not
beginning, at the soonest, until about fourteen years after. I might follow
this with some pregnant passages to this purpose, such namely as that in the
old In Armar. Eccles. Cant.
Custumal of Ickham manor in East Kent: Et isti Cotarii nusquam capient auram
nisi apud Ickham vel Brembling: such (secondly) as that in a like ancient In
Archiv. Archiep. Cant.
Custumal of Tenham manor: Quaelibet Coteria tenet unum messuagium, tres
acras, and debet metere 8 acras, etc. Et facie^t quicquit serviens de manerio
praeceperit: such (thirdly and chiefly) as that in the Penes Registrum
Consistorii Cantuar.
will of one Sir William Septvans Knight, sometime owner of Milton near
Canterbury, dated anno 1407: Item lego Adam Standerd, Thomae Hamonde, Roberto
Standerde, Roberto Church, and Johanni Richesforde servis and nativis meis,
pro bon^ servitio mihi ab eisdem facto, Nativi.
plenam libertatem, and volo quod quilibet eorundem habeat cartam manumissionis
sigillo meo signatam, in testimonium huj^smodi meae ultimae voluntatis. I might
add, that, what in confirmation of the probability of Spots Story is added,
viz. that hereupon the King so stomached the Archbishop, as to put him by his
place and office in his Coronation, has no support or warrant from any Story
of those times, all which, with Gervasius Dorobornensis, a Monk of his own
Church, agree in the yiedling and rendering other reasons hereof, chiefly his
being interdicted his Episcopal Function, for invading the Sea of Canterbury,
Robert the Archbishop being yet alive, and undeprived, and holding it and
Winchester both together: which is the more probable, because for the same
reason four years before, Wolstane the elect of Worcester refused to be
consecrated Bishop by him, and was sacred by Aldred, the Archbishop of York, as
the Monks of Worcester and Westminster have it in the year 1062. But to keep to
our Villenage, which apparently is traceable in Kent sithence the Norman
Conquest. Nor indeed seems it to have been otherwise here (in this particular
o^ Bondmen, or Villeins) in the times before the Conquest; witness (besides
the mention of such in the Ms. in Text. Roffens.
Saxon Laws of Ethelbert, Lothaire, and Eadric, all Kentish Kings) an old Saxon
tripartite deed or charter purporting a contract of marriage, which, because it
may serve to exemplify the manner of espousals in those elder times, and is a
great illustration to a model or constitution of that nature exhibited of late
by Sir Hen. Spelman, Council. Tom* 1. page 425. and Mr. Whelock, in his late
Edition of the Saxon Laws, page 60. I shall tender it to common perusal, from
that part of it left and laid up at Christchurch, transcribing it in the
Appendix, Scriptur. 17. Before I proceed, having made mention of that
constitution, touching the manner and rights of espousals, let me (so fairly
occasioned, with excuse for the digression) help to rectify the edition with
some animadversions, which to me it seems much to want, in the Saxon
especially. First then I conceive, the first word of the second chapter in the
Saxon copy, viz. ((...)) as belonging to the precedent chapter or article,
ought to be taken thence, and placed as the very last word of that precedent
article, and so we are to read it, (...),.i. according to the Latin copy, and
pleg^ent (rather* ^ide jubeant) ho^ amici sui. In the next, or second article,
I conceive the two last words there, (...), belong to the next, the third
article, which consequently is to begin the^e. As imperfect is that article in
the end as in the beginning, wanting to perfect it, the whole first line of the
next (the fourth) article, viz. (...) he* all which, I say, belong to the
precedent article, the fourth being to begin at (...), which I conceive not
well turned (as in the new Version there) by ^i quidem eve^iat, being rather,
under favor, thus to be rendered: si sic conveniat, and th^s indeed runs the
old version in the precedent page; and so (to pass by some intervening literal
mistakes) is that in the close of the sixth article, (...), by satis^ationemque
accipiant de celebrandis ^uptiis. The old version here is: Et excipiat inde
plegium qui jus habet in vadio. I once pitched upon this version:
Satisdationemque inde a cipiant qui sponsalia ordinaverint, i. e. Paranymp^i.
But leaving that, to return to our purpose. By what is premised, I conceive we
have ground enough to conclude against what Spot singularly delivers touching
the Conqueror and Kentish men's meeting, with the manner, product, and result
of it; and consequently, what is built upon it, our counties reteining her
Gavelkynd-customes and privileges by means thereof.

But after this pulling down with one hand, to help build up another while with
the other, and not to leave the cause of our enjoyment of those Liberties (that
especially of Partition, the more eminent property in Gavelkynd) thus
uncertain, let us enquire into the carriage of affairs of this nature about the
times of the Conquest, when they say we obtained to preserve and continue this
(amongst the rest) by composition with the Conqueror, whilst the rest of the
Kingdom was deprived o^ it* I say deprived, because as L. december in ^i. de
stipul. ^. m^numission^^, de justi^. and ju^.
Privatio praesupponit habitum, so those who are of this opinion take it for
granted, that before the Conquest* by virtue of a national custom first
induced by the Saxons, and by them traduced from the Germans, intended by
Ta^itus in his Haeredes successoresque sui cuique liberi, etc. and afterward
incorporated into our Laws by LL Ca^uti, par. ^. cap. 68, and 75.
King Can^^us* inheritances descended and were partible after the nature and
manner of our Gavelkynd, at this day. So of late (amongst others) Sir Hen.
Spelman, in his Glossary, ve^b. Gav^l^^um* Daniel in his History, ^ol* 38.
Verstegan in his Antiquities page ^7. Archbishop Parker in his Antiquitates
Britannicae, page 108. and Mr. Lambard, in his Glossary, verb. Terra ex
scripto, though afterward in his Perambulation, page 545. he is found to
cross himself herein, by saying that this custom was brought hither out of
Normandy by Odo the Conquerours brother. Now it is true, and not to be denied,
that by these Laws of Canutus inheritances were partible; but how? It may be
equally, (like our Gavelkynd) but it is not so expressed, nor do the words
enforce it. It Is ordered there indeed, that a partition of the estate be made,
in the one, between or among the wife, children, and next of kin, by the Lord;
in the other, by the heirs among themselves; in both, not (...) emne, or (...),
i. e. equally, but (...); in the former more explicitly thus: (...), etc. i.
e. (according to the old version in Brampton) unicuique secundum modum qui ad
eum pertinet. Here is now no equal division spoken of, no equalling the younger
with the elder brethren, or the like. But the estate is to be shifted (...), i.
e. according to right, justly, or if you will (after the old version of the
latter Law in Brampton, being the same verbatim with that in Mr. Lambard
Archaion, fol. 136. a.
elsewhere) recte, every one to have his due, happily after a Geometrical, not
Arithmetical proportion. Again, not by equal proportion, in point of goods at
least, for each was to partake thereof, (as in the Gavelkynd partition Davies
Reports, L^ Trish custom de Gavelkind, fol. 49.
in Ireland, each one a part according to their quality, degree, or desert*)
prorata, happily their reasonable part, whence indeed some do fetch and ground
a writ we have among us, called Rationabili part bonorum (concerning which
there is a question in our books, whether it lie by the common Law, or by the
custom only of some See Cowells Interp. verb. Rationabili part bonorum, and
Swinburne of Testam. par. 3. cap. 16, and 18.
Countries, and whose footsteps may be traced in venerable Bedes English Saxon
Ecclesiastical History, lib. 5. cap. 13.) but of this matter more anon, at the
close or foot of this Proposition. Or again, (...), i. e. juxta arbitrium boni
viri, as the Civilians in like case use to speak, or pro arbitrio Domini, as it
is in the former of those Laws, be (...), i. e. judicio suo* whose place* by
provision of succeeding times, both here and in Scotland, was supplied by the
Bracton, fol. 60. b. S^ld. Tit. of Hon. cap. 5. sect. 2^. p. 724 Stat. Will.
Reg. Scotor. 1. cap. 22, and 30.
Ordinary, first jointly with the deceaseds friends, afterward without them
and alone, as happily more to be confided in, because by common intendment, as
more knowing, so more careful to deal uprightly; though it be utterly unknown
or uncertain when this trust began by written Law to be committed to the
Ordinary; if I may guess, about what time that provision was made for the like
in Cu^^umar. Normann. cap. 20, 21.
Normandy, whereof in Matthew. Paris History, anno 1190. page 161. edit. ult. Or
else (to proceed) (...), according to right, i. e. Custom, or right, as it is
ordered and directed or tempered by the usages of several places, for 27.
Distinct. Utinam.
Quaelibet provinvincia abundat suo sensu. Apposite and pertinent to this
purpose is that observation of a late compendious Daniel, in Will. 1.
Historian of our own, upon occasion of the Confessors collection and
compilement of, as it were, a Codex Legum, (whither we may refer the original
of Magna Charta) a Standard-law to be current over all the Kingdom: Before
these Collections (says he) of the Confessors, there was no universal law of
the Kingdom* but every several Province held their several Customs, all the
Inhabitants from Humber to Scotland used the Danique Law, Merchenland, the
middle part of the Country, and the state of the West Saxons had their several
Constitutions, as being several Dominions, and though for some few years there
seemed to be a reduction of the Heptarchy into a Monarchy, yet held it not so
long together (as we may see in the succession of a broken government) as to
settle one form of order current over all, but that every Province, according
to their particular Founders, had their Customs apart, and held nothing in
common, (besides Religion, and the Constitutions thereof) but with the
universality of Meum and tuum, ordered according to the rights of Nations, and
that Jus innatum, the common Law of all the world, which we see to be as
universal as are the cohabitations and societies of men, and serves the turn to
hold them together in all Countries, howsoever they may differ in their forms.
So that though we shall admit these with the rest of Cnutes laws to be
national, as by their Preface (that, I mean, of the second part, containing his
secular or politic Constitutions) they are apparently no other, ((...):) yet I
take it these Laws (68. and 75.) conclude not for a national, general, or
universal descent of Inheritances, by an equal or Arithmetical division amongst
all the children or heirs, nor indeed for more than this, that a partition was
to be made of the same, in point of proportion, more or less, according to
what, pro more patriae vel loci, and (in point of goods) juxta arbitrium
Domini, was just and fit, there being no precedent general Law, or Canon here
(now extant at least) to regulate, or give directions in case.

But if not nationally, (for, to give one instance instead of many, Thoroldus,
in a Charter of his to Croyland Abbey, recorded by Hist. Croyl. sol. 519. a.
Ingulphus, makes mention of his Lord and kinsman, Earl Algar, the eldest son
and heir of Leofric, Earl of Leicester, and his Countess Godiva, Thorolds
sister, in the year 1051.) yet I am contented to admit and agree, that
provincially, and particularly here in Kent, we had such a Custom both before
and at the Conquest: neither am I against their opinion, who affirm the like
course and custom current in those times throughout the Kingdom, as not being
desirous to insist much upon this example in Thoroldus charter, or any such
like, to the contrary, for the present, though I doubt whether it can
concludently be argued from (the grounds and authorities they seem to go upon)
those Laws of Canutus. Nevertheless be it so: for though some will say, the
Conqueror found it not here, but either by himself, or his brother Odo,
brought it hither out of Normandy, and by the pattern and practice of his own
Country planted it here, (how can this stand with Spots Story by the way?) yet
I am not of their mind. For had it been from thence transplanted hither,
probably it would not have been confined to Kent, a corner only of the
Kingdom; but have spread it self rather over the whole, by the Conquerours
means, whose inclination and endeavors to propagate and implant here the
Customs of his own Country, are too eminent and notorious to be doubted of.
It Is nothing probable then, (what some have deemed) that we borrowed this
custom from Normandy, or that Odo was wrought upon by any pattern of that
Country to set it up amongst us, but rather found it here at his coming.
Supposing therefore such an universal custom here in England before and at the
Conquest, it will concern us next to make enquiry, how it came to pass, that
when all the Realm beside, has in a manner discontinued it, Kent only
re^^i^s it, in that g^^i^^al manner at l^a^^, whereby improcesse of time it is
become (as the Year-book quoted of Perambul. page 538.
Mr. Lambard phraseth it) as it were a common Law there* The answer must be but
conjectural, since Records herein fail us of all light, as well as Histories,
all but Spots, who for the reasons pre-alleaged shall be none of my Resolver.
Will you have the common answer? Why then they say the Conqueror abrogated
this custom in all parts of the Kingdom save only in Kent, which obt^ined to
continue it by composition with him when they met at Swanescomb. But having
formerly said (I hope) enough in answer hereunto, I will seek further, and try
if some other more probable cause may not be found for it.

The Conqueror then (I will suppose) consented to the continuance of this
custom generally throughout the Kingdom, in all, I mean, but Knight Service
land, the descent whereof to the eldest son alone, (partly for his own, and the
Realms better Coke upon Li^tleton, fol. 14. a.
defense and strengthening, and partly for the upholding and maintenance of
Hodie nobil^tas s^^inde allodiales satrapias divisioni inter liberos obnoxias,
in feuda redigere solet; scil. ut primogenito consulat, and poten^iae nervis in
unum glomeratis, suus familiae splendour mul^itudine liberorum in posteritate
non gravetur. Nic. Burgund. de Cons^^t^d. Fla^driae, Tract. 7. number. 7.
gentile families) I suppose none doubts to be less ancient than the Conquest,
for so much of it (at least) as is of ancient Tenure, (as Mr. Lambard desires
to qualify it:) Nay, and seems to give express allowance to it, without
distinction of lands, by that 36th of those Laws in Ingulphus copy, which after
the Conquest, he granted to the people of England, and were indeed (as the
title of them intimates) the Laws of the Confessor, his predecessor; or
rather, say Camb. Britan. Seld. Polyolb and Spelm. Councils.
some, of the Confessors predecessor, Canutus: Si quis intestatus obierit,
liberi ejus hereditatem aequaliter dividant. So runs the Law according to Notes
on Eadmer. p. 184.
Mr. Seldens version from the original French or Norman. Some happily may take
this as intended only as a rule for goods, not for lands too. But to that it
may be replied, that the word ( hereditatem) there (if of that acception then,
as since and at this day) will not admit of that construction; since, by the
common opinion both of elder and more Cowell Interpr. verb. Heir, and
Hereditament. As also Instit. lib 2. tit. 14. page 166.
modern Lawyers, nothing passes with us here in England, jure haereditario,
but only Fee, and that Hereditaments are such things as do naturally, and of
course descend to the heir, and neither to the Executour or Administratour, as
chattels do, whence that of Littleton, Sect. 1. Feodum idem est quod
haereditas; answering to that of Lib. 4. fol. 2^3. b.
Bracton, long before him: Feodum est id quod quis tenet ex quacunque causa
sibi and haer^dibus suis. See to this purpose Glanvill, lib. ^3. cap. 27.

But here we meet with an objection. By this argument Objection.
(will some say) you restrain and ti^ up the Constitution to lands only,
excluding goods, or chattels, as our Lawyers call them, from what ground, see
in Sir Hen. Spelmans Glossary, verb. Capitale, to which add Freherus his Notes
upon the Decalogue, published anno 1610. Precept the last. To construe it, (I
Solution.
must confess) or of either singly, or alone, were, in my judgment, too much
to restrain and streighten it, and in ^ffect to conclude it a lame and
imperfect Constitution, ordering the intesta^e dead man's estate, and the
disposal thereof, but to halves, as we say; wherefore I conceive, that to take
the word ( Inheritanc^) here to comprehend both, (as I suppose aeh^e does in
that 68. of Canutus Laws, whereto this here, if it were not taken thence, may
seem to have some reference) is Objection. So^u^^on.
not more reasonable, than to understand it either of chattels, or l^nds
singly, seems to me otherwise.

Why but then (say they) you admit of a po^e^ of devising Inheritance by will,
and consequently make F^e and Freehold deviseable, and that by Law, arguing
from those words: Si quis intestatus ob erit, etc. ^rue; dis^inguishing times:
for (^ take it) nothing was more usual in those See Gesta Guli^l. Du^^s, etc.
p. 200. b.
times, (I mean before the Norm^n Conquest, and this, if you ma^k it, is
o^iginally a Law of the Confessors, or rather of Canutus, his predecessor)
than to dev^se and give lands away by will, though therein they receded from
(their first copy) the German custom, of Nullum testamen^um; a provision
afterward received into the body of the Feudal Law, which thus has it: Lib.
F^udo^. 1. tit. 8. parag. 1. and ibi Ho^om^nnus.
Nulla ordinatione defuncti in feudo manente vel valente. It was then, I say, a
usual thing, with their Lords consent at least, to dispose of their land by
will, especially their Bocland, thence happily, amongst other titles given it (as
being sometimes termed and turned V^rsio Fragmenti Saxon in Text. R^^f^ns.
Alodium, otherwhile LL. Aluredi, cap. ^7. apud ^ornalens. LL. Ca^ut. c^p. 10^.
ibid. LL. Edo. in Lamb. ^ol. 136. a.
terra hereditaria, often LL. Ethelredi, cap. 2. in J^r^al.
terra libera) not seldom called Judic. Civit. Land. ibid. cap. 1. LL. Canu^i,
c. 32. ibid. and Glossar. ad calcem LL. Hen. 1. ve^bo Bocland.
terra testamentalis, that is (as an old Leiger-book in Guildhall London
expounds it) terra quam homo potuit in l^cto suo languens legare: with this
limitation notwithstanding, that such Bocland were not by precaution in the
original gift or grant, liable to that or the like restriction, in point of
alienation, occurring in the 37th of King Alfreds laws, which nevertheless
extended b^t to strangers, a man being there forbidden to alienate his land of
that nature (...), i. e. ^xtra cognationem vel progeniem, or, in the Civil law
phrase, extra familiam, from his own kindred or family, whence perchance it came
afterward to pass, that in such terragentilitia, the heirs concurrence was
required and used in the alienation. Instances of this kind (of disposing land
by w^ll, I mean) might be given in abundance, but a few may serve the turn. To
pass over, as obvious, because public, King Alfreds will, at the and of his
acts and life by Asserius, though I might here perhaps not impertinently take
up that of Regis ad ex^mplum, etc. to let that pass, I say, as also for the
like reason, to omit Byrh^ri^ks will of Mepham in Kent, extant in the
Perambulation, page 492. whereunto (if need were) I could add many more
examples, as well out of St. Albans private History, now of late made public
by my deceased friend Dr. Watts, as from the Records of the Church of
Canterbury, whereof, besides the copies of some whole wills, I have by me
several extracts: To let all these pass, I say, I shall only instance in a
will or two, one of a very eminent pe^sonage, an Etheling, Of whom see Spend,
Hist. in the life of Ethelred the 3^ Monarch.
Prince Ethelstan by name, the son of King Ethelred, which I shall set before
you in the Appendix, Scriptura 18, as Scriptura 22, the other; with some
imperfections and misprisions here and there, I confess, but through the
Transcribers fault that entered them in the Leiger, and by reason of his
ignorance (it should seem) of the Saxon tongue and character, which I dare not
undertake to rectify. Thus for practice. As for law: besides that power in all
men in those times to devise land in general, by their wills, without any
violence deduced and concluded from that 68 of Canutus laws, providing how a
man's whole estate (the Lords Heriot only excepted) shall be disposed of, in
case he die intestate, we have a more express law for it afterward, the 76th
I mean, for such land at least as is there termed (...), i. e. (as Mr. Lambard
construes it) terraomni lite soluta, or (as it is turned in Jornalensis, and
the 35th of the Confessors laws de Heretochiis in Mr. Lambard, fol. 136. a.)
terra acquietata comitatus testimon^o. Let me illustrate it by a passage in a
Charter In Armar. Eccles. Cant.
of King Edmund to Ael^here his Thane in the year 941. of certain lands and
possessions there called Mulanton, running thus: Prout pater ipsius Aelsheri
priorum temporibus nostrorum, sub contestamine totius popularis Senatus, sua
pecunia, ab illo and ab alio, prout tunc temporis mos erat, adqu^sivit. In
effect it was, as I conceive, if not the same with Bocland, (called
terratestamentalis, not only because deviseable, but also in regard of the
public testimony of the Shire, required and used in the passing of it
otherwise than by will) such land (like that mentioned of Mr Seldom, Tit. of
Hon. par. 2. cap. 5. page 631* and there said to be holden, qu^ete and absque
omni c^lumnia; or like that passed or conveyed, as in Sir Henry Spelmans
Councils, page 319. and 333.) as was unquestion^bly a man's own, as upon the
purchase or grant of it confirmed and assured to him in the legal way of those
times, such happily (like those of latter times passed by Fine) the conveyance
whereof was recorded and enrolled, or entered in the Shi^e-book, in public
Shire mo^e after proclamation there made, for any to come in that could lay
challenge, or pretend right un^o it* whence not improbably our manner of
recording conveyances, sometimes (as in Canterbury) Vid. Bract^n, lib. a. cap
1^. number. 12. fol. 38. ^.
in the Hundred sometime in the Burgemo^e, otherwhile in both, whereof I am not
unfurnished of instances. Thus for that kind of land. Now for Bocland, and how
the Law stood there: Glossar. ve^bo Bocland.
Sir Henry Spelman, I confess, is clear of opinion against all power of
ali^na^ion in the owner, and that of necessity it must ^e left to descend to
the heir, and thence is called terra ^aereditaria, grounding upon that 37th of
King Alureds laws, which he there recites. Under favor, that Law clearly makes
for the contrary, allowing unto the Possessour a power of alienation, saving
where his hands are tied from it by an express provision and prohibition to
the contrary, from those (the Ancestour, or who else) it came unto him from; a
caution in my apprehension of the same nature with an exception, which (as gl.
Ex his in addit. in parag. item placet. Insti^. de donatio. S^ parag. ut autem
lex. in Auth. de non alien.
Civilians use to say) firmat regulam in non exceptis. And as for its name of
terra haereditaria, and the argument upon it, it is easily answered, as thus:
so called it was to distinguish it from Folcland, otherwise called Gafolland,
wherein the Tenant being but as it were a Lessee, Usufructuary, or Fermour, and
having no propriety, upon his death, or other expiration of his term it
reverted to the Lord, and descended not upon the heir, as Bocland did, at least
ought to do, being (because his own in propriety) hereditary, if not alienated
by him in his life time, as it might be, in regard it was as well terra libera,
as haereditaria, and so called, which Folcland never was, however Sir Henry
Spelman, in a place Glossar. verb. Focland, and verb. Alodium.
so assert, likening it to Allodium, which indeed was liberum, and consequently
capable of alienation, either by gift or sale, to whomsoever the owner pleased;
a property appropriate to Bocland, thence otherwise called, especially abroad,
Allodium, whereof more hereafter. But further to clear the point of Boclands
being alienable, and in the power of the owner to dispose of at pleasure, have
here a pregnant passage for our present purpose, borrowed from a Charter In
Archiv. Eccles. Cant.
of Archbishop W^fred (who died about the year 830.) of the gift of certain
houses to his Successors in the Sea of Canterbury, thus speaking: (...)
Quaere: for the writing is not clear.
(...). That is, in our modern English: If any man shall say that this Mansion
is not more in my power, or (the power of) my heirs to use, than of the rest of
the Society, (or Covent) then let him know, that it never was Christ-church
land, nor any man's Bocland before it was mine: and then let him further think
and consider by other men's Bocland, as well in privileged places, as without,
whether they may grant away their own (land, or possessions) or give it for
(or, in) their lives times as pleases them, or wherefore mine should be of
different kind to those of other men. Thus the Charter, as I understand it.
Bocland then, I conceive, we may conclude alienable by the owner of it, both by
act or grant in his life time, and at his death by will, in the times (I mean)
before the Conquest. But afterward that custom of devising it by will ceased,
as did withal the descent of land generally, by equal division amongst all the
sons. For, as the English Laws and Customs in general, from that time suffered
a daily eclipse and declination by degrees, so this in particular (saving where
they were more tenacious of it than elsewhere, and in such places, whereof See
Stowes Survey, p. 535.
London seems to be one, as by special privilege were suffered to keep it
up) languished, and was at length supplanted by that other kind of descent,
which now regularly takes place throughout the most part of the Kingdom.
Insomuch as where this partible descent cannot, to uphold it self, justly plead
antiquity and ancient custom, it quite fails, and falls to the ground. And to
this pass (I take it) was it come in Glanvill and Bractons days, who
therefore harmoniously deliver this as a requisite and essential property in
land of such descent, that it be not only by nature partible (as it is by
being Socage, if we may interpret Bractons si haereditas partibilis sit, by
Glanvills si fuerit Socagium:) but withal, that by custom and of old it has
actually been parted. Now the Kentish men, it seems, the Commons there, I mean,
like the Londoners, more careful in those days how to maintain their issue for
the present, than their houses for the future, (a contrary respect to theirs
who have of late, by Act of Parliament, rid their lands of this Custom, as to
that property of Partition) were more tenacious, tender and retentive of the
present Custom, and more careful to continue it, than generally those of most
other Shires were: not because (as some Lamb. Peramb. page 546. from Littleton.
give the reason) the younger be as good Gentlemen as the elder brethren, etc.
(an argument proper perchance for the partible land in Wales) but because it
was land, which by the nature of it, apperteined not to the Gentry, but to the
Yeomanry, whose name or house they cared not so much to uphold, by keeping the
Inheritance to the elder brother. And thus at length, though it is like enough
from small beginnings, (as many times great streams have but narrow fountains)
it became so spread and diffused over all the County, that what was not
Knight Service, but Socage-land, or of Socage Tenure, was in time (in Mr.
Lambards phrase) apparrelled with the name, and (as may be added) qualified
with the properties of Gavelkynd. And hence also it comes to pass, both that
we very rarely, or never meet with any land there at this day, (other than
Knight Service land) that is not of Gavelkynd nature, and of a partible
descent, and that withal both our printed and manuscript Custumals, whether
general or particular, use never a word of Socage Tenure, but of Gavelkynders,
Tenants in Gavelkynd, Tenements of Gavelkynd* and such like, as Mr. Lambard
observes, page 544. And notwithstanding the ancient printed Custumal in
Tottell claims freedom only to the bodies of the Gavelkynders, which may be
the truer reading, yet Mr. Lambards may, especially at this day, pass well
enough, by whose copy it is claimed as due to all the Kentish men in general,
as, for the generality of the Commons, by common intendment, such at this day.
But of these things hitherto. Yet ere I proceed to the next Proposition, let me
discharge my self of a late promise for inquiry into the following Emergent:

Whether the Writ, De Rationabili part bonorum, lie See the Preface to the
Reader.
at the Common Law, or by Custom.
THis Writ is grounded and depends on a tripartite division of a man's
personal estate, whether dying testate or intestate, and leaving behind him
wife and children; as in case he leave only a wife, and no children, or
children only and no wife, upon a bipartite. In the former of which cases, one
third part of the goods belongs to the widow, another to the children, and
the third (called the Deaths-part) to the use of the Defunct, to be disposed
either by himself, as he shall see good by his will, or for him, if he die
intestate, by the Ordinary in pios usus. In the latter case, one moiety falls
to the widow, or to the children, (as the case shall be) and the other to the
use of the dead, as before. In both cases, to the children of the deceased,
each of them a rateable part, provided that such child be not his fathers heir,
or were not otherwise advanced by him in his life time, unless happily (for
hereof there is some question) waving that his former portion, he shall choose
rather (as in the case of lands) to take the benefit of this partition by the
way of Hotchpot, which is all one with the Civilians Hotchpot.
Collatio bonorum, or the Lumbards Missio in confusum. See Dr. Cowell, and Sir
Henry Spelman, in Hotchpot.

Now that there was any certain, or definite part or portion of the deceaseds
goods or estate, (whether real or personal) any Quota pars, or Legitima, as the
Civilians term it, by any custom here nationally observed, due to the widow or
children in the Saxon times, does not (that I can find) appear by any Law or
other monument of theirs now extant. The plainest and most visible footsteps of
that tripartite division or partition by this Writ intended, appear in that
remarkable place of venerable Bedes Ecclesiastical History, lib. 5. cap. 13.
where we read of one, who, Testatorlike, disposing of his substance or estate,
Omnem, quam possederat substantiam, in tres divisit portiones. E^quibus unam
conjugi, alteram filiis tradidit, tertiam sibiipsi retentans, statim pauperibus
distribuit. The Saxon reading has it more for our purpose thus: (...). Where
mark, the third part is there said to belong to himself: (...), etc. plainly
insinuating that the other two as rightly apperteined to his wife and children,
each of them a third. But withal observe, that this is the act of an
housekeeper in the Province or Region (as there called) of Northumberland:
Paterfamilias in regione Northan^ymbrorum, etc. so is he described; and such a
testimony indeed it is as makes much (I confess) for the antiquity of that
Custom (of a tripartite division) yet surviving and current in those Northern
quarters of the Kingdom, but whether, in right construction, extensive any
further, or concluding for a national custom in that particular, especially
since traceable in few other parts or counties of the Realm, by any later or
elder footsteps, I think may well be doubted. To proceed then, (for I intend to
state and handle the point rather as an Historian, relating the matter of fact,
than as a Disputant, arguing the case:) as for that Law or constitution of Vid.
Spelman. Council. tom. 1. p. 425.
King Edmund, which some insist upon for the widows right to a moiety of the
estate, if she have no issue, otherwise, in case of issue, and remaining sole,
to the whole, that clearly takes place only vigore contractus, or by force of
a precedent contract; the Law in that particular being ushered in with this
ground, or supposition: (...), etc. i. e. if it shall be so mutually agreed or
covenanted (before or upon the marriage.) Nor does that Law of King Canutus,
par. 2. cap. 68. conclude for more than this, namely, a partition of the estate
amongst the wife, children, and nighest kindred, to be made judicio Domini, by
the Lord (of the Soils) discretion, (...), i. e. rightly, or according to
right, and (...), i. e. after the measure, ra^e, or proportion that to them
belongs, not determining or making any mention, what that right, that
measure, or proportion is in certain, (not the widow and children each of them
a third; for then where were the kinsfolks share?) but leaving it ind^^^ni^o
and undetermined, as what happily being ordered by the Lords discretion, and that
swayed and regulated by (that optima legum interpret) Custom, might vary with
the place. Nor was any such partition current here, in case there were a will,
for what says the Law (...) (...), etc. i. e. If any one depart this life
intestate, etc. implying liberam testandi facultatem, a free liberty to dispose
otherwise by will: as does also that Law of his Successor, the Si quis
intesta^us obierit, liberi ejus haereditatem aequaliter dividant. Vid. Cl.
Seldeni Not. ad Eadmer. page 184. c. 36.
Confessor, ratified and reinforced by his Successor, the Conqueror,
providing that the children of persons intestate shall equally divide the
heritage. In which respect, and because by taking no notice of the widow, (as
neither does that other Law of Canutus, par. 2. cap. 75.) it tacitly seems
to exclude her, I know not well what (much pertinent to the point in hand) can
be concluded from that Law. And as not from this, so neither, I conceive, from
that Law of King Hen. 1. cap. 1. because it concerns and speaks only of the
Kings own Barons and Tenants: [ Si quis Baronum vel hominum meorum
infirmabitur, sicut ipse dabit vel dare al. jusserit.
disponet pecuniam suam ita datam esse concedo, quod si ipse praeventus vel
armis vel infirmitate pecuniam non dederit nec dare disposuerit, uxor sua, sive
liberi, aut parents, aut legitimi homines ejus eam pro anima ejus dividant
sicut eis melius visum fuerit] And is seemingly no national provision, no rule
intended for the generality of the Subjects, the Communalty: or if it were, yet
with such express full and free liberty (inconsistent with this Writ) given by
it to the party to dispose of his estate by will at his pleasure, as tacitly
was granted both by that forecited 68. Law of King Canutus, and that other of
his Successor the Confessor, whereof also before. So that admitting, or
supposing a will, the subsequent division or distribution (prescribed by that
Law of Hen. 1.) took no place, as by consequence neither did that reasonable or
rateable part intended by this Writ. Passing therefore hence, let us next (as
next in order of time) consult (that Oracle of the Law) Judge Glanvill, living
and writing in Hen. 2. days. He indeed, lib. 7. cap. 5. is express for this
kind of tripartite division: Cum quis (says he) in infirmitate positus
testamentum facere voluerit, si debitis non sit involutus, tunc omnes res ejus
mobiles in tres parts dividentur aequales. Quarum una debetur heredi, secunda
uxori, tertia vero ipsi reservatur: de qua tertia liberam habet disponendi
facultatem: verum si sine uxore decesserit, medietas ipsi reservatur. And to
the same purpose again, ^od. lib. cap. 8. Si post debitorum acquietationem
aliquid residuum fuerit, tunc id quidem in tres parts dividetur modo praedicto
(he refers to the forecited fifth chapter) Et de tertia part suum ut dictum
est faciat testamentum. To which kind of tripartite division, he plainly
seems to refer, and have respect afterward, lib. 12. cap. 20. where he lays
it down in terminis, as a thing recepti juris, warranted by the Custom of the
Realm, that is the Common Law, saying: De catallis autem (these are the words
of the Writ) quae fuerunt praefati R. praecipio quod ea omnia simul and in pace
esse facias, ita quod inde nil amoveatur nec ad divisam suam faciendam, nec ad
aliam rem faciendam, donec debita sua ex integro 1. reddantur.
reddatur. Et de residuo post fiat rationabilis divisa secundum consuetudinem
terrae meae. Thus Glanvill, with whom unanimously concur Vid. Bract. and Flet.
p. 125.
Bracton and Fleta. Hence now many learned men conclude this tripartite
division, and the Writ waiting thereupon, to be rather by or at the Common Law;
than (as is thought by others, and those learned men also) by Custom, and that
hereof Magna Charta, cap. 18. expressly takes notice, in the Savio, or
Limitation at the end, thus Englished: Saving to his wife and children their
reasonable parts. The Opponents, and such as take the contrary part, endeavor
to elude this as a matter rather of Counsel than command. So (for example) Dr.
Cowell, Instit. li. 2. tit. 13. parag. 2. followed by Sir Edw. Coke, in the
second part of his Institutes, page 33. who to assert his opinion in the
negative, (his denial of the widow and childrens right to a Reasonable Part by
the Common Law) thus there adds: The nature of a saving regularly is, to save a
former right, and not to give, or create a new, and therefore, where such a
Custom is, that the Wife and Children shall have the Writ, De rationabili
part bonorum, this Statute saves it. And this Writ does not lie without a a
particular Custom, for the Writ in the Register is grounded upon a Custom,
which (as has been said) is saved by this Act. But where going on he further
adds, that Bracton was of the same opinion, quoting for it, (as Of Testaments,
par. 3. parag. 16. fol. 112. b. and 133. a. where he is out in saying, that
Glanvill took his ground from Magna Charta, which is impossible; Glanvill being
dead long before: an eirour (it seems) occasioned by that marginal quotation,
not Glanvills own, but his that set him forth, or some others.
Swinbourne before him) that place of Bracton, fol. 61. a. [ Neque uxorem,
neque liberos amplius capere de bonis defuncti patris vel viri mobilibus, quam
^uerit eis specialiter relictum, nisi hoc sit de speciali gratia testa^oris,
utpote si been meriti in ejus vita fuerint, etc.] with submission, they are
both of them mistaken: that which Bracton there delivers, being a plain
exception, deviation and diversion from the general rule by him (as by Fleta
after him, totidem verbis) just before laid down, and taking place only in
Cities, Burrows and the like, by particular custom of the place, as (amongst
others, ut quidam dicunt, say they) in London, and that upon this double
consideration, namely, first, the advancement of trading and traffic (the
life of all Commonwealths, especially of Islands) which would be much
encouraged by this liberty left to the Merchant or Tradesman, to dispose of
his labors and gettings, where and how he saw best; and secondly, the
countenance of virtue, and discountenance of (her opposite) vice, when by a
necessity laid upon the wife and children, to comply with the husband and
father in such ways, both of thrift and duty, as might win and wear his love,
and consequently, make him willing to requite their merit, the virtuous should
be rewarded, the vicious discarded: Vix enim (say they, Bracton and Fleta both)
inveniretur aliquis civis, qui in vita magnum quaestum faceret, si in morte sua
cogeretur invitus bona sua relinquere pueris indoctis, and luxuriosis, and
uxoribus male meritis: and ideo necessarium est valde, quod illis in hac part
libera facult as tribuatur. Per hoc enim tollet maleficium, animabit ad
virtutem, and tam uxoribus quam liberis been faciendi dabit occasionem, quod
quidem non fieret, si s^ scirent indubitanter certam partem obtinere etiam sine
testator is voluntate. And this (I take it) is the thing (the good of the
Commonwealth, by the maintenance of traffic, much encouraged by the liberty
of a free Devise) by Glanvill, though somewhat darkly, pointed at, lib. 1^.
cap. 11. where (acquainting us, that an Assise of Mortdancester lies not for
houses or tenements, [which are wont to pass inter catalla in Burrows, as
Bracton and Fleta inform us] because of a greater commodity redounding to the
Kingdom by another kind of Assise, an established course I suppose he means,
warranting the liberty of a free Devise of such things, tanquam catalla) he
says: Item ratione Burgagii cessare solet assisa per aliam assisam excausa
majoris utilitatis in regno constitutam. But notwithstanding it were thus in
London in those times, (when Bracton and Fleta wrote) yet afterward it seems
that custom (of a free and arbitrary Devise) ceased, and (happily upon those
counter-grounds, or contrary considerations, brought and laid down against it
by the same Swinbourne, fol. 113. a.) gave place to this kind of tripartite
division: witness (besides Mr. Lambard, Perambul. page 561.) what in a book
lately published, entitled the City-law, and said to be translated from an
ancient French Manuscript, page 7. is delivered in these words: And it is to be
understood, that when a Citizen of the same City (London) has a wife and
children, and dies; all the goods and cha^tels of the said party deceased,
after his debts be paid, shall be divided into three parts; whereof one shall
remain to the dead, and shall be distribu^ed for his souls benefit; and the
other part shall be to his wife, and the third part to his children, to be
equally shared between them; notwithstanding any will made to the contrary,
etc. But (to proceed) although Glanvill, Bracton, and Fleta, one and all, seem
to conclude for this rule or order of Partition, to obtein and take place by
the Common Law; yet, as this course did not long survive them, but, except
where particular Custom (such as that whereon the Writs in the Register are
grounded) kept it up, at length grew into dis-use, in the case both of testate
and intestate persons (witness on the one hand, the liberty time out of mind
generally used at pleasure to dispose of personal estate made by will; and on
the other, the Ordinaries well-known power of distribution of Intestates goods,
which is not without warrant from that clause at the end of Magna Charta's 18th
chap. whereof in Matthew Paris, and Et si quis liber homo intestatus
decesserit, per manus parentum propinquiorum and am^corum su^^^m, and per visum
Ecclesiae distribuantur, salvis unicuique debitis quae desunctus debuit: which
in effect is the same with that of Bracton, and Fleta: ad Ecclesiam and amicos
pertinebit executio.
elsewhere:) so with all these passages in Glanvill, Bracton and Fleta, are so
inconsistent with what, in the case of testate persons, themselves with almost
the same breath, deliver, that I know not how possibly to reconcile them.
Whereof the former thus: Potest enim quilibet homo liber majoribus debitis non
involutus, de rebus suis in infirmitate sua rationabilem divisam facere sub hac
forma secundum cujusdam patriae consuetudinem, quod Dominum suum primo de
meliore and principaliore re quam habet recognoscat, deinde Ecclesiam, postea
vero alias personas pro voluntate sua. Quicquid autem diversarum patriarum
consuetudines super hoc teneant, secundum jura regni non tenetur quis in
testamento suo alicui personae praecipue nisi pro voluntate sua aliquid
relinquere, libera enim dicitur esse cujuscunque ultima voluntas, secundum has
leges sicut and secundum alias leges. The other two, to one effect thus:
Cuilibet autem sit licitum facere testamentum de rebus suis mobilibus and se
moventibus, and quatenus superfuerit deducto aere alieno, scilicet debitis
aliorum, etc. Thus, in mine opinion, do the same men more than seem to fight
with, and contradict themselves, and how to set them agreed is past my skill.
But indeed vix tanti est, it is not much material, since if we shall admit (what
some eagerly contend for) this rule and order of partition to have sometime
been by Law current throughout the Realm, yet by general disusage and
discontinuance, it is now, and that not lately, antiquated and vanished out of
ure, both in this (of Kent) and other Counties, surviving only (for ought I
hear) in the Province of York, and some few Cities; and that it should ever be
revived, at least in the case of testate persons, until first some way may, if
possibly, be found, how to dissolve this knot, and remove this rub of flat
repugnancie and disagreement of those ancient Authors (the vouched Patrons for
it) with themselves in the point; I for my part, saving better judgment, see
but little reason, and further than thus dare not in a case so controverted and
canvased by learned and judicious Lawyers, interpose any judgment of my own.

PROPOSITION IV.
Whether Gavelkynd be a Tenure or a Custom.

IT will not be amiss (I hope) to usher in the answer to this Quaere, with
some digression concerning Tenures. Facing then about, and looking back upon
the times before the Conquest, inquire we out the Tenures (if I may so call
them) then in use, and what other succeeded in their places afterward at and
since the Conquest. Here I expect it should be granted (for it is avouched I am
sure by several See Mr. Seldens Titles, 1. Edit. page 228, 273, 301. Illustrat.
upon Polyolb. p. 208 Sir Hen. Spelmans Glossary, verb. Feu^um.
men of credit) that before the Conquest we were not in this Kingdom
acquainted with what since and to this day we call Feoda, Foreiners Feuda, i.
e. Fiefs, or Fees, either in that general sense I mean wherein they are
discoursed of and handled abroad in the Book thence entitled De Feudis, at
home in that called Littletons Tenures, or in that particularly understood of
us, when we treat or speak of Knights-Fee, which could not then be known here,
when Knights themselves were not in being, as (says a Record in the Cathedral
of Canterbury, whereof more And in the Appendix, Scriptura 21.
anon) they were not till the Conquerours time Or if in effect they were known
to us, yet in terms certainly they were not: for the name of Fee, or Feudum, in
this sense is no where to be found in any our Records or Monuments of those
days now extant, and of credit, if my self and others have not been more
unhappy to miss it, than indiligent to seek it. It Is true, it occurrs in the
fifth and sixth of the Laws ascribed to the Confessor, set forth by Mr.
Lambard, in the Varia lectio there in the margent; but besides that the Text in
each place reads it Fundo, those Laws, I take it, for the most part, especially
as to their phrase, carry not that antiquity; but, like those of like kind in
Scotland, ascribed to King Malcolm the Vid. Spelm. Glossar. verb. Feudum, page
258. col. 2. and verb. Baro page 81. col. 1.
second, and King Alureds will at the end of the Story of his life penned by
Asserius, where the word several times occurrs, savor of a later dress. The
like no doubt may as truly be said of that, Qui in feodo suo, in the old Latin
Version of King Edgars Laws, following those in the original Saxon set forth in
the late Edition of the Councils by Sir Henry Spelman, page 446. And may we not
upon this (amongst other grounds) question those Charters in Histor. Croyland.
Ingulphus, thus far, I mean, as to doubt, whether many, if not the most of
them, speak not another than that tongue in which they were originally penned,
as being by the Author, (though English born, yet afterward Normaniz'd, by
conversing there some time, as a Retainer and Secretary to Duke William,
afterward Conqueror, and King of England) whose Story is penned in Latin, the
better to suit with it, taught to speak the Latin of his time, and late
Masters native Country? upon this ground, I say, that amongst many other
phrases scattered here and there, not in use with the Saxons, nor ever heard of
here in England till about Ingulphus own time, (such as Averia, Ballivus,
Bedellus, Communa pasturae, Justiciarius, For is factura, Tenura, Weif, Stray,
with many more such like, which I forbear to name in this place) occurrs
Feudum. For example, in the Charter of Witlaf, the Mercian King, dated anno
833. we have it thus: and xl. acras de eodem feodo in campo de Deping. The like
in a Charter of Bertulph, another Mercian King also, dated anno 860. and in
some other of later date from succeeding Kings, we have -- de eodem feodo de
Gerunthorpe, and the like: whereas it may very justly be doubted, whether
either the Laws, Stories, or other, either written or printed monuments of
credit of any Nation or Country, can show the word ( Feodum, or Feudum) in use
amongst them (but in stead thereof Beneficium, Feudum's elder brother, or the
like) until about that age, until (I mean) after the beginning of the tenth
Century from our Saviors incarnation. And hence give me leave, with Buchelius,
in his Illustrations upon Heda's History of the Bishops of Page 116.
Utrecht, to suspect that list or memorial, Page 111.
De vassis sive fide addictis Ecclesiae and Episcopo Trajectensi, (as there it
stands entitled) of Heda ascribed to Adelboldus the 19th Bishop of that See,
who after he had sat 18 years, died in the year 1028. as indeed a piece
unadvisedly referred to that time and place, and in all probability belonging
to some Successor of his. But be that as it will, I see nothing however that
may render us unsatisfied of the truth of their assertion, who say that the
Conqueror brought, or introduced first into this Kingdom Feudum, Feodum, or
(as in English) Fee, taken as it signifies Feudal services, especially
military, ( praedium militare) the sense in which, as it regularly occurrs in
the Hotom. de Feud. lib. 2. page 309. parag. ult. tit. 51.
Feudal books abroad, so constantly in Domesday-book here at home, for
distinguishing the land from other there said to be holden per gablum, ad
^irmam, in Alodio, and other like Tenures there occurring: the Introducer
borrowing (says one Spelman, ubi supra.
of my Authors) the term, (he might have added the Customs) from his own
native country, Normandy, which he concludes from a passage of himself there
quoted out of Domesday-book, thus speaking: -- In eodem feudo de W. Comite
Radulfo de Limes' 50. carucat. terrae sicut fit in Normannia: thus subjoyning:
Feudum and Nomanniam jungit, ac si rei novae notitia e Normannia disquirenda
esset. But with submission to better judgments, I question whether those
words: sicut sit in Normannia, may not relate to Carucatae terrae, being an
expression not used of Annuente Rege, omnes Carrucat as, quas Angli Hidas
vocant, funiculo mensus est: Order. Vital. Hist. Eccles. ad* ann. 1089.
the Saxons for a Plough-land, (but Aratrum, Sulinga, Hida, Familia, Mansio,
Mansa, Manens, Casata, and the like terms of quantity) rather than to Feudum,
from which too it is further distanced in the quotation than from the other.
But to let that pass: to the Conqueror (it seems) it is, that the name and
customs of our English Fees, or (as we now vulgarly call them) Bacons
^lements, tract. 2. p. 30.
Tenures, such at least as are military, ow their introduction, whatsoever the
Ch^p 1. Sect. 3. p. 16.
Mirroir (a book whose antiquity is too much cried up of some) has to the
contrary, as if in terminis known here in England in King Alfreds days, by
whom (as the Author there pretends) i^ was ordained that Knights* Fee should
descend and fall to the eldest, and Socage among all the sons: whereas in very
deed we knew neither one nor the other in those days, they with the rest since
and at this day called Fee-simple, Fee-taile, Fee-ferme, Frank-fee, as also
Grand and Petite Serjeanty, Escuage, Burgage, Villenage, and the rest, in the
book of Tenures and elsewhere obvious, being all of the Norman plantation, and
we by them, at least since their Conquest of us, brought acquainted with them,
not knowing what Fee (in that notion) meant before, nor being to this day
agreed among our selves, as neither are the Feudists and other writers on that
argument in other parts, upon the etymology and derivation, either of that o^
the word whereunto it is opposed, Allodium; wherein indeed Authors of several
sorts, Lawyers I mean, Etymologi^ts and Antiquaries so much differ and
disagree, as that the further we wade in the research of their opinions in that
kind, the more uncertain still we come off, and the further we are from (the
end of our inquiry) satisfaction. However, I will on this occasion adventure to
offer my sense, which, if well considered, may perhaps help to end the
difference.

Not to repeat that variety of other men's opinions Feudum derived,
in the point, of which some, and those the most, and with most general
applause and acceptance, fetch the former (Feudum) from Fides; others from
Faida, or Feida (bellum) a third from Foedus: a fourth from the German Fueden,
qua^i a fungendo, i. pascendo, or (as De We^c^* bild. S^^* ^. cap. 49. number 8.
Gryphiander has it) from the Saxon Foden, i. e. nutrire: to let these
derivations all pass without any further repetition, as obvious enough in the
writings of the Feudists and elsewhere, especially (with some additions of his
own) in Martinius Lexicon* Philologicum: as likewise not to repeat the like
variety amongst them, (as obvious as the other) concerning the latter,
(Allodium) which some will have to be a derivative and Allodium.
from a, the privative particle, and Laudium, or Laudatio, as a possession
acknowledging no Author, no Lord of the Soil, but God alone; others from that
privative particle, and Lodes, quasi sine Lode, that is, ^ine vassallo, as a
mad man is called amens, to say, ^ine mente, as whose possessour is no Vassal,
whilst a third sort fetch it from Alsleud, as we should say, possessions
common (i. e. such as may freely be given or sold) to all or any of the people,
the many: like in this (say some) to what of old we here in England called
Folcland, by which (but how properly, since Folcland is paralleled with what
sithence we call Cowells Interp^eter, and West, Symbol g p r. 1. l b. 2. s^ct.
603.
Copy* hold, may well be doubted) they are found to illustrate it, contrary to
a fourth derivation of others, who hold it inseparable from the family, and
thence of the Germans called Ein Anlod. A fifth sort there is, that draw it
from the foresaid privative particle a, and L^od (in French L^ud) a Vassal, as
it were, without vassallage, or without burden, which we English men (says my
Author rightly) at this day call Load: not further, I say, to trouble the
Reader with either any longer repe^ition of these and the like (for there are
some other) various opinions of this kind, or any Catalogue of the several
Authors of them, I will, as I promised, offer my conjecture at each words
etymology, with submission of it to better judgments.

In short then I say, that each of the two words in its original, which is
German, is a compound consisting of two syllables, of which two, the latter (to
begin with that) I conceive to be the same in both, and is no other than what
is borrowed toward the composition of many several words of the same original,
used and continued both in those, especially the Teutonic parts, and also here
in this Island, from the time of the Saxons settling here, down unto this day,
though with some little variation of the Dialect, occasioned by tract of time
bringing its corruptions, and the intermixture of other languages: and that is
with us hade, head, hode, with the Teutonics heyd, and heit, sometime hat,
betokening in each place (as dome, and ship, anciently written scip, in the
terminations of many of our words:) a quality, kind, condition, state, sort,
nature, property, and the like. Hence the military, masculine, feminine,
childish, paternal, maternal, fraternal, sisterly, desolate, presbyterial,
neighbourly, quality, nature, kind, condition, etc. of a Knight, a Man, a
Woman, a Child, a Father, a Mother, a Brother, a Sister, a Widow, a Priest, a
Neighbor, etc. is termed Knight-hode, Manhood, Womanhode, Childhode*
Fatherhode, Motherhode, Brotherhode, Sisterhode, Widowhode, Priesthode,
Neighbourhode, etc. The quality, nature, existence, of the Deity is styled
Godhead with us, with our Ancestors, the English Saxons (who wrote and had
that hade, which we since write and have hode and hood) Godhade. Head in
Maidenhead ows it self to the same original, denoting out the virgin-condition,
or maiden-quality of the party. Hood in Livelihood is also sprung from the same
root, whereby a man's state of subsistence is signified: and the like may be
said of hood, in Falsehood, Likelihood, and a many words more of like
termination, as expressing and setting forth in the one, the false, in the
other, the probable, likely, condition of the thing predicated. This may also
help us in the etymology of what we use to call Feud, or deadly feud, Feud.
(in deadly Feud) derived.
our Ancestors, the Saxons (...), the Germans Fhede, Feide, and Faide, which
in truth is but a compound of their F^h, i. e. Hostis, Inimicus, as we say at
this day a Foe, and hode, hade, head, heyt, etc. ^i. conditio, status,
qualitas, etc. together importing the condition of enmity in the person who
bears it. I could here enlarge with instances of very many Teutonic words thus
terminating, I mean, in their Dialect with heyd, heit, and the like, and by
such their terminations predicating, as is said before, a quality, condition,
etc. such as Allenheyd, Felheyd, Fijnigheyd, Hebbelickheyd, Heyligheyd,
Maeghdelickheyd, and numbers more obvious in every page of Kilianus
Dictionarium Teutonico-Latinum, and elsewhere; but I fear to be tedious.

Seeing now what the latter syllable in Feudum and Allodium, in their several
originals, signifies; and having taken the words thus asunder, let us next
consider of the other part of the composition, their former syllables, which in
Feudum (the former) is Feh, Feo, or Feoh, signifying as Saxon Gospels, Matt.
25. 18, 27 also chap 28. 12, 15. and Verstegan, page 218.
Pecunia in the general, so more peculiarly a Salary, Stipend, Wages, intended
of us when we say: Officers live by their Fees; whilst in the other, Allodium,
the former syllable rightly written, is All, Al, or (as with the Saxons) eal.
Put we now the syllables together again, and then the former will come forth
Feo-hode, Feh-hode, or the like; the latter, All-hode, and that most
appositely, if applied to the Feudists Feudum and Allodium, considered in their
originations and primitive acceptions. The former of which when first Vide tit.
Feud. ^. t^t. 1. De his qui feudum dare possu^t. Spelm. Gloss. verb. Felonia,
p. 253. Cowells Interpret. verb. Fee.
instituted, was but personal, not, as afterward, perpetual, patrimonial,
hereditary, or holden (in Glanvill and Bractons phrase) ad remanentiam, but as
a Clergyman holds his Benefice, (hence in some ancient Biblioth. Cluniae. page
1390. and Cujac. de Feud. lib. 3. tit. 1.
Charters called Feodum) only for life; the Tenant being but a mere
Stipendiary, a Termer, at best but a Freeholder for life, Usufructuarius, and
indeed some were not so much, but held only (as our learned Verb. Felonia.
Glossarist has it) ad voluntatem Domini, as Vulteius de Feud. lib 1. cap. 1.
number. 14.
others, precario, not unlike our Tenants at will since and at this day: the
land was only lent, as the German term for it Kilian. Diction. verb. Leen, and
Dr. Zouch, Descript. jur. temporalis, sect. 7.
( Lehen) seems to intimate. In process of time, degenerating and receding
from their first institution, they became perpetual and hereditary, yet holden,
as formerly, with a condition of service on the Tenants part, and stipendii
loco and nomine on the Lords; by way (as it were) of Salary, Pension, or
Stipend from the Lord, to gratify and recompense his man withal for such his
service, to which he was obliged under peril of forfeicture by the withdrawing
thereof. I dare not add in consideration of Fealty or Homage, (in those times)
since, though that acknowledgement in the Feudal Law, of some Fee tenable
without an oath of Vid. Hotoman. de Feud. lib. 2. tit. 3. parag. 4.
Fealty be indeed justly taxed for a paradox of such who will have Fee to come
of Fides, (whence happily our legal maxim, that all Tenures regularly are liable
to Fealty:) yet might Fee, by this derivation of it, stand with Fealty, and the
Tenants of it be called Vi. Spelm. Glossar. verb. Fideles.
Fideles feudales without a soloecisme; a good argument for the derivation of
it thus, rather than from Fides, as of more scope, and more consistent with Fee
of all sorts than that other derivation does allow. Fees, I say, were holden
but in service, nomine quasi alieno, the Dominium, that at least of Lawyers
called directum, (though the utile were transferred on the Tenant:) the
propriety, I mean, remaining and abiding still in the Lord, together with a
power of restraining his Tenant from alienation, and consequently such land was
but partially, conditionally, not totally and absolutely, granted out.
Contrariwise, that which was termed, in opposition to it, Allodium, as it was
hereditary, perpetual, and patrimonial, so was it ^ans all condition, free, and
in the power of the possessour to dispose of it ad libitum, how he pleased,
either by gift or sale, without asking any man leave: and as it was hereditary,
perpetual, patrimonial, and free land, so was it withal possessed totally and
wholly, not as our land generally in this Kingdom in Subjects hands at this
day said to be holden in Dominico suo ut de feodo, as our Lawyers phrase it,
but rather in Dominico suo ut de jure, (the owner having Dominium both directum
and utile:) or in the Feudists phrase, and after their unanimous, harmonious
definition of it, pleno jure; integre; ex toto; or ex solido, as De Gest.
Pontif. lib. 1.
Malmesbury has that which Hist. Novor. l. 1. p. 18. Vi ^. Dr. Zouch,
Descript. jur. temporal. sect 5.
Eadmerus expresses by in Alodium, quit of all services, like Frankalmoigne,
whereunto Mr. Seldom there in that respect resembles it. I may call it
absolutely, immediately, or (if you will) independently, without
acknowledgement of any superior Lord, not unlike the Prince of Haynault,
holding only (says my Spelm. Glossar. verb. Allodium.
Author) de Deo and Sole, or, as other absolute Princes, Gratia Dei, in a
word, in totality: whence the terms of praedia immunia, terra propria, fundus
proprii juris, patrimonium, in As in Hundii Metropol. Salisburg. Bibliothec.
Cluniac. and Praemonstrat. Hist. Ultraject. and Miraei Cod. Donatio, etc.
Charters and elsewhere given to such possessions. Probably, land of this nature
was the same with our Bocland, which I sometime find in the Latin rendering of
some Saxon pieces turned by it: (hence a hint to judge of the one by the
other:) for what in the 11th Chapter of the first part of King Cnutes Laws is
read Bocland* (...), etc. and in the old Latin version of it in the Kings Ms.
and Jornalensis, is turned haereditas: Si quis Tainus in haereditate sua terram
(it should be Ecclesiam) habeat, etc. in another like old version in the book
of Rochester called Textus Roffensis, is rendered Allodium* Si liberalis homo
quem Angli Thegen vocant, habet in Alodio suo Ecclesiam, etc. By Allodium also
is turned in the same Record (Textus Roffensis) what occurrs in the Saxon
fragment exhibited by Mr. Lambard, Perambulat. in Mepham* page 500. under the
term of (...)* Et si villanus ita crevisset sua probitate, quod pleniter
haberet quinque hidas de suo proprio Alodio, etc. Allodium, it seems thence,
being properly such land as is fully a man's own. Shortly then, Feudum, Fee, or
land holden in Fee, is no more (considered in its first and primary acception,
to which they must have regard that will hope to judge aright of the ground for
the first imposition of the name:) than what was holden in Fee-hode, by
contraction Feud, or Feod, i. e* in a stipendiary, conditional, mercenary,
mediate way and nature, and with the acknowledgement of a superior Lord, and a
condition of returning him some service for it, upon the withdrawing whereof
the land was revertible unto the Lord: in which respect, as the grant thereof
is improperly called a Donation, being but Vid. Fleta, lib. 3. cap. 2. parag. 4.
Feodalis dimissio, i. e. a Demise in Fee, so the Deed or Conveyance by which
it was demised, is as improperly termed a Charter of Donation, being no more
than a Charter or Deed of Feoffment. Such, I say* is Feudum. Allodium is
contrariwise what is holden in All-hode, in totality, in a total, full,
absolute, immediate manner and condition, without acknowledgement of any
superior Lord, and free from any tie or compact for the returning any service
at all for it unto any. Thus far (and I hope not too far, nor impertinently)
for clearing the etymon of Feudum and Allodium, as the argument, so the torture
of many learned pens, amongst whose derivations of one and the other, I humbly
crave this of mine (such as it is) may be admitted for future Indagatours, and
all others of unforestalled judgments freely to consider of.

And now to spin on our former thread, and to reassume our argument of the
Introduction of our Fees or Tenures by the Conqueror, which that etymon coming
in the way caused me a while to set aside: I here profess to concur with
them, who upon the question put, resolve it in the affirmative, whereof our
learned Verbo Feudum.
Glossarist, for one, thus: Feodorum servitutes in Britanniam nostram primus
invexit Gulielmus senior, Conquestor nuncupatus, etc. and a little after:
Deinceps vero resonarunt omnia feodorum gravaminibus* Saxonum aev^ ne auditis
quidem: no other Tenures, or, in the Scottish expression, Haldings of land,
being formerly here in use but these two, Bocland, and Folcland; The one (says
my Lambard, in verb. explicat. verb. Terra ex s^ripto.
Author) a possession by writing, the other without. That by writing (so he
adds) was a freehold, and by charter; hereditary, with all immunities, and for
the free and nobler sort. That without writing was to hold at the will of the
Lord, bound to rents and services, and was for the rural people. It may be
added, that the former took name from the lands booking, or entering (with the
limits of it) in a Codicil, (as then called) a little book, or (as we since
call it) a Charter, which if the land were given to a Layman, was in way of
Seizin delivered to the party that was to have the land, (hence happily that
ceremony we retain of delivering a Conveyance as the parties Act and Deed) or,
(if to a Monastery) laid and left most commonly upon the Altar: Ego autem
licentia and consensu illius, testimonioque Episcoporum and Optimatum suorum,
omnes terras meas, and libros terrarum propria manu mea posui super altar
Christi in Dorobernia, etc. as it is in the close of a In Armar. ^jusd.
ecclesiae.
Memorial of the gift of Monkton and other manours to the Church of Canterbury,
in the year 961, by Queen Edive, or Edith, whose picture, in thankful
remembrance, was until of late reserved in that Churches Treasury. Hence was
such a Charter vulgarly known in those times by the name of See Scriptur. 20.
in the Appendix, and Spelm. Glossary.
a Landboc, in the Latin of the times Telligraphum, sometime Codicillus, and
the like. Observe yet further, terram haereditario jure conscribere, and
liberam proclamare, (the Latin phrase for creating Bocland) was a prerogative
royal, or a Royalty, and out of the power of any Subject, whence that passage
often occurring in Subjects grants of lands in perpetuity to the forenamed
Cathedral, and other places, viz. and such a one King, (...), i. e.
haereditario jure conscripsit, Vide Sp^lm. page 319, 333. and Bed. Hist.
Eccles. Anglo-Saxon. lib. 3. ^. 24. and Chronolog Sax. anno 854.
as also that: liberam omnino proclamavit, and such like. King Ethelreds
privilege (as called) confirming to that Cathedral (amongst other things)
their whole possessions, is hence by Sp^lm. Council. p. 507.
one of the Subscribents called, (...). But notwithstanding this
Enfranchisement, the land was very seldom alienated by the possessour in
Frankalmoigne, without (what the Law of Anno 9. Hen. 3. c. 36. and anno 7. Ed.
1* Vide Custumar. Norman. cap. 32.
Mortmaine afterward required) a concurrent, or at least a subsequent
confirmation from the King, whereof examples are obvious in the List of that
Churches lands and benefactours, published in the Antiquities of Canterbury,
page 210. as also of the concurrence of the Magnates, or Nobles, in such
Bocland-grants, principally in that of Mallings. You shall have the very words,
because rema^kable: Anno Domini DCCCxxxviij. Ecgbertus and Athelwlfus Rex
filius ejus dederunt Ecclesiae Christi in Dorobernia Mallings in Suthsexan,
quod viz. manerium prius eidem Ecclesiae dedit Baldredus Rex, sed quia (mark
this) non fuit de consensu magnatum regni, donum id non potuit valere. Et ideo,
etc. Bocland thus flowing originally from the Crown, upon all forfeictures, and
particularly that of the estate of the possessour, for deserting the wars, as
if there were no mean between the King and him, the King alone was to take the
LL. Ethelr. par. c. 2. and LL. Canut. par. 2. cap. 75.
forfeict. But of Bocland more anon.

Some other kinds of land ('it is true) there were in those days, but all (I
take it) reducible to the precedent Diehotomy, such as, 1 Gafolland: (...),
Gafolland.
as it is in the truce or agreement between Alfred and Guthrun KK. in the
Archaion, Neatland. Inland.
cap. 2. 2 Neatland. 3 Inland: (...). so runs the first chapter of King Edgars
Laws there. 4 Utland: (...). Utland.
as we have it in the will of Byrhtric in our Kentish Perambulation, page 495.
Of which four, the two former, I conceive, were but the same with Folcland;
both one and the other importing land letten or demised, as Fol^land was, to
rural people, more Emphit^utico, for profit: the one from Gable, or Gafol, i.
^. Cens, or Rent, being termed Gafolland; the other called Neatland, either
from (...), to improve, fructify, whence (...) for a Foenerator, a Usurer,
(...), profit, (...)* profitable, (...), unprofitable, unthrifty, or else which
I rather think) from (...), Villanus, Colonus, as the old Version of the 19th
and 21th of K. Ina's Laws renders the word, which comes all to one with
Ceorliscus spoken of in that second Chapter of the Foedus Aluredi, and
Guthruni, Regum, and there described by his quality to be o^e that occupies
Such (^^ply) as that in a very a^cien^ Deed in Christ Church, called Terra
rusticorum. It occu^rs in a Charter of Amfridus de De^e, of lands in Fai^field,
made about Hen. 3. time* To which may be added what occurrs in a Charter of
Hubert the Archbishop to the Prio^y of S. Gr^go^ies by Cante bu^y, viz. De
decimls Militum and Ru^^icorum, etc.
Gafolland. As for the remaining two, Inland, Utland, the former was terra
dominicalis, land holden in Demesne, in the owners own hands, (and for the most
part designed in mensam Domini, whence otherwise stil^d in succeeding times
Bord-land, like the Civilians and Canonists bona ad mens^m) and in this respect
may not unfitly be referred to Bocland, regularly of like property. The latter
contrariwise, like Gafolland, and Neatland, was land letten out, and, in
opposition to Demesne land, termed in servitio, or tenement^lis, that is,
granted out in service by the Lord to his Tenants, to be holden of himself, and
so we may parallel it, as with Gafolland and Neatland, so with Folcland, being
of the same nature: like the Frenchmans Fief s^rvant, i. terra serviens, in
respect whereof the Tenants were bound to be Retainers, Attendants and
Followers to their Lords, Sui^ors to their Courts, and were thence called (in
the term of Hen. 1. Laws, taken up afterward of LL. Hen. 1. cap. 8. Bracton,
l^b. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10.
Bracton) Folgarii, concerning which see further in Sir Hen. Spelmans Glossary,
verb. Folgare, and Folgarii, as also in the Laws of King Knute, par. 2. cap. 19.

Besides these sorts of land, after ages (since the Conquest) produced many
other, such as, Work-land, Cot-land, Aver-land, Drof-land, Swilling-land,
Molland, Ber-land, Smiths-land, Ware land, Terra Susanna, For-land, Bord-land,
and such like. Of each of which (for some satisfaction to the inquisitive) in a
word or two.

The first ( Work-land) is land of a servile nature and Work-land.
condition, terra servilis, as I find it called, as also (what indeed the word
sounds) terra operaria, because happily at the creation of the manor, and
distribution of it into parcels, charged with servile works, such as plowing
and harrowing the Lords a^able ground, mowing. tassing and carrying in his hay,
sowing, weeding, reaping, and inning his corn, making and mending his fences,
thatching his barns, and such like: charged (I say) with servile works, and not
with Cens or Rent, or if also with rent, yet of the twain more especially with
works, and therefore contradistinct, and opposite to Gavelland, which was land
liable to Cens or Rent, or if also to works, yet chiefly to rent; both one and
the other being denominated from what was the more eminent service arising from
them. Hereof some footsteps visible in the 66. of King Ina's Laws.

The second ( Cot-land) that belonging unto, and occupied Cot-land.
by the Cotarii, Cotset^, or Cotmanni, a sort of base Tenants, so called from
certain Cotes, or Cottages, small sheds like sheep-cotes, with some little
modicum or parcel of land adjoining, originally assigned out unto them in
respect and recompense of their undergoing such like servile works, or baser
services for their Lords, as before expressed.

The third ( Aver-land) much the same with that Aver land.
before called Work-land, coming of the French Ouvrer, to work, or labor, but
chiefly differing from that in this particular, that the services thereof
consisted especially in carriages, as of the Lords corn into the Barn, to
Markets, Fairs, and elsewhere, or of his domestic utensils or
houshold-provision from one place to another, which service was of diverse
kinds, sometimes by horse, thence called Horse-average, otherwhile by foot,
Horse-average
thence termed Foot-average; one while within the precinct Foot-average.
of the manor, thence named In-average, another In-average.
while without, and then called Out-average; the Out-ave^ag^.
Tenant in the mean while being known by the name of Avermannus.

The fourth ( Drof-land) that holden by the service Drof-land.
of driving, as well of Distresses taken for the Lords use, as of the Lords
cattle from place to place, as to and from Markets, Fairs, and the like: more
particularly here in Kent of driving the Lords hogs or swine to and from the
Weald of Kent, and the Denns there, thence called of old Drofdens, namely from
the droves of hogs Drofdens.
sent thither, and there fed and fatted with mast, or pawnage; the Driver
whereof was vulgarly called Drofmann^u.

The fifth ( Swilling-land) that let out or occupied Swilling-land.
by Swillings, Swollings, or Sullings, that is, Ploughlands, coming of the
Saxon (...), a Plough, (in which notion the word may extend to all arable land)
the quantity whereof was various and uncertain, containing more or less
according to the nature of the land, a Plough being able to master a greater or
lesser quantity, thereafter as it is in quality. This (of Swillings) I find to
be a word proper to the Kentish, even from the Conquerours time, (to look no
higher) whose Survey (commonly called Domesday-book) shows Suling (and the
like) to have been a term in those days peculiar to this County, whereby to
express the quantity of their land, whilst Hide, and the like was of like use
elsewhere. To this head may be referred Hide-land, Hide-land, Yoke-land,
Aker-land, Rod-land.
Yoke-land, Aker-land, Rod-land, and the like, being quantities or portions of
land let out and occupied by the Hide, Yoke, Aker, Rod, etc. and denominated
accordingly.

The sixth ( Mol-land) was the same with Up-land, Mol-land.
of the Saxons called Dunland, standing in opposition to Meadow-land,
Mershland, or Low-land; the Tenant whereof was wont to be called Molmannus: the
word (as I conceive) being derivable from the Latin Moles, a heap, of which
see further in the Surveyours Dialogue. Hence probably the name of that place
in Ash (the seat and patrimony a^ this day, and from good antiquity, of the
Harflets, formerly of the Septvans, families both in their time ado^ned with
Knighthood) called Molland, being of an advantageous situation for the
overlooking of a large level of a rich Mershland.

The seventh ( Ber-land) that which was held by the Ber-land.
service of bearing, or carrying the Lords or his Stewards provisions of
victual or the like, in their remove from place to place, such Tenant being
thence called ^erm^nnus.

The eighth ( Smiths-land) that, in respect whereof Smiths-land.
the Tenant was bound, as to undergo the Smiths or Farriers office and work, in
and about shooing his Lords horses and carriages, so also to find and furnish
him with materials (of iron) for that purpose.

The ninth ( Ware-land) the same that otherwise Ware-land.
called in the Latin of the times, Terra warectata, or Terrajacens ad
warectam, that is land lying, or suffered to lie ^allow, coming from the French
Gare, (their g here, as in many other words, being turned into our w) whence
with them Terre garee, for old fallow-ground.

The tenth ( Terra susanna) land, not much unlike Terra-susanna.
unto, if not the same with the former, being superannated land, or land with
over much tillage worn and beaten out of state, and therefore of necessity
lying over year, and being converted from tillage to pasture, until it may
recover state, and be fit for tillage again, the term or denomination coming
from the French Susanne, signifying stale, grown old, past the best, or
overworn with years.

The eleventh ( For-land) the same (I take it) that For-land.
we otherwise use to call Fore-aker, whereof see more in Sir Henry Spelmans
Glossary, verb. Forera.

The twelfth and last ( Bord-land) that holden and Bord-land.
occupied by the Bordarii, or Bordmanu^, the same (I take it) with the French
Bord^ers, i. e. Villeins or Cottagers, such as hold by a servile, base, and
drudging Tenure, of them called Bordage. You may read both of the one and the
other in the old grand Custumier of Normandy, cap. 53. Within the ^ignification
of the word ( Bordland) are comprehended also (as is already hin^ed in this
chapter) lands holden in Demesme (of the Saxons termed (...)) and designed to
the furnishing of the Lords board or table, and the maintenance of him and his
family in victual. For which see Bracton, lib. 4. tract. 3. cap. 9. number. 5.
Which kind of Vide Fletan^, lib. 5. cap. 5. p^rag. 18. Foster-land.
land the Saxons used to call Foster-land, quasi fostering land, that is land
ad victum, a term obvious and very frequent with the religious men of those
days, who as they had their special Ferms and portions of land assigned them
ad victum, so had they other as peculiar to their clothing or apparelling, land
ad vestitum, which* from the Saxon (...), vestis, or vestimentum, they called
Scrud-land. They had withal their Sextary-land, Scrud-land. Sextary-land.
which was such as apperteined to the office, and was entrusted to the care, of
the Sacrist or Sexton, and was designed chiefly to the upholding and
maintenance of their Church or Temple, both in the Fabric and Ornaments.
Besides all these, they had their Almes^and, which was that appropriate to
their Almnery, Almestand.
a parcel or place of the Monastery set apart for harbor and relief to such
poor people (for the most part) as were allied, or otherwise related to the
Monks.

I may not he^e omit Over-land, a name attributed Over-land.
to such land as lies by or along a Rivers side, and coming of the Saxon
(...), i. e. margo, the bank of a River: whence that known places name lying by
London, along the Thames-side, called St. Mary Overies: compounded of the
aforesaid Over, and Ree, betokening a River, or Current of water. Land of this
name we have at or near Ash in Kent, along the Stour-side, running to
Sandwich Town and Haven.

I might to these add Monday-land, and the like, Monday-land.
which with it fellows, borrowed denomination from this or that week day, and
that in respect of the Tenants obligation to such or such servile works or
services, upon such or such days of the week, in respect of that land. But I
purpose to digress no longer, having for brevity sake, wittingly omitted the
quotation of the places where these several names occurr, which otherwise I
should willingly have added, and shall only in the Appendix, Scriptura 23.
present the Reader with a copy of a Saxon charter making mention of those two,
Fosterland and Scrudland, as somewhat more remarkable than the rest.

Now returning to our Bocland, you must know, that notwithstanding that
introduction of new Tenures by the Conqueror, we did not streightway forgo our
Bocland, that kind of Tenure I mean, but retained it both name and thing,
witness first what occurrs in In lib. Hosp. S. Laurentii prope Cantuar.
a Deed sans date of certain messuages, by Roger, son of John, Alderman of
Radingate in Canterbury, granted in Frankalmoigne to St. Laurence Hospital near
the city, founded by Hugh, of that name the second, Abbat of St. Augustines
there in the year 1137. viz. Duo messuagia quae sita sunt in terra d Bocland,
de qua nulli responde^, etc. where we have not only Bocland mentioned, but the
nature of it also in part se^ forth. Witness also another passage to the same
effect in a like ancient In Archiv. Eccles. Cant.
charter to the Church of Canterbury, for the grant of a parcel of land lying
without the walls of the city, between Queningate and Burg^^e, running thus:
Volo autem ut monachi teneant terram illam omnino liberam, sicut ego and
antecessores mei, and nemini inde respondeant. Witness lastly, Domesday book
it self, where though happily not the name of it, (as neither of Folcland, Saxon
terms both) yet the thing, to my apprehension, is very obvious and often
occurring under the name and notion sometime of Tainland, otherwhile (and I
think more often) of Allodium. Hence the phrase (for the former) of Vide Cl.
Seldeni Notas ad Eadmer. page 170.
clamare ad Tainland; of tenere in Alodio, for the other: both taken up (as I
conceive) in opposition to Fee; but the former so termed, because indeed
Bocland, or Alodium, was properly tenable by Thanes, (hence in the eleventh
chapter of King Cnutes Laws, par. 1. Thegn and Bocland in the original Saxon,
as Thegen and Allodium in the Latin version in Textus Roffensis, meet as
relatives:) not but that it was sometime held by Ceorles, as who were not
incapable of holding it, (witness the old version of the Saxon Fragment in Mr.
Lambard, whereof before:) but when so, as improperly there, and as much out of
place as Knights* Fee (proper to Knights and the nobler sort of people) were in
this Kingdom since and at this day in Socagers hands, or in the hands of
Sockmen, whose proper tenure was that of Gafolland: (...), as you have it
before.

I have often much wondered with my self, whence it should come to pass, that
diverse of our Canterbury houses and ground at this day pay no Quit-rent at
all, which others in the same place, though holden in Free Burgage are known to
do. But considering afterward with my self, that Bocland often occurrs in
Bocland in Canterbury.
Landbocs (as they were called) of the place in the Saxons time, I at length
concluded, at least conceived, such houses and ground to be the remains of our
ancient Bocland, which seems to be still surviving in them, as if holden in
Allodium, pleno jure, without all manner of chargeable service, and no other
(probably) than part of those eighty acres of land (or the like) in
Canterburies Survey in Domesday-book thus expressed: Habet etiam ('it is spoken
of Ranulfus de Columbers) quater viginti a^r as terrae super haec quas tenebant
Burgenses in Alodio (so I read it, rather than Alodia) de Rege, or, as a very
ancient book sometimes of St. Augustines Abbey, now with the Kings Remembrancer
in the Exchequer reads it: Item dicuat Burgenses quod idem Ranulfus tenet
quatu^r viginti agros de Allodiis eorum, etc. The same Domesday-book (to
prosecute this discourse of Allodium a little further) makes mention
particularly of some Allodiarii by name in that Kentish Survey, Allodiarii.
and there also we may read to this purpose: Has forisfactur as habet Rex super
omnes Alodiarios totius Comitatus Chent, and super homines ipsorum. And: In
Cantia quando moritur Alodiarius, Rex inde habet Relevationem terrae, excepta
terrae S. Trinitatis, and S. Augustini, and S. Martini, and exceptis his,
Godric de Burns, and Godric de Carlesone, and Aelnold Cilt, and Esber Biga,
Siret de Cilleham, (these last three are mentioned also in the Survey there of
Canterbury, amongst those whose lands were Sac and Soc-free, i. e. quit against
the King of Sac and Soc:) and Turgis, and Norman, and Azor. Super istos habet
Rex forisfactur am de capitibus eorum tantummodc, and de terris eorum habent
Relevamen qui habent suam Socam and Sacam. I rather read it habent, than habet
Relevamen, because by charters both of the Cathedral and St. Augustines Abbey,
of those succeeding times, I find the Monks in each place privileged with the
liberties of Sac and Soc, etc. over their Allodiarii, as termed in the charters
of the latter place, over their Thegnes, or Thegnes.
Theines, as in the former, in what form of words see in Theines.
the charter of each place, for illustration sake, copied in the Appendix here,
Scriptur. 19. and 20. And least these various terms ( Allodiarii and Thegnes)
rendering them of a seeming difference, should occasion any suspicion of their
being not the same, for your satisfaction to the contrary, take this note along
with you, that those who in the Latin charteis of St. Austins, are termed
Allodiarii, in the very same charters exhibited in English, (like as in those
at Christchurch) are styled Thegnes. But what (may it be asked) were they then
which in some very ancient Records of that Cathedral are named Threnges? Indeed
I have met with a Record Threnges.
there, (and you may meet with it here in the Appendix, Scriptur. 21. a choice
one in my account, as the book it self was i^ seems in his, who in the margent
of the first page of it long since left this note: Custodiatur been iste
libellus, quia etsi appareat non valere, been tamen valet, and est libellus
satis pretiosus monachis Ecclesiae Christi:) which makes no slight mention of
such Threnges belonging to the Monks there, in these very words: Quia vero non
erant adhuc tempore Regis Willmi milites in Anglia, sed Threnges, praecepit
Rex, ut de eis milites fierent, ad terram defendendam. Fecit autem Lanfrancus
Threngos suos milites, Monachi vero non fecerunt, sed de portione sua ducentas
libratas terrae dederunt Archiepiscope, ut per milites suos terras eorum
defenderet, and ut omnia negotia eorum apud curiam Romanam suis expensis
expediret, unde ad huc in tota terra monachorum nullus miles est, sed in terra
Archiepiscopi, etc. To this purpose Gervasius Dorobernensis, then a Monk of the
place, speaking of the Archbishops dividing the revenue between himself and the
Monks: Sibi etiam (says he) r^servaverunt Comites, Barons and Milites;
Monachis vero assignaverunt rusticos and agricultores. These Threnges
doubtless were the same, which in Domesday-book are somewhere called Drenches,
and Drenches.
if so, your best satisfaction what they were, will be from the words
explication in Sir Hen. Spelmans Glossary. But, me thinks, laying these Records
concerning them together, and then comparing them wi^h the forecited ancient
charters of liberties granted to the Monks of Christchurch and St. Augustines
on the one hand, and Domesday-book on the other, Drenches, Threnges, Thegnes,
one and all, may not unfitly be rendered in that books phrase, Allodiarii: being
such Liberales, (as the Saxon Thegnes is not unusually turned in the old Latin
translations, as Thegenscipe by Liberali^as) such Ministri, Fideles,
Servientes, Nobiles, as being by these places dignified with some portions of
their Allodium, or Bocland, did militiam ex arbitrio tractare, nullius ^omini
imperio evocati, nulloque feodali gravamine coerciti, (as our learned
Glossarist concerning Allodiarii) being permitted to continue in their pristine
estate, acquitted from military service and tenure, when as others were from
Threnges turned into Milites, and their land consequently subjected to military
fee and tenure. Whether the name of Drenches were taken up from such a cause as
our learned Glossarist, from a Record by him there cited, is assigned for it,
some reason there is to doubt from the mention of (the terms Synonimy)
Threnges, in that Record of Christchurch, as known in that notion here before
the conquest, whereas the other says they took name first after it: If before
it, (as the Christchurch Record) then I see, me thinks, some cause to suspect
the term corrupted from Thegnes, i. Thanes, which clearly that Cathedral had
before the conquest. On the other side, if the Record (in the Glossary) be
right, and that withal Threnges, Drenches, Thegnes and Allodiarii be (as all
the forecited authorities laid together, they seem to be) Synonima's, terms
identical, then were our Kentish Allodiarii, such as had not revolted from the
Crown, by opposing the Conqueror, whether by their aid or counsel, but had
peaceably submitted to him and his Empire, whilst consequently others of the
county opposing, withstanding, and resisting him and his coming in, had ipso
facto forfeited their possessions: and if so, then Spots history, whereof so
much before, may well deserve yet another dash, or, if you will, another spot.
But thus far of Allodium, as also of what induced it, Bocland, which, as to the
name, almost quite ceased with the Saxons, though, as to the thing it survived
some time after, under the notion of Allodium, into which it was translated of
the Normans here, and of them so altered also in the very thing, that it became
thus far subject unto Tenure, as in the opinion of learned Mr. Seldens Titles
of Hon. first Edit. page 390.
men, it was land (as we say) holden, and so accounted, whence in time that
common and received Id. Jan. Angl. page 61. Coke Instit. p. 1. fol. 1. and 5.
Cowells Interpreter in verb. Fee.
axiom amongst us, that in the Law of England (since the conquest at least) we
have not properly Allodium, that is, not any Subjects land that is not holden:
in which respect, as one Cowell, ubi supra.
says, he that can say most for his estate, says thus: I am seized of this or
that land or tenement in my Demain as of fee, Seisitus inde in dominico meo ut
de feodo, etc. And it is most true at this day, but under favor, it was
otherwise since the conquest, witness (besides Domesday-book, where the
opposite to Fee, Allodium, is very obvious) those charters afore-cited, the one
of St. Laurence, the other of Christchurch, (and such like) mentioning land
holden by the Authors or Owners, for which they were responsible to none, as
also the Pinenden plea for the Archbishops lands of Canterbury, and the grant
in Alodium mentioned in Eadmerus, evidencing clearly the contrary, and
asserting (some of them) the continuance of such creations from the King, to
whom, after Textus Roffensis, it peculiarly belongs to grant out, or pass land
in that kind: Carta Alodii ad aeternam haereditatem, being there reckoned and
ranked inter consuetudines Regum inter Anglos.

Now as our Bocland did not presently expire with the Saxons, its first
Authors, upon their vanquishing and supplanting by the Normans, so neither did
our Folcland, but survived and continued after the conquest, Folcland.
and remains unto this day, though not in the very name, yet in the thing and
substance. For, as aforetime the Saxons had their Ceorles, Gebures, Folcmen,
etc. as afterward the Normans their Villani, Bordmanni, Cotarii, etc. so what
the former held was called Folcland, Gafolland, etc. and was opposed to
Bocland* what the latter, Villenage, and (In some sense) Socage, opposed to
Chivalry, Knight Service, etc. and in all likelihood intended by that Rusticana
servitus occurring Servitus rust^can^.
in a charter of Wal^he^^nus Mamino^, granting the ^^thery of Bertrey to the
Church of Rochester* Quod si aliquid de pr^dicto Dominio in rusticanam
servitutem translatum est, etc. as it is in Mr. Seldens History of T^thes, cap.
11. page 313*

As for the original of Socage, there Vide Adv^ s^^* in Man* Paris. Hist. and D
Roger* Twysden. Praefat. in LL. Hen. 1.
are that refer us (for the finding of it) to a notable passage in G^rvasius
Tilburiensis his book entitled Dialogus So^ccarii, who lived and wrote in Hen.
2. days, which (to bring the Reader better acquainted with the state of
affairs in the disposal of our Countrey-mens Freehold in those elder times,
when as the English State was new molded) I here offer to his view: Post
Conquisitionem, etc. i. After the I turn conquisitionem, so, in analogy to
Conquaestors turning by Conqueror.
Conquest of the Kingdom, and the deserved subversion of the Rebels, when the
King himself with his Nobles surveyed his new Country, a diligent inquiry was
made, who they were, which taking part in the war against the King, had saved
themselves by flight: to all these, like as to the heirs of such as had fallen
in the war, all hope of any lands, Or, Ferms.
possessions and Or, Revenues.
rents, which formerly they enjoyed, was cut off. For they accounted it no
small favor to escape with life under enemies. But those who when summoned,
came not to the war, or being occupied in household or other necessary affairs,
were absent, when in process of time by their constant Or, Observance.
serviceablenesse, they had ingratiated themselves with their Lords, without
hope of succession, their children only, and that but at the Lords will, began
to possess. Afterward, when becoming odious to their Lords, they were every
where expelled their possessions, nor was there any that would restore what was
taken away, a common complaint of the Natives came to the King, that being thus
hated of all, and bereaved of their estates, they should be enforced to betake
themselves to foreign parts. At length, after consultation upon these matters,
it was decreed, that what by their deservings, and upon a lawful agreement,
they could obtein of their Lords, should be their own by inviolable right. But
they should challenge nothing to themselves Or, In way.
by name of Or, Descent.
succession, from the times of the Nations subduing. Which thing truly, how
discreetly it was considered of, is manifest, especially when as thus by all
means, for their own good, they were bound from thenceforth to apply themselves
by constant Or, Observance.
serviceablenesse to purchase their Lords favor. Insomuch as who of the
conquered people possessed lands, or such like, obtained them not, as seeming
to be due by right of succession, but in recompense of his deservings, or by
some intervening agreement. Hence we see how precariously matters stood with
the generality of our poor country men (in point of estate) in those days,
and with what observance and obsequious respect they were fain to carry
themselves toward their conquering Disseisors, to purchase many times but a
Modicum of what had lately been their own, and when they had it, see withal
upon what kittle, rottering, uncertain terms they held Some cause (happily) of
the paucity of Charters or Feoffments so ancient as those times, extant when
Bractan wrote, a^ he observes, fol. 38^.
it. The relation comes from a very good hand, and is so authentike, as (for
ought I know) it may be credited for it self. But if any man expect further
confirmation, I suppose it may be found in Bracton, lib 1. cap. 11. number. 1.
where he has this passage, and is in part seconded in it by Fleta, lib. 1.
cap. 8. Fuerunt etiam (says he) in Conquestu liberi homines, qui libere
tenuerunt tenementa sua per libera servitia, vel per liberas consuetudines, and
cum per potentiores ejecti essent, postmodum reversi receperunt eadem tenementa
sua tenenda in villenagio, etc. The same Bracton, fol. 168. a. 170. a. 208. b.
Author, fol. ^6. and elsewhere tells us of a sort of Tenants, ad similitudinem
Villanorum Sockmannorum per conventionem de gratia Dominorum, licet hoc esset
ab initio villenagium, etc. a passage, if not totidem verbis, yet in substance
often repeated of him, in my judgment intimating thereby that practice of the
Tenants currying favor and complying with their Lords, whereof in
Tilburiensis, and their obteining thereby to better their estates, and by
degrees to creep out of Villenage into a kind of Socage, a Tenure (thus) grown
to that latitude and so comprehensive, as it helps to make that Dichotomy, into
which all the Kingdoms lands in the hands of common persons, in point of
Tenure are resolved, Chivalry being the other. Now being of such note, a little
further enquiry after the antiquity of the thing, and etymology of the name,
to clear the truth in both, will not do amiss (as I conceive) in this discourse
of Tenures.

By the common and received opinion of our Lawyers, Socage, how vulgarly
derived.
derived I suppose, and first sucked from (that great Ornament of their
Profession) Lib. 2. cap. 35 number. 1. fol. 77. b.
Bracton, the term is said to come (to use the Authors own words) a Socko, and
in^e tenentes quitenent in Sockagi^, Sockmanni* dici poterant, ^o quod deputati
sunt, ut videtur, tantummodo ad culturam, etc. This (of Bracton) is strongly
backed by Littleton, in his book of Tenures, where treating of Socage, he says,
that the reason why such Tenure is called, and has the name of Tenure in
Socage, is this: because (says he) Socagium idem est quod servitium Socae, and
Soca idem est quod caruca, etc. A Soke or a Plough. In ancient time (for so he
adds for further confirmation) before the limitation of time of memory, a great
part of the Tenants which held of their Lords by Socage, ought to come with
their ploughs, every of the said Tenants for certain days in the year, to plow
and sow the Demesne of the Lord. And for that such works were done for the
livelihood and sustenance of their Lord, they were quit against their Lord of
all manner of services, etc. And because that such services were done with
their ploughs, this Tenure was called Tenure in Socage, etc. Thus Littleton,
followed by the generality of our common Lawyers and others since, not without
a kind of popular error, as under favor I conceive, and with submission to
better judgments, shall endeavor to evince, without check (I hope) for
presuming to control so great, so many, and those eminent Lawyers, whereas here
I oppose them not in point of Law, but only in matter of fact.

The first exception then that I take against this opinion, is its
inconsistencie with many several species of Socage-land, or land said to be of
Socage kind or tenure; such as Petite Sergeanty, Escuage certain,
Frankalmoigne, Fee-ferm, Burgage, By Divine service, and the like, which have
no manner of relation to the Plough, or matters of Husbandry, as originally
they say Socage had, and therefore still reteins the name, though the cause
whereupon it first grew be taken away, by changing the service into money. So
Littleton. An exception (this) warded off by the Patrons of the present
derivation, with a distinction of a double kind of Socage, the one, that so
called a causa, the other Coke Insti^. par. 1. sect. 117. and 120.
ab effectu, and to this latter sort (Socage in effect) are these of them
referred, as one would say, Socage at large, because partaking of the like
effects and incidents with Socage. But this distinction carries with it no
great antiquity, being questionless sought out since Bractons time, as
necessary to uphold that of his and his followers derivation of Socage from the
Plough, otherwise so inconsistent with these Tenures. Not but that I hold them
to be Socage, with the common opinion, but from another cause, as I conceive,
whereof anon.

In the mean time, I have a second exception against the derivation, which is
this: that though that of the Plough may be the chief service, wherein Socage
is conversant, yet are the Sycle and the Sith, the Fork and the Flail, and many
such like, attendants also upon it, and concomitant services with it in
Socage-land: to derive then Socage ab aratro, that being but one species of
Socage-services, is as improper under favor, as at this day to define Feudum
(comprehending whatsoever fee is constituted for any lawful and honest service,
although not military) by what the Feudists call Clientela militaris, because a
chief part of feudal service is military, and that of old Fees, for the most
part, were granted out militiae causa, an error into which De Feudis, pp. 22,
23.
Vulteius challenges Hotoman to have fallen, in his definition of Feudum
thence, which my Author calls a definition of a genus, by a species, concluding
it not logical.

A third exception taken to it may be this, that if Socage-land be so ancient
(under that notion) as King Alfreds time, as Mirroir, cap. 1. sect. 3. followed
by by Coke, Instit. par. 1. fol. 14. ^.
some will have it, who tells us that in those days Socage-fee was divided
between the heirs males, why then was it not rather from the Saxon (...),
signifying (what Soc never did with them) a Plough, (whence (...), for Plough
alms, being a pension of a penny imposed upon every Plough, in the name of
Vide Foed. ^d. etc. cap 6. Lamb. explicat. verb in ve^b. Arationis eleemosyna,
and Spel. Council. page 130.
Alms) called Sulh-age, or Sul land, to say Plough-service-land? or how could
it in those times be called Socage in the sense by this derivation intended,
when the word Soc, if it signify a Plough (as it does a Plough-share) being in
that sense a French word, cannot in any reason be thought to have taken place
here, I mean in the Saxons times, and so long before the French, by their
Conquest, and intermixture with us following thereupon, had prevailed to
suppress and extirpate the English language? But if it cannot pretend to so
much antiquity, as being a term, as well in the original, as in the sense,
Norman, or French, then probably they would not have imposed it without some
pattern, some precedent, of their own Country, as used there in like case: but
doubtless this was wanting, their See the Grand Custumier of Normandy, ca. 26.
and 53. with the gloss there; and Mr. Soldens Tit. Edit. 1. p. 291.
term for land of this condition being Tenement Villein, Villein Fief, Fief
Roturier, Heritage Roturier, and the like. Besides, had the term been of their
imposing, with intent to have it signify Tillage-service, Char^^ being the
usual word with them for a Plough, fetched from Car^^^ (whence their Carucata
terrae for a Plough land, no^ heard of here with us until their coming hither:)
more likely it had been called Vide Spelm. Gloss. verb. Carucagium.
Carucag^, or the like, as a certain Tribute by our Hen. 3. imposed by the
Plough, was therefore called Caruage, Carucage, and the like. Carucage


My next and last exception is from Fleta's derivation of Socmanni, Lib. 1. c
^* though afterward, lib. 3. c. 16. he concur with Bracton.
where speaking of the Kings manours, he says: In hujusmodi vero maneriis
erant olim liberi homines libere tenentes, quorum quidam cum per potentiores e
tenementis suis ejecti fuerant, eadem postmodum in Villenagium tenenda
resumpserunt: and quia hujusmodi tenentes cultores Regis esse dinoscuntur, eis
provisa fuit quies ne sectas facerent ad Comitatus vel Hundredos, vel ad
aliquas inquisitiones, assisas vel juratas, nisi in manerio tantum, dum tamen
pro terra, quorum congregationem tunc Socam appellarunt; and hinc est quod
Socmanni hodie dicuntur esse. A Soca enim derivantur, etc. Where, though he say
that the Socmanni were Cultores Regis, yet he says not that thence they were
called Socmanni; but that their Congregation, (their Assembly or Company) was
called Soca, and hence it is (faith he) that they are termed Socmanni, for they
are derived from Soca, etc. Thus he. Now if from Soca (an Assembly of
Husbandmen) then not from Soc, Sock, or Soke, (a Plough.)

To come now to that which I conceive to be the Socage, a new derivation of it
proposed.
right and genuine derivation of the term ( Socage.) To express a Liberty,
Immunity, Franchise, Jurisdiction, Protection, Privilege, etc. our Saxon
Ancestors were known to have and use a word somewhat variously written of
them, viz. Soc, Socne, Soken, and the like. Hence (to proceed to instances)
Sanctuary, the privilege sometime so called, was of them termed (...),
otherwise Vide ^^* Aluredi, c. 2, 5.
(...). With them also Spelm. Gloss^^* i^^^^ voce.
(...) signified a jurisdiction to keep the peace. Idem, ^. ^ voce.
(...), an immunity from service in war, or from warfare. LL. Ethelstan. apud
Exon and G^ea^e^^y^m. MS* in Jornalen.
(...), the Lords protection to his man or Tenant. Sp^lm. Glossar. in voce.
(...), being of a double sense, signified both a privilege or protection
against assaults upon a man in his own house, or under his own roof, and a
liberty or franchise to hold plea thereof, with power of animadversion by
mulct, or fine. Idem, in voce.
(...) imported a liberty or privilege of Faldage, debarred and denied unto
Tenants in times past, and by the Lord, for the enriching his own Demesne
lands, reserved to himself. Hence their word, Faldwrth, for him that enjoyed
such a liberty. Shall I Faldwrth.
now give you one example from the Normans? Nullus enim Socnam habet impune
peccandi, say the Laws of Hen. 1. cap. 24. speaking of Barons having Soch. And
(to enlarge yet a little further touching Soc, etc.) as it signified a Liberty,
Immunity, Franchise, Privilege, Jurisdiction, etc. so withal a Territory,
Precinct, or Circuit, wherein such a Jurisdiction, and such Privileges were to
be exercised, and that as well in a simple, as a compounded notion. Hence (for
the former) Socha of this and that place so obvious in Domesday-book, whereof
some instances in Ingulphus, by name, Soka de Donnedike, Soca de Beltisford,
Soca de Tad, Soca de Acumesbury. In this sense it frequently occurrs in Hen. 1.
Laws, where you may also often meet with Cap. 9. (where I read Placitornm for
Pr^latorum) and elsewhere.
Soca Placitorum quam quidam habent in suo de suis, and other such like
passages. In the same sense the Register has it, fol. 1. a. as also Bracton,
lib. 5. tract. 1. cap. 2. number. 3. In the Statute de G^v^leto, made anno 10.
Edw. 2. (where the Custodes, the Guardians of the Soke, are termed Sokerevi, of
Dr. Cowell) turned by Sokerevi.
Rent-gatherers) and in the Statute also 32. Hen. 8. cap. 29. it is used
accordingly. Thus of Soke, or Soken simply. In composition it occurrs often
with Port. As for example, the Knighten gild, sometime in or n^^r
East-Smithfield London, erected first by King Edgar, and confirmed with some
enlargement afterward by succeeding Kings, (being a portion of ground
enfranchised with special liberties, to be enjoyed within that extent of it set
forth by Survey o London, page 115* 925.
S^ow) was anciently called a Soke, and afterward, (because lying by
Eald-gate, now Algate, Port being added, or rather preposed to it) Portsoken,
being for extent and otherwise, I take it, the same, which at this day is known
there by the name of Portsoken-Ward. Here now we find it restrained to a part
only of a City, a particular Ward, but in some ancient Charters of Liberties
granted to several Cities, and other like places of this Kingdom, and
particularly to London, you may find it spreading it self to the utmost skits
and liberties of the City without the walls, as in H. 3. Coke Instit par. 4. page
252.
Charter to that City, ann. 11. of his reign: Et quod infra muros civitatis,
neque in Portsokne, nemo capiat hospitium per vim, sed per liberationem
Mareschalli, etc. The like occurrs in several charters to the city of
Canterbury, whereof one ('it is Henry the seconds) thus: Concessi etiam eis
quietantiam murdri infra urbem, and in Portsoka, and quod nullus, etc. Another
(of Henry the thirds) thus: Concessimus etiam quod nullus de civitate vel
Portsoka sua captus vel rectatus de aliquo crimine vel forisfacto pro qu^
debeat imprisonari, imprisonetur alibi quam in prisona ejusdem civitatis, etc.
A little after: Et quod nullus externus faciat Forstallu^^ in Civitate
praedicta, vel in Portsoka sua ad no^umentum Civium, etc. I spare to add more
instances, it being plain enough by these, that the liberty of the place in the
full extent of it is intended by Portsoca: you may call it not improperly, the
Extent of the Franchise. The forecited Statute 32. Hen 8. cap. 29. by occasion
there given to mention the Soke of Osweldbeck in Nottinghamshire, uses the
terms of Lordship and Soke indifferently, to express the territory wherein the
custom there mentioned took place, whereby it seems our term (Soke) also
signified a Lordship, the word extending thither, I conceive from the extent of
the privilege so called throughout the whole compass of the Lordship, viz
that whoever is dignified with it, and its constant concomitant Sac, as
regularly all Lords of manours are, has that dominion over all men and matters
of his Territory or Lordship, as freely to hold plea, and have and take
cognizance of the one, and between the other, in such matters, I mean, as (in
the language of Hen. 1. Cap. 22. where for accedit, I read excedit, according
as the 24th chapter has it.
Laws) exceed not his Soch, his cognizance, as being happily Regalia, certain
arduous or capital matters reserved to the King and his Justices. Hence, to
have Socne, or to be so privileged, after a book of Christchurch Canterbury,
is aver fraunche court de ses homes, answerable to that of Fleta, lib. 1. cap.
47. Soke (says he) significat libertatem curiae tenentium, quam Socam
appellamus, as also to what I read in an old Ms. amongst other etymologies of
this kind: Nota quod Sok est quaedam libertas, per quam Domini tenebunt Curias
suas, and habebunt sectam homagiorum. A great Sir Edw. Coke, Instit. par. 2. p.
230.
Lawyer of our times gives it this definition: Soc (says he) is a power or
jurisdiction to have a free Court, to held plea of contracts, covenants, and
trespasses of his men and tenants. Within a little after he proceeds to derive
it, in a different way (though not without some company) to what is here
afore-proposed; how rightly judicent ali^. Shortly, Soc, Soke, Socne, and the
like, (not to mention its derivation in Clement Reyners Before his Apostolatus
Benedictinorum in Anglia.
Onomasticon, and some others) betokened we see, both a Liberty, Privilege,
Franchise, etc. and a Precinct, or Territory, wherein such a Liberty, etc. was
exercised, if you will, a Sokmanry.

And resolving our Socage (the Tenure so called) to be deriveable from Soke,
considered under one of these acceptions, I stood irresolute a while to which
of the twain I should referr it. Once I intended to pitch upon the latter: and
then me thought, as the territory, precinct, extent, circuit, etc. of a
Lordship or Manor was called Soca, and Socmanria, so probably the men of that
Territory, Precinct, etc. in respect of their relation to that Soke, and their
dependence upon it, and the Lord thereof by Tenure, were termed Socmanni, that
is, men apperteining to the Soke, or Lordship, quasi Socae ascriptiiii; homines
Socae: and consequently, as in that respect the Men were called Socmanni, so
their services, (those duties in works, provisions, moneys, or otherwise, which
by their Tenure they were to return to the Lord of the Soke) were called
Socage; tract of time having added to Soke or Soc, (what a Sir Edw. Coke,
Institut. par. 1. sol. 86. a.
famous Lawyer of these times calls a legal termination) agium, in composition
(says he) signifying service or duty, as Homagium, the service of the man;
Esc^agium, Servitium Scuti, etc. And so the parts being put together, ( Soc and
agium) it comes forth Socagium in Latin, Socage in English. Thus, I say, was
it sometime in my thoughts to have derived Socage, and indeed not altogether
improperly in a large sense; all sorts of Tenants of or to a Soke, (the Caetus
Tenentium aut Vassallorum mancrii, the Homage, as sometime called) being from
their relations to the Soke or Lordship, and the Lord thereof, not unfitly
called Socmanni, and their service and tenure consequently Socagium. But at
length, upon second thoughts, I concluded this somewhat too large and vast a
derivation, as being comprehensive of all sorts of Tenants, Villeins and all,
which, with the In the word Villenage.
Author of the Terms of Law, I conceive to be improperly called Sokemen, or
their tenure Socage. Besides, when I first pitched upon that derivation, I
conceived the tenants whole service to be (if I may so call it) Socal,
respecting only the Soke, not foreign, whereas afterward I found that
Socage-service was not so to be restrained, it being ordinary with Tenants in
Socage to do service extra, or foris, Socam, as to ride with their Lord from
manor to manor, (like the Rod-Knights in Fol. 35. b. and sol. 79. b.
Bracton) to carry and pay rent to the Lord, and to deliver him corn and other
provisions at his Granary or elsewhere out of the Tenants proper Soke, and the
like: in which respect also with what incongruity are pure Villeins called
Sokemen? since they are so far from being tied to the Soke, that they may be
commanded out, and employed abroad wheresoever the Lord shall please, as well
without as within the Soke. Changing therefore my opinion, as to that
derivation, and looking further back to that other (the former) sense of Soke
(a Liberty, Privilege, Immunity, Franchise, etc.) I resolved finally to derive
and fetch it thence; and thus I make it good.

Amongst other sorts of land, our books are full of that called Terra servilis,
Villein-land, land holden in Villenage, servile land, such namely (for fuller
explanation of it) as that holden at the Lords will, both for time and
services; in both respects uncertainly; for time, it being in the Lords power
(of old Vide Bract^^, fol. 263. a ^ fol. ^8^. a. 208 b.
at least it was so) tempestive, or intempestive, to revoke, and resume the
same out of the Villeins hands into his own, and for services, the tenant being
altogether ignorant, and not knowing over night what service may be required of
him the next morning. He might also have greater or lesser taxations laid upon
him, at his Lords will: nor might he marry his daughter without a Fine to his
Lord, for his leave and license, and ita semper tenebitur ad incerta, says my
Author. Now to defend land against the Lord from Villenage, and to come off
acquitted of this servitude and servile condition, it was and is necessary of
the tenants part to show a tenure of his land, by opposite and contrary
services to those in Villenage, that is, per certa servitia, by certain,
express, definite, services: and, as otherwise it may be concluded, that his
tenure is Villenage, so hereby, if the service be not Regal, or Military, it is
as clearly Socage. For, that certa servitia, are a Supersedeas to Villenage,
and do make it to become Socage, proofs are obvious. To this purpose consult we
Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 9. as also ^od. cap. number. 6. where he is
express for the tenants acquital from all other services, (some being
expressed in the Charter made him by his Lord) than what are specified therein:
Alia omnia servitia and consuetudines quae expressa non sunt tacit videntur
esse remissa: and satis acquietat ex quo specialiter non onerat. See him again,
cod. lib. cap. 36. number. 8. at these words: Cum teneatur Sockmannus defendere
tenementum s^um erga Dominum suum per cerium redditum in pecunia numerata, vel
per quid tale, quod tantundem valeat, quae consistunt in pondere, numero, vel
mensura, in solido vel in liquido, sicut frumento, vino, oleo, secundum quod
redditus diversimode accipiuntur, etc. Have recourse also to the same Author,
lib. 4. tract. 1 cap. 23. number. 5. at these words: Dum tamen servitia certa
sunt; si autem incerta fuerint, qualecunque fuerit tenementum, tunc erit
Villenagium, etc. Add, as agreeable hereunto, that of Sir Edw. Coke, in his
Commentary upon Littleton, Sect. 120. To Tenure in Socage (says he) c^rta
servitia do ever belong. Hence it is, that the Author of the Terms of Law,
expounding Socage, or tenure in Socage much after the same manner with Bracton,
ubi supra, (to wit lib. 2. cap. 1^. number. 9.) says, that to hold in Socage, is
to hold of any Lord lands or tenements, yiedling to him a certain rent by the
year for all manner of services. You see it proved then, that certa servitia,
certain services, so they be not military, make a Socage tenure. The ground
whereof is obvious, viz. that by such tenure ( per cert^ servitia) the tenant
has a Soke, a privilege, an immunity, a Quietus est, as from Villenage in
general, so from all villein, military, or other services than those by
contract, or custom Vide LI. Edw. Confess. a pud Cl. Seld. Not. ad Eadmer.
cap. 33. page 184.
charged upon him: a Soke, I say, whereunto ^gium being added, signifying the
service or duty to be returned for that privilege, it comes forth Socagium in
Latin, Socage in English, as, by putting man to Soke, the Tenant is signified,
and called Sokeman. But if Soke here carry with it such a Objection.
sense, (of Immunity, Discharge, Privilege, etc.) how comes it then to pass
(may some perchance demand) that liberum is often found to accompany Socagium,
as liber also does Socmannus? For answer, I conceive, to Solution.
distinguish Free Socage from Base. Not but that Base Socage had its privilege
as well as the other, as being holden by services set and certain, or
determinate; but in regard those services regularly consisted in servile works
incident to Villenage, the tenure gat the name of Villanum Socagium, to
distinguish it from Liberum Socagium, acquitted of those servile works, and
consisting Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 35. number. 1. The rent hence called Quitrent.
in denariis. From hence also (such a Soke, such a Privilege) it is, that the
Villanum Socagium in the Kings Demesne is turned of Fol. 7. a. fol. 170. a.
fol. 272 a. fol. 209. a. Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 8.
Bracton and others, by Villenagium privilegiatum. By the way, hence judge
whether I am not right in my derivation of Socage from Soc, Soke, etc. a
Privilege, etc. when here you see Villanum Socagium of Bracton and others,
rendered by Villenagium privilegiatum, i. e. privileged Villenage.

It Is time now that we inquire how this derivation will suit with those before
remembered tenures, By divine service, in Frankalmoigne, Fee-Ferme, Petite
Sergeanty, Escuage certain, Burgage, and the like. Whereto I answer, Very well.
For, as they were all, through a tacit discharge from corporal service in
warfare, excused from military Fee, or Tenure, so on the other side, by reason
of an express tenure per certa servitia, or per certum redditum, common to
them all but Frankalmoigne, they were rendered quit and free of Villenage, and
consequently became of Socage tenure. As for Frankalmoigne, as it may challenge
an interest in the composition of Socage from Soc or Soke, and agium, to wit,
in the former syllable, so on the contrary side, has it as little to do with
the latter, because such tenure is quit of all service whatsoever, as well
spiritual, (unless Coke upon Littleton, in Frankalmoigne
uncertain) as temporal. But because as it has not to do with military service
on the one hand, so neither with Villenage on the other, and has its
privilege expressed in that epithete of Libera, it is referred to Socage, as
in some sort such.

This then is that (this tenure per certa servitia) that makes tenure By divine
service, of no relation to the plough, to become Socage. This makes also
Fee-ferme, a mere censual service, (much in the nature of that which among Lib
si. 1. ff. ag. vectigal.
Civilians is called Ager vectigalis) as being liable only to so much yearly
rent, without any other service regularly, unless Fealty, suit of Court, or
the like, according as the Feoffment may run, and having nothing to do with the
plough, to become Socage. This makes Escuage certain, another tenure of no
relation at all to the plough, but quatenus Escuage, as it is simply Escuage,
eo ipso, of Bract. fol. 37. a. and 79. b.
Knightservice, because by being certain it draws him not forth to any corporal
service in war, to be also termed Socage, whilst contrariwise what is properly
called Escuage, that namely which is uncertain, and so called, because (besides
its subjection to Homage, Fealty, Ward, and Marriage) it is uncertain how often
a man shall be called to follow his Lord into the wars, and again what his
charge will be in each journey, from being liable, I say to this uncertainty of
duty, is Dr. Cowell, Interp. verb. Escuage.
Knightservice. Hence (fourthly) it is that Burgage (a tenure no way smelling
of the plough, or tillage, being current and conversant only in cities and
towns) because holden for a certain annual rent, becomes with the rest Socage.
Hence also our Kentish Gavelkynd, considered in its name or term, (betokening
censual land) of no affinity with the plough, or plough-service, because, I
say, holden per certa servitia, comes to be called Socage. The like might be
said of Frank ferme, and other the remaining species of Socage-land: one and
all, as properly so called, as rightly, and with as much reason referred to
that head of our English tenures, as that which for its plough, or tillage,
service is said to be more peculiarly so called, standing not in need of that
distinction which the common opinion uses to bring them within the compass of
it, called ab effectu, because of like effects and incidents belonging to them
with Socage tenure; a distinction by this derivation rendered frivolous and
needless, and under favor therefore as fit to be laid aside, as their Coke
Instit. par. 1. fol. 86. b. Bacons Elements, tract. 2. p 36*
assertion is to be retracted, who, to vindicate the reteining of the name of
Socage, as of use only to distinguish that from a tenure by Knight Service,
affirm that the cause whereupon the name of Socage first grew, viz.
Ploughservice, is taken away, by the change of such service into money, whereas
presupposing our present derivation of Socage to be admitted, both name and
cause still continue. Thus much for Socage, a term that to me first occurrs in
Glanvill, never as yet in any elder Record. In a Roll of In Archiv. Archiep.
Cant.
Accounts of the Archbishop of Canterburies mannours, for the sixth year of
Archbishop Baldwyn (Glanvills Coaetanean and Companion in his voyage and
expedition, with King Richard the first, to the holy land) which by computation
was the year of our Lord 1190. it occurs by the name of Soggagium thus: Super
Soggagium London remanent xx. d. and this in Croydon manor there, amongst the
expenses and deductions following the receipts of that year. Which I mention,
not as conceiving it no elder than Hen. 2. days; yes I rather hold Socmannus,
Socmanria, and Socagium to be relatives, and consequently that where the one
occurrs, the rest are implied: but Socmannus is obvious in Domesdaybook, and
less ancient therefore I persuade my self Socage and Socmanry are not. Nunc
age, carpe viam, susceptum perfice munus.


Virg. 5. A^n^id.
Now therefore to come to our Quaere, (whether Gavelkynd be a Tenure or a
Custom) and give it an answer: I confess there are that in some sort hold the
negative, as who will have it to be a Custom accompanying the land where it
obteineth, rather than a Tenure whereby the land is holden, holding the whilst
the Tenure to be Socage: And of this opinion Perambul. page 535, 536, 537.
Mr. Lambard does more than seem to be. Now between Tenure and Custom in this
case with us, the difference, as I collect, stands thus: admit it only a
Tenure, and then the nature of the land is not concerned in point of descent;
so that in some cases (as the escheat of it by Death or Cessavit, to the Lord
that holds over by Knight Service, or to the Crown by forfeicture in treason
and the like) it cease to be any longer of Gavelkynd-nature, in point of
descent, and goes not, as before to all, but only to the eldest of the sons,
according to the course of the Common Law: whereas if it be a Custom following
the nature of the land, then it is, say they, inseparable from that land where
it obteineth, insomuch as notwithstanding this escheat, or whatever other
alteration of the tenure, it remains, as before, partible among all the sons,
or other heirs where sons are wanting. But to the point. Fl^^^ is exp^esse for
this, lib. 6 cap. 17. p^^^g. where h^ s^ith ^icut in tenurade G^^^lk^nde,
ve^^alibi, by ^er^a partibili^ est, etc. See Reg^st. or g. fol. 78. b.
To prove Gavelkynd to be a ^enure, I shall not need, I think, to multiply
authorities, the generality of those ancient deeds that I have seen for the
granting lands in Gavelkynd (whereof some are exhibited in the Appendix) are
wont to have their Tenendums (the usual and more proper place for the creation
of a tenure in any kind of grant) thus phrased: Tenendum either ad or in
Gavelikendam, or the like. The office recited of Mr. Lambard, in his Peramb
page 540. found after the death of Walter Culpepper is alike phrased: Tenuit in
Gavelkind being a much repeated passage in it. The Statute 18. Hen. 6. cap. 3.
in terms calls it a tenure, taking knowledge, that there were not at that day
within the Shire above 40. persons at the most, which had lands to the yearly
value of xx. pounds without the tenure of Gazelkynd, and that the greater party
of this County, or well nigh all, was then within that Tenure. And this alone
(which I shall add) may evince and clear it to be a tenure, that since the
Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, anno 18. Edw. 1. prohibiting the subject to
let land to be holden of himself, as there are not to be found any more grants
of land Sp^lm. G^oss. verb. ^^^^agium. Objection.
pro homagio and s^rvitio, so neither in Gavelkynd. For brevity sake, I will
urge no more authorities of this kind. Being thus then apparently a tenure, how
comes it to pass that we so usually call it the Custom of Gavelkynd, seldom
either making or finding mention of Gavelkynd, but with that adjunct, and under
that notion of Custom? Indeed the property of equal partition is and has so
Solution.
long been of that eminency in our Kentish Gavelkynd, and it so much
celebrated for that property, that as if it were the sole and only property of
it, all the other, in respect whereof this land may as well be called Gavelkynd
as for this, are as it were forgotten, and that only carries away the name
from its fellows: whereas that of Partition (as has been said before) is but
one among the many other properties and customs in our Kentish Gavelkynd, such
as Dower of the Moiety; Hereof see Bracton, fol. fol 313. a.
Loss of Dower by marriage before or after assignement; Whereof also i^ him,
fol. 276. b.
Not to forfeict lands for Felony; Power of alienation at fifteen years of age,
and the rest obvious in the Kentish Custumal. And because this, of Partition,
amongst the rest, properly depends of Custom, as thwarting the course of the
Common Law in like case, hence the Quaere grew at first, whether Gavelkynd were
a Custom or a Tenure. Indeed a very improper and incongruous Quaere, and
occasioned by the want of that distinction of the Genus from the Species, which
through inadvertencie are here confounded, Gavelkynd being the Genus, and
Partition the Species. So that if we shall but reddere singula singulis, this
doubt will quickly have an end: Gavelkynd generally spoken of and in gross, is
the Tenure; particularly, and with reference to this Partition, it is a Custom
accompanying the land of that Tenure. Or, if you rather will, Gavelkynd*
partition, whether inherent in the land, or not.
Gavelkynd is the Tenure; Partition, and the other properties, the Nature.

Which Solution gives occasion of another Quaere, and that indeed a main one:
Whether (namely) this Custom of Partition in Gavelkynd-land, be so inherent in
the land, and so inseparable from it, that notwithstanding the Tenure of the
land be altered, yet the land shall st^^l retein this property? No more (I take
it) than the rest of the fellow-properties as much depending upon Custom as
that, and for which the land may deserve the name of Gavelkynd, as well as for
that, and therefore some perhaps will say it shall retein them all
indifferently. I shall not here engage as an opponent, only invited by this
fair occasion, crave leave to propound Academically, what in like case I find
delivered by others, conducing (in my judgment) to facilitate the resolution,
leaving it to such as have more will to debate, and better skill to decide, the
question than my self, to give a fuller and more peremptory resolution in the
point. I may (I take it) not improperly state the question thus: Whether the
person in this case shall follow the condition of the land, or on the contrary,
the land that of the person. The former (it seems) takes place in Paris, the
French Metropolis, by the custom of the place: whence that of Choppinus,
treating of those Customs, page 316. Parisiensi i^^em munic^pi^ (says he)
quod gentilitia pariter sulget Nobilitate clarorum virorum, usus familiae
herciscundae minus est obnoxious invidiae. Ubi scilicet, non persunarum, sed
fundorum conditio nobilis, plebeiave, parts assignat. To which he adds a
little after: H^^d ide^ tamen dividundarum haereditatum rati^ immutata est
Parisiis: cum nobiles fundos, plebeii nobiliter, and ignobiles aequojure
generosi invitem partiantur. To the same purpose De mor^b. Parisior. p. 57.
our Author elsewhere ^els us, that priseo quodem G^llici fori usu, plebeius
fundus haud ideo pristinam exuebat conditionem; quod a recto ipsius Domino aere
comparatus esset: Ni ejus nomine comparator in clientelam se, una cum superiore
fundo suo, ad patronum contulisset; which his margin elsewhere De Doman. Franc.
p. 40.
records thus: Anciennement les rotures a^quises par le scigneur direct, se
partageoient returierement, si non que le dit acquereur les comprint en l'adveu
de son fief, le rendant au superieur. Thus went (it seems) the more ancient
Custom in those parts. But tempora mutantur. The case of latter times is
altered there, as the same Author gives us to understand in both the last fore
cited places: At post^rioris aevi Jurisprudentia, mutatis calculis, novam
invexit servientis fundi unionem tacitam, and consolidationem cum altero
dominante, ac parem adeo utriusque qualitatem praenobilem: Ni si illius emptor
subinde contestationem interposuisset contrariae voluntatis. Thus in the former
place. In the latter thus: Nostrae tamen aetatis moribus, diversum obtinuit,
censuales nempe and obnoxios agros sola per rectum Dominum acquisitione,
prorsus uniri, in unumque redigi cum praedio dominante: nisi protinus emptor
contrariae voluntatis testationem interposuisset. The effect of both is this,
that Censual lands by purchase coming unto the direct Lord (the Lord of the
Fee, or Over Lord) a^e, ipso jure, Feudal, and shall accordingly descend, as
thereby reunited to the Fee, unless the buyer, at the time of purchase, do
protest to the contrary. Will you please to hear his reasons? Unionis nempe vis
illa eo producitur, ut ignobile praedium, militari junctum, nobilitetur: eque
plebeio as so^^ vectigalibus obnoxio, transeat in feud^lis clientelae sortem
liberiorem. Thus he, De moribus Parisior* page 58. Much what one with that in
the other place ( De Domanio Franciae, page 41.) Quoniam tacita praediorum
unione, confusa erant jura servitutum, census and solarii vectigalis: Cum rei
propriae nulla superforet servitus, ex^ndeque vectigalis sundi qualitas esset
immutata. Thus he, whom see also, if you please, De Domanio Gallic^, page 168.
number. 2. Also page 284. number. 1. To whom add Hotoman, De Feudis, lib* 1. tit. 5.
parag. 2. in fine. You see by this how the present case stands in some parts
abroad. Here at home, as it seems by the very Custumal of Kent, in two several
cases therein specified, the descent of Gavelkynd-land is changeable, and the
land becomes unpartible; first (namely) when by escheat, happening either by
Death, or Cessavit; next, when, by the tenants voluntary surrender, it comes
into his Lords hands, who holds by Fee of Haubert, or by Grand Sergeanty, both
which Peramb. page 537.
Mr. Lambard takes to be Knight Service. To which may be added two other cases,
which occur in an ancient Kentish Eire, in the Exchequer, ann. 29. Edw. 1.
where enquiry being made, and the question propounded to the Kentish men, how
many ways Gavelkynd-land might be altered, and delivered from the ordinary and
custumary descent, answer was given by four, instancing in the two former, and
to them adding those other two, namely, 1* Per licentiam Regis, (by the Kings
license) and, 2. Per chartam Archiepiscopi, (by the Archbishops Of this some
examples before, Propos. 2. toward the end.
Charter.) Against this, and on the other side, (inter alia) may be opposed
what is pleaded in the fore-remembred controversy between Burgade Bendings,
and the Prior and Covent of Christchurch Canterbury, wherein the Prior, in bar
of Burga's claim to the moiety of his and the Monks manor in Franc bank, See
the Append* Scriptur. 5.
pleads, Quod Dominus Rex qui manerium illud deait praedecessoribus suis, non
tenuit illud nomine Gavelkinde. Whence (admitting the plea for Law) naturally
seems to result this double consectary. 1. That the King may hold land in
Gavelkynd. 2. That the King holding land in Gavelkynd, in case he shall grant
it away to any religious house, in puram and perpetuam eleemosynam, (in
Frankalmoigne) it remains notwithstanding partible, as before it came to the
Crown, in their hands at least whom the religious men shall infeoffe with it.
Much more doubtless might be said in the point, as well pro as contra: but I
shall leave it to be further argued by Lawyers, adding only in a word, what
upon the whole matter I conceive of the case. I would ask then, if our Kentish
Gavelkynd-land be partible quatenus Gavelkynd? I expect no other than an
affirmative answer. If so, and admitting withal that such property in
Gavelkynd-land owes it self to a custom accompanying land of that nature; yet
I suppose it shall enjoy that property no longer than the land it self
continues to be Gavelkynd, which some hold it is not, being once returned and
come back again into the Lords hands, (the King especially being Lord) that
granted it out in Gavelkynd, or of whom it formerly held in Gavelkynd: because
then, as L* adigere. parag quamvis. De jur. patron. c. cum cessante* extra. de
appellat. l. tutores. parag* Curatores. de admin* tut.
cessante causa sollitur effectus, so by reason of the unity of possession, the
Usu fructus (I cannot well English it) being consolidated and made one with the
property, that property of being censual land, which Gavelkynd denotes, and
which cannot be intended of any land holden in Demesne, and not in service,
cease, and is quite extinguished, there being required to make the land
censual, a censual Tenant, one that holds by censual services, such as here
is none (especially in the Kings case) when once the land is come home again,
reduced to its first principles, and reunited to (what, like Fief, is opposed
to service-land) the Lords* Inland, or Demesne-land, (as in the case of a
common Lord) or to the Crown, Bald. and alii citat* per Tholosan. Syntag. jur.
univer* lib. 6 cap. 5. number. 11.
a quo omnia feudamoventur and ^riuntur, the Fountain whence all Tenures are
derived, (as in the Kings case) from whence by the letting it out in Gavelkynd,
it was formerly severed. To this purpose see Petri Gregorii Tholosani Syntag.
Jur. univers. lib. 6. cap. 5. number. 11. But of this also hitherto, for I hasten
to an end.

PROPOSITION V.
Whether before the Statute of Wills (32. and 34. H. 8.) Gavelkynd-land in Kent
were deviseable, or not.

IN answer whereof, holding with those which resolve it in the negative,
howbeit (for my part) not studio partium, but veritatis amore, I shall oppose
to such as hold the contrary, what arguments are brought against them and their
opinion, in a case of Mr. Halls of Kent, verbatim, as I find them published in
print, which here follow, with their title:

Reasons and authorities to prove that Gavelkind-lands in Kent, are not, nor
were anciently deviseable by Custom.
FIrst it is a rule in Law, that an Assise of Mortdancester does not lie of
lands which are deviseable by Testament, etc. and this appears by diverse books,
as namely, 4. Edw. 2. Mortdanc. 39. 22. Assiz. 78. and Fitz. Not. Brevium 196.
1. But it appears by Bracton, fol. 276. b. that an Assize of Mortdancester will
lie of Gavelkind lands in Kent, and so it appears by diverse ancient Records,
quod vide in Itinere Johannis de Berewicke, etc. Anno 21. Edw. 1. Copia. fol.
1, 7, 22, 24. and in Itinere H. de Stanton. Anno 6. Edw. 2. Copia. fol. 1, 8,
9, 10, 13. By which it appears plainly, that an Assize of Mortdancester lies of
Gavelkind lands in Kent.

But an Assise of Mortdancester does not lie of lands within the city of
Canterbury, because lands are there deviseable by Custom, as it appears in
dicto Itinere H. de Stanton, fol. 3, 4, 6. And it is evident, that in the city
of Canterbury, (which was anciently part of the county of Kent) there was a
special custom used to devise lands, lying within the liberties of the city,
and to prove their wills in the Court of Burgmote in the same city. But there
needed no such Custom, if all the Gavelkind lands in Kent had been deviseable,
etc.

Also the most part of the ancient Wills of Gavelkind lands in Kent, before the
Statute of Uses did mention Feoffees of the lands devised, etc. as appears by
the Register-books of Wills, at Canterbury, and at Rochester, whereby it does
appear, that the Devisors were Cest^y que uses, and not owners of the land
devised, and although some wills of land make no mention of Feoffees, yet there
were Feoffees of the same land, as will appear by the deeds of Feoffment
thereof, and twenty to one do mention Feoffees, etc.

Also Sir John Fineux chief Justice de R. B. Sir Robert Read chief Justice de
C. B. and Sir John Butler, Justice, etc. devise their lands in Kent before the
Statute of Uses, and make mention of Feoffees, etc. which had there been a
Custom to devise, no question they had taken of it, etc.

Also many ancient deeds of Feoffment of lands in Kent referr to Wills, sc.
Dedi, concessi, etc. A. B. omnia terras and tenementa, etc. ad opus and usum
perimplendi ultimam voluntatem meam, etc.

Also there are wills to be found of lands in diverse other Counties of this
Realm, whereby lands were devised before the Statute of Uses, and no mention
made of any Feoffees, as appears in the Register-books of the Prerogative
Court, and in diverse other places, and yet without doubt they bad Feoffees
seized to their uses, etc. or else they could no^ there devise the same.

Also the houses and lands in Cities and Buroughs, which were deviseable by
Custom, were reckoned inter catalla sua; but it were strange that all the
Socage Lands in Kent (which are conceived to be Gavelkind) should be reckoned
inter catalla, etc.

And in the Register, fol. 244. there are fourteen several Writs of Ex gravi
querela, and none of them make mention of any County, etc. nor of Gavelkind,
but secundum consuetudinem Civitatis, or secundum consuetudinem Burgi, etc. And
if Gavelkind Lands be deviseable by Custom, etc. the Devisee can have no Writ
of Ex gravi querela, because there is none before whom the Action or writ
should be brought, etc.

Also Mr. Lambard in his Perambulation, writing of the Customs of Kent, makes
no mention of any Custom to devise lands: nor the Treatise called
Consuetudines Cantiae in the old Mag. Charta, fol. 147. which (without doubt)
they would not have omitted, if there had been any such Custom, etc.

Also between the Statutes of 27. H. 8. of Uses, and the Statutes of 32. of H.
8. of Wills, there were very few Wills made of lands, as appears by the
Register-books before mentioned, and the most of such Wills as were then made
(being but few in number) do make mention of Feoffees.

Also the common practice ever since the Statutes of Wills has been such, that
if a Will be made void for a third part, by a Tenure in Capite of part of the
land* etc. that third part shall descend to the Heir, and the Devisee shall not
have it; and this appears by special Liveries in the Court of Wards proving the
same; and by diverse witnesses that can prove the same to be so, etc.

And in Sanders case of Maidstone, in Anno 9. Jacobi Regis, all the lands were
devised by Will, and after the Will was avoided for a third part, by reason of
a Tenure in capite of a small part of the land, and the third part of all the
residue of the lands, being Gavelkind, did escheat to the King for want of
Heir, which land is ever since enjoyed under the Kings title by escheat. And
John Wall upon a trial recovered against White the Devisee.

Whereby it is evident that Gavelkind Lands in Kent were never deviseable by
Custom, and so it was agreed per curiam Pasch. 37. El. in C. B. in Halton and
Starthops case, upon evidence to a Jury of Kent, and it was then said, that it
had been so resolved before, and there it was said per curiam that Fitz. Not.
Brev. 198. l. is to be understood where there is a special custom, that the
Land is deviseable, etc.

And he that shall conclude upon that place of Fitz, Not. Brev. 198. l. that
all Gavelkind Land is deviseable, etc. may as well conclude, that all Lands in
every City and Borough in England is deviseable, which is not so, as appears
by Mr. Littleton, who says that in some Buroughs by custom a man may devise
his Lands, etc.

And if Gavelkind Lands were deviseable by custom, etc. Then a man may devise
them by word without writing, as it is agreed in 34. H. 8. Dyer. 53. for a man
may devise his Goods and Chattels by a Will Nuncupative, so may he likewise
devise his Lands deviseable by custom, because they were esteemed but tanquam
catalla, etc. and it would be a mischievous thing, if all the Gavelkind in Kent
should be deviseable by word only.

To these arguments and objections against the custom, certain answers and
exceptions by the learned Counsel of the adverse party have been framed and
returned in behalf thereof, reducible to three heads: which (to avoid all just
suspicion of partiality and prejudice wherewith some zealous advocates and
contenders for the custom have been, and may again be, ready to asperse me) I
shall here subjoyn; together with such answers and arguments (by way of reply)
as I have received from the learned Counsel of the other side, in further and
fuller refutation of theirs who endeavor to uphold the custom.

The learned Counsels arguments in behalf of the Custom.
FIrst, they deny the old book of 4. Edw. 2. Fitzh. Mortdancester 39. ^o be
L^w. But an Assise of Mortdancester lies of land deviseable, if it be true that
his Ancestour died seized, unless it appears that the Defendaut claims by some
other title. But if the Defendant plead that the land is by custom deviseable,
and was devised unto him, it is a good bar of the action.

Secondly, They rely much upon the book of Fitzherb. Natura Brevium, fol. 198.
which says, that a Writ of Ex gravi querela lies where a man is seized of
lands or tenements in any City or Borough, or in Gavelkynd, which lands are
deviseable by will time out of mind, etc. whence they infer that all
Gavelkynd-lands are deviseable by custom.

Thirdly, They cite the Treatise called Consuetudines Cantiae, in the book
called old Magna Charta, and Lambards Perambulation of Kent, fol. 198. that
lands in Gavelkynd may be given or sold without the Lords license, and they
interpret the word given, to be by will; and the word grant, to be by deed.

The Reply to the foregoing Arguments, by such as stand in opposition to the
Custom.
AS to the first Objection against the Argument taken from the Assise of
Mortdancester, they reply thus:

First, they maintain, that the Custom alone, without an actual Devise is
pleadable in abatement to an Assise of Mortdancester, as well as the Custom
with an actual Devise is pleadable in bar: for which there is not only that
book of 4. Edw. 2. but also Bracton, lib. 1. fol. 272. Ubi non jacet Assisa
mortis antecessoris, among his pleas in abatement of the Writ, (having before
treated of pleas in bar to it.) Cadit Assisa (says he) propter consuetudinem
loci, ut in Civitatibus, Burgis, etc. and 22. Assis. pl. 78. where upon the
like plea the Writ was abated: and Fitzherb. Not. Brev. fol. 196. I. (whose
authority they think strange to be denied in a matter of Law, wherein he was a
Judge, and yet so strongly relled on in a matter of fact and custom, in a
place whereto he was a stranger:) and so was it practiced and allowed in Itin.
Johan. de Stanton, 6. Edw. 2.

And the reason given by the book, why such a custom is pleadable in abatement
to this Writ, is because the suggestion of the Writ may be true, that the
Ancestour died seized, etc. and yet the heir have no title where the lands are
deviseable. And it is the property of this Writ, that the dying seized must be
traversed; and though the Tenant plead the Feoffment of the Ancestour, or other
matter in bar, (that is not matter of Estoppell to the heir, as a Fine,
Recovery, etc) yet must he traverse the dying seized, and the Jury shall be
summoned and charged to inquire, if the Ancestour die quo obiit seisitus fuit,
etc. and so are the books of 9. Assis. pl. 22. 27. Hen. 8. 12. Brook
Mortdancestor. 1. Old Not. Brev. fol. 117. and diverse others. Nor is there any
opinion to be found in any book of Law against that book of Fitzherb.
Mortdancestor, 39. until the 15th of King Charles, Launder and Brooks case,
Crook, lib. 1. fol. 405. obiter, upon the trial of this custom.

2. Admit that at this day the Law is held to be otherwise, yet it appears by
all the authorities aforesaid, that in those times the Law was taken to be,
that the Mortdancestor did not lie where there was such a custom: but it was a
good plea in abatement of the writ. And yet Assizes of Mortdancestor were then
frequently brought and maintained of lands in Kent, as appears by Bracton, and
the books abovesaid.

3. Whether the custom alone be pleadable in abatement; or the custom with an
actual devise be to be pleaded in bar, they say it cannot be shown (if it can
they challenge them to do it, who would maintain the custom) that it was ever
pleaded one way or other, either in abatement, or in bar, to any one of all
that multitude of Assizes of Mortdancestor brought at large in that County,
when in so small a City and County as Canterbury (where indeed there is such a
custom) they show it often pleaded to writs of Mortdancestor brought there
before Roger de Stanton and other Justices in Air.

Secondly, To the book of Fitzherb. Not. Brev. fol. 198. upon the writ of Ex
gravi querela (from whence the ground of this question sprung) they answer,
that the sense and meaning of that book (no less than the Grammar of it duly
observed) is no more, then that the writ of Ex gravi querela lies there where
lands in any City or Town, or in Gavelkynd, are deviseable by custom. Not that
all lands in Cities, and Buroughs, and in Gavelkynd, are deviseable by
custom. So that the mistake arises by making that a categorical, which is but
an hypothetical proprosition: and serves rather to ground an argument against
the custom. For if the writ of Ex gravi querela does lie there, where there is
such a custom; then ( a contrariis) it may well be argued, that where a writ
does not lie, there is no such custom: and it cannot be said to lie there (for
Fitzherbert speaks of places:) where it was never brought.

They say further, that this writ of Ex gravi querela is a formed writ in the
Register, appointed by Law as the proper remedy of the Devisee, where such a
custom is: and that therefore it has been required by the Judges, as a
necessary proof of such a custom, that it be shown that this writ has been
used to be brought there, where such a custom is alleged to be, 40. Assis.
pl. 41. and the opinion of Knivet, 39. Assis. Brook, Devise 43. In like
manner, as to prove a custom of intailing Copy-hold-lands, it must be shown
that plaints in the nature of Formedons have used to be entered. ( Heydons case
in the third Report.) But they say that for proof of this custom in Kent,
there is not only (of 14. in the Register, which all conclude, secundum
consuetudinem Burgi, or Civitatis) not one precedent of any such writ for Kent:
but that it cannot be shown that ever any writ of Ex gravi querela was brought
for any lands in the county at large, out of some City or Town. And it is a
question to whom such writ at large shall be directed, there being no form at
all in the Register of the direction of any such writ at large; the form there
to a City or Borough being either Majori Civitatis, or Burgi, etc.

They say it could not be, but that question must have arisen, (if not of the
custom) whether a will or no will: for the trial of which there was scarce any
other course (at least, none more ready) before the course of Ejectments grew
to be the practice, then either for the Devisee to bring this writ of Ex gravi
querela against the heir being in possession, or for the heir being ousted by
color of a will to bring his Mortdancestor. And therefore they think it not
credible that (if such a custom were, and so extensive as to the whole county
of Kent) there should be no Record, (if there be, they again challenge the
other side to show it:) whether any Devi^ee either brought this writ, or
pleaded this custom, (and pleaded it must be, as themselves acknowledge, and
is resolved in Launder and Brooks case:) for any lands within the county of
Kent out of some City or Borough: when as they are confident to say, that
there is not any custom used in Kent, and that extends through the whole
county, but Records may be shown where it has at some time been judicially
pleaded and allowed.

They add, that Customs, being special Laws, are suited to the place where they
are used; and that this is a custom very proper and suitable in Cities and
Buroughs, among Merchants and Tradesmen, that they might dispose of their
houses together with their personal estates: and that the pleading of this
custom in all Writs and Records is, that they are legabilia, tanquam bona and
catalla. And therefore by the books of 40. Assis. pl. 41. and Cokes 1. Instit.
110. it is held that this custom cannot be alleged in any upland Town. Then
how improper is it that all the estates in so great a county should be of no
other nature (in this respect) than goods and chattels, and liable to be
disposed and carried away by words caught from dying men? which (they say) may
serve too for an argument against the pretended benefit and utility of this
custom; especially when the multitude of controversies, arising upon wills,
have made it a question, whether it had not been better the Statutes, of 32.
and 34. Hen. 8. of wills, had never been made.

And therefore (they say) that in Wyld's case, in the 6th Report, which was
resolved by all the Judges of England, it is said expressly (and no doubt upon
good consideration) that at the Common Law, lands were not deviseable but by
custom only in Cities and Buroughs, Houses and such small things. And in
Matthew Menes case, in the 9th Report, where the will was of Gavelkind-lands in
Kent, and a house holden in Capite, it is all along held, that the will there
was enabled by the Statute, and puts a case of lands in London deviseable by
custom, as a stronger case; which certainly it were not, if lands in Kent were
so deviseable.

The third objection from the words (doner on vender) they say, deserves no
answer more than this, that the same words are used, that the Infant may doner
or vender, give or sell, his estate at the age of fifteen, and that no man will
say, that he may at that age make a will.

Thus have you the learned Counsels arguments (faithfully exhibited) both for
and against the custom of devising Gavelkynd-land in Kent, before the Statutes
of 32. and 34. Hen. 8. concerning the devising of lands by will. Treading (as I
said) in the steps of those who oppose the custom, give me leave, by the way
of Corollary, to add somewhat, happily not improper to be hinted and insisted on
in this argument. Besides then the repugnancie in this custom, to the common
opinion both of ancient and modern Glanvil, lib. 7 cap. 1. and 5 Bracton, fol.
18. b. fol 49. ^. fol 27^. a. fol. 407. b. fol 409. b. B^itton with others
cited by Dr. Cowell Instit. lib. 2. ti^. 20 number. 7. Coke upon ^i^tb^ton fol.
111. b. Linwoods Provincial. de Testam. c. Statutum parag. testamentis, verse.
legari possunt.
Lawyers, it fights with the very nature of Fee, (comprehending, at least with
us, Gavelkind, as holden by the Tenant in Dominico suo ut ^e Feodo) which,
though Fees are with us, as in France and elsewhere, become Bract lib 2. cap. 19
lib. 4. tract. 3. cap 9. number. 5. Cujac. de Fcud. lib. 1. tit. 2. and lib. 4.
tit. 19.
patrimonial, and so alienable by gift or sale followed with Scisin in the
Alienators lifetime; yet by the seudal Lib. 1. tit. 8. de success. feud. and
Vulteius lib 1. cap. 9. number. 70.
Law, are indisposeable by will, several reasons whereof are found rendered by
the Hotoman. upon that place of the Feuds.
Feudists. And it is inconsistent, and at variance with the common opinion of
Lawyers, both at home and abroad, so withal, and above all, it makes Gavelkynd
degenerate from it self, and its first original, which our Lamb. Peramb. page
528. and Spelm. Glossar. verb. Gaveletum.
Lawyers and Antiquaries, by an unanimous vote, referring to the Germans, vouch
for it that, amongst other of their Customs published by Tacitus: Haeredes
successoresque sui cuique liberi, and nullum testamentum: a passage, or
authority, equally insisted on by the Feudists to warrant their Feud. lib. 1.
tit ^. d* success. feud and Hotoman. ^bid.
Nulla ordinatione defuncti in fendo manente vel valente, prohibiting the
disposal of Fee by will, and of our municipal Lawyers and others, as for the
like, so withal to illustrate the original of our Lamb. and Sp^lm. ubi supra.
Gavelkind.

But that which in this case (as to matter of fact) very much, if not most of
all, works with me, (what it may with others I know not) and induces me to an
utter dis-belief and rejection of this Custom, is certain passages and clauses
in several wills extant and to be found in our Registers at Canterbury, and in
that at Rochester, intervening and happening in the interim of those two
Statutes; the one of Uses, made anno 27. the other, of Wills, inacted anno 32.
Hen. 8. (a time most proper for the Custom, if any such in being, by i^s
fruits, the immediate free devise of lands by will, at pleasure, without that
mediate, collateral and by-way, that periphrasis, of Feoffments and their Uses,
which now was out of doors; to assert and show it self:) all which (in my
opinion) do plainly tend to the dis-proof of this custom of devising lands in
Kent by will, before that Statute of wills. As for example.

1. In the will of Thomas Bourne of Tenterden, dated 3. May 1538. in the
Archdeacons Registry at Canterbury, lib. 21. quatern 7. And where (says he)
there is an Act lately made to avoid uses of wills, yet my mind is that Clement
my son shall have my house and shop in Tenterden with th'appurtenances to him
in fee. And that John Bourne my son shall have all my lands lying in the parish
of Hawkherst to him and his heirs in fee. And I give to my said son John xl. s.
upon condition that he will abide and stand to the dividing and order of my
lands, as my mind is before expressed. And if he will not stand to, and abide
the said order and division, but to shift his part throwly, then I will the
said xl. s. shall remain and be had to Alice my wife. Also I give to Clement my
son iij. l. upon condition that he do stand to and abide the division and order
of my lands and tenements, according as my mind is before expressed. And if the
said Clement de refuse my said order and division of my lands, and shift his
part throwly, then I will the said iij. l. shall remain and be had to Alice my
wife, etc.

Argument.
Had there been a Custom for devising lands by will, what needed that notice
to be taken here of the Act for avoiding uses of wills? And why is the Testator
put to it thus, to work and wage his sons to consent to that partition and
division of his lands, by a Legacy in money to be forfeicted upon their
refusal, and for choosing to shift or divide thoroughly, as a thing in their
power by Law, which could not be, had there been any such Custom.

2. In Thomas Sayer, alias Lamberds will of Feversham, dated in May 1538. in
the same Registry and Book, quatern. 9. some lands are devised away from the
two female Inheritrices, to be sold: and a partition also made between them of
other lands, Whereupon a Legacy in money is given to the heirs at Law, to wage
them to consent and condescend to that devise and division, in these words:

Item I will and bequeath to Isabel and Margaret my two daughters, to each of
them 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. to be paid to them by Benet my wife in money, or
money-worth, in four years next after my decease, upon condition that my said
two daughters, their Heirs and their Assigns, to suffer this my present will
and testament to take effect, according as I before have willed. And if my said
two daughters, their Heirs and their Assigns do this refuse, that my said will
can take none effect, according as I before have willed, then I will my said
two daughters, nor their Assigns, shall take no benefit nor profit of none of
my bequeaths to them before bequeathed, etc.

Argument.
The same Quaere here as before, viz. What needed this conditional Legacy in
money, had it not been free to them and in their power and choice, whether his
will (for the sale of some land, and for the division of other) should take
effect, or not?

3. In John Crowmers will of Pogylston Esquire, dated in February 1538. in the
same Registry, book, and quatern* this clause to our purpose is remarkable.

Item I will that each of my three daughters, Benet, Elizabeth and Grace, have
13. l. 6 s. 8. d. of such debt as their husbands do ow me: so that their
husbands be content that such lands as I have purchased go according to my
devise and will, or else not, etc.

Argument.
The like Quaerie here as before. Where also note, that although he mention a
devise of lands by will; yet no such will is either proved or registered,
because (probably) null and void in Law. The like whereof may be supposed of
Sparcklins will of Thanet, dated in March 1539. in the same book and Registry,
quarern 14. where his mansion place at Bronston is said to be bequeathed to his
son John: whereas no such thing appears by the approved will; nor is any land
at all devised by it. The like may be said of Cacherells will of Norborne,
dated anno 1537. in the same Registry and book, quatern. 8. where some Legacies
in money are charged upon a house there said to be given to the party charged
and his wife, whereas no such gift appears by the will.

4. In Sarlys will, dated anno 30. Hen. 8. in the same Registry and book,
quatern. 11. where he makes mention of his three daughters, we have this
clause:

Item, I will that he (my brother) shall have my part of my house at Wy, called
Jancocks, during his life, if that may be suffered by the Law, etc.

5. In the will of William Byx of Linsted, dated 1538. in the same Registry,
lib. 22. quatern. 1. occurrs this passage:

I will and bequeath all the profits, commodities, fermes, rents, of all my
lands whatsoever, etc. unto my brother germane, Laurence Byx, unto the timos
that my sons, Laurence and Nicholas come to the age of 22. years, etc. Also to
my daughters marriage 10. l. to be raised out of those profits, etc. and paid
by my brother Laurence. Provided always, if the Law will not suffer nor admit my
brother Laurence to enjoy and take up the fermes, etc. of my lands, then I will
that each of my said sons, etc. shall pay the said 10. l. unto my said
daughters marriage, etc.

6. Thomas Hunt of Pluckly in his will, dated in the year (no month) 1540.
(probably some time before the Statute of Wills that year made) in the same
Registry, book and quatern* gives to his wife the issues of his lands for life,
and after her death the lands themselves to his son John, charged with some
Legacies in money to his younger brother Anthony and his children: but with
this Proviso:

If this my will (says he) stand not good and effectual in the Law, then I
will that my said message and premises after the death of my said wife shall
remain to my said two sons I. and A. and to their heirs for ever, etc.

7. The like clause to this occurrs in the will of John Hubberd of Westerham,
dated the 23th of July 1537. in the Bishop of Rochesters Registry: viz.

Also if it do please God to visit my wife and all my children with death, then
I will that Richard Hubbard, the son of William Hubbard of Lynsfield shall have
my house and all my land, if that the Law will suffer it: paying therefore to
every one of my sisters, Agnes, Katherine and Margaret, three pounds six
shillings and eight pence, to be paid within the space of two years next after
my decease.

8. Nor is this passage less pregnant and pertinent to our purpose, taken from
the will of John Stace of Leigh, dated the 18th of March 1538. in the same
Registry.

And also I will that if the Kings last Act in Parliament will not stand with
my wife to enjoy the one half of my lands, I will then that mine Executour
shall pay yearly to Agnes my wife xl. s. during the term of her life, and that
to be paid quarterly at the four usual terms by equal portions, etc.

Argument.
In these five last wills mentioned ( Sarlys, Byx, Hunt, Hubberd and Staces)
what means that doubt and question in the Testators, whether their devises (of
houses and lands) were good, or would hold and stand firm in Law, had there
been such a Custom, and had not the Law been clear otherwise in this case, as
well in Kent as elsewhere?

I observe also, that in the interim of 27. and 32. H. 8. some few (and indeed
but very few) wills there are in the Registers at Canterbury, wherein lands are
devised: some with Feoffment, and some without, at least without mention made
of any. As for the former, those with Feoffment, I find the most of them dated,
though in or after the year 27. yet before the sixth of May 28. year of that
King, until when the Act was not to come in force. Besides, happily the
Feoffment was made before the Statute, and so could not be revoked (as I
conceive) without the Feoffees consent. As for the rest (those without mention
of Feoffees) some of them were of our City (Canterbury) or the like places,
where by particular Custom they might devise. Others (happily) had Feoffments,
although not mentioned. If not, they were no other (I conceive) than wills de
facto, or de been esse, made: nor did or could otherwise, or further operate,
inure, or take effect than the interessed or concerned parties should give way:
with whom in those elder times (times of more and greater regard and reverence
to the will of the dead than the present) the dying parent, or kinsmans mind
declared in his will, bare so great a sway, and did so much prevail, as to
persuade with them to renounce an advantage to themselves, for the fulfilling
of the deceaseds solemn and declared mind. Besides, it follows not, that
because such wills and devises are found, therefore they passed and were
allowed of as good and effectual: the contrary whereof is more than probable
by the ifs and conditions found in other wills of those times, arguing plainly
the Testators distrust and doubt of the validity, and consequently of the
success and effect of his devise, whereof examples are laid down before.

Before I close and wind up all, I have only this to add, by way of offer,
from the party opponent to this Custom, and his Council, (which, as a matter
much considerable, I may not pretermit:) that, whereas that abundance of wills
wherein lands are devised without mention of Feoffees, found and produced from
the Registries both of Canterbury and Rochester, is much insisted on in behalf
of the Custom: if from the Registries of any other Diocese out of Kent,
(where such devises never did, nor could obtein, until the Statute of Wills) of
equal circuit and extent to either of these, the very same thing may not as
truly be observed, and a proportionable number and quantity of such kind of
wills, (wills of lands devised without mention of Feoffees) cannot be produced,
and consequently the argument and inference thence drawn (for the Custom)
cluded and avoided, they will sit down convinced, and with their adversaries
subscribe unto that argument. An offer (this) in my judgment so fair,
ingenuous and plausible, as not to be rejected of any, but such as out of a
cavilling spirit, are resolved to turn the deaf ear upon all fair and equal
proposals: that I say not, such as, for maintenance sake, make it their study,
quocunque modo, to maintain their spurious interest. But that I may not seem to
be (what indeed I am far from being, any otherwise than in truths behalf) a
partisan in this business, I shall forbear all further censure, and if I may
but have the Readers leave to make my Epilogue, I shall, with thanks to him for
that, and the favor of all his other patience, quit the stage of my discourse
on this whole argument, and make my Exit.

Many other things offer themselves to his discourse, Perora^io.
that would treat of Gavelkind to the full; but they are (I take it) mostly
points of Common Law, which because they are not only out of my profession, but
besides my intention too, which was to handle it chiefly in the historical
part, and that no further than might conduce to the discovery of the
Primordiae, or beginnings of it, I will not wade or engage any further in the
argument, lest I be justly censured of a mind to thrust my sicle into another
man's harvest: only (so a close) craving leave to supply the common Kentish A
clause wanting in the printed Kentish Custumal supplied.
Custumal, at the end of Mr. Lambards Perambulation, with one clause, which,
according to an ancient copy registered in a quondam book of St. Augustines
Abbey at Canterbury, now remaining with my very noble and learned friend Sir
Roger Twysden, is to come in at page 574 lin. 2. after these words: Que de lay
est ^e^^ sans men. viz. (as that old copy gods on there:) E^si home ou femme
seit feloun de sei mesmes qeil s^y mesmes de gre se ocye, le Roy aura les
charteuz tuts and ni^nt l'an nele wast, mes se heir seit tautost enherite sans
contredit, kar tout seit il feloun de sey mesmes, il neyt my atteint de
felonye. Et clayment auxi, etc. as it follows in that printed Custumal. Which
clause, as I conceive, may be thus Englished: And if a man or woman shall be a
Felon of him or her self, who shall kill him or her self of his or her own
accord, the King shall have all the Chattels, and not the year and the waste,
but the Heir shall immediately inherit without contradiction: for albeit he or
she be a Felon of him or her self, he or she is no^ attainted of Felony.

Now craving pardon for what liberty I have taken to deliver my sense, and give
my conjecture, on several occasions here emergent, I shall here cut the thread
of this Discourse, wishing that as I have not spared freely to speak my mind,
so that every man that pleases, should assume the like liberty, not sus^ecting
me so opinionate of mine own vote, as to wish, much less to beg, least of all
to importune any unwilling man's concurrence, though happily unprovided of a
better of his own, disclaiming that magisterial boldness of him arrogated,
that said once upon a like occasion: -- si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti, si non, his utere mecum.


And (to wind up all) wish every man, in what he stands in doubt of, to be his
own Oedipus. Da veniam scriptis: quorum non gloria nobis Ovid. de pont. lib. 3.
El. 9.

Causa; sed utilitas, officiumque fuit.


An APPENDIX OF Such Muniments (viz. Charters, and other Escripts) as are
quoted in the precedent Discourse, with reference to this place for
transcription.
Charta pervetusta de terra ad Censum Vide page 50.
concessa.
ARnulfus Prior, and tota Congregatio Scriptura 1.
Ecclesiae Christi, omnibus fidelibus and amicis suis salutem. Sciatis nos,
consentiente Archipiscopo This (it seems) was before he granted them liberam
dispositionem rerum suarum, whereof in Eadmer. Hist. Novor. page 108.
Anselmo, concessisse Calvello and heredibus suis extra civitatem circa
castellum, novem parts terrae, inter terram arabilem and prata, ea conventione
ut ipse Calvellus and heredes sui singulis annis dent Celerario lij. sol. pro
omni re, praeter tres forisfacturas, id est, murdrum, and furtum, 3.
Forisfacturae.
si ipse Calvellus vel haeredes sui fecerint, and praeter si verecundium ipse
sive heredes sui fecerint monachis Ecclesiae vel servientibus eorum. Horum vero
denarior. una medietas dabitur in media Quadragesima, and altero in festo S.
Michaelis. Calvello autem mortuo, pro redemptione quam heredes facere Redemptio.
solent, heredes sui xx. sol. dabunt, and Censum quem pater prius dederat, ipse
deinceps similiter dabunt. Testes horum sunt Folbertus de Cill, Will. Folet,
Rogerius filius Herengodi, Robertus de Mala villa.

[Note that this Charter has a seal appendant on a labell proceeding from the
side-margent, round, and about the bigness of a five shillings piece of
silver, the wax yellow, stamped; but on the one side with the form of a Church,
much like that in the old seal of St. Augustines, in Sir Henry Spelmans
Counsels, page 122. The inscription in the ring of it this: SIGILLVM ECCLESIAE
CRISTI.]

Charta Prioris consimilis.
Wibertus Prior and Conventus Ecclesiae Scriptura 2. Vide page 50.
Christi Cantuar. omnibus fidelibus suis, tam praesentibus quam futuris
Salutem. Sciatis nos concessisse Goldwardo filio Feringi terram quae fuit
Walteri de Sartrino servientis nostri, Mariae filiae Richardi aurifabri, simul
cum propria terra sua in qua Feringus pater suus manebat, pro iiij. s. and
iiij. d. and ob. quos nobis inde annuatim reddet ad duos terminos, ij. scil.
solid. and iiij. denar. and ob. ad med. Quadrages. and ij. s. ad festum S.
Michaelis. Tenebit itaque praedictus Goldwardus de nobis has terras been and in
pace and honorifice jure hereditario per suprascriptum censum, and licebit ei
de ipsis tanquam de propriis libere facere quod voluerit, salvo jure and
redditu nostro. Ita tamen quod si eas alicui dare voluerit vel vendere, nobis
prius hoc indicabit, and nos ad emendum eas Simile habes in LL. Bu ger. apud
Scatob. c. 100*
proximiores esse debemus. Terra illa jacet juxta murum Eleemosynariae nostrae.
Testibus Bartholomaeo Dapifero, Willmo Camerario, Geldewino and Johanne, Cocis;
and multis aliis.

Alia Charta de terra ad Gablum concessa.
Robertus Monachus Ecclesiae S. Augustini, Scriptura 3. Vide page 50.
Custos and Procurator Hospitalis beati Laurentii, Omnibus Christi fidelibus
Salutem. Sciatis me concessisse Hamoni textori and heredibus suis duas acras
terrae contra Sanctum Sepulchrum, pro duob. solidis de Gablo, singulis annis,
jure hereditario tenendas. Medietatem autem dabit in media Quadragesimae, and
medietatem alteram in ad Vincula S. Petri, and tres gallinas in vigilia Natalis
Domini. Valeat. Testibus Alurico presbytero, Lidulfo, Willmo textore, and
fratribus illius loci.

Charta de terra ad Gavelikendam concessa.
Sciant praesentes et futuri quod ego R. Scriptura 4. Vide page 38. and 55.
Dei gratia S. Augustini Cantuar. et ejusdem loci Conventus dedimus Jordano de
Serres et heredibus suis ad Gavelikendam, Gavelikend.
xl. acras de marisco nostro pertinente ad manerium nostrum de Cistelet, cum
pertinentiis suis, Tenend. de nobis jure hereditario in perpetuum. Reddendo
inde nobis annuatim vij. solid. et vj. denarios sterlingorum ad Curiam de
Cistelet, in duobus terminis anni, in Nativitate Domini iij. s. et ix. d. et in
Nativitate Johan. Baptistae iij. s. et ix. d. Et pro hac concessione dedit
nobis praedictus Jordanus C. s. sterling. de Gersume. Vt igitur ista donatio
stabilis et firma permaneat sigilli nostri munimine eam roboravimus. Hiis
testibus Henrico de Cobbeham, Galfrido de Stokes, Stephano de Marisco, Philippo
de Fierport, Godefrido del Hac, Bricio del Hac, Waltero filio Roberti,
Gileberto fratre Abbatis, Willmo Pincerna, Wido Janitore, W. Coco, Alex.
Hostiario, et multis aliis.

Apographum processus litis inter Burgam de Bending, and Priorem and Conventum
Ecclesiae Cantuar.
De toto manerio de Wells coram W. de Scriptura 5. Vide page 51.
Ebor, R. de Turkeby, G. de Preston, and sociis suis itinerantibus apud
Cantuar. 3. Id. Junij, Anno Domini 1241. R. H. filii R. Johannis 25.

Burga quae fuit uxor Petri de Bendings petit versus Priorem S. Trinitatis
Cantuar. medietatem manerii de Wells sicut Francum Francus Bancus.
Bancum suum, ad faciendum firmam xviij. dierum, et unde praedictus Petrus
quondam vir suus eam dotavit, etc. Et Prior, scil. Rogerus de Lee venit et
dicit, quod habet manerium illud ex dono praededecessorum Domini Regis, qui
illud manerium aliquando tenuerunt. Et quod illud manerium dederunt Deo et
ecclesiae S. Trinitatis adeo libere sicut manerium illud tenuerunt in puram ac
perpetuam eleemosynam: ita quod illud manerium nunquam postea partitum fuit,
nec est partibile. Et dicit quod Dominus Rex qui manerium ill^d dedit
praedecessoribus suis, non tenuit illud nomine Gavelkinde. Et e contra Burga
Gavelkinde.
dicit, quod praedictum manerium est Gavelkinde, et partibile, ita quod quidam
Robertus de Valoignes, Dominus de Sutton, qui duxerat in uxorem Matildam de
Wells, cujus hereditas illud manerium fuit post mortem illius Matildis, habuit
nomine Franci Banci, medietatem illius manerii, et Petrus vir illius Burgae
habuit medietatem illam ex dono Hervei Bellet consanguinei ipsius Burgae,
postquam idem Petrus desponsavit ipsam Burgam, qui quidem Herveus redemit
medietatem illam per denarios suos de praedicto Roberto, ad opus ipsius Petri
ac Burgae. Et quod ita sit offert Domino Regi xx. s. per sic quod inquiratur
per patriam. Et Prior dicit quod praedictum manerium non est Gaulikend, neque
partibile, nec praedictus Robertus unquam habuit ibidem medietatem praedicti
manerii ut de Franco Banco suo. Et quod ita sit ponit se super patriam. Et ideo
fuit inde, etc. Juratores viz. R. de Setvann, I. de Esting, S. Juracores.
de Creie, G. de Dene, W. de Okrindenn, A. Perot, E. de Bocton, S. de Haute, B.
de Badlesinere, R. de Chilham, et Alanus de Leghes, Vered^ctum.
dicunt super sacramentum suum, quod praedictum manerium fuit quondam manerium
Domini Regis. Et quod datum fuit Deo et Ecclesiae S. Trinitatis in liberam,
puram et perpetnam eleemosynam. Ita quod manerium illud nunquam fuit
Gaulikende, nec partitum, nec est partibile, nec praedictus Robertus nunquam
habuit medietatem praedicti manerii nomine Franci Banci. Set dicunt quod post
mortem praedictae Matildis, tenuit praedictus Robertus totum manerium illud
simul cum custodia praedicti Petri. Ita quod praedictus Herveus dedit quandam
summam pecuniae praedicto Roberto pro custodia Judicium.
illa. Et ideo consideratum est, etc. quod Prior teneat, etc. and sine die, and
praedicta Burga in misericordia.

Carta de terra ad Gavelikende concessa.
Alanus Prior et Conventus ecclesiae Christi Scriptura 6. Vide page 38. and 55.
Cantuar. Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos literae istae pervenerint Salutem.
Volumus ad omnium noticiam pervenire quod nos concessimus and assignavimus
Theb. de Einesford and heredibus suis quater vigin^^ acras de Dominio nostro in
Northocholt, tenendas de nobis ad Gavelikende. Reddendo Gavelikende.
inde nobis xx. s. singulis annis, x. in med. Quadrag. and x. ad festum S.
Michaelis. Hanc tamen hac condition ei tenebimus si mansionim and domos suas
super praedictam terram fecerit. Debet insuper tam ipse quam heredes sui sequi
curiam nostram de Orpinton sicut ceteri homines de eadem villa.

Charta pirori consimilis.
Alanus Prior et Convenius ecclesiae Christi Sc^iptura 7. Vide page 38. and 55.
Cantuar. Omnibus Christi fidelibus Salutem. Sciatis quod nos concessimus and
assignavimus Stephano de Renardintone C. acras de marisco nostro inter wallas
Monachorum Pontis Roberti, et Oxeniam, ita quoddebet habere illas C. acras post
alias C. acras quas in eodem marisco dimisimus Stephano militi de S. Martino,
usque ad C. illas acras quas dimisimus Solomoni de Ges^ings. Concessimus ^utem
has praedictas C. acras eidem Stephano de Renardintone and heredibus suis ad
Gavelichinde. Reddendo inde nobis duas Gavelichende.
marcas argenti singulis annis, ad duos, viz. terminos, infra octavas
Nativitatis S. Johannis Baptistae unam marcam, infra octavas S. Michaelis
alteram marcam, pro omni servitio, nisi quod debet wallare secundum quantitatem
illius terrae intus and extra, tam contra salsam quam contra frescam, sicut
ceteri, et Curiam nostram sequi. Jura etiam Cantuarien. ecclesiae, et in hoc et
in aliis, quantum ipse potest cum ratione tueri et defendere. Haec autem omnia
sacramento corporaliter in capitulo nostro praestito juravit se fideliter
observaturum. Hiis testibus Godefrido coco, Stephano portario, Bartholomaeo
seneschallo, Willmo de Capes, Roberto Porter, et multis aliis.

Alia Charta consimilis.
Omnibus ad quos praesens charta pervenerit Scriptura 8. Vide page 38. and 55.
Gaufridus Prior and Conventus ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Salutem. Noverit
universitas vestra nos concessisse Joni and heredibus suis Berchariam nostram
ducentarum ovium, scil. medietatem de Osmundeseye in terra and marisco cum una
salina, Tenend. de nobis successive ad Gavelykende it a plene Gavelykende.
and integre sicut eam unquam Rogerus de Osmundeseye tenuit. Reddendo inde
nobis annuatim lvj. s. de redditu ad duos terminos, scil. ad festum S. Johannis
Baptistae xxviij. s. and ad festum S. Michaelis similiter viginti octo. Post
mortem vero praedicti Jonis dabunt nobis heredes sui successive de Relevio lvj.
s. Dabunt etiam idem J. and Relevium.
heredes sui post ipsum nobis annuatim ad Natale Domini unum Mathlardum, et
unam Annat^m, and quatuor cercellas, and ad Pascha unum caseum, and unum agnum
de Present. Present.
Super hoc sciendum, quod praedictus J. et heredes sui Curiam nostram de
Leysdun sequentur, and in auxiliis dandis and Scottis sicut alii Tenentes
nostri scottabunt. Et inde ipse and heredes sui successive salvos plegios
invenient de redditu terminis statutis reddendo, and de Berchariae
instanratione integre and fideliter conservanda.

Alia consimilis Charta Hospitali data.
Sciant presents and futuri, quod ego Scriptura 9 Vide page 38. and 55.
Radulfus Frone tradidi and concessi Deo and fratribus Hospitalis S. Laurentii
juxta Cantuariam, in orientali part siti, septem acras terrae meae tenendas in
Gavelekende de Gavelekende.
me and heredibus meis libere and quiet. Reddendo inde annuatim mihi vel
heredibus meis xlij. denarios, pro omni servitio, and omni exactione in duobus
terminis, scil. in med. Quadragesima xxj. denar. and in festo* S. Michaelis
xxj. denar. Praedicta autem terra nominata est Prestesteghe, quae adjacet
terrae Heliae de Blen. Pro hac donatione and confirmatione dederunt mihi
praedicti fratres and heredibus meis quinque marcas sterlingorum. His testibus
Johanne clerico, filio Henrici Sacerdotis, etc. and pluribus de Halymot.

Inquisitio de terris and tenementis quae Isabella de Monte alto tenuit de
Priore ecclesiae Christi Cantuariae.
Inquisitio facta apud Hokynden coram Scriptura 10. Vide page 58.
Eschaetore Domini Regis die Mercurii prox* ante festum S. Catherinae virginis,
anno R. R. Edwardi secundo, de terris and tenementis quae Isabella de monte
alto tenuit de Priore Ecclesiae Christi Cantuariae, and per quod servitiu^, per
sacramentu^ Willmi de Cokeler, etc. qui dicu^t per sacramentu^ suu^, quod
praedicta Isabella tenuit in Gavelikende die Gavelikende.
quo obiit de praedicto Priore unu^ messuagiu^ xlij. acras terrae cum
pertinentiis in Hokinden, per servitium december solid. undecim denarior. per
annum, and per servitium arandi unam acram terrae ad seminandum frumentum, quod
valet xij. d. per annum. Et per servitium metendi praedictam acram and cariandi
in Grangiam Prioris apud Orpinton blada ejusdem acrae, quod servitium extendit
per annum ad xij. d. Et per servitium arandi dimidiam acram terrae ad
seminandum frumentum, et dimidiam acram terrae ad seminandum ordeum, et
utramque dimidiam acram metendi et ligandi, quod quidem servitium extendit per
annum ad ij. s. Et per servitium solvendi unam denar. et obulum ad falcandum
pratum Domini Prioris, and per servitium curiandi unam carectatam and dimidiam
feni in Grangiam Prioris apud Orpinton, and valet per annum iij. denar. Et per
per servitium faciendi duo averagia de Orpinton usque Mepham per annum, and
valet opus viij. denar. Et per servitium claudendi tres peticatas circa
Gardinum Prioris praedicti apud Orpinton, and valet opus iij. d. per annum. Et
per servitium duarum gallinarum and xl. ovorum, et valet per annum vj. d.
pretium gallinae ij. d. Et per servitium faciendi sectam ad curiam praedicti
Prioris de Orpinton, de tribus septimanis in tres septimanas. Et dicunt quod
praedicta Isabella obiit per tres annos elapsos, et quod areragia a tempore
mortis praedictae Isabellae usque in hodiernum diem sunt l. s. j. d. ob.

Summa totius per annum -- xvj. s. -- viij. d. -- ob. Unde de redditu ^ssis. --
x. s. -- xj. d. -- De Consuetudinibus -- v. s. -- ix. -- -- ob.

Servitia Tenentium de Rokinge ad redditum posita.
Memorand. quod in festo S. Michaelis, Scriptura 1^. Vide page 60.
anno Dni Mcclxxxix. regni vero Regis Edwardi xvij. Prior et Conventus
ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. relaxaverunt Tenentibus suis de Rokinge, viz.
falcationem, levationem, cariagium, et tassationem prati. Item cariagium,
impletionem and sparsionem fimorum, facturam cratis, and Burghyard. Item
Burghyard.
averagia apud Merseham. Item fotaveagia. Item messionem and herciaturam and
collectionem stipularum. Item cooperturam grangiarum, and tonsionem ovium. Et
pro ista relaxatione, praedicti Tenentes solvent annuatim ad manerium praedict.
in festo omnium Sanctorum, and ad Purificationem beatae Mariae redditus
subscriptos pro equali portione viz. Robertus le Frode de xij. acris and dimid.
iiij. s. ij. d. ob. Timberdansland pro viginti sex acris iiij. s. ij. d. ob.
Terra Heymund pro novem acris iij. s. ij. d. Terra Juliani pro viginti acris
iiij. s. j. d. ob. Stameresland pro undecim acris ij. s. viij. d. Terra
Smalspon pro tresdecim acris ij. s. iiij. d. Terra le Bred pro octo acris and
dimid. xvj. d. etc.

Relaxatio servitiorum and consuetudinum Tenentium de Mepham, pro annuo redditu
solvendo.
Vniversis pateat per praesentes quod in ^iptura 12. ^e page 6^.
festo Nativitatis Domini, Anno ejusdem Mcccvj. Regni vero Regis Edwardi filii
Regis Henrici xxxv. Henricus Prior et Capitulum ecclesiae Christi Cantuar.
remiserunt et relaxaverunt hominibus et tenentibus suis de Mepham quasdam
consuetudines el servitia pro annuo redditu quinquaginta septem solidor. trium
denarior. et unius oboli ^isdem Priori et Capitulo in praedicto manerio suo de
Mepham in festo Apostolorum Petri et Pauli annuatim solvend. in forma
subscripta, viz. Tenentes de Gavellond de Gavellond.
octodecim Jugis, pro cariagio triginta et sex carectat. feni de prato de
Redhamme apud Clyve usque Mepham, quindecim solidos, viz. pro qualibet
carectat. quinque denarios. Et unum dimidium jugum est in Dominico. Item pro
averagiis tresdecim solid. and quatuor denar. Item pro clausura circa blada
duos solidos, undecim denar. and obulum. Item pro clausura circa Curiam quae
dicitur Burghyard. viginti duos denar. obulum Burghyard.
and quadr. Item Tenentes de sex Jugis and dimid. de Inland pro trituratione
and ventilatione Inland.
triginta and quinque quarteriorum frumenti, novem solid. quinquc denar. obolum
and quadr. viz. pro trituratione cujuslibet summae tres denar. and pro
ventilatione unum quadr. Item pro trituratione and ventilatione septemdecim
grossarum summarum et dimid avenae, tres solid. tres denar. and unum quadr.
viz. pro trituratione cujuslibet summae duos denar. et pro ventilatione unum
quadran. Item pro opere sarclandi octodecim denar. Item pro opere tassandi in
autumpno tresdecim denar. Item pro fimis spargendis sex denar. et obolum. Item
pro xviij. f. Cl^yis, vel Claiis. Vid. Spelm. Glossar. in voce. Worderinde.
Cladibus faciendis ad Ovile sex denar. Item pro cibo Prioris querend. et pro
servitio quod dicitur Worderinde, et pro pomis frangendis duodecim denar. Item
pro clausura circa blada, quae dicitur Swinhey, Swinhey.
duos solidos, december denar. et quadr. Item pro clausura xvj. perticarum et
quinque pedum muri infra Curiam ab ostio Aulae versus Portam Curiae xvj. denar.
et obol. Item pro grangia cooperienda duos solid. et sex denar. In quorum
omnium testimonium, sigillum commune praedictorum Prioris et Capituli, et
sigilla Walteri de Northwode, Johannis de Isebergh, Johannis de Halifeld,
Henrici de Mildenacre, Petri de Mildenacre, et Johannis de Prestwode, pro se et
omnibus aliis Tenentibus de Gavellond, ad requisitionem ipsorum: et Johannis de
Pettesfeld, Johannis de la Dene Capellani, Henrici de Lomere, Alfredi de
Northwode, Henrici de Northwode, et Walteri Ive, pro se et omnibus aliis
Tenentibus de Inland, ad requisitionem eorundem, huic scripto cirographato
alternatim sunt appensa. Acta sunt haec anno supradicto.

Breve Regis ( Wmi jmi) pro terris monasterii S. Augustini Cant. alienatis
recuperandis.
Willmus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Lanfranco Scriptura 13. Vide page 68.
Archiepisco Cantuar. etc. Salutem. Mando and praecipio ut faciatis S.
Augustinum and Abbatem Scotlandum reseisire burgum de Fordwich, quem tenet
Haymo vicecomes, omnesque alias terras quas Abbas Egelsinus fugitivus, mentis
lenitate, vel timore, vel cupiditate alicui dedit vel habere concessit. Et si
aliquis, etc.

Charta W. Regis jmi de restitutione ablatorum in Episcopatibus and Abbatiis
totius Angliae.
W. Dei gratia Rex Anglorum, L. Archiepiscopo Scriptura 14. Vide page 68.
Cantuar. and G. Episcopo Constantiarum, and R. Comiti de Ou, and R. filio
Comitis Gil. and H. de monte forti, suisque aliis proceribus regni Angliae,
Salutem. Summonete Vicecomites meos ex meo praecepto, and ex part mea eis
dicite, ut reddant Episcopatibus meis, and Abbatiis totum Dominium, omnesque
dominicas terras quas de Dominio Episcopatuum meorum and Abbatiarum, Episcopi
mei and Abbates cis vel lenitate, vel timore, vel cupiditate dederunt, vel
habere consenserunt, vel ipsi violentia sua inde abstraxerunt, et quod hactenus
injuste possederunt de Dominio ecclesiarum mearum. Et nisi reddiderint, sicut
GOS ex part mea summonebitis, vos ipsos velint nolint constringite reddere.
Quod si quilibet alius, vel aliquis vestrum quibus hanc justitiam imposui,
ejusdem querelae fuerit, reddat similiter quod de Dominio Esicopatuum vel
Abbatiarum mearum habuit, ne propter illud quod inde aliquis vestrum habebit
minus exerceat super meos Vicecomites vel alios quicunque teneant dominium
ecclesiarum mearum f. quam.
quod praecipio.

Breve Regis in subsidium Villanorum Abbatis S. Augustini Cantuar. se gravari
querentium in taxatione 10mae and 15mae.
Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Scriptura 15. Vide page 73.
Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae, Taxatoribus Decimae and Quintaedecimae in
Comitatu Cantiae, Salutem. Ex part dilecti nobis in Christo Abbatis S.
Augustini Cantuar. nobis est ostensum, quod vos omnia bona and catalla
Villanorum ipsius Abbatis in Comitatu praedicto, non deductis redditibus,
servitiis and custumis quae iidem Villani praefato Abbati reddunt and solvunt
annuatim, quae quidem redditus, servitia and custumae inter temporalia ipsius
Abbatis spiritualibus suis annexa ad decimam sunt taxata, et inde idem Abbas
decimam solvit, taxastis, et decimam and quintamdecimam praedictas inde levare
intenditis ad opus nostrum, in ipsius Abbatis et Villanorum suorum praedictorum
praejudicium et gravamen: Nos nolentes praedictum Abbatem, pro eo quod ipse de
temporalibus spiritualibus suis annexis decimam solvit in hac part indebite
prae gravari, vobis mandamus, quod deductis redditibus, servitiis, et custumis
Villanorum praedictorum, quae inter temporalia praedicti. Abbatis spiritualibus
annexa ad decimam sic taxantur, et de quibus idem Abbas decimam solvit, sicut
praedictum est, residua bona et catalla eorundem Villanorum taxari, et dictas
decimam et qnintamdecimam inde ad opus nostrum levari faciatis, prout alias in
hujusmodi taxationibus fieri consuevit. Et* si quid per vos a praefatis
Villanis indebi^e levatum fuerit, id sine dilatione restitui faciatis eisdem.
Test meipso apud Pontefractum primo die Martii, anni regni nostri septimo.

Charta de Homagio facto pro terra de Gavelkind, sicut de Villenagio.
Sciant omnes tam posteri quam praesentes Scriptura 16. Vide^ page 73.
quod Wmus filius Wmi de Elmton, and Radulfus frater suus diviserunt
hereditatem suam de duabus villis Burn et Wilrintune, sicut de Gavelikende in
Curia S. Augustini, in praesentia Domini Rogeri electi ejusdem ecclesiae and
plurimorum Monachorum and Laicorum: and Radulfus relevavit in eadem Curia
partem suam. Ipse vero Radulfus de medietate istarum duarum villarum fecit
homagium Abbati sicut de Villenagio, and reddet de Burn gablum quinquaginta
solid. quatuor terminis anni, dominica viz. Palmar. xxij. s. vj. d. in
Nativitate S. Johannis tantundem, ad festum S. Michaelis tantundem, ad festum
S. Thomae ante Nativitatem Domini tantundem, and tantundem servitii quantum ad
idem Villenagium pertinet, faciet. Similiter de medietate de Wilrinton, idem
Radulfus alios quinquaginta solidos, eodem modo, et eisdem terminis reddet cum
servitio. Ego autem R. Dei gratia electus beati Augustini Cantuariensis
ejusdemque loci conventus, hanc partem suae hereditatis praesenti charta et
sigillo ecclesiae nostrae eidem Radulfo confirmavimus. Hiis testibus quorum
nomina subscripta sunt, Willmo filio Nigelli, Elya de Silingheld, Radulfo de S.
Leodegario, Radulfo de Creye, Eylgaro de Esture, Hugone Cousin, Stephano de
Renardinton, Alano de Reading, Daniele de Wyvelesberhe, Hamone de Solforde,
Hamone de Aldelose, Alano de Legh, Rogero de Wadenhale, et pluribus aliis.

Chirographum pervetustum de Nuptiis contrahendis, and Dote constit^en^a.
Here appears in this writing the agreement that Scriptura 17. Vide page 76.
(...) Godwine made with Byrhtric when he his daughter (...) wooed, that is
first that he gives her one pounds (...) weight of gold Conditionally (and upon
this consideration) that she accept of his speech, i. e. consent to the
agreement, or contract here made, and on these terms will become his wife.
so as she his agreement received, (...) and he gives her those lands at
Street with (...) all that thereto apperteineth, and in Burwaremersh (...) one
hundred and fifty acres, and withal.
thereto thirty (...) oxen, and twenty cowes, and ten horses, and ten bondmen.
(...) This was agreed.
spoken at Kingstone before Cnute (...) king* in Living the Archbishops
presence.
witness, and in (...) the Covents at Christ-church, and Aelfmeres (the)
Abbats, (...) and the Covents at S. Augustine, and Aethelwines (...) (the)
Sheriff, and Siredes the elder, and Godwines (...) Wulfeyes son, and Aelfsy
child, and Eadmer (...) at Burham, and Godwine Wulfstanes son, and (...)
Charles the kings Minister.
knight, and when men that maiden (...) fetchd to Brightling, then went of all
this for surety.
in (...) pledge Ael^gar Syredes son, and Frerth priest of (...) Folestone
and of Dover Leofwine priest, and (...) Wulfsy priest, and Eadred Eadelmes
son, and (...) Leofwine Waerelmes son, and Cenwold rust, and (...) Leofwine
Godwines son at Horton, and Leofwine (...) the red, and Godwine Eadgi^es
son, and Leofsuh (...) his brother. And which soever of them longest lives
(...) seixe.
take all inheritances.
possessions as well that land that (...) I to them give as every thing. This
thing is known (...) of each, o^ every.
to all doughty.
valiant men in Kent, and in Sussex of Thanes (...) and of Churles, and this
writing is tripartite.
threefold, (...) one is at Christ church, a second*
another at S. Augustine, (...), the third has Byrhtric himself. (...).

Testamentum Ethelstani Etheling, filii regis Ethelredi, quo (inter alia)
contulit Ecclesiae Christi Cantuariae, manerium de Holingburne, anno Christi
1015.
In God Almighties name I Ethelstan Prince (...) make known in this writing
how I my substance and (...) my possessions given have for Gods glory.
love and (...) my souls redemption, and my father Ethelredes (...) king that
I it of obtained.
earned, that is first that I (...) consent that man set at liberty.
set free every forfeited pledge.
surety (...) Forte mancipia. Vide Dictionar. nosti. in voce (...). Spelm.
Glossar. verb. Domesticus, page 222. col. 2. Item Council. p. 403 and Ma^t.
Patis. Add^ ^am. p. 243.
that I by contract.
promise poss^ss^.
ought. And I give in (...) with me where I me rest to Christ and S. Peter
those (...) lands at Eadburghbery which I bought of my father (...) for.
with two hundred marks of gold by weight, (...), and for.
with five pounds of silver, and that land at Meralefan (...) which I bought of
my father for.
with two (...) hundred marks and a half of gold by weight, and that (...)
land at Mordune which my father me to let I give into (...) that place for our
both souls, and I him this pray (...) for Gods love and for S. Mary and for S.
Peter's that it (...) stand might, and that sword with silver hilt that (...)
Wolfriht made, and that gilt pouch, and that bracelet (...) which Wolfrihc
made, and that drink-horne that I (...) ere of that Covent bought at
Ealdminster. And I (...) will that men take that money which Athelwolds (...)
widow me ought to yield.
pay which I for her ere (...) paid have, and dispose it Elfsy bishop to
Ealdminster (...) for my soul, that is twelve pounds numbered*
by (...) tale. And I give to Christ-church in Canterbury (...) those lands at
Holingbourne and those which thereto (...) appertain, except that one
plough-land that I to Siferth (...) given have. And those lands at
Garwaldintune, (...) and I give those lands at Ritherfelde to the nuns (...)
minster of Saint Mary freely*
gratis, and one silver (...) great piece of five pounds, and to New-minster
one (...) silver basin of five pounds in that holy Trinities (...) name that
the place is dedicated to. And I give to (...) Shaftesbury to that holy
C^ucifix.
rood and to Saint Edward (...) those vi. pounds which I to Edmund my brothr
(...) made. known.
committed have. And I give to my father Ethelred (...) King those lands at
Cealtune saving.
except those (...) eight hides which I to Aelmer my Minister given (...) have.
And those lands at Northtone, and those lands (...) at Mulinton, and those
silver hilted swords which (...) Wlkytel possesses, and that brigandine that
with Morkere (...) is, and those horses that Thurbrand me gave, and (...) those
white horses which Liefwine me gave. And I (...) give to Eadmund my brother
those swords which (...) Offa King enjoyed. And those swords with the hollow
(...) hilt, and one javelin, and one silver tipped.
hemmed (...) war-trumpet, and that land which I possess in Eastangle. (...)
And those lands at Peakesdale. And I will (...) that men deliver every year
one days victual.
ferme to the (...) covent at Ely of this land on S. Etheldriths masseday (...)
and give likewise to the minster one hundred (...) pence. and feed there on
that day an hundred (...) needy.
poor. Be ever this alms delivered yearly, possess, i. e. whosoever owes the
land.
ow (...) the land he that possesses.
owes, whilst Christendom stands. (...) And if he will not that alms
perform who (...) that land has, go that land to S. Etheldrith. And (...) I
give to Eadrith my brother one silver hilted sword. (...). And I give to Elfsy
bishop one gilt Crucifix.
cross which (...) is with Eadrith Syfleds son, and one black stead. And (...)
I give to Elmer those lands at Hamelden which he (...) sometime.
ere had. And I pray my father for God Almighties (...) love and for mine that
he that confirm.
give which I (...) to him given have. And I give to Godwine Wlnothes (...)
son those lands at Cunitune which his father sometime.
ere (...) possessed. And I give to Elfsith my nurse.
foster-mother (...) for her great deserving those lands at Westune (...) which
I bought of my father for.
with three hundred (...) marks lacking a half of gold by weight. And I give
(...) to Elfwine my mass priest those lands at Horelvestune (...) and those
swords which Wyther enjoyed. And (...) my horse with my furniture. And I give
to Eylmere (...) my i. Sewer, forte.
dish thane those eight hides at Cateringetune, (...) and one diverse-coloured
stead and those sharp (...) Forte, a Cutlash.
swords and my target. And I give to Syferth those (...) lands at High-cliffe
and one sword and one horse and (...) my bowed shield. And I give to Ethelferrh
Stameren (...) and Lyving those lands at Tywynge. And I give (...) to Liefstane
Liefwines brother what of that landestate (...) which I from.
of his brother took. And I give (...) to Lyemare at Bygrove those lands which
I him sometime.
ere (...) from took. And I give to Godwine Drevelen those (...) three hides of
land at Little Gareshale. And I give (...) to Edrith Wynfelds son that sword
is marked with a hand.
which the (...) hand is on marked. And I give to Elfwine my (...) minister
that sword which he to me sometime sold.
sometime gave. (...). And I give to Elfnoth my sword white, and to my (...)
Huntsman that stead which is at Colingeregge. And (...) tender men of my gold
to Elurith at Berton and to (...) Godwine Drevelen so much as Eadmund my
brother (...) knows that I to them of right to yield ought. (...). Now thank I
my father with all humility in God (...) Almighties name for that answer which
(he) to me sent (...) on Friday after midsummers masse-day by Elfgare (...)
Elfstanes son, which was that he to me signified by (...) a message from my
father.
my fathers message that I might by Gods permission (...) and by his give my
lands and my substance.
possessions as (...) to me most expedeient seemed, i. e. Either to divine or
secular uses.
either for God and (...) for the world. And of this answer is to witness
(...) Eadmund my brother and Elfsy bishop, and Byrhtmer (...) Abbat and Eilmer
Eluriches son. Now pray I all the (...) wise men which my testament.
will shall hear read either (...) Clerks.
Clergy and Laics.
Laity, that they be of assistance that (...) my testament.
will stand may, since my father gives leave (...) for my testaments
wills standing. Now declare I that all (...) those things which I to God unto
Gods church and (...) Gods servants given have be don for my deer (...) fathers
soul Ethelred King and for mine and Elfrith (...) my grandmother that me
fedd, and for all theirs that (...) me to this estates.
goods helped. And he that this (...) testament.
will through any thing breaks let him give an account (...) thereof to God
Almighty, and to Saint Mary, (...), and to Saint Peter, and to all those which
Gods name (...) do laud. (...).

Charta Libertatum Ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. concessar. per Regem Henricum
primum.
H. Dei gratia Rex Anglorum, Episcopis, Scriptura 19. Vide page 123.
Comitibus, Proceribus, Vicecomitibus, caeterisque suis fidelibus Francis et
Anglis in omnibus Comitatibus in quibus Achiepiscopus Randulfus and monachi
ecclesiae Christi Cantuariae terras habent amicubiliter Salutem. Notum vobis
facio me concessisse eis omnes terras quas tempore Regis Eadwardi cognati mei,
and tempore Willielmi patris mei habuerunt and Saca and Son on Strande and
Stream, on Wode and Field, Tolnes and Teames, and Grithbreces, and Hamso^ne,
and Forestealles, and Infangenes thioves, and Flemen feormthe super suos
homines infra burgos and extra in tantum and tam pleniter sicut proprii
ministri mei exquirere debent. Et etiam super tot Thegenes quot eis concessit
pater meus. Et Thegenes.
nolo ut aliquis hominum se intromittat nisi ipsi and ministri eorum, quibus
ipsi committere voluerint, nec Francus nec Anglus: propterea quia ego concessi
Christo has consuetudines pro redemptione animae meae, sicut Rex Eadwardus and
pater meus antehac fecerunt. Et nolo pati ut aliquis eas infringat, si non vult
perdere amicitiam mea^ Deus vos custodiat.

Thus Englished in the same Charter.
(...) [] This answers not to the Latin; that, quot eis concessit pater meus;
this, as I to them have granted.


Charta consimilium libertatum Ecclesiae S. Augustini* Cantuar. concessarum per
S. Edwardum Regem.
Ego Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Anglorum, Scriptura 20. Vide page 112. and 123.
Eadsino Archiepiscopo, et Godwino Comiti, and omnibus suis Baronibus Canciae,
Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse Deo and S. Augustino and fratribus ut habeant eorum
Saca and Socna, et pacis fracturam, et pugnam in domo factam, et viae assaltus,
et latrones in terra sua captos, latronumque susceptionem vel pastionem, super
illorum proprios homines infra Civitatem et extra, theloniumque suum in terra
et in aqua, atque consuetudinem quae dicitur Teames. Et super omnes Allodiarios
suos quos eis habeo datos. Nec Allodia^ii.
volo consentire ut aliquis in aliqua re de his se intromittat, nisi eorum
praepositi quibus ipsi hoc commendaverint, quia habeo has consuetudines Deo
datas et S. Augustino pro redemptione animae meae ita pleniter et libere sicut
melius habuerunt tempore praedecessoris mei Knuti Regis, et nolo consentire ut
aliquis haec infringat, sicut meam amicitiam vult habere.

Epistola Gaufridi Supprioris and Monachor. Ecclesiae Cantuariensis ad Regem
Henricum 2. de lite inter eos and Baldvinum Archiepisc.
Excellentissimo Domino suo H. Dei gratia Scriptura 21. Vide page 67. and 101.
Anglorum Regi G. Supprior and Conventus ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. flebilis
and ultra modum afflictus Salutem and suspiria flentium and afflictorum
respicere. Cum scriptum sit, Gloria in excelsis Deo, and in terra pax hominibus
bonae voluntatis: ut pro bona voluntate in terris habita, gloriam habeatis in
coelis, Serenitati vestrae quem in nullo offendisse credimus vel recognoscimus,
supplicamus, ut si quid odii aut rancoris concepistis adversus nos aut
ecclesiam Cantuar. odio personae alicujus aut operis praesentes temporis vel
praeteriti, quod nos debeat respicere, pietatis intuitu remittatis, attendentes
innocentiam nostram, nec vindicantes aliorum peccata in nobis. Si peccavimus
public, puniamur, sin autem, quod ecclesia Cant. de qua omnes Anglorum Reges,
(...) Can^ dig^
non solum fidem Christi, sed and coronam Regni sumpserunt, qu^ usque modo
libera extitit, captivatur and con^ulcatur ab hominibus, cum sit matter omnium
in regno Angliae manentium. In Christo Jesu vobis dicimus, timemur ne novitates
multae and malae subito oriantur, quarum principia etsi nos sensimus, forsitan
exitus alios quam nos tanget nec transire permittet immunes, sed involvet. Qui
hanc novitatem non admiretur, quod Dominus Archiepiscopus dicit nos debere de
eo terras and possessiones nostras tenere? cum jam per quingentos annos and eo
amplius, a tempore scil. magni Theodori, Nota.
qui terras partitus est, and utrique parti suam portionem assignavit,
Conventus in pace possederit portionem suam, and libere administraverit, quod
and chartae Regum and Pontificum before attestantur, ex quarum tenore
perspicuum videre est, quod usque ad haec infoelicitatis tempora,
Archiepiscopus nihil juris vel dominationis plus habebat in terris Monachorum,
quam Monachi in terra Archiepiscopi. Et ne super hoc quisquam dubitet,
proferantur in medium charta S. Aedwardi Regis and Sancti Anselmi Achiepiscopi,
and aliae multae Regum and Pontificum. Quod autem dicitur Lanfrancum dividisse
terras, ideo est, quod cum Normanni, capta Anglia, omnium ecclesiarum terras
occupassent, Rex Will. ad instantiam Lanfranci, eas resignavit. Lanfrancum vero
singulis ecclesiis reddidit quod antea possederant, sibi autem quod ante
cessorum fuerat suorum retinuit. Quod autem tempore Lanfranci non sit facta
terrae divisio, testantur chirographia ante tempora beati Dunstani facta inter
Archiepiscopos and Monachos de concambiis terrarum multarum: sed and hoc
attestantur scripta vetustissima quae lingua Anglorum, Landbokes, id est,
terrarum libros, Landbokes.
vocant. Quia vero non erant adhuc tempore Regis Willielmi milites in Anglia,
sed Threnges, praecepit Rex, ut de eis milit^s Th^eng^s.
fierent ad terram defendendam. Fecit autem* Lanfrancus Threngos suos milites:
Monachi vero non fecerunt, sed de portione sua ducentas libratas terrae
dederunt Archiepiscopo, ut per milites suos terras eorum defenderet, and ut
omnia negotia eorum apud Curiam Romanam suis expensis expediret. Vnde adhuc in
tota terra Monachorum nullus Nota.
miles est, sed in terra Archiepiscopi. Terram tamen ducentarum librarum adhuc
habent Archiepiscopi: pro quibus omnibus valde miramur, quod vel talia dicit,
vel quod assensum ^i praebetis, quod vestra authoritate and nomine vestro, per
ministros vestros res and possessiones nostras invadit, cum nichil ad eum
spectent, set nos teneamus post Deum in capite de vobis, sicut and ipse: quod
manifestum est, decedentibus Archiepiscopis, quia terrae eorum statim
confiscantur, a seculo autem inauditum est, quod possessiones nostrae
confiscatae fuerint aliquo tempore. Quapropter supplicamus, ut maturius pro Deo
dum potestis haec corrigi faciatis, cum forte tunc Forte, voletis.
velitis, cum non poteritis.
potueritis. Valeat.

Donatio Wolgithae de manerio de Stisted, A. D. 1046.
Here appears in this writing how Wolgith gives Scriptura 22. Vide page 85.
(...) her substance after her departure, which to her the Almighty (...) God
gave in life to use, that is then first (...) to my Lord his right Heriot. And
I give that land (...) at Stistede with.
by Gods testimony.
witness and my friends (...) to Christ-church to the Monks for i. c. ad
victum.
sustenance, (...), on this condition that Elikitel and Kytel my children (...)
use those lands for their lives time.
days, and afterward go (...) that land to Christ-church without any deduction
(...) for my soul, and for Elfwines my Lords, and for (...) all my children,
and be half the men free after their (...) deaths.
days. And I give to the church at Stistede (...) together with that.
besides that which I in life gave Eldemesland. and (...) withal.
thereto Hyeken, that there be in all fifty acres in (...) champion
field after my departure. And I give to Wolk and (...) Kytel my sons that
land at Walsingham, and at (...) Charlton, and Herlingham. And I give to my two
(...) daughters Good and Bote Sexlingham and Summerledeton, (...) and to the
church at Sumerl. sixteen acres (...) of land, and one acre of meadow. And I
give to Ealgyth (...) my daughter that land at Cherteker and at Ashford, (...),
and the wood which I laid thereto. And I give to (...) Godwine Earl and Harald
Earl Frithton. And I give (...) to Christ-church to Christ's altar one little
(...) gilt Crucifi^.
cross and one carpet, and I give to S. Edmund (...) two boned horns. And I
give to S. Etheldrith (...) one woollen kyrtel. And I give to S. Osyth (...)
half a pound of money. And I give to Austine one (...) carpet. And he that my
will.
testament bereaveth (...) which I now bequeathed.
ordained have with.
by Gods witness.
testimony, (...) bereaved let him be of these earthly joys, (...), and cut
off him the Almighty Lord which all creatures (...) created and made from all
Saints.
holy men's communion (...) at.
in Domesday, and be he delivered to Satam the Devil (...) and all his cursed
companions into hell bottom, and (...) there be tortured.
perish with Gods reprobates.
deniers Or, Except he desist from molesting mine heirs.
without intermission, (...) and mine heirs never to trouble (s). Of this
(...) is for witness Edward King and many others. (...).

Donatio terrarum apud Apoldre, Orpinton, Palstre, Werhorne, Wittrisham,
ecclesiae Christi Cantuariae per Aedsium Presbyterum, de consensu Cnuti Regis
and Aelfgifae Reginae, ann. 1032.
Here appears by.
in this writing how Cnut King Scriptura 23. Vide page 120.
(...) and Aelfgife his Lady gave to Eadsy their Priest (...) when he turned
monk that he might dispose.
convey that (...) land at Apuldore as to himself most pleasing were. (...).
Then gave he it to Christ-church to Gods servants (...) for his soul, and he
it bought that of the Covent for his (...) days and Aedwines with four
pounds, on that condition.
contract (...) that men deliver every year to Christ-church (...) three
weighs of cheese from that land, and three cados.
bundles (...) of Eeles, and after his days and Aedwines go that (...) land
into Christ-church, with meat and with i. e. entirely.
men (...) even as it then improved.
enriched is, for Eadsies soul, and (...) he bought that land at Werhorne of
the Covent for (...) his days and Eadwines also with four pounds, then (...)
goes that land forth with the other after his days and (...) Edwines to
Christ-church with the stock.
crop that (...) there then on is, and that land for his days at Berwick (...)
which he obtained of his Lord Cnute king, and he (...) gives also those lands
at Orpington in his days for (...) his soul to Christ-church to Gods servants
for (...) clothing.
garment land, which he bought with eighty (...) Scrud-land. Hustings weight.
marks of white silver by Hustings weight, and he gives (...) also those lands
at Palstre and at Wittresham after (...) his days and Edwines forth with the
other to Gods (...) servants for foster-land for his soul. This bequest
Foster-land.
(...) he gives to the Covent on this condition.
contract that they (...) ever him well observe, and to him faithful be in
life and (...) after life, and if they by.
with any unadvisednesse with (...) him this condition.
contract shall break, then stands it in (...) his own power how he
afterward his own dispose (...) will. Of this is for witness Cnute King, and
Aelfgife (...) his Lady, and Aethelnoth Archb. and Aelfstan A b. and (...) the
Covent at S. Austines, and Brihtric young and Aetheric (...) husbandman, and
Thorth Thurkilles nephew, and (...) Tofi, and Aelfwine priest, and Eadwold
priest, and all the (...) Kings Counselors, and this writing is tripartite.
threefold, (...) one is at Christ-church, and one at S. Augustines, (...), and
one has Eadsy to.
with himself. (...).

FINIS.
I have perused this learned Treatise of Gavelkynd, and judge it very fit to be
published.

April 7. 1647. Ja. Armachanus.

A Table, or Index OF The principal Contents.
A.
AEHte, what, p. 84 Agium, in the termination of word what signifying, p. 137
Akerland, what, p. 117 Allodiarii, p. 123 Allodium, the same with Bocland, p.
88, 110. the word derived, p. 105. more properly in England since the Conquest,
p. 126. proper only to the King to grant, p. 126 Almesland, what, p. 119
Assise of Mortdancester, where it lies, p. 152, 157 Aver-bred, what, p. 25
Aver-land, what, p. 116 Avermannus, p. 116
B.
Bed-rip, what, p. 17 Bene-bred, what, p. 17 Beneficium, of same signification
anciently, that Feudum of latter times, p. 10^ Benerth, what, p. 18 Ben-rip,
what, p. 17 Bere-gafol, what, p. 29 Ber-land, what, p. 118 Bermannus, what, p.
118 Bians, what, p. 18 Black-maile, what, p. 34 Black-rents, what, p. 34
Blank-ferme, what, p. 34 Bocland, what, p. 84. whence so called, p. 112. how
variously denominated, p. 121 whether anciently deviseable, p. 89. whether
otherwise alienable, p. 87, 88. the same with Allodium, p. 8, 110. retained
after the Conquest, p. 120 Bordarii, p. 118 Bord-land, what, p. 114, 118
Bordmanni, p. 118 Burgh-yard, what, p. 22, 189 Bydel, what, and whence derived.
p. 20
C.
Mr. Cambdens derivation of Gavelkynd, p. 3 Carropera, p. 24 Carucae procariae
what, p. 18 roga^ae, p. 19 Carucage, what, p. 133 Charters, diverse of those in
Ingulphus questioned, and how far, and why, p. 101 Chivalry and Socage, two
tenures comprehending all the lands in Kent, and elsewhere in England, p. 129
Cniht, in the Saxon language, what, p. 7 Coke, Sir Edward, his derivation of
Gavelkynd, p. 3 The Conquerours progress and proceedings after his victory
near Hastings, p. 69. his Charter of Restitution of Church Lands, p. 68
Conquest, the times about it very rapacious, p 67 Contract of marriage, a Saxon
form or model of it, p. 75, 76 Coredy, what, p 19, 20 Corne-gavel, what, p. 16
Corporations, anciently en^eoffed with lands in Gavelkind, p. 8 Cotarii, what,
p. 116. their tenements changed into Gavelkind, p. 59 Cotland, what, p. 116
Cotmani, what, ibid. Custom, hardly left, p. 5. beginning within memory no
Custom, ibid. of Gavelkynd, a common law in Kent, p. 44 its essential property,
p. 49. how different from Tenure, p. 144 Cyricena-Socne, what, p. 133
D.
De rationabili part bonorum, the Writ so called whether lying at the Common
Law, or by Custom? p. 78, 91 Dome, in the termination of words, what
signifying, 106 Dover- castle the Lock and key of all England, p. 70 Drenches,
what, p. 124 Drincelean, what, p. 29 Drof-dens, what, p. 117 Drof-land, what,
p. 116 Drof-mannus, what, ibid Dun-land, what, p. 117
E.
Error, if settled, difficult to remove, p. 62. often caused for want of
altercation. ibid. Estates, in England universally partible before the
Conquest, and how, p. 77, 78 Ex gravi querela, the Writ so called, where it
lies, 153, 159
F.
Fald-Socne, what, p. 134 Fald-worth, what, ibid. Fee, not alienable without
the Lords consent, p. 8. whether anciently deviseable, p. 84 naturally not
deviseable, and why, p. 162 Fees, whether any in England before the Conquest,
p. 103, 111. become patrimonial in many places, p. 162. what in their original,
p. 108. how changed afterward, ibid. Females, capable of succession in
Gavelkynd- land, p. 7. excluded from succession with Males, p. 8 Feudastra,
what, p. 57 Feuduto, novum, and antiquum, p. 40 Feudum, the word how ancient,
p. 101, 102. derived, p. 104 Fewd ( in deadly fewd) whence derived, p. 107 Fief
de Haubert, and de Roturier, p. 36 Filctale, what, p. 30 Fildale, what, ibid.
Fines for the enfranchising of lands, p. 59 Fird-socne, what, p. 174 Fodrum,
what, p. 25 Folcland, the nature of it, p. 78 See also p. 114, 126. Folgarii,
what, p. 115 Foot-average, what 116 Forgable, what 30 Forland, what 118
Forsohoke 31 Foster-land, what, 119 Francus bancus 51, 178 Frankalmoigne, p 40,
142 Frank-fee 56 Freehold, whether anciently deviseable, 84 Frith-socne, what
133
G.
Gabella, what p. 13 Gablum, what, p. 13. terram pon^^e gablum, what, 14
Gabulum denariorum 26 Gafel, gafol, gafnl, gavel, what signifying 10 Gafolgylda
33 Gafol-hwitel ^6 Gaigneurs, what 25 Gavel absurdly rendered gifeeal in many
compounds, 10 Gavelate, what 31 Gavel-bred, what 25 Gavel-bord, what 22
Gavel-corne, what 16 Gavel-dung, what 21 Gavel-erth, what 17 Gavelet what 31
Gavel-fother, what 25 Gavelikendeys 33 Gavelkynd, the words vulgar derivation
proposed, page 2. scanned, p. 6. rejected, ibid. a new etymon proposed and
asserted, p. 10. the Custom so called a Common Law in Kent, p. 44. not causal
of Partition in land so called, p. 44. what it comprehends, p. 48. the tenure
so called almost universal in Kent, p. 44. whether eo nomine obteining in
Wales, p. 53. whether a Tenure or a Custom, p. 100. Prescription in it not
good, and why, p. 44 whether Socage and it Synonimies, p. 55. Grants of land in
Gavelkynd, p. 38. when ceasing, p. 51. See more in Partition, Villains.
Gavelkynd- land, females capable of it, p. 7. the nature of it, in point of
partition, scanned, p. 42. no prescription good there, and why, p. 46. liable
to Works, p. 57. whether deviseable in Kent before the Stat. of Wills, p. 151.
descendible to collateral kindred, p. 7. anciently conveyed to Gilds and
Corporations, page 8. alienable from the proper heir, p. 9. all partible land
not called Gavelkynd, p. 10. Gavelman p. 33 Gavel-med, what 20 Gavel-noh^, what
25 Gavel-ote, what 21 Gavel-refter, what 22 Gavel-rip, what 19 Gavel-rod, what
22 Gavel-sester, what 23 Gavel-swine, what 23 Gavel-timber, what 22 Gavel-werk,
what 24 Gavel-wood, what 23 Ge, how used with the Sa^ons, p. 38 Gecynde,
mis-construed by Mr. Lambard, 37 Geneat, what 14 Gersuma, what 59 Grants of
land in Gavelkynd, when ceasing 51
H.
Hade, head, hode, hood, etc. in the termination of words what signifying 106
Haereditaments, what 83 Hamso^ne, what 134 Hereslit, what, and whence derived,
32 Hide land, what 117 Hlaford-so^ne, what 134 Horse-average, what 116 Hotchpot
91 Hunig-gavel, what 28
I.
In-average, what 116 Ingulfus Charters, many of them questioned, and how far,
and why 101 Inheritance, the word how accepted in England, 83, 84.
Inheritances, in England universally partible before the Conquest, and how, 77,
78 Inland, what 114, 119
K.
Kent, with other Counties conquered and overrun by Will. 1. p. 66. Servi
there, p. 74. also Nativi, 75 Kind, in Dutch, what, and whence derived p. 6, 7
Knecht in Dutch, what 7 Knight service-land naturally incapable of partition 48
Knyghren-gyld 135 Knights, whether any here in England before the Conquest 123
Kind, in Gavelkynd of what signification 37
L.
Mr. Lambard his twofold derivation of Gavelkynd, p. 3. whereof one rejected,
the other admitted, p. 5. mistaken in the construction of gecynde 37 Land, all
in Kent and thorowout England, either of Chivalry or Socage Tenures, p. 38. all
in England, either ancient Demesne, or Frank fee, p. 57. and subject to Tenure,
126. descended, not alienable of old without the heirs consent, 39. purchased,
alienable at pleasure, ibid. censual, not censual, 35. how many several kinds
of land before the Conquest, 114. as also since 115 Landagendman, what 15
Land-boc, what 112 Land-gabel, what 15 Land-gafol, what ibid. Leaf-gavel, what
p. 27 Lef-silver, what ibid. Les-gavel, what ibid. Les-gold, and Les-yeld, what
ibid. Liberum feodum, what 56 Lyef-geld, what 27
M.
Mailer, what p. 34 Mailman, what ibid. Mail-payer, what ibid. Mala, what ibid.
Malt-gavel, what 27 Malt-peny, what ibid. Malt-shot, what ibid. Manopera, what
24 Mete-gavel, what 31 Mirroir, the book so called, censured 104 Molland, what
117 Molmannus, what ibid. Monday-land, what 120 Mortdancester, the Assise so
called, where it lies, 152, 157 Mortmaine, what, 40. the tenure of it double
ibid.
N.
Names, to be suitable with things very convenient, 11 Nativi in Kent 75
Neatland, what 114 Nidering, alias Nithing, a nickname of what signification,
and whence derived, 65
O.
Oale-gavel, what 24 Ordericus Vitalis, his relation of the Conquerors
proceedings and progress after his victory near Hastings, p 71 Ordinary, his
power of d^stributing Intestates goods here in England, when beginning, as also
in Scotland, and Normandy 79 Over-land, what 119 Out-average, what 116
P.
Parceners, how many sorts, 42 Paroc, what 23 Partition, in Gavelkynd- land,
neither from the name, nor nature of it only, 44. nor from prescription, 46.
but partly from the nature of it, and partly from custom, and what, 47. the
antiquity of it, 61. whether inherent in the land, 247, 150. why more general
in Kent than elsewhere, 52, 61. whether brought hither by Odo out of Normandy,
61, 81. whether continued there by composition with the Conqueror 62
Partition, but one property or branch of Gavelkynd, 48, 146. out of Kent whence
obteining ibid. and 54 Partition of goods 79 Peny-gavel, what 26 Some Phrases
in Ingulphus ancient Charters questioned p. 101 Pictavensis his relation of the
Conquerors proceedings and progress after his victory near Hastings, 69.
himself the Conquerours Chaplain, and an eyewitness ib. Portfoc^, what 135,
136 Portsoken, what 135 Potura, what 29 Prescription not good in Gavelkynd, and
why 44
R.
Rationabili part bonorum, 78, and 91 Redditus, albi, what, 34. nigri* what,
ib. Restitution, a Charter of it by the Conqueror 68 Rip-silver, what 19
Rochester- Castle besieged by Will. 2. 64 Rod-land, what 117 Romney, the
Conquerours passage by it in his march to Dover 69
S.
Contract of marriage in Saxon, 75. the edition of it corrected, 76. Several
wills in Saxon 85 Scip, ship, in the termination of words, what signifying, 106
Scotale, what 29 Scrude-land, what p. 119 Seisin, how delivered in the Saxons
times 112 Servi in Kent 74 Servitus rusticana 127 Sextary-land, what 119
Smithesland, what 118 Soca, Socha, Soke, Sokne, what 133, 137 Socage, free and
base, 55. the derivation of the word, and what it signifies, 129. whether it
and Gavelkynd Synonima's, 55. its original, 127. opposite to Villenage, 139
Socage-land and service, so called elsewhere, in Kent termed Gavelkynd 49
Socagium, the distinction of it into liberum and villanum, whence 141 Socmanni
137 Sokerevi 134 Sokmanry 137 Spelman Sir Henry, his derivation of Gavelkynd 3
Spots story (of the Kentishmens encounter and composition with the Conqueror)
exhibited, questioned, refuted, 63. a mere monk^sh ^igment, and why devised,
71. when he lived, 64. his commixture of falsity, 63 Stigand the Archbishops
deposing for opposing the Conqueror, not warranted by ancient story 75
Sul-aelmesse, what 132 Swilling-land, what 117 Swine-gavel, what 23
Swine-money, what ib. Swine-paneges, what ib. Swinhey, what 190
T.
Tainland, 121 Tenure, all land in England subject to it, 126. how different
from Custom, 144 Tenure, 1 by Divine service, 2 in Frankalmoigne, 3 in Fee
ferm, 4 by Petite Sergeanty, 5 by Escuage certain, 6 in Burgage, all Socage,
and whence, 130, 141 Tenure in Mortmaine twofold 40 Tenures in Chivalry and
Socage, all lands both in Kent, and elsewhere throughout England reducible to
one or the other of them 129 Tenures, in Gavelkynd new created, 9. what before
the Conquest 112 Terra ad gablum posita, what 14 Terrae censuales, what 36
Terra, haereditaria, 84. libera, 58, 84. susanna, 118. testamentalis, 84, 86.
unde nemini respondetur, 120 Thegenes, 1^3 Theines, p. 123 Threnges ibid.
Tol-sester, what 24 Truth often lost by too much altercation 62 Twy-gavel, what
28 Twy-sket, what ibid.
V.
Verstegan, his derivation of Gavelkynd 3 Villani in Kent 73 Villenage opposite
to Socage, 139 Villeine- services when first ceasing so generally in Kent 58
Villeine and Villenage in England in the Saxons time, 66. in Kent since the
Conquest, 72. and in Gavelkynd- land, 73. as also before the Conquest 75
Vilienagium privilegiatum, 141 Unlandagend, what 1^ Utland 114
W.
Wareland, what 118 Weilreif, what 65 Were-gavel, what 28 Werk-gavel, what 26
Werk-land 57 White-rents, what 34 Wills in Saxon 85 Wood-gavel, what 26 Words
in Ingulphus more ancient Charters, a sort of them questioned 101 Work-land,
what 115 The Writ, De rationabili part bonorum, whether lying at the Common
Law, or by Custom? 78, and 91 The Writ of Ex gravi querela, where it lies,
153, 159
Y
Yoke-land, what 117
FINIS.

