SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON OCCASION of the Publishing their MAJESTY'S LETTERS.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1645.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Upon Occasion of the publishing their Majesty's LETTERS.
SVCH is the unhappy engagement of many People in this Kingdom; such the
Nature of most men, That what is written to detract from Princes, or great men,
shall ever find an easier belief, then what is rationally offered, to defend
them against Aspersions. So as it might seem a vain thing, to declare a
private man's Opinion, concerning the intercepted Letters of the King, since the
Preface says, He must be a Papist, the worst of men, or a Jesuit, the falsest
of Papists, that would defend them.

Well! Let it find belief as it will, He is neither Papist nor Jesuit that
dares say, If there be not forgery in some part of the King's Letters, (for a
word or two varied, or omitted, may make a new matter) yet the inferences on
them, are neither perspicuous, nor modest. The Letters not unworthy a Prince
Defendor of the Faith, against whom so dangerous and causeless a Rebellion was
then in it is height, threatening both to his Government, and to the Protestant
Profession of the Christian Religion in this Kingdom, an utter ruin. I Will say
no more: But we know the Spyder sucks a poisonous juice cut of the same flower
a Be does Honey. Inquire into thy own nature, as well as these Letters, and
see if thou had had either a Christian or a Moral Spirit, whether these
short Observations following were not more natural out of those Letters, then
those published.

Look then upon these Letters as the truest Mirour of the King's mind; Here you
may say He was not drawn, but He showed himself to the life: So as the worst
of men cannot but confess, here is the worst of the King. And if it be so
(without any Flattery, which Princes in an imbroyl'd condition are not much
troubled with, for they are usually commended, or dispraised by Excesses) see
what is unworthy of Him in all that has passed from Him.

Will you see Him in His Religion, to Her, who by all your former Declarations
must be understood to have corrupted Him in that which He professed; yet in
Cipher it is Page 8th. I need not tell thee what Secrecy this business
requires, yet this I will say that this is the greatest point of confidence I
can express to thee: for it is no thanks to me to trust thee in any thing
else, but in this, which is the only thing of difference in opinion betwixt Us.
What? is the King so found a Protestant? Surely we have much slandered his
footsteps then: And he is the Lord's Anointed. We know the nature of the
Crime, and such a Crime there is: For how heinous is it now to flounder the
pretended House of Commons; or both Houses called the Parliament in this
usurped Authority. From the syncerity of my heart I profess it I conceive,
were the rest of the passages in the Letters, as ill as they are descanted and
paraphrazed upon, this might wipe off much of the sully.

But let us examine whether it be the natural coulor of the things, or the ill
humor in our sight, that makes them of the ill dye, and hue they are
represented. What is this great Secrecy, lets read the words. It is
presumption, not piety so to trust to a good Cause, as not to use all law full
means to maintain it, what ver is proposed, I find it is conceived law full:
I have thought of one means more to furnish thee with for my assistance then
hither to thou have had, (what not hitherto?) It is that I give thee power to
promise in my name to whom thou think fit, that I will take away all the
Penal Laws against the Roman Catholic, in England, as soon as God shall
enable me to do it: So as by their means (you see it is a Bargain, not a
Favor) or in their favors, I may have so power full assistance as may deserve
so great a favor and in able me to do it. Here comes the great and popular
Charge. Here say the three Orations to my Lord Major etc. And the Annotations
Printed at the end of these Letters, so Laws shall be repealed by force. The
King who has so often declared, and protested against Papists, now dispensing
with them. How agrees this with the title of Defendour of the Faith, etc.

An ill Rhetorician to a misaffected and ignorant People may make this seem
very odious: But to rational men (and I am confident many that could not find
out reason, will understand it when it is laid before them) I offer this that
follows,

That true it is, and would it were as received an Opinion, as it is true; That
no man or body politic, may commit a sin for any good that may be pretended
to be procured thereby: So as if this Dispensation were in it self sinful,
then for no end by the King to have been granted. But this Dispensation of
Penal Laws is but a forbearance of punishment, which certainly by all Learned
men is granted, Gro. de Iu. Bell. and Pac. C.
Princes may nay ought to do, when the exercising of Justice may be the breach
of Charity and other Virtues, that is, when for punishing some Rebels strong
and too well backed, He must wage a War that may be the destruction of many
of His Loyal Subjects.

Thus you see Princes, on whom Societies depend, may be rather charitable to
many, then just on few.

So the State of the Question will be this,

A Prince in his Government is like to be undermined: And the established
Religion of the Kingdom He professes, and is resolved to maintain (for sure
none will say now that the King is a Papist, or Popishly affected) is by the
power of a Rebellious sort of men like to be altered; A bloody and sharp War
being continued to effect this. To preserve his own Rights, and maintain the
Religion by Law established

The Question is, Whether He may not dispense with Penal Laws against another
Sect, or sort of His Subjects, who by themselves, or Friends may procure Him an
aid to maintain his Government and Religion? Surely I may say, yes.

For 1. If it be not to set up a false Religion, but to lessen Penalties
against it, it is not sinful: specially since it was a necessitated Act in Him
by the Rebellion of his other Subjects, For he approves not of their Religion,
but dispences with freedom of Conscience; And if this be an odious Tenent, sure
there be many think it so only in the King.

2. I will not say which is most Politic, but I believe I may say it is more
Christian to let the Doctrine of Teachers, and the good life of the Disciples
convert men to the purity of Profession, then the Coercive power.

3. If a stranger be not procured to resist this Rebellion, Then necessarily
the King must be dethroned, Religion established altered, or the War in the
Kingdom continued (if not both) for none ever saw quiet times after so great
Innovations. Now which were better, That a King should let all His Subjects be
imbrueing their hands in each others Blood, or by calling in Assistance, by
dispencing with Penalties against (still to be remembered, not setting up) one
sort of his Subjects, happily procure a Peace to all?

For if he had been considerably strong, peradventure His Rebels would not
need to have been fought with, but by Treaty have made a Peace secure, though
not pleasing to all. If they would not, were it not far better, He had power
to reduce them?

Lastly, can it be heinous in Him, to call Foreign friends to his assistance,
who has his own Subjects of this Kingdom, and others (though Subjects to Him,
yet Forraigners to the Kingdom) in the bowels of the Kingdom invading Him, and
sooyling His Subjects?

Besides, when is it that He promises this ultima Ratio Regis, but in March
last? Nay it was a secret then to Her, who was conceived the Cabinet of all His
secrets; so as I may say, it entered not into His heart till danger showed it
Him, or He kept it for a Reserve, that he would not part with if he could save;
Cursed be those that put the necessity on Him.

For the objection, how this suits with Defendor of the Faith, surely nothing
clearer; For it is to enable himself to defend the Religion professed. That
title leads Him, as much as He can to make all His Kingdom of one belief: But
rather to leave unpunisht diverse Professions, then let that established perish.

That this is the true case nothing clearer.

For see whether the Propositions of the Houses, either to take the Sword (not
his Militin alone, but also his Judicature) into their power, or the altering
the government of the Church, be demands upon the old Foundations or Laws of
this Kingdom; or rather upon new desires, of a sort of men, ambitious both to
reign over their King and fellow Subjects. If both Innovation, as without any
controversy they are, then is the case truly stated: And if so, sarewell the
Peace of this Kingdom, for the Question will not, nor can be, What is, But what
to the then Members of Parliament seems best. And if the King will not consent
to it; as now, so ever hereafter, a War may be levied. Poor Countrymen,
would you could distinguish betwixt Pretenses and Realities, that you might not
thus court your own Ruin, and call that Courtship, or Flattery to your Prince,
which is defense of Magna Charta, and consequently of your Peace. For grant
once, the present Laws of a Kingdom may be altered, by any other way then
they were made, you shall never have a Parliament, but you may justly fear a
War. But let the King have his just Rights of denying what he thinks unfit,
and the Houses theirs of tendting what they think fit, and the old splendour and
Peace of this Kingdom may be restored.

The second Observation is,

That in all the Letters, it is manifest, the King sincerely sought by His
Treaties, the Peace of his Subjects, and that he made the Laws in being, the
Standard or rule to measure it by. Nay the Queen is as earnest for it as any
one: A Peace that might not last, is that which both of them only fear.

First observe, In all this secrecy of Letters, there is not one Word, that
expresses the making use of the Treaty to any other end, then procuring Peace,
which as it shows the Kings integrity; so it manifest; the Queens innocence;
For had she been contrarily affected, the King would have used arguments to
have induced her thereunto. Read then what He says of it, what she says.

First in respect of the averseness of those at London to Peace, He is forced
to use dexterity in procuring a Treaty: you see then from whom the Treaty
moved; Therefore proposes His own coming up to London: And you see this is no
delusion, for the Queen Page 31. Startles at it, as being by Her supposed
probably of much danger to His Majesty's Person. But alas that She is careful
of Her Husband, will be anon objected to be Her fault, but not one of those
that I think worthy to Answer.

Nay, observe whether she be against it. She only tells Her thought (and has
had too just ground to suspect) If you trust to these People you are lost, etc.
Page 20. She declares, I wish a Peace more then any, and that with greater
reason. The short of all Her meaning is in page 30. J have nothing to say, but
that You have a care of Your Honor, and that if you have a Peace, it may be
such a one as may hold. A Peace with the Kings Honor (who from the beginning
desired no new thing, or any of that glorious greatness promised) and such a
one as might last, are very ill wishes, or they very ill men that interpret
them so. Nay observe in the same Letter She writes concerning Catholics, and
you will find She knew not what the King might resolve: for there is no such
dangerous influence from Her Majesty on the King, as the People must believe:
For (says she) in my opinion Religion should be the last thing upon which You
Treat: Why? For if You do agree upon strictnes against the Catholics (then
for ought she knew, it might be) it would discourage them to serve You. Look
upon page 11. And you will read the ways the King has used to come to a Treaty,
and the Grounds. These His Majesty sets down, how His whole party are
strangely impatient for Peace (where are His evil Counselors then, unless
advising Peace, be one evidence of it) What does the King upon this? Is it to
comply with them? No, His Answer is, Which obliged me so much the more to show
my real intentions thereunto. If you read on, you will find the King takes notice
of Factions among you: What use does He make of it, or what hope? I am put in
good hope (some holds it a certainty) that if I could come to a fair Treaty,
the ring-leading Rebels could not hinder me from a Peace. Sure then it is
plain, the Treaty was only sought to procure Peace. Nay page 2. See Whether
the King be not ready to resume the Treaty after it was broken (so certainly it
was left at your doors) and to make the Queen the means of it, so he were
satisfied but of a willingness to yield to reason. Nay before I part with
this, I Will desire you but to remember who were the Treaters, Men of great
Honor and Integrity, and to the end they might have all freedom, observe but
their Oath; and how strictly it bound them, from certifying even to His Majesty
the name, though in some cases they might the number of the dissenters. Would
you were in a Constitution and Temper to weigh; I dare say you could not then,
but value His Majesty's Wisdom in the Instructions He gave His Commissioners.
I Will end with these few notes out of them, to let pass the substance of those
Instructions, since my purpose only is, to show how really His Majesty sought a
Peace, how fowly soever He is now traduced.

That He offered, to join in the rectifying abuses, if any have crept into the
Church; Easing tender Consciences etc. Stands not upon giving the Rebels
security by strong Towns, that Articles agreed on should be performed, And
offering some of them rewards or places. Nay in all the Letters, there is not
one word of taking revenge in the future on any Person, which expresses as well
His Majesty's Christian, as generous spirit.

Be not now angry with me, that all this satisfies me of His Majesty's Princely
intentions to His people, and amazes me of your Comments. I cannot say remember
Cham, that discovered his Fathers Nakedness, for that is not your case; you
discover not, you make. There is no Example, But a Prophecy, or a Character of
such men as you, That in these latter times, Many should be Traitors, and speak
evil of Dignities etc. Your present successes, may make you unapt to believe
this, but when the time of Affliction comes, then you may as Solomon says,
Consider; For truly, I divulge this more to justify honest men, who have a
dutiful and reverend opinion of His Majesty's Letters, then with hope to
convert an unreasonable, and obstinate party. Many more instances, there are to
be drawn out of the Kings Letters, but there is a whole Book of the Treaty, and
I love not actum agere.

The next great Objection, Is the Cessation and Peace with Ireland. That also
is at large handled in the said Book, and therefore I shall only touch some
things natural to these Letters.

See then the Reasons, which are chiefly these, page 27. All the World knows,
the imminent and inevitable necessity, which caused me to make the Irish
Cessation. And there remains yet as strong reason for concluding of that
Peace. And page 16. 1. The impossibility of preserving my Protestant Subjects
in Jreland, by a continuation of a War, having moved me to give you these
powers and directions, which I have formerly done etc. 2. Besides it being now
manifest, that the English Rebels have (as far as in them lies) given the
Command of Ireland to the Scots: I think my self bound not to let slip the
means of settling that Kingdom (if it may be) fully under my obedience, nor to
loose that assistance I may hope from my Irish Subjects. Here you may observe,
the necessity lay upon the King; For you had deprived him, of force, either to
save his Protestant Subjects, or to reduce his Popish. Then He saw Jreland, as
a prey given to the Scots; And surely the Irish have (which I hope we shall
never grudge them, since they are His-Majesties subjects, what ever their
Religion is) reason to expect to have His protection. And lastly, His Majesty
saw his Irish Subjects designed as a Conquest for the Scot, and so he knew, he
should not only want that assistance, which in duty the Irish ought to yield
him (for certainly Protestant Princes, may use their Popish Subjects in their
Wars, since none doubt, Christians formerly, could serve Heathen Emperors in
theirs) But by the Scots Conquest of the Jrish, he was also to expect the
Rebellion against Himself so much the more strengthened: Nay, English subjects
might hereafter find the Scots, who now helped them in this Rebellion, when
they should be masters of their own Lands, possessors of so much of ours (for I
doubt few of us shall live to see them wholly outed) so enriched as they are,
by the plunder of this Country, and so strengthened by the footing given them in
Ireland, Would at last be as like to conquer, or give the Law to this Nation,
as they are now ready to assist some of them. And here let me say, since the
King was borne in Scotland, I cannot enough express, how much the English are
bound to Him, for His sense of the honor of this Nation. See how he expresses
it pag^^. The English Rebels (whether basely or ignorantly will be no very
great difference) have as much as in them lier, transmitted the command of
Ireland from the Crown of England to the Scots. Observe what He says in His
Instructions concerning the Scots interest, in the Government of the Militia of
this Kingdom: If the English Rebels will be so base, to admit ten Scots to
twenty English. But this care of the Honor of England, was no new humor, or
distaste toward the present Scots Rebels, for in that Letter, page 34. (so
spitefully printed, but so advantagiously to His Majesty) you see the King is
positive enough with the Question; to whom now the only objection is, that He
is too indulgent: And one part of the quarrel is, She neglects the English
Tongue, and the Nation in general. Behold then upon all Oceasions, how
sensible He is of the Honor of this Nation, who are at present so forgetful
of their Duty to Him, and their Country.

But to return to the business in hand. Mark the King's Offers, conclude a
Peace with the Irish what ever it cost so as my Protestant Subjects there may
be secured, and my Legal Authority preserved. A Fatherly, a Kingly care, one
would think. But for all this, you are to make the best bargain, (still it is a
Bargain, and still it is upon a necessity, and it is still but a Dispensation
with Penal Laws) and not discover your enlargement of power till you needs
must. At last if the suspension of Toinings Act, for such Bills as shall be
agreed on between you there, and the present taking away of the Penal Laws
against Papists by a Law, will do it, I shall not think it a hard bargain.

Poinings Act, (which is known to be a Law, whereby all Acts in Parliament
there, were to be first sent over hither, and confirmed by the King before they
be promulged) is the first. This indeed is a Branch of Royalty, a Flower of the
Crown, and not to be parted with, (certainly) were it not upon such a
necessity, as endangers the being of Sovereignty: True, it was a mark of
Irelands Conquest: and if it were so heinous in my Lord Strafford, to say the
Irish were a Conquered Nation, to the same Persons that were so severe in their
Judgments for that; Can it now be so grievous that a mark of a Conquest should
be wiped out?

The second is, dispensing with the Execution, and afterward Repeal of the
Penal Laws. This has had my observations on it in the first Objection, and
therefore shall not be repeated in this. Only you plainly see, it is a
necessitated dispensing with the punishment of particular Persons: Appeals to
Rome denied; Praemunire must stand in force; In short, Papists may be eased,
Popery not countenanced. Remember who causes the Storm that makes the Merchant
fling his goods over board.

For that Objection that His Majesty hasted the Peace of Ireland, least He
should be preingaged. Surely, considering to whom the War of Ireland was
designed, and both for his own Honor, and this Kingdom of Englands good, It
were better that Realm depended on Him, that is our King; Then the Scots, who
have been our troublesome neighbors ever. And if their hearts were looked
into; (though they have met with an Age has given them better belief) they
have notwithstanding brought in but their old good will to this Nation. The
French paid them heretofore for disturbing our Peace: the Houses at Westminster
buy them in now to have such a footing as may lead them to pretend to more then
they will hereafter spare them.

The Duke of Lorraine's Army is a great and a dangerous discovery. The King of
Denmark being desired to assist: The Prince of Aurange's aid by shipping; All
speak the drawing in of Fortaigne Forces, and this contrary to the many
Quotations of the King's Declarations and Protestations.

They that slight the Answer, know that it is a very substantial one, to say,
Do but distinguish times, and you accord all.

It will be hard to get belief, but known it is how backward the King was,
either to admit Papists into his Army, (not but he knew he might justly make
use of their service, The Protestants of France serving the French King, and
the Hollanders employing Papists in their Wars,) or to call in Foreign
Forces. But when He perceived your obstinacy. How you could dispense with your
own employing Walloon Regiments, and diverse other Papists; How you could have
Collections in Holland, Agents with Fortaigne Princes, Committees in Scotland,
for the two States, as you call them, that sent you in a great Army: Can you
object this to Him, and not think it concerns your Selves? No, you have too
much reason to do it: If you found not that the Common People, and your
interessed Party have so submitted their reason to your Declarations, that if
an implicit belief he rendered to the Chairman at Rome, you think it high
disobedience to be denied any of yours.

If I should in answer of the black Characters you put on your King in His
Government, desire you but to remember, how when you procured a Law, That
contrary it was to the Liberty of the Subject, they should be pressed to the
War, That notwithstanding immediately after Thousands were pressed by your
Ordinances, and how miserably many of them perished you know, and see by their
wretched Widows and Orphans. How when for the Subjects Liberty; Not the King,
not His Council, no Court of Justice could imprison, but the Subject must have
cause shown, and his Habeas Corpus upon demand granted; yet Thousands you
restrained, no cause shown, no admittance to Picad.

If I should mind you how Property was fenced by you, That no Tax could be
laid. Nay, Tonnage and Poundage, must be limited for a few months by a new
Law, and yet in a moment forced from the Subjects without one, As if you made
Laws not to preserve the Subjects Right, but to show your power to break them.
If I should remember you of your Murdering Ordinance, that (where no Law
could) deprived a Reverend Prelate of his Life; Of your Repeal of Statutes, in
the business of the Common Prayer Book, by your Votes, called an Ordinance. Of
your one day declaiming against an Excise, and the next day setting it up; and
many more. What fruit must I, or any other honest Subject look for by your
Government? How can you with any countenance question the King, for not
observing Laws, who think your selves bound by none? Let the Sovereign power
reside where it will, in one, as in this and other Monarchies, or in many, as
in Republiques, Yet every where the Subject may take the benefit of the Law:
And so you may remember we were heretofore admitted to implead the King for
ship-mony, was not the time of Government happy when Subjects Pleas could be
admitted? Had the Law the same freedom now, as then; your Soveraignti's would
soon be disproved, and your Tyrannies made manifest. Well, all I shall say is,
you have your Judge, and He resides in Heaven. The Lord is King, be the People
never so impatient: You shall reckon for your disloyalty to your Sovereign;
for your cruelty and oppression to your fellow Subjects; for your slaundring
the footsteps of Gods Anointed; Even for your Paraphrase upon these Letters,
whose style, and weight of Sense, as well as Integrity and Honor they are
lined with, will rise more in Judgment against you: And I confess, were you
as you ought to be, were a better means to convert you, then all that has
been so weakly, but well-meaningly laid down in these short notes, which
should have been drawn out longer, but that it is believed some Person of
Judgment will declare himself on this Subject, as I have (without ends) my
Duty and Affection to His Majesty's Person and Cause.

FINIS.

