SOME PASSAGES That happened the 9th. of March, between The Kings Majesty and
the Committee of both Houses, When the Declaration was delivered.
HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE



WHen His Majesty heard that part of the Declaration which mentioned Master
Iermyms Transportation, His Majesty interrupted the Earl of Holland in
reading, and said, That Is false. Which being afterward touched upon again, His
Majesty then said, It Is a lie. And when he was informed, it related not to the
Date, but the execution of the Warrant. His Majesty said, it might have been
better expressed then, and that it was a high thing to tax a King with breach
of Promise. As for this Declaration, His Majesty said, I could not have
believed the Parliament would have sent me such a one, If I had not seen it
brought by such persons of honor. I am sorry for the Parliament, but glad I
have it: For by that, I doubt not to satisfy my People; though I am confident,
the greater part is so already.

Ye speak of ill Councels, but I am Confident, the Parliament has had worse
informations then I have had Councels, His Majesty asking what he had denied
the Parliament, The Earl of Holland instanced that of the Militia, his
Majesty replied, that was no Bill: the Earl of Holland then said, it was a
necessary request at this time, and his Majesty also then said, he had not
denied it.

What passed the next day, when his Majesty delivered his Answer.
WHich was read by the Earl of Holland to the rest of the Committee, And that
being done His Lordship endeavored to persuade his Majesty to come near the
Parliament. Whereunto his Majesty answered, I would you had given me cause,
but I am sure this Declaration is not the way to it. And in all Aristotle's
Rhetorickes there is no such Argument of perswation. The Earl of Pembroke
thereupon telling him that the Parliament had humbly besought his Majesty to
come near them aforesaid. His Majesty replied, He had learnt by our
Declaration, that words were not sufficient. His Majesty being then again
moved by the said Earl of Pembroke to express what he would have said. He
would whip a Boy in Westminster School that could not tell that by his answer.
And further said, They were much mistaken, if they thought his answer of that,
a denial. And being also asked by the said Earl of Pembroke, Whether the
Militia might not be granted, as was desired, by the Parliament, for a time.
His Majesty swore, By God, not for an hour; you have asked that of me in this,
was never asked of a King, and with which I will not trust my Wife and Children.

His Majesty said, The Business of Jreland will never be done in the way that
you are in, Four hundred will never do that Work. It must be put into the
hands of One. If I were trusted with it, I would pawn my head, to end that
Work. And though I am a beggar my self, yet (speaking with a strong
asseveration) I can find Money for that. London, Printed for William Gaye, 1642.


