ENGLANDS FRIEND Raised from the GRAVE.

Giving seasonable Advice To the Lord General, Lievtenant-Generall, And the
Council of War.


Being the true copies of three LETTERS, WRITTEN BY Mr. JOHN SALTMARSH, A
little before his Death.

HEB. 11. 4. He being dead yet speaks.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle at the West end
of Paul's. 1649.

To the Reader.
THese Letters were written, and sent according to the superscriptions, by the
Author a little before his departure; they might have continued in silence, as
they have done ever since, but providence has otherwise disposed, through the
desire of many friends; and you have them truly printed according to the
original copies.

Mary Saltmarsh.

For his EXCELLENCY the Lord FAIRFAX.
Noble Sir,
GOd having raised me up from the power of the grave, though he has not made
known to me yet, what further use he has of me, but I wait on him whom I have
found to be my God, both in sickness and health. Sir, at present I am pressed in
spirit to write to you, and I yet know no other but it is from the Spirit of
God. There is a mighty noise of unrighteousness and injustice in the
proceedings at your Councels as to the Kingdom: And truly Sir, this not in most
Counties only amongst the people, but amongst the choicest, and the
conscientious Christians: the hearts of good people are departed from you very
much, and from your Army and Counsels: And Sir, whatsoever you or others may
think and persuade your selves, yet I am thus free to speak, that God has at
present brought a dark cloud over you, and the Lord show you a way out of it,
which is presented to me to be this only way, stop not the breathings of God
in mean private Christians; the counsels of God flow there, when the greater
persons sometimes (for his glory) are left naked without a word of advice from
him. I found this desolating evil beginning in your meetings. Be faithful to
your engagements for Justice to the Kingdom: you have many, and you promised
speedy redress of many things. Consider and compare in the light of God
impartially, how your first principles, and public promises and proceedings
answer each other: and where you have been unrighteous, delatory, or
unfaithful, be not discouraged speedily to depart out of those tents, least
God overtake you with a dispensation of more righteousness, and judge you.

Sir, the cries, the tears, the prayers of the oppressed and afflicted, and
the departing of many of Gods people in their hearts from you, are and will b^
burdensome stones, and cups of trembling. The Lord direct you in this your day,
that you may not depart from your first love, lest he who is the holy One, the
just One, the God blessed for ever, come against you with the spirit of his
mouth. Sir, I have little more to write, the Lord having discharged me of this
burden, which was as fire in my bones: And truly the shadows that some
Counsels of the flesh have brought upon this Army lately, has reached to the
darkening of all professing Christians in the Kingdom, in the hearts of the
people of the Kingdom: for, where should redress come (will they think) if
not from such as profess higher godliness then others?

Sir, Your Servant, John Saltmarsh.
From Laystreet in Essex, from M. Waddis house.
For Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell.
SIR,
I Have found the Lord appearing of late in my weak estate, and I cannot but
from these sweet shinings of his desire, to behold the like and more glorious
in those who are called to greater actions. Sir, it is the voice of people, but
that which sounds loudest is the voice of choice, and spiritual desiring
Christians, that your proceedings have much injustice, great delays, and the
hearts of many good people are turning from you, as you are in these ways, you
are much accused of unfaithfulness to solemn Engagements: Sir, I was moved
long since, you may remember, to tell you what would follow in stopping the
breathings of God in private and poor Christians, and I must tell you, and I
know other, but it is the voice of the Lord in me, that I observe you and some
others to begin an estrangement to such who were godly, honest and spiritual,
and to avoid discourse and communion with them: Me thinks I see in the light of
God a black cloud over some of you in the Army, and I am satisfied in spirit,
that there are great transgressions amongst you against public Justice and
Righteousness; behold, and you shall see before ye the Rock against which both
King and Parliament were dashed, and truly Sir, by what I see in your
proceeding, and hear of your Counsels by honest men, some of ye hasten in the
flesh to the same distress. Sir, break off this sin by righteousness, return
to your communion with Christians, let not the wisdom of the flesh entice you
under the disguise of Christian prudence, for that wisdom is not from above
which is not pure and easy to be entreated; run not to the old shifts of the
flesh in these your times of straight, lean not on Egypt, or any imaginary
strength which is not of God, if the Lord in his goodness and wisdom will have
some of your former glory which was his, and you might through temptation think
your own, to perish: be not ashamed of the fiery trial, but close in with that
which has most of God in it, do you not hear an oppressed and afflicted
Kingdom crying out to ye? believe it Sir, all professing Christians in all
places will suffer what evil is done by ye, the Lord show you wherein you have
counseled in flesh, neglected Christians, delayed Justice, failed in public
Engagements, neglected or grieved some afflicted Christians whom you should
have comforted, and then peace, glory, and excellent power will appear in you,
and Christians will bless God in you, whilst you walk in that more pure
administration: and Sir know, that you in your person will enjoy most of the
good or evil that shall follow; Sir, God powers out fresh abilities freely and
of mere grace, even rivers and streams of life in such weak vessels of his as
we are, and at this fountain I desire you may now live.

SIR, Your Servant, John Saltmarsh.

For the Council of War.
Honorable,
NOt to repeat to ye the sad outcries of a poor Notion for Justice and
righteousness, the departure of the hearts of many Christians generally from
you, the late testimonies of some in your own bowels, the withdrawing of that
Glory the Lord formerly clothed ye withal, but this I know ye have not
discharged your selves to the people, in such things as they justly expected
from ye, and for which ye had that Spirit of righteousness first put upon ye,
by an Almighty Power, and which carried you on upon a conquering wing: the
wisdom of the flesh has deceived and enticed, and that glorious principle of
Christian Liberty which we advanced in at first, (I speak as to Christians)
has been managed too much in the flesh.

Now if the Lord has opened to any of ye the unsoundnesse of any principles
then, or in the management of them, I hope he will show ye a better course and
path to walk in, and now ye are met in Council, the Lord make ye to hearken to
one another from the highest to the meanest, that the Voice of God wheresoever
it speaks, may not be despised; and think it no shame to pass over into more
righteous Engagements: that Wisdom which is from above is easy to be
entreated, look over your first Engagements, and compare them with your
proceedings, that you may see what you have done, what you must do; I know it
is unsavory to nature to be accused or taxed, but I hope there will be found
that Spirit in you, that will esteem the wounds of a friend better then the
kisses of an enemy. I write I know to such who in their first love were a
people loving God, and his appearances in the meanest Christian, and such as
pursued the good and happiness of the Kingdom cordially: and if the Lord has
not thought to take off the Spirit of righteousness from ye, and put it upon
another people, he will give you to discern this last temptation wherein
Satan has desired to winnow ye, and ye shall be a Diadem once more in the
hands of the Lord: For my self, as I am my self, there is neither wisdom nor
counsel in me, but if the Lord has breathed on my weakness for your sakes, I
shall rejoice in that mercy and grace of his. I rest,

Yours in all righteous Engagements, John Saltmarsh.
Laystreet October. 28.
FINIS.

