THE BUCOLICKS OF BAPTIST MANTUAN IN TEN ECLOGUES.

Translated out of Latin into ENGLISH, BY THO: HARVEY Gent.

Hor. de Art. Poet. Nec verbum Verbo curabis reddere --

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1656.

TO The most Accomplished and Incomparable, The LADY URANIA, Divinest of the
Nine Sisters The MUSES.
Exquisite Lady,
WHose singular Perfections are sublimed beyond your Sex; Because the
Dedication of Books is almost out of fashion with us ( Augustus and Moecenas
being long since extinct) and few favorers of Learning (especially divine
Poesy) surviving, except your noble self, I have presumed to dedicate to your
hand and Patronage, the Version of those Juvenalia, composed by the
(women-displeasing) Poet Mantuan, and by him disposed into Ten Eclogues. And
although (perhaps) I might have found some eminent Ladies for my Patronesses
nearer home, yet very few I doubt (scarce one of a thousand) but would have
conceived themselves so deeply concerned in the fourth Eclogue, that these my
labors must have despaired of any benign aspect from them. But your Excellent
self (inhabiting another Region, soaring on the top of Pernassus, and rarefied
with the Sovereign Influence of that perfumed Air) is so free from Passion,
clear in Judgment, and candid in Censure, that I nothing doubt of your
Acceptance, Protection and Pardon. To you therefore (my tutelary Patroness) I
dedicate these my Labors, which under your Name and Patronage shall be
transmitted unto the courteous acceptance of the benevolent Reader,

BY Your La: most humble Servant, Tho: Harvey.

TO THE LEARNED AND JUDICIOUS, Sir Marmaduke Lloyd KNIGHT.
SIR,
IT was mine hap (rather happiness) not long since to present you with the Poet
Mantuan accoutred in his own weeds and language. I then told you my desire to
render him in English: It is now done; and represented to your judicious view:
Whence it is derived to the Reader,

BY Your humble Servant, Tho: Harvey.

TO THE READER in general.
Generous Reader,
I Here present to thy perusal the Ten Eclogues of the Poet Mantuan; wherein
are many remarkable passages, as well Divine as Moral, not found (perhaps) in
any other Author of this kind: All which I leave unto thy judicious
observation in reading over the Book it self. For I love not to prejudice the
matter by a too tedious Epistle, which dulls the appetite, and defers
expectancy: Both which I dislike in my self and others. Yet at present, for
avoiding of violent Censures and virulent aspersions, which some women (not
half so candid as many of their Sex) might perhaps blurre me with for this my
labor; give me leave (for this once only to enlarge my self a little by way
of Apology, That in some sort I may vindicate the Author and my self (his
Interpreter) for being so (seeming) Satyrically invective against that Sex in
the fourth Eclogue. For I would not that either of us should be mistaken:
Because I (charitably) suppose, that the Author did not thunder out those
Epithetes in that Eclogue against All women in general, but against Ill women
in particular. Howsoever, for mine own part, I clearly declare, That I publish
this Version of these Eclogues, with this animadversion to the Reader, That I
do it neither invectively against, nor with prejudice to any woman whatsoever,
(for I honor the Sex.) But I could not dismember the Book, by leaving out that
fourth Eclogue; neither was it necessary I should: For I am confident, That no
discreet or virtuous woman will frown upon me or it. And if any other should, I
thus answer for my self. That I intend not All, but Ill women. And as
Contraries compared are more illustrated; so the dispraise of a vicious woman
is a praise to the virtuous. That insatiable prostitution of Faustina did, and
does with greater luster exemplify the chastity of Lucretia. But if any
self-willed woman be displeased hereat, I wish, That she would first reform her
self (and then she is none of the number intended by the Poet) before she
censure the Author or me: Otherwise she concludes her self one of the Poets
Catalogue. And having thus (with what convenient succinctness I could)
apologiz'd for us both, I commend the Book to thy reading and civil
acceptance, submitting it to thy benevolent and candid construction:
Subscribing also my self to be

Thy well-wishing friend, Tho: Harvey.

TO The Candid and Intelligent Women Readers.
LADIES,
THat rather unto Women, then to Men
I dedicate these issues of my Pen,
I must Apologize ere I begin,
For Feeminines are most concerned therein;
Their Loves, their Passions, their Infirmities
Too much disclosed to supercilious eyes.
Yet (Ladies) be not angry, nor the Book
With Prejudice or Passion overlook.
There Is something in it worth your best regard;
All Women are not censured by the Bard,
Ill Women only: These illustre those,
As Foiles the Diamonds, or as Thorns the Rose.
The honourer of your Virtues, Tho: Harvey.

THE ECLOGUES OF BAPTIST MANTUAN
Englished by Tho: Harvey.
ECLOGUE I. Treating of honest Love and its happy success Entitled FAUSTUS.
The Argument.
Here Fortunatus does desire
To talk of Love: his reasons why.
Faustus assents; declares his fire,
His Bride and Epithalamy.
The Speakers Fortunatus and Faustus. Fo. I Pray thee Faustus, while the cattle
chew
In the cool shade their cud; let us review
Our former loves? lest idle while we stay,
Or fall asleep, some cruel beasts of prey
Amid the rip'ned Corn that slily creep
Seize on our Cattle: better wake then sleep.

Faust. This place, this tree where-under we reside,
Well knows what cares me grieved, what sires me fried,
Three years, or (as I take it) four years past.
But since thou please, since thou leisure have,
From the beginning (here while we repose)
The Matter and the Manner I Will disclose.
Here on these Plains while I my Cattle fed,
When first Loves flames assailed mine heart-mine head,
Upon my Coat outspread (full many a day)
Cast careless on the ground I cureless lay,
With sighs and tears my sad -- sad fates recounting,
No rest to me, no labor sweet amounting;
Dull were my Senses in my senseless breast,
My restless mind was buried in unrest.
Like sick men's stomachs, whose dull appetite
No Cates to feed, no delicates invite:
My Poesy deceased, no Pipe of mine
Sounded at all; I did my Bow decline:
My Sling was hateful, hateful were my Dogs,
Hateful was Fowling, Nutting; All were clogs.
To weave a twiggen Basket, or with Hook
To catch the Fish, or Sparrows nests to look,
To wrestle, or with fingers up to sport
At Odd or Even (ah) I cared not for it,
Though pleasing one, while I (my self above)
Was uninfected with this sickness, Love.
But irksome are those sports which pleased of late;
To gather Strawberries and Grapes, I hate.
Like Philomel I mourned, when she with food
Returning in her beak to feed her brood,
Finds robbed her Nest, and emptied of her young;
Which seeing, she (poor wretch) with sorrow stung
Lets fall the meat, and sits (as if forlorn)
Right over against her Nest upon some Thorn;
Where, in sad tunes and melancholy tones
Her hapless self, her Mate and young bemones.
Or as when some fair Heifer is bereft
Of her first Calf (which in a Brake she left)
When, after she has ranged the groves, the grounds,
Making them all re echo with the sounds
Of her loud lowing; down she sits alone
In some sad shape at last, and gives a groan,
Careless of food, sitting as if forsook,
Nor eating grass, nor drinking of the brook.
But why with vain circuities am I
So long, so tedious? since I lose thereby
My words, my time, while here and there I glance,
Leaving the Substance for the Circumstance.
The sum is this: I lived against my will.
Now the particulars of this mine ill,
If thou perhaps would know, thou then may say it,
What wind (O Faustus) drove thee to this strait?
My Galla me (for I Will confess the truth
To thee my Fortunatus, dearest youth)
My Galla me with her serener shine,
With her most sweet aspect so did intwine,
So did entangle, as the Spider draws
The captived Fly surrounded in her claws.
For her fair face was ruddy, plump and round:
And though one eye did seem almost unsound;
Yet while I did admire her face, her years,
I said, Diana's beauty lacked of hers.

Fo. Love mocks the Senses, blindes our eyes, beguiles
Our Souls, befools us with bewitching wiles.
I think some Devil, creeping in our veins,
Inflames our hearts, and sets on sire our reins,
Our minds unhingeth, and our thoughts distracts.
Nor is this Love (which thus these things transacts)
A God, as some affirm: I rather guess
It is an Error, and a bitterness.

Fa. Add, that I hopeless was t'injoy my Love,
Though she compassionate and kind did prove;
Though she with signs and glances of her eyes
Expressed her love with mine to sympathize.
For always wheresoere she went, there went
Her married Sister, spy-like always sent;
Her crabbed Mother followed: Thus our fires
Were still opposed with opposite desires;
Like Cat and Rat: This seeks for meat, and that
Quick sighted guards the chinks to catch the Rat.

Fo. Full bellies Fasts commend; and those are worst
Unto the thirsty, that endure no thirst.

Fa. 'Twas Harvest; and full time with crooked hook
To reap the Corn, the fields did yellow look
With ripened Barley: Then (as 'twas their use)
My Galla's Mother did her self produce
With her two Daughters, here and there to glean
What Corn the Reapers had not gathered clean.
For or her Mother knew not of our flame,
Or did dissemble that she knew the same.
I think she did dissemble: For she knew
(Though from her sight my tokens I withdrew)
I gave her Daughter (her good will to get)
A pair of Pigeons, and a Leveret.

Fo. It Is only poverty that does oppose
Good natures and good manners: These and those
It shames; it is too propense for any vice,
And does to wickedness, to sins entice.

Fa. The Maid was gleaning Corn; and, as before,
The more I went, she followed me the more.
Her feet were bare, her bosom loosely dressed,
Her arms half naked, and in all the rest,
Befitting Summers heat she was yclad;
Green boughs in wreath upon her head she had
To shade her from the Sun, lest burned thereby
Her face should less delight a Lovers eye.
Now close behind me, sometimes near my side
She gleaned the Corn, I did of purpose slide.
A woman can nor conquer, nor defer,
Nor hide her love; such levity's in her.

Fo. All Lovers have their levity; nor have
This frailty women only, but the grave,
The great, the wise, they that would seem t'excel
All other mortals, have this fault as well.
They that are clad with Robes of Tyrian dye,
That walk in State, in King-like Majesty.
Affected so thou wast then her more mad,
Perhaps more light: The Maid (no doubt) was glad
To glean the Corn was given her; but thou
Didd'st give the Corn: Speak, who was maddest now?
But on. I must my turn in talking keep,
Lest peradventure else I fall asleep.

Fa. When us her peevish Mother did behold,
She took it ill, and thus began to scold;
Now whither go thou? why do wander from
Thy company? Come hither Galla, come.
Here near these Alders is a cooling shade,
The milder air here gently does invade
The trembling leaves with murmurs (pleasing prate)
Here gentle gales refresh, refrigerate.
O hateful voice unto mine ears (said I)
Go, go ye strongest winds that swiftest fly,
Go with a mischief, and that voice disperse;
If any Shepherd be so much averse,
As when his Sheep to pasture forth he leads,
He would not suffer them to grase the Meads:
Or fed, should drive them to the Rivers brink,
And then deny their thirsty mouths to drink;
Would not, O would not you that Shepherd call
Hard-hearted, merciless, unnatural?
That voice seemed worse to me, then when in ire
Jove rattles out his Thunders mixed with fire;
Or as when angry with our Earth, the Skies
Pour Cataracts of Waters from their eyes.
I could not choose, though loath I was to frown:
The Maid her vail from under (which hung down
Over her eye brows) me beheld the while,
And glanced upon me with a pleasing smile.
Which when her pettish Mother did yken,
She Calla called, Galla she called again.
But on her gleaning, Galla more intent,
Heeds not her words: And as I forward went
She followed, as by steps, so by desire;
I careful then to set her spark on fire,
(For subtle Love with cunning Complements
Vents fine deceits, and pretty frauds invents)
By singing now, and then with hollowing
Chearing the Reapers, I concealed the thing,
That Mother both, and Sister therewithal
Might think that Galla did not hear their call.
I put the Thorns aside, lest they should meet
The Maidens naked legs, and tender feet.

Fo. All Lovers are enslaved, and captived all,
With yielding necks they bear the yoke of thrall:
Their backs bear sharp-sweet stripes, and such as prick,
Oxe-like they draw the Plough, yet never kick.

Fa. I see thou then have something known of Love.

Fo. O it is a Common evil, it does move
In every sphere; the wisest man that is
One time or other has been mad in this.

Fo. This then so bad a good, so sweet a sour
Increased more cruel every day and hour,
Like Titans scorching heat till noon be past.
At length I pallid looked like one aghast,
Like a Lymphatick or a Frantic Ghost,
My Memory, my Sleep at last were lost.
Nor was it difficult my grief to know,
The Face, the Mind, the Look the love does show:
Which when my Father found, he grew more kind
Then was his use: perhaps he called to mind
His own experiments of love, whose fate
Made him another love commiserate.
At length indulgent he thus kindly said,
Tell, Faustus, tell me, speak, be not afraid,
What troubles thee? what thoughts perplex thy breast?
Poor Boy, thy very looks do Love attest;
Come, tell me; nor be bashful to declare
To me thy Father what thy sorrows are.

Fo. Though Fathers to their Sons may seem austere,
Though (supercilious) they may look severe,
Yet ever candid is their mind, their will
Is ever loving and indulgent still.

Fa. When thus my Father had himself expressed,
I fully, freely my desires confessed.
I craved his aid, he promised it; and e're
The Winter frosts did in the fields appear,
My Parents and the Maids consented both,
And her to me did solemnly betroth.
Yet could I not without some witness by
Be near the Maid, or in her company.
Inflamed the while with thirst, I gaping stood,
Like Tantalus amid the Crystal flood.
How often, O! have I sent home the Plow
Alone with th'Oxen (or I cared not how)
While to my Dear I went, in hope to find
All gone from home, her solely left behind?
I wanted not excuses, nor pretense
Of wanting something for convenience;
Plough-handle, Harrows, Plough-staff, Thongs or Yoke,
And though all wanting were for which I spoke
At the Maids Fathers house, yet (truth to grant)
I nothing but the Maid her self did want.
I was not wanting to my self; for I
Resumed my former sports, and did apply
My self to Fishing, Fowling, Hunting, and
What e're I took with mine industrious hand,
Or caught by chance, the Maid did thither draw,
I was a most officious Son in law.
At midnight once I stealing through the door
(For so the Maid and I agreed before)
The Dogs descri'd me, took me for a Thief,
Upon me fell: I forced (for my relief)
Leaped over an high grown hedge without demurs,
But scarce escaped biting of those barking Curs,
And thus with these delights (befit a Lover)
At length (though long) we past that Winter over.
The Spring returned, perfumed with Eglantine,
Green grew the Trees, and flourishing the Vine.
Now Ceres russel'd in her bristling Corn
With pendant ears; and when it must be shorn
The Mower thinks; for nightly now the skies
With Glowworms shine, and glist'ring Butterflies:
Lo now my Marriage, now my genial day
Approached, appeared; when I (without delay)
The Maid espoused; what need I more recite?
At night we found our long expected night,
When with successful winds (thank Hymen for it)
My ship arrived at the desired Port.
Then having killed an Ox, we did display,
Because it was a double Holy Day,
A double Feast; the Tables full were spread,
Under a broad green Tree, with meat and bread.
Oenophilus was there, who filled with wine,
Made welcome sports for all that there did dine;
And Tonius; whose Pipe of Boxen wood
Bored full of holes, made Music passing good.
At length, when all had eat and drank their fill,
His party-colored bag and Pipe most shrill
He took; his ruddy cheeks began to swell,
His eyes to stare, his eyelids rose and fell.
Then with an often and deep extracted blast
From's hollow lungs, the bagge's inflate at last,
Which with his elbow squeezed, and having found
Vent through the Pipe, did make the Pipe resound.
Now here, now there his nimble finges skip
From top to bottom, from his hand to his lip;
Whose jolly Music all the Yonkers calls
Away to Dancing from their Festivals.
Where on the Green, that day was sweetly spent
In Piping, Dancing, Sporting, Merriment.
And now three years are past, the fourth is nigh,
Since chanted was mine Epithalamy.
Thus our delightful days with posting hours
Are quickly past; what pleases, flies, what lowres,
Adheres more close, and longer does abide
Then twenty days of jollity beside.

Fo Faustus do see? look how the Cattle break
Into the Vineyards, while we sporting speak,
We must be gone; lest if we longer stay,
Our Purses for the Trespass soundly pay.

The End of the first Eclogue.
ECLOGUE II. Treating of the Madness of Love. Entitled FORTUNATUS.
The Argument.
First Fortunatus does relate
Po's inundation, with the event.
Next of Amyntas Love and Fate
He treats, and does his case lament.
The Speakers Fortunatus and Faustus. Faust. WHy come so late? what kept thee
thus from hence
So long a while? Now it is a se'night since
Thy flock was here: Where do thy Cattle keep?
What, are these Pastures hurtful for thy Sheep?

Fort. No, Faustus, no: The River Po which glides
With silver streams along our Meadows sides,
Grew late so proud, that uncontrolled he laves
The levelled Banks with his insulting Waves.
We leaving then the Flock, and careless of it,
Urged by the public and our private profit,
By day, by night did labor to make good
The ruined banks against the raging flood.

Fa. Our Tityrus, who sweetly sang the praise
Of Fields and Pastures in his learned Lays,
Reports for certain; That the River Po
Brings often ill fortune with its overflow.

Fo. It Is true perhaps, when unindifferent
The River with unlimited extent
Does timeless, meanless, boundless floods repeat,
High swelling on a sudden, after heat.
And now is the time: For now the Winter snow
From Hills high tops dissolves, and runs below,
Which empty Rivers fills. And thus those Hills
Unload themselves, and load the lesser Rills;
These load the Rivers, and the Rivers case
Themselves, and are disburthen'd in the Seas.
Men do the like; each does himself unpack,
And casts the burden on another back.
But now the River with a fair retreat
Is recontracted in its proper seat.

Fa. True: but (a wonder it is to speak) when Po
Did ebb, our Brook the more did overflow:
The City swims, the Cellars are afloat,
They row unto the vessels in a Boat:
The servant, sent to draw for such as dine,
Laughs while he swims unto the Butts of Wine.
And from the Cellars deep and watery Vault,
A great black Jack of Wine at length is brought.
Thus Citizens, though born they seem (perhaps)
To better fortunes, have some after-claps:
They many discommodities abide,
Yea manifold sometimes, and great beside.

Fo. No profit here, but some disprofit brings,
(Like Bees, that with their honey have their stings)
Here Is nothing perfect; fullness here does want,
All joys have here some sad Concomitant.

Fa. Thus far Eridanus. And now from Po
Let Us on, and chant our loves before we go.
Since now fair Venus all things moves to mirth,
The skies are clear and warm; the verdant earth
Is clad in green, the Birds with vernal song
Now clear the fields, and all are big with young.

Fo. Thou thine have chanted: Others, not mine own
I will relate; yet ones, to thee well known,
A Shepherds; once well known he was to thee,
While from enchanting Venus he was free:
That I may teach, and (teaching) plainly prove,
That nothing is more violent then Love.
Poorest Amyntas, but unhappy more,
Under some ill aspected Planet bore,
Driving six Bullocks, Heifers six to grass,
With a stout Bull that their Conducter was,
Chief Captain of the Drove; at last did come
To Coitus, where, with a Snow-like some
The silver stream of Mincius does dye
The Meadows, as it swiftly runs by
A new built Castle, whose high walls around
With Turrets and with Battlements are crowned,
Is Coitus; built in a Moorish soil,
But near the River, a most stately Pile.
Amyntas here reposing (where the Vine
With large embraces does the Trees intwine
Near to the glassy River, where it made
Along the Bank an over-hanging shade)
Sought to surprise with angling Rod and Hook
The silver Fishes in the Crystal Brook.
'Twas Harvest time; and Titans scorching force
Had singed the fields: The Nightingale was hoarse,
And ceased to sing: Nor could the Sheep by day
Be fed with grass, because 'twas burned away:
Nor were the skipping Grasshoppers (though few)
Refreshed with moisture of the nigthly dew.
But on the waters while he was intent,
And in a fruitless sport his study spent,
The Bull (as is reported) stung at first
With Wasps, next cours'd with Dogs, with Curs accursed,
Then hid by thievish Soldiers in a grove,
At last was lost, and vanished from the Drove.
Which when Amyntas knew, he climbed an hill,
And looking round about him, with a shrill
And hollow voice he called the Bull: but when
With long survey the Bull he could not ken.
When lost he found his labor, up he takes
His Bow and Quiver, and pursuance makes
After the Bull through ways unknown and known
Him seeking all the Pastures up and down,
Among the Stalls of Beasts and Cotes of Sheep,
Among thine hills Benacus; through the deep
Fat Olive fields, through grounds beset (by line)
With frondent Fig trees, and the fruitful Vine.
He came at length unto the lofty Crest
Of an high Mountain (higher then the rest)
Where Rocks of Sulphur are, which does reflect
Upon Benacus with a fair prospect,
Whence all the Meadows here and there that lie
Presented are apparent to your eye.
'Twas then S. Peter's Festival, and there
Under a broad green Elm assembled were
From all the villages a lusty Crew
Of youthful Men and Maids, who thither drew
When all had dined: where, when the Pipe did sound
They mixed together, danced a jolly round.
The Rusticks are a people of that guise,
Whom no Civility can civilize:
A restless and indomitable Creature,
Whom neither Art can qualife nor Nature.
They love to labor, sweating does them please;
On Holy days (when others take their ease)
The morning past they gormandise and feast,
Impatient of hunger and of rest.
And when their Paunch is crammed, and dinner done,
Hearing the Pipe, away to the the Elm they run:
Here rages one, another danceth there,
Who like an Ox most nimbly does careero;
And with his clouted Shoon, and lob-like land
He tears and tires that Earth, which with his goad,
His Plough and Harrows, 'twere a sin (they say)
To till or tear upon an Holy day:
And all that day he spends, till night recalls.
In bonny Belly cheer and Bacchanals,
With Singing, Laughing, Dancing, merrily,
Carousing till the Pots and Cups be dry.

Fa. Fool, why do prattle thus? Thou do condemn
The Country sports, when thou art one of them:
Thou to thy friends art bad, but (foolish Else)
In this thou art worse, and worst unto thy self.

Fo. I did but jest. Come, let us proceed to tell
Of our Amyntas, and what him befell.
He coming thither in the cooling shade,
And leaning on his staff of Maple made,
There stopped his passage, there his journey staid,
Until the scorching heat were more allaid.
Ah hapless Lad! though in the shade thou lie,
A greater heat then Titans will thee fry.
Shut, shut thine eyes; lest, Oh if they dismount,
Thou see Diana naked in the Fount.
Stop, stop thine ears; O listen not at all
To the bewitching Sirens flattering call.
Thou like Narcissus art: Narcissus first
But seeking at the Found to quench his thirst,
Thirsted the more. And thou, while thou do fly
An outward heat, with inward flames wilt fry.
O how much, how much better had it been
(If so thy fates had pleased) to have never seen
That luckess Bull, to have presently returned
To the other Cattle (e're thou thus had burned)
To Have kept those heifers that were left behind,
To Have lost thy Bull with a contented mind;
Rather, then while thy labor thou do waste,
Nothing to lose, to lose thy self at last.

Fa. But after losses who becomes not wise?
We should not after, but before, advise:
Vain is all after-counsel, and as vain
As, after fruits are ripe, a shower of rain.

Fo. Among the Maiden company was one,
One fairer then the rest, whose beauty shone
Amid her flaxen Tresses, nearly dressed,
A Virgin fairer, taller then the rest,
Some twenty years of age, of lovely face,
One, that the City Beauties would disgrace
If but contesting, or compared with them,
For Beauty, she would win the Diadem
From all the City Nymphs: A fillet round
Beset with golden glittering Aglets bound
Her Temples; whence a pendant vail enclosed
Her shoulders, which amid her breasts reposed,
There fast'ned with a yellow tach, and here
Closed with an iron button shining clear;
A linen garment white she wore, and new,
Laid thick of pleats, most comely to the view,
Hanging so long, so low, that it did meet,
And sweep the ground beneath her tender feet.
As Soon as her Amyntas did espy,
He perished by the sight: his ravished eye
Ingulph'd fierce flames: his amorous desire
Sucked in a secret unsuspected fire;
A fire that having once inflamed his heart,
Could nor in whole b'extinguish'd, nor in part
By floods of water, or by showers of rain:
Vain was Herbs force, and Magic Spells were vain.
Forgetful of his flocks, and careless frown
Of his domestic things (as not his own)
He Is all inflamed, and (empti'd of delights)
Expends the long, the melancholy nights
In bitterness and mourning: O how often,
Assaying with kind words, and language soft,
To quench his raging flame, to cool his heat,
His frantic, furious heat, did I repeat
My words, and thus did say, Distressed Boy,
Deserving pity, what does thee destroy.
What God in these perplexities involved
Thy troubled mind? But (ah) it is soon resolved:
It was not God, it was the Devil rather,
Satan himself, the worst of all; the Father
Of all those wicked spirits^ which they say
In thrice three nights, atd thrice a trebled day
From the Supernall Heavens headlong fell
To the Earth, or lower, to the lowest hell.
Tell me, go too: when thou did any know
Or do remember any that did grow
To wealth or credit thus, that in this wise
Enlarged his house, or did to greatness rise?
That thus with greater heaps of Corn did fill
His garners, or more ameld Fields did till?
That by such courses did increase his Flock,
Or wish more Cattle did his pastures stock?
Among so many multitudes of Nations
That on the spacious Earth have habitations
Are some, who to their execrable Feasts
Serve up men's Bodies for their bloody guests,
Who tear them with their teeth, and as their Food
Devour their Flesh: There are I say a brood
Of such cursed vipers, whom the furies haunt,
And with so many mischiefs them inchant.
But there is no kind so savage, none so bad
No Nation's there so barbarous, so mad,
But as an execrable thing does hate
To be by love of women Captivate.
Hence come contentions, hence comes strife and wars,
And ofttimes death with many bloody scarrs:
Hence Cities have been ruined, razed their wall:
Yea, the sage Laws, and solemn decretalls
Bound in red leather-volumes disapprove
This wanton sin, and hate unlawful love.
When thus Amyntas heard me speak of Laws
He made this answer (and without a pause,
For he was civilized, and did converse
Within the City) Thou do this rehearse
Quoth he, that by these warnings thou might seem
Wise, Circumspect, and of discreet esteem:
Thus thinking to be thought t'excell the wise
The supercilious Catoes for advise.
This error, this wise madness reigns too much*
Himself man flatters, and would fain be such
As he conceits himself, he fain would seem
A witty Creature, of a vast esteem:
But unadvised yet he spreads, he sets
To catch himself a thousand snares and Nets,
And oftentimes himself at unawares
Falls in his own dug pits, his ownrspread snares.
Once he was free, but brought himself in thrall,
And made the slavish yok^ he draw withal,
That is the burden of the Laws (For I)
Have seen those volumes) which so ponderous lie,
That neither our Forefathers, nor their heirs,
Nor we, nor our Posterity, nor theirs
Could, or can ever keep in act or awe
According to the letter of the Law.
Behold how foolish is Man's wisdom; Man
At heaven levells, and believes he can
Transcend the Stars, or in a Rank with them
Invested, wear a star-like Diadem,
When as his body dead, perhaps his soul
May transmigrate into some winged foul,
And Feathered so may sore aloft, and fly
With nimble plumes amid the middle sky.
Thus He: Then I replied, why do repine?
Why do thus snarle? The Laws are things divine.
God is their Author, them to disobey
Does too-too great impiety bewray.

Fa. These arguments are great, and treat (like Kings)
Of weighty matters, of mysterious things.

Fo. Why what do think I was; though now ('it is true)
My Coat is patched, my face of sordid hue,
Yet then in strength, wit, language I was rare,
None other Shepherd could with me compare.
And now, if thou would go with Front erect,
With upright body, thou for thine aspect,
For thy comportment, shall in some degree
Another Marius or Carbo be.

Fo. Amyntas thus reproved, did thus reply;
God envied Man created, when his eye
Viewed with what happiness his gifts began,
He thought that good, to be too good for man:
He quashed his wish, and limited his will
By new made Laws, which curb man's nature still,
And bridle him, as horsemen when they ride
Bridle their horses, lest they start aside.
My love compels my judgment to disclose,
And makes me freely speak: who does oppose
The common use of Wives, that man (in truth)
Is envious; but honesty (forsooth)
His envy must excuse: an honest thought
Which evil custom of long envy brought;
For while each man t'himself alone confines
His own delights, and with disdain repines
To make them public: This became a sage,
A common custom, honest made with age:
And jealous Madness by degrees did draw
This but a Custom to be made a Law.
Love is malignant, Pleasure is no less;
Both murmr at another happiness.
Then I, not daring longer to contest
Against a man with Passion so possessed,
Lest him inflamed with Love, with Choler burned,
And from the frantic Lover home returned.

Fa. See how this fond, this mad affection blindes
The soundest judgments of the sagest minds,
Us leading in a voluntary way
To grossest errors at the mid of day?

Fo. See how the Clouds on Baldus top condense
In black agglomerations? Come, let us hence;
'Twill hail, it is time to go; lest (if it rise)
The tempest our dispersed Sheep surprise.

The End of the second Eclogue.
ECLOGUE III. Treating of the hapless event of Frantic Love. Entitled AMYNTAS.
The Argument.
What Losses husbandmen attend,
What rage Amyntas did assail,
His death and lamantable end
Here Fortunatus does bewail.
The Speakers, Faustus and Fortunatus. Faust. THat rattling storm of hail, which
yesternight
Came rushing down from Baldus, did affright,
But did not hurt us with its sudden showers,
Thanks to those tutelary Saints of ours
That guard our Fruits: but yet those boisterous storms
(As Harculus, who came from thence, informs)
O Fortunatus spoiled Verona's Fields:
The Sheep and Cattle, with what else it yields,
The Country Cottages and Shepherds Cotts
Are battered so with those tempestuous shots,
Are so demolished, that small hope remains,
Or rather none to those poor Country Swains
For Corn and Cattle, all the riches are
Of Husbandmen, still subject, as to care
So to mischances; Citizens the while
A mass of Treasure in their Coffers pile.
Which neither Hail, Dew, Frost, nor irefull air
Can dash, dissolve, diminish, or impair.

Fort. I know not who the winds and storms Commands,
I know I know not; Nor, if I those hands
Did know, know I enough: but yet I dare
Speak what I know: my mind I will declare.
What? shall my life be thus embittered here?
Shall I here be so lashed, and so severe?
If (as they say) the Gods above the skies
Do rule the world, I think their deities
Take little care, or else but little know
The miserable toil of Men below.
See with what daily pains and hourly sweat
A poor a slender living here we get:
How many miseries within a year
For Wives, Flocks, Children do poor Shepherds bear?
With Summer heat we fry, with winters cold
We freeze: When Boreas with his blasts grows bold,
We sleep in ragged Cots upon the ground;
A thousand Pests, a thousand sores confound
Our Cattle, and a thousand things prevail
Against them: Here the sheepfold Thieves assail,
Wolves there; The Soldier yonder is as brief
To steal us both; Nay more then Wolf or thief.
Our hands with daily toil are stiff and hard,
Our face is rivell'd, rugged is our Beard,
Our skin is parched with heat; and yet at last
One sudden storm of hail does all lay wast.
The Gods do this, before whose shrines we bow,
And on whose Altars (with a solemn vow)
We sacrifice our Lamps, and voted lights
Of wax, devoted to Religious rites.
I know not what Indulgence, or what love
What Piety, what Pity from above
Involves poor Shepherds (poor by frequent losses)
With these so great mishaps, so grievous crosses.

Faust. This damage, this unhappiness proceeds
O Fortunatus, from our own misdeeds:
Gods Judgments all are always just: Our sin,
Our wickedness these plagues has ushered in.

Fort. What wickedness? What have we yet assaid
To murder Christ? what, have we Christ betrayed?

Faust. Oh, our repinings, Robberies, and rages,
Our veneries, lies, strifes, produce these strages.

Fort. What have the good deserved, for I suppose
All are not evil; yet both these and those
Suffer alike? One punishment is had
A like for all together, good and bad.

Faust. Alas, what know thou not (presumptuous clod)
It Is impious to think amiss of God?
But leaving these Mysterious things, too great
To know, which must be secret: Let Us repeat
Amyntas Love: Come, let us repeat again
Those care, which vexed his heart, which crazed his brain,
Which all have tried, which are unknown to none.

Fort. Love is a common thing, the wonted tone
Of youth, it is their study, their delight.
But grief and perturbations blind the sight
With passion, which does often unhing the mind,
Thus sad expressions from sad hearts we find.

Faust. Things known and understood, Thou may relate
For matter and for time, but never prate
Of things unknown, or of uncertainties:
(For so great Cosmas was accounted wise)

Fort. Faustus the'art wise: Let Us then known Loves repeat:
It rests, that of Amyntas now we treat,
Of his mad Love, his last sad Fate, and spend
Some tears upon his lamentable end,
A little after, passing by that way,
I saw the man again, who Frantic lay:
I, pitying his folly, Thus began:
O thou (quoth I) most miserable Man
Most misadvis'd whom fatal Aconite
Intoxicates, now made the common spite,
The Common sport of people: do not yet
Repent thy love? Do yet thy self forget?
Yet buried in Love do snatch from hence
Thy self, and thine with thee (by violence)
Thy Cottages and Cattle, as of y'ore
Expiring Sampson all things with him bore?
When old thou grow'st (if so the Fates be pleased)
Who shall sustain thee then? then when diseased,
Dull, Sleepy, poor, if now thy strength and wit
Decay, decline, if now thy Senses flit?
All these (like waters through an open Sluice)
If death prevent not, Age will introduce.
Keep home, be vigilant, observant be;
But chiefly whither thou do tend, foresee:
Beware thou go not thither, whither come,
Thou may deplore, thy most unhappy doom:
Discern thy ways; Remember Man was born
Not to delights or pleasures, but to scorn
Those flattering effoeminate deceits
Which spoil unstable youth with sugared baits,
I, I that Cattle have, and Milk, and Cheese,
Do scarce subsist in such hard times as these;
The want's so great in all our Fields and Tents,
Things have so many sad and bad events.
So great disprofits every where disperse,
So many things adverse in the Universe.
Hear an unheard of thing, a thing unknown
Of yore, which now to me these times have shown:
Autumn approaching, as it is our use,
I shore my sheep; which done, I did produce
At mornings Market, and exposed to sale
Twice thirty pound of Wool (nor is it a tale)
Expecting store of money for the same,
But short mine hope, mine expectation came:
'Twill scarce preserve my Flock 'twill scarce provide
Hay for the Winter: which way then beside
My Family shall be maintained as well,
Indeed Amyntas, yet I cannot tell.
He that is a Lover must himself improve
By gifts unto the Mistress of his love.
But thou whom fickle Fortune has bereft
Almost of all, to whom she scarce has left
A Cottage, under which thy poorness may
Be lodged at Night, or be received by day.
What can thou give which may be grateful said
Unto the wish of thy beloved Maid?
'Twas once enough to send those Loves of ours
Ten pleasant apples, or some purple flowers,
A Birds Nest, or sweet grass: when these were thought
Great gifts I well remember; But it is brought
From grass to gold; Love is a costly thing,
A dear bought sweet too great expense does bring
In these our times; Old customs are refused,
And now new Laws of Love, but worse, are used.
While thus I did persuade, He cast aside
His irefull eyes, and (frowning) thus replied:
If thou O Fortunatus do desire
My wished for health, Then give what I require,
Give me my Love: No Medicine but this one
Can cure my grief: This is the Cure alone:
Those other things, which thou so much do name,
Do but torment me more: This scorching flame,
This Fury which so rages in my breast.
Can never thence be pulled or dispossessed;
For still my mind as present does suppose
The Virgins shape, with me she comes, she goes,
She stays, wakes, sleeps with me: mine heart, mine head,
My bones, my reins are all Environed
With her fair Form: Nor from my melting heart
Can she, before my life departs, depart.
As when a Syence from one stock is cut,
And graff'd upon another, Both do shut
And join so close, That their two Natures grow
Together mixed, and Flourish in one bough:
So the beloved Image of my dear,
My lovely Mistress does my soul adhere,
Is there immerg'd: makes both our hearts but one,
But one makes both our souls: in us alone
The Spirit and the Senses are the same.
O happy should I be, if when my flame,
My spark of life expires, I might (at least)
Upon the tender lap, the milk white breast,
The snow-like arms of my most honored,
And dearest Love but lay my dying head.
She with her hands would close my dying eyes,
She with sad voice, with lamentable cries
Would wail my Funerals: and whether I
Deceasing to the Elysian Fields shall fly,
Or whether I be rapp'd and hurled upon
The burning Streams of Flaming Phlegeton,
I cannot happy be without thee, neither
Unhappy with thee; Might we be together.
Ye Dryades, and Goddesses of Flowers,
O ye fair Nymphs, and O of Woods and Bowers,
Thou Guardian Sylvanus, keep I pray,
Keep on your hills and Valleys all the gay,
The gallant Flowers of your woods and Fields,
Or of what sweets beside the Country yields:
Hedge in your groves, and thence the Cattle stop,
Lest they should brouze the buds, or flowers should crop
Keep, keep I pray these Flowers, These sweets, These all,
To Celebrate my loves sad Funeral:
Then all the ground about where ere you tread,
With Flowers sweetly smelling shall be spread:
Weave Garlands you: Garlands for sight, for sent,
Fair, fragrant to surround her Monument:
Garlands my Mistresses dead Corpse to cover
Until interred; Then to be Pendant over.
The Maiden Muses shall attend her hearse,
And weeping sing an Elegiack verse:
Shall on her grave ingrave in stone or lead
This Epitaph for aftertimes to read,
Here lies a Maid; Who, but she cruel was,
Might among Mortals for Immmortall pass:
Might have been Natures Paragon and Jewel,
Had she not to her Lover been too cruel.
O maid, if such a scorching flame as mine
Did but inflame that breast, that heart of thine,
An hundred gulphes, a thousand raging Seas
I would swim over, to give thy passions ease:
But thou more cruel, thou more serpentine
Then Hydra, do my self, my love decline.
But (ah) the maid is blameless, for as yet
She knows me not: and doubtless could she get
But knowledge of my love, she would afford
My love some comfort of her own accord.
Nor can I think that Nature e're did place
So hard an heart under so sweet a face.
But faces are deceitful; for the while
They seem most beautiful, they most beguile:
A cruel mind has often a Candid skin;
Fair looks without, conceal foul hearts within.
Yet I will speak, and make her know my love:
But should she then repulse me, should she prove
Unkind, mine eyes would melt in tears, mine heart,
My mourning heart with deep fetched groans would part
Would break in twain, and though she still detest,
And fly me following her with my request,
Yet whither ever I shall carried be,
These cares, these thoughts for her will follow me.
Hence, O far hence Physicians with your art,
For (ah) incurable's my grief, my smart:
Hence, O far hence Magicians, you whose spells
Can raise (they say) pale Ghosts from Pluto's Cells:
Hence, O far hence you, that the Powers Divine,
Suppose your vain Petitions can incline:
Your Orizons (alas) are despicable
Averse is Heaven and inexorable:
Impatience and madness me from hence
Transport with rage, and rap with violence:
I like to trace the solitary Crests
Of craggy Mountains, and the Dens of Beasts.
While thus he spoke, with friendly words I tried
TO assuage him, but my words were misappli'd.
For nothing, ah there could be nothing found
To cure his never to be cured wound.
Amid the silent Fields in discontent
The long, the melancholy night he spent,
And from the dawning to the close of day
Among the Brakes and Bushes hid he lay:
He never slept, and did but seldom eat,
Water his drink, wild apples were his meat.
After long groans at length, and mournful cries,
Exhausting with continual tears his eyes,
After most sad laments, with griefs o'reworn,
His heart within often sighs asunder torn
He died, ending, with his life, his love.
His livelesse body left the ground above
Without interment, and neglected quite,
The Birds devoured by day, the Beasts by night.

Fa. Ah, Cupids deadly dram, ah fatal gin,
Which whosoevers heart it enters in
Does wholly Captivate that wretched heart,
Transfixing it with an envenomed dart,
Men equalling with Beasts: what worse Receipts,
What more impoyson'd, or bewitching baits
Could Circe, could Calypso give then these?
What Styx, what Phlegeton could more disease?
What Furies more torment? O most unwise
You were, what e're you were, that did disguise
Blind Cupid with a godhead; what is Nature
A God, that hurts or Nullifies a Creature?
Where e're there is a God, him think we must
To be to man indulgent, harmless, just.

Fo. Ah sweet, and ever to be pitied youth,
Surpised thus in thy prime, thy lives chief growth;
What fatal star did on thy Birth reflect?
What part of heaven with so dire aspect
So much malign'd thee, that It made thy Fate
(Though causeless) from thy Birth unfortunate?
Yet from thee was not heavens sweet influence
Wholly declined, but that thou were from thence
Inspired with sacred Poesy, with skill
To sing sweet Sonnets on thine Oaten quill:
And, but for timelesse death, thy learned lays
Ivy deserved, deserved Parnassus Bays:
Nor did our Tytirus so well beloved
Of great Alexis, better sing ('it is proved)
Of Wars, Corn, Tillage, Pastures, every thing,
Then thou thy self, then thou thy self did sing.
For thy Mature, propense and active Mind,
(Which we long since observed, to good inclined)
Began to Fructify, began to impart
No vulgar showers of thy rare gifts and art.
Thou may be styled to thine etern renown
The Countries honor, and our ages Crown;
Po with our Mincius in doleful tone
With all their Nymphs shall thee bewail, bemoan,
As Thrac' an Hebrus Orpheus did lament:
Thee the sad Shepherds full of discontent
Bewail, as Daphnis once they did bewail;
For thee, like discontents assault, assail,
The grounds and Pastures all untilled and til'd.
Whose sad complaints are heard in every field,
Ye Shepherds with sweet Flowers his grave bestrew,
And yearly there his memory renew
With Elegies and Frankincense: with them
Sing there the Poets endless Requiem.

Fa. But thou the while Amyntas do possess
A better place, a place of happiness;
Here we bewail thee, thou the while art come
Into the pleasures of Elysium.

Fo. And he this day should be bewailed of us:
For I last night beheld an Ominous,
I know not what sad-seeming apparition
To me presented in a mournful vision.
But now it is evening: and the setting Sun
Declining in a cloud does rain forerun,
Foreshews our husbandmen that storms are near;
It Is therefore time before the storm appear
To recollect our Cattle: come (foretold)
Let Us drive our sheep and Cattle to the Fold.

The End of the third Eclogue.
ECLOGUE IV. Treating of the Nature of Women. Entitled ALPHUS.
The Argument.
Janus relates his Lad, his Goat
How first he lost, and then did find:
Whence Alphus does proceed to note
The Properties of womenkind.
The Speakers Alphus and Janus. Al. I Anus, I see thy Goat is lean, which wont
To be more brisk, and with his horned Front
Sky-ward erected wont to stalk in scorn:
Dull and dejected now (like one forlorn)
He flaggs his ears, the grass but smells, ornips
Or does but touch it with his outer lips.

Ja. He languisheth, and from that languishing
Arises mirth: which, when to mind I bring,
It makes me laugh; the jest is yet unshown,
But all the world will wonder, when it is known.

Al. Janus, thy pleasing tongue was used to vent
Most wittily, neat jests with merriment;
Tell therefore, tell me now (here is none but us)
What made thy lusty Goat to languish thus.

Ja. I Will tell thee, God's my witness it is no Fable.
'Twas lately done, it is truth and warrantable.
But I for nothing will not this report,
What Is my reward what will thou giveme for it?

Al. Ianus, i will show the bush, i will show the Field
Where a sweet-singing Nightingale does build.

Ja. Who slightly promise, lightly they Beguile.

Al. Who credits not is faithless; but the while
To make thee sure, lo, from my quiver drawn
A pair of arrows; Take them for a pawn.

Ja. I Will then begin: Ye Muses move my tongue,
Revive my memory, that I the wrong,
The sad misfortune of my Goat may tell;
And to Alphus grant the Nest of Philomel.
I hired a boy, and placed him over my sheep:
He daily fed them, and did duly keep
My Goat, my Kidds; his service for a while
Was grateful to me, till he saw the smile
Of a fair Virgin, who to these our springs
For water came: But since with languishing.
He pines, now sottish is become, neglects
To feed the sheep, the sheepcotes disrespects,
And all his business in a giddy vain
Turns topsy-turvy with his empty brain.
Him, while he slept, one would have thought awake,
For waking idly with himself he spoke;
He sleeping used and waking in extremes,
His body dull, his mind was full of dreams.
He loy'tring, in a grove, this Goat of mine
Ti'd by the horns with a strong twiggen line
Among the bush^s; (now it is four days since)
Assaying if the Goat could break from thence
By strength of neck, or hardness of his horns.
The Boy mean while among the brakes and thorns,
Stalks wandering up and down the wood to seek,
To find a birds nest in some bush or Creek.
His mind is on the maid, his thoughts reflect
Upon her beautifull-belov'd aspect,
Her Face, breasts, other parts, which here for shame
My blushing modesty forbears to name.
Day flies the while: The boy comes home at night
But left the Goat behind, forgot him quite.
At Midnight he bethought him, and arose
To seek the Goat: goes out, and as he goes
Half trembling in the dark, he falls at last
In a deep pit, whose mouth was overcast
With boughs and straw, so covered to betray,
To take wild Beasts that on our Cattle prey.
Deep was the Pit, and steep wherein he fell,
Returnles like the bottom of a well.
The Goat's in bonds, in prison is the boy,
No shepherd guards the sheep, though Wolves destroy,
'Twas the third hour next morn, I wond'red, I
My sheep reviewed, recounted, ('it is no lie)
Missing the Goat amazed I stood, I called
The Boy, the sheepcotes searched, and much appalled,
I feared lest 'nointed with enchanted oil,
And mounting on my Goat, he from the soil,
Had leaped, and traveled through the pathlesse air:
For witches so (they say) by ni^ht repair,
Using like magic ointments, and are hurled
To certain feasts far off, about the world.
Amazed, at length my sheep to grass I drove,
And musing with my self, while I the grove
Did enter in; Behold far off, behold
My Goat amid the bushes in the cold
And dusky shadow brayes, and striving stands
Butting with horns opposed against his bands,
This sudden apparition of my Goat,
This unexpected coming e're I thought,
Affrighted me: yet with courageous heart
At length I knew the Beast, I played my part,
I went among the Brakes, and cut in twain
Those rigid bands that did my Goat detain,
Returning homewards late, I spied afar
Among the Pastures that adjoining are
A multitude of jolly-merry Boys,
leaping and laughing loud with youthful noises
When near we came together me they knew,
Saluted, and thus said, O Ianus view,
View here thy Boy, but newly from the snares
Of Wolves drawn out, wherein at unawares
Headlong he tell, walking by night the ground;
And thus my Goat and Shepherd both were found.
The Goat thus wronged still pines: The foolish lad
More pining is, and then the Goat more mad.
The maid once hearing that she was beloved,
Grew quickly proud; and seeming nothing moved
Dissembles it, dissembles that she knew
The Lads affection, still her self withdrew,
As if abashed, and (like a subtle Trul)
To make her beauty seem more beautiful,
Her head, her breasts she decks, she blushing jetts
Down looking on the growing violets:
And cunningly she does the thing disguise
With sample shows, but Fox-like subtleties.
These are the women's studies, gins and arms.
My shepherd thus bewitched with these her charms,
Yet hoping that he should at length enjoy
His love, his Galatea: (foolish Boy)
Disdained his wages, and my service left,
Only pursued his love: I, thus bereft,
Was forced to leave mine oxen, plough and wayn,
And to undertake the shepherds trade again.
Youths levity to madness thus propense
Infests all Countries in aequivalence.

Al. What wit effects not, Fortune does advance:
O strange astonishment, O witty chance,
O pretty things deserving two months laughter.
Ianus, I Will keep my word: Pandions daughter
Does for thee labor, builds her nest for thee.
But now thou speak of this so crafty she,
This subtile-wily maid, I call to mind
What Vmber's of the frauds of women kind
Used often of yore to sing in learned verse.

Ia. Tell me (pr'y thee) tell, if ought thou can rehearse
Of Vmber, weigh his words, his verse awhile,
All Vmbers verses were of lofty style,
Were memorable all, and worth regard.

Al. They be, thou say, but not without reward
To be repeated: What reward, what pay?
What will thou give me? speak, and then I Will say.

Ja. I from thy promise thee release; and (more)
Here, take, thy pair of Arrows I restore.

Al. While I behind these sedges go t'untruss,
Look to my Cattle, Janus, lest they thus
Straggling abroad should break (beyond their lines)
Into the Vineyards, and there spoil the Vines.

Ja. O Ram, thou Ram that with thy crooked horns,
Like a black Devil, look among the thorns,
Entering the Vineyards still; thou wilt not forbear,
Till from thy forhead both thine eyes I tear.
Are not those Pastures, which in measure be
An hundred Acres, large enough for thee,
But that thou must destroy, thou must despoil
The Vines and Vineyards (that enclosed soil?)

Al. Janus, I thee remember, and return:
But I perhaps can tell (that thou may learn)
Things yet unknown to thee: for Umber knew
All that was lawful for a man to view,
All that was lawful for a man to know;
He knew the world above, the world below,
The skies, stars, earth, winds, rivers seas and fountains;
He traveled and had seen those lofty Mountains
Ossa, ceraunia, Rhodope; besides
The Gallick Kingdom, Araris, The tides
Of Rhene, Po, Tiber: And his witty pate
Greek Verses into Latin did translate.
In either tongue he second was to none,
But in each language learned. Him, him alone
Greece envied us: Him, him (that learned race)
The Arcadians themselves, with those of Thrace,
That chant it in the Groves did emulate, Thessaliam Temple did malign his
fate.
If thou perhaps do more desire to know,
Our Neighbors Candidus that lives below,
That followed still his Precepts, will impart
Us to; for he remembers it, his art.
But now the sev'n hol'd Pipe let us try, let us sound:
Yet I the Muses first implore around
To daigne their presence, but my chiefest guest,
Polymna, more remembering then the rest.
What the Author meant of all, the Translator intends only of ill women.
The female Sex is servile, cruel, proud,
Wanting law, measure, reason, very loud;
The bounds of right omits, extremes admits,
Does all things unadvisedly by fits:
Or it will slowly creep, or swiftly run,
Or cold it is as Ice, or hot as Sun:
Never well tempered, never moderate,
Or she will dearly love, or deadly hate.
Would she seem grave? Too sullenly she lowres:
Would she less grave seem plausible? She towers
On levity, and with a wanton smile
Displays immodest Impudence the while.
She weeps and laughs, fears, dares, is wise, unwise,
Will, will not: All things does by contraries.
Flitting, inconstant, wandering, prattling, vain,
Two-tongued, threatening, of imperious strain;
Angry, blood-thirsty, wicked, avaricious,
Catching, complaining, credulous, malicious,
Lying, impatient, burd'nous, tippling all,
Rash, taunting, light, ambitious, magical;
She-Pander, superstitious, slothful, prone
To gossip, studious of the Stews, alone
Of dainty palate, wanton, malapert,
Addict to tenderness, addict (with art)
To smooth-faced Adulation, and addict
To trim her face, to make her beauty trickt:
She, wrath and hate retaining, does defer
Till opportunity produce for her
Desired revenge, ungrateful, trustless, swelling,
Bold, cruel, wrangling, violent, rebelling,
Upbraideth others, but her own offense
Excuses with her whining eloquence;
Murmurs, accends debate, regards no ties
Of amity, scoffs friendship, always eyes
Her own advantage, only careful of it,
Only respecting her own proper profit;
Flatters, deludes, delays, too closely bites
With bitter jests, and to divulge, delights,
Vain fables adds to that which others spoke,
And of a Molehill does a Mountain make.
Feigns things are not, dissembles things that are,
Most learned to frame excuses, and most rare
To forge deceits; her face she fits for wiles,
Her face all imitating, frowns or smiles.
Her snares thou can not escape, thou can not fly,
Thou can not overcome her subtlety,
So great's her diligence, her skill so great
To work a mischief if she please to cheat.
And though thou see it with thine eyes, she dares
Excuse the wickedness: Her potent snares
Delude the Senses with her active mind.
In nothing thou can credit her, so blind
She Will make thee, yet she will make thee that thy faith
Must credit every thing she does, or says.
Examples this confirm: What horrid Crimes
Have not bold Females acted in their times?
Tarpeia for a Bracelet did betray
To Romes proud foes the Port, the Cities Key.
Bloody Medea did her hands imbrew
In her own childrens blood, whom (ah) she slew.
Adult rous Helen filled the Aegean Seas
With Ships of War. Scylla the foe to please
Betrayed her Father, stole his purple hair,
Fled with the foe, o'return'd his Regal Chair.
Biblis her Brother with base Lust pollutes,
Her self t'her Father Myrrha prostitutes.
Semiramis for her own Son did lust:
Amphiaraus was reduced to dust
By means of his unfaithful wife: The Daughters
Of Danaus killed, with unheard of slaughters,
Their husbands in one night. A bloody Crew
Of women the sweet Poet Orpheus slew,
And him in pieces cruelly did cut.
Pasiphae with Taurus played the slut.
Immodest Phoedra full of impudence
With Chastity did most unchaste dispense.
Rebeccah did with subtlety beguile
Her husband, and her elder son, the while
She covered the youngers smoother skin
With Kid-skins: so the Blessing he did win.
Stout Hercules was poisoned by his wife;
Hippodame betrayed her Fathers life.
Lavinia (to palliate a jarre)
Involved the Trojans in a doubtful war.
Bryseis from the Camp Achilles drew.
Chryseis with her Love-tricks overthrew
The noble Agamemnon, who, with Love
Mad and enraged, was punished from above
By Phoebus, for his too too bold device:
And Eve Mankind expelled from Paradise.
Believe it shepherds (for I here attest
The Country Gods) if you desire your rest,
If you the Pastures would should harmless prove
Unto your flocks, if you your flocks do love,
If Rest, Peace, Life be grateful to you; Chase
All wanton Wenches from your dewlling place.
Away with Thestilis far hence, away
With Phillis, and let her no longer stay
Neaera, Galatea, nor their mate
Lycoris; for they will spend your whole estate.
If you in your estates desire to thrive,
Far from your sheep cotes all those Lasses drive.
Tell me what woman ever past the Chain
Of Pluto's Cell, and thence returned again?
Had not Euridice been mad, she might
Have back returned through those black shades of night
By which she thither went: And Proserpine
Had not the luck those Dungeons to decline.
But dutiful Aeneas safely came
From those dark Dens; and Orpheus did the same.
Great Hercules from thence again, unburn'd;
And Theseus, and the Brethren two returned,
Both equal expert (brother like to brother)
In Riding the one, in Fights and Wrestling the other.
And our Redeemer did return from thence,
Whose rising brought the sweetest influence
Of Life and of Salvation. Shepherds, O
These, these are Mysteries for us to know,
For us to ponder: Let man's noble mind
Fly things obscene for better things designed.
Let Foeminines themselves delight, delude
With things and places infamous and rude.
As when a Sailer, forced with winds and tide
Has dashed his ship against a Rock, can guide
Unheedy Sailers to decline that Rock.
So man grown old and wiser, can unlock
By long experience the Chance of things
That are to come, and his Remembrance brings
Things that are past to light, and shows thereby
The many dangers of Mortality.
If Fowl, the Cruel Eagle, N^ts the Dear,
The Lamb the Wolf, Does Dogs do fly, do fear.
Why do thou not, O shepherd, fear and fly
VVomens inticements, hurt so much thereby.
Hyaena-like they are crafty to beguile,
And pious are, as is the Crocodile,
When flattering she weeps, she thee besets:
Fly, shepherd, women's looks, they be but Nets.
Trust not to courage, valor, nor to strength,
Nor to that Buckler, whose unwonted length
Did Perseus guard, that without hurt or dread
He saw the Snakes upon Medusa's head:
Those Snakes that metamophos'd into stone
All that beheld her face, but him alone.
Many have Monsters killed, have Giants tamed,
Have Cities overturned, have been famed
To bound the Seas proud waves, and at their wills
To stop the floods, to top the sharpest hills.
The solemn Games to their immortal praise
Have crowned the Victors brows with frondent bays.
But all those Conquerors that others spoiled,
By women conquered were themselves and foiled.
He that was first a Shepherd, then a King,
Renowned for his Lion and his Sling;
His Son that after his devout example
Erected sacred Zions stately Temple:
And Sampson, whose unconquered strength excelled
All others, were by women captives held.
Fire, Stones, Swords, Spears less hinder our designs,
Yea Death less hurts us then those Foeminines.
Nor with her native beauty pleased, she will
A thousand ways augment it with her skill:
Gold decks her forehead; and to make her fair,
She paints her face, and neatly curls her hair.
With art she goes, with art she guides her eyes:
She runs, and (sporting) from her lover flies
Among the bushes, that she thither may
Seduce her lover; willing she is to play,
But simple yet, and honest she would seem;
She Is negative, and strives, but her esteem
Prefers this one thing; all things else above
To be subjected in the fights of Love.
A woman ('it is a wonder) does present
The North-west wind, which in the firmament
Condenseth clouds, and scatt'reth them again
In furious tempestuous storms of Rain.
O whosoever thou be, I thee forwarn
This lesson from mine own experience learn;
Try not, whilst thou may choose, how many sorts
Of dangers this frail sex with it comports,
What deep disdains it has: It is a Creature
That is imperfect, and immund by Nature,
But cures it self with Art; she works by day,
And wakes by night to wash those blurs away.
She washes, shaves, paints, prints, anoints, adorns,
She Is all deceit, all skill, all filled with scorns.
Like Mymick Players, she is all Aconite,
Her Looking-glass she does consult for right,
All things she does thereby; she learns thereby
To move her lips, to frame her face, her eye:
She learns thereby to flatter with her lips,
To laugh, to sport; her shoulders and her hips
She learns thereby to wriggle as she goes,
All by the Looking glass she does compose.
What mean those naked breasts? what means (I pray)
That little-open chink above? the way
That like a cloven Valley down directs
Upon her naked bosom vain reflects?
Doubtless for nothing else, but that th'adust
And penetrable poison of hot Lust
Should more oppress the senses with desire,
And set men's hearts with Stygian flames on fire:
These are to young men rocks and sands and seas;
These are the Scylla's, the Charybdes these;
These are those Harpyes, beastly Birds that flew
About King Phineus house, and did bespew
His Table with their odious excrements:
These did defile his Chambers, Tables, Tents,
His Feasting-rooms: Nor freed were from these ills
Paths, Temples, ways, fields, rivers, seas or hills.
These are those Gorgons, each with monstrous head,
In the remotest parts of Africa bred;
Who with their horrid looks and hellish tones
Did living men transform to liveless stones.
Learned Vmber's Verses we recited have,
Which if they seem more tedious, or less grave,
Think then (for briefly we did them rehearse)
The fault is in the Matter, not the Verse.
It Is VVomens Madness, it is not o the Song,
It Is not the Verse that tedious is or long.
O memorable, grave and aged man,
Of whom old Vmbria so much began
To boast it self: whom (to thy City near)
Even Tiberis it self accounted dear.
Thee warlike Rome, not without pregnant cause
Did call so much: She knew (to thine applause)
Thy skill, thy Verses of Heroic style:
For thee, when thou did die, the Nymphs of Nile,
The Latin Naiades and Greek did mourn.
O may thy bones lie soft within thine Urn;
O may thy purer soul for ever, even
For ever rest in th'Empiraeal Heaven.

The End of the fourth Eclogue.
ECLOGUE V. Treating of the Behavior of Rich men toward Poets; Entitled
CANDIDUS.
The Argument
Sylanus here the Poets dull
And sluggish life does disallow.
But Candidus complains at full
How Poets are contemned now.
The Speakers* Sylvanus and Candidus. Syl. O Candidus, once thou did use to
feed
Thy Cattle here with us; and on thy reed
Did warble out among our Country Swains
In these cool shades sweet songs, melodious strains;
Ear-pleasing witty verses; and withal
Wast wont to wrestle stoutly for a fall:
But alt'red now, as if thou did derest
The Shepherds Calling, and the Countries rest,
The Pastures leave, thy self do idle keep,
Suffering thy Songs to cease, thy Pipe to sleep.

Ca. You that have wealth enough at home, whose kine
Strut with full Udders, whose white flocks resign
Each milking their full Dugs, whose Milk like snow
Fills full the Milkpails with its overflow.
You whose fat dinners on the Table smoke,
Our verses praise; if any thing be spoke
More witty, it is applauded, and you lend
Your well-pleased ears with joy: but while we spend
Our verse in vain (by which we wont to live)
Some flattering praise, and empty words you give,
But nothing else: Meanwhile the Poet's poor,
Thirsts, hungers, starves with cold, even at your door.

Syl. Why, can not heed thy flock, and versify
When leisure is; and, casting sorrows by,
Lead on a pleasing life exempt from care?

Cand. He that is a shepherd must no labors spare,
But all his care about his flock must stay,
To go, to come, to chase the Wolves away,
T'inclose his Cottage with an hedge, to buy
Fodder and straw for's sheep, himself t'apply
To seek food for himself: which done remains
But little leisure for Poetic strains.
Sylvan, a commendable verse does task
All our endeavors, all our wits does ask:
Both these, to Poetize, and sheep to feed,
Are grand employments, and my strength exceed.
When I did sing, I thirsted; but (accursed)
None gave a cup of drink to quench my thirst:
Some mocked, and said, Thy Cloak is over-worn,
Thy knees are bare, thy rough-grown Beard's unshorn.
O Candidus, Now leaveless were the Trees,
Cold Winter made the whited Mountains freeze.
I stormed, grieved, scorned: Victual for us and ours
Devours up all; Male-lambs and wool devours;
Our Female-lambs we fold not, but for breed
Reserved them: And because on Milk they feed,
Because we kept them for the flocks supply,
Our Ewes we milk'd not; so their dugs grew dry.
I now repent my wit, if any part
Of wit I had, I now repent mine art:
My life repents me; since among so many
Resplendent stars that nightly shine, not any
With favorable influence does shine
Upon mine head, nor to my good incline.
Thou know I sang till now without reward;
My youth not much in want, but little cared:
But the condition of old age, which since
Has seized upon me, makes a difference
Far greater, and does render me more poor,
More wanting necessaries then before,
More weak's my strength (that strength which does remain)
And so cuts off all hopes of future gain.
But what I gained in youth, I must with speed
Make use of (now is the time) to serve my need.
Behold the little Pismire, prudent Creature,
And provident, does by th'instinct of Nature
Within her hollow Cells, while Summer lasts,
Hoord up new Corn against cold Winters blasts:
And lest her hoorded Corn the ground hid under
Should grow, she bites it with her mouth asunder.

Syl. They the Nativities can calculate
Do know (they say) the Stars of each man's fate:
For under Mercury they Poets place,
And under Jupiter the Royal Race
Of Kings and Potentates: Joves influence
To these gives gold and rich magnificence;
To those does nimble Mercury devise
Wit, Language, Music, Art to Poetize;
These things are thine: Why seek'st thou riches then?
God all things does divide amongst all men
As most is for their good. O then ('it is best)
Go with thy lot content; leave us the rest.

Cand. Thou riches do possess, I verses have;
Why then Sylvanus do my verses crave?
Why do intrude upon another part?

Syl. I nor thy verses, nor Apollo's art
Desire to take from thee; but I desire
To please mine ears with thy melodious Lyre,
With thy sweet sounding, sweet resounding verse.

Cand. If this thou wish, 'twere fit we did commerce;
That as (Sylvanus) thou my verses have,
I of thy riches so might have a taste.

Syl. He tastes my wealth that loves me: but the kind
That envies, hates; and with malignant mind
Repines at others goods, at others good.

Cand. My verse might thus be likewise understood
Enough by thee, though far remote I, and thus
Thou shall of verses have enough from us.
Verse is our ears, Cheese is our mouths repast;
If thou thine ears wilt please, then please my taste.
This Love, this Piety, this God commands:
God gives not all men all things in their hands,
Because none should suppose he does exceed,
But one another succor we should need;
Which does all Nations join through th'Universe,
French, Moors, Italians, Spaniards, in Commerce.
Let Us join our stars; make Jove on me reflect,
And Mercury shall with benign aspect
Reflect on thee; shall give thee matchless things,
His Hat, Rod, Harp, Herculean Knot and wings.

Syl. Thy language with unnecessary words,
Too many vain and foolish things affords.

Cand. Thou say that all things vain and foolish be,
That in thy riches seem t'indamage thee:
But if thou will my Muse, my Verses hear,
Rowse up thy drowsy mind and make it clear
From worldly cares: A Verse desires to find
A cheerful heart, a clear, a candid mind.
But I dejected, frigid, indisposed,
With hunger stupifi'd, with wants enclosed,
Am circulating like a hungry Kite;
My mouth is scorched with thirst, my skin (once white)
Long since grew black and withered; in my Fold
I have no Cattle, in my Purse no Gold,
No Corn in Field: And (I thus poor and bare)
Would have me live secure, exempt from care?
This Medicine is no cure for my distress;
Come, make me merry, clothe my nakedness,
Provide me food, my weak old age supply;
Thou then shall hear me sing and versity.
Well furnished houses, Cellers full of wine,
Full vessels, flaggons full, full food to dine,
Barns full of Corn, fair flocks that bear the Bell,
Full bags of money; These all cares expel.
Then in December, in those winter nights,
To sit before the fire it much delights,
And there in th'ashes (for a sporting trick)
To plough up furrows with a little stick;
To roast ripe Chestnuts there, and them all over
With embers till they roasted are, to cover;
With full filled glasses of refined wine
To quench our thirst, to please our taste. In fine,
Among the merry spinning Maids to sit,
And hear them tell a Tale, and laughed at it.
Great Tityrus himself (as Fame does ring)
By learned Mecoenas patronized, did sing
More lofty strains of Farms, Fields, Cattle, Wars,
And with his high raised notes did reach the Stars;
Dame Fortune gave him eloquence: But us
Poor weak Plebeians, all bepatched thus,
Disguised with leanness, fed with coursest grain,
The Muses shun, Apollo does disdain.

Syl. If Fortune, as I hoped, my wish would grant,
I would, O Candidus, supply thy want.

Cand. I would to God, Sylvanus, that thy will
Were but as prompt, as forward to fulfill
Thy promises, as thine estate does rise
Now great enough to give my want supplies.
I seek not Cosmus riches, nor desire
Silk garments, Kingly fare, nor Cloaks of Tire.
I hunger not for Aesops costly dish,
Nor for Minerva's Buckler is my wish;
The Palaces I need not of that King,
To whom his iron colored Beard did bring
A Name; or else if I mistake it not,
That name by's brasen-colour'd beard he got.
These things long since (I now remember well)
I learned of learned Vmber in his Cell.
I but apparel ask, I seek but food
Within some little Cottage: This more good
Will do then wealth, if of this I were sure
It would with me, while life endures, endure.
Pythag'ras Table, Codrus household stuff
Let me but have, and I shall have enough.
Often have I found some that some hopes did show,
Magnificent in words, in deeds but slow:
But I on thee depend, on thee but one;
If thou deceive me, then my hopes are gone:
I then shall mute, I tongueless shall become,
As in the Solstice Philomel is dumb;
Then on the Posts our arms we may suspend,
The Play house shut, and give the Shows an end:

Syl. O Candidus, have seen the City Rome?
Have seen the sacred Synod thither come
Of Bishops? where so many Poets are:
Where such abundancs is of things so rare,
So beautiful? O it is a thing of ease
To gather wealth in such fair fields as these.

Cand. Thou do mistake, Sylvanus, if thou think
I covet to be rich: The Wolf does drink
Raw blood, does eat raw flesh; and thinks indeed
All other Cattle as he feeds, to feed.
Thou faulty, think others in thy fault,
And halting on the foot that thou do halt.
I seek not to be wealthy, but to live
Content with little, let them to me give
I shall contented be with meanest fare.
Romes Palaces I saw; but do suppose
That ever Rome did profit me with those?
Dead is Augustus (ah) and in his Urn
Never, O never hither to return.
If Rome give any thing, she gives but bables;
She takes our gold, and feeds us with her fables.
At Rome (alas) sole Money now does sway,
Virtue's exiled: but we must hope they say.
And now through all the world ( Augustus dead)
Poor Poets only with vain hopes are fed.

Syl. Come, speak of fights, men's famous acts recite,
Speak of the Wars of Kings and men of might;
And when thou speak, apply thy self to them
That Scepters hold, and wear a Diadem,
That govern Kingdoms; Thou may find (perchance)
Among them some that will thy state advance.

Cand. I them shall find that will me scoff and scorn,
Our Poesy lies now so much forlorn,
And has as much respect as have the Stews;
Why, O Sylvanus do provoke my Muse?

Syl. It is not seemly to provoke or wrong
A Poet with foul words, or lavish tongue.

Cand. I cannot, I, but speak the truth; but if
Thou would the truth should be concealed, in brief,
Provoke me not with words unfitly spoke.

Syl. To give good counsel is not to provoke.

Cand. I Am rich in counsel, but most poor in gold;
How shall so poor a Poet then unfold
Fights, famous acts of men, and wars of Kings;
So poor a Poet, whose whole In come brings
Not means enough to buy a knife that is fit
To cut a Pipe aright with holes in it?
See what a ragged sheath my knife is in,
The pin's dropped out; (it is not worth a pin)
Look on my knife which from the sheath I draw,
It Is edge is full of teeth, and like a Saw.
This yet were nothing; but where food is scant,
It is a great intolerable want.
Good Counsel strengthens, but bad breaks ones heart,
Weakens the strength, the courage does subvert.
Great men will blush to give a gift that is small,
And great they will not give; so none at all.
Add, that our Kings a verse as much affect,
As Northern winds the frondent leaves respect.
Or as the Southern winds indulge the Seas;
Or as cold-nipping frosts the Vineyards please.
Beside that Kings themselves inured to leisure,
Pleasing their senses with delights and pleausre,
What things they most affect, they most approve:
Hence wanton verse is made of lustful love,
Of scurrilous discourse, of Ganymeds
In Stews, of sloth, of most infamous deeds;
Which for a modest Poet to dispense
Were sinful, were a capital offense.
But they whose warlike hands with Sword and Shield
Have fought pitched Battles in a bloody field;
Who man-like armed in steel their foes controlled,
And not effeminately sat in gold,
Loved the grave Muses: And those noble Kings,
Whose potent hands achieved heroic things,
Heroic Verses loved: But when (in fine)
Those valiant men, those Spirits Masculine
Were once declined, no subject then was found,
Which Poets in their lofty strains might sound.
Then fell the Poets wit, then Poesy
With all her lofty strains did ruined lie.
But if perhaps some King should now prepare
For bloody Wars, should muster up with care
Well armed Forces, should with hot Alarms
Fierce Battles fight in honorable Arms:
If careless of his honor, he neglects
His Fame in Foreign Lands, or disrespects
Ages to come, contented with such praise
As present times and his own Subjects raise,
Not valuing t'immortalize his Name
By Poets, in the Registers of Fame;
He Is barbarous, and Verses does detest,
Or covetous, and does himself inchest
Together with his gold, where drowned he lies,
And with the burning cares of Midas fries.
And there are some that dare on Kings intrude
A rude, Malignant, rustic multitude,
Of jesters, wantons, Parasites, Compliers,
Adulterers, Stageplayers, Scoffing Liers,
These all hate virtue; these a thousand ways
Drive Poets from the King; as from their preyes
Crows drive all other beasts and birds, when they
Have found a new fallen Carcass for their prey.
And there some lawless, saucy Poets are*
Who rudely bred without a Master, dare
What Kings affect (and Kings sometimes affect
Ignoble things) in their weak dialect
To write, to register; for Poets too
Are mad sometimes; and these make much ado,
I know not with what levity of mind,
To pass for Poets; These, when once inclined
TO apply their mouths unto their trivial reeds
Themselves applaud, and boast their verse, their deeds,
Unelegant, conceitlesse, of no prize,
Indocible, improvident, unwise.
He that to these vain fellows hearkens much,
Thinks the fault common, thinks all Poets such;
So leaves the learned Poets; wanting skill
To know the true from false, the good from ill.

Syl. I by the Gods, and by the Olympic powers
O Candidus do swear, if Fates of ours
Successful prove, I will thy wants supply,
Mean time, till better times, live happily.
Refuse not then a little while to join,
For both our future goods, thine hopes with mine.

Ca. If thus to me thou wish, I wish again
Thou, O Sylvanus, may thy wish obtain.

Syl. I wish indeed, and long it shall not be
Before I true performance make to thee.

Cand. Go with a mischief, never to return
Most avaritious wretch, and quickly burn
With Midas Fever, quickly turn to gold
Like Midas whatsoever thou touch, or hold,
Or take, or taste; since in the base esteeem
Fair virtue, fouler then vile gold, does seem.

The end of the fifth Eclogue.
ECLOGUE VI. Treating of the difference between Citizens and Husbandmen.
Entitled CORNIX.
The Argument.
Cornix describes how different
The Citizens and Rusticks be:
Then taxes in his argument
The various Fools of each degree.
The speakers Cornix and Fulica. Co. NOw winter snows, the Northern wind does
roar
The Frozen icicles hang over the door;
The Ploughman with his Oxen take their rest
The ground's asleep, and lies untilled, undrest:
The shepherd in his russet Coat does close
The sheepfolds, and does sluggishly repose!
Smoky Neaera sits before the fire,
And pottage boyles; first Summers heat did tire,
But now it is praised: And winter praised then
Does now displease, and is disprais'd again.
Inconstant thus the present times abhor
That cold, which once they wished and hoped for.

Full. Good things expected seem more great, but less
That good is thought, which present we possess:
As at a distance burning lights appear
Greater afar, and lesser when more near.

Cor. Each season has it pleasures, has its joys,
Look how the rough and ragged coated boys,
Uncomb'd, undrest, rejoice when hogs are killed,
They take the Bladder, and till it be filled
With wind, their swelling Cheeks do puff and blow
The Bladder like a Belly: Beans they throw
Into the Bladder, then it shines and sounds,
They toss it up, and catch it at rebounds:
Now with their feet they kick it; by and by
Their arms embrace it: if aloft it fly,
With stretchtout Fists they meet it, and again
Repel it: if it fall, they run amain
And mount it up; so toyling at their play,
Running, returning, winter's worn away:
The Country Football thus does overcome
The winters cold; but we sit here at home
In better case, under a warm thatched roof)
Where (while the cold aloft is kept aloof)
We pass the time, and warm our selves the while
Before the fire, until the milk do boil.

Full. Cold winter does our Poverty declare;
Doubtless we young men all imprudent are,
And all improvident; while Summer lasts
We careless walk, forgetful of the Blasts
Of winter, all our Coin we cast away
Upon a fiddler for a little play.
But when the Northern wind returns with Frosts
From the Moscovian or Scythian Coasts,
The trees unclothing, when the naked trees
All leavelesse show the birds nests built in these,
We naked then are pinched with cold, our back,
Feet, shoulders clothing, Food our bellies lack.
Winter declares our foolishness; more wise
Are Citizens, their heaps of money rise,
They warmly cloth themselves, and furre their Coats
With skins of Foxes, Lynxes, Lambs, and Goats.

Cor. All men are mad; nor are we sole in fault:
Yea rather greater madness does assault
The Citizens themselves; but yet in this
Fortune their mother, our Stepmother is.
If hapless Fortune us oppress, our Fate
Is madness then: make me but Fortunate,
I shall be rich, I shall the chiefest be
Within the City, all will rise to me,
Will listen all: The vulgar then will stand,
And men of middle rank with Cap in hand,
They me will honor; all the multitude
Will ask my Counsel: and there will intrude
Upon me for advise the Magistrate,
The People, and the Senators of State.

Full. O Cornix, Cornix: it is not Fortune: it is
The wiser soul of man that acts this:
Fortune can none or great, or happy make,
It Is God that does it; as Amyntas spoke.

Cor. Why, Fortune is a God; but tell I pray
What did Amyntas of this matter say?
For he was wise and learned, he did know
The cause of things above, of things below,
But yet, a little e're thou tell, go see
The Fodderstalls, and how the Cattle be:
Go quickly, quickly come; and heat thee so:
Heat after cold's more sweet; go quickly, go.

Full. The snow's so deep, it reaches to my knees:
Our houses scarce will bear such loads as these:
A towering pile, on yonder Chimnies head,
Sharp pointed, mounteth like a Pyramid.

Cor. Give Fodder to the Cattle in the stalls,
Stop up with straw the Chincks about the walls;
Which done, make fast the doors, make sure the Fold,
Nothing does hurt the Cattle more then cold.
What art already come? Oh, what is this have
So much unwonted, that thou come so fast?

Full. Winter me careful makes in frost for fire;
But it is more strenuous, and I more desire
To make my lodging in the warmest hey:
There in an hollow bed my self to lay,
It Is comfort after cold: I need no sheets.
That bed is full of heat, is full of sweets.

Cor. Begin, and what the different manners are
Of Citizens and Country men declare.

Full. Thus then, this difference in each estate,
Which did those two so much discriminiate
Began, as our Amyntas did relate.
In the beginning when things first began,
The great Creator, God, Created man;
And with the woman joining him in love,
That glorious Maker of the skies above
(For thus Amyntas called God; this name
I well remember yet) willed them to frame
Themselves to generate a noble breed
Of Children, taught them how to raise their seed.
They fall to work, and faithfully fulfill
The Lords command: and would to God they still
Had kept it, and not broke it, as they did
By tasting the apples of the Tree forbid.
The woman is a Mother now become,
Brave boys and girls did issue from her womb,
And fruitful she by Childbirth every year
A Child or Children, did successful bear:
So that she multiplied the generations
Of mankind by those frequent Propagations.
The Lord returned when thrice five years were spent;
The woman as she sat within her Tent
Dressing her Children, looking out before
Perceived him coming, almost at the door.
Adam was absent: He secure did seed
His bleating Flocks, no base adul'trous breed,
No foul adult'rer was suspected then:
But woman afterward conjoined to men
By multiplied Marriages, the Trust
Between them brake, and was deceived by lust.
Then Goats were made without apparent horns,
The jealous husband then suspects and scorns
His chaste (perhaps) his loyal wife: Thus they
That others wrong, think others them betray.
The mother blushed: and doubting lest (in fine)
Her many Children were a pregnant sign
Of too much Lust: with speedishe puts aside
Some of her Sons, and them with hey does hide,
Stubble or straw: The Lord by this time came
Into the Tent, blessed all within the same:
Woman, said he, produce thy children here,
She then commands her eldest Sons to appear.
God smiled upon them as we use to smile
On pretty Birds, or little whelps: the while
He smiling said unto the first of them,
Take thou the Scepter and the Diadem,
Thou shall be King: The glittering sword and shield
With other warlike weapons of the Field
He gave unto the second: Thou, says he,
A Duke, and Captain in the wars shall be.
The peoples Axes, and their rods of broom,
The gentle Vine, the darts of famous Rome
He then produced, and on them all a row
That then were visible, he did bestow
Those noble gifts: when God had thus bestowed
Among the children there that then were showed
The Regal Rule, the places of command,
The Magistracy, silent he did stand,
Weighing those honors he conferred on Man:
Mean while the woman glad that things began
So luckily, with speedy posture runs
Unto the sheepcoats, and from thence her Sons
Which there were hid and under Fodder laid
She voluntary brings: and thus she said,
These also be my Children, O no less
Almighty Father these my Children bless.
Their bristled heads were white with chafe, with straw,
With Cobwebs foul their shoulders: which when saw
He did not smile on them, but casting down
His troubled looks o'reclouded with a Frown,
You smell (said God) of stubble, earth and hey;
Yours then shall be the Goad, the Spade, the Clay,
Your share shall be the Ploughshare, yours the yokes,
Yours all the Tools of Tillage, Carts, Wheels, Spokes.
Some shall be Ploughmen, some shall oversee
The Cattle, some of you shall shepherds be.
Some shall be mowers, some shall dig the ground,
Some Seamen, others Heardsmen shall be found.
But some of you we will make of Cities free,
Yet you but Botchers shall or Butchers be,
Bakers or skullions, or the like by Trade
Accustomed to be sordid, only made
For daily labor; and (till death) at best
You, servile, shall be servants to the rest:
This said, the Almighty reascended Heaven.
Thus servitude was to the Country given,
Thus, as Amyntas said, the difference ran
Betwixt the Citizen and Country man.

Cor. I should have wond'red if Amyntas spoke
Ought that was right, or which for us could make:
He was a Citizen; and City youths
(That have no business but to forge untruths
And foolish Fables) us incessant mock,
And moke poor Country men their laughin stock.
The Cities talkative and prattling vein,
Such Fopperies and vanities does feign.
Nor do they blush to frame these trifling lies
Of the Supream-supernall deities.
This jesting with the Gods ('it is manifest)
Is railing Blasphemy, no pleasing jest.
But art so witless, do thy Tripes so swell
Within thy belly, that thou can not tell,
Nor do perceive that while with Censures sharp
These carpe at others, at thy self they Carp?
But yet a little let us our selves apply
To note the Cities Follies, lest thine eye
Deceived (perhaps) with shows, should these men hold
More wise, more happy that in burnished gold,
Rich Purple, or fine Skarlet glittering shine,
I many men have seen with these mine eine
In brave apparel with Majestic pace
Walking about the public Market place,
Whom secret hunger and domestic want
Have sorely pinched, as if concomitant.
Doubtless in this the greatest follies lie:
For feyned wealth is real poverty:
And what does sloth of life, or sluggishnesse
But madness in reality express?
I likewise have some Fathers seen (O vile,
Unworthy, wicked men) who, that the while
Themselves may neatly live, may sleep and play,
Their faire^t daughters foully do betray,
Do prostitute to men of meanest race
In Brothel houses: what more bad, more base;
What more perfidious, what more foolish ever?

Full. But what it otherwise their best endeavor
Could not support their lives with fit supplies?

Cor. Why, since they have as many souls, and eyes,
And hands as we, why should they not, in sort
Like us with fit supplies their lives support?
And some there are who madly seek in vain
For wealth, where yet no mortal wealth could gain
From the beginning: they their brass and tin
Wash with the juice of herbs, and then begin
Their chymick distillations, and are bold
To think to extract from thence most perfect gold.
But (ah) from thence no gold they can exhale,
Their metal with black duskinesse is pale.
Some likewise are, that hidden gold to find
Under the ground, the ground have undermined:
Have used black Magic, and in enchanting spells,
These time and labor lose, gain nothing else.
What more uncertain, what more vain those?
What ever did more foolishness disclose?
These all things, that they Country work may fly
All things I say will undertake, will try,
And to do nothing, all things will pretend:
These ever are beginning, never end;
By sinful Usury they dare extort
Their infamous supplies, their base support,
Their hooks with force, with cunning, with deceit
Of Food, of maintenance; and always bait
A thousand ways for wealth, a thousand ways
They seek for honors, how themselves to raise.
We Country men keep Cattle, Goats, and Sheep;
These dogs, hawks, horses, Apes, and Monkies keep.
The shepherd feeds his Flocks and hea(...)t these
Feed Hawks and Hounds; judge now which most does please,
Which of these are more great, more noble things
O Fulick? which most wealth, most profit brings?

Full. If from our labors greater wealth arise,
Whence then have Citizens such store of prize?

Cor. They gain by fraud, by cunning and by force:
Force, cunning, fraud their labor is, their course.
See not (thou fool) how cruelly they press
Us husbandmen, what baits for us they dress;
With what great craft they catch us? to provoke
Our tongues to speak, what is not to be spoke,
A sacrifice they think from them proceeds,
Or else some pious, meritorious deeds,
To compass which, still pressed at their command
Are all their ears, their eyes, their mouths, their hands.

Full. But how so well acquainted have thou been
With the conditions of the Citizen?

Cor. I learned this heretofore, when I my Goats
Driving within the City from the Coats
Sold there, my milk crying up and down.
I sojourned with a Baker in the Town:
A Crafty fellow, prompt to their, to guile:
That underpar'd his half bak'd-bread with File.
He skilful in the City manners there
Related this: and did, affirming, swear
That then the City, nothing does reveal
More mischief, that he there did learn to steal.
And some there are, that having great estate
Left by their Predecessors, or the Fates,
On whores profufely spend them. O then this,
What more obscoene, O what more wicked is?
Come, tell me where are murderers? where is the trade
Of (...)oring used? where is sedition made?
Is It not among the Citizens resorts?
Reign not those things within the City ports?
What think of Kings, that others Kingdoms gain
By blood, that force their subjects to be slain?
What of the soldier that dares oppose
His breast to naked swords? that undergoes
A thousand dangers, one that for his pay
Hazards his life, or throws his life away?
Then this no greater madness; seeming glory
(Though momentary, though but transitory)
To life's preferred: a little praise they prize
Above their lives, above their liberties.
But what is glory? what is praise? what is fame?
What Is honor but a vain, an empty name?
It Is but the opinion, but the voice, the vote
Of the rude vulgar, which like froth does float.
These times to come will banish, will forget,
All these will vanish when thy Life does set:
As when the setting Sun at night declines,
The night comes on, the Light no longer shines.
They that the Seas sail over when they may
Live safe at land are fools: and fools are they
That put their trust to water and to wind:
So they that riches have, and have no mind
T'imploy their riches are but fools; and those
That for their children heaps of gold repose,
But pinch themselves, and their own bellies cheat
Are greatest fools: yet there is a fool as great
That what himself might do, leaves to be done
After his death by's successor or Son.
They who the Stars observe, and thence their Fate
Suppose to comprehend or calculate
Are Frantic fools: and he is more mad that pries
Into Gods nature, or his secrecies:
That dares upon that vast immortal light
Fix his but mortal, and too feeble sight.
Our faith is better: we believe by faith
All that, though but in words the Scripture says*
The Citizen does scarce herein assent,
Though forced with reason and with argument:
And on the sacred Altars one may ken
More Lamps of ours then of the Citizen.
Their faith is faithless too: they daily set
Their minds to search into the Cabinet
Of Gods decrees: But if it were fit to know
Them, or his Person, God would please to show
Himself and them: but since his will implies
They should be secret, what necessitie's
We should desire to know those hidden things
Which are denied us by the King of Kings:
And our devotion for all pious deeds
The City Pieties excells, exceeds:
For what abundance of all sorts of grain,
Of food, is gathered in a day or twain
From Country men, by those that ministering
Within the Temple sacred Anthemes sing?
My self have seen things so collected load
Full ships, which sailed within the walls, and rode
Within the Cities harbor: such the zeal
Is of the Country for the Churces weal.
And ther' another kind of fools, a sort
Immedicable, yet of great report,
Lawyers, Court brawlers, pleaders of a cause,
Skilled to gain money, Tyrants of the Laws.
They sell their Patronage for golden pay,
To trifle Causes out with long delay,
To make them long depend with a dilemme,
A vanity is, a Vintage is to them.
Another kind of fools on horseback are
Unlearned Physicians, Mountibanks that dare
Touch veins, sometimes unlawful for to touch
These on diseases (understood as much
By them, as by their horses) will impose
Some new found names, their rash advise to close:
These, though they grope in darkness, ignorant
Of what they do profess; yet have a grant
Sick persons to torment, and at their will
Unpunished, whom they cannot cure, to kill.
They that are rulers of the people, they
That govern others, making them obey,
The more command, the more of power they have,
The more insultingly they rage, they rave.
O where are pious Rulers now, O where
Do pieties and justice Friends appear,
Whom (once) our Fathers sitting by the fire
Were wont to name, remember and admire.
All things go now to wrack: the Temple's spoiled
Demolished, ruined, robbed, defaced, defiled,
And of the wrongs complains: the poor lament,
Sigh, groan: The widows weep with discontent.
But what is the cause which does these mischiefs cause?
Because base Lust does rule in stead of Laws.

Full. O Cornix, this thy fury does transcend
The bounds of honesty: thou do extend
All sins against all men; remember well
Some harmless men even in the City dwell.

Cor. In certain fields (I now forget their names)
Near Baleares Isles, no snake inflames
With stinging: For no snakes inhabit there:
Nor Owls in Creete, nor horses will appear
In Arecina's or Aegeria's wood,
Nor in City dwells a man that is good.

Full. Good men rare creatures, virtues are most rare,
And in few Cities, in few Countries are.

Cor. Thou Art mad O Fulica, thou art mad: For thou
As many foes have in the City now
As there are Citizens: they pil and pol
Poor us without respect, without control,
Us they constrain to steal, and then they send
Our bodies to the gallows to suspend.
It Is therefore just, nor is it against the Laws
That whatso're of theirs comes in our claws
We gripe, we shave it: and from them, from thence
What e're we gain by craft or diligence
To plume it lightly, softly by degrees:
And if that any by misfortune sees
The theft exceuse it, if unseen deny it.
The theft that hidden is, no wrong comes by it.
For whatso're the Citizens possess
Is all our labor, all our painfulnesse.

Full. Thou rovest now, now the most aequal line
Of right and reason thou do much decline.

Cor. O Fulica, the wickedness that reigns
In Cities all the word defiles, distaines.
Whence come in Summers prime those horrid storms,
Those floods, winds, hail, and water which deformes
The verdant Earth? I well remember, I
Have seen the trembling Earth a quaking lie,
Posts shaking, houses sliding as affright,
I saw the Sun by day, the Moon by night
Eclipsed, obscured why do the tares ore' top
The Corn, why spoil wild oats our harvest Crop?
The Vince does wiers bear in stead of grapes,
Unwholesome cloudy-weather blasts, mis-shapes
The vernall flowers: and all these ills, this curse
The City sins produce, and will bring worse.
Whence come tumltuous wars, and horrid arms
Which carry with them whatsoever harms,
Whatever evil is? within the walls
Of Cities, as from their Originalls,
As from their Fountains all these mischiefs spring.
Lycaon was a Citizen, a King.
Deucalion, with his beloved wife
Fyrrha, were Country dwellers all their life.
That brought the deluge, this removed the same,
That ruined mankind, this did man reframe.
If ever (as they say) these goodly frames
Of skies, Earth, Seas, shall be consumed with flames
This heavy judgment doubtless will come in
For sins of Citizens, for Cities sin.

Full. O Cornix, let us put a period
To this discourse: it is dinner time, and sod
The pottage is: I heard the boy's e're while
Speak of the Pottage: if of Cities guile
There any thing remains unsaid, to say,
Then speak it after dinner: come away,
Let Us go to dinner: it is an hour for meat
Weel leave the Cities, and our pottage eat.

The End of the sixth Eclogue.
ECLOGUE VII. Treating of the Conversion of young men to Religion, when the
Author began to take Religious Orders. Entitled POLLUX.
The Argument.
Here Galbula the Shepherds praise
Mounts to the stars; relates how
Pollux by sight of sacred rays
Converts, and does Religion vow.
The speakers Alphus and Galbula. Al. WHat think O Galbula, that where of
yore
Pollux the best of pipers, and before
The rest preferred, now suddenly retired,
And, as't by some power divine inspird,
His Pipes, Coat, Flocks and fellows he forsook,
And to religious vows himself betook,
His head does wear an hood, his back a gown,
Like a field Lark he looks with tufted Crown:
Four days before he did himself confine
To the religious Cloister, a divine,
A sacred apparition, as alone
He fed his Cattle in the pastures, shone
Most clear about him, which (they say) he saw;
And ever since from us he did withdraw.
The rest I now remember not ywis;
But what O Galbula, what think of this?

Gal. As our forefathers did affirm long since
(For I will utter things of consequence,
Which learned Vmber did of yore relate)
In the beginning, when man's first estate
God did dispose and order, he did will
Some should be shepherds, some the ground should till.
He that the ground first tilled, war rude, sharp, rough,
Like the stiff-stony ground that checks the plough:
But the first shepherd was a gentle child,
Most like the sheep, the sheep (a creature mild)
Which flows milk, which are from choler clear:
He (gentle) to no shepherd was severe,
Often from his flock he brought a sacrifice
Unto the sacred Altar: There he fries
A fatted Calf sometimes, sometimes a sheep,
But oftentimes a lamb: He thus did keep
A constant course of worship, that thereby
He brought great honor to the Deity.
He so prevailed with God, so well appeased
The Godhead, that the Deity was pleased
From the beginning to this time to fence
All Cattle with his careful Providence.
God then some shepherds of Assyria chose,
(The names I now remember not of those,
Cares so distract my mind) made kings of them,
And crowned them with a Regal Diadem.
Those (after) clothed in Purple and with Gold
I saw, they conquered Nations proud and bold.
When Paris saw three Goddesses (with joy)
In Ida's Mountain near to famous Troy,
Or Paris, or some one, that would (alas)
Have sacrificed his son, a shepherd was.
When Moses, frighted with Celestial fire,
Went bare foot on the ground to see, t'admire
The wonder, Moses was a shepherd then,
Moses, extracted from the watery Fen.
Apollo from his Throne deposed, exiled
In Greece, and wandering up and down the wild
Thessalian fields, a shepherd did abide,
Laying the greatness of his state aside.
When Christ was in the stable born, a Quire
Of Heavens Angels, glorious in attire,
Did to the shepherds in the sheep cotes sing
The birth of Earths Redeemer, Heavens King.
The shepherds having then that wonder heard
Of Christ's diviner birth, did not retard,
But ran with speed, the ground they lightly trod,
And were the first that saw the Son of God.
That little Infant, which on high does reign
Sole King of kings, did to those shepherds deign
Himself, his Cradle to behold, before
The Wisemen or the Kings did him adore.
And God himself, himself a Shepherd styles,
Styles those his Sheep, those men who free from wiles
Are of mild nature, of a lowly mind,
Of upright heart, to no deceit inclined.
And lest these words of mine thou should conceit
As a vain dream, insolid, wanting weight,
I Will tell thee more. As from the Town I came
Into the Country, I beheld the same
But very lately; I these wonders all
Saw lively painted on a Churches wall.
There Sheep were painted, painted were the Lambs,
As if down lying by their bleating Dams:
A numerous Troop of gallant horsemen there,
Dismounting from a Mountain, painted were,
Whose Coroents did shine with burnished gold,
A noble gallant sight; which to behold,
Detained all passengers with wondering eyes.
No marvel then if of the Deities
Our Pollux one might see: For those above
Love Villages, they sheep and sheep-cotes love.
God present is with simple, single breasts,
But (with deceit displeased) deceit detests.

Al. Thou speak the truth, if that the Pastures prove
Unhurtful to the Cattle of our Drove.
I saw both Ox and Ass, and Fodder-stall
With those brave horsemen painted on the wall:
I now remember what I then did eye
Presented there in rich Imagery;
I seemed to see those Oriental Kings
Presenting Gifts of Gold and precious things
Unto the Babe. But one thing I entreat,
O Galbula; which, if thou know, repeat.
What Apparition was it, which did accost
Our Pollux? Speak; think not thy labor lost.

Gal. I do both know it, and it likes me well
To tell it: it is a worthy thing to tell
A thing well worth our hearing, a relation
Religious, holy, worth our imitation.
A sharp hard-hearted Father, and a proud,
A rigid Stepmother, severely bowed
Our Pollux in his youth; his youth, the time
When sweetest sweetened thoughts are in their prime.
And when incessant labor had at length
Much weak'ned his infirm, invalid strength:
When by no means or art he could assuage
His Step-dames malice or his Fathers rage,
He did resolve to run away: but yet
One thing his resolution long did let,
And that was love; too passionate he moved,
With too too much impatience he loved.
Love is a Common Error, and appears
With too much vigor in our youthful years.
Love is a thing that is strong, but yet more strong
Is violence of love, where lasting long.
And when he was preparing to remove,
(For he was used t'acquaint me with his love)
With sad aspect, and lamentable groans,
In these complaints he thus his love bemones:
O Virgin, will not brinish tears be shed
From thy fair eyes, when thou shall hear I Am fled?
When thou shall hear, that thou so soon bereft
Of me so dear a friend, alone are loft?
Wilt any sighs for my departure spend?
Or will thou, cruel, me forget thy friend?
What, can thy flaming breast so quickly freeze,
That flaming breast of thine, which by degrees
Inflamed by love, so many times have filled
So many's eyes with tears for thee distilled?
Wilt not thou frequent sighs and groans exhale
From thy sad breast, and will thou not look pale?
I see the Maidens eyes, her tears I see,
I see the sorrows of her heart for me.
Alas, alas! what art can I invent
To palliate so great a discontent?
A double grief mine heart has over-laid,
One for my self, another for the Maid:
But I may weep, she not: yet fire, that lies
Most hid, more hotly burns, more fiercely fries.
Ye Gods preserve her safe for me, for mine;
That when mine exile past, I shall confine
My self at home, our (yet successless) love
May once at least at last successful prove,
Before old age too much come creeping on,
Before the vigor of our youth be gone.
Thus saying he went on; yet his desire
Was to return, such is the force, the fire
Of Love in youth: But now the Dice are thrown,
And his resolved of flight to most was known.
Tired out with grief and travel down he sat
Under a frondent Poplar, consecrate
To famous Hercules; and sitting there,
Behold a comely Virgin did appear,
Crowned with a Maiden Coronet; her face
Hands, eyes, and habit Nymph-like, full of grace:
And to lamenting Pollux thus she spoke,
Whither (dear youth) do travel? O betake
Thy self to quick return; Return, I say.
Thou knew'st not, (ah) thou know not how the way
Deceives, or whither it will thy steps mislead:
Yet (o) thou dare to wander, dare to tread
In paths unknown, supposing no deceit,
No dangers in these verdant fields await,
Thou think all safe; think (like a foolish youth)
What pleases profits, falsehood take for truth.
The stinging Snake collected in a round,
Lies lurking in the grass upon the ground.
Unwary persons soonest are beguiled.
When in the flaming fire the little Child
His harmless finger thrusts, he thinks no harm
Is in the fire, he thinks it will but warm,
Until he fe^l it burn, and then by sense,
He knows and fears the flaming violence.
This way with pleasing entrance does beguile
The passengers, and with delightful smile
Shows seeming joys: but entered in, when they
Think there is no danger in that pleasing way,
A thousand dangers, and a thousand snares
Surprise them in their passage unawares.
This path, as soon as yonder hill above
Thou Art over passed, points out a shady grove,
Where herds of wild and cruel creatures have
Each one his darksome Den, his dismal Cave;
This path leads thither: places for their site
Most horrid, darker then the darkest night.
Who so deceived goes thither, is forbid
Thence to return, but is in darkness hid.
And first his eyes are hoodwinked with a rag
Or fillet black as pitch; then him they drag
Through all the woods, through stormy brakes, and then
He Is changed into a Monster from a Man.
When he begins to speak, he roars or lowes,
When to lift up himself, he thinks he bows,
And downward goes four-footed on the ground.
Unable to behold the starry round.
The lower part of this black Valley shows
A Lake, which Sea-like with black water flows:
Above which over-hangs a mighty Mount,
Where pitch-like waters run from cold black Fount.
Those wretches hither drawn, are hurled from hence
Precipitate with horrid violence
Into the Stygian Lake, and deep Abyss;
Where in devouring Whirl-pools they by Dis
Ingulph'd, immerg'd, are huri'd from the light
T'infernal Styx, and Hells eternal night.
Alas, how many shepherds wit their flocks
Have been ensnared and perished on these rocks?
I careful still unwearied here do stay
T'assist, and to direct a better way.
Delay not then, nor vainly spend thy breath,
But O betimes of near approaching death
The flattering Courts abandon: Fly from hence,
Seek safer Coasts of better consequence,
Upon the private shore that lies opposed
To Cyprus, whence Mount Carmel is disclosed.
Carmel that famous Mount, whose towering head
With stately Cedars is environed.
Here the ancient Fathers (whom none parallels)
Had at the first their first-retired Cells:
Here were their houses made of frondent boughs
Within the thicked woods where Ilex grows.
And from this Mountain to your lesser hills,
Religion was deduced; as brooks and rills
Flow from an endless unexhausted Fount:
And you from this Original may count
A numerous, almost in numerous breed,
Which from this one Progenitor proceed.
In these sweet woods, where in abundance grows
The lofty Firre-tree, where with unctious boughs,
The fat and oily Terebinth does shine
With sweating Rosin, Pitch and Turpentine.
When thou shall happily thy life conclude,
Thine age shall in a moment be renewed
With change of years: Then I thee thence will bring
To better places, ever flourishing:
Thou shall Immortal be, shall from these clods
Of earth, have fellowship among the Gods.
Thou shall have residence above the bright
Refulgent stars, among the Nymphs in white;
Among the Nymphs of Trees, the Nymphs of Hills;
The Nymphs of Flowers, whence sweet perfume distills;
Whose heads are crowned with odorif'rous slowers,
With odorif'rous herbs; where thou the Powers
That are above shall see; where thou shall know
What heavens are above thee, what below.
This said* the Virgin vanished out of sight.
Then Pollux swore his mind was changed quite,
And that he suddenly was disengaged
From that (now conquered) Love wherewith he raged.
As flaming fire if it chance to burn the fields
Is quickly quenched, and to the water yields,
When swelled with floods the unruly River Po
His banks does overrun, or overflow:
So cruel love expires, which often in vain
His Quiver empts on those, that with disdain
Resist Loves first beginnings, and do prove
But timorous, or but lukewarm in love.
And Pollux, thus discharged of Cupids fire,
Into the silent Cloister did retire.

Al. Some men there are on whom the Gods do smile,
Yea though the men unwilling are the while:
And some there are whom the angry Gods assault,
Although without a cause, without a fault.

Gal. What power over Cattle we possess,
The Immortal Gods have over us no less.
This is enough for Country men to know;
Let Cities higher soar, and wiser grow.
Janus the Priest so taught, when as he came
Out of the City, and affirmed the same
Was on Record in a volum'nous Book,
Where it he read, whence he that doctrine took:

Al. The Sun is setting, and does scarely gild
The top of Baldus: Come, let us leave the field;
It Is time to leave it with the setting Sun.
Come Galbula, think not thy self undone
To carry Bag and Bottle home at night;
The Bag and Bottle empti'd are but light,
To carry both at night the labor's small,
They Are ponderous in the morning, but withal
They Are profitable burdens. Prithee come,
My work shall be to drive the Cattle home.

The End of the seventh Eclogue.
ECLOGUE VIII. Treating of the Religion of the Country men, Entitled RELIGION
The Argument.
The Mountains Candidus, the dales
Alphus commmends: then Candidus
The Virgins praise and Festivalls
That came to Pollux does discuss.
The speakers Candidus and Alphus: Ca. THe torrid Earth (O Alphus) now the Sun
Shines in the Summers solstice looks dun
Gaping for thirst: and now the the scorching blaze
VVarns us to drive our Cattle hence to graze
Upon the mountains, where less heat does fry,
Where moyst'ning dews upon the grass do lie.

Al. Those ay'ry Mountains, and high tops of hills
I see far off; but what from thence distills,
Or what the mountains are (to speak the truth)
I know not; For I always from my youth
Have dwelt in vales; But tell, what fruit abounds,
Or what is produced upon those hilly grounds?

Cand. O rude, and unconceited witless head;
What, wast thou born, and have been ever bred
Near brooks like more-hens, or in slimy vales,
Whence Phoebus such offensive Fumes, exhales
Where in the Bogs among the stinking weeds,
Among the Willows and green paper-reeds
That grow within the banks of foggy Fens,
Frogs, gnats, flies, worms have lurking holes and dens?
And dare thou then deride or vilipend,
The Mountains, from whose flowing founts descend
Such famous rivers? from whose Marble Mines
Such many pieces for the Temples shrines
Are hewed and polished? whose rich veins infold
Rare Metals, whence is dug refulgent gold?
What grounds but mountainous bear fitting trees
For shipping? what bear Physic herbs but these?
Upon the top of Baldus heretofore
Oft-times I gathered have black Hellebore.
No Medicine is more Physical, more fit
For Goats then this; Aegon commended it:
Aegon the Valsasine, when in the Spring
He gelt his Lambs and Swine, prescribed this thing;
He then prescribed it, and thus said, Apply
This for a sole and certain remedy.
Come, tell me where more Chestnuts are, or where
Is greater store of Acorns then are there?
Upon high Mountains I my self have seen
Clear Springs of waters, Pastures fresh and green;
I there have Pasties ear, and from the pot
Have filled my self with pottage fat and hot.
strong people there inhabit, there the youth
Is vigorous, and of gygantick growth:
Their feet are large, like brawn their shoulders hard;
Their stiff nerv'd arms strong sinews strongly guard;
Hairy their skins, hands rough, for service able;
To carry burdens indefatigable.
They from those Valleys to these Mountains high,
Resort, and to the Naval works apply.
No kind of men will fit the Town so well,
Whether you Cattle geld, or Timber fell;
Whether you cleanse the Stables, or the draught,
Or kitchins, or stopped gutters that are fraught
With sordid filth, or whether to descend
With longest ladders to the lowest end
Of deepest wells to cleanse them; these herein
Are expert, and for strength the wager win.
But what need many words? themselves they fit
For any labor, and accomplish it.
In kitchins some are Cooks, some make the fire,
Some turn the spit, some climb a little higher,
And sweep the Chimnies; others carry forth
Beeves bellies to the rivers: but their worth
Excels in this, most skilled they be to keep
Foul places clean, foul houses clean to sweep.
And, which I more admire, they run, they come
Under their burdens as not burdensome.
This people in poor Cottages are born,
They live on steep hills sides among the thorn;
And with the Goats inhabit as their guests,
In horrid Dens of wild, of cruel beasts.
Add here, that from the tops of Mountains high
It Is a short passage to the starry sky:
Some Mountains with their lofty Crests aspire
Unto the Clouds, some other mounting higher
Transcend the Clouds, and with their proud ascent
They touch, I think, the spangled Firmament.
There is a place (they say) that Eastward lies.
Where from the seas the morning Sun does rise,
Which (if I have ic not forgot too son)
With its aspiring top does touch the Moon;
And that long since a man there lived and dwell'd,
But for his gluttony was thence expelled,
Because that he devour d all th'Apples there,
And none reserved for mighty Jupiter.
Hence the divine and holy Fathers chose
Retired houses, places or repose
Among the Mountains: This do well attest
Carthusia, Carmel, Gargan; with the rest
Athos, Laverne, Laureta, Sina' Mount,
High topp'd Soractis shady vale and Fount,
Those Mountains famous by the fact and fate
Of old Nursinus, and that hill of state
Towred Camaldula, whose sacred head
With lofty Fir-trees is environed.
The rest I pass: for it is not mine intent
To speak of all in this short argument:
Celestial Creatures towering Mountains haunt;
Whereas the Duck, the Goose, the Cormorant,
The Snipe, the Bittern, Kites and moorish hens
Are ever padling in the foggy Fens.

Al. Among these praises of so great renown
With which thou do the craggy Mountains Crown,
Why speak thou not of corn, or of the vine?
Yet these two noble creatures Corn and Wine
Are the two chiefest Pillars, whose supply
Supports Man's Life in his Mortality.
The Mountaineers as soon as corn is shorn
Descend their hills into our vales for Corn:
Men of a rigid and severe aspect,
Of smoaky color, rustic dialect,
Lean, hairy, ragged, thirsty, full of wants;
The places natur's known by the Inhabitants.
But now thou speak of religious halls
Upon the Mountains, it to mind recalls
The strange reports we did of Pollux hear:
What Nymph, or O what Goddess did appear
To Pollux, tell (O Candid) if thou know
From our discourse of hills and vales does grow
No profit: but the benefit is great
When of Religion our discourse does treat.

Cand. Thy Galbula, that wont with thee to keep
To drive to grass the Cattle and the sheep,
Could satisfy thy wish, thee could acquaint
With the apparition of that Nymph-like Saint

Al. He many things of Pollux did unfold,
But of that Saint-like Nymph he nothing told:
Nor I (as I remember) did inquire:
But talking of Religion now does fire
My soul, does to my mind that Nymph recall,
Whose praise I count the greatest praise of all.

Ca. She was no Goddess of the Mounts or trees,
Nor of the Muses: she was none of these:
But she dismounted the supern^l skies,
Queen Regent of Celestial deities:
She mother of the mighty Thunderer,
Descended Heaven, that she might confer
Peace to the gasping youth; at her command
Tethys and Ceres as attendants stand,
And Aeolus himself, that strongly binds
In darksome Caves the ranging raging winds.
Her, God above the stars, above the Sun,
Above the glittering Constellation
Of Cassiopey has lift, has bound her Front
With Oriental stars incircl'd on it:
And that she might eternally be graced
The silver Moon under her feet he placed.

Al. O Candidus, thou speakst of wonders rare,
Unheard, unknown of Shepherds; but declare
What Is Tethys, what is refulgent Cassiopey?
Who Is Aeolus whom all the winds obey,
That bridles up the winds in concave cells?
What are those horses of the Sun? come tell's,
Great matters and unknown thou do unfold.

Ca. Some part of them are stars, some name of old.
All which when Pollux had me showed and taught,
Within a sacred Temple he me brought,
Where all these things were painted on a wall:
This wall (quoth he) thee will inform of all.
The wall was painted, gilded curiously
With many Pictures, much Imagery;
I do not all remember, dull and weak
My memory's become: though I now speak
I scarce remember; though I often fit
My mind to ponder, and reponder it.
Often to consider, and remember well,
More strong then Physic is, or Magic spell.
When with dark Clouds the skies are masked in black,
This Nymph can clear the Clouds, or chase them back.
She the dried fruits, half dead for want of rain,
Can with refreshing showers revive again,
She from the parcht-up pastures when she will
Can raise fresh founts, can rain on them distill,
And those raised founts, or rain distilled she can,
When ere she please, restrain from fields, from man.
Of barren grounds that bare no grass ere-while,
She when she will can make a fertile soil.
When that cold Planet, that malignant star
Of luckless Saturn culminates so far
As Scorpius, and in that dismal sign
Has entertainment with his pallid shine,
No storms of hail the Corn shall spoil, no fire
Shall houses burn; though, when those stars conspire
The Incensed heavens (as they say) such scars
Dejaculate on the earth from the angry stars.
All this that Virgin-Nymph (her Sexes Gem)
Can keep from us, and us preserve from them
If she but favor us, our harvest Crops
Shall fill our barns and garners to the tops.
And all the pregnant Cattle of our flock
Shall bring forth Twins, and multiply the stock.
If Cattle thrive not, or their fleeces shed,
She, solely with the nodding of her head
Can Milk, Fleece, Lambs restore; can with her art
The Cattle cure, and each disease divert.
There Is how no need to follow rustic Pan,
Or any rural Gods, which foolish man
Did (as it is reported) heretofore
With much devotion, but in vain, adore.
In Circle of the Nymphs rich Altar there,
Wax Pictures pendant were, which shapes do bear
Of Goats, Waynes, Oxen, Sheep; I did denote
And view them well; I there saw Janus Goat
Modeled in wax; and I remember, I
Read on a painted Tablet (hanging by)
Inscribed thus in Verse, Here view the vote
That Janus paid for his preserved Goat.
And while I this read over by degrees,
Pollux devoutly falling on his knees
Upon the Marble pavement straight before
That Altar; he the Nymph did thus implore,
O Goddess, Governess of Towns and Franks,
We pray thee let not Po swell ore his banks:
Let not, O let not the Nocturnal Hag
Our tender Infants through black darkness drag:
Let not Hobgoblins, nor the walking Sprite
Frequent our streets by day, nor house by night.
O Goddess, favor Husbandmen, destroy
The Moles, whose heap'd-up hills the fields annoy:
Remember (Nymph) when winter sharply blows
To cover all the Corn with dews, with snows.
O let no Vermin when the Corn is shorn,
The next ensuing year devour the Corn.
The Northern winds from growing Figs restrain;
From Cranes the Beans, from Geese defend the grain:
From Serpents Oxen, from the subtle Fox,
The subt'ler thief, preserve our herds, our flocks;
The fruits from Canker, Vines from hail and storms;
From Wolves the Cattle keep, from herbs the worms:
Our Dogs from madness, from fierce flames of fire,
From Lightning keep our Villages entire.
Our Bacon from the Mice and soldiers keep;
From worms, and from the things that slowly creep,
That slowly creep (alas my stupid mind
Has lost the rest, forgets what is left behind.
But verse has often to my memory)
Reduced forgotten things: I Will turn and try
Those measured numbers, I by them may chance
Oblivion, chase, remembrance readvance)
Our Bacon from the Mice and soldiers keep,
From worms, and from the snayles that slowly creep
Our gardens guard; (se'st Alphus, se'st thou not
The force of verse; I Have got what I forgot,
And now remember all the rest in fine)
From roaring thunder keep our Buts of wine:
From cold our Ewes with young when frost do freeze,
Our Calves and Cattle rescue from the Breeze;
Our hogs from swelling Squinzies in their throats;
From loss of labor in their rural Cotes
Assist O Goddess our inurbane swains;
O from the drone among Bees that drains
Their honeycombes defend the Bees; Defend
Our Pease from thievish birds; thine help extend
To keep the Fleeces of our sheep from rhorne,
From Burrs to keep our wool unshorn or shorn.
O Goddess, O of men the governesse,
Poets Protectresse, easer or distress,
Griefs medicine, Patroness of Flocks, of Cotes
I pray thee grant our Prayers, grant our votes.
Thus Pollux praid; I leaning to the post
Casting my stretched out leg my staff acrost,
Marked well his words; and with great care uplaid
In my remembrance all the words he said.

Al. O Candidus, think not that some reward
Pollux should have for his so great regard,
For's pious prayers, for's religious love?
Our goodness doubtless does goods improve,

Cand. Why should we not give him something for it?
That we should cratefull be it is very fit.

Al. Rustic; Thou cratefull do for grateful call.

Ca. Cratefull between and grateful the ods is small.
We must give something; yet lest twice we give,
Let Easter pass, what time the Priests do shrive
Offenders, and absolve them from their crimes.

Al. What shall we give (a Calfe's too much these times)
A Lamb, or Hare? Our pieties intent
Is laudable, if but a goose be sent.

Cand. The season shows the gift: when winters snow
Stops hares from running, then an Hare bestow.
A goose with Autumn and November shapes:
The Summer gifts are Filberts, Apples, Grapes.
A sucking Kid or Lamb are for the spring:
Then if thou do perceive a whinderling
Among the late fallen Lambs, that does not thrive,
That will not well be sold nor kept alive,
We Will give that gift; That gift when e're it falls
Will well enough befit their Festivalls.
And after dinner when my leave I took,
He gave me verses, copi'd from a Book
Of all the Virgins solemn Fasts and Feasts;
Thus saying, when Corroding care molests
Thy mind, these verses sing: and thou shall find
These verses medicines for thy care-sick mind.
When Titan from the Lion does decline,
And headlong enters into Virgo's sign,
Let age and youth rejoice; the virgin's plumed
With Angels wings, is to the Gods assumed.
Thrice eight days after she forsook this Earth,
Another feast is solemnized, the birth
Of that unspotted Virgin: then with fires
Her Altars flame: the Priest adores, admires,
Offers new sacrifices: whiles the Sun
Returns to Libra, where he swift does run
Preparing to aequiballance days and nights,
Picenum then exults with new delights:
Epirus ships transport (with swelling pride)
Their Epirots on the Adriatic Tide.
The Thuscans, Vmbrians, Venetians then,
With those of Sicily bring wares and men;
All which in multitudes with gifts from home
Unto the Temple of Lauretta come;
Where having paid their vows, they joyful rise
And on the lofty Mountain Merchandise,
And when the Sun his longer course does vary,
And in a shorter enters Sagittary:
When the tempestuous Northern wind bestrews
The frigid fields with hoary Frosts and dews,
The Vestalls to their private Cells confined,
Forgetting their own Parents, only mind
The Virgin Saint, and with their whole intent
Her sacred presentation represent.
And when the Sun from half-horse-Chirons bow
Flies languishing, and enters (as below)
The winters sign of Icy Capricorn,
Let men and women then themselves adorn
In rich apparel, let them then begin
To celebrate with joy that day wherein
The Virgin was conceived, that holy day
The sacred Nymphs beginning did display:
Who from her first beginning, from a child
With base Immundities was not defiled.
When scorching Phoebus all inflamed does fly,
To cool his heat in humid Aquary,
Returning toward, and now near the spring
All ye that married are go speedy, bring
To the Altars sacred fire, and to the fire
Bring Frankincense; exalt your torches higher:
Be pompous and triumphant, for this day
The Virgin in the Temple did display
Her Motherhead: strange things did then betide,
A Virgin mother there was purified,
When Phoebus enters Aries, the Flocks
Conductor, shining with his golden locks,
Beginning to disclose the new-come year
With western winds which blow more warm, more clear,
More hours adding to the day then night,
Let then the winged Paranymph inlight
The Virgins house, and those strange things he said
Annunciate unto the wondering Maid.
This Festival the people draws by flocks
From Arnus river, and the Thuscan rocks
To solemnize it, at the Virgins shrine,
Within the Temples of the Florentine.
And then, but yet not long before that tide
The Virgin was espoused, and made a Bride
This holy day the maiden Nymphs does call
To celebrate this solemn Festival.
When the refulgent Sun is entered in
To Cancer, and the dog star does begin
To breath diseases, then sweet incense burn
To celebrate that day, which did return
The Virgin Mother home, from visiting
That other mother: then to the Altars bring
First fruits of corn, and hang them round the Rood
In honor of the double Motherhood.
These Verses Pollux gave which he did write,
When in the fields he watched his Flock by night,
When in serener Nights he did survay
The glittering stars, heavens armies in array.
He then more verses gave; but now no more
We can repeat: the Sun below the shore
Declines; bright Hesperus begins to appear
Suppressing Phoebus from our Hemisphear.

The End of the eighth Eclogue.
ECLOGUE IX. Treating of the manner of the Court of Rome, written by Mantuan
after his entering into Religious orders; Entitled FALCO.
The Argument.
When Faustulus had well survai'd
Romes frigid Pastures, he begins
To tax the Pastors (unafray'd)
For their enormities and sins
The speakers Faustulus and Candidus. Fa. WHat chance, O Candidus, thee brought
so far
From thine own Country to this place? here at
No brooks, no Pastures, no refreshing springs,
No sheepcotes safe, no cooling shadowings:
And yet those grounds are daily grazed by sheep.

Cand. O Faustulus our Coridon did keep,
Great droves and herds of Cattle here, while ere
Much gaining by the Cattle he did rear;
And he persuaded me that on these hills
Grew wholesome grass, that here were pleasant rills,
But when I once perceived these barren Mounts,
These craggy Rocks, these water-wanting Founts,
That I did leave my Country, that I went
So long a journey, I did much repent.

Fa. Since it is thy chance so safely with thy droves
To travel unto these Italian groves,
Thou may by right of former friendship come
Unto mine house, and make mine house thine home;
Here some few acres of poor ground have I,
Which scarcely will my livelihood supply:
What e're it be, betwixt thy self and me
Suppose it common; thou perhaps may see
Some lucky fortune; fortune like the wind
Though variable, may to good be inclined.
Until the scorching heat does overpasse,
And while our Cattle, lying on the grass
In the cool shadow, chew their Cud, come in
My Cottage, thatched with sedge; on yonder pin
Hang up thy scrip, thy sheepheards crook lay by,
Sit down a While; with drink refresh thy dry,
Thy thirsty throat; drink's needful, come, assay
This liquor,'twill thy burning heat allay;
Here take thy cup; do not thy drink decline,
Our tongues will be more fluent after wine.

Cand. What mad man in such heat will drinking spare*

Fa. Wind cools the thirst, and frees the mind from care,
Wine, Friendship, and the bodies strength augments,
Contents the taste, abandons discontents.

Cand. This Country bears good grapes, if that the vines
Within this Country grow that made these wines.

Faust. Come, fill thy cup again, it is no wast,
To drink one draught of wine is but to taste,
The second moists the mouth; the scorched throats,
The third refrigerates; the fourth denotes
Arms and Alarums to thirst the fifth does fight;
The sixth does conquer; and (as some do write
As old Oenophilus does well relate)
The seventh over thirst triumphs in state.

Cand. It Is safe to follow sound advice; it is good
I embrace grave Counselors (if understood)
My thirst is quenched; but there remains behind
My care-corroded heart, my pensive mind.

Faust. It Is wine allayes^ thy thirst, so 'twill in sine
Allay thy pensive mind; come, fill thy wine,
Come fill thy wine, and drink this medicine cures
The grief of heart, against all cares ensures:
This medicine Rome it self does use as chief
Against corroding care, consuming grief.

Cand. Each work and labor has its intervalls
Of rest, and for repose and Respite calls:
Let rest the flagon here a little while,
And cover it; lest it the flies defile.
No rain by day, no dew by night's here seen,
Nor in dry Cottages can herbs grow green.
Fierce famine, daily labors, scorching air
With leanesse do the Flocks impeach, impair:
Their fainting spirits scarcely can sustain
Their feeble bodies: their thin buttocks strain
Their stretched out bones within their arid hides;
Their empty bellies clunge up to their sides
Contract their hollow Bowels: see this Bam
More fearful now then is the fearfull'st Lamb,
More weak then is a sheep, was wont of yore
With head and horns the wolves to beat, to gore.
All which the lucklesse Crow, with hapless prate
Dvining, did to me prognosticate.
But me my fervent votes too much did sway:
I scarce was out of doors upon my way,
But that unlucky bird with sad portent
Flew from my right, and to my left hand went,
And sat a top on the sinister side
Of my poor Cottage; where extending wide
Her craking throat, she did-forbid thereby
My journey with apparent Augury.
Ah hapless cattle, which were wont to abound
With Milk and young, when in your native ground
You grazed and fed; now seeking grass in vain
You lose more juice by going, then you gain
By feeding; here both we consuming are,
You with bare pasture, I with bitter care.
O riches of our Country! O the Meades
Still flourishing! O grass that overspreads
The Frondent fields! O pastures past compute;
O Fertile soil, and never wanting fruit!
There crystal brooks and running Rivers glide,
Wat'ring fields, gardens, Towns on every side.
There are fat Cattle, Fertile fields are there;
When Sol in Cancers Tropic does apear.
When every where the thrashing floors resound;
When July burns, our fields with green are crowned;
The checkered hedges made of tender twigs,
Bear berries there and Apples, grapes and Figs:
There spring among the thorns sweet smelling flowers;
O the delightful shades of woods and bowers!
O the soft whispers, gentle murmurs there,
Which (I remember) thou and I did hear
In the cool shadows of the Turtles groans,
The swallows chatt'ring, and the tuneful tones
Which musick-making Philomel did sing,
When first the shrubs with grasse-hoppers did ring!
The gentle air by leaves of trees increast
Breathed pleasing murmurs from the blushing East.
There the wild Cherry trees producing berries.
Spread out their branches laded all with Cherries;
I lying on the ground, saw where I lay
The skipping cattle to rejoice and play;
I saw the frisking Lambs leap here and there,
And butting with their horns to run Carrere.
When slept, I had upon the grassy ground,
Sometimes with face erect my Pipe I Would sound,
Or with my voice would sing; somet-mes i would pick
The ripened strawberries which the^e grew thick.

Faust. Thou then might happy live, then fortunate
Thou might be called; but that thy good estate
Decause thou then did underprize (For thou
Bidst never of misfortunes taste till now)
Thee therefore thy good fortune left; but when
She comes again (if e're she come again)
As with their wiers Vines on all that is near
Catch hold, and closely to the next elmes adhere:
So catch her fast, nor loose her caught: her face
She changes often, she comes and goes apace,
She Is never constant; like Nocturnal haggs
Who walk (they say) by night disguised in rags
Through dismal shades; and as her face does vary,
So does her mind rejoice when things miscarry.
What she did give, she takes; nor does she advance.
Her acts with judgment, but does all by chance
She does repel, repulse, despite, despise
All those that are too fearful, or too wise.

Cand. As often as on my memory recoyle
The delicacies of my Native soil;
So many tortures in contented sort
I cannot bear. But whither does transport
Me my disquiet mind. Now, 'drench'd with gall
Of sad misfortunes, I to mind recall
My former happy times; which thoughts do vex
My pensive soul, and me do more perplex.
Now May comes in, and in my Country now
The lowly Brooms, the lofty vines do blow
Along the banks of Po, the pastures sides
Where Mincius with silvered water glides:
There now the Corn is eared; with blossoms red,
Pomegranate trees now there are all bespread:
The frondent Alder there (this month of May)
Does sweet-white Flowers on each hedge display.
But here as yet the Mountains are not seen
Beginning to bud forth with any green.
And if the ground so backward proves in spring,
What will cold winter and hot summer bring,
When hoary winter does cold frosts repeat,
And Summers Solstice burns with raging heat?
Yet here some herds of smooth-skin'd cattle are,
Whose soft unwrinkl'd necks the yoke never bare,
Whose lofty Front aspires with double horn,
Whose wanton breasts on dainty beds are born:
Unless these Fodder eat that is good, that is choic'st
Their bodies cannot be so fat, so moist.

Fa. This herd of Cattle that advance their Crest
Higher then the earth, and higher then the rest
That have long jointed thighs, devour up all:
First grass, then leaves of trees, anon the tall,
The topmost branches of the greenest groves;
But these poor Cattle, these infeebled droves
That only graze the ground for their repast,
Are in these barren fields compelled to fast,

Ca. But what need words? all creatures are the same,
For still the greater do the lesser tame.
Wolves feed on Lambs, Eagles on Pigeons prey;
The Dolphins in the Seas course, chase away
The smaller fishes. How comes this about?
A most prodigious thing it is no doubt.
If thou these places at a distance ken
From some high Rock, thou will suppose them then
Fat pastures, full of grass: but come more near,
More bare these places, and more base appear.

Fa. Rome is the same to men as is an owl
To birds; she sitting as the Queen of fowl,
And proudly nodding on some withered stock
Calls multitudes of Birds, which thither Flock
All ignorant of fraud; where in amaze
At her foul head, great eyes and ears they gaze
They wonder at her hooked beaks threatening top
And on the branches while they skip and hop
Now here, now there, the Nets entangle some,
The limetwigs others; all that thither come
Are overcome, are made the Fowlers prey,
And to be roasted, thence are born away.

Ca. O this is pretty; nor at any time
Could any thing be spoke more fit, more prime.
But O look yonder where a snake does thrust
Himself with crooked windings through the dust,
And thirsty with his thrust out tongue does beat
The liquid air, to cool his scorching heat.

Fa. O Candidus, what I forewarn thee now
Remember well: when thou the go through,
Guard with thine hat thine eyes, for there the brakes
Extend sharp pointed thorns which bite like snakes,
Whose crooked Brambles cloaks and cloths do tear:
Lay not thy sheephook down, nor yet forbear
To bear hard stones, and arm thy self with those,
Lest on a sudden thee new foes oppose.
Cover thy feet with shoes: for there the brakes
Are full of horrid and envenomed snakes;
Whose bitter bitings kill: and now more long,
More hot the days, their poison is more strong.
A thousand wolves, as many Foxes dwell
In dens within these vales; and which to tell
Is strange and fearful, I my self have seen
(This climate is so violent and keen)
Even men themselves transformed into the shapes
Of wolves, and wolf like acting cruel rapes
Of their own Flocks; and O with too much blood
Of their own Cattle drenched, as with a Flood.
The neighborhood observe and laugh at those,
But nor detest the sin, nor it opposee.
And Monsters often in wondrous forms appear,
Which the will aspected Earth produces here.
And oftentimes the dogs so madly rage,
That they with cruelties, with bloody strage
Outstrip the Wolves themselves; and they which wont
To guard the Flocks, and thence all vermin hunt,
Are vermin turned, and hostilely prepared
Devour those sheep which they themselves should guard.
Egypt (as't is reported) heretofore
Some certain Beasts did for their Gods adore:
Their Superstition, yet is less then ours:
Here, not some certain beasts, but all have Towers,
Fanes, Altars; doubtless a most hateful thing
To God and nature: who made man a King,
And subordain'd (as histories record)
All earthly Creatures unto man their Lord.
And often a sickly Summer enters here,
Which does produce a pestilentiall year:
Then in the field the fainting cattle lie,
Cast down and dead: the Lambs do bleat and die
Under their mothers Udders; Oxen tire,
Suppressed with heavy burdens, and expire.
Nor has the sickness mean, nor cure the Pest:
But this house does that house infect, infest,
The next house from the next attracteth death:
And thus the plague gains daily strength and breath.
This plague wild Beasts does yet but seldom kill,
But sweeps away the better Cattle still;
The wolves with sharpened teeth and ravenous throats
Keep Festivalls within our sheeplesse Cotes:
And with our losses are these beasts enriched.

Ca. Alas, alas; what fury me bewitched?
What headlong madness hither poor me drew?
Great madness it is to credit, to pursue
Deceitful fame: when I but understood,
But heard of Roman hills, of Tybers flood,
Of Romes fair buildings (by the mouth of Fame)
My mind was all inflamed to see the same,
And there among so many things of praise
To spend the short remainder of my days,
I madly came with half my Flocks; my Tents,
My sheepheards tools, mine household implements,
My milk pailes, pans, pots, kettles, beechen vates,
Wherein the maid her Cheeses circulates,
Over high hills I brought: and now my cost,
And now my labor all at last is lost.
O whither shall I turn? what shall I do?
The pastures which I brought my cattle to;
The Fodder which I hoped for, is denied:
So many chances are on every side,
So many dangers; I must (in distress)
Return into my Country, must confess
Mine ill-advis'd attempt, and must retreat
Ore stony Mountains through laborious heat.
Ah hapless sheep; O shepherd, from afar
Misguided hither by some lucklesse star!
Much better had it been to have never known
This Country, but to have staid within thine own;
Securely there in some refreshing Cave
TO have spent thy days till age brought on thy grave,
And there to sit, and there thy Flock to feed
With wholesome grass which our rich pastures breed
Along the banks where silver Padus glides,
Or where fair Athesis from Trent divides,
Verona's soil; Or in the fields more green,
More known, where crystal Mincius runs between,
Or where swift-running Abdua does dance
On glassy waters to the Realm of France.

Fa. Thee thine, and me mine own credulity
Does often deceive; I Have seen men mounted high
Upon the top of Fortune, when their pride
Would higher clime to tumble down beside
Their expectation, and could never rise.
Experience makes men wary, makes men wise;
These try before they trust; they follow not
All specious things; the better things have got
The letter praise; there where (I do confess)
Some that their names retain, their Fames no less.
All things do by vicissitudes excel
Those Cities whereof Vmber used to tell,
Troy, Luna, Adria, Salvia have but names,
Time has expunged the rest of all their Fames.
If (now perhaps) our Country does decrease
In greatness, yet her goodness does not cease.
There Is none in all the world but knows how great
Romes glory sits in her majestic seat;
Indeed the fame thereof remains alone,
But all the former benefits are gone.
Those unexhausted Founts which wont of yore
To water all these pastures with their store,
Want water now themselves; their arid veins
Exhausted are; no cloud upon them raines.
No grounds here Tyber waters with his Flucts;
Consuming time our ancient Aqueducts
Has totn in pieces; Time (that all devoures)
Has ruined all our Castles, all our Towers,
Hence, hence; O far, far hence ye Goats avaunt,
Here Is only pining Famine, pinching want.
Yet (as it is famed, and as our selves have seen)
Here dwells a gallant shepherd on a green,
Who from a Princely bird his name derives;
One rich in sheep and pastures, one who thrives,
Who for his verse the old Poets does excel,
And Orpheus, that Orpheus, who from Hell
Fetching his wife, attracted with his song
The trees and stones to follow him along.
He for all virtue, for all pious deeds
All other Latians excells, exceeds,
As much as Po does Tiberis excel,
Or as sweet Roses stinking weeds for smell;
As Abdua Macra, or as willows high,
Low Bullrushes, tall Poplars, Organy.
We count him like that Prince, to whom of yore
Learned Tytirus for twice six days (or more)
The sacred Altars smoked with sweet perfumes;
He Is keeper of the sheep, no wolf presumes
To worry them; more watchful he is, more wise
Then Juno's Argus with his hundred eyes,
Then Daphnis he is more learned; and not alone
More learned then him, but then that leaned one
Who kept ('it is said) of old among the swains
Admetus herds in the Thessalian plains.
He Is worthy to take charge of all the breed
Of Salenus Master, worthy to succeed
That venerable Father, who to keep
The Assyrian Flock, to feed the Assyrian sheep
Forsook his nets, forsook his ship, forsook
His All; and to the sheep himself betook.
He can the Flock defend, can cure their wounds,
Can madefie the drought of parched grounds,
Fresh pastures he can give unto the Flock,
He can the Fountains open and unlock;
The Favor he can impetrate of Jove,
And from the Flock can thieves and wolves remove.
If he the favor stay; But, if he frowns;
Hence (Candid) with thy sheep to better downs.

The End of the ninth Eclogue.
ECLOGUE X. Treating of the Controvesies between the observant and
non-Observant Friars, written by Mantuan after his taking Religious Ord^rs;
Entitled BEMBUS.
The Argument.
The Poet now the difference
Of false and true Religion notes:
And rightly does distinguish thence
Yhe sheep of Carmel from the goats.
The speakers Candidus, Bembus, Batrachus, Myrnix. Ca. GReat discord (Bembus)
has arose between
The shepherds of the Galilaean green,
And the rough Mountaineers of Palestine;
To this side Batrachus does most incline,
Myrmix to that; their arguments are fit
For disputation; both, themlselves submit
Unto thy Judgment; briefly they will declare
Their Arguments, that thou thine ear wilt spare,
And if no greater business thee withhold,
Thou Father art of Prophets, know of old
To settle brawlings, discords to compose,
And with fair language foul debates to close.
Thou likewise (as it is Famed) have drank the wine
Of Hippocrene, have seen the Muses nine,
Those Goddesses who keep that sacred Fount,
Eurotas Lawrells, and Parnassus Mount,
Have seen where self Apollo with his boughs
Offrondent Laurel did surround thy brows,
Where many gifts he did on thee confer,
His harp, his Lute, his Ivory dulcimer.

Be Come, freely speak; since now this freez'ng day
Compells us by the warmer fire to stay;
While winter bars our Flocks to range the grounds,
While Boreas his frigid blasts resounds,
While bitter frosts benum the better soil,
While Icicles hang dangling at the tile,
While Rivers with their frozen waters keep
Their dull and drowsy Channells, as asleep
Under their Icie pavements; we condemn
All leisures which no business act in them.

My. We shepherds, hapless men, in summers shine
Walk straggling; careful lest out Flocks should pine;
But when cold weather makes us keep within,
Then discontents and brawling-strifes begin.

Ba. They that presume authentic Rites to change
At their own pleasure, and themselves estrange
From Laws observance, these those parties are,
O Myrmix, who beget domestic war.

Be. And is your strife about the authentic rites,
The customs of (those ancient Proselytes)
Your Fathers? Then, O Batrachus, declare
What are those rites, and what those customs are.
Declare why from Phoenician soil you came
To this our Country; I well knew the same,
I saw those Pastures, I those fields have seen
With unexhausted moisture clothed in green.
There from the top of Carmels Mount does spring
A Fount of Crystal waters, watering
With bubbling streams the thick adjoining woods.
I saw the River Jordan, in whose Floods
That great and famous shepherd, heretofore
His sheep immerging cured their curelesse sore.
This River rising, running down the sides
Of Libanus, with full filled current glides
Along the Galilaean fields, and makes
An ample Sea with its conjoined Lakes:
And running thence again, it makes again
With its united floods a spacious Main,
Near to that City, which (as stories Fame)
Tiberius Tiberia's did name:
And running thence again, at length it falls
(Leaving behind the Jerichonian walls)
Into th'infamous Lake Asphaltites.
By this, and by such other things as these
It Is proved enough that we these Coasts have seen;
This speak, and end at length your strife, your spleen.

Myr. Bold Batrachus does still himself obtrude
With brazen face, and more then rashly rude,
Prefers himself to me with great ostent.

Bat. I nor obtrude my self, nor argument,
But, as commanded by the Judge, proceed.

Bem. Lay down thy sheephook Myrmix, and (with speed)
Thine also Batrachus lay down; your parts
You must not plead with arms, but upright hearts.
Speak Batrachus; Myrmix the while forbear,
That you may better answer what you hear.
He Is mad that is choleric; and he that is mad
Is of so much impatience, is so bad,
That not his heart he can, nor tongue restrain,
His acts are foolish, and his words are vain.

Bat. Bembus, I will relate, I will recall
Our Ancestors and their original,
We from Assyria came, as Candid proved:
Elias is our Father, we removed
All kind of ill from shepherds with strong arms,
Who fire from heaven brought with heavenly charms
Of fervent prayers. Thither and, or higher
Ascended in a Chariot of fire.
A Noble this, this is an ancient Line
Of famous Parentage, almost divine.
All other shepherds wheresoere inliv'd,
Are but as Rivers from our Founts derived:
We gave thrm Laws, we taught them thou art to breed,
To feed their flocks; they then muchmore exceed
In sin, who being Prime in Order loose
Their Primacy, while unadvised they choose,
And inconsiderate attempts pursue,
We roots, boughs, others are: and we ('it is true)
Are also boughs which from the root did sprout
Of our forefathers, now with age worn out.
Elias to the shepherds gave a sure,
A never-erring art, whereby to cure
Their crazy flocks, whereby to learn to know
What fodder hurts, what storms or winds did blow:
Of healthful, of infectious years he told,
Omitting nothing that concerned the fold.
But that same fountain which did flow while-ere
From Carmels Mount so Chrystaline, so clear,
With changed current ('it is apparent) now
Does Southward run, where Eastward it did flow
In times of yore; the old channel yet is seen.
These Innovators (changing what has been)
Have made new courses, have that old forsook,
Which our forefathers wisely gave the brook.

Myr. What Is that to thee, whether the rivers source
Run in a newer or an older course,
So that it overflowing overspreads
With fertile waters the contiguous Meads?
And why do of heavens Clime complain? The sun
His daily race in Southern skies does run;
The Vine that Southward grows best wine distills,
Best Grapes are gathered from the Lybian hills.

Bat. And those best Ewe-trees are that northward grow,
A River therefore best should northward flow.
A shepherd art? and (mad man) careless grown
Of thy poor flock (as if 'twere not thine own)
Thou talk'w of Vines; as if an equal line
Did regulate a flock, and dress a Vine;
As though thou did not know, or could not find
A difference in waters, grass and wind;
And what ill winds unto the Cattle blow
From Southern Climates, learn of Rome to know.
If South-winds hurtless be, why then, O why
Are Modens fleeces of a dusky dye?
Why snow-like white is all Clitumnus breed?
Why for fine wool do Mantua's flocks exceed
All other sheep? And why's Verona's fleece,
Next unto Mantua's, the fined piece?
Whence come those multiplicities of things
In various forms? The reason (doubtless) springs
From nothing else, then from the diverse kinds
Of operations in grass, waters, winds.

Bem. I prithee Candidus hence quickly take
These shepherds sheep-hooks; I perceive they will make
Fierce wars this day: Take them in private hence,
And hide them under yonder sedgy fence.

Bat. Bembus, I speak to thee; while heretofore
We lived together, which our Cattle bore
One common mark, alas, what shame, alas,
How many mischiefs did our Cattle pass?
Unlawful 'twas our sheep to wash, to shear
At the first seasons (as it is used) of th'year:
The thorns unfleec'd, and naked made our sheep,
The briars tore their naked backs with deep,
With bloody scars; their skins with scabs were rent,
Consuming humors made them pestilent,
And ulcers all their bodies over did creep.
It therefore much concerns what herbage sheep
Do feed upon, what kind of waters they
Do drink, and in what region they stay.
Come, tell me, Myrmix, tell me why the wool
Has lost its former color? once less dull.
What gave unto the flock these fleeces new?
Why are those Cattle of a blacker hue,
Which brighter were in better times? it is strange:
Their manners changing made their fleeces change.
Bembus, I now to thee return; and will
Endeavor brevity: but I Will distill
The truth, that so the sentence thou shall give
May merit honor and for ever live.
The judgments thine: I will the truth pursue;
A true relation makes the judgment true.
Pond'ring these mischiefs, able scarce to bear
So many losses which so frequent were,
We came unto the Fountain, and from thence
To search the River was my providence.
Thy providence, O Myrmix, was the while
To look a Birds Nest, or in Hunters toil
To take a frisking Goar, or nimble Roe,
Fit gifts to give to thy beloved Froe.

Myr. See Bembus with what open scoffs he jeers?
This matter I suppose (as well appears)
Hands must decide, not tongues; and it is my wont
With blows not words to batter such affront.

Cand. To speak the truth, O Batrachus, thy tongue
Runs faster then is fit: Thou do him wrong.
Bad language whets on choler; scoffing words
The mind imbitter, cut more sharp then swords.
Thou dealst not with a Child, nor think we can
That Myrmix is an undervalued man;
It Is danger to speak what should not be spoke,
And men with saucy language to provoke.

Bat. Excuse me, Myrmix, I did mean thine Aunt:
But, by what error a Concomitant
I named, know not: Pardon my mistake.

Myr. I pardon it: But yet beware thou make
No more mistakes: Beware, provoke no more.

Bat. A stream of running water leaping ore
A lofty Rock, delv'd with its fall a Lake,
Whose pent up waters did a level make
Within the Banks: The Lake with darksome trees
Was overshadowed, and under these
Briars and Thorns thick growing in a brake
Did round enclose the melancholy Lake.
A thousand shapes of ven'mous things I spied
Within the Lake, a thousand more beside
Crawling along the banks, along the brim
Of those black waters up and down did swim:
A thousand more did through the wood decline
Unto the Lake with motion Serpentine.
Amazed, in haste back to the Cotes I ran,
And with my three toothed fork I there began
To turn the straw: when O behold, a Snake
Erects his head, and does great hissing make.
With his three-forked tongue, his jaws were swelled:
A Scorpion his envenomed claws upheld;
A Toad big belli'd crawling there I saw,
And a fell Viper hissing in the straw.
O fatal places, said I, not alone
Fatal to sheep but shepherds; I Will be gone.
Forthwith my flock dividing, I forsook
That dismal place, and my sad self betook
To seek out better pastures; and I led
New Rivers from the Fountains first found head
Through that old tract, and in those fields, those ways.
Where first the rosy-colored Morn displays
Her blush, when Phoebus at his re-ascent
Inflames the Saffron-tinctur'd Orient.
Here fruitful were my Cattle, Pastures here
Were flourishing, the bubling waters clear,
Unstained with filth, and undefiled with mire:
These are the places, whither did retire
Our sage forefathers, here they first did dwell.
The ruins yet are extant of their Cell:
Old wells of water, rotten Posts of wood
Pitched in the ground, which there divided stood
Sev'n foot apart; an hearth for fire, an hall
Surrounded with a ruinated wall.

Myr. Inconstant men affect newfangled things;
New Pastures therefore, and unheard of Springs
Thou seek'st and feign'st; and do these things devise
An author to be deemed of Novelties.

Bat. Grave men affect their own; which is the cause
Why Myrmix too too much himself withdraws
From gravity: This newness is not new,
But most authentic oldness, solid, true:
Religion, practiced in the pious lives
Of our forefathers, now restored, revives:
Which too too foully was corrupted, both
By thine own looseness, and thy Sects known sloth.
If therefore ruined houses one rebuild,
Or of a barren make a fruitful field,
Should thou be Judge, he shall condemned be.
Another Tree we plant, but yet that Tree
Which fruitless was we prune, and on the stock
Which was grown old (and barren like a block)
We graft new Ciences, and with our care
Make fruitful that which fruitless was and bare.

Myr. Though there thy Cattle eat fat-feeding grass,
And drink untroubled waters, yet (alas)
Too many Lambs there with their Dams are dead,
Whose Carkases have Wolves and Ravens fed.

Bat. These I confess, these Cattle which have taken
The pestilent infection of thy bane,
Infect beholders even from far: so much
Of poison's in them, and the force is such,
Such and so great of your envenomed art,
That more and more I wish from hence to part,
Hence to depart: But O, this ill alone
My flock indures, that yet it is not gone
Into the vast waste Wilderness, not yet
Can far enough into the deserts get
(Within some Cave, some: unfrequented Rock)
Retired from you, from your infected flock.

Myr. Thou Batrachus inventest many lies
Against our flocks: Thou sure art over-wise,
Art over-careful of another Tribe,
And rashly do unto thy self ascribe
Unjust Censoriousness: Why should not I
Who keep great store of Cattle this espy
As well as thou? what, is mine house (mine own)
Only to thee, to thy Companions known?

Bat. Because that the Aethiopians tawny skins
Are colli'd all with black, that color wins
Repute with them; Nor do they beauty lack,
Nor are disdained because their skins are black:
Their faces all, are all alike; who blames
Another face, his own therein defames:
Your sheep and shepherds have the like reflect,
Like Pest, l^ke scabs, like color, like aspect.

Bem. Forbear, your cause is understood, forbear;
The day declines, The Suns swift Chariotteer
Is whirled below, beyond yon tops of hills.
Hear, O ye Rivulets of ancient Rills,
Ye that derive by long antiquity
From great Progenitors your Progeny;
Hear what our judgment is, and O embrace
This our impartial sentence in your case.

Myr. Thou Batrachus do me too much provoke
With peremptory language, basely spoke.

Bat. Not I, but thy bad cause provokes thee more,
Thy guilty mind just judgment does abhor.

Cand. When it is high time to lay debate aside,
Your madness stirs new strife, anew you chide.
This quarrel then with everlasting hate
Perpetually shall live, beyond your fate.
What weakness, O what madness does pervert
Your senses thus, does vex your head, your heart?
What, blush you not, so rudely to behave
Your selves before a Judge so great, so grave?
Hear then without distemper, hate, or spleen,
That final sentence which you twain between
The learned Bembus shall pronounce, and it
Account authentic, and thereto submit.

Bem. Trace out that path, those ancient ways transact
Of your forefathers, keep that Older tract.
Recall your wandering flocks within their Pales,
From Dens of savage Beasts, from Rocks, from Vales.
And in those older fields, that ancient Plain
Erect your shepherds Cottages again.

The end of the fifth Eclogue.
THE EPILOGUE To the Readers.
SO, now it is done: Commend it, or Come mend it:
Be not offended at it, but defend it:
Nor at the Workman, or the Work, repine,
Scene, Author, Actors, all are transmarine.
No Persons, as this Book does them instyle,
Dwell in this Little World, Great Britains I Will:
Our Natives are so far from them in this,
As from the World our I Will divided is.
then Censure not: but in t'your selves descend,
And There, what Here you find amiss, amend.
Tho: Harvey

FINIS

