SOMNIUM CANTABRIGIENSE, OR A POEM Upon the death of the late King brought to
London,

By a Post to the Muses.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons next door to the Golden Lion in Aldersgate
Street. 1649.

To the famous Dreamer JOHN QVARLES, Ordinary Poet to CHARLES the SECOND.
GEntleman Poet come of Sire,
Who to the Muses was a Squire;
In Verse thou very Natural,
And no way Artificial
John Quarles, I the Muses post
Implore thine aid, (who rul'st the roast,
Helps the Kitchen Maids to Papers
To cover it, and set up Tapers,
Who least a Vacuum should be,
Ballads forbid in Poetry,
Have in spite of Angry Times,
Published many dreaming Rhimes)
To assist with might and maine,
Me in such a dreaming Vein.
The Daughters of Mnemosyne
Can help no more then they did thee; The (...)

For hardly either thou or I,
Could sleep so many Maids being by,
How should we dream then? and I fear
Could we, 't would be of them were there.
Apollo is the God of Day,
And so assist me neither may,
Nor will; for fear Diana might
Sue Him for trespass on her right,
And the Man is so unrulie
In the Moon she cannot truly.
None better therefore than thy self,
Can I invoke, Thou Rhimeing Elfe;
Come a Dreamer can infuse,
Virtue into a Sleeepie Muse.
Then if Thou have any pity,
Teach me how to dream a dittie,
Let my Verse be like my Theme
Dull, and heavy, such as thy Dream,
Which such due proportion kept,
We are covinc't, thy wit too slept:
That all who read me may protest,
I dream in earnest too, not jest
But if thou do deny me, Know
Thy Book shall never say me no.
The Apology.
GEntlemen, sure it is neither Law nor Reason,
A man should be attaint for dreaming Treason;
But if it should, it is nothing unto me,
Another dreamed, and told it as you see:
Yet both have more than dreamed, (you say) this Act
Has changed the dreaming of it into fact:
It Is true we writ, and published this story,
Good cause we knew we should be accessorie
Should we conceal it: Thus to clear all doubt
Of our Integrities, we put it out
You see; if any danger's in the thing,
Who can runn fastest may acquaint his King.
The Character of the Dreamer, and your Friend the bringer of it in Verse
THe Dreamer is a man of some degree,
A Bachilar of Art, past Sophistry:
An able disputant, you need not fear
A fallacy in what is presented here:
Had Two Fellows of Keys College who pretend to Revelations.
Philips seen as much, or Harrington,
They would have cried a Revelation.
But he averred it nonsense, for to write,
That he (when fast asleep) saw a new light:
He is so Orthodox, he would rather be
A Dreaming fellow thought, than Sectarie;
All such he hates more, than he loves a King,
Or Bishiop, never doubt then what we sing:
He deeply swore all true, and I am loath,
To have him put to dream another Oath,
He bid me tell you too, if any do
Doubt it or me, They may to Cambridge go,
To him; but sure you may believe your eyes
As soon as ears, it is cheaper; then be wise.
And I your Verser, Gentlemen believed,
For Age and standing too might have morewit.
Yet by the way know this, when first I saw
That Reverend utter Barrister at Law;
Hight William Prynne was turned an arrant Poet.
I thought no wise man ere again would do it:
Would he in Lawyers Lattine Verse as much;
He might do wondrous Service against the Dutch;
How would he yoke Who has written most dull verses against the State.
Salmasius, and that fool?
Who sure mistook, and slept on Mount The Castle Pryn was Prisoner in.
Orgule
Instead of Mount Parnassus, and of Rhene,
Or butter-milke has swil'd, for Hyppcrene.
But Pryn's on their side, and against the State
You say, let him deplorethen Charles his fate,
And verse so like himself; that all may swear,
He is to Ignoramus lawful Heir:
Thus he, and his Dutch dull-men may perchance
(If Fortune favor fools) Themselves advance.
I say when first I saw Pryns Mount His Poem he thus styles in honor to that
place where he writ it.
Orgule.
To which no Man can Rhyme, nor word but Fool.
And he must be an arrant one too, who
In English Verse like William Pryn shall do.
I was let blood in the Poetike Vein,
And drench't for ever swallowing Verse again.
And so remained, till of a versing kind,
A dreaming Poet rectified my mind,
And so inspired my Breast, I could not choose,
But here present you with a dreaming Muse:
The Dreamer too besought a friend to write
For him, whose Brains were troubled to indite
The Dream.
THe Worlds bright eye had in its lid the West
Closed all Beams, and night inviting-rest
Had drawn her sable Curtains round the sky,
And spread abroad her starr decked Canopie.
The God of sleep had summoned every Breast,
On its Allegiance to repair to rest.
But this most sorrowful Sir would not obey,
He heard the King had lost his Head that day:
Frantic with rage and grief he thus replies;
How can we sleep dull God without our eyes?
Which we have lost in losing of our Head
Thine Empire is expired now CHARLES is dead,
And we Deaths Conquest, whose keen Axes edge
Will vindicate thy breach of privilege.
This said, he takes a bottle, sorrowe's dry,
And drinking, vowed to write an ELEGY.
Then cries (his bottle plying still) divine,
And mighty sack no fancy can decline
So low, but Thou can raise it, only Thou
Can give a dumb Muse voice; O do then throw
So rich infusion through my heavy Brain,
That I revived may reach as high a strain
In Verse as Thou can give, and here I vow,
Fresh Laurels shall empale thy sparkling brow,
And the wide world shall know only thy Might,
Can make a Poet loftilie Endite.
Thus spoke He, and then drinks; Morpheus stood by,
And smiling to himself did thus reply:
Fondling alas! do think that sack can make
Thee find thy feet, which does from others take
All use of Legs? but thou shall quickly feel,
Our Mase as soon as Sack can make thee reel;
And since thou art so saucie, thou shall know
Our power, and what the God of sleep can do:
This said, he laid his Mace upon his Head,
Who straight sanke down asleep into his Bed.
His senses thus fast bound Morpheus commands,
A nimble dream to loose his fancies bands,
Which freed a rambling went, and made no stay
Until a Troop of Soldiers stopped its way.
This Troop besmeared, with blood and dust thus cried
England is free, great Jove be magnified,
And our just cause exaulted, thus they went,
Until they came, where sat the Parliament,
And Englands Genius in the midst enthroned
Whose Temples were with Verdant Laurel crowned.
The Soidiers seen stand! Englands Geniuss cries,
Your Servants, their brave Chief bowing replies,
Whose lives attended on your high command,
To know your further pleasure here do stand.
Welcome, thrice welcome, says he, to these arms
Are you, whose courage has preserved from harms
Your Country, and her freedom; to you I owe
This Laureat wreath, which now empales my Brow,
Take then the Palm and Laurel from these hands
Which your high valor has redeemed from bands;
And you grave Senators, who have endured
The trial, and by these have been secured
Embrace them, go ye on both hand in hand,
Your Counsel, and their Swords must save this I and.
Thus linked march, whilst I shall Io's sing
Unto your Triumphs, which through Europ ring,
That Warre-like Europe which stands doubting now,
Whither to smile, or knit an angry Brow,
On you were best; whose Tyrants though they hate
Englands example, yet fear Englands State.
For I am now in a poetike vein,
This Laurel has so wrought upon my Brain:
And my first Subject (since some Royal Slaves
In verse, and print have played the flattering knaves)
Shall be of that just Act, whereby you durst,
Make him drink blood, who so for blood did thirst.
This said, he paws'd a while, then round did look.
And rising, thrice his comely tresses shook.
Admited Ovid thus affirms his Jove,
Having conveen'd a Parliament above
Of Gods and Goddesses, before he spoke
To them did thus his dreadful tresses shake.
Thus dance the Oaths in circular careers
At the Celestial music of the Spheres:
And thus Prophetike Sibill when she sung,
Inspired Lays about her head she flung:
Mock not malignants then, for no way fit
It is the Tongue should run before the wit:
Nor Soloecisme can you it ever prove
To see the head at the tongues motion move,
Which shows that reason from her throne assents;
To that the tongue by vocal accents vents,
And that the soul Qneen Regent does conferr,
On it the office of Interpreter.
This gesture with the Subject suteth well
Jove of Lycaon, He of Charles does tell;
And do but you what he enditeth read,
I Am confident 't will make you shake the Head,
Which was, if you or We the Dreamer may
Believe, even word for word with this we say.
Be free my fancy, for the Tyrant's dead,
And find thy feet now he has lost his head.
The shackles are filled off, England is free,
And as my Country, my invention be:
In sacred Numbers, equail Acts rehearse,
And as they are divine, so be my Verse.
Astraea is returned, and whence she came,
Celestial justice does aloud proclaim.
Caligula's! have underneath your beds
It Thunders, hide, or you may loose your heads,
The God-like Senate here, great Jove above,
Accept not persons if they guilty prove.
That juggling Tyrant, Salmoneus King of Elis, who making a brazen bridge, and
riding in his Chariot to counterleit Thunder, was slain by a Thundorbolt.
was from's Chariot thrown
By the revengefull bolt, nor could the Crown
Of stately Elis free him from his fate,
Who proudly durst the Thunderer imitate.
Ixion's Scepter could not scotch the Wheel,
Nor Belieshazzer's Cups make justice reel.
Proph ets as well as Poets, lets us see,
That Kings from Heaven high justice are not free.
A triple Crown's no bail for CHARLES his Head,
Who murders men, by men his blood is shed:
The twice two Lions cannot defend the Throne,
When he turns Tyrant that does sit thereon. Philip Father of Alexander the
great, who said, he would make an Ass laden with gold march into the strongest
holds.

Thou subtle Father of a va liant Son
Had such men lived then? Thou had been undone.
Gold-bearing Asses could thee naught avail,
When golden Lions before these turn Tail.
The Rampant Lion gules couchant lies,
Yea dead before his wonted sacrifice.
Nor can the Harp enchant which Poets say,
Made the unbridled Destinies obey,
Yea Atropos to lay aside her knife, One of the three destinies which cuts the
thread of life.

And help rewinde a then unravel'd life.
Could Orpheus with a sound so easily bribe,
That before thought inexorable Tribe.
It Is Heavens High Court of justice only can
And Englands claim the style impartial than.
But most conceive CHARLES fingered ill the Harp.
And treble murders made it sound too sharp
He ran too much division to appease
Incensed Heaven, whom Concord best does please.
This made the Lillies fade, and Roses lie
Withered in the Field of Englands Heraldrie.
And though they nor the Thistle never bud,
Which have been watered with such showers of blood.
Yet Gules on Argent will enough dispense,
Both Englands valor, and her innocence,
For her renowned cross is farther known
Then Rose or Thistle, though when broadest blown:
Her justice now Fame's Trump shall louder sound,
And this great blow the earthly Globe surround:
Just, potent Senate! your victorious Arm,
Shall give remotest Nations the alarm;
And your loud Thundering sentence shall awake
The drowsiest slaves, whilst proudest Tyrants quake.
Thus when high Jove, his threefork'd lightning flings,
The oppressor trembles, but the oppressed sings.
Let Rome now cease, to boast her Erutus name,
And her bold Senate lackey to your fame;
Set her proud Tarquin lower on Record,
His petty Tyrannies can naught afford
May equal Charles's? whose licentious reign
Out-went what he durst wish, or Rome could feign.
Tullia ascended by her Fathers Tomb
And poisoned James for Charles, and George made room.
She drove her Chariot over the murdered King,
The Parliament's dissol'vd for questioning
Endeared Buckingham. Was Charles too nigh
In blood to James, even in his Tragedy?
Who could have thought but justice would be done
The Father murtherd, and the Judge the Son:
Poor Cobweb Laws! The Son whom you juge fit,
To follow the indictment, hindered it.
But this was like the rest, an Act of grace,
And Charles would not be judge in his own case.
Least truth unvailed, prerogative might mar,
And George call Charles along unto the Bar.
But Gossip Truth leave prattling: Doctors say
Charles never murderer pardoned, and pray
Dare the Lay-animals from their rules swerve,
When the Priests lips all knowledge must preserve?
Or dare thy boldest Sons believe this deed?
And so deny one point of the Cabs Creed.
O! Infidels who will believe their eyes
Befre these Ghostly Fathers fopperies.
O for a Cloud! it is ignorance only can
Preserve devotion in the English man.
This light of truth quite spoils the trade of Rome,
And robs Charles of the Crown of Martyrdom, Which adjourned bebecause of the
plague at London.

The Parliament's broke up; they could not shunn
Their fate though they had unto Oxford runn,
Oxford is part of England, there they fall;
Charles reigned, the plague was Epidemicall.
One City is to narrow for to mourn
The Nation must attend on James his Urne,
And London's plague (which never English eye
Equaled beheld until his Tyranny)
To the three Nations the Almighty sent,
To typifie the following punishment.
The hundred thousands, which these seven years fell
Five thousand in seven days did then foretell;
That England, Scotland, Ireland now may say,
Thousands the plague, ten thousands Charles did slay.
Nor could an Ocean bound him, France must feel
In Rochels bowels, Charles his treacherous steel:
There were not Protestants enough at home,
To state his fury, he abroad must roame;
And as if Englands earth could not suffice,
To drink the blood spilt by his Tragedies;
Both Cales and Re, the French and Spanish Sword,
To murder Englishmen must help afford.
At last Charles, who so prodigally spent
His! Cannon to beat down a Parliament,
Roused justice with his Thunder, who thought good,
He who in slaughter lived, should dye in blood.
Now you much inju'rd souls, who did so long
About Astraea's Throne for justice throng:
Now cease complaints; for Charles has paid that due
By the keen Axe, which he did owe to you.
Revenge with leaden feet may slowly come,
Her arms are steel, and when she strikes, strikes home.
And thou much angre'd Heaven, accept his head,
As his Souls ransom for the blood he shed.
And let this corporal punishent suffice,
That blood may never in judgment crying rise.
Then shall this sentencefull as gainefull be
To Charles, as England, which seemed just to thee.
This said, the Genius ceased, The Soldiers make
A mighty shout, Then did our Dreamer wake.
A POST SCRIPT To the Reader.
THat thou may be the better confirmed of the reallitie of this relation, I
shall present thee with a Copy of verses I had begun, but was stopped by the
arrest of sleep (who presented this dream to me that time) from going
forward; I have left them, as sleep found them, and would neither erase or add
one tittle: if they are abrupt, you had best quarrel with Morpheus, yet take
heed he serve you not as he did me: if this Relation please thee, I am sorry
thou had it not sooner: if thou be peevish and incredulous, I leave thee to
the dull Gentleman, to have this or the like knocked into thy pate with his
leaden Mace, the only argument able to convince those, whom truth and reason
cannot conquer. But I hope the best therefore farewell.

Cambridge early in the morning. Thy friend, or foe, choose thee whither. Sir,
The Dreamer.

THE ELEGY The Dreamer was making.
COuld Charles expire, and yet no Comet burn?
Or blazing Star wait on him to his Urne?
To tell the wandering world his fall drew nigh:
And with him too the fate of Monarchy.
Had sable weeds so totally over spread
Heavens mourning face? no Star could show its head.
Was moisture so predominant above?
No fire could through aires weeping regions move?
And so their moister influence cause to expire,
Old loyal flames, which Subjects hearts should fire.
O ye-O ye-
FINIS.

