THE LADIES Dispensatory, Containing The Natures, Virtues, and Qualities of all
HERBS, and SIMPLES useful in Physic Reduced Into a Methodicall Order, for
their more ready use in any sickness, or other accident of the Body.

The like never published in English.

WITH An Alphabeticall Table of all the Virtues of each Herb, and Simple.

London Printed for R. Ibbitson, to be sold by George Calvert at the Halfe-Moon
in Watlingstreet. 1652.

To His very good Friend, Mr. Gabriel Tailor.
SIR,
I Here present unto you, the painful delivery of a long travail; I hope you
will hold my boldness excused, that I have presumed to send it forth into the
World under your Name; as that also you will be pleased to accept this as a
tribute, of the Affection and Engagements, due unto you from me, for those many
Favors I have received of you, and which still oblige me to remain.

Yours, To serve you wherein he may, LEONARD SOVVERBY.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
AFter much revolving, writing, and blotting out, I resolved in my self to
have said nothing unto thee, but fearing thou might be prejudiced against
me, I have thought good to premise the helps and Authors, I have had and
followed, which are, Gerard with Johnson, Goraeus and Fuchsius, men of
excellent knowledge, and well esteemed in this kind of learning.

Against my Author Dioscorides, I do not so much as presuppose any Objection,
who having learned most Languages, and seen many Countries, with good
entertainment, will I presume find as good reception in England, and be
esteemed correspondent to his worth, and the credit he has acquired among all
learned men.

The work does sufficiently commend it self, being the first and only piece of
this kind in our English tongue, containing almost as many Medicines as lines,
and those consisting of pure, Elementary Simples; not compounded of a hodge
podge of sophisticated Drugs (like the Cadmeian Progeny) one oppugning the
other.

Thus hoping thou will pardon the errors (from which no man is exempted) of
this Collection, and accept of my pains, and good will; I Remain,

Thine, LEO. SOWERBY.

THE LADIES DISPENSATORY.
Simples serving for the Head.
Against pains of the Head arising from Cold.
Roots of Flower-de-luce of Illyria, applied with Vinegar and Oil of Roses.

Oil of wild Olives Anointed, or laid to any way outwardly.
applied. Oil of Almonds applied.

Seed of Agnus Castus applied like a Poultis.

Bitter Almonds bruised, and applied like a Poultis on the forehead, and
cheeks, with vinegar, or oil of roses.

Cramp-fish applied alive.

New-shorne unwashed Wool, applied with vinegar, and oil of roses.

Sisymbrium, or Watercresses.
Water-minte bruised, and laid to the forehead and temples.

Juice of the leaves, or of the berries of Ivy, applied with vinegar and oil
of roses.

Aloes applied on the forehead and cheeks, with vinegar and oil of roses.

Minte bruised and laid to.

Wild Time boiled, then moystned in vinegar and oil of roses and applied.

Leaves of Baccharis.
Plow-mans Spikenard bruised, and laid to.

Rue laid to with vinegar, and oil of roses.

Anise taken in drink.

Spondilium.
Meddow-parsnep laid to with Rue.

Peucedarum.
Sow-fennell laid to with vinegar, and oil of roses.

Nigella Romana of the Apothecaries.
Gith laid upon the forehead, small fleabane laid to.

The tender leaves of Anagyris
Beane-Trifoly, the weight of a dram taken in wine.

Rhodiaradix, Rosewort.
The root which smells like roses, laid to fresh with a little oil of roses.

A chaplet of Hippoglossion.
Horse-tongue.

Leaves of Chamcedaphne.
Periwinckle bruised, and laid to.

Juice of wild Cowcumbers, dropped into the nose with milk.

Leaves and berries of Kneeholme, drunk in wine.

Scammonie applied with vinegar, and oil of roses.

Perfume of Seawater, received as a stove, the head being covered.

Against pains of the Head, proceeding from heat.
Oil of Wild Olives applied.

Oil of roses applied as a liniment.

Flowers of privet laid to with vinegar.

The infusion of dry Roses well pressed, applied.

Seed of Agnus Castus laid to.

Purslaine laid to.

Melilot laid to with vinegar, or oil of roses.

Roots of Water-Lilly drunk, or put to the nostrils.

Rhodia radix.
Rose-wort laid on the forehead, and on the temples, with oil of roses.

Otherwise Opium.
Juice of Poppy applied on the forehead with oil of roses.

Psyllium.
Fleawort laid to with oil of roses, vinegar, or water.

A chaplet of Horse-tongue.

Great Housleeke laid to with oil of roses.

Leaves of morell, or Garden Nightshade applied.

Leaves and branches of Vine laid to. Serpentine Marble worn about the neck,
or arm.

To purge the Brain.
Juice of Cole-wort, of wind-flowre, of Beets, of Celandine, of Cycla^^eu.
Sowbread, or of Onions snuffed up the nose.

Pellitory of Spain, and Staphisacre chewed long.

Coloquintida in pills.

Dry Grapes chewed with Pepper.

Vitriol snuffed up the nose, and put into the nostrils with Cotton.

To mittigate the Headache.
THe sent of oil of Storax.

Yellow Olives, Acornes, Phenician Dates, or Wall-nuts often eaten.

Arbute berries, and branches of herb Ferula eaten.

Roots of Spicknell taken abundantly.

Juice of Worme-wood drunk.

Against the The drowsy or sleepy evil.
Lethargy.
SEed of Agnus Castus laid to with vinegar, and oil of roses.

Castorium dropped into the nostrils with vinegar and oil of roses.

Boiled onions eaten.

Mustard laid to, the head first shaved.

Spondilium.
Meadow Parsnep used in perfume, or applied on the head with oil olive.

Sow-fennell laid to with vinegar, and oil of roses.

To provoke sleep.
Root of Flower-de-luce of Illyria drunk.

In place of which the greater Galingall may be taken, says Fuchsius.
Amomum put upon the forehead.

Bitter Almonds eaten.

Seed of Agnus Castus drunk.

Lettice eaten.

Aloes applied alone, or with oil of roses.

The sent of Plow-mans spikenard.

Seed of Ethiopian reed drunk.

Five or six heads of Red poppy growing in Corn.
wild Poppy, boiled in three Cyathes of wine to the consumption of half, drunk.

Decoction of the heads or leaves of poppy drunk, or applied.

Seed of Henbane drunk, or laid to.

Rind of the root of sleepy Nightshade, the weight of a dram taken in wine.

Decoction of Mandragore root the measure of a Cyath, drunk with wine.

The smell of Mandragore apples.

Juice of Mandragore used in the manner of a suppositary.

To cause horrible dreadful Dreams.
Beans eaten.

Lentils eaten.

Seed of Pycnocomon:
Devils-bit, the weigh of a dram drunk.

Seed of great Convolvulus major.
Bind-weed the weight of three oboles drunk, with as much Dorycnium.
venomous Tree Tre-foile.

To cause Sneezing.
MVstard-seed bruised, and put to the nose.

The sent of sneezing-wort-flower.

The roots of Sope-wort, bruised and put to the nose.

Powder of the roots of Ranunculus, called about London Butter-flower.
Crow-foot, snuffed up the nose.

Spurge Laurel taken up the nose.

Powder of the root of white Hellebore, snuffed up the nose.

Against Swimmings and giddiness of the head.
Vertiginosities.
SEed of Baulme drunk.

Sow-fennell laid to with vinegar, and oil of roses.

The smell of Galbanum.

Briony root the weight of a dram drunk every day a whole year.

The tender branches of Vitis nigra.
black Briony boiled and eaten.

Squil wine drunk.

Squil vinegar drunk.

Against the Or dead Palsy.
Apoplexy.
BRiony root the weight of a dram, drunk every day a whole year.

Against the Falling Sickness.
Cardamomum.
Grains of Paradise drunk with water.

Caueamum.
Gum-Lac drunk.

Baulme-seed drunk.

Perfume of Bitumen surnamed Naptha discovers the Disease.

Seeds of the Aspe Tree taken in dry figgs eaten, vinegar.

The perfume of Vnguis odoratus.

Coagulum, that whereby milk is turned and brought into curds.
Curd of a Hare drunk.

The outward skin of a Weesils cod; farced with Coriander, dried and eaten.

The blood of a Weesil drunk.

Liver of an Ass roasted, eaten fasting.

An Asses hoof burned, drunk.

The Lichenes.
bonie excrescence growing on the Cronet of a Horses hoof bruised, and drunk
in vinegar.

Stones found in the belly of the Swallows first brood, tied in a piece of
Buck-skin, and worn about the neck

Whey drunk till it have loosed the belly.

Curd of a Sea-calfe drunk.

Gall of a Bear taken like an Electuary.

Gall of a Tortoise put in the nose.

Blood of a Land Tortoise drunk.

Storkes dung drunk with water.

Plantain boiled with Lentils eaten.

Mustard Seed bruised and put to the nose.

Pepper long chewed.

Squil drunk.

Agarick the weight of a dram taken with A composition made of vinegar, honey,
and water.
Oxymel.

Root of Eryngium.
Sea-holly drunk in water.

Seed of wild Rue drunk.

Root and seed of mountain Siler taken in drink.

Sow-fennel laid to the head with vinegar and oil of roses.

It distills from a certain herb in Media.
Gum Sagapene drunk.

Benzom taken in honey and vinegar.

The smell of A fat clammie matter, a kind of Cistus.
Labdanum.

Gum Issuing from the Cyrenian ferula.
Armoniacum taken with honey like an Electuary.

Seed and leaves of Trefoile drunk.

Flea-wort taken in vinegar.

Sea pimpernell after Gerrard.
Small Anthyllis taken in Oxymel.

Bettony leaves taken in drink.

Or cinque foil.
Five-leaved grass taken in drink the space of thirty days.

Seed of Spatling-poppie drunk in Aqua mulsa, water mingled with honey.
honied water.

Black Hellebore drunk.

Juice of Thought to be a kind of Fullers Teasell.
Hippophestus, the weight of three oboles drunk.

Briony the weight of a dram drunk every day for a year.

Branches of Vi^is Nigra.
black Briony Boiled and eaten.

Honey mingled with vinegar.
Honyed vinegar drunk.

Squil wine, or Squil vinegar drunk.

A stone clear like glass.
The specular Stone powdered, and drunk.

Found in Eagles Nests.
The Eagle Stone in powder, applied with ointment of privet, or Oil coming
before the Olives; be through pressed.
Gleucinum, or some other hot ointment,

A kind of Whetstone brought from Cyprus.
Naxian Stone drunk.

Against the Frenzy.
Oil of Saffron sprinkled on the head, put in the nose, or anointed.

Agnus Castus dropped into the nose with oil of roses and vinegar.

Sparagus drunk in white wine, wild Time laid to with oil of roses and
vinegar.

Perfume of Spondilium.
meddow Parsnep, or the herb laid to the head with oil.

Peucedanum.
Sow-fennell applied with oil of roses and vinegar.

Against inflammations of the brain.
PArings of Gourds laid on the forepart of the head.

Parings of Popon.
Pompions laid on the fore part.

Leaves of Heliotropium.
Turn foil, laid on the forehead.

Vinegar applied on the forehead.

Against Melancholy.
SEed of Basil drunk.

Black Hellebore drunk.

Bettony leaves drunk.

Epithymum,
Dodder drunk.

To prevent Drunkenness.
SAffron taken fasting in Sapa
sod wine

Juice of Pomegranats drunk.

Juice of Mirtle-berries drunk.

Coleworts eaten after meals,

Wormwood eaten fasting,

Against Catharres and Rheumes discending from the head.
Oil of Flower-deluce put in the Nostrills.

Storax applied, or the perfume of it.

Perfume of Bitumen.

Cinnamon taken in drink.

Roots of Spicknell bruised and taken with honey like an Electuary: especially
when the rheumes oppress the Stomach.

Filbirds roasted, and drunk with a little pepper.

Root of great Draggons roasted in embers, or boiled, eaten.

Gum Dragant taken with honey, like an electuary.

Hysope, figs, rue and honey boiled in water, the decoction drunk.

Helychri sum.
Golden mothweed, the weight of three obols drunk in wine and water.

Henbane seed the weight of one obol, drunk with seed of poppy.

To fortify the brain.
Agallochum.
Wood of Aloes.

Against the Scurfe, and Ulcers flowing in the head.
FRankincense and Niter to rub the Ulcers.

Milk of garden and wild fig tree, applied with dry Barley steeped in water,
dried by a fire and after fried for physical uses.
polenta.

Stale urine to wash the Ulcers.

Fenegreek applied.

Cich pease applied.

Mallows used as a poultis with man's urine.

Ashes of garlic incorporated in honey and laid to.

Fomentation with the decoction of Cyclamen
Sowbread.

Scalions applied with burned niter.

Melilot applied with water and earth of Chio, or with wine and galls,

Bramble leaves laid to,

Roots of Lillies burned and applied with honey.

Maiden-haire boiled in lie

Sharp brine rubbed on the Ulcers.

Simples serving for the Sinews.
Against the Shrinking of the Sinews.
Spasme.
ILlyrian Flower deluce drunk in vinegar,

Decoction of sweet-cane drunk.

Grains of Paradise drunk in water.

Root of Squinanthum, camells hay.
Squinanth, the weight of a dram, taken certain days with the like weight of
Pepper.

Costus taken in wine with wormwood.

Baulme taken in water.

Elicampane taken with honey as an Electuary.

Ointment of Marjerome used as a poultis.

Ointment of Galbanum applied,

A Gum brought from Arabia and India.
Bdelium applied.

Juniper berries drunk.

Fruit of cedar eaten.

Root of Halimus
sua Purslaine, the weight of a dram taken in honied water.

Ashes of fig tree applied with oil.

Castorium laid to, and drunk.

Wild time drunk.

Roots of Dragons roasted in embers, or boiled, eaten with honey.

Asphodill roots the weight of a dram drunk.

Capers
Fruit of the Caper bush drunk.

Rhyne of the Caper plant drunk.

Argemone
Bastard wild poppy, applied as a poultis.

Agaricke the weight of three obols taken in honyed wine.

The best Rubarbe brought from Pontus.
Rhaponticke taken in drink

Galbanum taken in pills.

Gentian root the weight of a dram drunk.

Round birth wort.
Aristolochia rotunda drunk.

Root of Falsely put for the true Rhaponticke in shops.
great Centuary drunk in wine.

Seed of white thistle drunk.

Roots of Cotton thistle.
Acanthium drunk.

Seed of Suthernwood drunk in water.

Decoction of the root of Leucaeantha.
Lady thistle in wine drunk.

Organie eaten with figs.

Roots of Eryngium.
Sea holly drunk with honied water.

Penniroyal drunk with water and vinegar.

Decoction of Calaminte drunk.

Roots of Baccharis
Plowmans spiknard boiled in water, drunk.

Hercules Al heal applied.

Rosemary roots applied with meal of Darnel, as a poultis.

Peucedanum.
Sow-fennel laid to with vinegar and oil of roses.

Clinopodium.
Wild Basil taken in drink.

Decoction of Germander drunk.

Benzoin the weight of an obol taken in pills.

Gum Sagapenum.
Serapinum drunk.

Galbanum taken in pills.

Bettony leaves a penny weight taken in honyed water.

Roots of stinking Spatula faetida.
Gladen drunk in sod wine.

Comfry taken in honyed vinegar.

Flea-wort laid to.

Wild Time drunk, or applied.

Decoction of Mullein drunk.

Briony eaten with honey as an electuary.

Squil wine drunk.

Germander wine drunk.

Wine of Tragotiganum.
Goats organie.

Satirion roots drunk in strong wine.

Coris.
Bastard St-Johns-wort drunk.

Against the Palsy, and resolution of the Sinews.
SOw-fennel laid to with vinegar and oil of roses.

Bark of the Caper plant drunk, also the fruit.

Roots of Madir drunk.

Coloquintida taken in a Glister.

The first shootes of black Briony boiled and eaten.

Squil wine drunk.

Against trembling of the Sinews.
Brains of Hares fried and eaten.

Castorium drunk, and applied.

Cole-worts eaten.

Decoction of marsh mallows drunk.

Against Rheumes fallen upon the Sinews.
VVHeaten meal, incorporated in juice of Henbane, and applied.

Barley meal incorporated in vinegar, and laid to.

Against Aches, and weaknesses of the Sinews.
Oil Made of wild Cowcumber roots and juice, and oil.
Sycionium applied.

Oil of Bays applied.

A sweet fat liquor issuing from the trunks of certain trees in Sytia.
Eleomelie applied.

Oil of privet.

Oil coming before the Olives be through pressed applied.

Oil of Galbanum.

Oil of great Marjerome.

Bdelium put in a poultis.

Lexive of the ashes of Fig Tree applied with oil.

Castorium drunk and applied.

Hedge-hogs eaten.

Vipers flesh boiled and eaten.

Decoction of Poterium, called by Gallen Neuras.
Burnet drunk.

Sow-fennel applied with vinegar and oil of roses.

The sap of Laserwort called Benzoin, there is another sort named, Asa foetida.
Laser, the weight of an obol taken in pills.

Small centaury taken in drink.

Roots of Lillies roasted in embers, incorporated in honey and applied.

Satirion root drunk in strong wine.

Roots of marsh mallows alone, or boiled in wine, or in honied water, and used
as a poultis.

Scarlet grain laid to with vinegar, is good for cut sinews.

Leaves of Ground-sel applied, is good for the same effect.

Daffodil roots is also profitable.

Juice of Hyppophestus the weight of three obols taken.

Seawater fomented.

Squil vinegar drunk.

Wine of Stichas.
French Lavender drunk.

Wine of Time drunk. An oyley grain.


Sesaminum laid to.

For cut sinews.
SNayles bruised and laid to.

Earth-wormes bruised and applied.

Butter laid to.

Ground-sel leaves applied as a poultis, with crumbs of Frankincense.

Leaves of small Dragons applied.

Roots of Poterion
Burnet bruised and applied.

Lilly roots incorporated in honey and laid to.

Scarlet grain laid to with vinegar.

Daffodil roots applied.

To subtilize the Sinews.
SEsaminum used as a poultis.

Ashes of Vine branches applied with hoggs lard, or oil.

Simples serving for the Eyes.
To restrain falling of Hair from the Eyelids.
FOmentation, with the decoction of spikenard.

The moisture that Snails cast being pricked with a needle, laid upon the
Eyelids.

The oylinesse of sheeps wool before it be washed laid to.

Gum and milk of Chondrilla.
Gum Succory applied.

Bolearmonick laid to.

For sharpness of the Eyes, and Eyelids.
Bark of the Frankincense Tree burned and laid to.

Soote of Burned of purpose in a close por.
Pitch applied.

Lysium.
Juice of Box thorn laid to.

Cutle bone powdered very small, and laid to.

Gall of a A little dark green Fish found in the Marsellian Sea
Scorpeno, or sea Urchin applied.

Gall of a sea Tortoise laid to.

Gall of a Partridge applied.

Gall of an Eagle applied.

A white Pullets gall applied.

Gall of a Hind, or wild she Goat applied.

Powder of Mustard Seed incorporated in honey, and laid to.

Verjuyce applied.

Scailes of brass applied.

Rust of Iron applied.

A natural caustic and corrosive Mineral, somewhat resembling brass, and is
full of long and shining ^eines.
Chalcitis laid to.

Bloud-stone incorporated in honey,

Against the inflammations of the Eyelids.
LEaves of great Marjerome laid to with polenta.

Pimpernel applied with polenta.

Leaves of Palma Christi bruised, and applied with polenta, like a poultis.

To make the Eyelids thin.
AShes of Muskles washed as they wash lead, applied.

Ashes of Vnguis odoratus applied.

To heal the Itch of the Eyelids.
IVyce of Qnions laid to with the same weight of The shavings of Ivory, or
Hartshorn (is commonly used for it) burned.
Spodium.

Aloes applied.

Milk of Fig Tree laid to.

To take spots and blemishes out of the Eyes.
OPobalsamum laid to, Liquor of the Balsame tree.
and dropped into the eyes.

Cancamum.
Gum Lac dissolved in wine, applied.

Myrrh applied.

Bitumen named Naptha applied.

Ashes of Muskles washed, as they wash lead, applied.

Ashes of Vnguis odoratus applied on the eyes.

Ashes of Snailes shells incorporated in honey applied.

Gall of a Scorpeno, or sea Hedgehogge dropped into the eyes.

The like may be done with the Galls of a sea Tortoise, of Partridge, of Eagle,
of white Hen, or of wild she Goat.

Mansurine boiled in a Copper pot, applied.

Milk of wild Lettice distilled into the eyes.

Juice of Dragons applied.

Juice of Onions distilled into the eyes.

Ginger applied.

Juice of Chamaesyce.
Spurge Time applied with honey.

Leaves of Argemone.
Bastard wild Poppy applied.

Gum Armoniack applied.

Clary laid to with honey. Orminum


Juice of Melilot applied with honey.

Salt applied.

A brackish foam or ^^m flo^ting (...) Lakes
Flos salis applied.

Sapphire stone applied.

Scailes of brass applied.

To take skarres out of the eyes.
GUm Lac dissolved in wine, droped into the eye.

Myrrh applied.

Bitumen named Naptha applied.

Rosin of Cedar laid to.

Ashes of Snailes applied with honey.

Man's urine boiled in a Copper pot, distilled into the eyes.

Oil of Fenegreeke, applied with oil of Myrtle.

Gum sapagene applied. Serapinum.


Juice of Chamaesyce.
Spurge Time applied with honey.

Verdigrease applied.

Wine lees burned applied.

Powder of Corral put thereon.

Bloud-stone laid thereon.

Sapphire applied.

Snayles burned in their shells, applied with honey.

Against dimnesse and darkness of Sight.
IVyce of sweet Cane dropped into the eyes.

Cinnamon incorporated in other ocular Medicines, for to lay to the eyes.

Cinnamon of the Ancients.
Cinnamomum put in the eyes.

Gum of Cherry-tree put into the eyes.

Infusion of The seed of an herb growing in Egypt, much like the seed of
Tamarisk.
Acacalis put in medicines prescribed to quicken the sight.

Juice of Or of sloes.
Acasia washed, and dropped into the eyes.

Three Pomegranat-flowers (how little soever they be) eaten, preserve one a
whole year from blear-eyednesse.

Frankincense put in the eye.

Crocomagna.
Ointment or dreggs of oil of saffron applied.

Small shavings of Ebonie, infused in good wine, and applied as a Any liquid
medicine.
Collyrie.

Juice of Box-thorne put upon the eye.

Rosin of Cedar applied.

Plum-tree Gum applied.

Vipers flesh boiled and eaten.

Swallows eaten.

Ashes of burned swallows put in Collyries.

Fish-grease applied.

Juice of Fennel dropped into the eyes.

The galls of a Scorpeno, or Hedgehogge of the sea, of Partridge, of Eagle, of
white Hen, or of wild she Goat, distilled into the eyes.

Man's urine boiled in a Copper vessel, used as aforesaid.

Milk of wild Lettice used as before.

Juice of the root of great Dragons.

Juice of Onion dropped into the eyes.

Juice of Melilot.

Juice of Celandine boiled with honey in a copper vessel, applied.

Juice of Othoma.
Chelidony dropped into the eyes.

Juice of small Centaury.

Rue eaten frequently,

Verjuyce distilled into the eyes.

Hercules All-heale applied.

Juice of the roots and leaves of Rosemary dropped into the eyes.

Benzoin applied with honey.

Juice of Baulme distilled into the eyes with honey.

Juice of Hore-hound applied with honey.

Powder of Pumise-stone put into the eyes.

Flos salis put into the eyes.

Wine-lees burned, put into the eyes.

A mineral that smells like Brimstone the best is pure white like silver.
Marchasite-stone put on the eyes,

The stone A greenish stone which steeped in liquor yields a white humor.
Thyites put on the eye.

The stone A round stone of the color of rusty Iron, containing within it a
yellowish earth.
Geodes applied.

The Sapphire stone applied.

To take a Web out of the Eye.
POwder of Cutle-bone applied.

Liquoris powder put in the eye.

For hurts and fresh wounds of the Eyes.
VVOmans milk dropped into them with Frankincense.

Blood of Ring-doves, of Pigeons, of Turtle-doves, or of Partridges applied.

Leaves of Thought of some to be scabious.
Stoebe applied as a Poultis.

Bloud-stone put into the eyes with milk.

For Ulcers of the Eyes.
SOote of Burned of purpose in a close pot.
Frankincense, or of Turpentine, or of Butter applied.

Bark of the frankincense Tree.

Myrrh cast in the eye.

Ashes of Harts-horne well washed, applied.

Liniment of Fine Wheat Flour steeped in water, then streined, and let stand
till it settle at the bottom, then drained off the water and dried in the Sun.
Amylum, especially when the ulcers are hollow.

Antimonie put in the eye.

The stones Called the milkstone.
Galactitus, A whitish stone found among the Samien earth.
Samius, also the Sapphire distilled into the eyes with milk.

Against Erosions happening in the corners of the Eyes.
FAt or oylinesse of new shorn unwashed wool applied.

Verjuyce dropped into the eye.

Against Fistulaes, and hollow ulcers of the Eyes.
OLd Walnuts bruised and laid to.

Decoction of Myrtle dropped into the eyes.

Raw mallows chewed, and applied with a little salt.

Plantaine applied as a Poultis.

The second kind of Mouse ear.
Auricula muris applied.

Leaves of Plow-mans Spikenard applied as a Poultis, at the beginning of the
malady.

Cammomel applied.

Leaves of Garden Nightshade.
Morel chopped small applied; or the juice laid to with the reddest of a Hens
dung.

Haver grass applied.

Oenanthe.
Flowers of wild (Grape-bearing) Vine applied.

Alexandrian Tutie, or A certain yellow mineral substance.
Calamine applied.

Scailes of brass applied.

Powder of Antimonie put into the Fistula.

To retire the eyes standing too far forth of the head, and to take away
spots, or buds that grow in the eyes.
Bean meal incorporated in white of Eggs, with roses and frankincense,
applied as a Poultis.

Bramble leaves bruised and applied.

Sapphire stone applied.

Against Inflammations of the eyes.
AMomum laid to with dry Grapes.

Soote of Frankincense, or of Pitch, applied as a Any thin pyntment.
Liniment.

Cyprus apples laid to with Polenta.

Mirtil-berries applied with Polenta.

Quince-flowers used as a poultis.

Cheese applied.

Sugar distilled into the eyes.

Sesaminum boiled in wine applied.

Purslaine laid to with polenta.

Endive applied alone, or with dry polenta.

Parings of Gourds applied.

Roots of Anemone.
Wind-flower applied.

Mouse-eare, applied with polenta like a poultis.

Juice of Gentian applied.

Sothern-wood boiled with Quinces, or with bread, used as a poultis.

Melilot put in poultisses, prescribed for inflammations.

Leaves of Plow-mans spikenard applied.

Leaves of Housleeke applied.

Parsley applied with bread, or polenta.

Flowers of the Raspis-bush applied with honey.

Leaves of Burnet applied with polenta.

Juice of Poppie incorporated in the yolke of an egg, then roasted in embers,
and laid to in saffron.

Seed and leaves of Henbane applied with meal, or polenta.

Fresh leaves of Mandragore applied with polenta. Leaves of Mullein, which
bears yellow flowers laid to.

After Articus.
Starre-wort applied.

Sweet Violet leaves applied.

Leaves of Palma Christi applied with Polenta.

For pains of the Eyes.
YOlke of an Egg roasted in embers, applied with oil of roses, and oil of
saffron.

Sesaminum boiled in wine applied.

Juice of Basil dropped into the eyes.

Wormwood boiled in sod wine, applied.

Rue used as a Poultis with Polenta.

Root of Aconitum, surnamed Pardalianchus put in medicaments prescribed for the
eyes.

For persons which are pur-blinde.
GRavie dropping from the Liver of a he, or she Goat, roasted.

Liver of a Wild she Goat, roasted, eaten.

Gall of a wild she Goat applied.

Blood of Stock-doves, of Pigeons, of Turtle Doves, or of Partridges applied.

Against the Pin, or Web in the Eyes.
GAll of a Scorpeno applied on the eyes.

Galen approves not this remedy.
Vipers grease incorporated in rosin of Cedar.

Pure honey and old oil.

Galls of Sea Tortoises, of Partridges, of Eagles, of white Hens, or of wild
she Goats applied.

Bean meal kneaded in wine, applied.

Juice of Onions dropped into the eyes.

Juice of Sow-bread used as aforesaid.

Gum Sagapene applied.

Gum Euphorbium applied with Annise.

Against weakness of sight.
GUm-Lac dissolved in wine, distilled into the eyes.

Pilulae.
Little balls found upon Poplartrees when they first begin to bud, bruised and
applied with honey.

Gall of a Scorpeno applied.

Cole-worts eaten.

Mustard applied with honey.

Time eaten.

Juice of Pimpernel taken up at the nose.

Summer savoury eaten with meat.

Wormwood applied with honey.

Juice of Rue boiled in a Pomegranate shel, adding thereto juice of fennel, and
honey, dropped into the eyes.

Juice of wild Rue distilled into the eye with wine, honey, chickens dung, and
juice of fennel.

Juice of sleepy Nightshade applied.

Flos salis applied.

Against Catarres and Rhumes of the eyes.
SAffron applied with woman's milk.

Frankincense applied with the yolk or white of an egg.

Soote of frankincense applied.

Soote of pitch applied.

The tenderest leaves of Erroniously called, Sycamore.
great Maple boiled in wine, applied.

Shavings of Ebonie, powdered small applied.

Juice of the leaves of wild Olivetree distilled into the eyes.

Harts-horne burned, washed, and applied.

Soote of butter laid to.

Amylum applied.

Tutie washed and applied.

Beans husked, chewed, and laid upon the forehead.

Two drams of the seed of Water-basill, incorporated in four drams of honey,
applied as a liniment.

Leaves of Burnet applied with Polenta.

Scailes of brass washed, and put in the eye.

Lead washed, applied.

The stones Galactites, A stone wherewith Linen Drapers use to whiten their
cloth
Morochthus, and Samius, put in the eye with milk.

Colature of Henbane-seed applied.

A bitter persian Gum.
Sarcocall a distilled into the eye.

Allome applied.

Powder of Corrall applied.

Powder of Pumeisestone applied.

Powder of Bloud-stone.

Against Blear-eyednesse.
PUrslaine and the juice applied.

Juice of Plantaine dropped into the eyes.

Leaves of Housleeke applied.

Powder of Chalcitis, but not without good advise.

Ashes of Sponges applied, especially when the disease is dry.

Bloud-stone bruised, and applied with milk.

Against dazeling of the Eyes.
POwder of Germander sprinkled on the eyes, or applied with oil.

Juice of Melilot applied with honey.

Black Hellebore put in Collyries prescribed for the eyes.

Verdigrease put in the eyes.

Simples serving for the Ears.
Against pains of the Ears.
Juice of Bay Berries incorporated in old Wine, and oil of roses.

Juice of Popler leaves, both this and the former must be dropped into the
ears.

Labdanum applied with wine.

Decoction of dry roses, boiled in wine, distilled into the ears.

Juice of the leaves and bark of willow boiled with oil of roses, in a
Pomegranate shell, to annoint the ears.

Juice of sour Pomegranats boiled with honey, dropped into the ears.

The hardened juice of Poppy hea^s.
Opium applied with oil of Almonds, myrrh, and saffron.

Serpents skin boiled in wine dropped into the ears.

Woodlice chopped small, and boiled in oil of roses in a pomegranate shel,
distilled into the ears.

The grease of a Foxes Lungs distilled into the ears.

Green mineral Chalk boiled in Goose-grease dropped into the ears. Grease of
a Goose, or of a Fox, or of Hens, dropped into the ears.

Urine of a Bull, or of a wild Bore, boiled with myrrh used as aforesaid.

Honey distilled into the ears with mineral salt.

Seed of Sesaminum put in the ears with oil of roses.

Juice of Beets used as aforesaid.

Juice of Plantaine distilled into the ears when the peccant matter is hot.

Juice of the parings of Gourds distilled into the ears with oil of roses.

Juice of great and small Dragons dropped into the ears.

Juice of Leekes distilled with frankincense, vinegar, and milk.

Juice or decoction of mustard.

Juice of Ivy, and of the berries.

Wormwood perfumed, or applied with honey.

Juice of green Organie distilled with milk.

Juice of Mint dropped into the ears.

Juice of Melilot distilled with sod wine.

Juice of Rue boiled in a Pomegranate shel.

Juice of Sow-fennel, dropped into the ears with oil of roses.

Juice of A small kind of Burre.
Goose-grease.

Juice of Hore-hound distilled into the ears with oil of roses.

Juice of Hemp.

Juice of Knot-grasse.

Juice of wall Pellitory.

Juice of water Basil distilled with Brimstone and Niter.

Colature of Henbane-seed distilled into the ears.

Juice of Morell.

Juice of Pimpernel.

Juice of the leaves of wild Cowcumbers.

Salt dropped into the ears with vinegar.

Against interior inflammations of the ears.
SAffron put in the ears.

Sesamininum put in the ears with oil of roses.

Against Impostumes and swellings which grow behind the ears.
NEw shorn unwashed Wool applied.

Dung of Goats nourished upon mountains boiled in wine, or in vinegar applied.

Lin-seed bruised, reduced to a Poultis.

Bean meal applied with honey and fenegreeke.

Herb patience boiled and applied.

Plantaine applied as a plaster.

Seed of Erysimum
Bank Cresses bruised, boiled, and applied.

Perfume of Hisope, also a poultis of the same.

Misseltoe incorporated in the same weight of wax and rosin applied.

Marsh Mallows boiled, and reduced to a liniment.

Psyllium.
Fleawort applied with oil of roses, water, or vinegar.

Leaves of Morell applied with salt.

Galiopsis.
Hedge-nettle applied with vinegar.

Cimolian earth applied.

For ears full of ordure and filth.
Myrrh incorporated in Opium.

Castorium, and The juice of an Herb growing in Syria.
Glaucium put in the ears.

Frankincense distilled into the ears with sweet wine.

Rosin of the Larch-tree, of the Pitch-tree, of the Firre-tree, or Turpentine
put in the ears, with honey, and oil of olives.

Lycium.
Juice of Box-thorne dropped into the ears.

Decoction of Sumack.

Juice of mirtill-berries.

Juice of wild Olive Tree leaves, dropped into the ears with wine.

Gall of a Bull distilled into the ears with milk of a Woman, or of a Goat.

Urine distilled into the ears.

Umbilicus veneris. Wall penniwort.
Ladies Navell distilled into the ears with Deers marrow.

Juice of Asphodil roots alone, or with Frankincense, honey, wine, and myrrh.

Juice of Onyons.

Wormwood applied with honey.

Annise distilled into the ears with oil of roses.

Juice of the flowers of meddow Parsenep dropped into the ears.

Juice of Knot-grasse.

Decoction of Stoebe.

Juice of Flea-wort,

Verjuyce distilled with honey.

Allome incorporated in juice of Coronopus
Buckes horn, dropped into the ears.

Flos salis put in the ears.

For ears that are bruised or crushed.
SCalions applied with dry Polonta.

Brimstone applied with wine, and honey.

For Ulcers of the ears.
NEw shorn unwashed wool applied.

Gal of a Hog distilled into the ears.

Against deafness of the ears.
DEcoction of Asphodil roots dropped into the ears with oil.

Juice of Onyons dropped into the ears.

Black Hellebore put in the ears, not removing it for three days.

Juice of Briony distilled with honey.

The whitest kind of verdigrease put into the ears through a Tunnel.

The smoke or steam.
Perfume of Brimstone, put into the ear by a Tunnell.

Against ticklings and noise of the ears.
ROsin of Cedar put into the ears.

Juice of Ivy berries distilled with old wine and oil of roses.

Dry figs bruised and incorporated in Mustard seed, with some liquor, and put
into the ears.

Bulls gall dropped into the ears.

Honey applied with mineral salt bruised small.

Juice of Leeks distilled into the ears with Frankincense, vinegar, and milk.

Juice of Onyons dropped into the ears.

Mustard bruised and put into the ears with figs.

Perfume of boiling vinegar, put into the ears through a Tunnell.

Against worms in the Ears.
ROsin of Cedar distilled with vinegar.

Man's Urine boiled in a Pomegranat shell, distilled into the ears.

Juice of the roots of the Caper bush, dropped into the ears.

Juice of Calaminte.

Juice of Fleawort.

Vinegar dropped into the ears.

Simples serving for the Nose.
To staunch the bleeding at the Nose.
POwder of Frankincense cast into the nostrils.

Snailes bruised with their shells and applied.

Juice of Leekseed dropped into the nostrils with powder of Frankincense.

Rue bruised, applied,

Leaves of Nettles applied with the juice.

Cummin applied with vinegar.

Pith of Fennel-giant put in the nostrils.

Lysimachis
Yellow Willow herb put in the nostrils.

Juice of Clymenum
water Bettony dropped into the nostrils.

Flowers of stinking dead Netle put in the nostrils.

Juice of Shavegrasse dropped into the nostrils.

Vinegar drunk, and put in the nostrils.

Nose bleed yarrow applied.

Chalcitis distilled with Juice of Leeks.

To cause one to bleed.
DEcoction of the root of Crocodilium.
Chamelaeon thistle drunk.

Against Pimples of the Nose, and Noli me tangere.
CYprus apples bruised with figs and applied.

Roots of great Dragons applied.

Benzoin applied with vitriol, or verdigrease, and filed plates of brass,
resolved in vinegar: but first cut the pimples with sizzars.

Verdigrease applied.

Sandaracha, red Arsenick.
Red Orpine applied with oil of roses.

Against Cankers and Ulcers of the Nose.
ROOt of great Dragons applied, Juice of Ivy dropped on them.

Best red Arsenicke applied with oil of roses.

Against stench of the Nose.
JUice of Ivy dropped into the Nose.

Against dropping and distillations of the Nose.
SEed of Gith bruised, and bound up in a cloth, to smell often.

To purge the Humors of the Brain by the Nose.
Juice of Onyons put in the nostrils.

Juice of both kind of Organie put in the nostrils with oil of flower-deluce.

Juice of Sowbread dropped into the nose.

To provoke sneesing.
BEaver stones put in the nose.

Seed of Basil, or the juice put in the nose.

Mustard seed, bruised, snuffed up the nose.

Root of Ranunculus Butter flower.
Crow-foot, dried powdered and snuffed up the nose.

Flowers of sneesing-wort snuffed up the nose.

Root of sope-wort put in the nose.

Powder of white Hellebore.

Simples serving for the Mouth and Tongue.
Against Cancers and corrosive Ulcers.
POwder of Gallingal roots put in the mouth.

Decoction of Aspalathus an aromatical wood used by perfumers.
rosewood, boiled in wine, held in the mouth, with which also the mouth may be
washed against malign ulcers.

Acacia put in the mouth.

Juice of Plantain held in the mouth.

Wash the mouth with the decoction of Capers boiled in vinegar.

Juice of Liquorice held in the mouth.

Juice of Organy held in the mouth.

Sweet Violets applied with honey.

Serapias
Finger Orchis applied.

Cammomil chewed.

Juice of Bistorta Britanica.
Snake-weed held in the mouth.

Juice of Tribulus.
Caltraps taken with honey, like an electuary.

Decoction of Bramble held in the mouth.

The mouth washed with the decoction of Cinkefoile roots.

Wash the mouth with the second kind of verveine and wine.

Staphis acre applied with honey.

Flowers of Wild (grape bearing) vine.
Labruske in powder, sprinkled upon the ulcers.

Allome applied with honey,

Burned salt applied with Polenta.

To sweeten the Breath.
MAstick chewed.

Myrrh chewed.

Citrons chewed.

Anise chewed.

Wild Oats boiled with roses held in the mouth,

For sharpness of the Tongue.
THe tongue rubbed with Minte.

Seed of Sumacke and honey used as aforesaid.

Simples serving for the Teeth.
To make the Teeth clean.
POwder of purple fish shel, of the Calamary fish shel, of Muskle shel, of
unguis odoratus, and of Snailes shell, used in dentrifices.

Cutlebone, and Hearts horn used to rub the teeth.

Decoction of Plantain root to wash the teeth.

Rub the teeth with round Aristolochia.

The fifth kind of A kind of seafoam indurate called also Spuma maris.
Halcyonium, the pumeise stone, the A white stone, clear and transparent like
glass, for which (as some say) it was formerly used
Arabian stone, and the stone Samius used in dentrifices.

For the Tooth ach.
THe teeth often washed in the decoction of the leaves of pine tree, or of
pitch tree.

Rosin of Cedar put in the hollow of the tooth.

Bark of Sycamore boiled in vinegar, wash the mouth in the said decoction.

Wash the mouth in the decoction of Tamarisk boiled in wine.

Lees of oil boiled in a Copper vessel till it be thick like honey, to wash
the mouth therein, with vinegar, wine, or honied wine.

The mouth washed with the decoction of the bark of Mulberry-tree.

Milk of Fig Tree put in the hollow of the tooth with wool.

The mouth washed in the decoction of Serpents skin boiled in vinegar.

The indented prick of the Forke-fish applied upon the tooth.

The mouth washed in the decoction of Frogs boiled in water and vinegar.

Liver of a Lizard put into the hollow of the tooth.

Earthworms boiled in oil, distilled into the opposite ear, on the other side
of the diseased tooth.

The mouth washed in the decoction of Sorrel.

Decoction of Sparagus roots held in the mouth.

Juice of Asphodill roots dropped into the ear, opposite to the affected tooth.

Decoction of heart of Pine, of Garlic, and of frankincense held in the mouth.

Decoction of the root of Called also, Rest barrow.
Cammock boiled in water and vinegar, to wash the mouth therein.

Lotion of the mouth, with the decoction of the seed of Capers.

Also the bark of the Caper bush, and the root chewed, is good for the same.

Roots of Lepiddium, Pepper-wort.
Dittander hanged about the neck, after the opinion of some.

Roots of Crowfoot applied.

Juice of Anagallis.
Pimpernell, distilled into the opposite ear.

Five kernels of Ivie-berries, boiled in oil of roses, in a pomgrana te-shel,
dropped into the ear, on the other side of the diseased tooth.

Decoction of black Chameleon-thistle held in the mouth.

The mouth washed in the decoction of Bedeguar Spina alba.
white Thistle.

Root of our Lady-thistle chewed.

The The steam or vapor.
perfume of boiling Wormwood taken at the mouth.

Decoction of Hisope boiled in vinegar held in the mouth.

Hercules All-heale put in the hollow of the affected tooth.

Decoction of Pellitory of Spain boiled in vinegar held in the mouth.

Juice of Sow-fennel put in the hollow of the grieved tooth.

Decoction of Gith, boiled in vinegar, with heart of pine, held in the mouth.

Benzoin put in the hollow of the tooth.

Galbanum applied, and put in the hollow of the tooth.

The mouth washed with the decoction of Baulme.

Decoction of marsh Mallows boiled in vinegar, held in the mouth.

Decoction of Bettony boiled in wine, or in vinegar.

Periwincle chewed.

Roots of Polemonia, white Ben.
Spatling-poppy chewed.

Decoction of Cink-foyle root held in the mouth.

The mouth washed with the decoction of Henbane-roots, boiled in vinegar.

Decoction of sleepy Nightshade held in the mouth.

The mouth washed in the decoction of the roots of Colacum Ephesians emerum, having
dark red roots.
wild-meddow saffron.

Lotion of the mouth with decoction of mullein.

Decoction of Cloteburre.
Arction boiled in wine held in the mouth.

Decoction of wild Cowcumbers held in the mouth.

Lotion of the mouth, with the decoction of Coloquintida.

Decoction of Staphis acre boiled in vinegar, held in the mouth.

Milk of Spurge, named Caracias, put in the hollow of the tooth, defending it
with wax, least the milk fall down into the throat.

Lotion of the mouth with hot vinegar.

A metal like to Melanteria, but thinner and more spungie.
Sorry put into the hollow of the diseased tooth.

To cause viciate teeth to fall out.
ROsin of Cedar put into the hollow of the tooth.

Lees of oil boiled with verjuce till it be thick like honey, applied on the
tooth.

The indented prick found in the tail of the Fork-fish, put in the hollow of
the tooth.

Roots of Crow-foot put in the hollow of the tooth.

Roots of black Chameleon-thistle, put in the hollow of the tooth.

To fasten loose teeth.
DEcoction of Mastick-tree held in the mouth.

The mouth washed in the pickle of Olives.

Oil of wild Olives held in the mouth.

The mouth washed with the decoction of Sorry.

Allome dissolved in vinegar, and honey, applied.

For teeth set on edge.
PUrslaine chewed.

To stay watering of the Gums.
POwder of Galingall applied.

The expression of dry roses boiled in wine, put in Lotions for the mouth.

Pickle of Olives held in the mouth.

Oil of wild Olives held in the mouth.

Galls applied in any sort.

Pomegranate-flowers infused in their decoction to wash the mouth.

Decoction of Plum-tree leaves, held in the mouth.

The mouth washed with Asses milk.

Dry Peni-royall burned, reduced to powder, and applied.

Decoction of Bramble held in the mouth.

The mouth washed in the decoction on of Staphis acre.

Verjuyce applied with honey.

The mouth washed with vinegar.

Rust of Iron applied.

Allome applied in any sort.

Burned salt applied with dry polenta.

Powder of Alablaster, or of A black hard mineral substance, wherewith
Ironworke is polished, and precious stones and glass cut.
Emerie applied.

For rotten putrified Gums.
GUm Lac applied, is a singular remedy.

Box-thorn bruised, applied.

Juice of Plantaine held in the mouth.

Liniment of Aloes, made with wine, or honey.

Land or water Caltraps, applied with honey.

Ashes of the flower of Labrusk, applied with honey.

The mouth washed with vinegar.

Powder of Chalcitis, or of Allome, or of Pumeise-stone, or of Verdigrease
applied.

Simples serving for the Neck and Throat.
Against the Squinancie.
Tar applied.

Wine of Mulberries boiled in a Copper vessel, and re-boyled in the Sun,
applied with a little honey.

Wood-lice applied with honey.

Ashes of burned Swallows, applied as a poultis with honey.

Gall of a Bull applied with honey.

Gall of a Tortoise applied.

Vinegar gargalized.

Honey gargalized.

Juice of Onions applied.

Pepper applied with honey.

Wormwood applied with honey and niter.

Seed of Radish gargalized with vinegar, mingled with honey.

Decoction of Hisope boiled with Figs, gargalized.

Swallows salted and dried, the weight of a dram taken with water.

Benzoin gargalized with honied water.

Sweet Violets boiled in water drunk.

Juice of wild Cowcumbers applied with honey, old oil, or the Gall of a Bull;
This is an excellent remedy.

Liniment made of salt, honey, oil, and vinegar.

Spartium.
Spanish Broom steeped in water, then the juice pressed out, and the weight of
an obol is to be drunk.

For inflammation of the jaws.
AShes of burned Swallows applied as a Poultis with honey.

Milk gargalized.

Frogs boiled in oil, reduced to a liniment, to annoint Apostumes of the Neck,
of the nape of the neck, or Chine.

Honey applied.

Juice of green Organy gargalized.

Juice of wall Pellitory gargalized, and applied without.

Juice of both sorts of Nettles gargalized.

Powder of Chalcitis applied.

Allome applied.

Burned Salt applied with honey:

Vinegar gargalized.

Aloes applied with honey, or wine.

Juice of Britannica.
Snake-weed applied.

Caltraps applied with honey.

Juice of Bramble-berries gargalized.

Decoction of dry Figs gargalized.

To put up and fasten the The palate of the mouth.
Uvula.
BEnzoin applied with honey.

Decoction of Plum-tree leaves, boiled in wine gargalized.

Verjuyce applied.

Vinegar gargalized.

Verdigrease in very small powder applied.

Against Rheumes of the throat.
DEcoction of Poppy-heads, reduced in form of a A medicine more liquid then an
Electuary.
Lohoch with honey, this composition must be often taken.

Bdelium dissolved with fasting spittle, applied.

Female Verveine gargalized with wine.

Verjuyce applied.

Verdigrease powdered very small and applied.

Allome applied.

Vinegar gargalized.

Against sharpness of the Throat, and passage to the Lungs.
Myrrh resolved under the tongue.

Barley water gargalized. Amilum reduced to the form of an Electuary.

Juice of Mustard gargalized.

Juice of Lichorice dissolved under the tongue.

Gum Dragant taken with honey as an Electuary.

Benzoin dissolved in water, taken as Lohoch.

Symphitum petreum.
Wall-wort chewed.

Decoction of Cinkfoile-roots gargalized.

Aethiopis:
Ethiopian mullein taken with honey, as an Electuary.

Milk gargalized.

Juice of Lycium.
Box-thorn bruised, and taken as a Lohoch.

Simples serving for the Breasts and Lungs.
For those which spit, and vomit Blood.
REere Eggs supped.

Ashes of Harts-horne washed, and drunk with Gum Dragant.

Climenum.
Water Bettony drunk Juice of wild Time the weight of two drams drunk in vinegar.

Dung of a wild she Goat mingled with wine, or water, drunk.

Wheat meal boiled very thick, taken as an Electuary,

Amilum drunk.

Green pitch of Herb Ferula drunk.

Purslaine well boiled eaten.

Plantaine taken in any sort whatsoever, or the juice.

Seed of Plantaine drunk.

Leek-seed drunk with the like weight of Mirtill-berries.

Agarick the weight of three obols drunk in honied water.

Rhapontick drunk, as before.

Juice of Willow Herb drunk, and applied.

Roots of great Centaury drunk.

Roots of white thistle drunk.

Roots of Arabian thistle drunk.

Aloes the weight of six scruples, taken in fresh water, or in whey.

Juice of Knot-grasse drunk.

Pills of the juice of Sage taken with honey.

Wall wort taken with water.

Juice of Mint taken with vinegar.

Decoction of marsh mallows drunk.

Bettony leaves the weight of three obols taken in wine and water.

Roots of Comfry drunk.

Achillea, noble yarrow.
Achilles yarrow drunk.

Ten grains of Tragos.
Sea Grape drunk in wine.

Roots of Burre dock drunk with Pine-apples.

Seed of Isopyrum.
Columbine drunk.

Mayden-haire drunk.

Juice of Vine leaves drunk.

Flowers of Labrusk drunk.

Verjuyce drunk moderately.

Powder of Corrall drunk.

Powder of the Bloud-stone, or of the stone Morochthus, or of Samian earth,
drunk with the juice of Pomegranats.

For the Tisick.
PIstachoes, or Pineapple kernels eaten alone, or with honey.

Turpentine alone, or taken with honey like an Electuary.

Tar the measure of a Cyath, taken as an Electuary.

Juniper Berries drunk.

Bay Berries bruised, and taken with honey, or sod wine.

Decoction of dry Figs boiled with Hisope drunk.

Boiled river Crabs eaten with their broth.

Woman's milk sucked from the Duggs.

Broth of all fat things good to eat.

Plantaine drunk.

Leekes boiled with honey.

Agarick the weight of a dram taken in sod wine.

Roots of banck Ursine drunk.

Leaves of Hore-hound, or the juice drunk.

Bettony leaves taken with honey.

Myrrhis.
Sweet Chervill taken in broth.

The saltish mold. or boar that grows on that Stone.
Flower of the Asian-stone taken as a Lohoch.

For Apostumes of the Lungs,
SEed of the second kind of Sowbread drunk the space of forty days.

The persume of Coltsfoot taken at the mouth, breaks all Apostumes in the
body.

For difficulty and shortness of breath.
Bay Berries bruised, and taken with honey, or sod wine.

Decoction of dry Figs with Hisope, drunk.

Decoction of old Cocks supped.

Hisope wine drunk.

Plantaine boiled with Lentils, eaten.

Rhapontick drunk.

Honied water drunk.

Round Aristolochia drunk.

Roots of great Centaury drunk.

Decoction of Hisope, Figgs, Honey, and Rue, boiled in water drunk.

Decoction of Stichas.
French Lavender boiled in water drunk.

Penniroyall drunk with honey and Aloes.

Squill reduced to an Electuary, the weight of three obols taken.

Decoction of Time boiled in honey, drunk.

Summer Savoury taken as aforesaid.

Decoction of the roots of Plowmans Spikenard drunk.

Rue drunk.

Juice of Sow-fennell supped in a reere egg.

Gith taken in wine.

Galbanum taken in pills.

Decoction of Hore-hound, or the juice drunk.

Fever-few taken with Matricaria.
Oximel.

Leaves of Anagyris.
Bean Trifoly drunk in sod wine.

Seed of Matrifilva.
Woodbine drunk with wine.

Decoction of Maiden-haire drunk.

Polytrichum.
Black Maiden-haire drunk.

Juice of wild Cowcumbers is a very good remedy for a short breath.

Juice of stinking deadly Thapsia.
Carrot drunk.

Briony taken with honey as an Electuary.

Red Arsenick taken in pills.

Brimstone used in perfume, or taken in a reere egg.

Agarick the weight of a dram taken.

Gum Lac drunk in water, or in honied wine.

Against a Cough.
ILlyrian Flower-deluce eaten.

Grains of Paradise drunk in water.

Cinnamon eaten or drunk.

Perfume of sweet Cane alone, or with Turpentine.

An Electuary made of Elicampane and honey.

Myrrh the bigness of a bean taken.

Storax or Bdellium taken in the manner of an Electuary.

Mastick drunk.

Juniper berries drunk.

Cedar berries eaten.

Seed of Paliurus.
Christ's thorn drunk.

Labdanum mingled in medicines or implaisters.

Gum of Cherry-tree drunk in wine and water.

Bitter Almonds, reduced to an Electuary, with honey and milk.

Gum of bitter Almonds drunk in wine and water.

Filbeards drunk with honyed water.

Dry figs eaten.

Decoction of Germander drunk.

Scordium
Water Germander drunk,

Perfume of Colts foot taken at the mouth:

Perfume of virgins wax.

Honey eaten.

The decoction of wheat meal, taken as an Electuary, with Mint and butter.

Decoction of Oatemeal eaten.

Linseed taken with honey and pepper.

Beans eaten.

Boiled Raddish eaten, especially when the Cough is old.

Roots of great Dragons, roasted in the embers, or boiled, eaten.

Asphodill roots the weight of three drams drunk,

Boiled Garlic eaten, is good against old Coughs.

Seed of Erysimum
Bank Cresses, taken with honey as an Electuary.

An Electuary of pepper.

An Electuary of Squill, and of honey, when the Cough is inveterate.

Root of great Centaury drunk, when the disease is old.

Electuary of Gum Dragant, and Honey,

Decoction of Hysope, boiled in water, with honey, figs and rue, drunk

French Lavender prepared as the Hisope.

Electuary of Organy and honey.

Tragoriganum.
Goats Organy prepared in the same sort.

Decoction of the roots of plowmans spikenard, drunk, when the Cough is of long
continuance.

All-heal drunk in sweet wine.

Seed and roots of seselios of Marseilles, drunk.

Roots of Candy Alexanders eaten.

Seed of Daueus.
Yellow Carrot drunk, when the Cough is inveterate.

Juice of Sow-fennell taken in a rear egg,

Benzoin taken in the same sort,

Decoction of Horehound, or the Juice, drunk.

Galbanum taken in Pills when the disease is old.

Gum Sagapene eaten, when the Cough lasts long.

Juice of He xine parietaria
Wall Pellitory, the weight of a cyath taken, when the Cough is old.

The herb and root called Horse-tail drunk.

Decoction of Rushes drunk.

Poppy-heads boiled in water, to the consumption of one half, then add honey
sufficient to make it into an Electuary,

Henbane seed drunk.

Decoction of Mullein drunk, when the Cough is inveterat.

Root of Cacalia.
mountain horse-foot steeped in wine, eaten

Electuary of Briony and of honey.

The Caro.
pulpe of white grapes dried, eaten.

Honyed water drunk.

Thapsia.
Stinking deadly Carrot applied as a Liniment.

Hisope wine drunk.

Perfume of red mineral Arsenicke, and of Rosin, taken through a Tunnell.

Perfume of Brimstone, or brimston taken in a rear egg.

Against sharpness of the breast.
Juice of Liquorice dissolved under the tongue.

Root of Mountain Horse-foot steeped in wine, and taken after the manner of an
Electuary.

To clear the voice.
Myrrh dissolved under the tongue.

Electuary of honey, and of gum dragant.

Benzoin resolved in water, and supped.

Electuary of Storax.

Coleworts eaten.

Wine of Hisope drunk.

Against Pleurisies.
HOgs-lard washed in wine applied.

Juice of Hercules All-heal drunk.

Gum Sagapene applied as a A poultis
cataplasme.

Against pains of the Sides without a Feavor.
DUng of she Goats incorporated in oil and wax, applied as a poultis.

Liniment made of Barley meal boiled with melilot and poppy heads, in honyed
wine.

Stems of green Coleworts burned, and incorporated in Hogs Lard, then applied
as a poultis.

Decoction of the roots, of our Lady thistle, boiled in wine drunk.

Asphodil roots the weight of a dram drunk in wine.

Juice of the roots of Gentian the weight of a dram taken.

Round Aristolochia drunk in water.

Root of great Centaury drunk.

Benzoin taken in broth.

Galbanum applied.

Leaves of Hore-hound applied with honey.

Leaves and seed of stinking Trifoly drunk.

Ethiopian mullein drunk.

Decoction of Acorum.
sweet cane drunk.

Costus drunk with wormwood and wine.

Agallochu^
Wood of Aloes drunk in water.

Myrrh the greatness of a Bean taken.

Bdellium drunk.

Turpentine applied.

Electuary of Briony, and of honey.

For inflammations of the Lungs.
Basil applied with dry polenta.

Electuary of Nettle seed, and of honey.

Electuary of Goats organy and honey.

Chrysocome
Golden tode flax drunk.

Honied water drunk.

For those which spit putrified matter.
ELectuary of Bank cresses and honey.

Bettony leaves the weight of two drams, taken in four Cyathes of honied water.

Roots of Bur dock with pine apples.

Ethiopian Mullein drunk.

Wine of Hysope.

Red Arsenicke taken in honyed wine. I cannot approve of this Medicine.

Perfume of brimstone, or brimstone taken in a rear egg.

To help difficulty of breathing,
BAy berries taken in honey, or in sod wine.

Dry Beans boiled with Hysope, drunk.

A young child's Urine drunk.

Rue drunk.

Seed of the second kind of Sowbread, drunk.

Roots of great dragons roasted in the embers, or boiled, and reduced to an
electuary.

Honied water drunk.

The herb, or seed of Soendilium
meddow parsnep, taken in broth.

Root or leaves of horse-taile drunk.

Seed of Sothernwood, and seed of Ciprus, bruised, drunk in water.

Decoction of hisope, boiled in water, with figs, honey, and Rue, drunk,

Decoction of Calaminte drunk.

Hysope wine drunk.

Decoction of Time, boiled in honey, drunk.

Summer savory drunk with honey.

Seselios of Marscilles drunk.

Decoction of black maiden-haire drunk.

Cummin drunk in water and vinegar.

Root of Candy Alexanders eaten

Stinking deadly Carrot, applied.

Gum ammoniacke drunk.

Leaves of Baulme reduced to an electuary.

Perfume of Coltsfoot taken through a Tunnell.

Juice of Hippophestus the weight of three obols taken.

Oak of Jerusalem drunk, or reduced to an Electuary.

Seed of Woodbinde drunk.

Decoction of Maidenhair drunk.

To expel excrements difficult to spit.
ILlyrian Flower-de-luce drunk.

All That part in Beasts (as in Caives) whereof Runnet is made.
Curds drunk.

Boiled Raddish eaten.

Leekes boiled with French barley.

Garden Cresses boiled in pottage.

Scallyons roasted in embers eaten.

Gum Ammoniack taken as a Lohoch.

Water Germander drunk.

Liniment of stinking deadly Carrot.

Electuary of Lin-seed.

Three obols of dried Squil, reduced to an Electuary.

Dry hore-hound drunk, with powder of Flower-de-luce.

Wine of Hisope drunk.

Against Rheumes falling down into the Breast.
SEed of Bank-cresses taken as an Electuary with honey.

Against all maladies of the Breast.
LEekes boiled in honey eaten.

Juice of Licorice drunk.

Electuary of Time, and Honey.

Electuary of Summer Savoury, and honey.

Electuary of the root of Seselios of Candy, and of honey.

Roots of Rosemary drunk.

Wall-wort boiled in honied wine drunk.

Juice of Cinkfoile-seed drunk.

Simples serving for the Heart.
For swoundings of the Heart.
THe smell of Cowcumbers.

Penni-royall put to the nose with vinegar.

Buglosse drunk.

For panting and throbbing of the heart.
SUccory applied alone, or with polenta.

Wormwood boiled in sod wine applied.

Bramble leaves applied.

Against hardness of the Mideriffe
RHapontick drunk.

Wormwood wine drunk.

Against inveterate inflammations of the precordiall parts.
Water Germander incorporated in Wax applied.

Simples serving for the Teats or Duggs.
For inflammations of the Duggs.
LIniment made of Frankincense, of Cimolian earth, and of oil of roses.

Quinces reduced to a poultis, or liniment.

A poultis of Wall-nuts, of Rue, and of a little honey.

Bean meal applied alone, or with polenta.

Roots and leaves of Asphodills applied with wine.

Seed of bank Cresses applied.

Root of Hemerocallis.
Liriconfancie, applied in the manner of a poultis.

Boiled Marsh-mallowes applied.

Kernells of Grapes applied with salt.

Powder of the stone A precious Stone brittle as a shell, resembling the
Agathe, after some. Goraeus says, it is a kind of Cadmia.
Ostracites, applied with honey.

Powder of the stone Geodes, applied with water.

Samian earth applied with oil of roses, and water.

To draw forth the Duggs of Women lately delivered.
WHeat bran boiled in decoction of Rue, applied.

Leaves of Plow man's Spikenard, applied as a poultis.

Epimediam.
Leaves of Barren-wort chopped small, applied with oil as a poultis.

Henbane-seed bruised, and applied with wine.

Leaves of Palma Christi applied.

Kernels of Grapes applied with salt.

To dissolve and mollify hardness of the Duggs.
Meal of Orobus.
bitter Vetch applied as a poultis.

Ground pine, applied with honey.

Kernels of Grapes bruised with salt, and applied.

For ulcerated Duggs.
AShes of Vnguis Odoratus applied. Roots of Asclepias.
Swallow-wort applied.

To resolve Milk curdled, and clottered in the Duggs.
TEn drops of Wax, of the greatness of a hirse grain swallowed.

Bean meal applied alone, or with polenta.

Liniment made of meal of Lentils.

Parsley, and the juice applied.

To put the Milk away.
HEmlock applied on the Duggs.

To increase Milk abundantly.
LEaves of Halimus.
Sea-purslaine eaten with meat.

Seed of Agnus Castus drunk.

French Barley boiled with fennel-seed, eaten often.

Decoction of Mallows drunk.

Juice of Sow-thistle drunk.

Lettice eaten often.

Rocket eaten often.

Wind-flower, and the branches boiled and eaten with French Barley.

Anise drunk.

Dry Dill-seed drunk, or the decoction of the tops.

Fennel eaten.

Gith drunk many days.

Seed of Circes.
Bind-weed, Nightshade taken in broth.

Periwinckle eaten.

Roots of Echium.
Vipers Buglosse taken in broth, or with wine.

A kind of Cytisus, or milk trefoile.
Glaux boiled with oil, salt, and meal, taken as broth.

Polygala.
Milk-wort drunk.

Juice of Briony boiled with wheat, eaten, but this I do not allow.

To defend Milk from settling in the Breasts.
MInte applied with polenta.

Lees of Wine applied with vinegar.

To keep the Duggs from growing.
HEmlock bruised, and applied.

Powder of the Naxion stone, applied.

Simples serving for the Stomach.
Against turnings of the Stomach, and to prevent vomitting.
INfusion of Quinces drunk.

Spikenard, and Celtick Spikenard drunk in water.

Dates eaten.

Date-skinnes in powder, put in cataplasmes for the Stomach.

The inward skin of a Chickens gizerne dried, powdered, and drunk with wine.

Amber drunk.

Beans boiled in vinegar and water, eaten.

Twenty grains of Lentils bruised and eaten.

French beans eaten.

Watercresses drunk.

Bramble Leaves applied outwardly.

Lettice eaten unwashed.

Wild Lentils eaten.

Dried Squil drunk.

Agarick the weight of three drams taken alone without any liquor.

Juice of Gentian roots drunk with water.

Roots of our Lady-thistle drunk.

Two or three sprigs of Mint, drunk with the juice of sower Pomegranats.

Peony-seed drunk in strong wine.

Bettony chewed, drinking presently after wine mingled with water.

Juice of the leaves and branches of

Vine, drunk.

Wine of Myrtle drunk.

Lees of wine applied.

Squil wine drunk.

Against waterishnesse and rheumes which fall down into the Stomach.
Juice of Lycium.
Box-thorn drunk, or taken in pills.

Raw Quinces eaten.

Green Mulberries dried to powder, sprinkled on meat.

Lexive of the ashes of Figtree, the measure of a Cyath taken.

Tamarisk drunk.

Galls bruised, and steeped in wine, or water, applied.

Seed of Sumack sprinkled on meat.

Myrtle leaves bruised, and applied with water.

Liniment made of the leaves of wild Olive Tree, and of dry Polenta.

Curd of a Hare, or of a Horse, the weight of three obols taken in wine.

Beans boiled in water and vinegar eaten.

Meal of Egyptian beans, and the decoction of their husks, taken with
honied wine.

Seed of Sorrel drunk in water, or in wine.

Plantaine boiled in vinegar, eaten with salt.

Seed of Jacynth drunk.

Coronopus.
Bucks horn boiled, eaten.

Rhapontick drunk.

Roots of white Thistle drunk.

Pith of green Fennellgyant.
Ferula drunk.

Juice of Laserwort taken with kernells of Grapes.

Root of water Lilly dried, drunk.

Juice of water Bettony drunk.

Seed of Limonium.
water Plantaine, the weight of an Acetabule taken in wine.

Ten grains of Tragos.
small Sea-grape taken in wine.

Decoction of Poppy heads, reduced to an Electuary with honey; to make it more
effectual you may add juice of Acacia, and of male holly-rose.

Decoction of Grape kernels drunk.

Grape kernels reduced to powder, used instead of polenta.

Water wherein hot Steel has been quenched drunk.

The stone Morochthus drunk.

Wine of Myrtle drunk.

Maiden-haire drunk in wine.

Black Maiden-haire drunk in wine.

To cause Vomitting.
Bay Leaves drunk.

Snayles which stick to briars and bushes eaten.

Roots of Pompions dried, the weight of a dram drunk in honied water.

White Daffodill roots eaten.

Organie confected in the Sun, in a copper vessel, with onions, and seed of
Sumack drunk. It must have stood in the Sun all the Dog-dayes, and as many
other as amounts to forty.

Best, true bole.
Bole-armonick of the Orient, drunk.

Against pains of the Stomach.
CAmmels hay drunk.

Scalions eaten.

Rhapontick drunk.

Decoction of Wormwood boiled in sod wine, drunk.

Decoction of Melilot boiled in wine drunk.

The small leaves of Mugwort bruised, and applied with oil, in the manner of a
poultis.

Roots of water Lilly applied.

Branches of Groundsell boiled in sod wine, eaten, or drunk.

Powder of Alablaster incorporated in a seare-cloth.

Against gripings of the Stomach.
SPikenard, and Celtick Spikenard drunk in water.

Squinanthum.
Cammels hay drunk.

Juice of Sycamore drunk.

Pine apples eaten.

Woman's milk supped.

Juice of Sow-thistle drunk.

Penni-royall taken with vinegar and water.

Juice of both kinds of Hawk-weed, drunk.

Water Germander the weight of two drams taken in honied water.

Peony-seed taken in old thick red wine.

Against inflammations of the Stomach.
PUrslaine applied with dry polenta.

Sow-thistles applied as a poultis.

Juice of Vmbilicus veneris.
Wall Penni-wort applied.

All kinds of Succory eaten in vinegar.

Juice of Licorice drunk.

Parsley drunk.

Fennel drunk in fair water.

Knot-grasse applied.

Leaves of Morell applied.

Leaves of Spurge Laurel drunk.

Leaves and Here, as in all places else, when vine follows, is meant the
tendrils wher-with they catch hold of what is next them, to get higher.
branches of Vine applied as a poultis.

Flowers of Labrusk applied.

Against wind in the Stomach.
ROots of Menm, Bearewort.
Spicknell boiled in water, or bruised raw, and drunk.

Spikenard, and Celticke Spikenard drunk in water.

Castorium drunk.

Broth of old Capons.

Wormwood drunk with Seselios, or Celtick Spikenard.

Seed and roots of Lygusticum.
Lovage drunk.

Seed of Candie Alexanders drunk.

Against the Hickop, and Yexing.
SEed of Watercresses drunk in wine.

Rhapontick drunk.

Round Aristolochia drunk.

Two or three branches of Minte drunk with juice of sower Pomegranats.

Decoction of the seed and tops of Dill drunk.

Wild Cummin drunk in vinegar.

Madwort drunk, or carried in the hand, or distilled into the nostrils.

Decoction of Ceterach drunk,

Woodbine-seed drunk.

Samphire drunk.

Against sharp belching.
AGarick the weight of a dram taken.

Goats Organie drunk.

Bettony leaves the greatness of a bean taken with clarified honey.

To resolve Milk and Blood, fixed and clotted in the Stomach.
LExive of the ashes of Fig Tree, drunk.

Curds of Horses, of Hares, of Lambs, of Kids, of Hindes, of Calves, or of
Bufles the weight of three obols taken in wine.

Tops of golden Moth-weed, drunk in honied wine.

Benzoin drunk.

Against inflammations of the Stomach.
A Poultis of both kinds of Hawkweed.

A poultis of the leaves and branches of Vine with polenta.

Sweet Violets applied with polenta.

To procure an appetite.
PEpper eaten.

Vinegar used in sauce.

Wormwood drunk.

To help Digestion.
ROcket eaten.

All sorts of Pepper eaten.

Ginger eaten.

Squill boiled in honey eaten.

VVorm-wood drunk, or applied on the stomach.

Goats Organie drunk.

Penni-royall drunk.

Roots and seed of Lovage drunk.

Seed of Seselios, of Marseilles drunk in wine.

Carvi.
Caraway drunk.

Bettony leaves the greatness of a bean, taken after meals, with honey, well
clarified.

Wormwood wine drunk.

Against the flowing down of humors upon the stomach.
MAiden hair drunk in wine.

Decoction of dry Peaches drunk.

Quinces infused, then pressed, drink the liquor.

Simples serving for the Liver.
Against stoppings and obstructions of the Liver.
SPicknard, and Celtick Spicknard, drunk in fair water.

Bark of the Bay tree, the weight of three obols taken in wine.

Leaves of Pitch tree, the weight of a dram taken in water, or in honied water.

Electuary of bitter Almonds, of milk, and of honey, the bigness of a small
nut taken.

Juice of Gentian roots, drunk in water.

Agarick drunk.

Rhapontick drunk.

Eryngium
Sea Holly taken in wine.

Decoction of Cammomill, drunk.

Leaves of ground Pine, drunk seven days together in wine.

Buttonie the weight of a dram taken in honied vinegar.

Egrimony, or the seed drunk.

Root of horned poppy drunk.

Rubrica Sinopica, called also Bolearmonick but is not the true right Bole.
Red Oker drunk.

Electuary of the juice of Licorice.

Against the Jaundise.
SPikenard, and Celticke Nard, drunk.

Harts-horne burned, washed, and drunk.

Wood-lice drunk in wine.

Cich Pease boiled with Rosemary, eaten.

Roots of sharp pointed docks boiled in wine, drunk.

Seed of Orange drunk in honyed water.

Decoction of Sparagus roots, boiled with figs, and Cich pease, drunk.

Decoction of Rock Sampire, and of their seed and roots, drunk.

Electuary of Bank cresses.

Electuary of Squill and of honey, the weight of three obols taken.

Celandine root, drunk in wine with Anise.

Root of Meddow Parsenep, drunk.

Agarick the weight of a dram taken.

Rhapontick drunk.

Decoction or infusion of wormwood, three cyaths taken every day,

Alloes the weight of a dram drunk.

The whole body washed in the decoction of Organy.

Calaminte drunk in wine.

Wild fennel drunk.

Rosemary roots, taken in wine with pepper.

Decoction of Rosemary, drunk.

Gith bruised and put into the nose with oil of flower-deluce.

Benzoin taken with dry figs.

Juice of Hore-hound dropped into the Nose.

Decoction of both kinds of poley drunk.

Leaves and flowers of fleabane drunk.

Decoction of Ceterach drunk.

Liverwort applied with honey.

Decoction of Maiden-haire drunk.

Decoction of black Maiden-haire drunk.

Decoction of Cammomil, drunk.

Buphthalumus.
Ox eye drunk, going out of a Bath.

Peony root drunk.

Seed of Jacynth drunk in wine. Roots of Madir drunk in honied water.

Leaves of ground Pine, drunk, seven days together in wine.

Bettonie leaves taken in water.

Juice of wild Cowcombers, drunk.

Decoction of the roots of Orkanet drunk.

Juice of Cinkefoile the weight of 3 Cyaths, taken certain days together.

Decoction of Osyris.
Tode flax, drunk.

A bath made with the decoction of Chrysanthemum.
Marigolds.

Squill wine drunk.

Leaves of verveine one dram, fankincense three obols, old wine a hemine, take
of this composition fasting, forty days together.

Boxthorn, boiled in vinegar drunk.

Decoction of Tamariske, drunk.

Baccae Halicacabi
Winter cherries drunk.

Leaves of Chamasyce.
Spurge Time, the weight of three obols, taken six days together in water.

Leaves and berrys of Butchers broom drunk in wine.

Ashes of Harts-horne, two drams drunk.

Brimstone taken in a rear egg.

Against the Dropsy,
A Sarabacka drunk.

Cinnamon drunk.

Decoction of sweet Cane, drunk with the seed of Smallage.

Land Hedge-hogs eaten.

Snailes bruised with their shells, and applied, are good against dropicall
tumors.

Lees of oil applied as a Poultis with a very hairy skin.

The Patients Urine drunk.

She Goats urine, drunk every day with Spicknard.

Ciches boiled with Rosemary, eaten.

Raddishes applied as a poultis.

Plantaine boiled with Lentills.

Roots of Walwort boiled in wine, drunk.

Boiled Garlic eaten.

A poultis of Scalions, of honey and of Pepper, in powder.

Squill three obols taken with honey.

Juice of Pimpernell drunk in wine.

Roots of Carline thistle, drunk in wine.

Broth made of wormwood, of figs, niter, and darnell meal.

Decoction of Maidenhair, drunk.

Decoction of black Maiden-haire drunk.

A poultis of hysope, figs and niter.

Decoction of Oakefearn
Polipodie drunk.

Decoction of Organy boiled with figs drunk.

Decoction of Marjerome drunk.

Poultis of Rue and of figs.

Decoction of Rue taken with wine, or the whole body washed therein.

Seed of All-heale drunk.

Annise drunk.

Seed of candy Alexanders, drunk.

Juice of Laserwort taken with dry figs.

Decoction of Germander drunk.

Decoction of both kinds of Poley drunk.

Androsace
Sea navell-wort the weight of two drams drunk in wine.

Bettony leaves drunk in water.

Juice of wild Cowcumber roots the weight of one obol and a half taken; or the
weight of four drams and a half, of the rind of the roots taken.

A Bath of sea water.

Roots of wild vine boiled in water, taken in two cyaths of wine, allayed with
sea water.

Squill wine drunk.

Seed of Agnus Castus drunk.

Liniment made of dry figs, boiled in wine with wormwood, salt, and polenta.

The third kind of Hacyonium.
Spuma maris.

Sand heated in the Sun, the dropsicall person put in it up to the neck.

To heat the Liver.
SPicknard and celticke Spicknard drunk.

Decoction of Amomum, drunk.

Leaves of Pine tree, or of Pitch tree drunk in water, or in honied wine.

For pains of the Liver.
DEcoction of common sweet cane drunk.

Decoction of Wormwood applied with sod wine.

Woodbine seed, drunk in wine.

Against hardness of the Liver.
GUm ammoniacum applied, and drunk.

Simples serving for the Spleen.
Against hardness of the Spleen.
RAw Quinces applied in a poultis.

Root of Sycamote drunk and applied.

Raddishes applied as a poultis.

Coleworts eaten in vinegar.

Decoction of Germander drunk.

Meal of Lupines applied.

To open the Spleen.
CEltick nard drunk in wine.

Maiden hair drunk.

Black maiden hair drunk.

Against inflammations of the Spleen.
ILLyrian Flower-deluce drunk in vinegar.

Common sweet Cane drunk.

Celtick Spicknard drunk in wine.

Mountain Spikenard drunk in wine.

Decoction of Tamariske boiled in wine drunk.

Seed of Agnus Castus drunk.

Against pains of the Spleen.
DIttany drunk, and applied.

To diminish and extenuate the Spleen.
ILlyrian Flower-de-luce drunk in vinegar.

The false adulterated sweet Cane, a kind of Corn-flag:
Common sweet Cane drunk.

Mountain Spikenard, and Celtick Spikenard, drunk in wine.

Decoction of Tamarisk boiled in wine drunk.

Seed of Agnus Castus drunk.

Seed of the second kind of Sowbread, drunk forty days together.

Gum Sagapene drunk.

Gum Ammoniacum the weight of a dram taken in vinegar.

Germander drunk in vinegar.

Garden Cresses drunk.

Roots of the Pepper-plant applied.

Decoction of both kinds of Poley drunk in vinegar.

Juice of Sow-bread applied.

Capers the weight of two drams drunk forty days together in wine.

Root of the Caper-bush, the weight of two drams drunk in wine.

Lep idium.
Dittander applied with Elicampane roots.

Ivy leaves boiled in wine, or dried, incorporated in bread, and applied.

Wild Woad drunk and applied.

Agarick the weight of a dram taken in honied vinegar

Rhapontick drunk.

Roots of Candie Alexanders eaten in a sallad, or otherwise.

Gentian root the weight of two drams drunk.

Round Aristolochia drunk.

Decoction of the root of Crocodilium.
Chameleon-thistle drunk; this is very profitable.

Liniment made of Figgs, of Hisope, and of Niter.

Goats Organie drunk in vinegar.

Penni-royall applied with salt.

Bastardstone parsley after Cordus.
Sison drunk.

Juice of Sow-fennell drunk.

Liniment made of Misseltoe, boiled with Cole-worts, and the stone Goraeus
says, it is jet.
Gagates.

Teuerium
Great Germander drunk in water, or vinegar, or applied with Figs.

Roots of Cheiri.
Wall-flowers applied with vinegar.

Roots of water Lilly drunk in wine.

Leaves of Ceterach drunk, or the decoction of them drunk forty days together
with vinegar, or the leaves applied with vinegar.

Seed of Rampions drunk.

Hemionitis.
Moon-fearn drunk in vinegar.

Seed of Madir drunk in honied vinegar.

Leaves of the second kind of Lonchicis
Spleenwort drunk in vinegar.

Bettony leaves taken in Oximel.

Roots of Spatling-poppy taken in water.

Seed of Woodbinde drunk in wine forty days together.

Seed of stinking Gladdon taken in vinegar.

Roots of Orkanet drunk in honied water.

All kind of Nettles used in seare-clothes.

Black Maiden-haire drunk.

Squill wine drunk often.

Ben drunk with honied water, and meal of bitter vetch.

Briony the weight of three obols drunk in vinegar, every day for thirty days,
or applied with Figgs.

Young shoots of black Briony boiled, and eaten.

Roots of male Fearne drunk.

Wine, or water wherein hot Steel has been quenched drunk.

Third kind of Halcyonium drunk.

Corrall drunk in water.

Liniment made of Asian Stone, of vinegar, and of unslecked Lime.

Scailes of Iron which fall from the Grind-stone drunk in vinegar.

Simples serving for the Guts.
For the Colic.
ELectuary of bitter Almonds, of milk, and of honey, the greatness of a
Filbeard taken.

Snailes bruised with their shells, and a little Myrrh, drunk.

Roasted Larks eaten.

A Hoggs heel burned to powder, drunk, when the disease is windy.

Butter given in a Glister, when the Gut Colon is ulcerated.

Dung of Poultry drunk in wine, or in vinegar.

Decoction of Rue given in a Glister with oil.

Petroselinum.
Garden parsley drunk.

Coloquintida given in a Glister.

Decoction of Carthamum.
Bastard Saffron given in a Glister.

For the Belly-ach and worms.
ILlyrian Flower-de-luce drunk.

Decoction of common sweet Cane drunk.

Roots of Spicknell bruised, and reduced into an Electuary with honey.

Grains of Paradise drunk in water.

Lignum Aloes drunk in water.

Wall-nuts burned with their shells, and applied on the navell.

Decoction of Figgs and Rue, given in a Glister.

Leaves of Halym^^.
Sea-purslaine the weight of a dram, drunk in honied water.

Saffron drunk.

Seed of Daums.
yellow Carrot drunk.

Roots of Rosemary drunk.

Seed of Fenell-gyant drunk.

Juice of Sow-fennell taken in a reere egg.

Decoction of Baulme Given in a Glister.
glisterised.

Castorium drunk.

Butter given in a Glister.

Wild Time drunk.

Decoction of Calaminte drunk.

Sea Holly drunk.

Melted Wax drunk.

A small seed like Cummin but less, brought from the Orient.
Ammeos taken in wine.

Liniment made of Wheat bran boiled in the decoction of Rue.

Millet heated, and applied on the belly in a little bag.

Meal of bitter Vetch steeped in vinegar, applied.

Seed of VVater-Cresses drunk in wine.

Pepper drunk with Bay leaves.

Electuary made of Squil, and of honey

Rhapontick drunk.

Decoction of Marjerome drunk.

Roots of great Centaury drunk.

Rue boiled with dry Dill, drunk.

All-heale taken in wine.

Decoction of the seed and tops of Dill drunk.

Seed and roots of Lovage drunk.

Decoction of Cummin, given in a Glister with oil.

Flowers, leaves, and seed of Phalangium.
Spiderwort drunk.

Centunculus.
Cotten-weed drunk.

Leaves and Flowers of Fleabane drunk.

Root of Peony drunk.

Pseudebunium.
VVinter Cresses taken in vinegar.

Fomentation with sea water.

Ground pine drunk.

Decoction of Gramen.
Couch-grasse drunk.

Leaves of Spurge Laurel drunk.

Salt heated and applied in little bags.

Niter drunk in honied water with Cummin.

Seed of Seselios of Marseilles drunk.

Roots of Swallow-wort drunk.

Alisma.
Bears ear drunk alone, or with the like weight of yellow Carrotseed.

A Hoggs heel burned drunk.

Decoction of Lin-seed given in a Glister.

Agarick the weight of two obols taken.

Against the Bloody Flix, and the A painful wringing Flix, which breeds
ulcers in the Guts.
Dysemerie.
DEcoction of Rose-wood glisterised.

Myrrh the greatness of a Bean taken.

Mastick drunk.

Bark of the Pitch-tree drunk.

Bark of An Indian root.
Macer drunk.

Leaves and roots of Christs-thorne drunk.

Hawthorn berries eaten, or drunk.

Berries of Rubus Canis.
Wild Eglantine eaten.

Leaves and flowers of Cistus.
Holly-rose drunk,

Juice of Male Holly Rose, drunk.

Ladanum drunk in old wine.

Wild rose buds, unblown, drunk.

Juice of Lycium:
Box-thorn drunk.

Juice of Acacia drunk.

Decoction of Acorn shells drunk.

The inward rind of Chef-Nuts, drunk.

Unripe Galls, bruised and drunk with wine, or water: or applied with the same
liquors.

Decoction of Sumack leaves given in a glister, or drunk.

Seed of Sumacke used in place of salt.

Decoction of the rind or skin of Dates glisterised, or drunk.

Kernells of four Pomegranats, dried, and drunk; or fomented beneath.

Leaves and seed of Myrtle drunk.

Quinces eaten raw or boiled, or their juice drunk.

Pears domestical or wild, eaten.

Medlers eaten.

Berries of the Lote Tree, eaten, or drunk.

Dried Services taken in any sort.

Sloes eaten.

Carobs eaten.

Snailes roasted in their shells, in the embers, according to Gallen.

Fomentation with the pickle of the fish A fresh water fish like a Sturgeon.
Silurus.

Hares blood fried, eaten.

the pickle or brine of fish or flesh
Garum given in a glister.

Hartshorn two drams, drunk.

Wax taken in broth.

Milk wherein burning flints, have been quenched, glisterised.

Curd of a Hare, or of a Horse, the weight of three obols, drunk in wine.

Garden Sparagus, boiled or roasted in the embers, and eaten.

Roots of It bears leaves like Kneeholme, and is of a sharp astringent raste.
Idea drunk.

Juice of Marsh Mallows boiled, drunk in wine or water.

Roots of Marsh mallows drunk.

Hearts tongue drunk.

Purslain well boiled, eaten.

Plantain given in a glister.

Juice of Horse tail, drunk.

Goats Suet taken with Sumacke, and polenta, or glisterised.

Baulm drunk.

Tragium.
Small Saxifrage boiled, eaten.

Beans dressed with water and vinegar.

Root of Bear ear drunk, with the same weight of the seed of All-heal.

Seed of Sorrel drunk in wine, or in water.

Willow herb drunk.

Ten grains of small Sea-grape drunk in wine.

Leaves of Periwincle drunk in wine.

Decoction of Stoebe glisterised,

Seed of water plantaine drunk in wine.

Herb Speedwell boiled, drunk.

Roots of spatling Poppy taken in wine.

Leaves and seed of Egrimony drunk in wine.

Roots of water Lilly, dried, and drunk in wine.

Housleek drunk in wine.

Blood of a he Goat, of a she Goat, of a Hare, of a Heart, fried and eaten.

Juice of the leaves and branches of vine, drunk.

Decoction of Grape skins drunk.

Grape kernells reduced to meal, applied as polenta.

Dry white Grapes eaten alone or with their kernells.

Verjuyce given in a glister.

Wine of the flowers of Labruske drunk.

Wine of Quinces drunk.

Wine of Sumack drunk.

Lemnian Earth drunk.

Brine given in a glister when the guts are ulcerated, through the long
continuance of the disease.

Water Germander the weight of two drams drunk in water.

Ivy flowers, so many as you can hold between three fingers, drunk in wine
twice a day.

To bind the Belly.
CUrd of a Hare drunk:

Any Milk wherein burning flints have been quenched, drunk.

Cheese boiled, or roasted, eaten.

Dogs dung drunk in water in the canicular days.

Crust of wheaten bread eaten.

Liniment made of Barley meal, and of mirtil berries, or of wild Pears, or of
Pomegranat shells and wine.

Broth of Spelt-corn or of Oats or of Millet eaten.

Rice eaten,

Boiled Lentills eaten with their husks, especially if they be boiled in
Vinegar, or with other astringent things.

Seed of Sorrel or of sharp pointed Docke, drunk in wine or in water.

Coleworts well boiled, eaten.

Black Beets boiled with their roots among Lentills, eaten.

Plantain boiled in vinegar, eaten with salt, or given in a glister. The seed
also drunk in wine is very good.

Wild or garden Succory, eaten.

Juice of Chondrylla.
Gum Succory, boiled, and drunk.

Wild Lentills taken in any sort.

Acynos.
Stone Basil drunk.

Annise drunk.

Seed and tops of Dill drunk.

Parsely eaten.

Hearts tongue drunk.

Roots of Branke ursine drunk.

Wild Fennel drunk.

Rue drunk or eaten.

Sera^ias finger Orchis.
Satyrion drunk in wine.

Peony roots boiled in wine drunk,

Decoction of Marsh Mallows drunk.

Roots of Bears ear drunk.

Juice of Knot-grasse drunk.

Periwincle drunk in wine.

Bagopus
Hare foot Trefoile taken in wine, or in water, provided the party have no
fever.

Roots of stinking Gladdon taken in honied wine.

Leaves of Orkanet taken in wine,

Decoction of branches of Bramble, drunk.

Decoction of Cinkefoile roots, drunk.

Phoenix.
Red Darnell drunk in strong wine.

Roots of Idea drunk.

Seed of Bull-rush, especially of sea Bull-rush, fried and drunk in wine
allayed with water,

Root of Asiragalus
Milk vetch, drunk in wine.

Root of Jacynth drunk in wine.

Seed of black Poppy drunk in wine.

Flowers and roots of Mullein, drunk.

Flowers of Labruske Drunk.

Wine of sour Pomegranats drunk.

Red Oker given in a glister, or taken, in a rear egg.

Lees of wine applied.

Housleek drunk in wine.

Decoction of Maidenhair drunk.

Decoction of black Maiden-haire drunk.

Vinegar mingled with meal.

Against inveterate Fluxes of the Belly.
BLood of a he Goat, of a she Goat, of a Hare, or of a Heart, fried in a skin
and eaten.

To loosen the Belly.
CHerryes eaten.

Sweet Apples eaten.

Peaches eaten.

Ripe Mulberries eaten.

Ripe figs eaten.

Sea Hedg-hog eaten.

Broth of A small shel fish.
Tellines, Not unlike a cockle, only having a whiter and smoother shell.
Flions, Cockles, and other small shellfish supped with salt.

Cutlefish eaten.

The fish Silurus eaten.

Broth of Gudgeons supped.

Broth of all fish supped alone or with wine.

Broth of old Capons.

Milk supped.

Whey drunk.

New Cheese eaten.

Butter eaten, or supped.

Marrow of bones eaten.

Cich Pease eaten.

Herb Patience, Beets, Mallows, Orage, White Beets, Sparagus, or Lettice,
boiled and eaten.

Coleworts lightly boiled, eaten.

Goats Organy drunk.

Against wind in the Guts.
LIniments made of wheat meal; and of juice of Henbane.

A Poultis made of Barley meal, of Fenegreek and of Lin-seed.

Seed of Basil drunk.

Rhapontick drunk.

Decoction of the seed and tops of Dill drunk.

Decoction of Cummin, given in a Glister with oil.

Cummin seed steeped in oil, and water, reduced to a Liniment with Polenta.

Juice of Sow-fennell taken in a rear egg.

Decoction of Cammomil drunk.

Against long worms.
Grains of Paradise drunk.

Decoction of the root of Pomegranat tree drunk.

Walnuts eaten abundantly.

Decoction of the bark of the roots of Mulberry tree drunk.

Garlic eaten or drunk.

Roots of Carline thistle, the weight of an acetabule taken in the decoction of
Castorium and of Organy.

Roots of Finger fearn, the weight of three drams drunk with honey.

Seed of Gith drunk, or applied with water upon the Navel.

Vitrioll the weight of a dram taken in the manner of an Electuary with honey.

Sted and Leaves of Heliotropium.
Turnsoil, drunk with Hisope, Niter, and garden cresses.

Against round Worms.
Meal of Lupines taken as an Electuary with honey, or drunk with vinegar,
pepper, and Rue.

Colewort seed drunk.

Juice, or seed of Purslain drunk.

Garden cresses drunk.

Worm-seed-wort drunk.

Electuary of Hisope and of honey.

Minte drunk.

Decoction of Calamnite taken with salt and honey.

Time drunk.

Summer Savory drunk.

Decoction of Rue drunk with oil.

Coriander seed taken in sod wine.

Third kind of Orcanet drunk with Hisope and garden Cresses.

Wormwood wine drunk.

Housleek taken in wine.

Roots of Common ordinary Fearn or brake.
Fearn the weight of three drams taken in wine, but before you take this
medicine you must eat Garlic.

Against Fluxes caused by Laxative Medicines.
GIzernes of old Cocks salted and dried in the shade, drunk.

Against wounds of the Guts.
LEaves and roots of Horse-taile, drunk in water.

Against Ulcers of the Guts.
ALL sorts of Milk wherein burning flints have been quenched, given in
Glisters.

Powder of Sapphire stone drunk.

Simples serving for the Fundament.
To heal Clefts and Chaps of the Fundament.
LIniment of Tar.

Lees of oil boiled in a Copper pot, to the consistence of honey, used as a
liniment.

Seed of Agnus Castus applied with water.

River Crabbs burned and applied with sod honey.

Roots of Virga pastoris.
Teasell boiled in wine, bruised and applied often.

Wall-flowers incorporated in Wax, applied as a poultis.

Flowers of Lab^^ske applied.

Washed Lead applied.

For Ulcers of the Fundament.
POwder of Frankincense incorporated in milk, applied upon soft linen folds.

Juice of sower Pomegranats boiled with honey, used as a liniment.

Unwashed wool applied, to incarnace and mollify the ulcers.

Washed lead applied.

Against Apostumes of the Fundament.
RAw Quinces applied as a poultis.

Yolke of an egg rested in the embers, reduced to a liniment with oil of
roses and saffron.

Aloes applied with sod wine.

Ashes of Dill seed burned, applied.

Rosemary applied as a poultis.

Leaves of stinking Hore-hound roasted in the embers, applied.

Bramble leaves applied,

Wall Pellitory applied.

Cinkefoile roots applied.

Ashes of Vine branches, and of Grape-skins applied with vinegar.

Rust of Iron used in a liniment.

Washed lead applied.

Red Arsenick applied with oil of roses.

Hoggs Lard applied.

Saffron put in Cataplasmes.

Against inflammations of the Fundament.
LIniment made of Melilot, Lentils, Quinces, dry Roses, bark of Pomegranate,
and oil of roses.

Liniment of the juice of Sow-thistle.

A Poultis made of Melilot, meal of Fenegreek, Linseed, and of sod wine.

Rosemary applied.

Liniment made of the boiled roots of marsh Mallows.

Poultis made of the roots of Consolida major.
Comfry, with groundsell leaves.

Flowers and leaves of Groundsell, applied with a little wine.

To resolve Tumors of the Fundament.
Tar laid thereto.

For the falling of the Fundament
LEaves and juice of the Masticktree applied.

Decoction of Quinces fomented.

Cramp-fish applied.

Liniment made of the juice of Sow-bread, boiled till it be as thick as honey.

Flowers of female Pimpernell applied.

Aster Atticus.
Star-wort applied.

Liniment or fomentation made with vinegar.

Sharp brine fomented.

For a great desire of going to stool, without doing any thing.
GListers of sheeps milk, of Goats milk, or of Cowes milk, wherein burning
flints have been quenched.

A Glister of the decoction of Fenegreek-seed.

Lin-seed applied in any sort.

Liniment made of meal of bitter Vetch soaked in wine.

Against Warts growing on the Fundament.
GAll of wild she Goats applied.

Sheeps dung applied with vinegar.

Asa Fetida boiled in vinegar in a Pomegranate shell.

Vinegar applied.

To cause Emeroids come forth.
THe place rubbed with onions.

To stay the Bleeding or mattering.
Flux of the Emeroids.
ALoes applied with vinegar.

Rosemary used as a poultis.

Bramble leaves laid to.

Liniment made of Dates.

To heal Emeroids.
SEed of Sumack applied.

Liniment made of Dates.

Decoction of Rest-harrow drunk according to the opinion of some.

Washed lead applied.

Liniment of the Goraeus says, it is white marble.
Arabian stone.

Purslaine well boiled applied.

Simples serving for the Reins.
For pains in the Reins.
GRains of Paradise drunk in wine.

French Spikenard drunk, and applied.

Decoction of Amomum drunk.

Liniment made of the roots of Reed Cane, and of vinegar.

Gum Dragant, dissolved in sod wine, the weight of a dram, with ashes of
Hearts-horne washed, and a little of the best Allome; drink this composition.

Juice of Sow-fennell drunk.

Dry white Grapes eaten.

Third kind of Spuma Maris drunk.

Decoction of Fenell, bathed and fomented.

Pimpernell drunk.

Agarick the weight of a dram drunk.

Juice of Licorice drunk in sod wine.

Tordilium.
Seselios of Candie drunk.

Authyllus.
Sea pimpernell drunk.

Peony roots drunk in wine.

Symphitum retreum.
Wall-wort drunk in water.

Decoction of Orkanet boiled in water drunk.

Honied wine drunk.

For the Stone, and gravel of the Reins.
ALL sorts of Spikenard drunk, but Celtick Spikenard is best.

Bay leaves drunk, or the bark of the root which is much more effectual.

Gum of Cherry-tree drunk in wine.

Gum of bitter Almond-tree taken in sod wine.

Rind of the root of Rest-harrow drunk in wine.

Annise drunk.

Seed of Consolidaregalis.
wild Cummin drunk.

Decoction of Mugwort fomented.

Decoction of Cammomill drunk, or used as a Bath.

Leaves of Fever-few drunk.

Decoction of marsh Mallows drunk.

Decoction of Bears ear drunk

Juice of land, or water Caltraps drunk.

Root of Bramble drunk.

Decoction of the root of horned Poppie drunk.

Leaves and roots of wall Penniwort drunk.

Wormwood wine drunk.

Maiden-haire drunk.

Black Maiden-haire drunk.

Dry white Grapes eaten.

Honied wine often drunk.

Third kind of Spuma maris drunk.

To heal Ulcers of the Reins.
ALL sorts of milk drunk.

Leaves and roots of Plantaine drunk in sod wine.

Dry white Grapes eaten.

Honied wine often drunk.

To remove obstructions of the Reins.
RHapontick drunk.

Wormwood wine drunk.

Honied wine drunk.

Simples serving for the Bladder.
To expel Urine.
DEcoction of common sweet Cane drunk.

Roots of Spicknell boiled in water, or bruised raw, drunk.

All sorts of Spikenard drunk.

Grains of paradise drunk in wine.

Asarabacca drunk.

Dry great Valerian drunk.

Malabathrum.
Indian leaf drunk.

Cinnamon drunk.

Cinnamomum drunk.

Costus drunk.

Squinanth drunk.

True sweet Cane drunk, with the seed of Couch-grasse, or Parsley.

Decoction of Rose-wood drunk.

Saffron drunk.

Decoction of Elicampane roots drunk.

Crocomagma
Dregs of oil of Saffron drunk.

Kernels of Pine apples eaten, or drunk in sod wine, with seed of cowcumbers.

Decoction of Mastick-tree drunk.

Berries of the Turpentine-tree eaten.

All kind of Rosins, especially Turpentine swallowed:

Cyprus leaves taken in sod wine, with a little Myrrh.

Cedar berries eaten or drunk:

Decoction of Bay leaves fomented.

Bark of Poplar tree, the weight of an ounce drunk.

Decoction of leaves and roots of Christs-thorne drunk.

Leaves of Philly^^a.
Mock-privet drunk.

Ladanum drunk in old wine.

Gum of Ethiopian Olive Tree, and of other Olive Trees drunk.

Acornes drunk.

Decoction of the outward skin of Dates in powder, drunk.

Juice of sower Pomegnanats drunk.

Gum of Cherry-tree drunk.

Gum of the bitter Almond tree drunk.

Sea Hedge-hoggs eaten.

Land Hedge-hoggs salted and dried, drunk in honied vinegar.

Earth-wormes bruised and drunk in sod wine.

Honey drunk.

French Barley eaten.

Ale drunk.

Broth of Cich pease supped.

Broth of bitter Vetch supped.

Decoction of Lupine roots drunk.

Boiled Cole-wort stalks eaten.

Radish eaten, and the seed drunk.

Skirrets eaten.

Sparagus lightly boiled.

Great water Parsnep taken in any sort.

Seed of Cowcumbers drunk.

Seed of both kinds of Rocket drunk.

Small Dragons drunk.

Boiled French beans eaten, with their shells.

Asphodill roots drunk.

White Daffodill roots eaten, or the decoction thereof drunk.

Wild, and Garden Leekes eaten.

Boiled Onions eaten.

Garlic eaten.

Capers drunk forty days together.

Juice of Anagallis.
Pimpernell drunk.

Decoction of Calamint drunk.

Decoction of Sage drunk.

Seed of Chamaeleon-thistle drunk.

Decoction of Time drunk.

Decoction of Summer Savoury drunk.

Wild Time drunk.

Rue taken in any sort.

Root of Bedeguar.
White-thistle drunk.

Roots of Brank ursine drunk.

Rind of the root of Rest-harrow drunk in wine.

Roots of Sea-holly drunk.

Worme-wood, or the decoction thereof drunk.

Decoction of Hisope drunk.

Organie drunk.

Decoction of Goats Organy drunk.

Wild Rue applied on the groine.

Seed and root of Lovage drunk.

Seed of All-heale drunk.

Caraway seeds drunk.

Decoction of the seed and tops of Dill, drunk.

Smallage eaten raw, or boiled,

Petroselinum.
Parsley drunk.

Decoction of Fennel drunk.

Gith drunk many days together.

Decoction of Poley-mountaine drunk.

Decoction of Mugwort used in fomentation.

Decoction of Cammomill drunk, or used as a Bath.

Gromell taken in white wine.

Root of Madir drunk.

Roots of Spleen-wort drunk in wine.

St. John's Wort drunk.

Bettony leaves drunk.

Seed of Woodbinde drunk, is an excellent remedy.

Saxifrage drunk,

Roots of stinking Gladdon, the weight of three obols drunk, but the seed is
much better.

Seed of Sea Bulrush fried, and drunk in wine and water.

Perfume of Ageratum.
Maudlein with uncut leaves.

Winter Cherries eaten.

Seed of sleepy Nightshade drunk.

Leaves, berries, small stalks, and roots of Kneeholme drunk in wine.

Broome-seeds eaten.

The first spriggs of Briony boiled, and eaten.

Decoction of Cytisus.
milk Trifoile drunk.

Seed of yellow Carrots drunk.

Seed of Bastard St. John's Wort drunk.

Juice of Horse-taile drunk.

Leaves of Wall Penni-wort eaten with the roots.

Seed of Rampions, and of Pseudobunium.
Winter-Cresses drunk.

Roots of Astragalus.
Milk vetch taken in wine.

Roots of Jacynth drunk.

Young spriggs of black Briony boiled and eaten.

Juice of the leaves of Spurge Laurel drunk.

Wine of Quinces, of Hisope, of Squill, or of Wormwood drunk.

Honied water drunk.

For those which piss with difficulty and pain.
A stinking worm so called.
PUnies bruised and surringed up the yard.

Wood-lice drunk in wine.

A kind of great flies unknown in England.
Cigales roasted, and eaten.

Perfume of Grasse-hoppers chiefly for women.

Ashes of Harts-horne well washed two drams.

Decoction of Mallows bathed.

Purslaine eaten often.

Decoction of Sparagus roots drunk.

Decoction of the roots, leaves, and seeds of Samphire boiled in wine, drunk.

Decoction of Sandix, it is made of burned Ceruse.
Artificial Vermillion drunk.

Bastard Parsley eaten as other Garden herbs.

Decoction of great Marjerome drunk.

Decoction of the roots of Plowmans Spikenard drunk.

Seed of Basil drunk.

Roots of Candie Alexanders drunk.

Agarick the weight of a dram taken.

Juice of Sow-fennell drunk.

Rhapontick drunk.

Juice of Phalaris.
Canary-grasse taken in wine, or in water.

Nettle-tree bruised drunk alone in wine, or in sod wine with seed of Mallows.

Ground Pine drunk.

Decoction of Carline-thistle drunk.

Seed of Southern-wood bruised, steeped in hot water, and drunk.

Seed of All-heale drunk, or applied on the groine.

Seed of Seselios of Candy drunk.

Roots of spatling Poppy drunk in water.

Seed of Sison.
Bastard Stone Parsley drunk.

Ammeos taken in wine.

Parsley-seed drunk.

Galbanum drunk.

Decoction of water Germander boiled in wine, or in water, drunk.

Second kind of sea Pimpernell, the weight of two drams drunk.

People drunk.

Decoction of marsh Mallows drunk with wine.

Decoction of the roots of Couchgrasse drunk.

Roots of ^^^^tion.
Clote burres boiled with the seed, drunk.

Maiden-haire drunk.

Black Maiden-haire drunk.

Third kind of Spuma maris drunk.

Powder of Boodstone drunk in wine.

Powder of the Stone Morochthus drunk in water.

Powder of the Stone white stone in form of an Acorn brought from Syria.
Judaicus, the bigness of a Cich-pease taken in hot water.

Sponge Found in Sponges.
Stones taken in wine.

For the Strangury.
DEcoction of common sweet Cane drunk.

Seed of Watercresses drunk in wine.

Hercules All-heale taken in wine.

Seselios of Marseilles drunk.

Seed of Consolida regalis.
wild Cummin drunk.

Seed and root of Smallage, or of Parsley drunk in honied wine.

A shrub having leaves like Organie, many branches, and small black berries.
Polycnemon taken in wine.

Wild Basil drunk.

Roots of An herb with great roots, rising in many round heads, growing among
stones.
Oenanthe taken in wine.

Leaves and flowers of Flea-bane drunk.

Decoction of Spleenwort drunk.

Onions boiled with Sparagus roots, drunk.

Onobrychis.
Red Fetchling drunk.

Juice of knot-grasse drunk.

Saxifrage boiled in wine drunk.

Roots of stinking Gladdon taken in honied wine.

Juice, seed, and leaves of Tragium.
small Saxifrage drunk.

Leaves, roots, and berries of Butchers Broom drunk.

Roots of Alexandrian bays the weight of six drams drunk.

Tops of Helichrison.
Golden mothweed drunk in wine.

To heal Ulcers of the Bladder.
LEaves and berries of myrtle drunk.

All sorts of milk drunk.

Cowcumber-seed drunk in milk, and sod wine.

Dry white Grapes much eaten.

For wounds of the Bladder.
BUtter surringed.

Leaves of Horse-tayle drunk in water.

To void the stone of the Bladder.
THe gizerne of A kind of Eagle so called.
Ossifragus drunk at times.

Mice dung taken in honied wine with Frankincense.

Urine of a Boar drunk.

Decoction of the roots of sharpe-pointed dock drunk.

Great water Parsnep boiled, or raw, eaten, or drunk, or the decoction of them
drunk.

Seed of Watercresses drunk.

Decoction of Plow-mans Spikenard drunk.

Seed or roots of Parsley drunk in wine.

Wild fennel drunk.

Gum Sagapene drunk.

Decoction of Maiden-haire drunk.

Decoction of black Maiden-haire drunk.

Gum issuing out of Vine-stocks drunk in wine.

To break Stones in the Bladder.
Grains of Paradise drunk, with a dram of the rind of the root of Bays.

Bdellium drunk.

Gum of Cherry-tree drunk.

Decoction of Spleen-wort drunk.

Milium solis.
Gromell drunk in white wine.

Saxifrage drunk.

Decoction of Couch-grasse drunk.

Seed of small Saxifrage drunk.

Roots and berries of Knee-holme drunk.

Powder of the Stone Judaicus, falling therefrom, being rubbed against another
sharp stone, drunk in hot water.

Sponge Stones drunk.

For those which cannot keep their water.
SEed of wild Rue fried, and eaten.

Red Darnell drunk in strong wine.

Against the Itch of the Bladder.
HErcules All-heale drunk in honied water, or in wine.

Cepaea.
Garden Brook-lime drunk.

For those which piss small clots of blood.
SEEd of wild Cummin drunk.

Tops of golden Moth-weed drunk in honied wine.

For persons which piss blood by reason of stones broken in the Bladder.
SHarp brine surringed up the yard or passage of the Urine, so soon as it is
perceived.

Simples serving for the genitall Members and secret parts.
To cause standing of the Yard.
COstus drunk in honied wine.

Saffron drunk.

Lin-seed taken with honey and pepper.

Boiled Turnips eaten.

Rocket much eaten.

Seed of Rocket drunk.

Roots of great Dragons roasted in embers, or boiled, drunk in wine.

Asphodill roots eaten.

Garden Cresses drunk, or eaten.

Leek seed drunk.

Boiled Scalions eaten.

Garlic bruised with Corianderseeds, eaten.

Nettle-seeds drunk in sod wine.

Roots of Gallium
Ladies Bed-straw eaten.

Juice of Mint drunk.

Roots of All-heale eaten.

Annise drunk.

The rankest roots of Bastard Satyrion eaten, or drunk.

Roots of Satyrion eaten.

Clary drunk.

The first and highest root of Xyphion.
Cornflag drunk in wine.

Reins of A kind of small land Chrocodile diverse parts whereof are of good use
in physic.
Skinke, the weight of a dram drunk in wine.

All sorts of Milk supped.

To augment Sperme and natural Seed.
COriander seed drunk.

Finally all Medicines good to cause standing of the Yard, are propper for
this, except those which are excessively hot and dry.

To binder standing of the Yard.
SEEd of Agnus Castus drunk, or the leaves applied on the Genitalls.

Purslaine eaten, or laid upon the Genitalls.

Seeds of Lettice drunk, defends dreaming of love in the night.

Decoction of the seed and tops of Dill frequently drunk.

Rue eaten and drunk often.

The leanest roots of bastard Satyrion drunk.

Hempseed taken frequently.

The second and lowest root of Cladiolus.
Corn-flag drunk.

Hemlock with the tops, applied on the Genitalls, having first bruised it; this
is a very good receipt.

For those which lose their Seed.
ROots of water Lilly drunk.

Roots of Illyrian flower-de-luce drunk in vinegar.

For Ulcers of the secret parts.
NEw-shorne unwashed wool applied.

Liniment of the powder of Aloes, or the powder it self applied.

Juice of Knot-grasse boiled in wine, and applied with honey.

Allome applied in any sort.

Flos salis, powdered, and sprinkled.

For inflammations of the Genitalls.
CIches boiled with bitter vetches applied.

Beans boiled in wine, applied as a poultis.

Leaves of Groundsell, and the flowers, used as a poultis.

Liniment of Asphodill leaves and roots.

Cimolian earth applied.

A poultis of Melilot.

Liniment made of the stone Geodes.

Liniment of Rue, and of Bay leaves.

Liniment of Organie, of salt, and of leaven.

A poultis of Cummin, dry Grapes, and Bean-flower, or with wax.

Liniment of Coriander, dry grapes and honey.

A poultis made of Lilly roots cut in chives, with henbane, and wheatemeale.

Liniment of Samian earth, of oil of roses, and water.

Henbane seed bruised and laid to with wine.

Against itching of the Genitalls.
DEcoction of Sage applied with wine.

All Rosins, especially Turpentine applied.

Against hardness of the Genitalls.
SEEd of Erysimum.
Bank Cresses laid to.

For those which have no The foreskin, or skin that covers the nut of the
yard.
Prepuce
Juice of stinking deadly Carrot, applied on the head of the member causes a
tumor, which mollified by fomentation of fat things, serves in place of a
foreskin.

Honey applied thirty days, upon the member after bathing.

For Corrisive Ulcers of the Genitall Members.
GAll of a Bull applied with honey.

Flowers of Labruske bruised and applied with honey, saffron, Myrrh, and oil
of roses.

Against Warts growing on the genitall Members.
HEad of a Cackarell-fish salted, burned, and laid to.

Gall of wild she Goats applied.

Sheeps dung laid to with vinegar.

Time applied as a poultis.

Summer Savoury laid to.

Powder of Pepper, Rue; and Niter, used in frication.

Milk of Spurge applied.

Branches of Chamasyce.
Spurge Time bruised, and applied.

Juice of Mercury applied.

Seed of Turne-soile laid to.

Simples serving for the Matrix.
For the suffocation of the Matrix.
ROots of Spicknell bruised, and reduced to an Electuary with honey.

Juniper berries drunk.

Perfume of Vnguis odoratus.

Punies put to the nose.

Bitumen smelled unto applied, or perfumed.

Curd of a Seal drunk.

Urine boiled in oil of privet, given in a Glister, or surringed.

Juice of Plantaine drunk.

Mustard Seed bruised, and put to the nose.

Agarick the weight of a dram taken.

Liniment of Rue incorporated in honey, applied to the fundament, and secret
parts.

Seed of Hercules All heal drunk in wine.

Root of Mountain Siler, with the seed, drunk.

Sow-fennell smelled to.

Gum Sagapene applied about the nostrils, to smell to.

Seed and leaves of stinking Tre-foil drunk.

The black berries of Peonie, fifteen in number, drunk.

Roots of Bears ear drunk.

Bettony leaves the weight of a dram drunk.

Perfume of the stone Jet.
Gagates.

To provoke Women's monthly Purgations.
ILlyrian Flower-de-luce taken in wine, or used in fomentation, Fomentation and
Baths, with the decoction of Spicknell roots, used beneath.

Decoction of common sweet Cane fomented beneath.

Decoction of Galling all roots fomented.

Roots of Asarabacca, the weight of six drams drunk in water.

Decoction of Valerian drunk.

Cinnamon drunk.

Cinamomum drunk, or used with Myrrh in manner of a Suppositary, or pessarie.

Costus drunk.

Squinanth.
Cammels hay drunk.

Sweet Cane drunk, or used in fomentation.

Gum Lac drunk in honied water.

Decoction of Elicampane roots drunk.

A poultis made of Myrrh, and Wormwood incorporated in juice of Lupines, or
in juice of Rue.

Storax drunk, or applied.

Bitumen drunk in wine with Castorium.

Cedar berries drunk with pepper.

Decoction of Bay leaves fomented.

Leaves of Phyllirea.
Mock-privet drunk.

Seed of Agnus Castus, the weight of a dram drunk.

Gum of Olive tree drunk.

Bitter Almonds applied.

Milk of Fig Tree drunk with bruised Almonds.

Snayles and their shells bruised, put into the natural place of women.

Castorium the weight of two drams drunk.

Juice of Onions applied on the secret parts.

Unwashed wool used as a pessary.

Liniment made of the grease of a Goose, or of a Hen.

Dung of she Goats nourished on mountains, drunk with some odorant thing.

Decoction of Lin-seed fomented.

Decoction of Lupines used as a suppositary with myrrh and honey.

Radishes eaten, or the juice drunk.

Asphodill roots drunk.

Decoction of sea-Holly drunk.

Decoction of Cole-worts supped, or the juice applied with Darnell meal as a
suppositary.

Great water Parsnep eaten as other pot-hearbs.

Samphyre eaten, or the decoction drunk.

Roots of great Centaury drunk, or the juice used as a suppositary.

Gum of Gum Succorie used with myrrh as a suppositary.

Some think it is Volubilis major, the greater Withiwind.
Scandulaceum drunk.

Milk of wild Lettice drunk.

Wild and Garden Leeks eaten.

Decoction of Garlic leaves used as a Bath.

Sow-bread drunk, or used in the manner of a suppositary.

Seed of Southern-wood drunk with water.

Seed and rind of the Caper plant drunk.

Roots of Wind-flower used in a suppositary.

Ivy berries bruised, and used as a suppositary or pessarie.

Penni-royall drunk.

Agarick the weight of a dram drunk in Oximel.

Organie drunk.

Wormwood drunk, or applied beneath.

Goats Organie drunk.

Decoction of Sage drunk.

Ammeos drunk in wine.

Decoction of Time, and of Summer Savoury drunk.

Wild Time drunk.

Seed of Candie Alexanders drunk.

Decoction of great Marjerome drunk or applied on the natural place of women.

Decoction of the roots of Plowmans Spikenard drunk.

Wild and garden Rue drunk and applied beneath.

Hercules All-heale drunk in wine.

Seed and roots of Lovage drunk, and applied.

Seed of All-heale drunk.

Seed and roots of Seselios of Marseilles drunk.

Seselios of Candie drunk.

Fennel taken in wine.

Bastard stone Sison.
Parsley drunk.

Rosemary roots drunk.

Juice of Sow-fennell drunk.

Parsley drunk.

Yellow Carret drunk.

Gum Ammoniacum drunk.

Gith drunk frequently.

Gum Sagapene drunk.

Benzoin drunk with Pepper and Myrrh.

Galbanum perfumed, and used as a suppositary.

Clinopodium.
Wild Basil drunk.

Decoction of Germander drunk.

Lilly roots burned, and applied beneath with oil of roses.

Decoction of Baulme used below as a Bath.

Seed and leaves of Trefoile drunk.

Decoction of both kinds of poley drunk.

Juice of water Germander drunk, or the herb used as a suppositary.

Decoction of Mugwort used as a Bath.

Myrthis.
Sweet Chervill drunk.

Flowers and leaves of Flea-bane drunk.

Roots of yellow Lilly applied with wool.

Leaves and berries of Knee-holme taken in wine.

Decoction of Cheiri.
Wall-flowers-used as a Bath.

Seed of Wall-flowers the weight of two drams taken in wine.

Decoction of Cammomell drunk, or used as a Bath.

Peonie root the bigness of an Almond taken.

Roots of Madir applied below,

Decoction of Maiden-haire drunk.

Black Maiden-baire drunk.

Leaves of Anagyris.
Bea^e Trefoile bruised, and drunk in sod wine.

St. John's Wort drunk, and applied beneath.

Seed of bastard St. John's Wort drunk.

Leaves of all kind of Nettles bruised, and applied with Myrrh.

Bettony leaves the weight of a dram, taken in wine.

Seed of Medium.
Blew Coventrie bells drunk.

Juice of Spurge Laurel leaves taken in wine.

The first root of Gladiolus.
Corn-flag applied beneath.

Seed, leaves, and juice of Tragium.
small Saxifrage the weight of a dram drunk.

Chrysocome.
Golden Tode-flax taken in Metheglin.

Tops of golden Moth-weed drunk in honied wine.

Juice of Mandragore, the weight of half an obol applied below.

Seed of Mandragore drunk.

Spurge Laurel drunk.

White and black Hellebore applied beneath.

Young shoots of black Briony boyd as Sparagus, eaten.

Turne-sole leaves, applied beneath.

Wine of Squill, or of Wormwood, or of Hisope drunk.

To restrain great excess of Women's monthly Purgations.
SPikenard.

Moss of trees used in Baths.

Bark of the Frankincense-tree applied in a pessary.

Hawthorn berries eaten, or drunk.

Hypocistis.
Juice of male Holly-rose drunk, or put into the natural place of women.

Seed of Sumack drunk, stay the whites of women.

Green Dates eaten.

Date-skins drunk.

Kernells of Pomegranats dried in the Sun, powdered, and sprinkled on meat, or
boiled and eaten.

Galls put in Baths, and fomentations for the lower parts.

The inmost skin of Acornes drunk, or applied beneath.

Mirtill berries used in Baths, or fomentations.

Decoction of Quinces fomented.

Acacia drunk and applied.

Juice of Lycium.
Box-thorne used in manner of a Suppositary.

Decoction of Lote tree drunk, or fomented below.

Leaves of Mastick tree drunk, or applied in a suppositary.

Curd of Hares, of Kids, of Lambs, of Hearts, of Calves, or of Hindes drunk, or
used in a suppositary.

Harts-horne burned, and washed with some astringent liquor drunk.

Juice of wild Olive Tree leaves, applied upon the natural place of women.

Dung of she Goats nourished on mountains, dried, powdered, and applied with
Frankincense, as a suppositary.

Roots of herb Patience used as a suppositary.

Plantaine drunk, or fomented.

Juice of Goats beard taken in wine, or used as a suppositary.

Leaves of Leekes boiled in sea water, and vinegar, bathed below.

Decoction of branches of Bramble, drunk.

Roots of Arabian-thistle eaten.

Wild Darnell drunk in strong wine.

Seed of horned Poppie drunk.

Yarrow used in a suppositary.

Roots of Idea drunk.

Decoction of Bramble drunk.

Leaves of Horse-taile drunk.

Suppositary of Minte.

Seed of sea Bul-rush fried, and drunk in wine allayed with water.

Wild Basil drunk in wine.

Annise drunk, especially for the Whites.

Cummin used in a Suppositary with vinegar.

Seed and root of the water Lilly, which bears yellow flowers, drunk with
thick strong wine.

Peony berries twelve in number taken in strong wine.

Juice of Willow herb applied in a suppositary.

Moly.
Sorcerers Garlic used in a suppositary with Darnell meal.

Juice of Knotgrasse applied in a suppositary.

Decoction of Symphitum petreum.
Wallwort drunk.

Juice of By some called Saponalia.
Clymenum drunk with wine.

Seed of Water Plantain, the weight of an Acetabule taken in wine.

Root of Medium.
Blew Coventry bells boiled and made into an Electuary, with honey.

Berries of Tragos.
small Sea Grape ten in number taken in wine.

Henbane seed the weight of an obol taken in honyed water.

Juice of Morel applied with wool as a suppositary.

A suppositary of Mandragore-seed, of brimstone, and of wine.

Honsleek used in a suppositary with wool.

Decoction of Grape-skins drunk, and fomented.

Flowers of Labruske used in a pessary.

Verjuyce used in a pessary.

Rust of Iron applied in a suppositary.

Chalcitis used in a pessary with juice of Leeks.

Lees of wine applied on the groin, and on the secret parts.

Bloodstone taken in wine.

The stone Morochthus applied with wool as a pessary.

Powder of the A kind of artificial Cadmia.
stone Ostracites, the weight of a dram taken in wine.

Samian earth drunk with the flowers of wild Pomegranat tree.

To expel the after birth.
CA storium the weight of two drams drunk with Penniroyall.

Seed of the second kind of Sowbread drunk.

Decoction of Garlic leaves used in fomentation.

Long Aristolochia drunk with myrrh and pepper, or used as a Pessary.

Pennyroyall drunk.

Decoction of Time drunk.

Decoction of Summer Savory drunk.

Parsely seed drunk.

Decoction of Hore-hound drunk.

Decoction of Siachis.
wild Hore-hound drunk.

Decoction of Mugwort bathed.

Four pounds of Circea;
Bindeweed nightshade, bruised and infused a whole night in seven pounds of
sweet wine: drink of this infusion 30 days together.

Leaves, stalks, and seed of Oenanthe taken in honyed wine.

Wall-flowers the weight of two mdras taken in wine. Cheiri.


Roots of Madir used in a suppositary.

Leaves of Bean Trefoile drunk in sod wine.

Ground Pine used in a suppositary with honey.

Chrysocome
Golden Tode flax drunk in honyed water.

Black maiden hair drunk.

Briony used in a Suppositary.

Myrrh drunk.

Juice of Sow-fennel drunk.

Seed of Rampions drunk.

Seed of Candy Alexanders drunk.

Decoction of Maiden-haire drunk.

To cause abortion.
CAstorium the weight of two drams taken with Penniroyall.

Milk of a Bitches first Litter drunk.

Unwashed wool applied in a Suppositary.

Dung of wild she Goats taken with some sweet and aromaticall thing.

Perfume of Vultures seathers.

Broth of Cich pease supped.

Decoction of Lupines, fomented with myrthe and honey.

Great water Parseneps used as other Kitchen herbs.

Decoction of great Dragons surringed.

Pepper drunk.

Roots of Sow-bread fastened to the thigh.

Stalks of Ivy leaves applied in a Suppositary with honey.

Gentian root used in a Suppositary.

Roots of great Centaury used in a Pessary.

Juice of small Centaury surringed.

Penniroyall drunk.

Dittany drunk, used in a pessary, or perfumed.

Decoction of Time supped.

Decoction of summer Savory drunk.

Root of Plowmans Spicknard fresh gathered, used in a Suppositary.

Root of Hercules All heal cut sharp at the end, put into the natural place of
women.

Seed and root of Mountain Siler drunk,

Galbanum with myrrh taken in wine, or perfumed.

Wild Basil drunk.

Decoction of Germander drunk.

Juice of Scordium.
water Germander the weight of a dram drunk.

Decoction of Mugwort fomented beneath.

Flowers and leaves of Fleabane drunk

Seed of Wall-flowers the weight of two drams taken in wine.

Leaves of Onosma.
Wild Buglosse taken in wine.

Roots of Madir used in a Suppositary.

Leaves of Bean Trefoile drunk in sod wine; or worn about the neck, but it
must be taken away, so soon as the woman is delivered.

Roots of Orkanet applied.

Juice of Mandragore surringed.

Sweet Chervill drunk.

Leaves of Turnsole put into the natural place of Women.

Perfume of Brimston taken below.

Seed of yellow Carrot drunk.

Gum ammoniacum drunk.

Woodbinde seed the weight of a dram taken in wine.

Root of Alexandrian Bays the weight of six drams taken in sweet wine.

Allome used in a suppositary.

Jasper stone fastened to the thigh.

The Eagle stone used in the like manner

The Samian stone worn about the neck.

To hinder Conception.
LEaves of Willow taken apart, or with water.

Curd of a Hare, taken three days after the woman's monthly purgation.

Menstruall blood applied on the natural place.

Colewort flowers applied in a pessary presently after the woman is delivered.

Sparagus roots worn about the neck.

Pepper put into the natural place, after a woman has known a man carnally.

Ivy berries, the weight of a dram taken after their monthly purgation.

Sccuridaca.
Hatchet Fitch used in a Suppositary before the carnal knowledge of a man.

Rosin of Cedar applied on the man's member.

Powder of the stone Ostracites the weight of two drams, drunk four days
after the monthly purgation.

Scaleferne gathered in the night when the Moon does not shine, fastened unto
the woman's belly, with the Milt of a Mule; according to the opinion of some.

Seed and leaves of Wood-bine drunk 36 days together,

Leaves of Epimediu
Barrenwort, bruised and drunk 5 days together, presently after the monthly
purgation.

The Lower root of Gladiolus
Corne-flagge drunk.

Roots of Brakes drunk.

Turnesole worn about the neck.

Rust of Iron drunk.

Minte applied on the natural place of women, before they know men carnally.

To cause Conception.
CUrd of a Hare used in a Suppositary, presently after the woman's monthly
purgation.

Perfume of darnell meal, myrthe, Frankincense, Bitumen, and Saffron taken
beneath.

Seed of All-heale drunk.

To deliver a woman of a dead Child.
DIttany drunk, and applied in a suppositary.

Decoction of Sage drunk.

Galbanum drunk with Myrrh, and wine.

Decoction of Hore-hound drunk.

Decoction of Coltsfoot drunk.

To preserve the Child till the limited time.
THe Eagle stone worn about the left arm.

The Samian stone worn about the neck.

For Women in Labor.
ROOt of Dittany drunk.

Decoction of the Roots of Plowmans Spicknard fomented.

Wild Fennel drunk.

Juice of Sowfennell drunk.

Dry Peony roots drunk.

Decoction of Marsh Mallows surringed.

Against loathing of meat of women with Child.
Juice of the leaves and Tendrels of vine drunk.

Against inflammation of the Matrix.
DEcoction of Spicknard bathed.

Decoction of Squinanth to bath the secret parts.

Decoction of the leaves and seed of Agnus Castus, fomented.

Fresh Butter applied.

Juice of Sow-thistle applied.

Agarick the weight of a dram taken in Oximell.

Decoction of Penniroyal to foment the privy parts.

A Poultis of Melilot, and of sod wine.

Gum of Hercules All-heale put into the natural place of women with honey.

Decoction of Mugwort used as a bath.

Decoction of Wallflowers applied in fomentation.

Root of Sea Pimpernell laid to with milk and oil of Roses.

Decoction of Feverfew bathed.

Decoction of Marsh Mallows incorporated with Goose-grease; or in Hogs Lard,
or in Turpentine, used as a Suppositary.

For Ulcers in the natural places of women.
DEcoction of Rose-wood boiled in wine surringed.

Milk wherein burning flints have been quenched, surringed.

Unwashed wool applied, both heals and mollifieth.

Liniment of the Leaves of Fenugreek and vinegar.

Leaves of Swallow wort applied.

To mollify bardnesse of the natural parts of Women.
APoultis of Myrrh, and Wormwood, made with sap of Lupines, or with Rue.

Liniment of Storax.

Liniment of the grease of a Goose, or of a Hen.

Liniment of Bdellium.

Decoction of Mallows surringed.

Labdanum used in a pessary.

Hercules All-heale put into Women's natural places with honey.

Decoction of Elder, and of Wallwort fomented.

Decoction of Fever-few used as a bath.

The expression of Fenugreek steeped in water, incorporated in Goosegrease, and
used as a pessary.

Roots of Lillies applied.

Persume of Ageratum.
Maudlein with uncut leaves.

Against Wind in the Matrix.
AGlister of Rue boiled in oil.

Geranium herb Robert.
Herb Doves foot, and the roots, the weight of a dram drunk.

Against falling and relapsing of the Matrix.
PErfumes, or fomentations made of Cinnamon.

Juice of Mirtill berries fomented.

Decoction of Quinces used in fomentation.

Decoction of Galls used as a Bath.

Acacia in a suppositary.

Juice of male Holly-rose used in a suppositary.

Leaves of all sorts of Nettles applied.

Vinegar used in fomentation.

Against pains, and gripings of the Matrix.
LIniment of the grease of a Goose, or of a Hen.

Urine boiled with oil of privet applied.

Decoction of Lin-seed surringed.

Decoction of Mallows surringed, or used as a Bath.

Decoction of Purslaine surringed; this is a singular receipt against gripings
of the Matrix.

Rhapontick drunk.

Roots of great Centaury drunk.

Decoction of Dill used beneath in fomentation.

Verveine leaves incorporated in fresh Hoggs lard, or in oil of roses used as
a suppositary.

Decoction of Henbane-seed surringed.

Juice of Mandragore applied in a pressary.

Simples serving for the Arms and Legs.
For the Gout of the Legs, and Feet.
AMomum applied.

Roots of Spicknell applied.

Liniment made of Aspen leaves, and of vinegar.

Raw sresh lees of oil, used in fomentation.

Decoction of the leaves and bark of Willow fomented.

A poultis made of milk of Figtree, vinegar, and meal of fenugreek.

Snayles bruised with their shells.

Liniment made of the ashes of a burned Weesill, with vinegar.

A round spungie excresence of the sea.
Sea Lungs chopped small and applied.

Liniment made of woman's milk, of opium, and of wax.

Suet of Sheep, of she Goats, or of he Goats, incorporated with the beasts
dung from which it was taken, and applied as a liniment.

Menstruall blood applied.

Dung of wild she Goats applied with their suet.

A poultis made of Barlie meal, and of Quinces.

A poultis made of boiled lentils with polenta.

Decoction of Turnips to foment the diseased part.

A poultis made of Cole worts, of fenugreek, and of vinegar.

Liniment made of Succory alone, or with polenta.

Parings of Gourds applied.

Roots of Aron.
Cuckoo pint incorporated in Ox dung, and applied as a poultis.

Asphodill roots the weight of a dram taken in wine.

Decoction of Sow-bread fomented.

Scalions applied alone, or with honey.

Liniment made of Hercules Allheale, and of dry grapes.

Poultisses of Rosemary, Darnell meal, and vinegar.

Water Germander applied with water, or vinegar.

Liniment made of Wall-flowers, and of vinegar.

Androsace.
Sea Navell-wort applied.

Liniment made of the juice of Wal-Pellitory, incorporated in wax, and suet of
a he Goat.

A poultis made of the seeds and leaves of Henbane, and of polenta.

Housleek applied when the diseaseis accompanied with great heat.

Liniment made of Nettles.

Corraline applied.

Liniment made of wild Cowcumber roots, and of vinegar.

Juice of stinking deadly Carrot applied.

Ben applied.

A poultis made of the leaves of Elder, and of Wall-wort, incorporated in suet
of a Bull, or of a he Goat.

A poultis of Briony incorporated in she Goats dung.

Liniment of Turne-sole leaves.

Dry Grapes, the kernels taken out, Or Raisins stoned
applied with juice of All-heale.

Stews made of boiling vinegar, and of brimstone.

Liniment made of the rust of Iron.

Liniment of brimstone, water, and niter.

Salt and vinegar applied.

Liniment of Bean meal, and Asian stone.

Liniment made of Jet.

Bricks very well burned applied.

For the Sciatica.
ROots of Spicknell applied.

Elicampane roots boiled in wine, applied.

Dicoction of Illyrian Flower-deluce given in a Glister.

Grains of paradise taken in water.

Asarabacca drunk, or glisterised.

Bark of Poplar tree, the weight of an ounce drunk.

Iberis.
Sciatica cresses bruised and applied as a poultis.

Pickle of the Fish Silurus given in a Glister.

Pickle of all Fish glisterised.

Seed of Candie Alexanders drunk.

Dung of Ox'n at grass applied.

A poultis of Darnell meal boiled in honied water.

Liniment of meal of Lupines, and vinegar.

Gum Ammoniacum drunk.

Seed of Asci^um.
S. Peters-wort taken in water.

Decoction of Sparagus roots drunk.

Decoction of Marsh Mallows drunk.

Mustard Seed bruised, and applied, with Figgs, letting it remain till the
place look red.

Garden Cresses given in a Glister.

Seed of Bank Gresses glisterised.

Scalions applied alone, or with honey.

Capers drunk.

A poultis made of the leaves and roots of Lepidium.
Dittander, bruited and in corporated with Elicampane roots.

Agarick the weight of three obols, taken in honied vinegar.

Rhapontick drunk.

Seed of Ant^rosaemum.
Tutsan St. John's Wort drunk, but you must drink water presently after the
Medicine has done its operation.

Decoction of great Centaurie given in a Glister.

Decoction of our Lady-thistle roots drunk.

Seed of Southern-wood drunk in water.

Roots of Madir drunk.

Penni-royall applied till the place be made red.

Green Calaminte bruised, and applied till the place be red.

A poultis of Time, Man's dung, and Polenta.

Summer Savoury prepared in the like manner.

Seed of wild Rue drunk forty days together.

Liniment of Hercules All-heale, and honey.

Liniment of Asa Fetida incorporated in wax, oil of privet, and oil of
Flower-de-luce.

Euphorbium taken in some Aromaticall potion.

Leontopetalum.
Lions leaf given in a Glister.

Seed of St. John's Wort drunk forty days together.

Leaves of ground Pine taken in water forty days together.

Bettony leaves drunk in water.

Roots of Spatling Poppy taken with water.

Roots of stinking Gladdon taken in honied wine.

Seed of wild Basil taken in wine, with myrrh, and Pepper.

Decoction of Cinkfoile roots drunk.

Tops of golden Moth-weed taken in wine.

Decoction of the root of horned Poppy drunk.

Decoction of the Ethiopian Mullein drunk.

Arction.
Clote-burre drunk in wine, or applied.

Leaves of Spurge Chamaesyce.
Time, the weight of three obols, taken in water thirty or forty days together.

Fresh Coloquintida glisterised, or used in frication.

Roots of wild Cowcumber, given in a Glister.

Infusion of Broom steeped in Sea water, given in a Glister.

A poultis of Scammonie boiled in vinegar, and barley flower.

Honied vinegar drunk.

Sorry given in a Glister with wine.

Brine glisterised.

A salt blackish foame cleaving to reeds, and other marsh herbs in dry seasons.
Adarca applied.

Against the Gout of the hands, and pains of the joints.
BRoth of old Cocks supped.

Liniment of Cole-worts, fenugreek, and vinegar.

Rue drunk, or used in a poultis.

Agarick the weight of a dram taken in honied vinegar.

Decoction of Cinkfoile roots drunk.

Liniment made of Fleabane, oil of roses, and vinegar, or water.

Roots of Mandragory applied as a poultis with dry polenta.

A poultis of Nettles.

Black Hellebore drunk.

Sea weed applied fresh.

Liniment of the juice of Thapsia.
stinking deadly Carrot.

Daffodill roots bruised and applied with honey.

Honied vinegar drunk.

Honied wine frequently drunk.

For bruised joints.
LIniment of Vine branches burned to ashes, and incorporated in grease, or in
oil.

Against knobs and nodosities growing on the joints.
ROots of wild Hemp boiled and applied.

Liniment made of Oker.

To heal Kybes on the heels.
Frankincense applied with grease of a Hog, or of a Goose.

Tar applied.

Acacia applied.

Decoction of Mirtill berries fomented.

Burned Figgs incorporated in a Cerot, and laid to.

Liniment of the ashes of burned river Crabbs, and honey.

Sea Lungs chopped small, and applied to, fresh.

Ashes of burned Asses hoof, incorporated in oil, applied.

Bears grease anointed.

Juice of wall Penni-wort applied.

A plaster made of Lentils, Melilot, dry roses, pomgranate shells, Quinces, and
oil of roses.

Decoction of bitter vetch used in fomentation.

Decoction of Turnips fomented.

Decoction of Beets bathed.

Leaves of great Dragons boiled in wine, applied.

Oil boiled in the hollow of an Asphodill root, applied.

Decoction of Sow-bread fomented, or oil boiled with a little wax, in the
hollow of the roots of Sow-bread.

Burned Squill applied.

Decoction of Crow-foot bathed.

Clote burre applied with wine.

Allome dissolved in water.

Against blisters and inflammations of the feet, caused by the shoes,
LIghts of Lambs, of Bears, or of Hoggs applied.

Soles of old Shoes burned, and applied.

Juice of Onions incorporated in Hens grease, and applied.

To heal clefts, and chaps of the Feet.
LIniment made of the ashes of river Crabbs, and of sod honey.

Squill boiled in oil, applied with rosin.

Against Ulcers which grow on the ends of the Fingers, and divide the skin from
the Nails.
Juice of Pomegranats applied.

Mirtill leaves bruised, and applied.

Leaves of wild Olive tree bruised, and laid to.

Powder of Ivorie applied.

Aloes applied with sod wine.

Patonychia, whitelow-grasse.
Nayle-wort chopped small, applied.

Brionie boiled in oil till it be soft, applied.

Flowers of Labruske, burned and applied with honey.

Rust of Iron laid to.

Acacia applied.

Leaves of Sumack applied with honey, or vinegar.

Leaves of Hore-hound laid to with honey.

Cinke-foyle roots applied.

Milk of male Spurge applied.

Vinegar applied.

Allome dissolved in water.

Salt applied.

Against Apostumes which grow in the roots of the Nails.
FRankincense applied with honey.

Shavings of Ivorie laid to.

Leaves of Nayle-wort applied.

To cause rough Nails fall off.
Tar applied.

Lin-seed with the like weight of Garden-cresses, and honey.

Cyprus apples applied.

Liniment made of the roots of Herb Patience boiled in vinegar.

Roots and leaves of Crowfoot applied.

Liniment of Scrophularia minor.
the lesser Celandine.

Misseltoe applied with powder of Orpine.

Allome sprinkled with water.

Liniment made of Brimstone and Turpentine.

Red Arsenick applied with pitch.

Lees of wine burned, and incorporated in rosin, applied.

To take away loose Nails.
DRy Grapes applied. Or Raisins.


For bruised Nails.
SCallions applied with dry Polenta.

To take away Corns.
WHeaten leaven applied.

For Veins puffed and swelled with blood.
ROots of Cirsium.
Thistle gentle applied on the diseased place.

Against pains of the sides.
ROots of Echium.
Vipers Bugloss drunk. Coltsfoot applied.

Against Kernells and Inflammations of the Groine.
HAre-foot Tre-foile applied.

After Articus.
Starre-wort fresh gathered, applied.

Against burstings, and falling down of the Guts.
CYprus apples applied.

A poultis of Pomegranate Flowers.

A poultis of wall-wort.

Cinquefoile drunk.

Leaves and roots of Horse-taile drunk.

A Cataplasme of Aloes.

Against Windy ruptures.
LIniment of the ashes of Vine branches.

Simples serving generally against many Maladies, and first of those which
serve against Fevers.
Against Tertian Fevers.
A Spider bruised in a cloth spread upon linen, and applied on the forehead,
or Temples.

Earth-wormes boiled in Goose-grease, applied.

Three entire Plantaine roots drunk in three cyaths of wine, with as much water.

Three leaves, and as many berries of stinking Trefoile, bruised, and drunk.

St. John's Wort drunk in wine.

The third knot or joint (from the ground) of the stalk of female Verveine
drunk, with the leaves which are upon it.

Three grains of Turne-sole drunk before the fit.

Juice of Purslaine supped.

Against Quartane Fevers.
SEven Punies put in beans made hollow, drunk.

Four entire Plantaine roots drunk in four Cyaths of wine, and as much water.

The worms which are found in Fullers Thistle, fastened to the arm, or worn
about the neck in a little leather purse.

Wild Rue drunk in wine.

St. John's Wort taken in wine.

Four sprigs of Cinkefoile drunk.

The fourth knot or joint of female Verveine (counting from the root) drunk,
with the leaves found thereon.

Four grains of Turne-sole taken an hour before the fit.

Against long inveterate Fevers.
BRoth of old Cocks.

Agarick drunk.

Honied wine drunk, when the stomach is very weak.

Against Fevers A kind of Quotidian, in which is felt both heat and cold.
Epiales.
THree or four leaves of Henbane drunk.

Against intermitting Fevers, returning at certain times.
Mustard Seed sprinkled on meat.

Seed of Candie Alexanders drunk.

Pepper drunk.

Rue drunk.

Gum Sagapene drunk.

Cammomill given in a Glister.

Juice of knot-grasse drunk an hour before the fit.

Cinkefoile drunk in water, or in wine, with a little pepper.

Against languishing Fevers,
PUrslaine applied on the mouth of the stomach, and on the sides.

Against shaking of Fevers.
PEpper drunk.

Agarick the weight of a dram drunk.

Round Aristolochia drunk before the fit.

Liniment made of Southernwood and oil.

Decoction of Calaminte drunk.

Hercules All-heale applied.

Seed and roots of Candie Alexanders, drunk in sod wine.

Liniment of wall Pellitory.

Benzoin taken in wine with frankincense and pepper.

Liniment of fleabane and oil.

Seed of bastard St. John's Wort drunk with pepper.

Seed and root of Buglosse drunk.

Liniment made of Wood-binde-seed, and oil.

Against pestilentiall Fevers.
Myrrhis.
SWeet Chervill drunk every day, twice or thrice a day.

Simples serving against Apostumes, Swellings and Tumors.
Against inflammations, and redness of any diseased part.
FResh Rose leaves, bruised, and applied.

Liniment of bruised Acornes.

Seed of Sumacke applied with water.

A poultis of meal of Lupines, dry polenta and water.

Juice of Wall-penniwort, anointed about the Tumor.

A poultis of Plantaine.

Asphodill roots laid to with dry polenta.

Vinegar applied with unwashed Wool, or Spunges.

Rhapontick applied with vinegar, when the place has been long inflamed.

Penniroyall applied with polenta.

Leaves of Coltsfoot, bruised, and applied with honey.

A poultis of Feverfew.

Second kind of Spleen-wort applied.

A poultis of the roots of wild Hemp.

Knot grass applied.

A poultis of Caltraps.

Roots of stinking Gladon applied with vinegar.

Achillea.
Yarrow applied.

A poultis of Wall-Pellitory.

Liverwort applied.

Liniment made of female Verveine leaves, when the place has been long
inflamed.

Leaves and heads of Poppy applied, or the heads only with dry polenta.

Leaves and seed of Henbane applied.

Fresh leaves of Mandragore applied with Polenta.

Briony root boiled in wine, laid to.

Liniment of the leaves of Wall-wort, or of Elder, and Polenta.

Liniment of Indian leaf, to break apostumes.

Wheaten Bran boiled in good vinegar, applied.

Wheat flower steeped in oil and water, or in honyed water used as a Liniment.

A Poultis of Wheaten-bread, boiled in honyed water, with herbs proper for the
same effect.

Sesamum applied.

Against Carbuncles.
LEaves of Privet applied.

Liniment of Tar, Honey, and dry Grapes, to break the Carbuncles and remove the
skars.

Cyprus leaves bruised and applied.

Liniment of Savin leaves and wine, to break the Carbuncles.

Dry ripe Olives applied to take away the skars.

Kernells of old Wall-nuts applied.

Pigeons dung incorporated in honey and Lin-seed.

A poultis of meal of bitter Vetch.

A poultis of meal of Lupines and vinegar.

Coleworts applied with salt to break them.

Garden Cresses applied.

Leeks applied with salt.

Liniment of Hercules All-heal.

A poultis of Coriander, Or Raisins.
dry grapes and honey.

Liniment of Asa foetida.

Milk of Male spurge applied.

Raisins stoned.
Dry Grapes cleansed from their kernels applied with Rue.

Against fellons, and small Apostumes.
WHeaten Leaven applied.

Wall-pellitory applied.

A poultis made of salt, dry grapes, and Hogs Lard, or honey.

Asphodill roots boiled in wine lees, applied.

Leaves of Colchicum Ephemerum.
Meddow Saffron boiled in wine, applied.

Liniment made of Nettle leaves.

Roots of Leontopadium.
Lions Cudweed worn about the neck.

Wild Cowcumber roots applied with Turpentine.

Liniment made of the juice of Scammony, honey and oil.

Gum of Mulberry tree roots, applied.

Liniment of the juice of stinking deadly Carrot, and honey.

Leaves of Pycuotomum.
Devils bit applied.

Red Arsenick applied with grease.

Liniment made of Asian stone, incorporated in Tar, or Turpentine.

Liniment of Cimolian earth, incorporated in vinegar.

To prevent Gangrenaes, and relieve diseased parts, tending to St. Anthonies
fire.
LEaves of Sumack applied with honey and vinegar.

Juice of Pomegranats applied.

Old Wallnuts applied.

Lie made of the ashes of Fig tree applied with Spunges.

A poultis of Raddishes, salt, and darnell meal.

Meal of Ciches applied with Barley and honey.

Liniment made of Lentils, Melilot, oil of Roses, dry Roses, Pomegranat shel,
and salt water,

Meal of bitter Vetch applied.

Coleworts boiled, used as a Cataplasme with honey.

Scalions applied alone, or with honey.

Asa fetida applied, having first scarified the place.

Leaves of stinking Nettle, with the seed, Juice, and stalks thereof, applied
with vinegar.

Leaves of Mullein which bears yellow flowers, applied.

Milk of Male spurge applied.

Liniment made of the root, Berryes and leaves of Briony, with salt.

Or Raisons stoned.
Dry Grapes the Kernells taken out applied with salt.

Against the Holy fire, burning sharp Inflammations, and St. Anthonies fire.
LIniment made of Saffron, mingled with refringarative things.

Cyprus leaves applied alone, or with polenta.

Leaves of Ramne thorn applied.

Leaves of Privet applied.

Roses laid to.

Juice of Acacia laid to.

Leaves of Wild Olive tree bruised, and laid to.

Liniment made of Mirtell leaves, oil of green Olives, and a little oil of
roses or wine.

Menstruall blood applied.

Wild she goats dung, boiled in wine, or vinegar, applied.

Settlings of the parties Urine applied.

A poultis made of Lentils, Melilot, dry roses, oil of Roses, and Pomegranat
shells.

Liniment made of Mallows boiled in oil.

A poultis of Coleworts chopped and incorporated in polenta.

A poultis of Purslaine and Polenta.

Liniment made of Plantain, Cimolian earth, and Ceruse.

Leaves and roots of Succory applied with polenta,

Liniment made of the leaves of Garden Woad.

A poultis of Acynos.
Stone Basil.

Liniment made of the juice of Rue, Vinegar, Ceruse, and oil of roses.

Liniment made of Coriander, bread, and dry polenta.

Liniment made of Lilly leaves; and vinegar,

Leaves of Coltsfoot, bruised and applied with honey.

A poultis made of the herb and flowers of Feverfew.

Knot grass applied.

Roots of Orcanet applied with polenta.

The root of Lycopsis
Wild Buglosse applied with polenta.

Raspis flowers applied.

Wal-Pellitory laid to.

A poultis of boiled Cinkefoile roots.

Liniment made of Male Verveine and vinegar.

Poppy heads cut in pieces applied with polenta.

Liniment made of the juice of Morell, or of the leaves, incorporated in
polenta.

Liniment made of Mandragore roots and vinegar.

Juice of Hemlock applied.

Juice of Wall-Pennywort applied.

Liniment made of Fleabane, or of its Mucilages.

Ducks meat applied.

Liniment made of the leaves of Palma Christi, and vinegar.

Housleek applied.

Yarrow applied.

Vinegar applied.

Rust of Iron applied.

Chalcitis applied.

Liniment made of Salt and Vinegar or of Hisope.

Against the Shingles.
Juice of Acacia applied.

Mirtill leaves applied with oil of green Olives, or with a little oil of
roses, and wine.

Leaves of wild Olive tree, bruised, and laid to.

Liniment made of Wild she Goats dung, boiled in wine or vinegar.

A poultis made of Lentills, Melilot, oil of roses, dry roses, and Pomegranat
shells.

Liniment made of the juice of Wal-Pellitory and Ceruse.

Plantaine applied.

Liniment of Cellandine and wine.

Bramble leaves applied.

Liniment made of the juice of Morell, Ceruse, oil of Roses, and Lithargy.

Against Wheales, Pushes and red Spots.
LIniment made of the dung of she Goats, or of Sheep, and vinegar,

Coleworts chopped small, applied with Polenta.

Plantaine applied in any sort.

Cowcumber leaves applied with honey.

A poultis made of the leaves of Leeks and the seed of Sumack.

Liniment made of Wormwood and water.

Coriander seed applied with Or Raisins.
dry graps and honey.

Misletoe applied on soft linen folds.

Seed of Turnesole applied.

Raisins stoned.
Dry Grapes, the Kernells taken out laid to with Rue.

For the Kings Evil.
ILlyrian Flower-de-luce boiled and applied.

Liniment made of Tar, and Barley meal, boiled in a young child's Urine.

Dry figs boiled and applied.

The first figs which being too forward do not thrive.
Early figs boiled and applied

Boiled Vipers flesh, eaten.

Weesills blood applied.

Ashes of Asses hoofes steeped in oil, applied,

Dung, of Oxen at grass applied.

A poultis of Barlie meal, and pitch, incorporated in a young child's urine.

A Poultis made of Darnell meal, and Pigeons dung boiled in wine.

Liniment of Beane-flower, honey, and Fenugreek.

Liniment made of Lentills boiled in vinegar with Melilot.

Meal of Lupines applied with vinegar.

Herb Patience boiled, applied.

Plantain applied with salt, or the roots worn about the neck.

Liniment made of Brimstone and Mustard.

Garden Cresses applied with Brine.

Pepper applied with Pitch.

Coriander seed applied with Bean flower.

Galbanum applied.

Goose grass applied.

Leaves of Baulme applied with salt, as a poultis.

Marsh Mallows boiled in wine, or in honied water, applied.

Cinkefoile roots boiled, or chopped small, and applied.

Liniment made of Benzoin and wax.

Juice of Wall Penniwort applied.

Fresh leaves of Mandragore applied with polenta.

The third kind of Housleek applied.

Leaves, stalks, feed, and juice of stinking Nettle used in a poultis.

Four sprigs of Winter Cresses drunk with water, or applied.

Maiden-haire, applied.

Liniment made of Tiles, powdered and incorporated in a Sear-cloth.

Leaves and roots of the Caper-bush, bruised and applied.

Against flat Apostumes, called in Greek Panos.
LIniment made of the leaves of wild Olive tree, and honey.

Dry figs, boiled and applied.

Dung of Oxen at Pasture, applied.

Meal of Lupines applied with vinegar.

Orage raw, and boiled applied.

Plantain laid to with salt.

Liniment made of Scallions boiled with polenta, and Hogs Lard.

Leaves of Garden Woad applied.

Sea Holly worn about the neck.

Liniment made of Southernewood, or of Barley meal, incorporated in oil and
water.

Stone Basil laid to.

Seed and flowers of Esculapius Allheal used as a poultis.

Coriander seed applied with Bean meal.

Gum Ammoniacum applied.

Onobrychis.
Red Fet^^ling chopped small, applied.

Liniment made of the uppermost root of Gladiolus
Corne-flag, of Darnel meal and fresh water.

Fleawort applied with oil of roses, or water, or Vinegar.

Leaves of Mandragore new gathered, applied.

Liniment made of the leaves, seed, stalks, and juice of stinking Nettle.

Roots of Clote burre applied on the leaf with grease.

Pycnocomon.
Devils bit applied.

Fleawort used in a poultis.

Wine Lees applied.

To resolve all Apostumes and Tumors.
RIver Crabs applied.

Lin-seed applied.

Meal of Fenugreeke used in a Poultis.

Leaves and roots of the Caper bush, bruised, and applied.

Root of Candy Alexanders applied.

Gum Ammoniacum applied.

Leaves and flowers of Buphthalmum.
Oxe-eye, incorporated in wax, applied.

Liniment made of fresh Mandragore leaves and polenta.

A poultis made of the juice, leaves, stalks, and seeds of stinking nettle.

Aigilops.
Havergrasse applied.

Dyphriges.
Dross of brass applied with Turpentine, or wax.

Marcasite stone applied.

Alablaster burned, and incorporated in rosin, or in pitch.

Liniment made of Fullers earth.

Against hard, or almost unsensible swellings between the flesh and the skin,
called Scirrhus.
Blood of a Bull applied with polenta.

Liniment made of the dung of Oxen, at grass, and vinegar.

Darnell meal boiled in wine, with Pigeons dung.

Lin-seed boiled with niter and lie, of the ashes of Fig Tree.

Hydropiper.
Arse-smart applied.

Roots of wild Hemp applied.

For Cankers.
LIniment made of the ashes of river Crabbs boiled in honey.

Seed of bank Cresses bruised, and applied.

All sorts of Nettles applied.

Leaves, juice, seed, and stalks of stinking nettle applied.

To dissolve all swellings.
HOggs Lard applied.

Cole-worts chopped small, and applied with polenta.

Gourds applied.

Seed of Loppamin.
small Clote burre.

Liniment made of Scalions boiled with polenta and Hoggs grease.

Lin-seed used in a poultis.

Liniment of fenugreek seed

Onions boiled, and applied with figgs, and dry grapes.

Daffodill roots applied.

Briony roots boiled in wine applied.

Leaves of Garden-woad applied.

Root of Candie Alexanders applied.

Goats Organie applied with polenta.

Minte applied in a poultis with polenta.

Liniment made of the leaves of great Marjerome incorporated in Wax.

Yellow Carrot applied.

Rosemary roots used as a poultis.

Gith applied with vinegar.

Hormigum.
Common Clary applied with water.

Flowers of Oxe-eye, incorporated in wax.

Boiled marsh Mallows applied.

Root of wild Hemp used in a poultis.

Liniment made of the leaves of bean Trefoile.

Knot-grasse used in a poultis.

Liniment made of the roots of stinking Gladon and vinegar.

Wall pellitory applied.

Cinkfoile roots boiled, and used as a poultis.

Leaves of female Verveine applied.

Liniment made of oil of roses, vinegar, and water.

Leaves of meddow Saffron boiled in wine, applied.

Leaves of Cytisus.
Milk Trefoile applied with bread.

Root of wild Cowcumber applied with polenta.

Branches of Spurge Time bruised. and applied.

Seed of Devils-bit applied with polenta.

Indian leaf applied.

Wine lees, crude, applied alone, or with myrtle.

Against Steatomata.
Apostumes which yield an oiley fat matter.
MArigold-flowers Chrysanthemum.
bruised, incorporated in wax, and applied.

Against Melicerides.
Apostumes which yield matter like Honey.
LIniment made of herb Patience, oil of roses, and saffron.

Melilot applied with water.

Raisins stoned, and applied with Rue.

Against swellings caused by Blows.
COleworts chopped small, applied with Polenta.

Liniment made of Gourds applied.

Arse-smart applied.

Liniment made of Time, or of Summer Savoury.

Against bruises, and prints of strokes.
NEw Chief applied.

Unwashed Wool steeped in oil, and vinegar.

Beane-flower applied with honey, and fenugreek.

Meal of Lupines applied.

Raddish applied with honey.

Ashes of Garlic laid to with honey.

Mustard applied.

Arse-smart applied.

Sneesingwort, and the flowers applied.

Scalions applied alone, or with the yolke of an egg.

Rhapontick applied with vinegar.

Aloes applied with honey.

Asa fetida applied.

Wormwood applied with honey.

Hot sea water fomented.

Hisope with hot water.

Calaminte with wine.

Leaves of great Marjerome dried, applied with honey.

Wild Cummin chewed, and laid to with honey and raisins.

Ammeos with honey.

Vinegar and honey.

Juice and roots of stinking deadly Carrot incorporated in the like weight of
frankincense and wax, applied as a poultis; it must remain only two hours on
the part offended, which must be often fomented with Seawater.

Briony root boiled in oil till it be soft, applied.

Liniment of salt and honey.

Simples serving for Wounds.
To heal Wounds.
CYprus leaves bruised.

Elm leaves, especially the rind or skin of the Bark, used instead of a
swath.

Gum of Sycamore applied.

Liniment made of the lees of oils boiled in a copper vessel.

Green Dates applied.

Leaves and seed of Agnus Castus applied.

Pomegranate flowers applied.

Frankincense sprinkled on the Wounds.

Ashes of burned wool applied.

Leaves of wild Cole-worts applied.

Bastard Argemone.
wild poppy applied.

Juice of Licorice laid to.

Fresh roots of great Centaury applied.

Leaves of small Centaurie bruised, and applied.

Yarrow applied.

Roots of Burnet bruised, applied.

Roots of Candie Alexanders applied.

Aloes in powder sprinkled.

A bitter Gum brought from Persia.
Sarcocalla applied.

Polionemon applied with water.

Poley used as a poultis.

Water Germander applied.

Horse-tayle leaves laid to.

Leaves of Spleen-wort applied.

Marsh Mallows boiled in wine, or in water and honey, applied.

Leaves of Sideritis.
Iron-wort applied.

Ground Pine laid to with honey.

Second kind of Iron-wort applied.

Knot-grasse used in a poultis.

Solomon's Seal used as a poultis.

Wall-wort applied.

A poultis made of Comfry.

Juice of Clymenum applied.

All sorts of Iron-worts applied.

Roots of Lycopsis.
wild Buglosse applied in a poultis.

Seed of Basil applied

Roots of Couch-grasse bruised, and applied

Flea-wort applied.

Cinkfoile applied.

Scarlet grain powdered, and sprinkled on the wounds.

Verveine applied.

Leaves and flowers of Groundsell, applied with crumbs of frankincense.

Leaves of Mullein applied with vinegar.

Fresh Sponges applied with water, and vinegar, without any grease.

Unwashed wool steeped in vinegar, and in oil.

Leaves of Dragons boiled in wine.

Leaves of Garden-woad applied.

Yarrow applied.

Powder of the stone Morochthus, sprinkled.

To stench bleeding of a Wound.
Juice of wild Olive Tree leaves applied.

Galls burned, and quenched in vinegar, or in brine, sprinkled.

Pomegranate flowers applied.

Dry leaves of Called Persian Plum-tree
Persea applied.

Cyprus leaves and nuts bruised, and applied.

Frankincense sprinkled.

Ashes of burned Froggs applied.

Cobwebs applied.

Dung of wild she Goats applied with vinegar.

Asses dung crude, or burned, and applied with vinegar.

Leaves of Scabions applied.

Purslaine applied.

Plantaine applied.

Roots of Idea applied.

Leaves of Garden-woad applied.

Sage applied.

Flowers of Gallium
Ladies Bed-straw, put in the wound.

Leaves of Tutsan St. John's Wort laid to.

Cinkfoile applied.

Wild Darnell fastened to the body with red wool.

Liverwort applied.

Roots of milk vetch put in the wound.

Henbane-seed the weight of an obol drunk in honied water.

Yarrow applied.

Cinnaber, and Dragons blood put in the wound.

Allome applied.

Brimstone applied.

Plaster applied.

Fresh Spunges applied alone, without any other thing.

Ashes of burned spunges applied with Pitch.

Eretrian earth sprinkled.

Powder of Antimonie sprinkled.

To stench blood descending from the Brain.
CHickens brains drunk in wine.

Antimonie powdered, and sprinkled.

To resolve clotted Blood.
TIme put in the wound.

Summer Savoury applied.

To heal wounds caused by venomous shot.
Juice of Dittanie drunk, and dropped into the wound.

To re-incarnate Bones destitute of Flesh.
ILlyrian Flower-de-luce applied.

Roots of Hercules All-heale applied.

Liniment made of Myrrh, and Snayles without their shells.

To heal Wounds in the pellicles of the Brain.
BUtter applied.

Against the inflammations of Wounds.
NEw dung of Oxen at grass, enveloped in leaves, heated upon embers, and often
applied and changed.

Liniment made of the leaves of Pine, and of pitch tree, bruised.

Bean flower used in a poultis.

Meal of Lupines applied.

Yarrow applied.

Flowers of Labruske put in Cataplasmes.

Verdigrease applied.

To draw out Splinters, or other things which stick in wounds.
SNailes with their shells, bruised and applied.

Flesh of a salted Silurus applied.

A Lizards head cleft, and applied.

Scalions used in Cataplasmes.

Clarie applied with water.

Pimpernell applied.

Daffodill roots applied with meal of Darnell.

Round Aristolochia applied.

Dittany applied.

The first root of Corn-flag applied with wine and frankincense.

Roots of stinking Gladdon applied.

Leaves, seed, and juice of Tragium.
small Saxifrage applied.

Seed of Pycnocomum.
Devils bit laid to with polenta.

Root of Hawthorne applied.

Roots of Reed-cane applied.

Mustard Seed laid to.

To take away all superfluous flesh.
Galls bruised and sprinkled.

Date stones burned, washed, and applied.

Ashes of a sea Hedge-hoggs skin, applied.

Ashes of burned Purple shel-fish, applied.

Liniment made of the Ashes of Vnguis odoratus, applied.

Head of a Cackarell fish burned, applied.

Ashes of burned wool applied.

Powder of water Germander.

Burned brass or Verdigrease applied.

Washed Lead, Antimonie, Lithargy, Ceruse, Borax, Oker, dross of Brass,
Arsenick, Punice stone, Coral, flower of the Asian stone, dried, powdered, and
put upon the excressence in any sort whatsoever.

Marcasite stone applied with Rosin.

To Cicatrise a Wound.
CAdmia washed, and applied.

Washed lead applied.

Simples serving against Ulcers.
Against corrosive Ulcers.
BArk of Pine, or of pitchtree bruised, and applied in a liniment with beaten
Vitrioll.

Decoction of Mastick tree fomented.

Cyprus leaves bruised, and applied.

Leaves of both kinds of Savine bruised, and applied.

Leaves of all sorts of Ramne-thorne applied.

Flowers of Cistus.
Holly-rose applied.

Leaves of wild Olive Tree, bruised and applied.

Rotten wood laid to.

Ripe Olives burned, and laid to.

Date skins in powder applied.

Myrtle leaves bruised, and applied with oil of green Olives, or with a little
oil of roses, and wine.

Bitter Almonds applied with wine.

Head of a Cackarell fish burned, bruised, and laid to.

Pickle of fish applied.

Gall of a Tortoise laid to.

Liniment made of Darnell meal, Radishes, and salt.

Lin-seed boiled in wine.

Meal of bitter vetch applied.

Radishes bruised, and applied.

Leaves of Beets applied.

Plantaine applied in any sort.

Roots of great Dragons bruised, and applied with honey, and brionie.

Leaves and roots of Asphodill applied with wine.

Pimpernell bruised, and applied.

Ivy leaves boiled in wine applied.

Roots of Celandine applied with wine.

Leaves of Garden woad applied.

Round Aristolochia applied.

Root of black Chamelian thistle used in a poultis.

Green Penni-royall applied.

Marum.
Herb Mastick applied.

Seed and flowers of Esculapius Allheale applied.

Leaves of All-heale bruised, and applied with honey.

Liniment made of Coriander, bread, and Polenta.

Leaves of Hore-hound applied with honey.

Milk of male spurge applied.

Verjuyee applied with vinegar.

Juice of Hemlock applied.

Housleek applied.

Meddow Parsnep applied with Rue.

Knotgrasse applied.

Verveine applied with vinegar.

Leaves of Morell applied with Polenta.

Vinegar fomented.

Sharp brine fomented.

Petasitis.
Butter burre applied.

Scailes of brass sprinkled.

Verdigrease applied.

Burned salt applied with Polenta.

Chalcitis applied.

Dross of Brass applied.

Powder of Asian stone applied with vinegar.

Liniment made of Allome, with the like quantity of galls, and lees of vinegar.

Against old inveterate Ulcers.
FLowers of Holly Rose applied.

Small Centaury applied.

A Tent made of the root of Esculapius All-heal.

Liniment made of Misletoe and Frankin sense.

Germander applied with honey?

Juice of the leaves of Lillies; boiled in a brass pot, applied with honey, and
vinegar.

Water Germander bruised, and applied with honey.

Root of Astragalus.
Milk vetch applied.

Root of Talichrum.
Silver weed applied.

Leaves of Clot bur applied.

Vernish laid to with vinegar.

Fresh Spunges laid to without any other thing.

Flower of Asian stone applied.

Against malign Ulcers.
PLantain applied in any sort.

Roots of Dragons, chopped small, applied with honey and Briony.

Butter Bur applied.

Fleawort bruised and applied with honey.

Leaves, berries, and roots of Briony applied with salt.

Roots of Brakes bruised and applied.

Powder of Cadmia sprinkled.

Flos salis applied.

Flower of Asian stone applied with honey.

Powder of the stone Ostracites, applied with honey.

Against hollow Fistulaes and Ulcers.
DEcoction of Illyrian Flower-deluce surringed.

Hogs grease surringed.

Honey dropped into them.

Juice of Plantaine dropped into the Ulcers,

Juice of the roots of great dragons, applied with honey.

Round Aristolochia, applied with honey, and roots of Flower-de-luce.

Parings of meddow Parseneps, applied and fastened about Fistulaes, consumes
their hardnesses, and callocities.

Cinkefoile applied with salt and honey.

Yarrow surringed.

Milk of male Spurge, dropped into the Ulcers.

Vinegar and verjuyce surringed.

Chalcitis surringed.

Cadmia applied, being first made liquid.

Fresh Spunges soaked in honey applied.

Gentian applied in any sort.

Against the bardnesse and Callocities of Ulcers.
Dried roots of Caper bush, applied

Verdigrease applied with Gum ammoniacum, as a Collyrie.

Dry Spunges tied with thread, and used as a Tent.

Against Ulcers caused by corrosive things.
LIniment made of all sorts of milk, especially of Cowes milk.

Against the Scurfe, and to kill Lice.
STaphis acre, bruised and applied with oil.

Against filthy salt Ulcers.
LEaves of wild olive tree, bruised and applied with honey.

Illyrian flower-de-luce applied with honey.

Pickled Olives bruised and applied.

Turpentine applied.

Tar applied with honey.

Skin of a Sea Urchin, burned and applied.

Ashes of purple shell fish burned, applied.

Ashes of Vnguis odoratus, sprinkled on the Ulcers.

Meal of red vetch applied.

Liniment made of Coleworts, Fenugreek, and vinegar.

Roots and leaves of Asphodills applied.

Bark of the Caper bush, dried, and applied.

Root of Passe-flower applied.

Ivy leaves boiled in wine.

Celandine applied with grease.

Round Aristolochia applied.

Dry roots of Rosemary, applied with honey.

Stinking Horehound applied with honey.

Leaves of white Hore-hound applied with honey.

Leaves of female Verveine applied.

Daffodill roots applied with honey, and meal of bitter vetch.

Roots and berries of Briony applied with salt.

Verdigrease boiled in honey, applied.

Burned brass sprinkled on the Ulcers,

All sorts of Nettles, bruised and applied.

Root of Sowfennel bruised.

Cadmia applied.

Honey applied.

True Tuty applied.

Brine applied.

Allome used in any sort.

Flower of Asian stone, dried and applied.

Against Burnings.
BErries of Sycamore, incorporated in grease, applied.

Decoction of the leaves of Privet fomented.

Flowers of Holly rose applied with wax.

Gum of Acacia dissolved in an egg, preventeth bladdering.

Myrtle leaves, crude, or burned, incorporated in wax.

Mulberry leaves, bruised and applied with vinegar.

Frankincense incorporated in the grease of a Hog, or of a Goose.

Ashes of Cutle fish applied.

Ashes of burned Musles applied.

Ashes of Vnguis odoratus applied.

Ashes of burned old shoes applied.

Hogs grease applied.

Sheeps dung incorporated in wax, and oil of roses.

Dung of Pigeons, or of Hens, incorporated in oil with Lin-seed.

Sesamum with oil of roses.

Mallows boiled in oil.

Green leaves of Beets applied.

Ashes of Coleworts incorporated in the white of an egg.

Milk of wild Lettice applied with woman's milk.

Flowers of Ivy incorporated in wax, and the leaves boiled in wine.

Roots of Brank Ursine applied.

Seed and leaves of wild Rue applied.

Birdlime dissolved in hot water, and applied, preventeth bladdering.

Flower of Tiph-wheat incorporated in old Hogs Lard well washed.

Roots of Hemerocallis.
Lyriconfancy, applied.

Leaves of marsh Mallows applied with a little oil.

Leaves and seed of St. John's wort applied.

Leaves and seed of Ascyron.
St. Peter's wort applied.

Leaves of Tutsan St. John's wort, applied.

Roots of Orkanet, boiled in oil, and incorporated in wax.

Wall Pellitory applied.

Leaves of horned Poppy, applied with oil.

Leaves of wild Mullein applied in a poultis.

Powder of Antimony incorporated in fresh grease, applied; preventeth
bladdering.

Allome applied with water.

Salt with oil, or Fullers earth alone, preventeth bladdering.

Phrigian stone incorporated in wax, applied.

Ink applied with water.

Cinnaber and Dragons blood applied.

Flowers of Gallium.
Ladies Bed-straw, applied.

Burned roots of Lillies incorporated in oil of roses, or the leaves, applied.

Leaves of Hounds-tongue incorporated in old Hoggs-grease.

Young Elder leaves applied.

Daffodill roots applied with a little honey.

Oil boiled in the hollowed root of an Asphodil, applied.

Against Ulcers dropping matter like Honey.
ROots of Pompions applied with honey.

Garden cresses applied.

Against Scabs, or red Sores growing in the Fundament.
SCalions roasted in embers applied with the ashes of a Cackarell-fish, head
burned.

Against gallings which happen by chafing between the Thighs, or elsewhere.
POwder of old Shoes burned, applied.

Against inflammations of Ulcers.
CObwebs applied.

To incarnate hollow Ulcers.
FRankincense put in them.

Tar applied with honey.

Pitch applied.

Marrow of the bones of all foure-footed beasts applied.

Honey dropped into them.

Cadmia sprinkled.

Corrall put in them.

Flower of the Asian stone applied with honey.

Eretrian earth applied.

Pumice-stone sprinkled.

To cicatrise Ulcers.
AShes of burned Purple-fish.

Ashes of Muskles, and of Vnguis odoratus applied.

Aloes applied.

Leaves of Agrimonie choppoed small, and incorporated in Hoggs-grease, applied.

Powder of the roots of Brakes sprinkled on them.

Cadmia applied.

Burned brass applied.

Scailes of Brass sprinkled.

Verdigrease incorporated in oil and wax.

Antimonie, Lead Ore, Lithargie, Ceruse, Chalcitis, Pumice stone, winelees
burned, lime washed, corrall, flower of the Asian stone, or Tiles well baked,
applied in any sort whatsoever.

Simples serving for Ruptures, and Dislocations.
For members out of joint.
ROots of Rose-bushes applied with vinegar.

Roots of Clote burre, bruised and applied, to ease the pains of the wrinch.

Decoction of Acacia fomented.

Leaves and seed of Agnus Castus used as a poultis.

She Goats dung incorporated in wax, and oil of roses applied.

Sparagus roots applied with wine, or vinegar.

Decoction of Sow-bread fomented.

Decoction of Scalions fomented.

Roots of brank Ursine applied.

Leaves of sweet Marjerome incorporated in wax, applied.

A poultis made of the leaves of Orkanet, honey, and meal.

All sorts of nettles applied.

Daffodill roots bruised, and incorporated with honey laid to.

Leaves of black Brionie applied with wine.

Polipodie applied.

Liniment made of Turnsole leaves.

Liniment made of the ashes of Vine branches, and Grape skins burned,
incorporated in vinegar.

Salt, meal, and honey applied.

For broken Bones.
DEcoction of Mirtill leaves used in fomentation.

Unwashed wool dipped in oil, wine, and rose vinegar applied.

Decoction of Mullein drunk.

Painters soote incorporated in wax, applied.

Liniment made of the decoction of Elm leaves, or of the decoction of the
bark of the roots.

To draw out broken Bones,
ROund Aristolochia used in a poultis.

Powder of the root of Sow-sennell, put in the wound.

Euphorbium put in the wound.

Roots of stinking Gladon, applied with Verdigrease.

Brionie bruised, and applied.

Root of black Brionie.

For persons which have had great falls.
Juice of Gentian roots, the weight of a dram drunk.

Decoction of the root of Plowmans Spikenard drunk.

Yarrow drunk with water and salt.

A Lexive made of the ashes of Vine branches, with vinegar, salt, and honey.

For persons which are bursten.
DEcoction of Common sweet Cane drunk.

Grains of Paradise drunk in water.

Decoction of true sweet Cane drunk, with seed of Couch-grasse, or of Parsley.

Electuary made of Elicampane root and honey.

Bdellium drunk.

Juniper berries drunk.

Cedar berries eaten.

Root of Halymus.
Sea Purslaine, the weight of a dram taken in honied water.

Root of great Dragons roasted in embers, or boiled, taken with honey.

Asphodill roots the weight of a dram taken in wine.

Scalions boiled in vinegar eaten.

Pills of Agarick, the weight of three obols taken with honied wine.

Juice of Gentian roots, the weight of a dram drunk.

Round Aristolochia drunk.

Wild Time drunk.

Root of great Centaury taken in wine.

Roots of brank Ursine drunk.

Roots of Candie Alexanders eaten, or drunk.

Decoction of our Lady-thistle roots boiled in wine, drunk.

Seed of Southernwood taken in water.

Organie eaten with figgs.

Leaves and roots of Horse-tayle drunk.

Decoction of Calaminte drunk.

Decoction of the roots of Plowmans Spikenard drunk.

Rosemary roots drunk.

Gum sagapene drunk.

Benzoin taken with some lie.

Galbanum taken in pills.

Polycnemon drunk in wine.

Water Germander eaten with Garden cresses, honey, and rosin.

Decoction of marsh Mallows drunk.

Roots of marsh Mallows drunk in wine, or in water.

Bettony leaves the weight of a dram drunk in clear water.

Wall-wort drunk in honied vinegar.

Comfry roots drunk.

Root of stinking Gladdon drunk in honied wine.

Tops of Helychrisum.
golden Moth-weed drunk in wine.

Decoction of Mullein drunk.

Electuary made of Briony roots and honey.

Powder of the stone Schistos drunk.

Simples serving against venom and poisons, and also against the biting and
stinging of venomous Beasts.
Against the stinging and biting of venomous Beasts.
ROots of Illyrian Flower-de-luce taken in vinegar.

Grains of Paradise taken in wine.

Celtick Spikenard, taken with decoction of Wormwood.

Valerian put in preservatives prescribed against venomous bitings.

Cinnamomum drunk.

Cinnamon drunk.

Decoction of Elicampane roots drunk.

Bdellium drunk.

Sycomore berries drunk.

Leaves and flowers of Heath drunk.

Seed of Agnus Castus drunk.

Acornes eaten.

Wall-nuts eaten.

Rosin of Sycomore applied.

Milk of Fig Tree put in the wound.

Liniment made of Tar, and of salt.

Decoction of the leaves and roots of Christs-thorne drunk.

Chickens brains taken in wine.

Caterpillars applied with oil.

Curd of Hares, of Lambs, of Calves, of Hindes, of Bores, of Hearts, of Buffles,
of Kids, or of fallow Dear, the weight of three obols taken in wine.

Blood of a sea Tortoise drunk with Cummin, and the curd of a Hare.

Honey drunk with oil of roses made hot.

Wheat meal applied with wine, and vinegar.

Juice of Leeks taken with honey, or a liniment made of the leaves.

Wild Leekes eaten.

Pepper taken in any sort.

Sea holly taken in wine.

Toucrium.
Great Germander applied with vinegar.

Bastard wild Poppy taken in wine.

Agarick the weight of three obols taken in wine.

Rhapontick drunk.

Germander drunk.

Gentian root the weight of a dram taken in wine with Rue, and Pepper.

Long Aristolochia, the weight of a dram drunk, or applied on the wound.

Decoction of Organie drunk.

Leucas.
Poley mountain drunk in wine, or used in a poultis.

Penni-royall taken in wine.

Juice of Dittany taken in wine.

Roots of Plow-mans Spikenard taken in wine.

Seed of Hercules All-heale taken with Aristolochia.

Seeds and roots of Lovage drunk.

Seed of All-heale drunk.

Annise drunk.

Roots of Swallow-wort drunk in wine.

Cummin taken in wine.

Ammeos drunk in wine.

Thought to be wild Larkes spur.
Delphinium applied on the wound.

Benzoin drunk and applied.

Galbanum applied is very good.

Wild Basil drunk.

Leaves of stinking Tresoile taken with Oximel.

Decoction of Poley drunk.

Bettony leaves the weight of three drams taken in nine ounces of wine, or
applied on the wound.

Juice of Knot-grasse drunk.

Liniment made of Periwinckle.

Root of Sparganium.
Burre reed taken in wine.

Strong brine dropped into the wound.

Lemnian earth drunk.

Liniment made of Organie, salt, honey, and hisope.

Against the bitings of Vipers.
COstus the weight of half an ounce drunk.

Cinnamon drunk.

Tar applved.

Leaves of Juniper, and juice of the said leaves drunk.

Leaves of Ash, or the juice of the leaves drunk.

Bay leaves applied.

Southernwood applied.

Galbanum applied instead of the linen folds usually laid next above the
plaster.

Green Organie put in the wound.

Chickens cleft alive, and applied on the wound.

A poultis made of bruised Cammomill, barley meal, and honied vinegar, before
you lay it to, foment the Wound often with hot honied vinegar.

Bramble leaves applied with wine.

Juice of Leekes drunk in a hemine of pure wine.

Juice of Baulme drunk in wine.

Curd of a Hare drunk.

Omotarichus.
The salted flesh of a Tunie eaten, but you must drink presently after, or you
may apply it on the wound.

Powder of Harts-horne taken in wine.

The Patients own urine drunk.

Wheat bran boiled in the decoction of Rue, applied.

Liniment made of the meal of bitter vetch, steeped in wine.

Raddish applied.

Juice of Cole-worts drunk with niter, and the root of Flower-de-luce.

Gum Succory eaten.

Garlic taken in wine, or applied.

Squil boiled in vinegar applied.

Juice of Pimpernell taken in wine.

Pith of Fennel Giant taken in wine.

Juice of Clote burre taken in wine.

Juice of the roots of Madir drunk, with the leaves.

Juice of Land Caltraps the weight of a dram taken, or applied on the wound.

Leaves and roots of the first kind of Orkanet eaten, drunk, or worn about
the neck.

Seed of wild Basil drunk in wine.

Roots of Elder, or of Wall-wort, boiled in wine, drunk.

Brionie root the weight of two drams drunk.

Ashes of Vine branches applied with vinegar.

Against the bitings of Serpents, and Aspes.
RIver Crabbs bruised, and drunk with Asses milk.

The stones of A beast living in Nilus.
River Horses drunk.

Castorium drunk.

Powder of Weesils salted, and dried in the shadow, the weight of two drams
taken in wine.

Froggs boiled in oil, eaten with salt.

Gudgeons eaten.

Seven punies taken in any sort.

A Bores liver dried, and taken in wine.

Hens cleft alive and laid upon the wound, letting them remain so long as they
are hot, then laying to others.

Butter applied.

Wild Goats dung boiled in wine, or in vinegar, and applied.

Honey drunk with oil of roses.

Asphodill roots the weight of three drams drunk, or used with the leaves and
flowers in a poultis.

Garden cresses drunk.

Seed of white Thistle drunk.

Southernwood taken in wine.

A poultis made of Hisope bruised with honey, salt, and cummin.

Nepeta.
Field Calaminte drunk, or used in a poultis.

Seed and flowers of Esculapius Allheale drunk, or applied.

It bears a leaf like sweet Marjerome, a yellow flower, and has a small root.
Panaces de Chiron drunk, or applied.

Juice of Hawk-weed taken in wine.

Seed of Elapphoboscum.
Wild Parsnep drunk.

Incision made in the Patients head unto the bone, Euphorbium put therein, and
the wound re-closed.

Leontopetalon.
Lions leaf drunk, takes away the pain.

Lilly leaves applied.

Baul me drunk in wine, and applied on the wound.

Leaves of Hore-hound drunk.

Wild Time drunk, and applied.

Rue eaten with Wall-nuts, and dry Figgs.

Dry water Germander taken in wine.

Hart's-tongue taken in wine.

Roots of Candie Alexanders applied.

Fennel taken in wine.

Gum Sagapene taken in wine.

Rosemary roots taken in wine.

Fleawort applied.

Periwinckle taken in vinegar.

Root of Echium.
Vipers Buglosse taken in wine, also whosoever drinks the roots, leaves, or
seed of Vipers Buglosse, shall be preserved from being bitten by Serpents.

Seed of wild Basil drunk.

Seed and leaves of Agrimonie taken in wine.

Sprigs of golden Moth-weed taken in wine.

Roots and leaves of female Verveint taken in wine, or applied.

Mandragore roots applied with honey, or oil.

Roots of Oleander taken in wine.

Fomentation with hot vinegar, if the poison be cold, otherwise if the poison
be hot, use cold vinegar.

Decoction of Maiden-haire drunk.

Sea water fomented.

Liniment made of salt, organie, honey, and hisope.

Ashes of Vine branches applied with vinegar.

Samian earth drunk in water.

Serpentine marble worn about the neck.

Against the bitings of the Serpents called Emourrous.
Garlic drunk, and applied.

Pure wine drunk abundantly.

A poultis made of Vine leaves, boiled, and incorporated in honey.

Against the bitings of horned Serpents, called Cerastes.
SEsamum applied with oil of roses.

Seed of Radishes drunk in wine.

Liniment made of salt, incorporated in rosin of Cedar, or in pitch, or in honey.

Against the bitings of A venomous worm having many legs.
Scolopendra.
SEEd and roots of Asphodill taken in wine.

Salt with honey, and vinegar.

Wild Rue applied, or drunk in wine.

Strong brine fomented.

Aristolochia taken in wine.

Wild Time taken in wine.

Calaminte taken in pure wine.

Against the bitings of the Serpent called A most venomous stinking scailie
Snake, broad headed, and of a dark rawny color.
Dryinus.
ARistolochia taken in wine.

Leaves of stinking Trefoile drunk.

Asphodill roots drunk.

Acornes drunk.

Roots of Holme Oak bruised, and applied on the wound.

Against the bitings of a water Adder.
ORganie bruised, incorporated in water, and applied with oil, or lie.

Liniment made of the rind of Aristolochia chopped small, with roots of oak,
barley meal, and honey.

Aristolochia the weight of two drams taken in water, and vinegar.

Juice of Hore-hound taken in wine.

New Hony-combe taken with vinegar.

Against the bitings of the Serpent called A Serpent covered with green
scailes, and spots resembling Milletseed.
Genchrus.
LIniment made of the seeds of Lettice, and wine.

Summer Savoury taken in wine, with wild Rue, wild Time, and Asphodill roots.

Gentian drunk.

Grains of paradise eaten.

Against the bitings of shrew Mice:
THe shrew Mice themselves cut in pieces, and applied on the wound.

Liniment made of Garlic, Fig Tree leaves, and Cummin.

Wormwood taken in wine.

Roots of Chrisogonum.
Tormentill chopped small, and applied with vinegar.

Galbanum applied on soft linen folds.

Liniment made of barley meal, and honied vinegar.

Kernels of sweet Pomegranats boiled, and applied.

Bruised leekes applied.

Decoction of Southernwood drunk in wine.

Wild Time taken in wine.

Rocket taken in wine.

Cyprus apples taken with vinegar.

Sow-bread taken in honied vincgar.

Pellitory of Spain drunk in wine.

Root of Carline Thistle drunk.

Against the stinging of the Fork fish, sea Scorpion, and sea Dragon.
DEcoction of Sage drunk.

All simples good against the bitings of Vipers.

Decoction of Wormwood, or of Brimstone boiled in vinegar.

The Beasts themselves which stung the Party, cut in pieces, and applied on the
wound.

Great sea Barbell cleft, and applied.

Basil applied with polenta, and vinegar.

Lead rubbed on the wound.

Brimstone applied.

Against the bitings of Weesils.
ROcket eaten, but you must drink good wine presently after.

Against the bitings of Cockatrices.
CAstorium the weight of a dram taken in wine.

Opium drunk.

Against the biting of A broad headed sharp mouthed Serpent of many coulors.
Lizards.
PUrslain well boiled.

Against the bitings of mad Dogs.
Lycium.
Juice of Box thorn taken in pills, or drunk in water.

Ashes of river Crabs drunk the weight of two drams in wine of Gentian roots,
three days together.

Salted Cackarell fish eaten.

Omotarichus.
The salted flesh of a Tuny applied.

Pickle of all fish fomented.

The Liver of a mad dog roasted and eaten takes away all fear of water.

Blood of a dog drunk.

Urine of a dog drunk.

Honey drunk with hot oil of roses.

Wheat chewed and applied.

Onyons incorporated in rue, salt, and honey applied.

Garlic drunk in wine, or used in a poultis.

Hercules All-heal incorporated in pitch, used as a poultis.

Fennel roots chopped small applied with honey.

Asa fetida applied.

Stinking Hore-hound applied with salt.

Mad-wort eaten.

Crow Garlic eaten and applied.

Salt things applied.

Benzoin.

Against the bitings of Dogs.
BItter Almonds incorporated in honey applied.

Muskles flesh eaten.

Gudgeons applied.

Meal of bitter Vetch steeped in wine applied.

Plantain used as a poultis.

Cowcumber leaves applied.

A poultis made of Scallions, honey, and powder of Pepper.

Minte applied.

All sorts of Nettles applied withsalt.

Leaves and roots of Hounds tongue incorporated in old Hogs grease, applied.

Liniment made of the leaves of Elder and of Wall-wort.

Ashes of vine branches applied with vinegar.

Against the stinging of the Spider called A most venomous Spider, having a
perilous and deadly sting.
Phalangium.
BErries of Tamarisk, drunk.

Mirtill drunk in pure wine.

Juice of Mulberry leaves, the weight of a Cyath, drunk.

Lexive of the ashes of figtree drunk withwine and white salt.

River Crabs, bruised, boiled, and drunk with Asses milk.

Great Sea Barbell, cleft and applied.

Decoction of mallows applied.

Sweet Chervil taken in wine.

Decoction of Sparagus roots drunk in wine.

Wild Lettice drunk.

Seed of Coris,
bastard, St John's wort drunk in wine.

Juice of Ivy taken in vinegar.

Southern wood drunk in wine.

Seed of Yellow Carrot taken in wine.

Gith the weight of a dram drunk in water.

Clavers drunk in wine.

Baulme drunk in wine or applied in a poultis.

Leaves, flowers and seed of Phalangium.
Spiderwort drunk.

Tender leaves growing near the bottom of Sea Rushes, applied.

Roots of Jacynth applied.

Housleek drunk.

Sea water fomented.

Roots of wild Pomegranat tree powdered very small, or Aristolochia
incorporated in Barley flower; and vinegar, applied.

Decoction of Baulm, or of the leaves fomented.

Seeds of Southernwood, of Annise, of Ethiopian Cummin, and of wild Ciches, the
weight of two drams of any of them taken in an Hemin of wine.

Fruit of the Cedar bruised, applied on the wound, or drunk.

Bark of Sycomore drunk.

Decoction of green Cyprus apples drunk with wine.

Decoction of ground Pine drunk.

Seed of Tresoile drunk.

Against the bitings of the Lizard called Stellio.
SEsamum applied with oil of roses.

Against the bitings of Crocodiles
SAlt applied on the wound.

Against the bitings of all four footed beasts.
A Boares Liver fresh or dry drunk.

Against the stinging of Scorpions.
GAlingall applied.

Grains of Paradise taken in wine.

Amomum applied with Basil.

Bay berries drunk in wine.

Juice of Mirtill taken in pure wine.

Milk of domestical fig tree dropped into the wound.

River Crabs bruised, boiled, and drunk with Asses milk.

Scorpions bruised, and applied, or roasted and eaten.

Delphinium.
Wild Larks spur applied.

Great Sea Barbell opened and applied.

Salted Cackarell fish applied.

Lizards opened, and applied take away the pain.

Mice opened, and applied.

Dung of Asses, or of Horses at grass mingled with wine, drunk.

Man's urine, drunk

Wheat meal applied with wine and vinegar,

Seed of Lychnis.
Rose Campion drunk in wine.

Seed of sharp pointed dock, or of Sorrel drunk in win, or in water.

Juice of Sow-thistles eaten, or applied in a poultis.

Succory laid to as a poultis.

Spider wort drunk.

Wild Lettice drunk.

Basil applied with Polenta.

Seed and flowers of Asphodills drunk in wine.

Southern-wood taken in wine.

Sweet Marjerome applied with salt and vinegar.

Both kinds of Hawkweed applied in a poultis.

Benzoin dissolved in oil applied.

Colus agrestis.
Wild bastard thistle drunk in wine with Pepper, or carried in the hand,
asswageth the pain,

Leaves of Baulme applied.

Roots of spatling Poppy woorne about the neck.

Black-berries, and their flowers.

Leaves of Mullein bearing yellow flowers applied.

Juice of Spurge Time applied.

Scorpions grass applied.

Turnesole drunk in wine, and applied.

Sea water fomented.

Sulpher viv.
Natural Brimstone incorporated in Turpentine applied.

Bruised Calaminte applied, or fomented with water and vinegar.

Galbanum applied as a bolster.

Barley meal mingled with wine.

Decoction of Rue fomented.

Bruised Trefoile put in the wound.

Cyprus applied with wine, and Rue.

Juice of Sow-fennell drunk.

Decoction of Penni-royall, or of Gentian drunk.

Rind of Aristolochia the weight of two drams taken.

Salt with Lin-seed.

Sapphire stone applied.

Against the stinging of Waspes, and Bees.
BAy leaves bruised, and applied.

Mallows chopped small, applied with oil.

Leaves of Watercresses.

Decoction of marsh Mallows drunk in water and vinegar.

Salt applied with Calves grease.

To drive away all venomous Beasts.
PErfume of the Juniper plant.

Cedar berries incorporated in the sat of Venison, or in Deeres marrow; anoint
all the body over with this composition.

Perfume of the leaves of Agnus Castus, or strew them in the place whence you
would drive the venomous Beasts.

River Crabbs bruised, boiled with Basil, and given to Scorpions.

Perfume of Harts-horne.

Liniment made of the suet of red Dear, and of Elephants, to anoint the body.

Decres marrow to annoint the body.

Perfume of Garden Cresses.

Southernwood strewed, or perfumed.

Leaves of Organie put under the Pillowes and Matteresses where men lie.

The savor of Dittanie kills all venomous beasts.

Perfume of Calaminte.

Perfume of Sow-fennell.

Perfume of Willow-herb chaseth away all serpents and flies.

Perfume of Gith.

Perfume of Galbanum.

Perfume of both kinds of Poley, or strew them about the place.

Perfume of Fleabanc.

Perfume of Jet.

Against all sorts of Poisons.
VAlerian put in preservatives.

Cinnamon drunk.

Tar made into a Lohoch with honey, the weight of cyath taken.

Cedar berries put in preservatives.

Wall-nuts eaten fasting with Rue, and dry Figs.

Juice of Cinksoile roots drunk.

Curd of a Hare drunk.

Epipactis.
Wild white Hellebore drunk.

Castorium drunk.

Calamint drunk as a defensative.

Powder of Weesils salted, and dried in the shadow taken in wine.

The cod-skin, or ventricle of a Weesill stuffed with Corianders, dried, and
taken in wine.

Milk of a Bitches first Litter drunk.

Sea Holly taken in wine.

Oil of olives, or butter, drunk.

Blood of Geese, Drakes, and Kids, put in preservatives.

The Patients urine drunk.

Turnep-seed drunk.

Rue-seed the weight of five drams drunk in wine.

Seed of Navew gentle drunk.

Decoction of Mallows, and the roots, often drunk and vomited.

Cole-wort seed put in preservatives.

Seed of bank Cresses drunk.

Laser picium.
Laser-wort drunk.

Agarick the weight of a dram taken with wine and water.

Roots of Carlisle thistle drunk in wine.

Bedeguar.
White Thistle worn about the neck.

Seed of Southerne-wood drunk in wine.

Decoction of Parsley drunk.

Leaves of Hore-hound drunk.

Bettony leaves the weight of a dram taken in wine.

Roots of spatling Poppie taken in wine.

Juice of Land Caltraps drunk in wine.

Berries of Hederaspinoco.
Sharp pricking Ivy taken as a preservative.

Luke warm vinegar drunk.

Lemnian earth drunk in water.

Samian earth taken in water.

Against the poison of the Sea Hare.
ROsin of Cedar dissolved in wine, drunk.

River Crabs boiled, and eaten with their broth.

Asses milk, or sod wine, drunk continually.

Decoction of the roots of Mallows drunk.

Root of Sow-bread drunk in wine.

Black Hellebore, or juice of Scammonie, the weight of a dram taken with honied
water, and kernels of Pomegranats.

Warm Goose blood supped.

Alisma.
Bears ear, the weight of one or two drams drunk in wine.

Against the Venomes and Poisons of Toades and green Froggs.
Blood of a sea Tortoise drunk, with the curd of a Hare, and Cummin.

Root of Bears ear the weight of one or two drams taken in wine.

Wine abundantly drunk, and vomited.

Roots of Rose bushes, or of Galingall, the weight of two drams drunk.

Against A venomous black fly.
Long-leggs, and Caterpillars that breed upon Pine Trees.
Oil of Flower-de-luce, or of Quinces drunk.

Dry Figgs eaten, or the decoction of them boiled in wine, drunk.

Thebane Dates eaten, or bruised and drunk in honied wine, or in milk.

All sorts of Pears eaten.

Woman's milk drunk abundantly.

All Simples good against Cantharides, are good against these.

For persons which have swallowed Horse-Leeches.
BRine drunk.

Benzoin drunk.

Leaves of Laser-wort taken in vinegar, or their juice gargarized with vinegar.

Leaves of Beets taken with vinegar.

Snow taken with water and vinegar.

Punies drunk in wine, or in vinegar.

Vinegar with salt drunk.

Niter and water gargarized.

Vitriol dissolved in water, gargarized.

For those which have drunk Venemousgreen flies, breeding in the tops of Ash,
and olive trees
Cantharides.
DEcoction of Furmentie, of Rice, of small Saxifrage, of Mallows, of Lin-seed,
of Fenugreek, or of marsh Mallows, given in a Glister.

Niter drunk in honied water.

Kernells of Pine-apples taken in wine.

Seed of Cowcumbers bruised, and taken in honied wine, or in milk.

Goose-grease drunk in sod wine.

Milk supped.

Sweet wine drunk plentifully.

Bark of the Frankincense-tree taken in sod wine.

Samian earth drunk in sod wine.

Penni-royall bruised, and drunk in water.

Oil of roses, and of Flower-deluce taken in decoction of Rue.

Tendrells of Vine bruised, and taken in sod wine.

Broth of all fat things.

For Persons which have drunk Salamander.
ROsin of Pine Tree taken in an Electuary.

Galbanum taken with honey.

Pineapple kernels bruised, and drunk in decoction of ground pine.

Nettles boiled with Lillies in oil, drunk.

Eggs of Land and Sea Tortoises eaten.

Decoction of Froggs, and Sea Holly drunk.

To dissolve milk and blood clottered and co-agulated in the stomach.
CUrd of a Hare drunk.

Warm vinegar drunk and vomitted.

Early Figgs having their milk in them, taken in water and vinegar.

Niter drunk.

All kind of Curds taken with vinegar, and root of Laserwort, or with Benzoin.

Seed of Coleworts drunk in Lie, made of the ashes of Fig Tree.

Seeds of Flea-wort drunk with pepper and vinegar.

Juice of bramble drunk in vinegar.

Liniment made of Barly-meale, and of honied water, to annoint the mouth of the
stomach, and the belly.

Time drunk in wine.

Dry leaves of Calaminte drunk.

Against the malignity of Colchicum the Apothecaries Hermodastylus.
Meddow Saffron.
ORganie drunk in sod wine, or in oximel.

Cowes milk drunk, or Asses milk taken in great quantity,

Decoction of Acornes, or of Oakeleaves drunk.

Pomegranate shell drunk.

Wild Time boiled in milk drunk.

Juice of Coronopus.
Bucks-horne drunk.

Juice of the Tendrels of Vine drunk.

Juice of bramble drunk.

Pith of Fennel giant taken in wine.

Myrtill-berries drunk in water.

The inward skin of Chestnuts powdered, and drunk with juice of Buckshorne.

Organie drunk with Lie.

All Simples good against Tad-stooles, are proper against this.

Against sleepy Nightshade,
HOnied water much drunk.

Milk of Goats, or of Asses drunk.

Sweet wine drunk warm with Annise.

Bitter Almonds eaten.

All beasts having shells, eaten raw, or roasted.

Sea Crevices, Those which have undivided cleyes, and prickles on their backs
Lobsters, and river Crevices eaten, and their broth supped.

Against Henbane.
Bark of Mulberry-tree drunk.

Honied Water drunk abundantly.

Any kind of milk drunk, especially Asses milk.

Decoction of dry Figgs drunk.

Pineapple kernels eaten.

Seeds of Cowcumber drunk in sod wine.

Brackish wine drunk with sod wine, and fresh Hog's Grease.

Nettle-seeds drunk in water.

Niter drunk in water.

Succorie eaten.

Mustard taken in any sort.

Garden-cresses, Radishes, Garlic, or Onions taken in wine.

Against Of which there is two sorts, Libbards bane, and Wolfes bane.
Aconitum.
CUrds of Hares, of Kids, or of Calves drunk in wine.

Decoction of Ground pine drunk.

Dross of Iron taken in honied vinegar.

Decoction of Organie, of Rue, of Hore-hound, and of worme-wood, taken with
wormwood wine.

Housleek, southernwood, Groundpine, and Chameloa.
widdow-waile, taken in wormwood wine.

Baulme the weight of a dram, milk, or honey, castorium, pepper, and rue, of
each a like quantity; the whole to be taken in wine.

Wine wherein gold or silver, or iron, red hot has been quenched drunk.

Broth of Hens mingled with lie, and wine, drunk.

Decoction of fat things taken with wine.

Against Yew.
HOt vinegar drunk, and vomited.

All Simples serving against Hemlock are proper against this.

An addition to the Simples serving against poisons.
Blood of He Goats, She Goats, of Hares, of Hearts, or of Dogs, fried, and
eaten.

Galbanum drunk with myrrh.

Cinkfoile roots drunk.

Roots of oak, of beech, or of holme oak powdered and taken in milk.

Quinces eaten, or drunk with penni-royall and water.

Amomum, or Carpobalsamum.
fruit of the Balsam-tree taken in wine.

Against the Opium.
juice of black Poppy, and of horned Poppy.
Honey drunk with hot oil of roses.

Organie drunk with sod wine, or with oximel.

Root of Beares-eare, the weight of two drams taken in wine.

Vinegar drunk and vomited.

Salt taken in Oximel.

Pure wine drunk with wormwood, and cinnamon.

Niter drunk in water.

Organie drunk with Lie, or sod wine.

Seed of wild Rue taken in wine, with pepper, and All-heale.

Pepper with Castorium drunk in wine, and honied vinegar, or decoction of
Summer savoury, or of organie.

Decoction of fat things supped in wine, or in sod wine.

Marrow of bones drunk with oil.

Against Hemlock.
Wormwood drunk in wine.

Organy drunk in sod wine, or in oximel.

Vinegar drunk and vomited.

Pure wine a great quantity drunk at times.

Milk of Cows, or of Asses drunk.

Castorium taken in wine with rue, and minte.

Amomum, grains of Paradise, or storax drunk respectively the weight of an
ounce.

Pepper taken in wine with seeds of nettles.

Bay leaves drunk.

Benzoin taken in oil, or in sod wine.

Sod wine drunk abundantly.

Against the Gum of Carline Thistle.
Wormwood drunk in wine.

Organie taken in wine.

Vinegar drunk and vomited,

Seeds of wild rue drunk.

Roots of Laserwort drunk.

Decoction of Goats organie drunk.

Turpentine swallowed.

Spikenard drunk.

Castorium and Laserwort the weight of an obol taken.

Wall-nuts, rue, rosin, and castorium, of each a dram; bruise all together, and
drink them in wine.

Juice of widdow-waile, of stinking deadly Carrot, or of wormwood, the weight
of a quarter of an ounce of any of them, taken in honied water.

Against Coriander.
PVre wine drunk alone, or with wormwood.

Oil swallowed.

Eggs dressed with oil, eaten, or drunk in brine.

Decoction of Hens, and of Geese, drunk with good store of salt.

Sod wine drunk with Lie.

Against Psyllium.
Flea-bane.
ALL Simples prescribed against coriander, are proper for this.

Against Some think it to be a kind of Crowfoot.
Apium risus.
HOnied water drunk much.

Milk drunk in great quantity.

Fomentation with hot water.

Against Mandragore.
HOnied water drunk largely.

Niter taken in sweet wine, or in sod wine with wormwood.

Vinegar and oil of roses, sprinkled on the head.

Agrimony, pepper, mustard, castorium, or rue; any of them bruised with
vinegar, and applied to the nose to smell to.

The odor of Lamps extinguished.

Against Tad-stooles.
HEns dung drunk in vinegar.

Honey drunk in hot oil of roses.

Radishes eaten, or drunk.

Wormwood taken with vinegar.

Leaves of baulme drunk with niter.

Lexive made of the ashes of vine branches drunk.

Decoction of Summer savory drunk.

Decoction of Organy drunk.

Hot Vinegar drunk and vomited.

Vitrioll drunk with water.

Salt drunk with Oximel.

Leaves of wild pear tree, drunk and eaten.

Hens eggs eaten in water and vinegar with a dram of Aristolochia.

Seed and roots of All-heal drunk in wine.

Wine Lees burned, and drunk in water.

Mustard drunk.

Garden Cresses eaten.

Against Plaster.
ORgany drunk with sod wine, or Oximell.

Decoction of Mallows drunk, also wash all the body therewith.

Oil drunk.

Honyed water drunk.

Decoction of dry figs, drunk.

Lie made of the ashes of vine branches or of fig tree, taken with a good
quantity of wine.

Organy taken in lie, or vinegar, or sod wine.

Time taken as aforesaid.

All Simples serving against Tadstools, used for this.

Against Ceruse.
Oil of great Marjerome, or of flower-de-luce, drunk.

Juice of Elm leaves drunk.

Kernells of Peach stones drunk in barley water.

Decoction of dry figs, or of Mallows drunk.

Milk drunk luke warm.

Sesamum bruised and taken in wine.

Lie of the ashes of vine branches drunk.

Pigeons eggs supped with Frankensence.

Against Lithargy.
SEEds of wild Clary drunk.

Myrrh, Wormwood, Hysope, Parsely seed, Pepper and flowers of Priver, any of
them taken with wine.

Dried dung of Stock Doves drunk in wine with Spicknard.

Against Quicksilver.
MIlk drunk in great quantity and vomited.

Also all Simples serving against Lithargy.

Against unslecked Lime, red Arsenicke, and Orpine.
MIlk with honied water drunk and vomited.

Decoction of fat things supped.

Decoction of Mallows, and of marsh-Mallowes boiled till it be very thick,
drunk.

Seeds of Tragos.
small Sea Grapes drunk.

Decoction of Linseed drunk.

Decoction of Rice supped.

Simples serving to Embellish the Body.
Against the shedding of Hair.
LIniment made of Myrrh, Labdanum, and Myrtill wine.

Ashes of the rind of Canes applied with vinegar.

A Poultis made of Labdanum, wine, Myrrh, and oil of Myrtill.

Juice of Myrtil berryes applied.

Ashes of Wallnut-shells powdered, and applied.

Liniment made of the ashes of burned Filbeards incorporated in grease of Bears.

Ashes of a land Hedgehog skin applied with Tar.

Ashes of a burned Hares head, incorporated in Bears grease.

Ashes of burned Frogs incorporated in Tar.

Ashes of Rats dung applied with vinegar.

Bears grease applied.

Dung of she Goats applied with vinegar.

Raddishes bruised and applied with Darnell meal.

Coleworts used in frication with salt.

Fresh leaves of Beets applied raw.

Ashes of Asphodill roots applied.

Onions used in frication.

Ashes of Garlic applied with honey.

Mustard applied.

Rub the place with Garden Cresses.

Juice of Sow-bread applied.

Leaves and roots of Crowfoot applied: but it must be soon removed.

Alloes and wine applied.

Ashes of Southernwood incorporated in juice of Raddishes, or in oil of Palma
Christi.

Juice of Laserwort applied with pepper, and vinegar.

Roots of water-Lilly applied with pitch.

Leaves of Hounds-Tongue incorporated in old Hogs grease.

Maiden-haire applied with oil of Lillyes, or oil of Myrtill, or with wine,
or Hysope.

Juice of stinking deadly carrot applied.

Rust of Iron applied.

Red Arsenicke applied with Rosin.

Third kind of Spuma Maris, burned, and applied.

Naxian stone applied.

Ashes of burned Sea horses, incorporated in pitch, in grease, or in oil of
great Marjerome.

Ashes of she Goats hoofes, applied with vinegar.

To cause shedding of the Hair.
TUrmerick applied.

Oil wherein a Scolopendra has been boiled, anointed.

Sea Hare applied alone, or with Sea-Nettle, having first bruised it.

Ashes of a Salamander with oil.

Gum of Ivy Tree applied.

Roots of Oak fearn bruised, and applied; after the person has been made to
sweat.

Water which issues out of green vine branches, when they are burned, applied.

Arsenick applied.

Babilonish Galingall, applied.

To cleanse the head from Dandriffe and Scurfe.
DEcoction of the leaves and Bark of Willow, to wash the head,

Juice of Myrtill berries applied.

Liniment made of Ox gall, Niter, and Fullers earth.

Stale man's urine used in Lotion.

Maiden hair put in Lie.

Fenugreek put in Lie, then wash the head therein.

Mallows with man's urine.

Decoction of Beets applied.

Ashes of Garlic with honey.

Burned Lilly roots with honey.

Liniment made of Scallions, and burned Niter.

Allome with bitter Vetches and pitch.

To color hair yellow.
PRivet leaves bruised and infused in juice of Sopewort, to reduce them to a
Liniment.

Lycium.
Juice of Boxthorn applied.

Wash the head in the decoction of Lote Tree.

Burned Lees of wine incorporated in oil of Mastick, applied on the head the
space of one night.

To color hair black.
CYprus leaves bruised and applied with vinegar.

Decoction of Sumack applied.

Mulberry leaves bruised and applied with vinegar.

Galls in fused in vinegar, or in water applied.

Decoction of the bark of Date trees often applied.

Decoction of Myrtill leaves, put to some lie.

Juice of Acacia applied.

Rind of the roots of Holme oak, boiled in water till it become soft, applied
a whole night.

Ivy berries applied.

Decoction of Sage often used.

Bramble leaves applied.

Sorry applied.

To kill Lice and Nits.
ROsin of Cedar applied.

Wash the head with the decoction of Tamarisk.

Honey applied on the head.

Decoction of Beets used.

Garlic drunk in the decoction of Organy.

Gum of Ivy tree applied.

Staphis acre applied.

Red Arsenick applied with oil.

Allome applied with water.

Against Sun-burne.
WHites of Eggs, applied.

Juice of Sow-bread, applied.

To make the Face smooth, and to give it a luster.
LIquor growing in certain purser upon Elmes.

Mastick applied.

Meal of Lupines applied.

Seeds of wild Turnips applied.

Liniment made of juice of Pompions dried in the sun, with their seeds, and
flower.

Solomon's seal applied.

Ben applied with urine.

Seed of Palma Christi applied.

Berries of wild vine applied.

Lithargy washed and applied.

First and second kind of Spuma Maris applied.

Earth of Chio applied.

Dung of Land Crocadiles applied.

To cause a good color.
CIch pease much eaten.

Agarick the weight of a dram drunk.

Hysope drunk and eaten.

Earth of Chio applied.

Gum of Cherry-trees applied.

Dry figs eaten.

To take wrinckles out of the Face.
BErries of Cacalia.
Mountain Horse-foot incorporated in wax and used as a Liniment.

Liniment made of Briony roots, of bitter Vetches, of earth of Chio, and of
Fenugreek.

Earth of Chio applied.

To take Moles out of the face.
THe face washed in the decoction of Savine.

Ashes of Vnguis odoratus applied.

Ben bruised and incorporated in urine.

Ashes of River Crabs.

Daffodill roots with nettle seeds and vinegar.

Berrys of wild vine applied.

Cinnamon with honey.

Roots of Costus applied with water, or honey.

Briony roots applied alone, or with bitter Vetches, earth of Chio, and
Fenugreek.

First and second kind of Spuma Maris, applied.

To raze Pocke-holes and Scars out of the Face.
Myrrh applied with honey, and Cinnamon.

Leaves of Leeks, and seed of Sumack applied.

Juice of Onyons applied with salt.

Scallyons applied alone, or with the yolk of an egg.

Penniroyall incorporated in wax.

Sorry applied with water.

First and second kind of Spuma Maris applied.

To take blemishes and red pimples (caused by the Sun) out of the face.
ROOts of Illyrian flower-de-luce applied with Hellebore.

Cinnamon with honey.

Roots of Costus applied with water or honey.

Decoction of the bruised roots of bitter Almond tree, applied.

Milk of fig tree applied.

Snails and their shells burned to ashes, and applied with honey.

Blood of Hares applied.

Ashes of burned Cuttle fishes applied.

Linseed applied.

Meal of bitter vetches applied.

Watercresses applied.

Burned Scallions applied with Spuma Maris.

Decoction of Ivy leaves boiled in wine.

Roots of black Chameleon thistle applied.

Madwort chopped small, and applied with honey.

The earth of an Isle called Melia, it is of like virtue as Allome.
Melian earth applied.

Juice of Sow-bread, applied.

To take away Freckles.
ILlyrian Flower-de-luce applied with white Hellebore.

Liniment of Cinnamon and Honey.

Costus applied with water and honey.

Blood of Hares applied hot.

Wheat flower applied with honyed vinegar.

Radishes applied with Darnel meal.

Seeds of Coleworts powdered, and sprinkled on them.

Water Cresses bruised and applied.

Ashes of Garlic applied with honey.

Roots of great Dragons applied with honey.

Scallions applied with honey and vinegar.

Gith rubbed on them.

Galbanum with vinegar.

Madwort chopped small and applied with honey.

Daffodill roots applied with nettle seed and vinegar.

Seeds of Palma Christi applied.

Liniment made of the berryes of wild vine.

Briony roots applied with bitter vetches, fenugreek and earth of Chio.

Adarca applied.

To raze out Moles naturally printed in the Body.
SVma Maris applied.

To keep the body fair.
MAstick sprinkled.

Liquor growing in purses upon Elms, applied.

Butter applied.

Dung of Land Crocodiles applied.

Juice of Pompions dried in the Sun, applied with their seeds, and water.

Briony roots applied.

Juice of Sow-bread applied.

To take away Scarres.
ASses grease applied.

Beane-flower used in a poultis.

Leaves and roots of Crowfoot applied.

Calaminte boiled in wine applied.

Roots of wild Cowcumber bruised, and applied.

Ben boiled in vinegar, and applied with niter.

A Poultis made of briony roots, bitter vetches, earth of chio, and fenugreeke.

Borax applied.

First and second kind of Spuma maris applied.

Against the Leprosy, and St. Anthonies fire.
SNayle shells burned, and applied.

Blood of Hares applied.

Ashes of burned Cuttle-fishes applied.

Bean flower applied.

Meal of Lupines applied.

Raw leaves of Beets applied.

Leaves and roots of Gum succory, bruised, and incorporated in honey, niter,
and water.

Roots of great Dragons applied with honey.

Juice of Asphodill roots applied, first well chafing the skin of the offended
part in the Sun.

Juice of Onions applied in the Sun.

Ashes of Garlic with honey.

Pepper applied with niter.

Roots of Caper-bush bruised, and applied with vinegar.

Bastard wild Poppie dried, bruised, and applied with niter, wine, and
brimstone.

Leaves of Telephium.
Spanish Opium applied with Barley meal, oil, and water, but it must remain
but six hours.

Juice of Gentian roots applied.

Root of black Chameleon-thistle applied with brimstone.

Rue used in frication with wine, pepper and niter.

Seeds of Rosemary with strong vinegar.

Burned Lilly-roots applied with honey.

Roots of water Lillies applied with water.

Roots of madir with vinegar.

Seeds of marsh mallows, fresh or dry, bruised, and applied in the Sun.

Roots of Orkanet with vinegar.

Daffodill roots, and nettle-seeds applied with vinegar.

Liniment made of briony, bitter vetches, earth of chio, and fenugreek.

Ben boiled in vinegar, applied with niter.

Roots of wild Cowcumbers bruised, and applied.

Seeds of Palma Christi applied.

Black Hellebore applied with vinegar.

Brimstone applied in any sort whatsoever.

First and second kind of Spuma maris applied.

Against Tetters, and Ring-worms.
Bark of the Pine, and of the Pitch-trees applied.

Decoction of the leaves of mastick-tree fomented.

Liniment made of Cyprus leaves, and dry polenta.

Leaves of Rhamne-thorne applied.

Rotten wood sprinkled.

Seeds of Garden cresses applied.

Rhapontick applied with vinegar.

Black Hellebore applied with vinegar.

Ben applied with urine.

Gum of vine-stocks applied with niter, having first well chafed the place.

Brimstone with Turpentine.

The place rubbed with salt, oil, and vinegar.

First and second kind of Spuma maris applied.

Adarca applied.

Tar applied.

Frankincense sprinkled.

Gum of Ethiopian Olive Tree applied.

Plum-tree gum applied.

Milk of Fig Tree applied with Polenta.

Liniment made of honey, boiled with allome.

Virgins wax applied.

New wheaten bread applied with brine.

Ciches and barley with honey.

Roots of sharp-pointed Docks boiled in vinegar, applied; having first well
chafed the place, and rubbed it with niter.

Garden-cresses applied with honey.

Liniment made of the ashes of Garlic, and honey.

Liniment made of mustard and vinegar.

Root of black Chameleon-thistle boiled in vinegar, applied.

Rue with allome and honey.

Benzoin, or Asa fetida applied with vinegar.

Birdlime dissolved in vinegar, applied.

Roots of wild Cowcumbers, bruised, and applied.

Milk of male spurge applied.

Liniment made of briony roots, of bitter vetches, earth of chio, and fenugreek.

Seawater fomented.

Against Blisters, Wheales, and Heat Pushes.
ANy kind of raw milk, drunk with honey, water, and a little salt.

Whey drunk.

Vinegar applied.

Butter applied.

Stale man's urine.

Meal of Lupines applied.

Juice of Sow-bread applied.

Lotion with the decoction of Penniroyall.

A poultis made of rue, wax, and oil of myrtil.

Staphis-acre applied.

Liniment made of Ben and urine.

Rust of Iron applied.

Allome with honey.

Cinnaber, or Dragons blood applied.

Tiles calcined in a Furnace applied.

Against Alphos.
Morphew, and other blemishes of the face.
LIniment made of the juice of stinking deadly Carrot.

Liniment made of Ben, and urine.

Daffodill roots applied with nettle-seeds, and vinegar.

Lote-tree applied with honey.

Powder of wild cowcumber roots applied.

Seeds of Palma Christi applied.

Liniment made of the berries of wild vine.

Liniment made of briony, bitter vetches, earth of chio, and fenugreek.

Against the Psora.
wild Scab.
LIniment made of Staphis-acre bruised, and oil.

Seeds of briony applied.

Sea water fomented.

Ben boiled in vinegar.

Salt applied.

Against the Scurfe.
LIniment made of Cardamomes and vinegar.

Liniment made of the sap, or liquor issuing out of green olive trees when they
are burned.

Milk of fig tree applied.

Skin of a Sea Hedge-hogge raw, or burned, applied among other medicines,
prescribed to mundifie the scurfe.

The head anointed with liniments made of the ashes of burned Sea-Horses,
incorporated in Tar, or grease, or in ointment of great Marjerome.

Stale urine applied.

Whey drunk.

Ciches with barley and honey.

Meal of Lupines.

Bastard wild Poppy dried, bruised, and used in frication with niter in a bath.

The lesser Celandine rubbed on the scurfe.

Liniment made of the roots of black Chameleon-thistle, with a little vitriol,
rosin, cedar, grease, brimstone, and allome.

Liniment made of ben, and urine.

Lotion with the decoction of Organy

Liniment made of boiled Cinkfoile roots.

Potamogeiton.
Pondweed applied for the Itch.

Lote-tree applied with honey.

Liniment made of black hell ibore, wax, pitch, and oil of cedar.

Antimony incorporated in wax, with a little ceruse.

Allome sprinkled, or dissolved in water, is good for the Itch.

Against the Scurfe, and scabbinesse, tending to the wild scab.
Ox Gall, with niter, and fullers earth.

Man's urine and niter fomented.

Bark of the Juniper plant burned, and applied with water.

Bark of the Ash-tree burned, and applied with water.

Elm leaves chopped small, and applied with vinegar.

Gum of Ethiopian Olive Tree applied.

Liniment made of turpentine, or of the rosins of Larch-tree, or of Firre-tree,
with verdigrease, vitriol, and niter.

Milk of Fig Tree applied with dry polenta.

Wheat bran boiled, and incorporated in strong vinegar.

Barley meal applied with strong vinegar, oil, and water.

Darnell meal, brimstone, vinegar, and wine applied.

Roots of sharp-pointed Docks applied, having first chafed the place, and
rubbed it with niter.

Coleworts chopped small, and applied with polenta.

Black Hellebore with vinegar.

Ashes of Garlic with honey.

Mustard with vinegar.

Briony seeds applied.

Garden-cresses with honey.

Roots of orkanet with vinegar.

Roots and leaves of Crow-foot applied.

Gith applied.

Roots of Cowcumber powdered, and applied.

Ben boiled in vinegar, applied with niter.

Juice of stinking deadly Carrot applied.

Liniment made of Scammony boiled in vinegar.

Gum of Vine-stocks applied, rubing the place first with niter.

Verdigrease and niter incorporated in turpentine.

Allome boiled with Cole-worts and honey applied.

Brimstone incorporated in turpentine and vinegar.

Salt, oil, and vinegar boiled together.

First and second kind of Spuma maris applied.

Adarca applied.

Melian earth applied.

Against the Itch.
MIlk of Fig Tree applied with polenta.

Brimstone and niter.

Frication with salt, oil, and vinegar.

Allome applied with water.

Against the Leprofie.
LAnd Hedge-hoggs dried, and frequently eaten.

Rosin of Cedar applied.

Liniment made of the ashes of snailes.

Salamander put among other medicines prescribed for the same effect.

Whey drunk.

Liniment made of the galls of He or She Goats.

Calaminte eaten with Whey.

Tamariske much eaten.

Against hardness of the skin, and Warts.
LIniment made of ashes of the bark of willow, and vinegar.

The salt head of the Cackarell-fish burned, applied.

A Lizards head cleft and applied.

Sheeps dung applied with vinegar.

Honey boiled with allome.

At the new of the Moon, take as many cich pease as you have warts, and with
every pease touch one wart, then bind the said pease in a linen cloth, and
cast them behind you.

Seeds of Turnesole applied.

Burned squill applied.

Leaves and roots of Crow-foot.

Roots of Teasell boiled in wine, bruised and applied.

Gith applied with stale urine, having first chafed the place.

Benzoin or Asa fetida mingled with was applied, having first scarified the
place.

Wild basil drunk certain days together.

Branches of spurge time bruised, and applied.

Water issuing out of green vine branches, when they are burned, applied.

Verdigrease applied.

Against Corns.
WIne of Pomegranats applied.

Milk of fig tree incorporated in grease, applied all about the place where
the Corn is.

Liniment made of frankincense, vinegar, and pitch.

Frication with rue, pepper, wine, and niter.

Ciches with barley and honey.

Leaves and roots of crow-foot.

Roots of Teasell boiled in wine, bruised and applied.

Liniment made of the juice and milk of male spurge.

Branches of spurge time bruised and applied.

Seeds of Turnesole applied.

Small Turnesole applied.

Water issuing out of green vine branches burned, applied.

Ointment made of Calves grease, and salt.

Against the stench of the Armc-holes.
LIniment made of myrrh, and liquid allome.

Powder of dry myrtill leaves cast into the Arme-pits.

A poultis made of the roots of cardoones.

Allome applied.

Against clefts and chaps in the Lips.
Ointment made of Hens-grease, or of Goose-grease.

Juice of boxe-thorne applied.

To provoke sweat.
Seeds of fennel giant applied with oil.

Red fetchlin applied with oil.

Heraclian honey eaten.

Ripe figs eaten.

Mustard eaten.

To binder sweating.
SCalions eaten.

Frication with sulpher.

Plaster, the Stone Morochthus, or samian earth applied.

To make the skin thin.
LIniment made of the roots of Sow-bread.

Simples serving to evacuate Humors, either upward, or downward.
To purge Choler.
ILlyrian flower-de-luce, the weight of seven drams taken in honied water.

Seed of Thlaspi.
Triacle mustard drunk.

Aloes drunk.

Wormwood drunk.

Decoction of Goats organy drunk.

Seed of wild rose campion, the weight of two drams drunk.

Seed of Tutsan St. John's Wort, the weight of two drams drunk.

Black Hellebore taken alone, or with scammonie, and one dram of salt.

Roots of Pycnocnmum.
Devils-bit, the weight of two drams taken in honied water.

Small Centaury eaten.

Dry fever-few taken with salt, or in honied vinegar.

Milk of Thapsia.
stinking deadly Carrot taken in honied water.

Seed of withiwind bruised and drunk.

Bastard-woad bruised and drunk.

Juice of wild Cowcumber roots, and their rind, the weight of one obol and a
half drunk.

Juice of Teasell, the weight of an obol taken.

Thirty grains of Palma Christi bruised, and drunk.

Juice of all sorts of spurge, the weight of two obols taken in water and
vinegar.

Juice of mercury supped.

Six or seven grains of spurge, taken in pills, with figgs, or dates.

Esula rotunda.
Petty spurge taken in a cyath of honied water.

Juice of scammonie the weight of a dram, or of four obols taken in fair
water, or in honied water.

One part of the leaves of Chamelaea.
widdow-waile incorporated in two parts of wormwood, and made into pills with
honied water.

The inward part of Thymelea
spurge flax, the weight of twenty grains drunk.

Leaves of elder, and of wall-wort, eaten in pottage.

The lowest part of the root of Apios eaten.

Empetrum.
Samphire taken in honied water, or in some broth.

Powder of dry Polipodie taken in honied water.

Decoction of Cynocrambe.
Dogs mercury drunk.

Decoction of Turne-sole taken with water.

One or two drams of Agarick drunk in honied water.

Roots of spurge the weight of two drams taken in honied water, or a dram of
the seeds taken, or the juice thereof made into pills, with meal, the weight
of a dram taken.

To purge Phlegm.
ILlyrian Flower-de-luce, the weight of seven drams taken in honied water.

Juice of mandragore the weight of two obols taken.

Black Hellebore taken alone or with Scammony and a dram of salt.

Seed of box-thorn, the weight of a cyath taken.

Elm bark the weight of an ounce taken in wine, or in clear water.

Broth of old Capons, prepared after Dioscorides his manner.

Roots of Sow-bread taken in honied water.

Squil boiled in honey drunk.

Hysope boiled in water with honey and Rue, drunk.

Time drunk with salt, and vinegar.

Seeds of meddow Parsenep drunk.

Gum Armoniack, the weight of a dram drunk.

Dry or green leaves of spurge Laurel drunk.

Juice of Hyppophastus, the weight of three obols, taken.

Dodder growing about Time, drunk with honey.

Juice of Briony taken in honyed water.

Juice of the seed of Carthamu^
bastard Saffron taken in Capons broth, or in honyed wine.

Powder of Load-stones, the weight of three obols, taken in honyed water.

Decoction of small Centaury drunk.

Dry Feverfew taken in honied vinegar, or with salt.

Seeds of Withiwind bruised, and drunk.

Bastard woad bruised and taken.

Juice of wild Cowcomber roots, and their bark the weight of an oboll and a
half, taken.

Juice of Teasell the weight of an obol taken.

Thirty grains of Palma Christi, drunk.

Juice of all kinds of Spurge, the weight of two obols, taken in water, and
vinegar.

Six or seven grains of Spurge taken in pills with figs, or dates.

Petty Spurge taken in a cyath of honied water.

Juice of Scammony, the weight of a dram, or of four obols, taken in clear
water, or honyed water.

One part of the leaves of Widdow-waile incorporated in two parts of Wormwood,
and made into pills with honyed water.

Pith of Spurge flax, the weight of twenty grains, drunk.

Leaves af Elder, and Walwort eaten as other pot herbs.

The lowest part of the root of Apios eaten.

Samphiere taken in broth, or in honied water.

Powder of dry Polipodi, taken in honied water.

Decoction of wild Mercury drunk.

Decoction of Turnsole, boiled in water, drunk.

One or two drams of agarick, taken in honyed water.

Roots of Spurge, two drams taken in honyed water, or a dram of the seeds
taken, or the juice thereof made into Pills with meal, the weight of a dram,
taken.

To Purge Melancholy.
Juice of Mandragore, the weight of two obols, taken in honied wine.

Broth of old Capons, prepared after Dioscorides his order.

Dodder growing about Time, taken with honey.

Whey drunk.

Dry Organy the weight of an acetabule, taken in honied water.

Peniroyall drunk.

Black Hellebore, drunk.

Broom, drunk.

White Turbith, Epithyme, Salt, and Vinegar, of each a like quantity, taken.

To cause vomiting.
TRiacle Mustard seed drunk, expels red choler.

Mandragore drunk expels Melancholy.

Milk of stinking deadly Carrot drunk in honied water.

Juice of Spurge the weight of two obols taken in honied water.

The uppermost part of the root of Apios eaten.

Flowers and seeds of Spanish Broom drunk in honyed water.

Seeds of stinking bean Trefoile, chewed.

Bettony roots taken in honied water expel Phlegm.

Seeds of Spatling Poppy, the weight of an Acetabule, taken in honied water.

Five grains of Staphis acre, taken in honied water.

Roots of Sylibum a dram drunk.

Ben taken in honied water.

Boiled Daffodil roots, either eaten, or drunk.

Thirty grains of Palma Christi, drunk.

Rind of Radish, drunk in honied water.

Juice of all kind of Spurge drunk,

Burned brass taken in honied water.

For the Dropsy, and to expel water being between the skin and the flesh.
ROOts of Sow-bread taken in honied water.

Decoction of Poley drunk.

Juice of Hyppophestus, the weight of three obols, taken.

Juice of Hyppophae the weight of an obol taken.

Thirty grains of Palma Christi, drunk.

Six or seven grains of any kind of Spurges, taken in pills, with figs or Dates.

Leaves of elder, and of wall-wort eaten in Pottage.

Samphire taken in broth, or in honied water.

Decoction of wild mercury drunk.

Asarabacca drunk.

Juice of wild Lettice taken in honied vinegar.

Roots of Trefoile, the weight of two drams taken in wine.

Juice of spurge drunk.

Pith of spurge flax, the weight of twenty grains drunk.

Roots of wild vine boiled in water, taken in two cyaths of wine, allayed with
sea water.

Scailes of brass taken in honied water.

Decoction of mercury supped.

To loosen the Belly.
CHerries new gathered eaten.

Prunes eaten.

Carob beans eaten.

Ripe figs eaten.

Milk of fig tree supped.

Decoction of Cockles, or of great sea muscles.

Vnguis Odoratus drunk.

Radish eaten.

White beets eaten.

Blites eaten.

Decoction of sorrel, and also the herb eaten.

Mallows eaten,

Orage eaten.

Coleworts lightly boiled eaten.

Decoction of husked lentills.

Sparagus eaten.

Juice of gourds boiled entire drunk

Ginger taken in any sort whatsoever.

Sow-fennell drunk.

One or two drams of dry squill taken fasting.

Seeds of Tutsan St. John's Wort bruised, and drunk.

Juice of wall Pellitory drunk.

Seeds of wild poppy the weight of an Acetabule taken in honied water.

Decoction of Hounds-tongue drunk.

Boiled sprigs of spurge time eaten.

Young tender shoots of briony, boiled and eaten.

A note of the Weights and Measures used in this Book.
24 Grains Makes a Penny weight 10 Grains Makes a Obol 2 Obols Makes a
Scruple 3 Scruples Makes a Dram 8 Drams Makes a Ounce 1 Ounce and a half Makes
a Cyath 2 Ounces and a half Makes a Acetabule 10 Ounces Makes a Hemine.
The Contents.
Simples serving for the Head.
AGainst pains of the Head arising from cold. Page 1 Against pains of the
Head, proceeding from heat p. 3 To purge the Brain p. 4 To mitigate the
Head-acb p. 5 Against the Lethargy ib. To provoke sleep p. 6 To cause horrible
dreadful dreams p. 7 To cause Sneezing ib. Against Vertiginosities ib. Against
the Appoplexie p. 8 Against the Falling Sickness ib. Against the Frenzy p. 11
Against inflammations of the brain ib. Against Melancholy p. 12 To prevent
Drunkenness ib. Against Catharres, and Rheumes descending from the head ib. To
fortify the brain p. 13 Against the Scurfe, and Ulcers flowing in the head
ib.
Simples serving for the Sinews.
Against the Spasme p. 14 Against the Palsy, and resolution of the Sinews p.
17 Against trembling of the Sinews p. 18 Against Rheumes fallen upon the
Sinews, ibid. Against Aches, and weaknesses of the Sinews ib. For cut Sinews
p. 20 To subtilize the Sinews ib.
Simples serving for the eyes.
To restrain falling of Hair from the Eyelids p. 21 For sharpness of the
Eyes, and Eyelids, ibid. Against the inflammations of the Eyelids, p. 22 To
make the Eyelids thin p. 23 To heal the Itch of the Eyelids ib. To take
spots and blemishes out of the Eyes ibid. To take skarres out of the eyes p. 24
Against dimnesse and darkness of Sight, p. 25 To take a Web out of the Eye p.
28 For burts and fresh wounds of the Eyes, ib. For Ulcers of the Eyes ib.
Against Erosions happening in the corners of the eyes p. 29 Against Fistulaes,
and hollow Ulcers of the eyes ib. To retire the Eyes standing too far forth
of the head, and to take away spots, or buds that grow in the Eyes p. 30
Against inflammations of the Eyes ib. For pains of the Eyes p. 32 For persons
which are pur-blinde ib Against the Pin, or Web in the Eyes, p. 33 Against
weakness of sight ib. Against Catarres, and Rheumes of the eyes, p. 34 Against
Blear-eyednesse p. 36 Against dazeling of the Eyes ib.
Simples serving for the Ears.
Against pains of the Ears p. 37 Against interior inflammations of the
ears, p. 40 Against Impostumes, and swellings which grow behind the ears ib.
For ears full of ordure and filth p 41 For ears that are bruised or crushed,
p. 42 For Ulcers of the ears p. 43 Against deafness of the ears ib Against
ticklings, and noise of the ears ib Against Worms in the ears p. 44
Simples serving for the Nose.
To stanch the bleeding at the nose p. 45 To cause one to bleed p. 46 Against
pimples of the Nose, and Noli me tangere ib. Against Cankers, and Ulcers of the
Nose, ib. Against stench of the Nose p. 47 Against dropping and distillations
of the Nose, ib. To purge the humors of the brain by the Nose ib. To provoke
sneezing ib.
Simples serving for the Mouth and Tongue.
Against Cancers and corrosive Ulcers, p. 48 To sweeten the Breath p. 49 For
sharpness of the Tongue p. 50
Simple serving for the Teeth.
To make the teeth clean ib. For the Toothache p. 51 To cause viciate teeth to
fall out p. 55 To fasten loose teeth ib. For teeth set on edge p. 56 To stay
watering of the gums ib. For rotten putrified gums p. 57
Simples serving for the Neck and Throat.
Against the Squinancie p. 58 For inflammation of the jaws p. 59 To put up and
fasten the Uvula p. 60 Against Rheumes of the throat ib. Against sharpness of
the throat, and passage to the Lungs p. 61
Simples serving for the Breast and Lungs.
For those which spit, and vomit blood, p. 62 For the Tisick p. 64 For
Apostumes of the Lungs p. 65 For difficulty and shortness of breath ib.
Against a Cough p. 67 Against sharpness of the breast p. 71 To clear the
voice ib. Against Plearisies p. 72 Against pains of the sides without a
Feavour b. For inflammations of the Lungs p. 73 For those which spit putrified
matter p. 74 To help difficulty of breathing ib. To expel excrements difficult
to spit, p. 76 Against Rheumes falling down into the Breast ib. Against all
maladies of the Breast p. 77
Simples serving for the Heart,
For swoundings of the heart ib. For panting and throbbing of the heart, p. 78
Against hardness of the Mideriffe ib. Against inveterate inflammations of the
precordiall parts ib.
Simples serving for the Teats, or Duggs.
For inflammations of the Duggs ib. To draw forth the Duggs of Women lately
delivered p. 79 To dissolve and mollify bardnesse of the duggs, p. 80 For
ulcerated Duggs, ib. To resolve Milk curdled, and clottered in the Duggs ib. To
put the Milk away ib. To increase Milk abundantly p. 81 To defend Milk from
settling in the breasts, p. 82 To keep the Duggs from growing ib.
Simples serving for the Stomach.
Against turnings of the Stomach, and to prevent vomitting ib. Against
waterishnesse and rheumes which fall down into the Stomach p. 84 To cause
Vomitting p. 86 Against pains of the Stomach ib. Against gripings of the
Stomach p. 87 Against inflammations of the Stomach ib. Against wind in the
Stomach p. 88 Against the Hickop, and Yexing ib. Against sharp belching p. 89
To resolve Milk and Blood, fixed and clotted in the Stomach ib. Against
inflammations of the Stomach p. 90 To procure an appetite ib. To help Digestion
ib. Against the flowing down of humors upon the stomach p. 91
Simples serving for the Liver.
Against stoppings and obstructions of the Liver ib. Against the Jaundise p. 92
Against the Dropsy p. 95 To heat the Liver p. 98 For pains of the Liver ib.
Against hardness of the Liver ib.
Simples serving for the Spleen.
Against hardness of the Spleen p. 99 To open the Spleen ib. Against
inflammations of the Spleen ib. Against pains of the Spleen p. 100 To diminish
and extenuate the Spleen ib.
Simples serving for the Guts.
For the Colic p. 104 For the Belly-ach and worms p. 105 Against the bloody
Flix, and the Dysentery, p. 107 To bind the Belly p. 111 Against inveterate
fluxes of the belly p. 114 To loosen the belly ib. Against wind in the Guts p.
115 Against long Worms p. 116 Against round Worms p. 117 Against Fluxes
caused by Laxative Medicines p. 118 Against wounds of the Guts ib. Against
Ulcers of the Guts ib.
Simples serving for the Fundament.
To heal clefts and chaps of the fundament, p. 119 For Ulcers of the Fundament
ib. Against Apostumes of the fundament, p. 120 Against inflammations of the
fundament, p. 121 To resolve tumors of the fundament ib. For the falling of
the fundament ib. For a great desire of going to stool, without doing any
thing p. 122 Against Warts growing on the fundament, ibid. To cause Emeroids to
come forth p. 123 To stay the flux of the Emeroids ib. To heal Emeroids ib.
Simples serving for the Reins.
For pains in the Reins p. 124 For the Stone, and gravel of the Reins, p.
125 To heal Ulcers of the Reins p. 126 To remove obstructions of the Reins
ib.
Simples serving for the Bladder.
To expel Urine p. 127 For those which piss with difficulty and pain p. 132
For the Strangury p. 135 To heal ulcers of the Bladder p. 136 For wounds of
the bladder ib. To void the stone of the bladder p. 137 To break Stones in the
Bladder ib. For those which cannot keep their Water, p. 138 Against the Itch
of the Bladder ib. For those which piss small clots of blood, ib. For persons
which piss blood by reason of stones broken in the Bladder p. 139
Simples serving for the genitall Members, and secret parts.
To cause standing of the Yard ib. To augment Sperm and natural Seed, p. 140
To hinder standing of the Yard p. 141 For those which lose their Seed ib. For
Ulcers of the secret parts ib. For inflammations of the Genitals p. 142 Against
itching of the Genitals p. 143 Against hardness of the Genitals ib. For those
which have no Prepuce ib. For Corrisive Ulcers of the Genitall Members ib.
Against Warts growing on the Genitall Members p. 144
Simples serving for the Matrix.
For the suffocation of the Matrix p. 145 To provoke Women's monthly purgations,
p. 146 To restrain great excess of Women's monthly Purgations p. 153 To expel
the after birth p. 157 To cause abortion p. 158 To hinder Conception p. 161 To
cause Conception p. 163 To deliver a Woman of a dead Child, ib. To preserve
the Child till the limited time, ibid. For Women in Labor p. 164 Against
loathing of meat of Women with Child ib. Against inflammation of the Matrix
ib. For Ulcers in the natural places of Women, p. 165 To mollify hardness of
the natural parts of Women p. 166 Against Wind in the Matrix ib. Against
falling and relapsing of the Matrix, p. 167 Against pains, and gripings of the
Matrix, ibid.
Simples serving for the Arms and Legs.
For the Gout of the legs and feet p. 168 For the Sciatica p. 171 Against the
Gout of the hands, and pains of the joints p. 175 For bruised joints p. 178
Against knobs and nodosities growing on the joints ib. To heal Kybes on the
heels ib. Against blisters and inflammations of the feet, caused the shoes p.
180 To heal clefts, and chaps of the feet ib. Against Ulcers which grow on the
ends of the Fingers, and divide the skin from the Nails ib. Against Apostumes
which grow in the roots of the Nails p. 181 To cause rough nails fall off ib.
To take away loose nails p. 192 For bruised nails ib. To take away Corns ib.
For Veins puffed and swelled with blood, ib. Against pains of the sides p.
193 Against Kernells and Inflammations of the Groine ib. Against burstings, and
falling down of the Guts ib. Against windy ruptures ib.
Simples serving generally against many Maladies, and first of those which
serve against Fevers.
Against Tertian Fevers p. 184 Against Quartane Fevers p. 185 Against long
inveterate fevers ib. Against Fevers Epiales p. 196 Against intermitting
Fevers, returning at certain times ib. Against languishing Fevers ib.
Against shaking of Fevers ib. Against pestilentiall fevers p. 197
Simples serving against Apostumes, Swellings, and Tumors.
Against inflammations, and redness of any diseased part p. 188 Against
Carbuncles p. 200 Against Fellons, and small Apostumes, p. 201 To prevent
Gangrenaes, and relieve diseased parts, tending to St. Anthonies fire, p. 192
Against the Holy fire, burning sharp Inflammations, and St. Anthonies fire p.
193 Against the Shingles p. 208 Against Wheales, Pushes, and red Spots, p. 205
For the Kings Evil p. 208 Against flat Apostumes, called in Greek Panos p.
211 To resolve all Apostumes and Tumors, p. 209 Against hard, or almost
unsensible swellings between the flesh and the skin, called Scirrhus p. 212
For Cankers p. 213 To dissolve all swellings ib. Against Apostumes which yield
an oyley fat matter p. 213 Against Apostumes which yield matter like Honey ib.
Against swellings caused by Blows, p. 216 Against bruises, and prints of
strokes ib.
Simples serving for Wounds.
To heal Wounds p. 220 To stench bleeding of a Wound p. 220 To stench blood
descending from the Brain, p. 222 To resolve clotted blood ib. To heal wounds
caused by venomous shot, ib. To re-incarnate Bones destitute of flesh, ib. To
heal Wounds in the pellicles of the Brain, p. 223 Against the inflammations of
Wounds, ib. To draw out Splinters, or other things which stick in wounds ib. To
take away all superfluous flesh p. 224 To Cicatrise a Wound p. 225
Simples serving against Ulcers.
Against corrosive Ulcers p. 226 Against old inveterate Ulcers p. 229 Against
malign Ulcers ib. Against hollow Fistulaes and Ulcers, p. 230 Against the
hardness and Callocities of Ulcers p. 231 Against Ulcers caused by corrosive
things, ibid. Against the Scurfe, and to kill Lice, p. 232 Against filthy salt
Ulcers ib. Against Burnings p. 234 Against Ulcers dropping matter like Honey, p.
236 Against Scabs, or red Sores growing in the Fundament p. 237 Against
gallings which happen by chafing between the Thighs, or elsewhere ib. Against
inflammations of Ulcers ib. To incarnate hollow Ulcers ib. To cicatrise Ulcers
p. 238
Simples serving for Ruptures, and Dislocations.
For members out of joint p. 239 For broken bones p. 240 To draw out broken
bones ib. For persons which have had great falls, p. 241 For persons which are
bursten ib.
Simples serving against Venom and Poisons, and also against the biting and
stinging of venomous Beasts.
Against the stinging and biting of venomous Beasts p. 244 Against the biting
of Vipers p. 247 Against the biting of Serpents, and Aspes, p. 249 Against the
bitings of the Serpent called Emourrous p. 253 Against the bitings of horned
Serpents, called Cerastes ib. Against the bitings of Scolopendra ib. Against
the bitings of the Serpent called Dryinus p. 254 Against the bitings of a water
Adder, ib. Against the bitings of the Serpent called Cenchrus ib. Against the
bitings of shrew Mice p. 255 Against the stinging of the Fork-fish, sea
Scorpion, and sea Dragon p. 256 Against the bitings of Weesils ib. Against the
bitings of Cockatrices ib. Against the biting of Lizards p. 257 Against the
biting of mad Dogs ib. Against the bitings of Dogs p. 258 Against the stinging
of the Spider, called Phalangium p. 259 Against the biting of the Lizard called
Stellio p. 260 Against the bitings of Crocodiles p. 261 Against the bitings of
all four-footed Beasts, ib. Against the stinging of Scorpions ib. Against the
stinging of Waspes, and Bees, p. 264 To drive away all venomous Beasts ib.
Against all sorts of Poisons p. 265 Against the poison of the Sea Hare p. 267
Against the Venomes and Poisons of Toades, and green Frogs p. 268 Against
Long-leggs, and Caterpillars that breed upon Pine-trees ib, For persons which
have swallowed Horse-Leeches p. 269 For those which have drunk Cantharides,
ibid. For persons which have drunk Salamander, p. 270 To dissolve milk, and
blood clottered, and co-agulated in the Stomach p. 271 Against the malignity of
Meddow Saffron, p. 272 Against sleepy Nightshade ib. Against Henbane p. 273
Against Aconitum ib. Against Yew p. 274 An addition to the Simples serving
against Poisons ib. Against the juice of black Poppy, and of horned Poppy p.
275 Against Hemlock p. 276 Against the Gum of Carline Thistle ib. Against
Coriander p. 277 Against Flea-bane p. 278 Against Apium risus ib. Against
Mandragore ib. Against Tad-stooles ib. Against Plaster p. 279 Against Ceruse p.
280 Against Lithargy ib. Against Quicksilver p. 281 Against unstecked Lime,
red Arsenicke, and Orpine ib.
Simples serving to embellish the Body
Against the shedding of Hair p. 282 To cause shedding of the Hair p. 284 To
cleanse the head from Dandriffe and Scurfe p. 285 To color hair yellow p. 286
To color hair black ib. To kill Lice and Nits p. 287 Against Sun-burne ib. To
make the face smooth, and to give it a luster ib. To cause a good color p. 288
To take wrinckles out of the Face p. 289 To take Moles out of the face ib. To
raze Pock-holes and Scars out of the face, p. 290 To take blemishes and red
pimples (caused by the Sun) out of the face ib. To take away Freckles p. 291 To
raze out Moles naturally printed in the Body p. 292 To keep the body fair ib.
To take away Scarres p. 293 Against the Leprosy, and St. Anthonies fire p. 294
Against Tetters, and Ring-worms, p. 296 Against Blisters, Wheales, and Heat
Pushes p. 298 Against Morphew, and other blemishes of the face p. 299 Against
the wild Scab ib. Against the Scurfe p. 300 Against the Scurfe, and
scabbinesse, tending to the wild scab p. 301 Against the Itch p. 303 Against
the Leprosy ib. Against hardness of the skin, and Warts, p. 304 Against
Corns p. 305 Against the stench of the arme-holes, p. 306 Against clefts and
chaps in the Lips, ib. To provoke sweat p. 307 To hinder sweating ib. To make
the skin thin ib.
Simples serving to evacuate Humors, either upward, or downward.
To purge Choler p. 308 To purge Phlegm p. 310 To purge Melancholy p. 313 To
cause vomiting p. 314 For the Dropsy, and to expel water being between the
skin and the flesh p. 315 To loosen the Belly p. 316
A Table of the virtues of the Simples contained in this Book.
Note the several kinds of Herbs are expressed in the Page.
A
ACacalis, good for the sight, p. 25 Acacia, good against Cankers, 48. Bloody
flix, 108. helps the Flux of the menstrues, 154. 167. heales Kybes, 178.
Ulcers, 181, Anthonies fire, 204. Burns, 234. Ruptures, 239, etc. Aconitum,
takes away pains of the eyes, p. 32 Acornes, mittigates the Headache, p. 5
stays the Flux, 108. expels Urine, 128 takes away inflammations, 188. helps
the stinging of venomous beasts, 245. 253. 272 Agarick, cures the Falling
sickness, p. 9. Spasme, 15. spitting of blood, 63. the Tisick, 65, 67. stays
vomiting, 83. belching, 84. helps the Jaundise, 93. the Spleen, 101. kills
Worms, 107. profitable in Fevers, 185. 196. purges Choler, 310. see more,
125, 145. 164. 175. 242. 246. Agnus Castus, good for the Headache, p. 2. 4. to
provoke sleep, p. 6. against the Frenzy, 11. increases milk, 81. causes
Chastity, 141. drives away venomous beasts, 264. see more, 97, 100. 119. 147.
245. Alablaster stays watering of the Gums, p. 57. and takes away pains of
the Stomach, p. 87 Candie-Alexanders good for a Cough, p. 70. difficulty of
breathing, 75. wind in the stomach, 88. Dropsy, 97. diminishes the Spleen,
101. causes Urine, 133. provokes women's Terms, 149. good against Fevers, 196,
197. Ruptures, 242. bitings of Aspes, 251. All-heale, good against the
Toothache, 53. Cough, 70. expels Urine, 130. 134. profitable against the
suffocation of the Matrix, 145. causes abortion, 159. good for Ulcers, 228.
and the stinging of venomous beasts, 246. see more, 16. 27. 97. 150. 163. 197.
Allome, good against Rheumes of the eyes, p. 35. ordure in the ears, 42. to
fasten loose teeth, 56, 57. against inflammations of the laws, 60. Rheumes of
the throat, 61. Ulcers in the privy parts, 142. heales Kybes, 180. stops
bleeding of Wounds, 222. good against all Ulcers, scurfe, and scabbinesse, vid.
p. 228. 233. 236. 301. 303. Almonds, ease the Headache, p. 1. 2 provoke sleep,
6. help a Cough, 68. obstructions of the Liver, 92. Colic, 104. gravel of
the Reins, 128. Ulcers, 227. cures the venom of the sleepy Nightshade, 273.
takes away red pimples, 290. Aloes, good against the Headache, p. 2. provokes
sleep, 6. heales the Itch of the Eyelids, 23. putrified Gums, 57. spitting
blood, 63. the Jaundise, 93 Emeroids, 123. Ulcers, 142. 180. 238. shedding of
hair, 283. purges Choler, 308. Amber, good to stay vomiting, p. 83. Amilum,
profitable against ulcers in the Eyes, 28. 35. sharpness of the throat, 61,
spitting blood, 62. Ammeos, good against the Belly-ach, p. 106. Paine-pisse,
134. provokes women's Courses, 149. heals the stinging of venomous beasts,
246. Amomum provokes sleep, p. 6. cures inflammations of the Eyes, 30. heats
the Liver, 98. helps the Reins, 124. Gout of the legs and feet, 168.
stinging of Scorpions, 261. and cures poisons, 274. 276. Annise and the Seed,
against the Headache, p. 2. increases milk, 81. helps the Dropsy, 97. gravel
of the reins, 125. stays Woman's Courses, 155. helps the biting of venomous
Beasts, 246. Anthyllis, cures the Falling Sickness, p. 10. Antimony, good
against Ulcers, and Fistulaes of the eyes, p. 28. 30. and other parts, 238.
301. Burnings, 236. stays bleeding of wounds, 222. Sweet apples, loosen the
belly, p. 114. Arabian-thistle, helps spitting of blood, p. 63.
Arbute-berries, mittigates the Headache, p. 5. Aristolochia, or Birthwort,
round and long, cures the Spasme, p. 16. shortness of breath, 66. pains of
the sides, 73. Hickop, 89. Ulcers, 227, 230, 233. draws out broken bons, 240.
diminishes the Spleen, 101. keeps teeth clean, 50. heales the singing of
venomous beasts, 246, 253. Gum-Ammoniacum, cures the Falling Sickness, p. 10.
stoppings of the breast, 75, 76. hardness of the Liver, 98. provoks women's
terms, 150. causes abortion, 161. Arsenicke or Orpine, cures Noli me tangere,
p. 46. old Cough, 67, 71. Apostumes of the Fundament, 120. shedding of hair,
284, 285. kills Lice and Nits, 287. takes off rough nails, 192. and proud
flesh, 225. Asa-Fetida, takes away Warts on the Fundament, p. 122. cures the
Sciatica, 174. Carbuncles, 201. Gangrenaes, 193. Bitings of a mad Dog, 257.
Asarabacca, cures the Dropsy, 95. expells urine, 127. provoks women's Terms
146. cures the Sciatica, 172. Ash-leaves cures the biting of Vipers, p. 247.
Aspe-tree, the seed cures the Falling Sickness, p. 8. the leaves the Gout of
the hands and feet, p. 168. Asphodills, cures the Spasme, p. 15. filth in the
ears. 42. Deafness, 43. Toothache, 52. Cough 69. pains of the sides, 72.
Inflammations of women's Dugs, 79. expells Urine, 129. increases Venery, 139.
cures the Gout of the legs, 170. Kybes on the heels, 179. Inflammations 188.
Ruptures 242. venomous bitings, 250, 253. and stings, 262. stays shedding of
hair, 283. heales Ulcers, 227. Ass and its parts, the hoof cures the Falling
sickness, p. 9. Kybes on the heels 179. The dung stops bleeding 221. Cures
the stings of Scorpions 262. The grease takes away Scarres 293.
B
BArbell of the sea, good against the stings of venomous beasts, p. 256, 259,
261. Barley good for Sinews, p. 18. Throat, 61. Sides, 72. is binding 112.
Expells urine 129. Increases milk plentifully, 81. Batrenwort, Draws forth
women's Dugs p. 79. Hinders conception 162. Basil, Good against Melancholy, p.
12. The Spasme, 16. Pains in the eyes, 32, 35. Pains in the ears, 39. causes
Sneesing, 47. takes away inflammations of the Lungs, 73. Binds 112. helps the
Strangury, 132, 135. provoks Terms 150. Helps venomous stings, 256. Baulme,
Good against Vertiginosities, and the Falling sickness, p. 7, 8. Spasme, 15.
dimnesse of Sight, 27. Toothache, 53. difficulty of Breath, 75. Belly-ach, 105.
Bloody Flux, 110. the Bitings and Stingings of venomous beasts, 248, 251, 260,
262. Bays, Profitable against Aches, p. 18. pain of the ears, 37. Tisick and
shortness of breath, 64, 65, 74. causes vomiting, 86. helps obstructions of
the Liver, 91. gravel in the Reins, 125. Expells Urine, 128. provoks the
Menstrues, 147. is good against Venom and Poison, 247, 261, 264, 276.
Bdellium, Good against the Spasme, and Aches, p. 15, 19. Rheumes of the Throat,
60. pains in the Sides, 73. Stone in the Bladder, 138. Ruptures, 241. Stinging
and biting of venomous beasts, 244. Beans, cause dreadful dreams, p. 7. good
for the eyes, 30, 33, 35. Swelling behind the ears, 40. against a Cough, 69.
difficulty of Breath, 74. Inflammations of women's dugs, 79. to resolve curdled
milk, 80. stays Vomitting, 83, 84. Bloody Flux, 110. heales Inflammations of
the Genitalls, 142. and of Wounds, 223. Bear, the Gall good against the
Falling sickness, p. 9. the Grease heales Kybes, 179. and shedding of Hair,
283. Herb Beares-eare, good against Belly-ach, p. 107. Looseness and Bloody
Flux, 110, 113. Stones in the Reins, 126. Suffocation of the Matrix, 146.
poisonous things, 268, 275. Beaver stones causes Sneesing, p. 47. Beets purge
the Brain, p. 4. help pains in the ears, 38. are loosening, 115. heal Kibes,
179. Ulcers, 227. Burnings, 234. those who have swallowed Horse-Leeches, 269.
shedding of Hair 283. cleanse the head from Dandriffe, 285. kill Lice and Nits,
287. cures the Leaprosie, 294. Ben, or Behen, diminishes the Spleen, p. 103.
cures the Gout of the legs or feet 171. takes away Scars, 293. Morphew, 299.
Scurfe, 301, 302. Benzoin, Helps the Falling Sickness, p. 10. the Spasme, 17.
Dimnesse of sight 27. Pimples on the Nose, 46. Toothache, 53. Squinancy, 59.
sharpness of the throat, 61. Cough, 70. clears the voice, 71. is good against
pains in the sides, 73. resolves clotted milk, 90. is good in shaking
Fevers, 197. and in Ruptures 243. Bettonie, good against the Falling
sickness, p. 10. Melancholy, 12. Spasme 17. stanches bleeding at the nose,
45. helps the toothache, 54. spitting blood, 62. the Tisick, 65. spitting
Matter, 74. Vomitting. 83, 85. Belching, 89. helps digestions 91. removes
obstructions of the Liver, 92. cures the Dropsy, 97. diminishes the Spleen,
102. expells urine, 131. helps the suffocation of the Matrix, 146. the
Sciatica, 174. Ruptures, 243. and poisons, 247, 267. causes vomitting, 315.
Binde-weed, causes horrible dreams, p. 7. Birdlime, helps burns, p. 235.
Tetters and Ring-worms, 297. Birth-wort, vid. Aristolochia. Bitumen, helps
rheumes of the head, p. 12. Spots in the eyes, 23. Suffocation of the Matrix,
145. provoks terms, 147. Blites, loosen, p. 317. Bolearmonicke, restrains
falling of hair from the eyelids, p. 21. causes vomiting 86. Borax, takes away
scars, p. 293. Boxthorne and the juice, takes away sharpness of the eyes, p.
21. dimnesse of sight, 26. filth of the ears, 41. helps rotten gums, 57.
sharpness of the throat, 62. Rheumes of the Stomach, 84. the Jaundise, 95.
restraines excess of women's Terms. 154. helps the biting of a mad dog, 257.
Bramble, Heales the Scurfe, p. 14. retires eyes which stand too far forth of
the head 30. heals Ulcers, 49. stays watering of the gums, 56. helps
Inflammations of the Jaws, 60. panting and throbbing of the heart, 78. stays
vomiting, 83. Binds, 113. helps apostumes of the fundament, 120. stops bleeding
of Emeroids, 123. is good against the gravel of the Reins, 126. restrains
excess of women's terms, 154, 155. against the bites of Vipers, 248. dissolves
clotted milk, 271, helps the malignity of Meddow-Saffron, 272. Bran, draws
forth women's dugs, p. 79. helps the Belly-ach; 106. Inflammations, 200. bitings
of Vipers, 248. Brankursine, helps the Tisick, p. 65. Binds, 113. expels urine,
130, helps burns, 235. Members out of joint, 239. Ruptures, 242. Brass, the
scales helps sharpness of the eyes, p. 22. Ulcers and Rheumes of the eyes, 30,
35. Ulcers in other parts, 228, 233. and cicatriseth them 238. Brimstene, cures
bruised ears, p. 42. deafness, 43. shortness of breath, 67. Cough 71.
spitting of putrified matter, 74. Jaundise, 95. causes abortion, 160. cures the
Gout of the legs or feet, 171. Leprosy, 296. the Itch, 303. Bricks, cure the
Gout, p. 171. Brine, heals the Scurfe on the head, p. 14. Bloody Flux, 111.
falling of the fundament, 122. pissing of blood, 139. Sciatica, 175, corrosive
Ulcers. 228, 233 stinging and biting of venomous beasts 247, 253. and persons
who have swallowed Horse-leeches. 269. Briony white and black, heales
vertiginosities, and the appoplexy, p. 8. the Falling sickness, 10. Spasme,
17. Palsy, 18. Deafness 43, shortness of breath, 67. Cough 71. pains of the
sides, 73. increases milk 81. diminishes the spleen, 103. expells urine, 132.
cures the Gout of the legs, 171. Ulcers at the fingers ends, 181.
Inflammations, 200. Gangrenaes, 193. Ulcers which are filthy and salt, 230,
233. members out of joint, 240, draws out broken bones, 241. helps Ruptures,
243. the bitings of Vipers, 249. takes wrinckles and moles out of the face,
289, 292. keeps the body fair, 293. kills Tetters, and Ringwormes, 298. takes
away Morphew, 299 cures scabbines, 302. and purges phlegm 311. Brooklime, heals
the Ich of the Bladder, p. 138. Broom, cures the Squinancie, p. 59. expells
urine, 132. helps the Sciatica, 175. purges Melancholy, 314. Bucks-horne, helps
Ordure of the ears p. 42. Rheumes of the Stomach, 85. corrects the malignity of
Meddow-Saffron 272. Buglosse, profits against swoundings of the heart, p. 77.
causes abortion, 160. is good against shaking Feavors, 197. Anthonies fire,
205. Vipers-Buglosse, increases milk, p. 81. takes away pains of the sides,
193. cures the biting of Serpents, 252. Bull, the urine is profitable against
pains of the ears, p. 38. his gal cleanses the ears from filth, 41. takes
away noyses in the ears, 43. cures the Squinancy, 58. and Ulcers of the Genital
members, 143. Burnet, good for weak or cut sinews p. 19, 20. Inflammations of
the eyes, 31. against rhcume of the eyes, 35. Bur-docke, good against spitting
of blood, p. 63. and putrified matter, 74. Bur-reed, Profits against the
bitings and stingings of venomous beasts, p. 247. Butter, helps cut sinews, p.
20. Ulcers of the eyes, 38. Rheumes, 35. the Colic 104. is loosening, 115.
cures wounds in the bladder, 136. inflammations of the Matrix, 164. wounds in
the pellicles of the brain, 223. bitings of Serpents, 250. blisters, wheales,
and heat-pushes, 298. Butter-bur, helps corrosive, malign ulcers, p. 228, 229.
Butter-flower, vid. Crow-foot.
C.
CAckarell-fish, takes away Warts from the genitall member, p. 144. consumes
superfluous flesh, 225. cures corrosive Ulcers, 227. bitings of mad dogs, 257.
stings of Scorpions, 261. Cadmia, cures and incarnates salt, hollow Ulcers,
233. 237, 238. Calamarie-fish-shell, makes the teeth clean, p. 50. Sea-calfe's
curd, cures the Falling Sickness, p. 9. Calamine, heales Ulcers of the eyes,
p. 30. Calaminte, profitable against the Spasme, p. 16. worms in the ears,
44. difficulty of breath, 75. the Jaundise, 93. Belly-ach, 105. Worms, 117. to
expel Urine, 130, against Fevers, 197. Ruptures, 242. bitings of venomous
bealts, 250. 253. 263. drives away venomous beasts, 265. dissolves milk
coagulated in the stomach, 271. takes away scarres, 293. Caltraps, cure
Cancers, p. 49. putrified Gums, 57. inflammations of the jaws, 60. gravel in
the reins, 126. inflammation of any diseased part, 189. bitings of Vipers,
249. poison, 267. Cammels Hay, vid. Squinanth. Cammock, cures the Toothache, p.
52. viz. Rest-harrow. Cammomill, heales Fistulaes in the eyes, p. 29. Cancers,
49. obstructions of the Liver, 92. Jaundise, 94. wind in the guts, 116. gravel
in the reins, 125. expels urine, 131. provokes women's Terms, 151. is good
against bitings of Vipers, 248. Rose-Campions, cures the stinging of Scorpions,
p. 262. Canary-grasse, helps pissing with pain, p. 133. Capers and the Plant,
profitable against the Spasme, p. 15. Palsy, 17. Worms in the ears, 44.
Ulcers in the mouth, 48. Toothache, 52. diminishes the Spleen, 101. expels
urine, 130. hard lips of ulcers, 231. Caraway and the Seed, aids digestion, p.
91. expels urine, 130. Carline-thistle, cures the Dropsy, p. 96 kills worms,
116. helps the pain-pisse, 134. the biting of Shrew-mice, 256. is an Antidote
against poison, 267. Carobs, helps the Bloudy-flux, p. 109. Stinking deadly
Carrot, profitable against shortness of breath, p. 67. Cough, 71. 75. Fellons,
192. stays shedding of Hair, 284. heales morphew, 299. scabbinesse, 302.
Yellow Carrot, good against a cold, p. 70. expels urine, 132. provokes
menstrues, 150. causes abortion, 161. is helpful against venomous bites, 192.
259. Castorium, cures the Lethargy, p. 5. Spasme. 15. trembling of the Sinews,
18. aches of the same, 19. filth of the ears, 41. wind in the stomach, 88.
kills worms, 105. expels menstrues, 148. the afterbirth, 157. is an Antidote
against the biting of Cockatrices, 156. against Hemlock, 276. Cedar and the
Berries, helps the Spasme, p. 15. dimnesse of sight, 26. Worms in the ears,
p. 44. Toothache, 51. cause viciate teeth to fall out, 55. good against a Cold,
or Cough, 68. expels urine, 128. provoke Menstrues, 147 cure ruptures, 241. is
good against all poison and venomous beasts, 260. 264, 265. 267. kills Lice and
Nits, 287. Celandine, purges the brain, p. 4. helps dimnesse of sight, 27. the
Jaundise, 93. causes rough nails to fall off, 192. cures ulcers, 227. 233. and
the scurfe, 300. Centaury greater and lesser, profits against the Spasme, p.
16. aches of the sinews, 19. darkness of sight, 27. spitting of blood, 63.
shortness of breath, 66. Cough, 69. pains of the sides, 73. Worms, 106.
Purges the menstrues, 148. causes abortion, 159. eases gripings of the Matrix,
168. cures old inveterate ulcers, 229. ruptures, 242, and purges Choler, 309.
Ceterach, helps yexing, p. 89. and the Jaundise, 94. Chalcitis, cures
sharpness of the eyes, p. 22. blear-eyednesse, p. 36. stenches bleeding at the
nose, 46. cleanses rotten gums, 57. helps inflammations of the jaws, 60.
restraines the menstrues, 156. cures ulcers, 228. 231. Green mineral Chalk,
takes away pain in the ears, p. 38. Camelian-thistle, causes bleeding, p. 46.
helps the toothache, 53. causes viciate teeth to fall out, 55. diminishes the
spleen, 101. expels urine, 130. cures ulcers, 227. takes away red pimples, 291.
tetters, and ring-worms, 297. Cheese, helps inflammations of the eyes, p. 30.
binds 112. Chelidenie, good against dimnesse of sight, p. 27. Cherries and the
tree, is profitable against darkness of sight, p. 25. Coughs, 68. loosen, 114
help gravel in the reins, 125. expel urine, 128. break the stone in the
bladder, 138. Chervill, cures the Tisick, p. 65. provokes menstrues, 151.
causes abortion, 160. useful in pestilentiall Fevers, 197. Chestnuts, stay the
Bloudy-flux, p. 108. is an Antidote against Meddow-Saffron, 272. Earth of Chio,
gives the face a luster, p. 288. causes a good color, 288. takes wrinckles
and moles out of the face, 289. Christs-thorne, cures a Cough, p. 68.
Bloudy-flux, 107. expels urine, 128. preserves against ven emous beasts, 245.
Ciches, help the scurfe of the head, p. 13. Jaundise, 93. Dropsy, 96. loosen,
115. expels urine, 129. remove inflammations of the genitals, 142. cause
abortion, 159. prevent Gangrenas, 192. cause a good color, 288. cure tetters,
and ring-wormes, 297. take away warts, 304. Cimolian-earth, heales swellings
behind the ears, 41. allayes inflammations of the genitals, 142. cure fellons,
192. Cinnaber, stenches bleeding of wounds, p. 221. helps burnings. 236.
Cinnamon, good against Catharres, p. 12. dimnesse of sight, 25. Cough, 67.
Dropsy, 95. expels urine, 127. provokes menstrues, 147. against falling of the
Matrix, 167. poisons, and venomous beasts, 244. 247. 265. takes away Sunspots
out of the face, 290. and freckles, 291. Cinnamomum, helps dimnesse of fight,
p. 25. expels urine, 127. provokes menstrues, 147. helps the stings of venomous
beasts, 244. Cinquefoile, or five-leaved grass, good against the
Falling Sickness, p. 10. Cancer in the mouth, 49. Toothache, 54. sharpness of
the throat, 61. maladies of the breast, 77. Jaundies, 94. binds, 113. cures
impostumes of the fundament, 120. Sciatica, 174. Gout in the hands, 175. ulcers
on the fingers ends, 181. falling of the Guts, 193. Quartan Fevers, 185, and
others, 186 Anthonies fire, 205. bleeding of wounds, 221. Fistulaes, 231. all
kind of poisons, 265. 275. Scurfe, 301. Cyprus and the Apples, allayes
inflammations of the eyes, p. 30. is profitable against Noli me tangere, 46.
expels urine, 128. cause rough nails to fall off, 192. help burstings, 193.
Carbuncles, 200. Holy Fire, 193. stinging of venomous beasts, 260. 263.
Tetters, and Ringwormes, 296. Citrons, sweeten the breath, p. 49. Clarie, takes
spots and blemishes out of the eyes, p. 24. causes venery, 140. draws
splinters out of wounds, 224. Clavers, heal venomous stinging, p. 259.
Clote-burre, good against the Toothache, p. 54. paine-pisse, 134. Sciatica,
174. Kybes, 179. inveterate ulcers, 229. dislocations, 239. bitings of Vipers,
249. Cobwebs, stanch bleeding, p. 221. allayes inflammations of Ulcers, 237.
Cocks-gizerne, good against Fluxes, p. 118. the broth against the Gout, 175.
and old Fevers, 185. Cockles, loosen, p. 115. Cole-worts, purge the brain, p.
4. prevent drunkenness, 12. help the trembling of the Sinews, 18. weakness
of sight, 34. clear the voice, 72. good against hardness of the Spleen, 99.
both bind and loosen according as they are boiled, 112. 115. kill worms, 117.
expels urine, 129. and menstrues, 148. hinder conception, 161. are profitable
against the Gout, 169. 175. Gangrenas, 193. Holy Fire, 204. filthy Ulcers, 232.
burns, 235. biting of Vipers, 248. stays shedding of hair, 283. take away
freckles, 291. Colis-foot, good against impostumes of the Lungs, p. 65. Cough,
68. difficulty of breath, 75. expels dead Children, 163. helps Pains of the
sides, 193. inflammations, 189. Holy fire, 205. Coloquintida, purges the head,
p. 5. is profitable against the Palsy, 18. Toothache, 54. Colic, 104.
Sciatica, 175. Columbine, good for persons which spit blood, p. 64. Comfrie,
good against the Spasme, p. 17. spitting of blood, 63. inflammations of the
fundament, 121. and persons which are bursten, 234. Coriander and the Seed,
kills Worms, p. 117. augments Sperme, 140. allayes inflammations of the
Genitalls, 142. is good against Carbuncles, 201. Holy fire, 205. and Ulcers,
228. Corn-flag, causes venery, p. 140. purges the menstrues, 152. draws
splinters out of wounds, 224. Corrall, takes scarres out of the eyes, p. 24.
helps Rheumes, 35. spitting of blood, 64. incarnates hollow ulcers, 237.
Corraline: helps the gout of the legs, or feet, p. 170. Costus, profits
against the Spasme, p 7 15. pain in the sides, 73. expels urine, 127.
increases Venery, 139. provokes menstrues, 147. helps the biting of Vipers,
247. take moles out of the face, 289. Sunne-spots, 290. and Freckles, 291.
Cotten-weed, good against Belly-ach, and worms, p. 106. Couch-grasse, kills
worms, p. 107. help pain-pisse, 134. breaks stones in the bladder, 138.
Coventric-bells, provoke menstrues, p. 152. Wild-Cowcumbers, profitable against
the Headache, p. 3. pains in the ears, 39. Toothache, 54. Squinancy, 59.
shortness of breath, 67. swoundings of the heart, 77. Jaundise, 94. Sciatica,
175. Fellons, 192. Leprosy, 295. Tetters, and Ring-worms, 298. Morphew, 299.
purge Choler, 309. Garden-Cowcumbers, expel urine, p. 129. heal ulcers of
the bladder, 136. oppose the malignity of Cantharides, and Henbane, 270. 273.
River-Crabs, or Crey-fish, good against the Tisick, p. 64. clefts and chaps of
the fundament, 119. Kybes, 179. chaps of the feet, 180. against the bitings of
Serpents, mad Dogs, etc. 249. 257. 259. 261. 264. 267. Cramp-fish, good
against the Headache, p. 2. Cresses several kinds, profit against Apostumes
behind the Ears, p. 40. Cough, 69. spitting putrified matter, 74. 76.
inflammations of Women's Dugs, 79. vomiting, 83. Hickop, 88. Jaundise, 93.
Worms, 117. Strangury, 135. causes Venery, 140. cures the Sciatica, 172.
Carbuncles, 201. Ulcers, 236. the biting and stinging of venomous Beasts, 250.
264. cures the malignity of Henbane, 273. Crow-foot, or Butter-flower, causes
sneesing, p. 7. 47. helps the Toothache, 52. causes viciate teeth to fall out,
55. heales Kybes, 179. causes rough nails to fall off, 192. takes away
skarres, 293. cures the scurfe, 302. warts, 304. and corns, 305. Cuckow-pinte,
helps the Gout in the legs or feet, p. 170. Cummin, stanches bleeding at the
nose, p. 45. profits against difficulty of breath, 75. Hickop, 89. worms, 106.
wind in the guts, 116, gravel in the reins, 125. Strangury, 135. pissing of
blood, 138. inflammations of the genitals, 142. restraines menstrues, 155.
Cuttle-fish, is profitable against sharpness of the eyes, p. 22. web in the
eye, 28. makes teeth clean, 50. loosen, 115. heal burns, 234.
D.
DAffodills, profitable against aches of the Sinews, p. 19. cut sinews. 20.
causes vomiting, 86. expels urine, 129. help the Gout in the hands, 178. draw
splinters out of Wounds, 224. cures Ulcers, 233. burns, 236. dislocations,
240. take moles out of the face, 289. freckles, 292. help the Leprosy, 295.
Morphew, 299. Darnell, binds, p. 113. helps persons who cannot keep their
water, 138. restraines excess of menstrues, 155. cause conception, 163. stanch
bleeding of a wound, 221. profit against ulcers, 227. and the scurfe, 302.
Dates, and the Tree, mittigate Headache, p. 5. prevent vomiting, 82. stay the
Bloudy-flux, 108. heal Emeroids, 123. expel urine, 128. restrain menstrues,
153. take superfluous flesh out of wounds, 224. heal ulcers, 226. color hair
black, 286. Devills-bit, causes ugly Dreams, p. 7. heales Fellons, 192.
draws splinters out of wounds, 224. purge Choler, 308. Dill, and the Seed,
increases milk, 81. helps the Hickop, 89. worms, 106. bind, 113. expel wind
out of the guts, 116. profit against Apostumes of the fundament, 120. expel
urine, 130. diminish Venery, 141. helps pains and gripings of the matrix, 168.
Dittander, helps the toothache, p. 52. diminishes the Spleen, 101. Dittanie,
causes abortion, p. 159. expels dead Children, 163. heales venemed wounds, 222.
246. draws splinters out of wounds, 224. drives away venomous beasts, 265.
Dodder, cures melancholy, p. 12. purges phlegm, 311. Dogs-dung, binds, 112.
the Liver is good against the biting of a mad Dog, 25. Doves-foot, helps wind
in the Matrix, p 166. Gum-Dragagant, or Tragacantha, profits against Rheumes of
the head, p. 13. sharpness of the throat, 61. Cough, 69. pain in the reins,
124. Dragons great and small, cure Rheumes of the head, p. 13. Spasm, 15. cut
sinews, 20. spots in the eyes, 24. dimnesse of sight, 27. pains in the ears,
38. Noli me tangere, 46. Cough, 69. difficulty of breathing, 74. expel urine,
129. augment Venery, 139. cause abortion, 159. help malign ulcers, 227. 229,
230. Ruptures, 242. Anthonies fire, 294.
E
EAgle, the Gall mittigates sharpness of the Eyelids, p. 22. Ebonie,
profitable against dimnesse of sight, p. 26. rheumes of the eyes, 34. Eggs,
good against pains in the eyes, p. 32. spitting of blood, 62. Apostumes of the
sundament, 120. corrects Coriander, 277. cleares Sun-burning, 287. Eglantine,
cures the Bloody Flux, p. 108. Egrimonie, removes obstructions of the Liver, p.
92. profits against the Bloudy-flux, 110. cicatriseth ulcers, 238. cures the
biting of Serpents, 252. is an Antidote against Mandragore, 278. Elder,
mollifies hardness, p. 166. helps the Gout of the legs and feet, 171. Burns,
236. bitings of Vipers, 249. and Dogs, 258. Eleomelie, helps aches of the
sinews, p. 18. Elicampane, good against the Spasme, p. 15. Cough, 67. expels
urine, 128. provokes menstrues, 147. profits against the Gout of the legs, and
feet, 171. Ruptures, 241. biting and stinging of venomous beasts, 244. Elm,
good for broken bones, p. 240. corrects Ceruse, 280. beautifies the face 292.
cures scabbinesse, 301. Emerie, stays watering of the gums, p. 57. Endive,
allayes inflammations of the eyes, p. 31. Euphorbium, takes away the pin or
web out of the eye, p. 33. cures the Sciatica, 174. draws out broken bones,
241. helps the biting of Serpents, or Aspes, p. 251.
F
FEarne, diminishes the Spleen, p. 103. kills worms, 117. Fennel, garden and
wild, is profitable against dimnesse of sight, p. 26. increases milk, 81.
helps inflammations of the stomach, 88. Jaundies, 93. binds, 113. mittigates
pain in the Reins, 124. expels urine, 131. voydes the stone of the bladder,
137. provokes menstrues, 150. is good for women in labor, 164. and persons
bitten with venomous beasts, 251. 257. Fenugreek, heales the scurfe on the
head, p. 13. scarres in the eyes, 25. wind in the guts, 115. mollifies
hardnesses, and cures ulcers in the secret parts, 165. 166. cleanses the head
from dandriffe, 285. Ferula, or Fennell-gyant, mittigates headache, p. 5.
stanches bleeding at the nose, 45. helps spitting of blood, 62. Rheumes of the
stomach, 85. belly-ach, 105. biting of Vipers, 249. the malignity of
meddow-saffron, 272. Feverfew, good against shortness of breath, p. 66.
gravel in the Reins, 126 inflammations of the matrix, 165. hardness of
Women's natural parts, 166. Holy fire, 205. Figgs and the Tree, help Rheumes
of the head, p. 13. Spasme, 15. aches of the sinews, 19. itch of the eyelids,
23. noise of the ears, 43. Toothache, 51. inflammation of the jaws, 60. the
Tisick, 64. shortness of breath, 65. cough, 68. Rheumes of the stomach, 84.
clotted milk, or blood, 89. Dropsy, 97. diminish the spleen, 101. loosen,
114. prevent Gangrenaes, 192. help venom, 259. 273. take away red pimples,
290. Filbirds, good against Rheumes of the head, p. 12. Cough, 68. Five-leaved
grass, vid. Cinque-foile. Tode-flax, helps inflammations of the Lungs, p. 73.
Jaundise, 95. provokes menstrues, 52. Fleawort, profits against Headache, p. 4.
Falling Sickness, 10. spasme, 17. Apostumes behind the ears, 41. ordure in
the ears, 42, worms in the ears, 44. Jaundise, 94. worms in the belly, 106.
strangury, 135. provokes menstrues, 151. causes abortion, 160. dissolves
clottered milk, or blood, 271. Flin^s, stop the bloody flux, p. 109. bind,
111. cure ulcers in the guts, 118. and in the natural parts of women, 165.
Flos salis, takes blemishes out of the eyes, p. 24. helps dimnesse of sight,
27. 34. ulcers in the secret parts, 142. and elsewhere, 230. Flower-de-luce of
Illyria, profitable against pains in the head, p. 1. to provoke sleep, 6. help
Rheumes of the head, 12. Spasme, 14. Cough, 67. excrements difficult to spit,
76. inflammations of the Spleen, 99. shedding seed, 141. provokes menstrues,
146. heals wounds, 222. ulcers, 232. stinging and biting of venomous beasts,
244. takes away red pimples and freckles, 290. 291. Fork-fish, helps the
Toothache. p. 51. causes viciate teeth to fall out, 55. Foxes grease, eases
pains of the ears, p. 37. Frankincense and the tree, heales scurfe on the
head, p. 13. sharpness of the eyes, 21. dimnesse of sight, 26. ulcers in the
eyes, 28. Rheumes of the eyes, 34. filth of the ears, 41. bleeding at the
nose, 45. inflammations of duggs, 78. ulcers in the fundament, 119. restrains
menstrues, 153. heales kybes, 178. Apostumes on the roots of the nails, 181
bleeding of wounds, 221. burns, 234. hollow ulcers, 237. is a remedy against
the drinking of Cantharides, 270. cures tetters and ring-wormes, 297. Froggs,
mittigate Toothache, p. 51. inflammation of the jaws, 59. stops bleeding of
wounds, 221. biting of Serpents and Aspes, 250. helps persons who have drunk
Salamanders, 271. stays shedding of hair, 282. Fullers earth, vid. Cimolian
earth. Fullers-thistle. good against quartaine fevers, p. 185. vid. Teasell.
G
GAlbanum, helps vertiginosities, p. 8. the spasme, 15, 16. aches of the
sinews, 19. Toothache, 53. shortness of breath, 66. cough, 70. pains of the
sides, 73. paine-pisse, 134. provokes menstrues, 150. causes abortion, 160.
expels dead children, 163. cures ruptures, 243. bitings of Vipers, 247. of
Shrew-mice, 255. stinging of Scorpions, 263. drives away all venomous beasts,
265. is a remedy against poison, 275. takes away freckles, 292. Gallingall,
heals Cancers in the mouth, p. 48. stays watering of the gums, 56. provokes
menstrues, 146. Galls, stays watering of the Gums, 56. helps rheumes of the
stomach, 84. bloudy-flux, 108. excess of menstrues, 153. falling of the
matrix, 167. consumes superfluous flesh, 224. color hair black, 286. Garlic,
cures the scurfe of the head, p. 13. Toothache, 52. cough, 69. Dropsy, 96.
worms, 116. expel urine, 129. menstrues, 149. helps the biting of Vipers,
249. of Serpents, 253. of mad Dogs, 257. stays shedding of hair, 283.
cleanses the head from Dandriff, 285. Garum, stops the bloudy-flux, p. 109.
Gentian, good against the Spasme, p. 16. inflammations of the eyes, 31. pains
of the sides, 72. vomitting, 83. diminishes the spleen, 101. causes abortion,
159. helps Fistulaes, 231, great bruises, 241. biting and stinging of venomous
beasts, 246. 255. 263. Germander, good against the Spasme, p. 17. diminishes
the spleen, 36. helps a cough, 68. excrements difficult to spit, 76.
inflammations of the precordiall parts, 78. gripings of the stomach, 87.
Dropsy, 97. hardness of the spleen, 99. diminishes the spleen; 102. cures the
Bloudy-flux, 111. paine-pisse, 134. provokes menstrues, 151. causes abortion,
160. profits against old inveterate, ulcers, 229. ruptures, 243. and the biting
and stinging of venomous beasts, p. 246. 251. Ginger, takes blemishes out of
the eyes, p. 24. helps digestion, 90. Gith, profitable against headache, p. 3.
dropping of the nose, 47. Toothach, 53. shortness of breath, 66. increases
milk, 81. helps the Jaundise, 94. kills worms, 116. expels urine, 131.
menstrues, 150. drives away venomous beasts, 265. takes away freckles, 292.
Stinking Gladdon, profits against the Spasme, p. 17. diminishes the spleen, 102
expels urine, 131. helps the Strangury, 136. Sciatica, 174. inflammations 189.
draws splinters out of wounds, 224. broken bones, 241. is useful in ruptures,
243. Glanx, increases milk, p. 81. Goat, the gall helps purblinde persons,
p. 32. warts on the fundament, 122. the urine helps the Dropsy, 96. the suet,
the Bloudy-flux, 110. as also the blood, 114. and is a preservative against
poison, 274. the dung cures Apostumes behind the ears, 40. spitting of blood,
62. pains in the sides, 72. provokes menstrues, 148. helps the Gout, 169.
stenches bleeding of wounds, 221. Goats-beard, restraines the menstrues, p.
154. Goose, the grease, provokes menstrues, p. 148. eases pains and gripings
of the matrix, 167. persons who have drunk Cantharides, 270. Goose-grease,
helps pains in the ears, p. 39. Gourds, profitable against inflammations of
the brain, p. 11. of the eyes, 31. pain in the ears, 38. Gout in the legs,
170. Grains of Paradise, good against the Falling Sickness, p. 8. Spasme 14.
cough, 67. worms and belly-ach, 105. 116. pains in the reins, 124. expel
urine, 127. break stones in the bladder, 137. profit against the Sciatica,
172. ruptures, 241. stinging and biting of venomous beasts, 244. 255. 261.
Grapes, purge the brain, p. 5. good against a Cough, 71. inflammations of
duggs, 79. draw forth duggs, 80. profit against Rheumes of the stomach, 85.
Bloudy-flux, 111. pains in the reins, 124. gravel in the reins, 126. ulcers
in the bladder, 136. excess of menstrues, 156. Gromell, expels urine, p. 131.
breaks the stone in the bladder, 138. Grasse-hoppers, profit against the
painpisse, p. 133. Groundsell, helps aches in the sinews, p. 19. and cut
sinews, 20. pains of the stomach, 87. inflammations of the fundament, 121.
and of the Genitalls, 142. Gudgeons, loosen, p. 115. help the bitings of mad
dogs, 258. Gum-Lac, profits against the Falling Sickness, p. 8. blemishes of
the eyes, 23 weakness of sight, 33. rotten putrified gums, 57. shortness of
breath, 67. expels menstrues, 147.
H
HAlcioniuns, makes teeth clean, p. 50 diminishes the spleen, 103. Hare, the
curd, profitable against the Falling Sickness, p. 8. Rheumes of the stomach,
84. bloudy-flux. 109. looseness, 111. excess of menstrues, 154. helps
conception, 163. bitings of Vipers, 248. poisons, 266. 273. blood of Hares
takes blemishes and freckles out of the face, 291. the brains help trembling
of the sinews, 18. Harts-horne, heales ulcers of the eyes, p. 28. Rheumes, 35.
make Teeth clean, 50. helps spitting of blood, 62. the Jaundise, 92.
Bloudy-flux, 109. painepisse, 133. excess of menstrues, 154. biting of Vipers,
248. drives away venomous beasts, 264. Hart's-tongue, stays the Bloudy-flux, p.
109. binds, 113. is profitable against the biting of Serpents and Aspes, 251.
Haver-grasse, heales hollow ulcers of the eyes, p. 29. Hawk-weed, helps
gripings of the stomach, p. 87. inflammations of the same, 90. bitings and
stingings of Serpents, Aspes, and Scorpions, 251. 262. Hawthorne and the Hawes,
stay the Bloudy-flux, p. 108. excess of menstrues, 153. draws splinters out
of wounds, 224. Heath, is profitable against the biting and stinging of
venomous beasts, p. 245. Hellebore white and black, causes sneesing, p. 7. is
good against the Falling Sickness, 10. melancholy, 12. dazeling of the eyes,
36. deafness of the ears, 43. provoke menstrues, 152. help the Gout, 178.
poisons, 266. Leprosy, 295. Tetters, and Ring-worms, 296. Hemlock, puts away
milk, p. 80. hinder women's duggs from growing, 82. hinder Venery, 141. cure
Holy fire, 205, and ulcers, 228. Hemp, good against pains of the ears, p. 39.
hinders Venery, 141. takes away knobs and nodosities of the joints, 178.
Her-bane, provokes sleep, p. 6. helps Rheumes of the head, 13. inflammations of
the eyes, 31. Rheumes of the eyes, 35. pains of the ears, 39. Toothach, 54.
Cough, 70. wind in the guts, 115. inflammations of the genitalls, 143. excess
of menstrues, 156. pains and gripings of the matrix, 168. Gout, 170. Fevers,
196. bleeding of wounds, 221. Herbe-mastick, helps ulcers, p. 227.
Herbe-patience, or sharp-pointed Dock, is good against Apostumes, p. 40.
restraines menstrues, 154. causes rough nails to fall off, 192. helps tetters
and ring-worms, 297. scabbinesse, 302. Hind, the Gall, good against sharpness
of the eyes, p. 22. the curd resolves milk, or blood clotted in the stomach,
89. Hippophestus, profits against the Falling Sickness, p. 10. aches of
sinews, 19 difficulty of breath, 75. Hisope, helps Rheumes of the head, p. 13.
Apostumes behind the ears, 40. Toothache, 53. squinancie, 59. shortness of
breath, 65, 66. Cough, 69. 75. Dropsy, 96. expellurine, 130. causes a good
color, 288. Hog, the gall, good for ulcers in the ears, p. 43. the heel
good for bellyach, and worms, 107. the grease or Lard good against Plurisies,
72. Apostumes of the fundament, 120. ulcers, 230. burns, 234. Hedge-hogs, help
aches of the sinews, p. 19. Dropsy, 95. loosen, 114. expel urine, 129. take
away superfluous flesh, 224. stay shedding of hair, 282. Sea-holly, is
profitable against the Falling Sickness, p. 9. Spasme, 16. obstructions of the
Liver, 92. Belly-ach, and worms, 105. expel urine, 130. preserve against
venomous wounds, 245. and poison, 266. Holly-rose, good against the
bloudy-flux, p. 10. excess of menstrues, 153. falling of the matrix, 167.
ulcers, 226. 229. Burns, 234. Honey, profitable against the Falling Sickness,
p. 10. Pin and Web in the eye, 33. pains in the ears, 38. noise in the ears,
43. Squinancy, 58. inflammation of the jaws, 59. difficulty of breathing, 66.
Cough, 68. 71. inflammation of the Lungs, 73. ulcers in the reins, 126. expels
urine, 129. helps the Gout of the hands and joints, 178. filthy malign ulcers,
230. 233. 237. the biting and stinging of venomous beasts, 245. 250.
Nightshade, 272. Henbane, 273, Apium risus, Mandragore, and Tad-stooles, 278.
Horse, the hoof, profits against the Falling Sickness, p. 9. the curd, helps
Rheumes in the stomach, 84. milk and blood clotted in the stomach, 89.
Bloudy-flux, 109. Horse-foote, helps the Cough, p. 71. sharpness of the
breast, 71. takes wrincles out of the face, 289. Horse-taile, is profitable
against the Cough, p. 70. difficulty of breath, 75. Bloudy-flux, 110. wounds in
the guts, 118. wounds in the bladder, 136. expel urine, 132. restraines
menstrues, 155. help falling of the Guts, 193. 242. Horse-tongue, mittigates
the Headache, p. 3, 4. Hore-hound, good against dimnesse of sight, p. 27.
pains in the ears, 39. Tisick, 65. shortness of breath, 66. Cough, 70.
pains in the sides, 73. excrements crements difficult to spit, 76. Jaundise,
94. Apostumes of the fundament, 120. expells the afterbirth, 157. dead
children, 163. helps ulcers growing on the fingers ends, 181. and elsewhere,
228. 233. biting of Serpents, 251. Water-Adder, 254. and of mad dogs, 258.
Hounds-tongue, helps Burns, p. 236. the biting of dogs, 258. the shedding of
hair, 283. Housleeke, helps the headache, p. 4, inflammations of the eyes, 31.
Bleareyednesse, 36. Bloudy-flux, 110. worms, 117. excess of menstrues, 156.
Gout of the legs and feet, 170. ulcers, 228.
I
IAcynth, helps Rheumes of the stomach, p. 85. the Jaundise, 94. binds, 114.
expels urine, 132. Idea, stays the Bloudy-flux, p. 109. binds, 113.
restraines the menstrues, 155 heales wounds, 220. Jet, vid. Stone Gagates.
Indian-leafe, expels urine, p. 127. allayes inflammations, 200. St. John's Wort,
helps the Spasme, p. 17. expels urine, 131, provokes menstrues, 152. profits
against the Sciatica, 174. tertian fevers, 184. and quartaines, 185. 197.
burns, 235. Iron-rust, is good against sharpness of the eyes, p. 22. watering
of the gums, 57. impostumes of the fundament, 110. excess of menstrues, 156.
hinder conception, 162. is profitable against the Gout, 171. ulcers on the
fingers ends, 181. the malignity of Aconitum, 274. shedding of hair, 284.
scailes of Iron diminish the spleen, 103. Ivy and the berries, profit against
Headache, p. 2. pains of the ears, 39. noise in the ears, 43. ulcers of the
nose, 46. stench of the same, 47. Toothach, 53. Spleen, 101. Bloudy-flux, 111.
provoke menstrues, 149. cause abortion, 159. hinder conception, 162. helps
ulcers, 227. 233. burns, 235. poison, 259. 267. causes shedding of the hair,
284. Juniper and the berries, good against the Spasme, p. 15. Tisick, 64.
Cough, 68. suffocation of the matrix, 145. Ruptures, 241. biting of Vipers,
245. drives away venomous beasts, 264. cures scabbinesse, 301. Ivorie, helps
ulcers on the fingers ends, p. 180, 181.
K
KNeebolme, profitable against the Headache, p. 3. expels urine, 131. voyds the
stone of the bladder, 138. provokes menstrues, 151. Knot-grasse, helps pains
in the ears, p. 39. filth in the ears, 42. spitting of blood, 63. griping of
the Stomach, 88. binds, 113. profits against the Strangury, 136. ulcers in the
secret parts, 142 excess of menstrues, 155. fevers, 196. inflammations, 189.
Holy fire, 205. corrosive ulcers, 228. biting of venomous beasts, 247.
L
LAbdanum, good against the Falling Sickness, p. 10. pains in the ears, 37.
Cough, 68. Bloudy-flux, 108. expels urine, 128. mollifies, 166. stays shedding
of hair, 282. Labruske, helps Cancers in the mouth, p. 49. putrified gums, 57.
spitting of blood, 64. inflammations of the Stomach, 88. binds, 114. heales
clefts in the fundament, 119. ulcers of the genitals, 143. excess of
menstrues, 156. ulcers on the singers ends, 181. inflammations of wounds, 223.
Ladies Bed-Jraw, increase Venery, p. 140. stay bleeding of wounds, 221. heales
burns, 236. Ladies-navell, good against filth of the ears, p. 42. Larkes,
help the Colic, p. 104. Larkes-spur, helps the stinging of Scorpions, p. 261.
Laser, helps aches of the sinews, p. 19 vid. Asa-faetida. Laserwort,
antidotary against poison, p. 266. is good for persons which have swallowed
Horse-leeches, 269. French Lavender, good against shortness of breath, p, 66.
Cough, 69. Spurge-Laurell, causes sneezing, p. 7. helps inflammations of the
Stomach, 88. belly-ach, and worms, 107. expels urine, 132. purges menstrues,
152. and phlegm, 311. Lead, helps Rheumes of the eyes, p. 35. clefts in the
fundament, 119. ulcers in the same, 120. Apostumes in the same, 120. Emeroids,
123. consumes superfluous flesh, 225. stinging of venomous beasts, 256. Leekes,
profitable against pains in the ears, p. 38. noise of the ears, 44. bleeding
at the nose, 45. spitting blood, 63. Tisick, 65. excrements hard to spit, 76.
malladies of the breast, 77. expel urine, 129. increase Venery, 140. provoke
menstrues, 149. help Carbuncles, 201. stinging and biting of venomous beasts,
245. 148. 255. take pock-holes and scarres out of the face, 290. Lees of Oil,
help the Toothache, p. 51. cause viciate teeth to fall out, 55. good against
the Dropsy, 96. clefts of the fundament, 119. Gout of the legs and feet, 168.
Lees of Wine, take skarres out of the eyes, p. 25. cure dimnesse of sight, 27.
drives milk out of the breast, 82. binds, 114. restrain menstrues, 156 cause
rough nails to fall off, 192. color hair black, 286. Lemnian earth, helps
the Bloudy-flux, p. 111. the biting and stinging of venomous beasts, 247.
poison, 267. Lentils, cause horrible dreams, p. 7. resolve curdled milk, ^0.
help turnings of the Stomach, 83. ^inde, 112. good against the Gout, 169.
Kybes, 179. Gangrena, 193. Holy fire, 204. Lettice, provokes sleep, p. 6.
takes blemishes out of the eyes, 24. helps dimnesse of sight, 27. increases
milk, 81. good against vomiting, 83. loosens, 115. causes chastity, 141.
purges menstrues, 149. profits against burns, 235. stinging and biting of
venomous beasts, 254. 259. 262. Wood-lice, good against pains in the ears, p.
38. squinancie, 58. Jaundise, 92. paine-pisse, 133. Licium, vid. Juice of
Box-thorne. Lillies, help the scurfe of the head, p. 14. aches of the sinews,
19. cut sinews, 20. inflammations of the genitals, 142, provoke menstrues,
151. mollify, 166. good against Ulcers, 229. Burns, 236. Dandriffe on the
head, 285. Leprosy, 295. Water Lillies, good against headache, p. 4. Rheumes
of the Stomach, 85. pains of the Stomach, 87. diminish the spleen, 102. stay
the Bloudy-flux, 110. losing of the seed, 141. menstrues, 155. shedding of
hair, 283. helps Anthonies fire, 295. Lime, cicatriceth ulcers, p. 238.
Lin-seed, good against Apostumes behind the ears, p. 40. Cough, 68. belly-ach
and worms, 107. increases Venery, 139. purges menstrues, 148. allayes
gripings of the matrix, 167. causes rough nails to fall off, 181. is good
against ulcers, 227. takes away Sun-spots, 291. Lions-leafe, helps the
Sciatica, p. 174. biting of Serpents, and Aspes, 251. Liquorice, takes the web
out of the eye, p. 28. is profitable against Cancers in the mouth, 48
sharpness of the throat, 61, of the breast, 71. all malladies of the breast,
77. inflammation of the Stomach, 88. obstructions of the Liver, 92. pains of
the reins, 125. Liriconfancie, good against inflammations of women's duggs, p.
79. burns, 235. Lithargie, consumes superfluous flesh, p. 225. cicatriseth
ulcers, 238. Liverwort, cures the Jaundise, p. 94. inflammations, 189. bleeding
of wounds, 221. Lizard, mittigates Toothache, p. 52. draws splinters out of
wounds, 223. helps the stinging of Scorpions, 261. Lote-tree, colors hair
yellow, p. 286. is good against Morphew, 299. and scurfe, 301. Lovage, expels
wind out of the Stomach, p. 88. help digestion, 90. profits against belly-ach,
and worms, 106. expels urine, 130. provokes menstrues, 150 is profitable
against the biting and stinging of venomous beasts, 246. Lupines, profitable
against hardness of the spleen, p. 99. worms, 117. expels urine, 129. purges
menstrues, 148. is good against inflammations, 188. Carbuncles, 201. makes the
face smooth, 288. helps Leprosy, 294.
M
MAcer, helps the Bloudy-flux, p. 107. Madir, good against the Palsy, p. 18.
Jaundise, 94. diminish the spleen, 102. expel urine, 131. purge menstrues,
151. expel the afterbirth, 158. cause abortion, 160. help the Sciatica, 173.
biting of Vipers, 249. Leprosy, 295. Mad-wort, helps the Hickop, p. 89. biting
of mad Dogs, 258. blemishes caused by the Sun, 291. Mallows, profit against
the scurfe, p. 13. ulcers in the eyes, 29. increase milk, 81. loosen, 115.
help pain-pisse, 133. mollify, 166. good against Holy fire, 204. burns, 234.
stinging of Waspes, 264. drinking of Horse-leeches, 270. Lime, or Arsenicke,
281. Dandriffe, 285. Marsh-mallowes, profitable against trembling of the
sinews, p. 18. aches of the sinews, 19. Apostumes behind the ears, 41.
Toothache, 54. spitting of blood, 63. inflammations of the Dugs, 79.
Bloudy-flux, 109. bind, 113. good against inflammations of the fundament, 121.
Stone and gravel in the reins, 126. paine-pisse, 134. helps women in Labor,
164. inflammations of the matrix, 165. Sciatica, 172. burns, 235. ruptures,
243. stinging of Waspes, 264. Leprosy, 295. Mandragore, and the Apples,
provoke sleep, p. 6. and 7. good against inflammation of the eyes, 31. provoke
menstrues, 152, cause abortion, 160. helps pains and gripings of the matrix,
168. Gout of the hands and joints, 175. inflammations, 189. Holy fire, 205.
biting of Serpents, and Aspes, 252. purges melancholy, 313. Serpentine Marble,
helps pains in the head, p. 4. biting of Serpents, and Aspes, 252. Marjerome,
good against the Spasme, p. 15. aches of the sinews, 19. inflammations of the
eyelids, 22. Dropsy, 97 Paine-pisse, 133. provokes menstrues, 150. is
profitable against dislocations, 239. stings of Scorpions, 262. Marigolds,
helps the Jaundise, p. 95. Marrow, loosens, p. 115. incarnates hollow ulcers,
237. corrects the malignity of Poppie, 275. Mastick, and the Tree, sweetens the
breath, p. 49. fastens loose teeth, 55. helps the Cough, 68. Bloody Flux, 107.
falling of the fundament, 121. expels urine, 128. restraines excess of
menstrues, 154. is good against ulcers, 226. makes the face smooth, 287. kills
Tetters and Ring-worms, 296. Maudlein, expels urine, p. 131. mollifies hard
places, 166. Mayden-haire black and white, helps scurfe on the head, p. 14.
spitting of blood, 64. shortness of breath, 67. 75. 76. Rheumes of the
Stomach, 86. 91. Jaundise, 94. Dropsy, 96. opens the Spleen, 99. diminishes
the Spleen, 103. binds, 114. good against the Stone, and the gravel in the
reins, 126. pain-pisse, 135. Stone in the bladder, 137. excites the menstrues,
152. expel the afterbirth, 158. helps the biting of Serpents, and Aspes, 252.
Wheate-meale, is good against rheums falling upon the sinews, p. 18. spitting
of blood, 62. Cough, 68. biting and stinging of beasts, 245. Medlers, cure the
Bloudy-flux, p. 109. Melian-earth, takes away blemishes caused by the Sun, p.
291. help scabbinesse, 303. Melilot, profitable against the headache, p. 4.
scurfe on the head, 14. dimnesse of sight, 27. inflammation of the eyes, 31.
dazzling of the eyes, 36. pains in the ears, 39. pains of the Stomach, 86.
inflammations of the fundament, 121. and of the matrix, 165. Mercury, takes
away warts on the genitall members, p. 144. purges Choler, 309. helps the
Dropsy, 316. Mice, good against the stinging of Scorpions, p. 262. their dung,
voyds the Stone in the bladder, 137. Miller-graine, good against the belly-ach,
and worms, p. 106. Milk of Women and Kine, helps fresh wounds in the eyes, p.
28. inflammations of the jaws, 59. sharpness of the throat, 61. gripings of
the Stomach, 87. loosens, 115. heal ulcers in the reins, 126. and in the
bladder, 136. Gout of the legs and feet, 169. Fistulaes, 231. is good against
the malignity of Henbane, 273. of Apium risus, 278. of Ceruse, 280. of
Quicksilver, 281. of Lime, and Arsenick, 281. blisters, wheales, and heat
pushes, 298. Milkwort, increates milk abundantly, p. 81. Minte, garden, wild
and water, mittigates the headache, p. 2. pains of the ears, 39. is
profitable against the sharpness of the tongue, 50. spitting of blood, 63.
settling of milk in the breast 82. Hickop, 89. increases Venery, 140. hinders
Conception, 162. heales the biting of a mad Dog, 258. Mirtle-tree and fruit,
prevent Drunkenness, p. 12. help ulcers in the eyes, 29. inflammations of the
eyes, 30. filth of the ears, 41. Bloudy-flux, 108. ulcers of the bladder, 136,
excess of menstrues, 153. falling of the matrix, 167. kybes, 178. Holy fire,
204. burns, 234. Misseltoe, good against Apostumes behind the ears, p. 40.
diminishes the spleen, 102. causes rough nails to fall off, 192. heales old
ulcers, 229. Moone-fearne, diminishes the spleen, p. 102. Morell, or garden
Nightshade, helps the headache, p. 4. ulcers in the eyes, 29. pains of the
ears, 39. Apostumes growing behind the ears, 41. inflammations of the
Stomach, 88. excess of menstrues, 156. Holy fire, 205. corrosive ulcers, 228.
Moss, restraines excess of Women's monthly purgations, 153. Mothweed, helps
Rheumes of the head, p. 13. milk clotted in the Stomach, 90. Strangury, 136.
those which piss small clots of blood, 138. purges menstrues, 152. is good
against the Sciatica, 174. ruptures, 243. biting of Serpents and Aspes, 252.
Mouse-eare, helps ulcers in the eyes, p. 29. inflammations of the eyes, 31.
Mugwort, good against pains of the Stomach, p. 86. Stone, and gravel in the
reins, 125. expels urine, 131. the afterbirth, 157. causes abortion, 160.
helps inflammations of the matrix, 165. Mulberries and the Tree, mittigates the
Toothache, p. 51, helps rheumes of the Stomach, 84. loosen, 114. kill worms,
116. profit against burns, 234. Mullein, profitable against the Spasme, p. 17,
inflammations of the eyes, 32. toothache, 54. sharpness of the throat, 61.
Cough, 70. pains of the sides, 73. binds, 114. is good against the Sciatica,
174. burns, 2^5. broken bones, 240. ruptures, 243. stinging of Scorpions, 263.
Muskles, make the eyelids thin, p. 23. helps dimnesse of sight, 23. make Teeth
clean, 50. profit against burns, 234. cicatrise ulcers, 238. heal the biting
of a mad Dog, 258. Mustard, profitable against the Lethargy, p. 5. provokes
sneezing, 7. is good against the Falling Sickness, 9. sharpness of the eyes,
22. weakness of sight, 34. pains in the ears, 39. noise in the ears, 44.
sharpness of the throat, 61. suffocation of the matrix, 145. Sciatica, 172.
intermitting Fevers, 196. malignity of Henbane, 273. and of Tad-stooles, 279.
Myrrh, takes blemishes out of the eyes, p. 23. helps ulcers in the eyes, 28.
filth of the ears, 41. sweetens the breath, 49. good against sharpness of the
throat, 61. Cough, 67. pains of the sides, 73. Bloudy-flux, 107. provokes
menstrues, 147. expels the afterbirth, 158. re-incarnates bones, 223. stays
shedding of hair, 282. takes pock-holes and scarres out of the face, 290.
N
SEa-navell-wort, helps the Dropsy, p. 97. Nayle-wort, or Whit-low-grasse,
good against ulcers growing on the fingers ends. Nettles, profit against
Apostumes behind the ears, p. 41. bleeding at the nose, 45. inflammation of
the jaws, 60. of the Lungs, 73. diminish the Spleen, 102. increase Venery,
140. purge menstrues, 152. helps falling of the matrix, 167. Gout of the hands
and joints, 178. Fellons, and small Apostumes, 201. prevent Gangrena's, 193.
good against filthy ulcers, 233. members out of joint, 240. biting of dogs,
258. the malignity of Henbane, 273. Garden Nightshade, vid. Morell. Binde-weed
Nightshade, expels the afterbirth, p. 157. Sleepy Nightshade, causes sleep,
p. 6. helps weakness of sight, 34. Toothache, 54. expels urine, 131. Niter,
good against ulcers on the head, p. 13. belly-ach and worms, 107. swallowing
of Horse-leeches, 269. Henbane, 273. black Poppy, 275.
O
HOlme-oake, good against the biting of Serpents, p. 254. poison, 275. colors
hair black, 286. Oak of Jerusalem, helps difficulty of breathing, p. 76.
Oats, sweeten the breath, p. 49. helps a Cough, 68. Oker, helps obstructions
of the Liver, p. 92. binds, 114. is profitable against knobs and nodosities on
the joints, 178. Oleander, good against the biting of Serpents and Aspes, p.
252. Olives and the Tree, profits against headache, p. 1. 5. filth in the
ears, 41. loose teeth, 55. watering of the Gums, 56. rheumes of the Stomach;
84. excess of menstrues, 154. ulcers on the fingers ends, 180. Carbuncles,
200. Holy fire, 204. corrosive ulcers, 226. 232. scurfe, 300. Onions, purge the
brain, p. 4. good against the Lethargy, 5. Itch of the eyelids, 23.
blemishes in the eyes, 24. dimnesse of sight, 27. pin or web in the eye, 33.
filth in the ears, 42. deafness, 43. noise in the ears, 44. squinancie, 58.
Emeroids, 123. expel urine, 129. help the Strangury, 136. provoke menstrues,
148. heal blisters and inflammations of the feet, 180. biting of mad Dogs,
257. shedding of hair, 283. pock-holes, and scarres in the face, 290.
Leprosy, 294. Opium, good against pains in the ears, p. 37. biting of
Cockatrices, 256. Opohalsamum, takes blemishes out of the eyes, p. 23. Orage,
cures the Jaundise, p. 93. loosens, 115. Finger-Orchis, helps Cancers in the
mouth, p. 49. Organie, profitable against the spasm, p. 16. pains of the
cares, 39. purges the brain, 47. helps Cancers in the mouth, p. 49.
inflammation of the jaws, 59. Cough, 69. inflammation of the Lungs, 73. causes
vomiting, 86. helps digestion, 90. cures the Jaundise, 93. Dropsy, 96.
diminishes the spleen, 101. expels urine, 130. allayes inflammations of the
genitals, 142. purges menstrues, 149. helps ruptures, 242. stinging and biting
of venomous beasts, 246, 247, 248. the malignity of meddow Saffron, 272. of
Aconitum, 274. of Hemlock, 276. of Carline-thstle, 276. of Tad-stooles, 279. of
plaster, 280. Orkanet, good against the Jaundise. p. 94. diminishes the spleen,
102. binds, 113. kills worms, 117. profits against pains in the reins, 125.
causes abortion, 160. allayes the Holy fire, 205. cures burns, 235.
dislocations, 239. biting of Vipers, 249. Leprosy, 295. Orpine, vid. Arsenick.
Oxe-eye, helps the Jaundise, p. 94. Oil, profitable against the pin and web in
the eye, p. 33. the malignity of Coriander, 277. of Plaster, 279.
P
PAlma Christi, helps inflammations of the eyelids, p. 22. of the eyes, 32.
draws forth women's duggs, 80. makes the face smooth, 288. purges phlegm, 312.
Parsley, allayes inflammations of the eyes, p. 31. resolves curdled milk, 80.
is good against nflammations of the Stomach, 88. Colic, 104. expels urine,
130. helps pain-pisse, 134. Stone in the bladder, 137. provokes menstrues, 150.
expels the afterbirth, 157. is an antidote against poison, 267. Parsenep,
meddow and wild, good against Headache, p. 2. Lethargy, 5. Frenzy, 11. filth
in the cares, 42. difficulty of breathing, 75. the Jaundise, 93. expels urine,
129. Stone in the bladder, 137. causes abortion, 159. helps corrosive ulcers,
228. 230. biting of Serpents and Aspes, 251. Partridges gall, good against the
sharpness of the eyes, p. 22. Passe-flower, helps filthy salt ulcers, p. 232.
Peaches, helps Rheumes of the Stomach, p. 91. loosen, 114. correct the
malignity of Ceruse, 280. Pears, stay the bloudy-flux, p. 108. Pellitory of
Spain, and the wall, purge the brain, p. 5. profit against pains in the
ears, 39. Toothache, 53. inflammations of the jaws, 59. Cough, 70. Apostumes
of the fundament, 120. gout of the legs and feet, 170. shaking fevers, 197.
inflammations, 189. Holy fire, 205. biting of Shrew-mice, 256. Penniroyall,
helps the Spasm, p. 16. watering of the Gums, 56. shortness of breath, 66.
swoundings of the heart, 77. gripings of the Stomach, 87, helps digestion, 90.
provokes menstrues, 149. expels the afterbirth, 157. causes abortion, 159.
helps inflammations of the matrix, 164. sciatica, 173. inflammations of any
part, 189. corrosive ulcers, 227. biting and stinging of venomous beasts, 246.
those who have drunk Cantharides, 270. take pock-holes and scars out of the
face, 290. Penni-wort, allayes inflammations of the Stomach, p. 88. profits
against the Stone, and gravel of the reins, 126. expels urine, 132. heales
kybes, 179. inflammations in any diseased part, 188. Peonie, prevents vomiting,
p. 83. profits against gripings of the Stomach, 87. Jaundise, 94. belly-ach,
and worms, 106. binds, 113. helps pains in the reins, 125. pain-pisse, 134.
suffocation of the matrix, 146. provokes menstrues, 151. is beneficial for
Women in labor, 164. Pepper, good against the Falling Sickness, p. 9.
squinancie, 58. Cough, 69 procures an appetite, 90. diminishes the spleen, 100.
profits against the belly-ach, and worms, 106. causes abortion. 159. hinders
conception, 161. helps intermitting Fevers, 196. stinging and biting of
venomous beasts, 245. the malignity of Hemlock, 276. Leprosy, 294.
Periwinckle, profitable against Headache, p. 3. Toothache, 54. increases milk,
81. cures the bloudy-flux, 110. binds, 113. helps the biting and stinging of
venomous beasts, 247. 251. S. Peters-wort, good against the Sciatica, p. 172.
and burns, 235. Pigeons blood, helps wounds in the eyes, p. 28. the dung
cures Carbuncles, 200. burns, 234. the eggs, correct the malignity of Ceruse,
280. Pimpernell, allayes inflammations of the eyes, p. 22. helps weakness of
sight, 34. pains in the cares, 39. Toothache, 52. Dropsy, 96. pains in the
reins, 134. draws splmters out of wounds, 224. cures ulcers, 227. biting of
Vipers, 249. Pine Tree, and the fruit, allayes the Toothache, p. 51. 52. helps
the Tisick, 64. gripings of the Stomach, 87. heat the Liver, 98. expel utine,
128. allay inflammations of wounds, 223. profit against ulcers, 226. drinking
of Cantharides, 270. of Henbane, 273. heal tetters and ring-wormes, 296.
Ground Pine, mollifies hardness of duggs, p. 80. removes obstructions of the
Liver, 92. cures the Jaundise, 94. belly-ach and worms, 107. pain-pisse, 134.
expels the afterbirth, 158. is profitable against the Sciatica, 174.
Pistachoes, helps the Tisick, p. 64. Pitch and the Tree, good against
sharpness of the eyelids, p. 21. inflammations of the eyes, 30, rheumes of
the eyes, 34. Toothache, 51. obstructions of the Liver, 92. bloody. flux, 107.
incarnates hollow ulcers, 237. Plantaine, profitable against the
Falling Sickness, p. 9. ulcers in the eyes, 29 blear-eyednesse, 36. pains in
the cares, 38. A postumes behind the ears, 40. Cancers in the mouth, 48.
makes teeth clean, 50. cures putrified gums, 57. spitting of blood, 62, 63.
Tisick, 65. shortness of breath, 66. rheumes of the Stomach, 85. Dropsy, 96.
bloudy-flux, 109, 110. binds, 112. heales ulcers in the reins, 126.
suffocation of the matrix, 145. excess of menstrues, 154. 156 Tertian Fever,
184. Quartane Fever, 185. inflammations, 188. Holy fire, 204 bleeding of
wounds, 221. corrosive ulcers, 227. 229. hollow Fistulaes, 230. biting of dogs.
258. Plum-tree leaves, stay watering of the gums, p. 56. fasten the pallat of
the mouth, 60. the gum, helps dimnesse of sight, 26. Poley, good against the
Jaundise, p. 94. Dropsy, 97. diminishes the spleen, 100. purges menstrues,
151. helps the stinging and biting of venomous beasts, 246. 247. drives away
all venomous beasts, 265. Polipodie, or Oake-fearne, good against the Dropsy,
p. 96. dislocations, 240. causes shedding of hair, 284. purges choler, 310.
and phlegm, 313. Pomegranats, and the Tree, prevent Drunkenness, p. 12. helps
dimnesse of sight, 26. pains in the ears, 37. watering of the gums, 56.
bloudy-flux, 108. bind, 114. cure ulcers of the fundament, 120. expel urine,
128. stay excess of menstrues, 153. cure ulcers on the fingers ends, 180.
falling down of the guts, 193. Pompions, good against inflammations of the
brain, p. 11. cause vomiting, 86. help ulcers, 236. make the face smooth,
288. keeps the body fair, 293. Poplar-tree, profitable against weakness of
sight, p. 33. pains in the ears, 37. expels urine, 128. cures the Sciatica,
172. Poppy, wild, black, horned, etc. good against headache, p. 4. provokes
sleep, 6. profits against the Falling Sickness, 10. Spasme, 15. inflammations
of the eyes, 31. toothache, 54. rheumes of the throat, 60. cough. 70. rheumes
of the Stomach, 85. stopping of the liver, 92. diminish the spleen, 102. stay
the bloudy-flux, 110 binds, 114. helps the Stone and gravel in the reins,
126. pain-pisse, 134. excess of menstrues, 155. sciatica, 174. inflammations,
189. Holy fire, 205. burns, 235. biting and stinging of venomous beasts, 246,
poison, 267. Leprosy, 294. Privet, mittigates headache, p. 3. aches of the
sinews, 18. expels urine, 128. purges menstrues, 147. cures the Holy fire,
204. burns, 234. colors hair yellow, 286. Pullets gall, helps sharpness of
the eyes, p. 22. Punies, help pain-pisse, p. 132. suffocation of the matrix,
145. Quartain Fevers, 185. biting of Serpents and Aspes, 250. Purple-fish,
makes the teeth clean, p. 50 consumes superfluous flesh, 224. cicatriseth
ulcers, 238. Purslaine, mittigates the headache, p. 4. is good against the
Spasme, 15. inflammations of the eyes, 31. Blear-eyedness, 36. Teeth set on
edge, 56. spitting of blood, 26. increases milk, 81. allayes inflammations of
the Stomach, 87. profits against belly-ach and worms, 105. bloudy-flux, 109.
Emeroids, 123. pain-pisse, 133. pains and gripings of the matrix, 167.
languishing fevers, 196. biting of Lizards, 257.
Q
Quinces and the tree, allay inflammations of the eyes, p. 30. of the duggs,
78. stay vomiting, 82. rheumes of the Stomach, 84. 91. mollify hardness of
the spleen, 99. stay the bloudy-flux, 108. heal Apostumes of the fundament,
120. help falling of the matrix, 167. preserve against poison, 275.
R
Radish, helps the Squinancy, p. 58. Cough. 69. excrements difficult to spit,
76. Dropsy, 96. hardness of the spleen, 99. expels urine, 129. the menstrues,
148. prevent Gangrenaes, 192. heal corrosive ulcers, 227. the biting of Vipers,
248. of Serpents, 253. the malignity of Tad-stooles, 278. shedding of hair,
283. take away freckles, 291. cause vomiting, 315. Ramne-thorne, allayes the
Holy fire, p. 204. heales corrosive ulcers, 226. Tetters and Ring-worms, 296.
Rampions, diminish the spleen, p. 102. expels urine, 132. the afterbirth, 158.
Raspis-bush, allay inflammation of the eyes, p. 31. Holy fire, 205. Ethiopian
Reed, provokes sleep, p. 6. Rest-harrow, or Cammock, heales Emeroids, p. 123.
expels urine, 130. Rhapontick, cures the spasme, p. 16. spitting of blood, 63.
shortness of breath, 66. hardness of the Midriffe, 78. rheumes of the
Stomach, 85. pains of the Stomach, 86. hickop, 89. stopping of the Liver, 92.
diminishes the spleen, 101. profits against the belly-ach and worms, 106.
obstructions of the reins, 126. paine-pisse, 133. sciatica, 173.
inflammations, 188. stinging and biting of venomous beasts, 246. Tetters and
Ringwormes, 296. Rice, binds, p. 112. and corrects the malignity of Lime or
Arsenick, 281. Ring-doves blood, cure wounds in the eyes, p. 28. Rocket,
increases milk, p. 81. helps digestion, 90. expels urine, 129. increases
venery, 139. cures the biting of shrew-mice, 255. Roses, good against Headache,
p. 4. pains in the ears, 37. watering of the gums, 56. bloudy-flux, 108.
inflammations, 188. Holy fire, 204. members out of joint, 239. poison of Toads,
268. Rosemary, profitable against the spasm, p. 16. dimnesse of sight, 27.
malladies of the breast, 77. Jaundise, 93, 94. belly-ach, and worms, 105.
Apostumes of the fundament, 120. bleeding of Emeroids, 123. purges menstrues,
150. is good against the Gout, 170. filthy ulcers, 233. ruptures, 243. biting
of Serpents, and Aspes, 251. Leprosy, 295. Rose-wood, helps Cancers in the
mouth, p. 48. bloudy-flux, 107. expels urine, 127. is good against ulcers in
the natural places of women, 165. Rosewort, mittigates the Headache, p. 3. and
4. Rue, profits against headache, p. 2. falling sickness, 9. dimnesse of
sight, 27. pains in the eyes, 32. weakness of sight, 34. pains in the ears,
39. bleeding at the nose, 45. shortness of breath, 66. 74. Dropsy, 99.
Colic, 104. belly-ach and worms, 105. binds, 113. kills worms, 117. expels
urine, 130. helps persons which cannot keep their water, 138. hinders Venery,
141. allayes inflammations of the genitals, 142. helps suffocation of the
matrix, 145 wind in the matrix, 166. sciatica, 173. gout of the hands and
joints, 175. Quartaine Fevers, 185. intermitting fevers, 196. Holy fire, 205.
burns, 235. biting of Serpents and Aspes, 251. stinging of Scorpions, 263.
Leprosy, 295. Rushes, good against a Cough, p. 70. and the venom of Spiders,
260.
S
Saffron, good against the Frenzy, p. 11. Drunkenness, 12. dimnesse of sight,
26. inflammations of the ears, 40. Colic, 104. belly-ach and worms, 105.
Apostumes of the fundament, 120. expels urine, 127. increases Venery, 139.
cures the Holy fire, 193. Meddow-saffron, mittigates toothache, p. 54. profits
against fellons, 201. Gum sagapene, profitable against the Falling Sickness,
p. 10. Spasme, 17. scars in the eyes, 25. pin or web in the eye, 33. Cough, 70.
Plurisie, 72. diminishes the spleen, 100. voyds the stone in the bladder, 137.
helps the suffocation of the matrix, 146. provokes menstrues, 150. cures
ruptures, 243. biting of Serpents and Aspes, 251. Sage, profits against
spitting of blood, p. 63. expels urine, 130. allayes itching of the genitals,
143, purges menstrues, 149 expels dead Children, 163. stays the bleeding of
wounds, 221. Salamander, causes shedding of hair, p. 284. cures the Leprosy,
304. Salt, takes blemishes out of the eyes, p. 24. mittigates pains of the
ears, 40. helps Cancers in the mouth, 49. Squinancy, 59. inflammations of the
jaws, 60. belly-ach and worms, 107. gout of the legs and feet, 171. ulcers
on the singers ends, 181. corrosive ulcers, 228. members out of joint, 240.
biting of serpents, and Aspes, 252, 253. 261. 263. the malignity of Poppy, 275.
of Tadstooles, 279. wild scab, 299. scabbinesse, 303. Samian-earth, good
against inflammations of the duggs, p. 79. of the genitals, 143. excess of
women's terms, 157. biting of Serpents and Aspes, 252. drinking Cantharides,
270. Samphire, cures the Hickop, p. 89. Jaundise, 93. pain-pisse, 133. expels
menstrues, 148. purges choler, 310. Sand, cures the Dropsy, p. 98.
Sarcocolla, helps rheumes of the eyes, p. 35. Satirion, good against the
spasme, p. 17 aches of the sinews, 19. binds, 113. increases venery, 140.
Savine, profits against Carbuncles, p. 200. corrosive ulcers, 226. takes moles
out of the face, 289. Saverie, good against weakness of sight, p. 34.
shortness of breath, 66. 75. malladies of the breast, 77. worms, 117. expels
urine, 130. takes away warts off the genitall members, 144. expels the
afterbirth, 157. helps the sciatica, 173. resolves clotted blood, 222.
Saxifrage, stays the bloudy-flux, p. 110. expels urine, 131. breaks the stone
in the bladder, 138. provokes menstrues, 152. draws splinters out of wounds,
224. Scabious, stanches bleeding of wounds, p. 221. Scale-fearne, hinders
Conception, p. 162. Scalions, good against the scurfe of the head, p. 14.
bruised ears, 42. excrements difficult to spit, 76. pains of the Stomach, 86.
Dropsy, 96. gout of the legs and feet, 170. Sciatica, 172. bruised nails,
192. splinters, 224. scabs on the fundament, 237. members out of joint, 239.
ruptures, 242. biting of Dogs, 258. Dandriffe, 285. rases pock-holes, and
scarres out of the face, 290. Sunspots, 291. freckles, 292. Scammonie,
mittigates Headache, p. 3. helps the Sciatica, 175. fellons and small
apostumes, 192. scabbinesse, 303. purges choler, 309. phlegm, 312.
Scarlet-graine, helps aches of the sinews, p. 19. cut sinews, 20. Scorpeno,
the gall, helps sharpness of the eyes, p. 22. dimnesse of sight, 26. pin or web
in the eye, 33. Scorpions-grasse, cures the stinging of Scorpions, p. 263.
Sea-grape, helps spitting of blood, p. 63. rheumes of the Stomach, 85.
bloudy-flux, 110. the malignity of Lime and Arsenick, 281. Seale-fish, helps
the suffocation of the matrix, p. 145. Seawater, good against the headache, p.
3. aches of the sinews, 19. Dropsy, 97. belly-ach, and worms, 107. biting of
Serpents and Aspes, 252. 260. 263. Tetters and Ring-wormes, 298. Wildscab, 299.
Serapinum, vid. Gum Sagapene. Serpents skin, helps pain in the ears, p. 38.
Toothache, 51. Services, stay the Bloudy-flux, p. 109. Sesaminum, allayes
inflammations of the eyes, p. 30. pains of the eyes, 32. pains of the ears,
38. inflammations of the ears, 40. Seselios, helps the Cough, p. 70.
difficulty of breath, 75. malladies of the breast, 77. digestion, 90. belly-ach
and worms, 107. pains in the reins, 125. pain-pisse, 134. strangury, 135.
provokes menstrues, 150. Shave-grasse, stanches bleeding at the nose, p. 46.
Sheeps-dung, takes away warts of the fundament, p. 122. of the genitall
members. 144. helps burns, 234. hardness of the skin, 304. Siler, good
against the Falling Sickness, p. 9. suffocation of the matrix, 146. causes
abortion, 160. Silver-weed, cures old ulcers, p. 229. Silurus, stays the
Bloudy-flux, p. 109. loosens, 115. is good against the sciatica, 172. draws
out splinters, 223. Sison, diminishes the spleen, p. 101. Skink, increases
venery, p. 140. Skirrets, expel urine, p. 129. Sloes, stay the bloudy-flux, p.
109. Smallage, expels urine, p. 130. helps the strangury, 135. Snake-weed,
cures Cancers in the mouth, p. 49. inflammations of the jaws, 60. Snayles,
helps cut sinews, p. 20. Falling of hair off the eyelids, 21. blemishes in
the eyes, 23. scars in the eyes, 25. bleeding at the nose, 45. causes vomiting,
86. good against the Colic, 104. bloudy-flux, 109. provoke menstrues, 147.
profit against the gout of the legs and feet, 196. draws splinters out of
wounds, 223. take away Sun-spots, 290. Sneesing-wort, causes sneesing, p. 7.
48. Snow, helps persons who have swallowed Horse-leeches, p. 269.
Solomons-seale, makes the face smooth, and gives it a luster, p. 288.
Sope-wort, causes sneesing, p. 7. 48. Sorrel, mittigates the Toothache, p. 52.
helps rheumes of the Stomach, 85. bloudy-flux, 110. binds, 112. Sorry,
mittigates the Toothache, p. 55. fastens loose teeth, 56. is good against the
sciatica, 175. takes pock-holes and scars out of the face, 290. Southern-wood,
profits against the spasme, p. 16. inflammations of the eyes, 31. difficulty of
breathing, 75. purges menstrues, 149. is good against the sciatica, 173.
ruptures, 242. biting of Vipers, 247. Serpents and Aspes, 250. of Shrew-mice,
255. stinging of Scorpions, 262. drives away venomous beasts, 265, stays
shedding of hair, 283. Sow-bread, purges the brain, p. 4. is profitable
against the scurfe of the head, 14. pin or web in the eye, 33. Apostumes of the
Lungs, 65. diminishes the spleen, 100. helps falling of the sundament, 121.
provokes menstrues, 149. causes abortion, 159. is good against the Gout of the
legs and feet, 170 kybes, 179, members out of joint, 239. shedding of hair,
283. Sun-burne, 287. Sun spots, 291. Sow-fennell, mittigates the headache, p.
2. profits against the Lethargy, 6. vertiginosities, 7. Falling Sickness, 10.
frenzy, 11. spasme, 16. Palsy, 17. aches of the sinews, 19. pains of the
ears, 39. Toothache, 53. shortness of breath, 66. Cough, 70. belly-ach and
worms, 105. pains in the reins, 124. pain-pisse, 133. suffocation of the
matrix, 146. purges menstrues, 150. is good for women in Labor, 164. helps
filthy ulcers, 233. draws out broken bones, 240. drives away venomous beasts,
265. Sow-thistle, increases milk, p. 81. helps gripings of the Stomach, 87.
inflammations of the fundament, 121. of the matrix, 164. stinging of Scorpions,
262. Sparagus, cures the frenzy, p. 11. toothache, 52. Jaundise, 63.
bloudy-flux, 109. loosens, 115. expels urine, 129. helps the pain-pisse, 133.
hinders conception. 161. is good against the Sciatica, 172. members out of
joint, 239. Speed-well, stays the bloody flux, p. 110. Spelt-corne, binds, p.
112. Spicknell, mittigates headache, p. 5. helps rheumes of the head, 12. wind
in the Stomach, 88. belly-ach, and worms, 105. expels urine, 127, is good
against suffocation of the matrix, 145. purges menstrues, 146. profits against
the Gout of the legs and feet, 168. Sciatica, 171. Spider, cures the Tertian
fever, p. 184. Spider-wort, is good against the belly-ach and worms, p. 106.
stinging of Spiders, 260. and of Scorpions, 262. Spikenard, stays the falling
of hair from the eyelids, p. 21. vomiting, 82. helps gripings of the Stomach,
87. wind in the Stomach, 88. obstructions of the Liver, 91. Jaundise, 92.
inflammations of the spleen, 99. heats the Liver, 98. diminishes the spleen,
100. expels the stone and gravel of the reins, 125. urine, 127. restraines
excess of menstrues, 153. allayes inflammations of the matrix, 164. heales the
biting and stinging of venomous beasts, 244. Plow-mans Spikenard, mittigates
headache, p. 2. provokes sleep, 6. is good against thespasm, 16. ulcers in the
eyes, 29 shortness of breath, 66. Cough, 69. draws forth women's duggs, 79.
helps the pain-pisse, 133. stone in the bladder, 137. purges menstrues, 150.
helps ruptures, 242. causes abortion, 159. is good for women in labor, 164.
Spleen-wort, diminishes the spleen, p. 102. expels urine, 131. helps the
strangury, 135. breaks the stone in the bladder, 138. allayes inflammations,
189. Sponges, profitable against blear-eyednesse, p. 36. bleeding of wounds,
222. ulcers, 231. Spurge, takes blemishes out of the eyes, p. 24. and scarres,
25. mittigates the Toothache, 54. cures the Jaundise, 95. warts on the genitall
members, 144. sciatica, 175. ulcers on the fingers ends, 181. and elsewhere,
228. stinging of Scorpions, 263. purges choler, 309. phlegm, 312. causes
vomiting, 315. cures the Dropsy, 315. Squill, helps the Falling Sickness, p.
9. shortness of breath, 66, cough, 69. excrements difficult to spit, 76.
wambling of the Stomach, 83. digestion, 90. Jaundise, 93. Dropsy, 96.
belly-ach and worms, 106. kybes, 179. biting of Vipers, 249. hardness of the
skin, 304. purges phlegm, 311. Squinants, good against the spasme, p. 15.
gripings of the Stomach, 87. expels urine, 127, provokes menstrues, 147.
allayes inflammations of the matrix, 164. Staphis-acre, purges the brain, p.
5. helps cancers in the mouth, 49. Toothache, 54. watering of the gums, 57.
scurfe, 232. kills Lice and Nits, 287. cures the wild scab, 299. Star-wort,
allayes inflammations of the eyes, p. 32. helps the falling of the fundament,
122. kernels and inflammations in the groine, 193. Steel, stays rheumes of
the stomach, p. 85. diminishes the spleen, 103. Stock-doves blood, helps
purblinde eyes, p. 32. Stoebe, cures fresh wounds in the eyes, p. 28. filth of
the ears, 42. bloudy-flux, 110. Arabian-stone, or white Marble, makes the
teeth clean, p. 50. heales Emeroids, 123. Asian-stone, helps the Tisick, p.
65. diminishes the spleen, 103. cures the gout of the legs and feet, 171,
fellons, 192. ulcers, 228, 229. 237. Bloud-stone, good against sharpness of
the eyes, p. 22. scarres of the eyes, 25. wounds of the eyes, 28. rheumes of
the eyes, 35. blear-eyednesse, 36. spitting of blood, 64. pain-pisse, 135.
excess of menstrues, 156. Eagle-stone, profits against the Falling Sickness,
p. 11. causes abortion, 161. preserves the Child till the limited time, 163.
Stone Gagates, or Jet, helps the suffocation of the matrix, p. 146. drives away
venomous beasts, 265. Galactitus, or the Milk-Jone, cures ulcers in the eyes,
p. 29. rheumes of the eyes, 35. Stone Geodes, helps dimnesse of sight, p. 28.
inflammation of women's duggs, 79. of the genitalls, 142. Jasper-stone, causes
abortion, p. 161. Stone-Judaicus, helps the pain-pisse, p. 135. breaks stones
in the bladder, 138. Marchasite, or Fire-stone, helps dimnesse of sight, p. 27.
Stone Morochthus, helps rheumes of the eyes, p. 35. spitting of blood, 64.
rheums of the Stomach, 85. pain-pisse, 135. excess of menstrues, 156.
Naxion-stone, or Whet-stone, good against the Falling Sickness, p. 11. keeps
duggs from growing, 82. hinders shedding of hair, 284. Stone-Ostracites,
allayes inflammations of the duggs, p. 79. stays excess of women's purgations,
157. hinders conception, 162. heales malign ulcers, 230. Phrigian-stone, cures
burns, p. 236. Pumice-stone, helps dimnesse of sight, p. 27. rheumes of the
eyes, 35. makes teeth clean, 50. good against rotten gums, 57. incarnates
hollow ulcers, 238. Samius-stone, heales ulcers in the eyes, p. 29. rheumes of
the eyes, 35. makes teeth clean, 51. causes abortion, 161. Saphire-stone,
takes scarres out of the eyes, p. 24, 25. helps dimnesse of sight, 28. 30.
ulcers in the guts, 118. stinging of Scorpions, 263. Stone Schistos, helps
ruptures, p. 243. Specular-stone, good against the Falling Sickness, p. 10.
Sponge-stone, helps pain-pisse, p. 135. stone in the bladder, 138.
Stone-thyites, helps dimnesse of sight, p. 27. Storax, mittigates the headache,
p. 5. good against rheumes of the head, 12. cleares the voice, 72. provokes
menstrues, 147. mollifies, 166. Storkes-dung, profitable against the
Falling Sickness, p. 9. Succorie, stays falling of hair from the eyelids,
p. 21. panting and throbing of the heart, 78. binds, 112. provokes menstrues,
148. cures the gout of the legs or feet, 169. Holy fire, 204. stinging of
Scorpions, 262. Sugar, allayes inflammations of the eyes, p. 30. Sumacke, good
against filth in the ears, p. 41. sharpness of the tongue, 50. rheumes of the
Stomach, 84. bloudy-flux, 108. Emeroids, 123. excess of menstrues, 153. ulcers
at the fingers ends, 181. inflammations, 188. prevent Gangrenaes, 192. colors
hair black, 286. Swallows, profitable against the Falling Sickness, p. 9.
dimnesse of sight, 26. squinancie, 58, 59. Swallaw-wort, helps ulcerated duggs,
p. 80. belly-ach and worms, 107. ulcers in the secret parts, 165. biting and
stinging of venomous beasts, 246. Sweet-cane, good against the Spasme, p. 14.
dimnesse of sight, 25. Cough, 67. pains of the sides, 73. Dropsy, 95. pains
in the Liver, 98. inflammations of the Spleen, 99. diminishes the Spleen, 100.
cures belly-ach and worms, 105. expels urine, 127. helps the Strangury, 135.
provokes menstrues, 146. cures ruptures, 241. Sycamore, profits against rheumes
of the eyes, p. 34. Toothache, 51. gripings of the Stomach, 87. hardness of
the spleen, 99.
T
TAmariske, mittigates the Toothache, p. 51. helps rheums of the Stomach, 84.
Jaundise, 95. inflammations of the spleen, 100. kills Lice and Nits, 287. cures
the Leprosy, 304. Tar, good against the squinancie, p. 58. Tisick, 64.
clefts of the fundament, 119. tumors of the fundament, 121. kybes, 178. causes
rough nails to fall off, 181. profits against Carbuncles, 200. filthy salt
ulcers, 232. 237. stinging and biting of venomous beasts, 245. 247. Tetters and
Ring-wormes, 297. Teasell, heales clefts of the fundament, p. 119. takes away
corns, 305. Bastard-thistle, helps the stinging of Scorpions, p. 262.
Cotton-thistle, cures the spasme, p. 16. Thistle-gentle, helps veins puffed
and swelled with blood, p. 192. Lady-thistle, good against the spasme, p. 16.
Toothache, 53. pains of the sides, 72. vomiting, 83. sciatica, 173. ruptures,
242. White-thistle, profits against the spasm, p. 16. toothache, 53. spitting
of blood, 63. rheum of the Stomach, 85. expels urine, 130. heales the biting
of Serpents and Aspes, 250. Time, profitable against the Headache, p. 2.
spasme, 15. weakness of sight, 34. spitting of blood, 62. shortness of
breath, 66, difficulty of breath, 75. malladies of the breast. 77. belly-ach,
and worms, 105. 117. expels urine, 130 takes away warts, 144. provokes
menstrues, 149. expels the afterbirth, 157. causes abortion, 159. helps the
sciatica, 173. clotted blood, 222. ruptures, 242. biting of Serpents and Aspes,
251. 253. 255. the malignity of meddow saffron, 272. of plaster, 280.
Tormentill, cures the biting of Shrewmice, p. 255. Tortoise, good against the
Falling Sickness, p. 9. sharpness of the eyes, 22. Squinancy, 58. Corrosive
ulcers, 227. stinging and biting of venomous beasts, 245. Trefoile several
kinds, profits against the headache, p. 3. Falling Sickness, 10 shortness of
breath, 66. pains of the sides, 73. binds, 113. expels urine, 132. helps
suffocation of the matrix, 146. expels the afterbirth, 158. allayes
inflammations of the groine, 193 cures the Tertian Fever, 184. stinging and
biting of venomous beasts, 247. 260. 263. Tunnie-fish, helps the biting of
Vipers, p. 248. of mad dogs, 257. Turbith, purges Melancholy, p. 314.
Turmericke, causes shedding of hair, p. 284. Turne-sole, allayes inflammations
of the brain, p. 11. kills worms, 117. takes away warts, 144. purges
menstrues, 153. causes abortion, 160. helps Tertian Fevers, 185. members out
of joint, 240. stinging of Scorpions, 263. hardness of the skin, 304. takes
away Corns, 306. Turnips, increase venery, p. 139. is good against the Gout of
the hands, and feet, p. 169. kybes, 179. all sorts of poison, 266. Turpentine
and the Tree, heales ulcers in the eyes, p. 28. profitable against the Tisick,
64. pains of the sides, 73. expels urine, 128. cures itching of the genitals,
143. salt ulcers, 232. scabbines, 301. Blood of Turtle-doves, helps wounds in
the eyes, p. 28. Tutie, cures fistulaes in the eyes, p. 30. rheumes of the
eyes, 35. filthy salt ulcers, 233.
V
VAlerian, expels urine, p. 127. menstrues, 146. stinging and biting of
venomous beasts, 244. preserves against poison, 265. Verdigrease, takes scars
out of the eyes, p. 25. helps dazzling of the eyes, 36. deafness of the ears,
43. Noli me tangere, 46. rotten putrified gums, 57. rheumes of the throat, 61.
inflammations of wounds, 223. proud flesh, 225. corrosive ulcers, 228. 231.
233. cicatriseth ulcers, 238. helps scabbinesse, 303. Verjuyce, good against
sharpness of the eyelids, p. 22. dimnesse of sight, 27. ulcers in the corners
of the eyes, 29. filth in the cares, 42. watering of the gums, 57. rheumes of
the throat, 61. spitting of blood, 64. bloudy-flux, 111. excess of women's
menstrues, 156. Vermillion, helps pain-pisse, p. 133. Vernish, heales old
ulcers, p. 229. Verveine, helps Cancers in the mouth, p. 49. rheumes of the
throat, 61. Jaundise, 95. pains and gripings of the matrix, 168. Tertian
Fevers, 184. Quartane Fevers, 185, inflammations, 189. Holy fire, 205.
corrosive ulcers, 228. 233. Vetches several sorts, mollifies, p. 80. helps
belly-ach and worms. 106. expels urine, 129. 132. heales kybes, 179.
Carbunckles, 201. prevents Gangrenaes, 193. sten^^^s bleeding of wounds, 221.
cures old ulcers, 229. 232, biting of Vipers, 248. Vine, good against the
headache, p. 4. spitting of blood, 64. vomiting, 84. inflammations of the
Stomach, 88.90. bloudy-flux, 111. Stone of the bladder, 137. loathing of meat,
164. bruised joints, 178. windy ruptures, 193. members out of joint, 240.
biting of Vipers, 249. and Serpents, 252, 253. of Dogs, 258. the malignity of
meddow saffron, 272. of Tadstooles, 279. causes shedding of hair, 285. takes
away warts, 305. and corns, 306. Vinegar, profits against inflammations of the
brain, p. 12. worms in the ears, 44. bleeding at the nose, 46. Toothache,
55. rotten gums, 57. Squinancie, 58. procures an appetite, 90. takes away warts
on the fundament, 122. helps falling of the matrix, 167. inflammations, 188.
ulcers, 228. 231. poison, 267. clotted milk, 271. the malignity of Hemlock,
276. of Tadstooles, 279. blisters, wheales, and heat pushes, 298. Squill
Vinegar, helps vertiginosities, p. 8. Falling Sickness, 10. aches of the
sinews, 20. Violets, allayes inflammations of the eyes, p. 32. heales Cancers
in the mouth, 49. squinancie, 59. inflammations of the Stomach, 90. Viper,
helps aches of the sinews, p. 19. dimnesse of sight, 26. pin or web in the
eye, 33. Vitrioll, purges the brain, p. 5. kills worms, 116. helps the evil
quality of, Tadstooles, 279. Vnguis Odoratus, good against the
Falling Sickness, p. 8. blemishes of the eyes, 23. ulcerated duggs, 80.
suffocation of the matrix, 145. proud flesh, 204. filthy ulcers, 232. burns,
234. Urine, heales ulcers in the head, p. 13. blemishes of the eyes, 24. scars
of the eyes, 25. dimnesse of sight, 27. filth of the ears, 41. worms in the
ears, 44. difficulty of breathing, 74. Dropsy, 96. suffocation of the matrix,
145. pains and gripings of the matrix, 167. Holy fire, 204. biting of Vipers,
248. Wall-flowers, diminish the spleen, p. 102. heales clefts in the fundament,
119. provoke menstrues, 151. expel the afterbirth, 158. allay inflammations
of the matrix, 165. Wall-nuts, mittigate Headache, p. 5. heal ulcers in the
eyes, p. 29. inflammations of the duggs, 79. belly-ach, and worms, 105. 116.
Carbuncles, 200. prevent gangrenaes, 192. is an antidote against poison, 265.
the gum of Carline-thistle, 277. Wall-wort, helps sharpness of the throat, p.
61. spitting of blood, 63. malladies of the breast, 77. Dropsy, 96. pains in
the reins, 125. falling down of the guts, 193. Wax, profits against Colds, p.
68. milk curdled in the breasts, 80. belly-ach and worms, 106. bloudy-flux,
109. tetters and ring-wormes, 297. Weesill, good against the Falling Sickness,
p. 8. gout of the legs and feet, 169. biting of Serpents and Aspes, 250.
poison, 266. Whey, profitable against the Falling Sickness, p. 9. loosens,
115. heales blisters, wheales, and heat-pushes, 298. Leprosy, 304.
Widdow-waile, purges choler, p. 309. and phlegm, 313. Willow, helps pains in
the ears, p. 37. hinders conception, 161. cure the gout, 169. dandriffe, 285.
hardness of the skin, 304. Willow-herbe, stays bleeding at the nose, p. 45.
spitting of blood, 63. bloudy-flux, 110. drives away venomous beasts, 265.
Winde-flower, purges the brain, p. 4. allayes inflammations of the eyes, 31.
increases milk, 81. provokes menstrues, 149. Wine of Germander, cures the
spasme, p. 17. Wine of Hisope, helps shortness of breath, p. 65. cleares the
voice, 72. expels putrified matter, 74. helps difficulty of breath, 75. Wine of
French Lavender, cures aches of the sinews, p. 20. Wine of Myrtle, helps
vomiting, p. 84. and rheumes of the Stomach, 85. Wine of Mulberries, cures the
Squinancy, p. 58. Wine of Goates-Organy, helps the Spasme, p. 17. Wine of
Quinces, stays the bloudy-flux, p. 111. expels urine, 132. Wine of Squill,
good against vertiginosities, p. 8. Falling Sickness, 10. spasme, 17. Palsy,
18. vomiting, 84. Jaundise, 95. Dropsy, 97. diminishes the spleen, 103.
provokes menstrues, 153. Wine of Sumack, stays the bloudy-flux, p. 111. Wine
of Time, cures aches of the sinews, p. 20. Wine of Wormwood, kills round
worms, p. 117. Withiwind, purges choler, p. 309. vid. Bindweed. Wood,
diminishes the spleen, p. 101. cures the Holy fire, 204. bleeding of wounds,
221. corrosive ulcers, 227. VVood of Aloes, fortifies the brain, p. 13. helps
the belly-ach and worms, 105. Woodbinde, helps shortness of breath, p. 67.
difficulty of breathing, 76. hickkop, 89. pain of the Liver, 98. diminishes
the spleen, 102. expels urine, 131. causes abortion, 161. hinders conception,
162. helps the shaking of Fevers, 197. Wool, mittigates the headache, p. 2.
restraines falling of hair from the eyelids, 21. ulcers in the eyes, 29.
cures Apostumes behind the ears, 40. ulcers in the ears, 43. ulcers in the
fundament, 120, ulcers in the secret parts, 141. provokes menstrues, 148.
Earth-wormes, helps cut sinews, p. 20. Toothache, 52. expels urine, 129. cures
Tertian Fevers, 184. Wormseed wort, kills round worms, p. 117. Wormwood,
mittigates headache, p. 5. prevents Drunkenness, 12. helps pains in the eyes,
32. weakness of sight, 34. pains of the ears, 39. filth in the ears, 42.
Toothache, 53. Squinancie, 58. panting and throbbing of the heart, 78. pains
of the Stomach, 86. wind in the Stomach, 88. procures an appetite, 90. helps
digestion, 91. the Jaundise, 93. Dropsy, 96. pains of the Liver, 98. stone
and gravel in the reins, 126. obstructions in the reins, 126. expels urine,
130. provokes menstrues, 149. heales the biting of Shrew-mice, 255. cures the
malignity of Hemlock, 276. of Carline-thistle, 276. of Tadstooles, 278. purges
choler, 308.
Y
Yarrow, stays bleeding at the nose, p. 46. spitting of blood, 63. excess of
women's menstrues, 155. allayes inflammations of wounds, 223. FINIS.

Errata.
Page 7. line 6. read weight, p. 8. l. 19, 20. r. seeds of the Aspe-tree taken
in vinegar. Dry Figs eaten, p. 15. l. 25. r. Rind, p. 21. marg. Lycium, p. 26.
l. 2. Acacia, in marg. r. Crocomagma, p. 31. l. 24. r. with saffron, p. 34. l.
5. blot out, at. p. 39. l. 15. r. Goose grass, p. 40. l. 6. r. sesaminum, p.
45. l. 1. to stanch bleeding at the nose, p. 52. marg. r, Lepidium, p. 67. l.
1. r. Wood-binde, p. 75. marg. r. spondilium, p. 79. marg r. Epimedium, p. 93.
l. 5. r. Orage, p. 98. marg. Halcyonium, p. 108, l, 22. r. sour, p. 117. l. 3.
Turnsole, l. 15. Calamint, p. 125. marg. r. Symphitum petreum, p. 141. marg. r.
Gladiolus, p. 157. marg. r. Stachys, p. 168. l. 12. r. pessary, p. 175. l. 27.
r. Mandragore; p. 193. l. 25. r. refrigerative, p. 213. marg. r. Lappa min. p.
225. l. 9. Pumice-stone, p. 267. l. 1. r. Carline thistle, marg. r. Hedera
spinosa, p. 292. l. 22. r. Spuma p. 294. last line, r. Spanish Orpine.


