THese Reasons, tending not only to the sweetning of the Two Kingdoms, England
and Scotland, the Parliament, and Dissenting Brethren on both sides, in the
Assembly, each to other; but also to the preserving a Just Liberty for them all
respectively, I commend to the Press.

March 30. 1646. John Bachiler.

THE DIVINE RIGHT OF Presbytery, Asserted by the present Assembly, and
petitioned for accordingly to the Honorable House of Commons in PARLIAMENT.
With REASONS Discussing this Pretended Divine Right; and yet with tenderness
to the Brethren of the Presbyterial way. Pleading for a Liberty of Conscience
for them in this their Opinion, as for others of their Dissenting Brethren, and
equally for both. With INFERENCES upon their late PETITION. By JOHN SALTMARSH,
Preacher of the Gospel.

Revel. 2. 2. Thou have tried those that say they are Apostles, but are not.
LONDON, Printed for G. CALVERT, at the Black* Spread-Eagle at the West End of
Paul's. 1646.

To those Brethren of the Assembly of Divines, Petitioners who are for the
pretended Divine Right of the present PRESBYTERY.
BRETHREN, Meeting ye out of the Assembly, or that bounder appointed ye by
Parl. I cannot justly be denied this reasoning with ye; for the Ordinance by
which ye sit, does enable ye only to advice of things propounded, but not to
propound or demand any as ye have done of late; See Ordin. Jun. 12. 1043. p. 4.
so as in this ye have brought your selves down to the same magnitude with us
that are private men. Here is the difference now; Ye are many of better parts
and abilities; I am as one born out of due time; yet the same Covenant is upon
me with your selves, nor ought I because I am but one, presume to see Truth
more then ye because ye are many; nor, I hope, ye who are many, will presume to
see Truth more then one, because ye are many; Nay, 2 Pet. 1. 17.
it is that voice from the excellent glory which both you and I must hear, and
which can only teach us Truth; It is not the voice of any other. And surely
since Truth has had its lot in the world to live upon voices in Assemblies and
Synods, where that is only Truth which is voted so; and not in its own glory
and evidence, where that is only Truth which is so: The Mystery of iniquity
has been more advanced then the Mystery of godliness.

THE DIVINE RIGHT OF Presbytery, etc. With Reasons discussing this pretended
Divine Right.
FIrst, They who are the Presbyters in this present Presbytery, pretend to be
Presbyters by a power of Ordination from Bishops, as the Bishops were
Presbyters: and if so, they are to make it appear, that there is a true
personal succession of Ministry from the Apostles, and that they do lineally
succeed without interruption; for in succession unless there be a certain,
perpetual, and personal derivation of power, there can be no certainty, nor
infallibility of the truth of such a power; and whether the proof of this draws
not with it a necessary and perpetual visibility of a Church, (contrary to the
opinion of all the Reformed Divines;) and further, a truth of Church-Ministery,
and Ordinances of Jesus Christ in the Antichristian State, from whence this
Ministry of theirs comes, by which they stand present-Presbyters; and how any
true Ministry can be found in that very Antichristian State, which is called
the man of sin, the mystery of iniquity, the Whore of Babylon, the falling
away; and how the same State can be both merely Antichristian and Christian, a
Whore of Babylon and a Spouse of Jesus Christ, a Ministry of God and a mystery
of iniquity, a Temple of God and of Idols; I leave it to be judged.

2. That these present pretended-Presbyters cannot be found true Presbyters but
by such a personal and successively derived power, will appear* from their
present Model of Ordination; they allowing and accounting none for Presbyters
or Ministers, but such as are sent out by their personal Ordination, or were
formerly ordained by Bishops; so as they make these, and these must make
others; and thus their power is derived from a personal and lineal succession,
and demonstratively proved from their own practice: nor will it help them that
Jesus Christ always had a Church, or some invisible Saints under Antichrist,
because they must both prove themselves and the Episcopal Ministry to succeed
that very Church or those very invisible Saints; and that, that Church or those
very Saints, were Presbyters or Ministers; for we know men may be Saints, but
not sent, or ministerially sent; good men, but not good Presbyters, as in their
own way of practice will more appear: for if any shall now call himself a true
Presbyter or Minister, he must prove his sending to them by a personal
Ordination; which proof of their Ordination we demand from them, as they would
do now from any others.

3. See their Humble Advice.
How these things can stand together. That the Divine Right is in the
Congregational Presbytery, as they acknowledge; and yet that there is a
Classical, Provincial, and National Presbytery, which are but Prudential and
Humane, or Mixed Judicatures, according to such a distinction; and yet are
allowed by them a Power Supreme and coercive to the Divine Right of the
Congregational Presbytery, which is the first and immediate subject of the
Divine Right of Presbytery, as they themselves acknowledge. And now whether do
not their own Principles control that pretended Divine Right they plead for and
set up, See in their Humble Advice, etc. to the Parl. Manuscr. Page 4.
a Presbytery of Charity and Prudence, over the Presbytery in the particular
Congregation, which they say is only of Divine Right?

4. How can that Presbytery whose constitution is so questionable, challenge
such a Divine Right? As first, their Presbyters, or first constituting
Principle, are ordained by a questionable power, viz. that of Bishops.

Their Ruling Elders by a power as questionable, viz. by a Rule or Ordinance of
Parliament; prudential, for trial, for election, because of the general
corruption in this Kingdom both in Ministers and people; not by that very
Apostolical Scripture-Rule or Institution of Jesus Christ.

Their Congregations Parishional, and of politic constitution; not
Congregational, according to Scripture.

Their way of constituting this present Presbytery extraordinary, by such an
Assembly, without precept or example for such a Way in the whole New Testament,
from whence the whole Order of that dispensation ought to be framed, and not
from the Law, or Old Testament, or some cases of necessity in the State or
Church of Israel by way of Analogy, See the Humble Advice, etc. of the
Assembly, in Manu.
as they say in their Model to the Parliament.

The Primitive Elders and Apostles were qualified immediately from the Spirit
with gifts proper to such a Ministration; which these Presbyters and Elders
being not, but most by gifts, and habits of Art and Science acquired by
industry: therefore these present Presbyters cannot challenge the same power for
Church Censures, without the same Spirit gifting them, and anointing them to
such a power and administration in the Church; but ought to be content merely
with a mixed and partly prudential power, because of the mixture of their
anointing and gifts, if they will needs have such a Government set up for
Christ's, which is not all Christ's, and most of that all very questionable
whether of Christ or no.

For all their proofs alleged from Scripture for the Presbytery by Divine
Right, or of such Presbyters as were ordained either by Christ himself, as the
Apostles; or by a power from the Apostles, or from such who in that power
received from the Apostles, did ordain, or by a power in the Church or
Congregation preceding such a power, and accompanying such a power: Now this
present Presbytery can neither make it self appear to be so purely ordained,
nor have they the Church or Congregational power so preceding or accompanying
such an Ordination; nor is that act of Imposition of hands by which their
present Presbyters stand Ministers, a mere sign of setting apart, or merely
significative, but an Institution for gifts to be conferred: under the Law, it
was an empty and bare Rite; but under the Gospel, it cannot be proved to be
such an empty Rite; Gospel-signes being but few, full, and ministerial to the
Spirit; not merely significatively-visible, as the Institutions and Rites under
the Law were. So as all being thus questionable still in this present
Presbytery; how can they so Apostolically challenge such a Divine Right, their
present constitutions being mixed, questionable, fallible, not one and the same
with that primitive, pure, certain constitutions and practices?

Whereas it appears in their Scripture-proofs, that both in Jerusalem, Ephesus,
Crete, etc. the Prebyters and Elders did constitute, etc. and were most
consulted with, and advised; and therefore they assume the same power, and so
force out rather then prove out their frame of their present Presbytery from
such practices: I desire the Brethren to tell us whether the Word of the Gospel
was then wholly in Scripture or writing, but partly in the Spirit and gifts or
teaching: and therefore the Eldership of the Churches then were so gifted, as
to direct, constitute, advise; and from the ministration of gifts in the
Eldership, etc. the Institutions, forms and Rules were given out into Scripture
or writing; which Scripture or written Word is now in the place of that
infallible Primitive Eldership: and therefore for any Presbytery or Eldership
to assume now such a power as the first did, they do not only without warrant
substitute themselves to such a Presbytery or Eldership which stood by another
anointing or spirit of gifts then themselves do; but they sit down in the
throne with the very Scripture or written Word of God, casting a shadow upon
the glory and infallibility of that Word, by that present authority and power
which they now challenge in the interpretation of that Word in their Presbytery,
because by such a sure and certain power as Divine Right allows them, they
having not a sure and infallible Spirit for Church Censures, or the execution
of such a power, may put forth a certain, sure executive power, by an
uncertain, unsure, and fallible spirit. And so how proportionable a power of
Divine Right, is with a spirit not purely Divine; and how proportionable a
power of Church Censures acted by a gift not purely the Spirit's, but rather
the Universities and Schools; and to join such an Eldership so with the
infallible Word or Scripture, which for want of that primitive or pure
anointing by gifts, shall control the pure Word of Truth, by an Interpretation
less then truth, I leave to all the world of believers to judge.

How such a visible power and Judge as a National Assembly of such a
Presbytery, can be set up, which must judge all the Churches and Congregations
of Christ, all the Magistracy and State-power in the Kingdom, they assuming to
themselves a spirit of judging and discerning of sins: And whether by this
power the Parliament of England shall not fall under the cognizance, See in
their last Petition.
interpretation, and censure of such an Assembly, for some sins which they as a
Civil power may commit, especially dealing in Ecclesiastical causes: And then
how far such a National Assembly may manage such crimes to the heightening of
their own interest, and to the troubling the interest of the State amongst the
people, I let all judge, who know how the same visible Ecclesiastical Judge is
condemned by all the Reformed Kingdoms under another notion, viz. of the
Antichrist, and Pope, and Councels: And how that Antichristian power and Judge
in Ecclesiasticals has troubled this and other Kingdoms, to the embroiling
them by excommunications into Wars and commotions (as in our Histories, etc.)
and has at length taken up other weapons then the Word to make good their
Ecclesiastical censures and interests.

And whether this visible power under the form of Classical, Provincial,
National, Ecumenical, be any other then the like Papal, Episcopal power,
differing only in form, in Consistorial, Provincial, National, Ecumenical
Counsels and Synods, the like spirit of Dominion, ruling, conventing,
excommunicating in each.

Objection. But how will you do to satisfy Parliament, Presbyterials, and
other dissenting Brethren?

Answ.Not that I will determine, but propound for the Parliament: It appears
that the State-conscience according to the present corrupt constitution both of
Ministers, and Elders, and People of this Kingdom, cannot yield a Divine Right
to a Presbytery so constituted; and therefore they are not to be forced to the
judgment of the present Assembly, no more then the Assembly do desire to be
forced themselves to their judgment; and therefore each is to enjoy their
liberty in the Lord as they are persuaded.

The State is to enjoy their liberty in their judgment of no Divine Right in
this present Presbytery.

The Assembly may enjoy theirs, in their judgment of a pretended Divine Right
of Presbytery in all Congregations, which will conscienciously practice with
them, not seeking to make the State subservient to them by their Civil power,
which no Scripture-practice will warrant from any Eldership or Presbytery
there: and thus the French Churches enjoy the Presbytery at this day, having no
Civil power to help them.

And the other dissenting Brethren may enjoy their Divine Right too, being as
fully persuaded from Scripture of theirs as the other are of theirs, and
equally live under the same liberty, and not trouble the State with any thing
but their prayers and obedience.

Objection. But the Brethren of the Assembly expect the Parliament should join
with their results.

Answ.I know not why they should expect that, for they are no more infallibly
gifted then their Brethren, that they should expect more from the State then
they.

Their Ministry is as questionable.

Their Interests are more in the world then the Interests of the first
Presbyters were, as in their maintenance by Tithes, and in their power of
Classical, Provincial, National, the Kingdom being thus corrupted, and in that
subserviency and power of compulsion, they demand of the Magistrate, and
Princes of the world.

And why our dissenting Brethren may not with as much justice, honor,
conscience, desire the State to settle such a Gospel Order as they believe to
be true; the other being no more enabled to demand of the State any power for
imposing their conclusions true by a power of the States own giving by
Ordinance: And whether the State seeing no infallibility of spirit in any of
all sides, since what the Truth which they hold bring in its own evidence and
demonstration before them, ought to be pressed, as bound to one by any Interest
more then to another, save that of Truth, I leave to be considered; and then,
what reason the Brethren have thus to press their supposed Divine Right, I
desire to know.

Objection. Whether is this to settle things according to Covenant?

Answ.Yea, The Covenant binds us to Uniformity; but then, that clause According
to the Word of God does restrain the Uniformity to the light which each Kingdom
sees by, according to that Word; and therefore our Brethren of Scotland see
Presbytery in one degree, the Hollanders in another, and the French in another,
and at this time England in another; and yet all should be one in that clause
of the Covenant, viz. to defend each other in their degrees of Reformation
against the Common Enemy, We Scotland, and Scotland us; and what a comely thing
it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity, though they cannot in Uniformity!

THE LAST PETITION OF THE Assembly, for Divine Right in their present
PRESBYTERY, with Inferences upon it.
PETITION. That the Provisions of Commissioners to judge the scandals not
numerated, appears to our consciences to be so contrary to that way of
Government which Christ has appointed in his Church.

InferenceWhence we may infer, that the Assembly do suppose the Parliament
and Commissioners to be far below the Ministers and Eldership in spiritual
gifts and discerning, which I suppose cannot be well presumed, considering the
Assembly and Eldership now is not anointed with that pure spirit and gifts as
the first were; but with habits of Arts and Sciences, and with some measure of
the Spirit, which many both of the Parliament and Commissioners both may be,
and are enabled with as well as they; and whether is not this to set up the old
distinction of Layty and Clergy, and to set the present Eldership and
Presbytery upon a higher form then the Magistrate? seeing the gifts are not so
distinct as at first, why should the Offices be so distinct?

Petition In that it gives a power to judge of the fitness of Persons.

InferenceWhence we may infer, that they presume themselves to be that very
Ministry and Eldership of Jesus Christ, though both their Ministry is by
Bishops, and their Elders by a prudentiall constitution and election at this
present; and may not the Magistrate, who is unquestionably the power of God,
Romans 13. appointed to be Judge of good and evil, more lawfully judge of sins
and Gospel rules, then they who are a questionable Ministry and Eldership in
this present Presbytery?

PetitionAnd to be so differing from all example of the best Reformed Churches,
and such a real hinderance to the bringing the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity, and in all these respects
so disagreeable to our Covenant.

InferenceWhence we may infer, that if all do not believe as one believe, it
is pretended that all are in breach of Covenant; and thus the Covenant is made
a snare by interpretation, and principles of spiritual compulsion employed in
the Covenant, contrary to the Spirits wisdom who both allows and advises the
several statures and measures of light, the weak, and the strong: and whether
the Communion by unity is not a glorious supplement to the Rent of uniformity,
that of Unity being in the Spirit, that of Uniformity in the Letter; and why
should our Brethren thus bring down the State and Kingdom more to other
Reformed Kingdoms, or not rather raise up the other Reformed Kingdoms to
this? and if any thing be revealed more to this Kingdom, that has sit by this
long time, why should not the other hold their peace, and believing Kingdoms
as believers walk with one another so far as they have attained? and wherein
they have not, the Lord shall reveal even this unto them; not but that this
Kingdom ought to form it self into any Communion with the rest, so far as
their* Communion excels, and so the other into Communion with this, so far as
this excels, and both so far to one another, as they are persuaded, not
compelled, which are no Arguments for Faith, but Formality.

Petition Do humbly pray that the several Elderships may be sufficiently
enabled.

InferenceWhence we may infer, that their whole endeavor is, to raise up the
Interest of the Eldership and Presbytery into a distinct, sole, and Independent
body and power; which how conformable, and obedient, and consistent it may
prove to and with the power of the State in one and the same Kingdom, would be
considered, when such an Interest grows up from its infancy and first
Reformation, into a fuller and more perfect man: And whether their petitioning
of a power from the State to complete and make them an Eldership and
Presbytery, does not imply a power in the State more or rather as fully
Ecclesiastical as their Presbytery; for can the State give them any
Ecclesiastical power, and have none in it self? so as according to these
Principles the State is Ecclesiastical as well as they, and so not to be
denied the power of Commissioning with them: or else it is a mere contradiction
to pray for power from those to their Eldership and Presbytery, which they say
is a Government and Power entirely Ecclesiastical and complete in it self;
and so, as they either pray for that which they have of their own already, or
else pray for that from the State which they cannot give them.

Petition It belongs unto them by Divine Right and by the will and appointment
of Jesus Christ; which with the help of superior Assemblies in cases of
appeal, or in all administrations therein, will prevent (through the blessing
of God) all the feared inconveniences.

Inference.Whence we may infer, that the Prebsytery and Eldership of a
Congregation is of Divine Right, etc. yet that Divine Right is perfected and
completed by that which is not of as pure Divine Right as it self, viz.
Superior Assemblies; and so becomes neither purely Prudentiall, nor Divine,
but Mixed, and so is neither good Divine, nor good Humane Right.

Petition And the Magistrate to whom we profess the Church to be accountable
for their proceedings in all their Elderships and Church Assemblies, and
punishable by him with civil censures for their miscarriages.

Inference.Whence we may infer, that the Civil Magistrate is neither over
nor under the Presbytery, and where they place it, who can tell by this
Petition of theirs? for over it the Magistrate is not; for they say
Commissioners over them are not sufferable; and under it they say the
Magistrate is not, for their Eldership and Presbytery are to be accountable to
the Civil power for their miscarriages; and how at the same time they should
subject their Churches in their mal Administrations to the Magistrates power of
judging, and yet challenge such an entire, sole, supreme, and Ecclesiastical
Judicature, is a mystery becoming the learning of that same Assembly to reveal
which first begun it.

Principles against the Divine Right of their present Presbytery extracted from
the Reasons.
1. THey are no such Presbyters of Jesus Christ as the first were, because
ordained by an Antichristian power of Bishops; nor were Bishops true
Presbyters, nor those who joined with them in their Ordination who were made by
them, nor is there any succession of Ordination, but it implies both a
Perpetual Visible Church, and a true Church Ministry and Ordinances under
Antichrist, which are all to be proved by them.

2. If there were any such true Church invisible under Antichrist, to which
they succeed in their Ministry, then it must appear that they succeed that
very invisible Church, and that that very invisible Church had a true Ministry
or Presbytery in it; for men may be Saints, or good men, yet not good
Presbyters, or Ministerially sent.

3. As they now in their practice will not account any for true Presbyters but
such who can prove to them their personal Ordination from them, so we demand
of these Presbyters an account of their personal succession accordingly, which
personal succession if it be false and interrupted anywhere in the Line, must
needs be all false, from such a point where the first interruption was made.

4. Though Christ's promise is enough to ground a perpetuity of Church and
Christ's presence, yet not of his promise made good to such particular men, or
to their pretended succession.

5. They that challenge a Divine Right to the power they act by, must act by a
gift as divine and infallible as their right and power, and thus did the
primitive Presbyters and Elders; therefore the gift now being but mixed, their
right or power is but mixed accordingly, and not Divine.

6. They who were Elders or Presbyters in the first Churches, as Jerusalem,
etc. were gifted by a spirit which taught the very infallible Word which is now
written or Scripture, and so they then did constitute, advise, counsel in the
place of this written Word; and all Scripture Forms and Institutions were then
in the gift, and persons; but no such thing can be said of any Eldership or
Presbytery of men now.

7. They who set up an Eldership or Presbytery now of Divine Right, to
constitute, ordain, counsel, etc. do join to the Word written, or infallible
Scripture, a Power less infallibly gifted, who by such a Divine Right and
Power pretended, shall control the Word of Truth, by Interpretations of that
word less then truth, which is not consistent with the glory of the Word.

8. There is no Eldership or Presbytery in Scripture, but either the Churches
Act did precede it, act it, or accompany it, by precept or practice, which
makes the Divine Right of the Presbytery questionable, uncertain, unsafe,
because of a contrary Scripture, and precept.

9. The Eldership and Presbytery which are brought for instances are
questionable; first for the Persons, who were not such very Presbyters as they
would imply, but Apostles, Evangelists, etc. or otherwise ordained, either by
Apostles, or Church, or otherwise gifted by special unction, or else an
Eldership of eminency not of Office.

10. They hold this Divine Right is in the first subject in the Congregationall
Presbytery, and yet they set up a Classical, Provincial, National Presbytery
to complete and control this of the Congregationall; and how this their Divine
Right can be subjected thus to a right less Divine, is unreasonable, and
unscripturall to imagine.

11. Suppose such a power as a National Presbytery collected from all parts of
the Kingdom, every Congregation having an Interest, or part there, and this
Presbytery so National and Collective inforformed by a Divine Right, for
judging sins, etc. shall not this National Presbytery take cognizance of
States, if sinning, Ecclesiastically as well as others? and if so, what
proceeding, what censures will follow from such a body as universal as the
body of that State, and of as much interest in the Kingdom as they, and of more
interest, by how much more Divine a Right they act by, and by how much nearer
they are seated to the conscience, and how Kingdoms have been embroyled by
such an Ecclesiastical Interest, Histories will tell ye?

12. So as in this strait when Parliament is persuaded of no Divine Right,
Assembly of a Divine Right, and the Dissenting Brethren of another Divine
Right; is not the way this, to let the Parliament have their Liberty of
Conscience, to settle no Divine Right, by a Power; and the Assembly to use
their Liberty in a Divine Right, with all that will peaceably join with them in
the Kingdom under that Power, and not to trouble the Magistrate further; and
the other Brethren as peaceably to enjoy their other Divine Right, as the
Brethren of the Presbyteriall way theirs, and all alike under the same Civil
Power, and neither of them with it, and all other Reformed Kingdoms, in unity
of the spirit, and love, to one another?

Principles destructive to their present Petition extracted from the Inferences.
1. The Presbytery now not so distinct in gifts and office, but the Magistrate
may rule with them.
THe Eldership, and Presbytery in the Primitive Churches had a spirit anointing
them to such Administrations; but now as the anointing is not so, nor is the
Office pure, peculiar, and distinct; the Magistrates and Parliament have gifts
as spiritual as there are any now in the pretended Presbytery, and may
therefore as well put forth a Power in their Churches or Congregations, as
they, unless their Churches, Officers, and Gifts, were more Christ's, then they
are.

2. The Magistrate may better rule then the Eldership or present Presbytery.
The Magistrate is unquestionably a Power of God, and the present Presbytery
are Officers questionable in their Offices, Gifts, etc. therefore the
Magistrate may more lawfully put forth a Power coercive to sin then they.

3. Uniformity in the Word of God is the Uniformity of Churches.
They that press the Covenant for Uniformity so penally as they do, make it a
snare of compulsion, not in the Word of it, but in their Interpretation of that
Word; unity in the spirit, makes up the want of Uniformity in the letter;
Kingdoms are to be no more compelled to uniformity in Laws Ecclesiastical
then in Civil, but may walk together as Believers so far as they have
attained; that clause according to the Word of God, makes room for the
several statures of Christ, and measures of light in the Covenant, and they
that agree in that are truly Uniform, for it is the uniformity with the Word,
not with one another, but so far as we are all alike in that Word, which is the
very Uniformity of the Kingdom of Christ.

4. The Magistrate as they now make him is Ecclesiastical as well as they.
They that ascribe a Power to any to complete and actuate them in their
Ministration, do acknowledge that very Power by which they are informed to be
in those that so inform and complete them, so as the very Petitioning a State
for Power and qualification for Eldership and Presbytery, does imply a
Presbyterall and Ecclesiastical Power in that State, and if so, the Magistrate
may as well govern in that Church, as any Ruling Officer they have.

5. The present Presbytery in mystery, both over and under the Magistrate.
They that are a Magistracy neither over nor under the Presbytery, tell me in
what sphere or where rule they? for over it, they are not, Commissioners they
say are contrary to the word; and under it, they are not, for their Presbytery
is accountable as they say unto it, See Petition.
so as they who are so much in the dark with their Government, do with
Magistracy they know not what, and would place it they know not where.

The Position being a safer way for the Magistrate then the Erastian, and how
the Presbyteriall Brethren cannot justly exclude him from ruling with them,
according to the present constitution both of the pretended Church and
Presbytery.
That the Magistrate or Parliament cannot be excluded from Government in this
present Presbytery as the present Assembly would exclude them, because this
Kingdom of England is not a Church in Gospel order, but a Kingdom of Believers
in general, and because their present Presbyters and Elders are no true
Presbyters of Jesus Christ according to Gospel Order; and till both this
National Church and Officers be that very Kingdom of Christ, and those very
Officers of Christ, the Magistrate may as lawfully, yea more lawfully rule then
any other pretended Officer, Minister, or Elder amongst them; for Magistrates
have the whole Kingdom of the world allowed from God for their place of
Government: And this Kingdom of England being but a Kingdom or world of
Believers, not a Church, they may as they are powers of God rule amongst them;
Jesus Christ being only King and head in that Church or Kingdom which is more
his own, and the Magistrates Kings for him in that Kingdom which is the world,
or less his own: so as the Presbyteriall Brethren cannot exclude the Civil
power from governing with them, according to the unsound constitution of their
Church, Ministers and Elders; nor till they have proved the truth both of their
very Church, Ministry, and Eldership; for all Scripture proofs of Eldership
and Presbytery is respective to the true Presbytery and Eldership; according to
truth, not to every pretended Presbytery and Eldership of the Nations; so as
till the very Constituting Principles of Presbytery be proved true, no
Scripture either alleged for Presbytery belongs to them, nor any other by
which they would exclude the Magistrate, as from the Church of Christ.

Conclusion.
These few things I have writ to draw forth the strength of others in a thing
of this Nature, which is of as high concernment in the things of Gospel Order,
as any point now abroad, for surely it is not a University, a^ Cambridge or
Oxford, a Pulpit and Black gown or Cloak, makes one a true Minister of Jesus
Christ, though these are the best things in the composition of some; the
Mystery of Iniquity has deceived the world with a False and Artificial
unction for that true one of the Spirit; and the Ministry has been so
clothed with Art and Habit, that if the Apostles should live again, and preach
in that plainness they came, they would be as despised; for we wonder after
the Wise, the Scribe, and the Disputer of this World.

FINIS.

