Some Remarks Upon a Scandalous LIBEL, Entitled The Declaration of James, Duke
of Monmouth, etc,
HAving lately perused a printed Paper, entitled The Declaration of James,
Duke of Monmouth, etc. I thought it my duty as a true subject of England, a
true Protestant, an honest man, and a lover of truth, to discharge (as far as
in my Power it lies) All true Subjects, true Protestants and honest men from
the Imputation of being any ways concerned in abeting so villainous a Cause.

Next, I shall endeavor to vindicate His present Majesty and Parliament under
Him assembled, together with those subordinate Gouvernours, Insinuated, or
intended in the said Declaration, from any irregular proceeding in their
administration of Justice.

And lastly, I shall answer such particular accusations as the Authors of the
said Declaration, have falsely and impudently laid upon His Maj. (or any under
Him) as they concern his own Royal Person, the Protestant Religion ' or our
own lives, liberties, or Properties.

To the first, I do affirm that all the true Subjects, true Protestants, and
honest men within the Kingdom of England, have promised and sworn to oppose
to the utmost of their power with their lives and fortunes, All such Noblemen,
Gentlemen and Others now in Arms, who will own, or are supposed to have
signed, agreed to, or are meant to be Included in the said Traitorous
Declaration.

To prove this, I refer the Readers to the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
generally taken by all Subjects, as also the several addresses of all the
Counties, Shires and Corporations within the Kingdom of England; but more
particularly to the late unanimous Address and votes of Both Houses of Parl.
about the 23, of May last as also of June 13th. That they would assist His
Majesty with their lives and fortunes against Argyle, and James, Duke of
Monmouth, and there Adherants, and all Rebels and Traitors and All Others
whatsoever that shall assist them or any of them. And when I come to speak of
Parl. I shall make it evidently appear, that this present Parl. is the true,
legal, and only Representative of all the Subects of England. And I doubt not
but our neighbor Nations are already convinct, That the Kingdoms of Great
Britain detest and abhor this said traitorous Declaration, and all Persons
abetting or Subscribing it.

To the second: The said Declaration setts forth that His present Majesty
usurped the Crown. That he avows Himself to be of the Romish Religion; That
he has called in multitudes of Priefts and Jesuits. That he has governed
arbitrarily by collecting the Customs and Excise sense the death of the late
King. That his Judges are suborned and fors worn. That the present Parl. is
packt by false returns, Illegal Chartres, with a great deal more of such
stuff, which obliged them to be take themselus to Arms. These accusations
help to make up so absurd and ridiculous a libel, that it wants the Common
Excuse of plesantrie and wit, and indeed deserv's nor a sober answer. But,
least strangers should possibly be imposed upon for want of that true knowledge
of our English affairs and Government, which Englishmen are supposed to have, I
shall bieifly answer every particutar Objection.

First, His Majesty's right to the Crown is so evident and clear, that I
challenge all Historians, Civil Lawers or Examples in Christendom to set forth
a Title in an Hereditary Kingdom freer from Usurpation then His own, both as
to matter of Law, and matter of fact. For (supposeing King Charles the 2d. dyed
without legitimate Issue) His present Majesty is acknowledged by his Enemies
as well as by all Christendom, to be indubitably the next, and Immediate Heir
to His Brother. His accession to the Crown was so peaceable, that there was not
so much as one sword drawn, nor one single man raised to promote him to it or
support him in it: it was in plain words resigned and delivered to Him by His
Royal Brother upon his death bed; He was as peaceably proclaimed and Crowned;
As peaceably acknowledged by voluntary aderesses from all parts of His
Dominions: By all foreign Princes; By the States of Holland and Those who have
there at present the next and most Immediate right to succeed after Him, and
even by Amsterdam it self: and all this unanimously acknowledged and conferm'd
by the two Parl. of England and Scotland and universal Concurrance of Ireland.
All this would be so plain that the most ignorant might comprehend it, were it
not that James, Duke of Monmouth has been and still is believed to have a
legitimate and legal right to the Crown of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, with the Dominions thereunto belonging: In answer to this, I do
affirm, that were the said Noble Dukes right to the Crowns of England etc.
legitimate and legal as he pretends, yet as his circumstances have hitherto
stood, His present Majesty is noe Usurper. To prove this further, I must
acquaint those who have not heard it (if any such there be) that the said Duke
was not only never ownd by the King, Privy Council, or any Parl. which has
ever set sense the late Kings happy restoration, But he has been as
publicly, solemly and legally disclaimed and disowned to be the Kings
legitimate son by them All, as possibly the nature of the case would admittt:
He as thankfully himself accepted the honor of bring declared the Kings
Natural Son, when from Mr James Croftes (the reputed son of the late Lord
Crofts) he was by the mere favor and goodness and recommendation of His
present Majesty preferred to that, and those high Titles which he lately
enjoyd: And the late King himself, when he was upon his death bed, and
sensible that he could not out live 24. hours, and by consequence had noe
apprchensions of popish poisons, or blunderbesses, or could be influenced by
Popish Motives or Instigations, was so fair from declaring him His legitimate
Son, or leaving his Crown unto him; That he left him not so much as his
blessing, which indeed he had obstinately forseited by being a treble traitor,
to his King, his Country, and to his Father, and by giving publicly the lie,
to his late and present Majesty, by that Gentleman like trick with which he
took his last leave of white hall. Now when these known circumstances (besides
many more too long to be set forth) shall be duly considered, let all sober
and Impartial men judge, whether there be the least probable grounds to believe
this pretended legitimate and legal right, and whether it be morally possible,
that the King should be so unjust and unnatural, as to disinherit his only
Son, Whom he so long, and so truly loved, and moreover should confirm it too,
even at last, when neither hopes nor danger could prevent Him from declaring
the truth: The pretended right therefore of the Duke of Monmouth, being so
highly improbable, or at least, doubtful, I say in this case, although the Duke of
Monmouth had a concealed right, yet in the mean time until this right could be
legally and peaceably proved and granted to him, His present Majesty cannot be
reputed, either in reason, in Law, or in conscience an Usurper. This accusation
therefore is (as I said) ridiculous and frivolous. His Majesty's next pretended
crime is, that he ownd Himself bairfac't to be of the Romish Religion. Indeed
it seems strange, that the Son of a King, and pretended Heir to three Kingdoms:
Should have yet to lettle honor in him, as to impute it a crime to a Prince to
practice publicly the Religion which he professes. Must Hypocricie be the
badge of reformation? And must Integrity and sincerity be judged criminal by
the pretended restorer of the truwe Christian faith? Ah James Scott, God who is
the Searcher of hearts, knows how well thy principles and thy practices agree;
And I must say (for I am noe flatterer) it is to be believed that were your
inward man as truly known as your outward man has been (notwithstanding those
several shapes through which it has lately run) the r's not a Turk but would
be ashamd to accept of thee for a partner much more a Protector of his faith.
Thirdly we are told that His Majesty Has called over multitudes of Prieses and
Jesuits. Supposeing this were true, I can scarce tell of what nature his fault
would be; But this I certainly know, that the indiscretion of those multitudes
who went over, Isunpardonnable, since they know how they are exposed and lvable
not only to imprisonements, but even to the sentences of death it self; And
for once I will advance a Negative against a single affirmative, and say (upon
much better grounds then they affirm) that His Majesty has never called in
such multitudes of Priests and Jesuits as is pretended, but on the contrary I
have good reason to believe that he does totally discountenance all such,
except those few who may be employed for the service of His own Chapel. 4tlv
It is objected, That His Majesty has governed arbitrarily by collecting the
Customs and Excise sense the death of the late King: Alas Gentlemen, does all
this noise and up roar against Arbitrary Power, absolute Tyranny etc. conclude
in this one single pretended Instance of it? The case then is this: The Parl.
of England had granted to the late King (upon good causes and confiderations
the fornamed Customs and Excise during His life: The King dies, and His present
Majesty by Proclamation with the advice of His Privy Council, orders the
Collection of the same until the meeting of the next Parl: Some reasons I have
heard given; and they were these, First, because these Customs and Excise being
granted to the late King toward the Support of the nauye, and for the defense
of the Kingdom against its Enemies, if the effect be necessary, the cause must
equally continue and the defense of the Kingdom, being the safety of the
people which is the Suprema Lex, the means to procure this safety is always
supposed to be also granted, for qui dat finem dat etiam media, especially
sense the Customs so collected, were to continue no longer then until such
time as a Parl. could conveniently Assemble; Besides, the Merchants themselves
agreed generally to the payments of these Customs, and declard, that (without
any consideration of the King in the case) the abrupt stopping of the said
Customs, would prove more prejudicial to the Merchants universally, then the
payment of them could possibly be. Thirdly, the collection of these said
Customs was not only reasonable and necessary, but in the Opinion of eight of
the twelve Judges (as these noble declaring Gentlemen confess) it was also
Judged legal, and according to the constant Custom and ancient practice in
such like cases. And lastly, the Parl. being Assembled, was so far from calling
the Judges to account for their Judgment, or the officers for their
collection, that they immediately confirmd the same to His present Majesty as
they had formerly done to the late King. Now let the world Judge what reason
these violent men have to take up Arms, against their lawful King and Governor
(which neither reason nor religion could ever Justify) upon the pretense of
arbitrary power and Tyranny, when this case of collercting the Customs,
resolved by the Judges as a foresaid, is the only single Instance which they
have produict for either: men and Brethren examine your selves for ye know not
what Spirit ye are of.

But to obuiate and preclude my answer to the aforesaid case of the Customs,
these Gentlemen have branded our Judges with the Infamous Titles of subornd and
foresworn: In deed I know not how far these reverend Judges of the Land, and
administrators of Justice amongst us (made also by the late King) may be guilty
of two such crimes as perjurye and subornation, but this I will affirm, that
if so many men born of good families, of honorable Education, learning,
wisdom, piety, and of irreprochable lives and conversations can be capable of
committing such enormous offenses, I can never reasonably hope to see the
Benches free from corrupt mercinary and the worst of men, no, not when James
Duke of Monmouth and his Rebels shall have taken care for the future for
debarring ignorant scandalous and mercinary men from the administration of
Justice, and that the judges shall hold their places by the ancient tenure of
quamdiu se been gesserint, or that the wisdom of his imaginary Parl. shall
have settled some way and method for the approbation of such as shall be
advanced to the degree and dignity of Judges.

And lastly, that no consideration might stop the progres of their villainous
designs, and having made way for the execution of them by the condemnation of
the King with all His Ministers and Judges, they now fall foul upon, and
profane their pretended sacred Idol, Parl. and tell us that this present Parl.
is a Company of men, pack't together by false retuns, illegal Chartres and
other corrupt means. And so by the way leaves noe hopes of a true legal Parl.
whilst the sun and moon endure; for if James Duke of York a Traitor, Tyrant,
and a popish usurper (as they call Him) has been able with out force to pack
such a Parl. in which there are as many; Rich, Noble, Honest worthy Gentlemen,
as any Parl has ever known how shall we hope that the true Protestant James
Duke of Monmouth backed by his pretended legitimate and legal right, together
with the power of the sword should not be much more able to pack a Parl. of the
greatest rebels Traitors Schismatics and villains (to the destruction of all
good men) that any age has ever yet product The Experience of this has been
sufficiently seen in the late rebellion, for which (with the murder of the
blessed Martyr King Charles the first, his partner and accomplice Argyle, is
not ashamed Blaspemously to return the glory to God. But to come to the meritt
of the cause, I must acquaint you how the constitution of Parliaments has been
for nere 500 Years, which is a sufficient time for our purpose, without
searching farther into Antiquity: I shall tell you then, that the
Parliamentaire Representatives of the Nation were chiefly the Barons of
England, and Knights of the several Shires, and Counties therein: These two
remain with little or no alteration from that time to this, and to show how
far the said Knights may be taken at this day, for the Representatives of the
Common of England, I must also Inform you. That every Knicht of the sheir; is
chosen by the Major part of all such Commoners who wish in the said shires or
Counties, have the value of 40 sh. per ann. freehold in the said shires or
Counties: Which privilege comprehends so great a number of Householders, that
there are few men excluded besides servants and some farmers who are often
times strangers come in unto us: And the Election of these Knights of the
Shires and Counties remains as it anciently was, without any alteration Illegal
Chartres, or any false returns or corrupt means other then what might have been
used ever sense their first Institution, and may continue to the end of Parls
and time. Illegal Chartres then have no relation to Knights of the Shires,
because there neither are, nor never were any Chartres in the case, and if any
false returns have been made, or corrupt means used, the Parliament it self
when fully Assembled is Judge of the right at this day, as formerly at any
time it had been; Thus we see how far, Knights of the shires may be
representatives of the Commons of England, and where the abuses or corrupt
means in the choice of them, are to be Judged and rectifyed.

The accusation then of Illegal Chartres is applicable to Corporations only,
which from the Kings Chartres or Grants have received the Privilege of sending
Burgesses or Parl. men to Parliaments; To explain this, I do again affirm
(and I challenge all the complotters of this Rebellious Declaration to show the
contrary) that this privilege of Corporations began not until the time of
King John who reigned about the year of our Lord 1199. Which was nere 140.
Years after William the Conqueror and who was the founder of many and called the
Patron of all Corporations: The Occasion in short was this: King John, to
Balance the Power of his rebellious Barons erected several Corporations, and
out of his mere favor and benevolence, granted Chartres to them upon several
Conditons and limitations, by which they had the Privilege of choosing and
sending Burgesses to Parl. From hence we must observe these things. 1st. that
this Privilege of Corporations was noe ancienter then the time of King John,
and by consequence not a fundamental part of the English Monarchy, which was
antecedent so it and the Creator of it 2. This privilege ever proceeded from
the mere grace and benevolence of our Monarchs, and lastly that it was granted
upon several conditions, which when broken, their Chartres were forfaited in
Law, and their Privileges ceased: And accordingly during this intervall of
time, the Charters of several Corporations, even that of London it self) were
forfeited suspended, and some times taken away. This then being the true case
of Chartres and Corporations, we must next observe That King Charles 2d.
finding several corporations had notoriously broaken, or not performed those
conditions by which they held their Chartres, He cites them in a legal way by
quo warranto's to try thire Case at Law, whereafter a full hearing, (even to
the content of the parties concerned) with the assistance of the most learned
Council that England afforded (as in the case of the Charter of London) the
verdicts have been given for the King, and many other Corporations sensible of
there guilt, or desirous to have the Conditions of their Charters altered,
having surrend'red there old Chartres into the hands of the late King, His said
Majesty out of his mere grace and favor. did either confirm the old
Chartres, or granted new ones with such conditions and limitations, as in His
Princely Wisdom He thought most fit, according to the undoubted right of King
John, and the rest of His Royal Progenitors. Now by virtue of these Chartres,
and according to the Powers and Privileges therein expressed, those Corporations
have chosen and sent their Represeutatives or Burgheffes to his present Parl.
And this being the exact State of the case, I appeal to all men of sense and
reason, whether these Chartres can be called Illegal, or their Burgesses (being
duly chosen according to them) a Company of men packt together by corrupt and
fraudulent means. And this confirms what I at first averd, that this present
Parl. being the true, legal and only Representative of all the true Subjects of
England, the whole Nation has by them detested and abhord this traitorous
Declaration and all the Rebels concerned in it.

I come now to the third and last head which contains the false impudent and
particular reflections of the late Duke of Moumouth against His Majesty's
sacred Person, in which he is not ashamd like a base villain, to call him
murderer, Assassim, Traitor and suchlike, and instanceth the murder of Sr
Edmund Bury Godfrey, the death of the late Earl of Essex, and that even of the
late King His most dearly beloved Brother. He mentions also the burning of the
city of London, and subordination of false witnesses; Now let all men of
honout, and men of arms Judge, whether this be like a Declaration of war upon
the pretense of a legal and legitimate right to three Kingdoms, or rather the
most scurrulous and saucy Invective of some mean poor spirited railing fellow,
who shows himself at least hereby to be the true Son of that impudent
scandalous abandond woman his Mother, who after Monmouth was borne became a
common strumpett so many Persons now alive whom I know, and could name: Hold
not thy tongue o God of my praise, for the mouth of the wicked, and the
mouthful of deceit, are opered upon me; They have spoken to me with a lying
tongue, They compessed me about also with words of hatred, and fought against
me without a cause, They have rewarded me evil for good and hatred for my
friendship; let his days be few, and let another take his charge, let his
posterity he destroyed, and in the generation following, let their name bt
put out, Psalm. 109.

It would be impertinency and great presumption in me should I pretend to
answer crimes, which are so far from being suspected to be true, that I am
persuaded they are not believed by the Slanderers themselves: Besides, as the
truth of most of these cases has been legally discovered and attested, so
neither time nor place will permit me to infert the several trials and
Evidences, which have been given in them. I am sufficietly convinct, That the
most unspotted honor, and most Royal, Heroic, generous and pious principles,
and actions of His present Majesty, even to niceness It self, through the
whole course and circumstances of his life, and series of His private as well
as public actions, are so notoriously known through the whole world, that all
Christendom, with the Kings and Princes thereof, would unanimously concur, and
beg to become His Compurgators, and from their souls abhor and detest those
most villainous men, and worst of Traitors, who so falsely, maliciously and
sawcily have dared to profane the Sacred Caracter of so Incomparable a Prince:
but that I may undeceive some Innocent men and strangers to Our Country who it
may be have been poysned by the false reports, false Oaths and perjuries of
these profligate, out lawd, and insolent Traitors; I must humbly beg His
Majesty's leave, that I may speak to two of those particulars, of which being
my self an eye witness to the one, and a competent, and Impartial Judge of the
other, I persuade my self, that according to the truth of these two cases,
Those who shall peruse these Papers, will equally judge of the rest.

The first is that of the burning of London: The beginning of that fire, with
its growth and progres is now as generally known, as its end: I shall only
their fore say this: That being my self present most part of the time, both by
day and by night, and a sufferer in that fire as well as my neighbors, I had
many several occasions to be very nere His present Majesty, then Duke of York,
and I do testify, That His diligence, care, and pains in stopping that
dreadful fire, was almost equal to any particular sufferer in it; That His
compassion and affliction for its progres, both in words and actions, seemd so
great as if He Himself had been the only Sufferer; and His advice in quenching
those flames so pressing, and so reasonable, that, had not men's fears outrun
their dangers or had His advice been vigorously followed, in all moral
probability, they had put a much earlier stop to that vast conflagration; and
all honest men are thoroughly and fully convinct, that His then Royal high: the
Duke of York, did no more directly or indirectly contrive (as they call it) the
burning of the City of London, then of the so much celebrated Temple of Diana
(so many thousand of years sense) at Ephesus.

The second case, Is the poysning His Majesty of blessed memory; Indeed the
horror of so damd and false an accusation, with the stupendous inveterate
malice of Jams Scott late Monmouth, and his most accursed associates, does
almost confound my thoughts, and stop my pen: However, I must say in general:
That had it pleased God Almighty in his great mercy to us, to have sent an
Angel from heaven and assured us, that he would take (in his due time) His late
Majesty from us, but by a death so natural, that there should not be the
least circumstantialt conjecture of violence, I dare be bold to affirm that
the wit of man could not have found out or desired a kind of death more
natural and free from the suspicions of humane malice, then that of the late
King. In particular, the manner of the Kings being taken with the first fit,
was Apoplectical, the Effects, Apoplectical the Method and cure of his first
fit by Cupping, Scarifying and suchlike, (accordng to the rules of art in
those cases) answered Apoplectical indications, the lettle distortion of this
Mouth, and failing in His speech Apoplectical, every circumstance so much
Apoplectical, that His last fit was plainly and truly for told Him (according
to the Nature of such Apoplexies) many hours before their was any outward
appearance of the fit, His Body when opend, His gutts, vitals, brains and All,
were so far from showing the least suspicion of poison, that they
sufficiently declared an Apoplexy, the unanimous concurrance of all his
Physicians pronounced a natural death: And were all these circumstances, with
many more, insufficient to prouve the same, yet the soft and hearthy tears
alone of that Undaunted Hero King James the second, would convince Opinias
trite and incrudulite it self, thatt was impossible He should with so much
sorrow lamant a Death, which (as they urge) He not only had desird but
contrived, whilst the Hypocrisy of the bravest of men, must have exceeded the
vile dissembling art of the most mercinary slave: And I defye Brinvillers (were
she now alive) with all the art of Indian or Siciliane Poysoners to invent a
dose which should so fully in all points and Circumstances resemble such a
natural Apoplexy, as that which carried off our late Blessed Sovereign, I have
only one objection to answer, which, how frivolous soever it be, yet since it
is particular, and believed by some men, I beg leave to speak to it: they say
then that when the late King perceved he was poysned, he should with great
passion utter these words, Good Lord, what have they done unto me? Now as some
circumstantial truths have been ever mingled with material falsehood, like leaf
gold over bitter pills, to make them pass the better, so I must ingeniosluy
confess, that I have heard His Majesty should have spoken some such words as
those, but good God, upon how different an occasion from what it is now
applied, I have been credibbly then told, that after the King was recouvered
from his first fit, in which his Chyrurgeons, had cupt Him sacrifyed and cut
him upon the shoulders, and other parts the King (not knowing what had past
whilst He was senseless, (and feeling at last the smart and pain of those
wounds which in His fit he had received being surprised at what he had not
felt before, should say some such words as those Good Lord, what have they done
unto me? Thus we see Innocencye brought to support the fowlest malice, and
truth it self enjag'd to confirm the most accursed lie: Yet notwithstanding
all this, James, Duke of Monmouth declares he will prosecute James Duke of York
(as he calls His present Majesty) for the aforesaid villainous and unnatural
crime in pursuance of a vote torevenge the Kings death (upon Papists he shoold
have said for such was the vote) in case he came to an untimely end, until he
has brought Him to suffer what the laws adjudged to be the punishment of so
execrable a fact and in a particular manner being deeply sensible of that
barbarous and horrid parricide committed upon his father does resolve to pursue
the said James Duke of York, as a mortal and bloody Enemy, and will endeavor
as well by his own hand as by the assistance of his friends and the law to have
Justice executed upon him. Gently gently young man and put not your self into
passion, dog days are coming on, and if you heat your blood too much phlebo to
my in the Jugular vein will prove your only cure. But to be serious: Never was
villainous cause supported by a more suitable argument, one of the most glorious
Princes and worthiest of all mankind, must be hectord thus, and suffer (if they
could compass it) for an Imaginary crime, which was never committed by any
mortal, besides themselves in their Impudent Declaration, and that in
pursuance too of a vote for scandalous, so unreasonable and unjust that it
must remain a blott to all Parliaments and publik Assemblies which time it
self can never wipe off. I have spoke what is sufficient concerning the death
of the late King, and shall only give you the cause and motive of that noble
vote:

Whilst the late popish plott (supported by the Testimonies of that most
execrable perjurd villaiu Titus Oats. And some others as infamous as himself)
was most in vogue. The house of Commons, out of a furious zeal to preserve the
Protestant Religion, had almost forgott Christianity, and rashly past a vote,
that if the late King should come to an untime end they would revenge, His
death upon the Papists. This, how unjust soever it was, seemed yet tender and
kind toward the late King; But oh the malice of those cursed heads, who,
(having imposd upon, and deceived many, of that mistaken Parliament) had formd
a Plott so hellish and so bloody, that nothing but the barbarous in humanity
of it, ever made the truth of it suspected: However it being (by Gods great
mercy and providence who is the Protector of Innocence) not only discoverd and
prevented, but made so notoriously plain that the whole nation is fully
satisfied of its truth; I shall acquaint you with the case. That voting Parl:
being dissolvd, the heads nevertheless and promoters of the plott met in
Caballs, as was legally and fully examined and proved, where at last a
resolution was taken (as at first designed) that the late King should be ass
assinated by theirs own accomplices Rumbold, Walcup and others, and immediately
the odium and punishment of their own horrid crime, was to be Thrown and
executed, not only upon all Papists, but upon their Bratt Prelacy, as Argile
terms the Church of England; so with one most monstrous bloody Regedical
stroke, they intended to have subverted the Government, and extirpated root
and branch all those who had been ever faithful and loval to the King and our
ancient Monarchy, or true sons of the Church of England, And the pious double
Apostate head and Capt. General of the Protestant forces (as Monmouth styles
himself) together and in company with the said Rumbold and others, the
intended murderers of his dear Father King Charles 2. is now desperately, and
openly endeavoring to accomplish that cursed design, which (by the especial
providence of God) wanted then its damnable effect: Now if All this, and every
particular of it be not true, then not only our own nation, but all the
Christian Princes of Europe are miserably deceived, who sent their Ministers
to congratulate the the Kings happy deliverie from those bloody villains, and
traitors; The adresses to the same effect from all the Courties, Shires and
Corporations in England, mere delusion and mockery; Witnesses of their own
faction, and all concurring circumstances, mere eheat and legerdemain, the
Judges of our Land, deaf and blind; and the most legal trials in open Court
by 12. substantial Gentlemen and Citizens (against whom the criminalls
themselves had noe exceptions) the premeditated resolutions of violence, and
injustice. But on the other side if what we have now affirmd, and every
material part of it be true (as heaven and earth know it is) what then shall
we say to these incorrigible dissembling traitors and most bloody minded
Rebels? Hear all ye people, hearken thou O earth, and all that therein is,
And let the Lord God be witness against you, even the Lord from his holy
Temple. Mich. 1^ v. 2.

For St Edmund bury Godfry, and the Earl of Essex their case was examined with
all the strictness and Justice, that possibly the Law in such cases does, or
can afford, and the devil himself could not have invented greater lies; then
have been published concerning the latter, by some of the rebels, but to speak
more particular to that would require a larger volume. Sydney, Russell and
those other Traitors, who were executed for their treasons, had not only all
imaginable Justice, but much more favor and mercy shown them, then any of
those Papists who before had sufferd. Armstrong indeed was not permitted to
plead to the meritt of his crimes, not that there wanted either treasons or
witnesses to have hanged him ten times over (as was publicly offered in the
Court) but he being before out lawed for treasons, by due course of Law and not
appearing or or sunendring himself voluntarily with in the time prefixed, he
could noe more have the benefitt of that law from which he fled, but was ipso
facto guilty and liable by Law to the punishment of treasons except His Maj.
out of his mere grace, and by the power of His Royal prerogative had pardoned
his out laury and had set him in statu quo prius; which I say being a mere act
of mercy as that of pardonning a man already condemnd, it is in the Kings Royal
breast to have mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and since the King was
pleased upon this Occasion to refuse it, Armstrong can noe more complain of
Injustice, then any robber or traitor that has been executed these 100 Years.

As for our Religion, lives, liberties and pooperties, we enjoy them with such
an entire, happy, lawful freedom that we are envied by all the subjects of
Europe; nor is there an empire, Kingdom, Commonwealth or Government in the
whole world, under which subjects may live more happy and secure then in our
own; these are besides so fenced and hedged about (as the Declaration, says)
that I defye the wit of man, and power of Parl. to add one word which shall
not rather enflave then en franchise, ruin, then support them. The Protestant
Religion, as it is now professed, has been so established and confirmed by acts
of Parl. for more then these 100 Years, that except a Protestant Parl. (and
other then such there can never be) should introduce poperye, and with their
our hands deliver up that power, which they do, and may and are so tenacious
to preserve, the Protestant Religion must eternally flourish in England, whilst
Kings and Parliaments endure. In a word, our Religion, lives, liberties and
properties an so well founded, so strongly fortifyed, and so carefully
protected by Our most Gracious Sovereign King James the second, that with the
machinations and conspiractes of James, Duke of Monmouth some years hence, not
the present open hostilities and detestable Rebellion of James Scott, Argyl,
with their Accomplices, and the assistance which they vainly (and injuriously
to all Government) flatter themselves they shall receive from foreign powers,
will ever be able (by the blessing of God) so violate them, or break in upon us.

Thus I have spoken what is, I hope, sufficient at least what is punctually
true, concerning those several points of which I intended to discourse: for the
rest of his insignificant, railing canting staff. I think it not worthy of a
further reply, for I persuade my self that what has been already said, will
satisfye al impartial Readers, but nothing will convince the positive and the
prejudic't. His promises and his threats which are vastly great, are equally
ayrie and ridiculous, and this Chymerical Hero woul have done mutch better to
have employed his thoughts upon some new conquest in Terra Ausirali incognita,
or of the world in the moon, then thus unjustly, wickedley, and bloodily
endeavor to disturb the peace of three Kingdoms, which detest his principles
and disown his pretensions.

For those Protestant Kings, Princes, and Governors whom he impudently invites
to partake with him in his rebellion, as it is a public afront, and
unpardonable injury to them all, so I doubt not but they will all as
publicly disown both him, and his adherants.

To conclude, if ever Rebellion was grounded upon the falsest of pretenses, it
is this. If ever rebellion was raisd by the worst of of men, against the Best
of Princes, it is this, and lastly, if the most notorious, barefac't sins of
fornication, adultery, cold murder and repeated apostacies, rapes and incest,
were lost in the whole world besides, they might be found in James Scott the
pretended double head, and twice apostat popish Capt. General of the
Protestant forces and false protectors of the reformed Protestant Religion.

O Lord God the Avenger, show thy self clearly, Exalt thy self. O Judge of
the World, and render a reward to the proud, they prate and speak feircely, all
the workers of Iniquity vaunt themselves, but the Lord is my refuge, and my
God is the rock of mine hope, and he will recompense them in their
wickedness, and destroy them in their own malice, Yea the Lord our God shall
destroy them. AMEN.

God save King James the II.

