THE QVEEN OF DENMARK'S LETTER TO THE KING of SCOTS, Now resident in the City
of Paris.

Dated from Her Majesty's Royal Court at Hamborough, November. 16. 1651.

Together with the Removal of Major General Massey, and the sending of him
prisoner to the Tower.

M R
portrait of the author, apparently Sophie Amalie of Brunswick-Luneburg, queen
consort to Frederik III, king of Denmark

London, Printed for George Horton, 1651.

The Queen of DENMARKS Letter to the King of Scots, now in the City of PARIS,
dated from Hamburgh November 16. 1651.
Highly Honored, and dearly loved Kinsman,
HAving (with much remorse and morosity of mind) received clear and unfallible
Intelligence of your Majesty's late defeat in England: as also how miraculous
an escape you made thence, we thought fit to let you know, that we think our
self (in a high nature) obliged to congratulate your Majesty's magnanimity (the
essence of a Prince) in the managing of that Heroic and unparalleld attempt
(an Act which shall eternize your name) as also to exult and rejoice with you
for your unheard of deliverance after so dire a storm, providence appointing so
safe an Harbor, alotting you an Asylum or residence in such a metropolis,
where, as you are honored of all, so are you dearly beloved by our Brother the
Monarch of France, and all the Princes of the blood, your Majesty (we doubt
not) needs no Phylosophical Lecture of patience, or aequanimity, since you
breath that virilem sapientiam stoicorum (which Seneca does so much extol) that
masculine and heroic bravery of the Stoics, whereby they did put of man, and
tread above the stage of humane chance.

It is a Highway saying, that we are Architects of our own fortune; but
fortune cannot be wrought or framed without the tools of virtue, and so it
becomes a Statute of virtue, which was carved for the statute of fortune: yet
it is true, that though we be not Authors of of its entity, yet we are of its
quality, and the present power now Diameter to your Majesty, may perceive how
fickle the blind Goddess may be, by your late invading them, when they least
doubted such an Inroad; and had you but given them one blow, those that sung
Hosanna before, would soon have tuned their Pipes to a Crucifixion. If every
man have his fortune, and every fortune its wheel, how can we complain that our
wheel descends, since one part of the wheel does not descend so much one way,
but it ascends another way, those men only complain of fortune, who have their
souls so tacked to their bodies, that when one falls and precipitates, the
other does so too; but those who possess one part of the wheel with their
souls, and another part with their bodies, do wish always the adverse or
contrary part of the wheel, and if they have it not, they make it so, because
the one part mounts toward Heaven, when the other hurries down toward Hell.
But your Majesty may (perhaps) say, you have lost your Kingdoms; you have not
left them, but surrendered them, they are the favors of fortune, what other
goodness have they in them but what he stamps that does enjoy them? Dignity is
like a purple Attire, which does embellish dirt, because it hides the ugliness
of it; but disgraceth Gold, because it hides the splendour of it, every thing is
bright where the Sun shines; but a Carbuncle if it glitter and sparkle, must
be placed in the dark, it must be removed out of another light if you would see
its own virtue, desire to be naked, dispoiled of Dignities, and sequestered from
Wealth: you are come down from the Hill, not thrown down from thence: Men are
not therefore nearer Heaven, because they are advanced above us; he that is
sometimes nearest unto it, sees it least; he that stands on the top of a
Mountain sees nothing else but the Sun, whereas he that is in the bottom of a
Well, can thence number the Stars: Also you may (perhaps) be agrieved that
your Kingdoms are taken from you, with as much violence as your Fathers Head
was taken off; but your Majesty may please to consider that nature which has
planted in Man that most ardent desire o Command would have showed her self an
envious Mother, if she had not also given something to command: There is no Man
but has a Kingdom within himself, and he is not worthy to be a King over
others, that is not first a King over himself; rejoice that you are a Monarch
over your own affections, to see your passions so good Subjects: this Harmony
brings you to hear that of the spears, and to contemplate that of God himself;
and in this most delightful Symmetry, you shall taste that peace and
tranquillity of mind which was by ancient Sages reputed the felicity of the
blessed; if you may not come in place to right the oppressed, yet you may
procure it to be done, and though you have not to relieve your friends, yet you
have whereby to pity them: is not this body of Clay enough to press down the
soul, unless we clog it also with the weight of Kingdoms and Provinces? the
greatest of Dignities is a circumstance that does always add weight to our
faults: it is very true, that the transition from a place of eminent Command,
unto a private life, is not easily concocted, except only by those who do not
change their intellect by changing their condition: the changing of a man's
condition is the death of one man, and the Generation of another; all Estates
and conditions of men in the world are equal, the felicities of this world are
not in things themselves, they subsist in opinion only, and become great or
small, according as they are apprehended, and they have the greatest share of
them that believe they have it. Sovereignty is like a Mountain which seems to
the Subjects (who are at the feet of it) with his towering head to touch the
Skies; but to those that are at the top, it seems with its basis to reach Hell.

Divine providence by an inscrutable decree, by a most strange Revolution, has
mutated the English Nation (your Fathers Subjects in times past, and over whom
you claim a power) from a Monarchical to a popular Estate, your Majesty has
experience (I hope) that this change has not happened by Fate or Fortune, but by
Gods immediate decree; nor is this more then has happened in all Ages to Bodies
politic, of a far vaster size then that of Great Britain, viz. to the Medes,
Persians, and Romans, etc. those democratical Demigods that now sit at Helm,
and steer their Argosie of England, Scotland, and Ireland, think themselves
obliged to accept of that which divine providence (I shall not determine why)
not only has offered, but thrust upon them, pleading the same Right which
William the Norman first laid claim to, and his Posterity after him; your
Majesty's best revenge will be to wait on the will of Heaven, who in his own
time will (...) (for ought we know) all back again to (...) form: the wisdom of
this Age (...) the folly of the next; however for (...) shall ever endeavor
all we may, though with the hazard of our life (should the whole Universe
beside, conspire against your Majesty) to make the World sensible that we are

Your Majesty's cordial and unfeigned Kinswoman, M. R.
Given at Our Court at Hamborough, November. 16. 1651.
On Thursday last being the 27 of Nov. Major Genesis Massey was brought from
Warwick Castle to London, and guarded by a Troop of Horse to the Tower: being
confined to the same Lodgings that Mr. Love was lately in: He is now recovered
of his wounds; and I wish mercy may intervene, that a more fatal one does not
befall him.

FINIS.

