A TREATISE against IMAGES. and PICTURES in Churches. And an Answer to those
who object that the times are changed.

Written by George Salteren, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for William Lee, and are to be sold at the sign of the Turks
head in Fleet Street, 1641.

A TREATISE against IMAGES and PICTURS in Churches.
And an Answer to those who object that the Times are changed.
THe old Serpent, the father of lies, is still the same; he is full of
inventions and devises to draw men from god, and to bring them to destruction.
And the wicked heart of man is still like it self, apt to apprehend whatsoever
that Serpent suggesteth, so it be pleasing to their depraved dispositions, and
corrupt affections.

Although it be most clear and evident, that the setting up of the pictures
of Saints in Churches, is, 1. no way warranted by the word of God. 2. but
severely prohibited, and condemned. 3. And therefore justly accursed by our
common prayers. 4. And so declared by the doctrine of our Church in the
Homilies: yet he has found a shift to say, that the Homilies were made for
those times, namely for the beginning of the Reformation, and therefore the
more severe; but now the times are changed, and a milder course is taken. As if
the whole Authority condemning these vanities, and abominations, depended only
upon the Homilies, and not upon the eternal and immurable truth of Gods holy
Word and Commandment. Let us not deceive our selves; for the neglect of Gods
Commandments, which the Prophet Samuel calls Rebellion, is as the sin of
witchcraft, apt to delude and blind us. But they that look into the clear
light of Gods word do know that the negative precepts of Gods Law, Obligant
semper, and ad semper: as our Church, and all our godly, and reverend Bishops,
and learned Divines in their books, allowed, authorized, and published, have
taught us. These books also agree with the doctrine of the Homilies, that the
words of Gods Law are to be taken by a Senechdoche speciei, pro genere,
according to the doctrine of our Savior, Mat. 5. And the rules thereupon
collected by the learned fathers of the Primitive Church, Augustine, Isidor,
etc. And therefore the word graven Images must be extended to all Images,
whether molten, carved, or painted; the word similitude to all kinds of
similitude, though but in conceit; and the word (thou shall not worship, nor
bow down to them) to all kinds of worship, though it be but setting them in
honorabili loco, as our Homilies speak out of Saint Augustine. And this has
been taught us for truth now almost these 80 years together.

And this truth is not made more strong, but more clear and evident to us, by
the constant expositions of godly men both before and since the making of the
Homilies. Vox populi Dei, vox Dei est, and praxis Sanctorum interpres
praeceptorum: which yet is more manifest by the Laws, Ordinances, Canons, and
Constitutions, both Ecclesiastical, and Politic, as well consequent, as
concurrent; and by the continuance and renewed confirmations of the Articles,
and book of Common prayers, without alteration or qualification in this point:
and lastly, by the absurdities of the Consequents, that must be inferred upon
this new conceit of the change of times. For what will or can they say? If we
demand when this change was made, by whom, and by what authority, wherein, how
declared, and how accepted? was the doctrine of the Homilies true then, and is
it not so now? or was the sense and meaning of the Law of God so then, and it
is not so now? Is the truth of the eternal God mutable and temporary? Are Gods
Laws subject to times? Or is it not a mere nonsense, or contradiction to say
that Gods Law was once so to be understood; but not so now? Why then is the
fact and judgment of that learned and godly Bishop Epiphanius, together with
the consent of S. Hierom. S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, the Elibertin Council, and
all the Primitive Church, the Council of Constantinople, the excellent godly
Bishops, Serenius, Nassitiensis, Claudius, Thaurinensis, Guilielmus
Miniatensis; whereof some with their hands, and all with their writings and
authority, did tear and break down Pictures, and Images of Saints? Why are
they so highly commended, and approved therein, by our late godly and learned
Bishops, and Doctors, Jewel of Sarum, Hall of Exon. usher of Armagh, Peter
Martyr, Mr. Perkins, Doctor James, Doctor Mayor the Catechist, and others; some
of which books were new printed and set forth within these five years last
past, together with that excellent book of Martyrs ordained to be set open for
every man to read in all Cathedral Churches, and Bishops houses. I demand
therefore, when this change was made that they pretend? was it within these
three years, or two, or one? I demand also by whom, or by whose authority? For
it is manifest, and known to all the world, that the most blessed Queen
Elizabeth made none, but constantly kept her self to her word; semper eadem.
Our most noble and learned king James made none; but by his Proclamation
prefixed before the Common prayerbooke, and every year new printed, most
straightly prohibited all Innovations. Neither has our most gracious, and pious
King Charles made any; but by his Declaration before the Articles most severely
forbids all alterations: and that also within these five years. Who then
are these that will have an Alteration or Innovation? And by whose authority,
or by what means have they changed the times? Thirdly, how has this change
been made, instituted, or accepted? For, Leges instituuntur, cum promulgantur;
confirmantur, cum moribus utentium approbantur: Laws are then instituted when
they are proclaimed; and are confirmed, when they are observed in the lives of
the subjects. What has been done in this kind? Do they think that Gods Laws
can be altered by humane inventions? or that Laws once, by supreme authority
and public consent, made and approved, can without equal authority and
consent be altered and changed, by the conceits of private men? If they may by
this trick shift off the doctrine of one Homily, why not of all the rest? why
not of the Homily of reading the word of God, of Faith, of Repentance, of
Christian love and Charity, of good works, of Prayers, of repairing Churches,
and lastly also those most godly Homilies of obedience, and against
disobedience, and Rebellion, and so set every man's conscience at liberty? Yea,
why may they not proceed from the Homilies, and by the same reason reverse also
the consecrations of our Bishops, and ordinations of our Ministers, and all the
Articles, Canons, and Constitutions, Laws, and Statutes, as well of the Church,
as of the State; and so bring all to confusion? For if one Homily that has
been now these 80. years almost approved, and by so many Canons and
constitutions may now so easily be rejected and annulled; why not all the rest?
If one Article may be so vacated, why not all? And if this setting up of
Pictures grow once to be publicly allowed, and that these Imaginers or Imagers
obtain his Majesty's approbation (which God forbid) what shall we do next?
shall we still go to Church every Ashwednesday to curse all setters up of
Idols, and worshippers of Images, and so to curse every of us, both our selves,
and one another? to curse all our most reverend and godly Bishops; yea to curse
him and his, whom I for my part dare not name or think of, without a most
ardent prayer to Almighty God for their both temporal and eternal
blessedness? I say not only every Ashwednesday, but every day, when we offer
up to God our prayers, according to the godly order of our Common prayer book:
Since that in using part we agree to the whole, and also to the intent and
meaning of those curses allowed by our Church, and by all our godly and
reverend Bishops, from the first year of that excellent Queen Eliz. to this
instant time of the reign of our most gracious King Charles. What fearful
things be these to think of? and yet how can they be avoided, if once this gap
be opened, that with a public contempt of our public ordinances these
Pictures in Churches shall be publicly accepted?

But because some do lightly esteem the authority of our Homilies, though
made by most learned, godly, and reverend men; whereof some were Bishops in the
time of King Edward; and Marryrs under Queen Mary unto death; others were
Martyrs by banishment under Queen Mary, and Bishops in Queen Elizabeth time;
which Homilies do utterly condemn the setting up of all Images, called the
Images or Pictures of Saints in Churches: I have thought good to set down
certain sentences of the holy Scriptures, together with the expositions, as
well of the Ancient Doctors, and Fathers, as of our most learned and reverend
Bishops (whereof some are yet living) and also of Catechismes that by comparing
the one with the other, it may plainly appear by their unanimous consent, that
the setting up of such Images and Pictures in Churches, is and has been most
justly declared, to be unlawful and accursed, not for any temporal, but for
eternal reasons; viz. as being directly against the Commandments of God, sc.
The second Comamandement, Thou shall not make to thy self any Image, nor the
likeness of any thing, etc. Thou shall not bow down, nor worship it, etc.

Here upon says Tertullian Tertul. de Idol.
principale crimen generis humani summus saeculireatus, tota causa judicii,
Idololatria. (...) graece sormam sonat, ab eo per diminutionem I dolum
deductum, aeque apud nos formulam fecit. Inde omnis forma vel formula Idolum se
dici exposcit; Inde Idololatria omnis circa omne Idolum famulatus and servitus:
Inde omnes Idoli Artifex ejusdem and unius est criminis. Idolum tam fleri, quam
coli Deus prohibet. Quanto praecedit ut fiat quod coli possit, tanto prius est
ne fiat, si coli non licet. Propter hanc causam ad eradicandum scil. materiam
Idololatriae, Lex divina proclamat; Ne feceritis Idolum, and conjungens, neque
similitudinem eorum quae in Coelo sunt, and quae in terra, and quae in mari.
Omnia colit humanus error, praeter ipsum omnium Conditorem: eorum imagines,
idola, imaginum consecratio, idololatria.

Ait quidam, cur ergo Moses in eremo simulacrum serpentis ex aere fecit? Been,
quod idem Deus and Lege vetuit similitudinem sieri, and extraordinario
praecepto serpentis similitudinem interdixit, si eundem Deum observas, habes
legem ejus, ne feceris similitudinem: Si and praeceptum factae postea
similitudinis respicis, and tu imitare Mosen; ne facias adversus legem
simulacrum aliquod, nisi and tibi Deus jusserit. Facio, ait quidam, non colo:
imo tu colis qui facis ut coli possint; colis autem non spiritu vilissimi
nidoris alicujus, sed tuo proprio, nec anima pecudis impensa, sed anima tua.
Illis ingenium tuum immolas, illis sudorem libas, illis prudeatiam accendis:
might he not have said also, illis pecuniam erogas?

Idolatry is the principal crime of mankind, the greatest guilt of the world,
the total cause of judgment. (...) in the Greek signifies a form; from
thence by diminution is an Idol derived, which in like manner signifies a
formula, or little form; from whence every form, be it little or great, may
be rightly termed an Idol: so that Idolatry is all kind of service or worship
of any Idol whatsoever: and from thence every maker of an Idol is guilty of one
and the self same crime. God prohibiteth that an Idol should be as well made,
as bowed down unto. As much as it is avaylable that that should be made, which
may be worshipped, by so much it is better that that should not be made which
may not be adored: For this cause i. e. the extirpating of occasion of
Idolatry; the divine law proclaims, Thou shall not make to thy self a graven
image, adding, nor the likeness of any thing in heaven, nor in the earth, nor
in the sea: For humane vanity is apt to worship any thing, excepting only the
Creator of all things; the Images and Idols of which, and the consecration of
them is Idolatry.

But some one will say, why then did Moses make the image of a serpent in
brass? Well, because the same God has forbidden by his law, that a likeness
should be made, and by an extraordinary precept has restrained the likeness
of a serpent. If thou honor the same God, thou have his law; Thou shall not
make any likeness: and if thou respect the precept, the Image which was made
after, do thou in like manner imitate Moses: make not to thy self any Image
against the law, unless thou art commanded by God, as Moses was. I make them,
says one, but I worship them not: yes, thou do worship them who make them;
for now they may be worshipped: yea thou worshippest them not with the spirit
of any vile creature, but thine own; nor to the hazard of the soul of a
beast, but thine own soul. To them thou do offer up thy wit, thy labor,
and thine art, and might he not have said, to them thou give chy money?

And having examined, and condemned A strology, Magic, and other idolatrous
Arts, he adds in the end this general conclusion: Nulla igitur ars, nulla
professio, nulla negotiatio, quae quid, aut in struendis, aut in formandis
idolis, administrat, carere poterit titulo idololatriae. Therefore no art, no
trade, nor profession which ministers any thing to the making or forming of
Idols can be freed from the name of Idolatry. Yet he goes forward, and shows
how Idolatry may be committed in other actions of our life, by seeing, hearing,
etc. He adds, Omnis patientia ejusmodi Idololatria: That all permission of
the same is Idolatry.

So this ancient and learned Doctor of the Church has expounded to us the
second Commandment: first, showing the true meaning and large extent of the
word Idolum, that it comprehends as much as the word forma, which all learned
Logicians do know is the fourth species of the predicament of quality; and so
comprehends all things which may be reduced to that species, either by
Aequipollence, or Subdivision, whether it be Image, or simulacrum, or effigies
(as Tertullian himself speaks upon 1 Io. 5.) or whether it be exemplar, or
species, as the learned Bishop Castaneas shows, or Statue, or Picture, as
Divines do teach.

And yet he adds similitudinem or likeness, a word much more large, as that
which runs throughout all the four species of quality, and extends as
well to the invisible conceits and imaginations of our mind, as to the
exterior visible forms and figures; for what is there, either in the world, or
out of the world, in act or in conceit, but it may be called simile, or
dissimile, like, or unlike? And again, eorum quae in Coelo, quae in terra,
quae in mari etc. Omnia (says he) colit humanus error praeter ipsum omnium
Conditorem. And qui dixit omnia, nihil omisit, Heb. 2.8. of those things which
are in heaven, in the earth, in the sea, etc. humane error worshippeth any,
excepting only the Creator of all. And he who has spoken all, has omitted
nothing, Hebr. 2.8.

Secondly, he answers the objection of the brazen serpent made by Moses; to
which also may be reduced (says our excellent learned Bishop Jewel, with the
consent of all our Church) the making of the Cherubins by Moses and Solomon,
and as I conceive the allowance of Caesar's Picture upon his Coin, and such
like.

To all which, that answer which this most learned Doctor makes, will serve:
Well and good (says he, according to the Translation of our Jewel.) One and
the same God, both by his general Law forbade any Image to be made; and also
by his extraordinary and special commandment willed an Image of a serpent to
be made. If thou be obedient to the same God, thou have his law; make thou no
Image: But if thou have regard to the Image of the serpent that was made
afterward by Moses, then do thou as Moses did; make not any Image against the
law, unless God command thee, as he did Moses; for God is free and subject to
no law; He commands us and not himself, says our Jewel. And for the
Picture of Caesar, may not I add, make no Image unless our Savior Christ
allow it, as he did Caesar's Picture. Or which at lestwise the holy Catholic
Primitive Church, within the first four hundred years after our Saviors
birth, has declared to be allowed, as the sign of the Cross, May not I say
also upon the same grounds, Make thou no Image of those things, whose form and
countenance, God and our Savior Christ would have to be altogether hidden,
unknown, and forgotten; as Moses body, the countenance of Christ, of his
Apostles, of the Prophets, of the Martyrs and Saints; Of whom no true Image can
be made, because it is unknown of what form or countenance any of them were?
And therefore as soon as any Image is made of them, straightway a lie is made,
says our Church in her Homilies.

Thirdly, the said learned Doctor Tertullian goes forward to answer another
objection, Facio (ait quidam) non colo, as now some do say; we set them up for
ornament, and not to worship; to which he answers in like sort, as our Church
does in her Homilies; Yes, thou worshippest them, which make them, because
now they may been worshipped; yea, thou worshippest them thy self, to them
thou offerest up thy spirit and thy soul; namely, thy wit, thy labor, thy
skill and cunning; And might he not have said, thy money, and thy time, which
is thy life? thus he shows how largely the word Colere is to be understood.

And lastly, he answers diverse other objections and doubts, showing with all
how many ways Idolatry may be committed; yea, sometimes by giving an alms to
a poor body, accepting his thanks or prayers in some sort; adding that
general sentence, that patience is sometimes Idolatry, etc. So largely does
this godly Faexpound this Commandment: To whose judgment, all the holy Fathers
of the Primitive Church, within four hundred years after the birth of our
Savior, which is the proper time of the true Fathers, as by Vincentius may be
collected, and all our godly and reverend Bishops, for almost 80. years now
together, as well in their Authentical Articles, Canons, and Constitutions,
and in their Dogmaticall Books, Sermons, and Catechismes allowed, as in their
Polemicall disputations, have agreed and confirmed: Which I note partly to stop
the mouths of some that would make this a School point, or Controversy;
partly to touch the timidity and coldness, shall I say, or unworthiness of
others, which are afraid to speak of that in the Pulpit, which is allowed and
commanded to be read publicly and taught in our common Catechismes, as well
by every good Pater-familias, as by every Preacher, as by that which follows
shall appear; for indeed, the whole Scripture, even all the old and new
Testament are but a very short and brief Epitome, of the infinite wisdom,
truth, mercy, and justice, of our heavenly Father; and of his incomprehensible
love to us in our Lord Christ Jesus, passing all understanding; and therefore
in most places, and specially in the Decalogue, is to be taken
Synechdochically, of the part for the whole, speciei pro genere, continentis
pro contento, etc. in the largest sense that the rule of faith will admit, as
Saint Augustine, and all other learned Divines have taught us. Let us go
forward therefore.

Our said learned and reverend Bishop Jewel, in his reply to Harding; page
498. cites some of the sentences of Tertullian above mentioned, approving the
same; which book of Iewell's, is by order of our godly Bishops set up in all
our Cathedral Churches, publicly to be read of all men that will.

Lactantius, lib. 2. cap. 19. Deus in summa regione quaerendus est; Quare
dubium non est, quin religio nulla sit ubicunque est Simulacram. Nam si Religio
ex Divinis rebus est, Divini autem nihil est, nisi ex Coelestibus rebus, carent
ergo Religione Simulacra. Which by all our Bishops and whole Church, in the
Homilies, is thus rendered: God is to be sought in the highest Region;
Wherefore there is no doubt, but that no Religion is in that place, wheresoever
any Image is: For if Religion stand in godly things, and there is no
godliness, but in heavenly things; then are Images without Religion. Note that
he says there is no Religion, wheresoever there is Simulacrum, any Image; so
that the suffering of any Image to be in a place, excludes Religion out of
that place; Patientia est Idololatria, says Tertull.

This Doctrine of our Homilies is confirmed by the Canons made 1o. Iacobi Regis.

Whosoever affirms that the 35th Article of the Doctrine of the Church of
England is erroneous (which Article teaches us, that the Homilies against the
peril of Idolatry, contain good and wholesome Doctrine, and very necessary
for these times) he that affirms the said Article to be enoneous, is
excommunicate ipso facto, by the fifth Canon; but he that sets up Images of
Saints in Churches, or affirms that it is lawful, to set up Images of Saints
in Churches, in so contradicting the Homilies by word or deed, affirms that
the said Article is erroneous; for negatio sive in verbis, sive in factis; a
negation either in word or deed, etc. is all one, say both Divines and Lawyers,
according to Saint Paul, Tit. 1.16. Tertul. de Idol. Nazianzen in Tetrast. S.
Augustine, Quid verba audiam c^m facta videam? Wesemberch. Res ipsa loquitur,
etc. Why shall I hearken to words when I see deeds? the thing it self does
make it evident, etc.

Therefore, he that sets up Images of Saints in Churches, or affirms that
it is lawful to set them up in Churches, is excommunicate ipso facto, by the
Canon. See his Majesty's Declaration, that the Articles do contain the true
Doctrine of the Church of England; And let every man be well advised, whether
he will oppugn his Majesty's Declaration or not: Neither is the setter up of
such Images in Churches, only excommunicate, by the Canon; but accursed also by
our Church in the Common Prayer Book, upon the place of Deuteronomy. 27. next
following.

Cursed is the man that makes any graven or molten Image, an abomination unto
the Lord, the work of the hands of the crafts-man, and puts it in a secret
place, Deuteronomy. 27.25.

This Curse is yearly read in our Churches, by the Canon of our
Common Prayer Book, upon the 6th of March, and the same is yearly repeated with
most solemn, and devout Imprecation or commination, upon every Ashwensday: And
what the sense and meaning of the said Curse imports, is declared likewise by
our Church, in the Homilies appointed to be read in our Churches by the
Common Prayer Book, Articles, and Injunctions, in these words.

Hom. 3. Against Idolatry, page 63. Cursed be the man, etc. Thus says God.
For at that time, no man durst have or worship Images openly, but in corners
only. And the whole world being the great Temple of God, he that in any corner
thereof robs God of his glory, and gives it to stocks and stones, is
pronounced by Gods word accursed. And he that will bring these spiritual
Harlots, out of their lurking corners, into Public Churches and Temples, that
spiritual fornication may be there openly, of all men and women without shame
committed with them, no doubt that person is cursed of God, and twice cursed;
And all good and godly men will say Amen, and their Amen will take effect also.

Again, Homil. 3. against Idol. pa. 45. Idolatry, which is most abominable
before God, cannot possibly be escaped and avoided, without the abolishing and
destruction of Images and Pictures in Temples and Churches: For that Idolatry
is to Images and Pictures, specially in Temples and Churches, an inseparable
accident (as they term it;) so that Images in Churches, and Idolatry go both
together, and therefore the one cannot be avoided, except the other (specially
in all public places) be destroyed. Wherefore to make Images, and publicly to
set them up in Temples and Churches, places appointed peculiarly to the Service
of God, is to make Images to the use of Religion; and not only against this
precept, Thou shall make no manner of Image; But against this also; Thou shall
not bow down to them, nor worship them. Does not our Church herein apparently
confirm the judgment of Tertull. Colit qui facit, he worshippeth them, that
makes them.

Yet again, our Church in the Hom. 3. against Idol. page 62. out of S.
Augustine, Images placed in Churches are as it were in the appointed place, and
height of honor and worship (as S. August. speaks) where the living God only
(and not dead stocks and stones) is to be worshipped. Which sentence is more at
large, recited by our learned Bishop Jewel, in his reply 514. in these words:
They say we know that Images are creatures corruptible, and therefore we
neither use them nor take them as Gods: And thus they think themselves wise
men, that can know that which birds and children be able to know: Even so the
Heathen were wont to say of their Idols. But Saint Augustine says, Very
children know that these Images have eyes and see not, mouths and speak not:
Wherefore then does the holy Ghost so often teach and admonish us the same
thing, in the Scripture as if we knew it not? He answers, Quia species
membrorum in eminenti collocata suggestu, cum honorari and adorari caperit a
multudine, parit in unoquoque sordidissimum erroris affectum: Because the Image
of members set up in an eminent room, when it is once honored and adored by
the multitude brings forth in every one of them, a most vile affection of
their error: And again, Cum in his sedibus locantur, honorabili sublimitate,
ut a precantibus, and immolantibus attendantur, ipsa similitudine animatorum
membrorum atque sensuum, quamvis sensu and anima careant, afficiunt infirmos
animos; ut vivere atque spirare videantur: When they are placed in such seats,
in an honorable sublimity, that they may be seen by those that offer up
praise and prayer, by the very likeness of living members and senses, although
they are void of life and sense, infirm spirits are so affected, that they
seem really to live and breath: And again, Quis adorat, vel orat intuens
Simulacrum, qui non sic afficitur, ut ab ea exaudiri seputet? Who worshippeth
or prays looking upon an Image, and is not moved in conceit, that the Image
hears him? Mark, he does not say, adorat Simulacrum, but, orat intuens
Simulacrum, as of purpose to meet with these vain and felse excuses and
distinctions, which that old Serpent the Devil (says, the Ancient Doctor of
the Christian Church, Clemens) utters by the mouths of certain men. Does it
not stand every man in hand to take heed how he listen to the subtilties of
that Serpent, who was a liar and a murderer from the beginning, and taught our
first Parents to distinguish, and exclude themselves out of Paradise? And is
not this sufficient to show, how both the godly Fathers of the Primitive
Church, and the reverend Bishops of our Reformed Church, have all agreed to
that exposition of Tertullian, Colit qui facit, vel qui locat? He worshippeth
them, who makes them, or sets them up.

But why then is this word (to worship it) added in some places? To which three
answers are made; the first, ex vi termini; for the particle [To] does not only
signify the intention of the Agent, but many times the consequent of the Act;
as in that of our Savior Christ, Matthew. 5. He that looks on a woman [to
lust, etc.] The meaning is not only with an intention to lust, but to look so,
as lust does follow: Whereupon our Savior adds; If thine eye cause thee to
offend, pluck it out, etc. And Saint Paul puts the case, that some may be
provoked to offend, by seeing a man eat a thing offered to an Idol; and
although he grants that meat is a thing indifferent, yet he adds; If meat
make my brother to offend, I will eat no meat, while the world stands, 1 Cor.
8. So here the consequent is to be avoided.

The second ex consequentia suppositi: For where the second Commandment is,
Thou shall make no Image, etc. He that will add this clause, to the intent to
worship it, does utterly evacuate and overthrow the judicial part of the
Commandment. For it is manifest by Deuteronomy. 12. and 13. and many other places of
Scripture, that God ordained this Law to be a Judicial Law, and the offenders
to be punished by the Magistrate; which is not possible, if it be restrained
to the intent; for de occultis cordium Indicabit Christus, says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 4. and cogitationis poenam nemo patitur; says the Law; As if a man should
stab another, and yet say he meant not to kill him, or as if one should lie
with another man's wife, and yet say he did it not to the intent to commit
Adultery; will this excuse him? Is it not an absurd thing to conster a Law
according to the conceit of an offender, and not according to the sentence of
the Judge, or Judicial Interpreters? So we have seen before, that the learned
Divines both of the Primitive Church, and of our own present Church, do agree
in this, that colit qui facit, colit qui locat in honorabili sublimitate; he
worshippeth them who makes them, he worshippeth them who sets them in an
high place of honor; Never regarding the intent; and that to set up an Image
aloft in the Church, with what intent soever, is not only against this
precept, Thou shall not make any Image, but against this also, Thou shall not
bow down, nor worship it; The third ex sensu mandati; for it is answered also
by our Learned Catechismes, that in the commandments, one sin is put
commonly for all of the same rank; yea for all instruments, occasions, per
Synechdochen speciei. And this prohibition of making Images, was (as Tertull.
says) ad eradicandam materiam Idololatriae, to subvert the causes of Idolatry:
Also commonly the greatest sin is named, to make all the rest more odious.
Therefore this word [to worship it] is not put to restrain, but to aggravate.

Let us now therefore come to another point of Tertullians exposition, and see
how that also is confirmed, both by the Ancient Fathers of the Primitive
Church, and by the now reverend Fathers of our Church; Colit qui patitur:
quaedam patientia est Idololatria, he worships them that permits them: some
kind of permission is Idolatry, says he.

Hom. 2. against Idol. pa. 22. Epiphanius Bishop of Salanim in Cyprus, a very
holy and learned man, who lived in Theodosius the Emperors time, vriteth thus
to John Patriarch of Jerusalem: I entered (says Epiphanius) into a certain
Church to pray; I found there in it a linen cloth hanging in the Church door
painted, and having in it the Image of Christ, (as it were) or of some other
Saint, (for I remember not well whose Image it was;) Therefore when I did see
the Image of a man hanging in the Church of Christ, contrary to the authority
of the Scriptures, I did tear it, and gave counsel to the Keepers of the
Church, that they should wind a poor man that was dead in the said cloth, and
so bury him. And afterward, the said Epiphanius sending another cloth
unpainted, for that painted one which he had torn, to the said Patriarch
writes thus. I pray you, will the Elders of that place, to receive this cloth
which I have sent by this bearer, and command them, that from henceforth no
such painted clothes, contrary to our Religion, be hanged up in the Church of
Christ. And this Epistle, as worthy to be read of many, did Saint Hierom
himself translate into the Latin tongue, says our Church in the Homily;
adding further certain proofs that S. Hierom had this holy and learned Bishop
Epiphanius, in most high estimation, and therefore did translate this Epistle,
as a writing of Authority: And thereupon observes these special points:
First, that Epiphanius judged it contrary to Christian Religion, and to the
Authority of the Scriptures to have any Images in Christ's Church. Secondly,
that he rejected not only carved, graven, and moulten Images, but also painted
Images out of Christ's Church: Thirdly, that he regarded not whether it were the
Image of Christ, or of any other Saint, but being an Image would not suffer it
in the Church: Fourthly, that he did not only remove it out of the Church, but
with a vehement zeal tare it in sunder; and exhorted that a Corse should be
wrapped and buried in it, judging it meet for nothing, but to rot in the Earth.
Thus does our Church and all our Reverend Bishops, not only allow the
judgment, but commend the fact, and zeal of Epiphanius.

And the same points were observed upon this Epistle of Epiphanius, by our
godly and learned Bishops, in the time of King Edward, in their reasons
exhibited to the said King, to show why they would not agree to suffer Images
in Churches, as appears in the book of Martyrs, page 1929. a book allowed by
all our Bishops and Church, and lately new Printed, and set forth this last
year, and appointed by our Canons, to to be set up in all our Cathedral
Churches, for every man to read, that Will.

Hom. 3. against Idols page 61. Suffer Images to be set up in the Churches and
Temples; ye shall in vain bid them beware of Images (as S. John does) and
flee Idolatry, as all the Scripture warn us: ye shall in vain preach and
teach them against Idolatry; for a number will notwithstanding fall headlong
into it; what by the nature of Images, what by the inclination of their own
corrupt nature. Wherefore as a man given to lust, to sit down by a strumpet,
is to tempt God: so it is likewise to erect an Idol in this pronenesse of man's
nature to Idolatry, nothing else but a tempting, etc.

What S. Augustines opinion is, appears before. Quis adorat, vel orat intuens
simulacrum, etc. Who worshippeth or prays looking upon an Image, and is not
persuaded in mind that the Image hears him?

Hom. 3. against Idols page 49. What means it that Christian men after the
use of the Gentile Idolaters, cap and kneel before Images, and infra: is not
this stooping and kneeling before them, adoration of them?

Chemnic. in exam. Deus usum simulacrorum ad cultum, simpliciten numerat inter
Deos alienos, and ita prohibet at nullus elustoni aut acceptioni locus esse
possit. Et infra, in statuis enim, per statuas, seu ad statuas seu imagines,
Deus nec se, nec Angelos, nec Sanctos, nec ullam creaturam vult coli. The use
of Images for service, is by God simply reckoned amongst strange Gods; and
therefore he prohibiteth all manner of delusions or exceptions. And further,
for God will not have himself, nor his Angels, nor Saints, nor any creature
worshipped, either in statues, by statues, or before statues, or Images.

And again, he cites another sentence of Epiphanius, in these words, Estote
memores, ne in Ecclesias Imagines inferatis, neque in Sanctorum Caemiteriis eas
statuatis; sed perpetuo circumferte Deum in cordibus vestris: Quin etiam ne in
Domo communi tolerentur; Non enim fas est Christianum per oculos suspensum
teneri, sed per occupationem mentis. Be you careful that you bring no Images
into Churches, nor into the Chapels of Gods people; but always carry God in
your hearts; for it is not lawful that a Christian should be held in
businesses of the eye, but in contemplation of the mind. Mark what he says,
that it is not lawful by Gods Law (which is signified by the word, Fas; fas
jus divinum est) that a Christian should be held by the eyes, but by the
contemplation of his mind.

But our common Catechismes allowed, and often printed, most plainly teach the
same doctrine: namely the Catechism called Mr. Balls Catechism, the eighth
Edition, 1631. page 176. upon the second Commandment, to this Question; What
is here forbidden? He answers, inter alia, making of Images for a religious
use, Levit. 19.4. and 26.1. worshipping God in, at, or before an Image, 1 King.
19. will worship grounded only upon good intent or custom, Mat. 15.19. Col. 2.
So the learned Catechism of Doctor Mayer, not only allowed, but commanded, in
the fourth Edition, 1630. page 212. What are we forbidden in the second
Commandment? Answ. All outward Idolatry, which is, 1. By making any Image of
God, or of any creature to be worshipped. 2. By falling down before any
Image. 3. By serving God after our own santasies, and page 216. The second
kind of Idolatry is the falling down before an Image, whether with an
intention the better to be put in mind of God, or of any Saint, or by bowing
before the Image, to give worship to the thing represented, or ignorantly only
according to the tradition of the fathers. For howsoever, or under what
pretense soever, if the knee be religiously bowed, before any Image, Idolatry
is committed, and this Commandment broken: So the reverend Doctor Mayer, with
the consent of all our Church; to which must be added, that it is a point of
Gods glory and worship, to be alone in his holy Temple, before whom not only
all the earth must be silent, Hab. 2.20. but the most holy Angels, Cherubins
and Seraphins must hide their faces, and cover themselves: yea, both heaven and
earth must fly away before him, Apo. 20.11. And therefore in his Temple, before
him only we must perform those duties which the Prophet David so often calls
us to do, namely, to come before him only, to bow before him, to kneel before
him to worship before him, to speak before him, to sing before him, Psalm.
95.96.98.100. etc. even before him only in whose Temple all things must set
forth his glory, Psalm. 29.9. and who has most solemnly sworn, that he will
not give his glory to any other, Esa. 42. For the Lord shall rise up, as in
Mount Perazim, he shall be wrath, as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do
his work, his strange work, and perform his act, his strange act, Esa. 28. Let
us therefore return and apply this to the sentence of the Scripture pronounced
in our Common prayer book, and expounded in our Homilies:

Cursed are the worshippers of Images. And again, Deuteronomy. 27. Cursed is he that
makes the blind to go out of the way. This curse is read and repeated in our
Churches yearly, Martii 6. and upon every Ashwednesday, by the Canon of our
Common prayer book, and is thus applied by our Church in her Homily. Hom. 3.
against Idols page 55. I will out of Gods word make this general argument
against all such makers, maintainers, and setters up of Images in public
places. And first of all I will begin with the words of our Savior Christ: Woe
be to that man by whom an offense is given. Woe be to him that offends one
of these little ones, or weak ones. Better were it for him that a mil-stone
were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the midst of the sea and
drowned, than he should offend one of these little ones, or weak ones. And in
Deuteronomy. God himself denounces him accursed, that makes the blind to wander
out of the way. And in Levit. Thou shall not lay a stumbling block, or stone
before the blind. But Images in Churches and Temples have been, be, and ever
will be offenses and stumbling blocks, especially to the weak, simple, and
blind common people, deceiving their hearts by the cunning of the Artificer
(as the Scriptures expressly in sundry places do testify) and so bringing them
to Idolatry; therefore woe be to the erecter, setter up, and maintainer of
Images in Churches and Temples.

Article 22. Anal. Propos. 3. The Romish doctrine concerning Images is fond,
and not warranted by the holy Scripture, nor consonant, but contrary unto it.

Proofs out of the word of God. Images are such an abomination to the Lord, as
to make them among all men odious: he describes the vanity of them by his
Prophets, as that they are the doctrine of vanity, the work of errors, the
teachers of lies, silver and gold, the work of men's hands, vanity, etc. He
gives a straight commandment not to bow down to them, nor worship them, not
to make them, to fly from them; yea to destroy both Images themselves, the
Idolaters, and the enticers to Idolatry: He commends greatly, and praises
such men as have destroyed Images, etc.

He finally curses the Images themselves, the Image-makers, and the
Image-servers, or worshippers.

This Exposition of the Article above said is confirmed by all our Church, and
so published. And his Majesty by his Declaration has ratified these Articles,
commanding all his Subjects to continue in the uniforme profession of the same,
prohibiting the least difference from them, and declaring, that all the Clergy
men within his Realm agree in the usual literal meaning of the said
Articles. Which usual literal meaning can be no other, than that which is
allowed by the authority of the Church of England, and so published, and namely
upon the 22 Article in the words above. Bishop Hall in his book of the old
Religion, cap. 10. commends the fact of Epiphanius, and his famous Epistle,
which (says he) is honored by the translation of S. Hierom, concerning the
Image found by him in the Church of the village of Anablatha, though out of his
own Diocese, how he tore it in an holy zeal, and wrote to the Bishop of the
place, beseeching him that no such Pictures might be made contrary to our
Religion -- and infra. Some fly (says he) to the distinction of Images and
Idols, a distinction without a difference of their own making, not of Gods. To
be sure God takes order for both: ye shall make you no Idol, nor graven Image,
nor rear you up any standing Image, neither shall ye set up any Image of
stone in your land to bow down to it. And again, we may well shut up all
with that curse in Mount Gerezim: Cursed be the man that makes any graven or
molten Image an abomination to the Lord, the work of the hands of Craftsman,
and puts it in a secret place: and all the people shall say, Amen; and
surely their Durandus, after he has cited diverse Scriptures against Idols, as
Exodus 20. Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 4. Number. 21. etc. at last concludes, ex his and
similibus, etc. By these and the like Authorities is condemned the too much use
of Images. And again, the holy jealousy of the Almighty will not abide any of
his honor divided with his creature: and what ever worship more than mere
humane is imparted to the creature, sets it in Rivality with our Maker. So the
learned and eloquent Bishop Hall in his book of the old Religion. Now whether
the setting up of Images in Churches be not nimius usus Imaginum, upon all that
which has been said before; whether the setting up of them in honorabthi
sublimitate (as S. Augustine speaks) in the appointed place and height of
honor and worship, where the living God only is to be worshipped (as the
Homily out S. Augustine speaks) be not a worship more than mere humane; let
every man judge. Truly S. Ambrose, in his book de fuga saeculi, agrees with
the Fathers above cited, saying, Ecclesia inanes Idaeas, and varias nescit
simulacrorum figuras. Doctor Usher Archbishop of Armah, in his answer to the
Jesuits Challenge, likewise utterly condemns the setting up of such Images
and Pictures in Churches, citing and approving the sentences and judgments of
Epiphanius, S. Hierom, S. Ambrose, Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, Serenus
Bishop of Massilia, and many others, which book now lately was new Printed, in
Anno 1631. Did all these go upon Temporal reasons? Does our Common prayer
book pronounce, and yearly renew such heavy and dreadful Curses, for a
Temporal respect only, as our late Imagers, or Imaginers would have us to
imagine? Why do then our common Catechismes give us this general doctrine, and
instruction, that where one vice or sin is forbidden, all of the same kind,
and that necessarily, depend thereon; as also the lest occasion or enticement
thereunto are likewise forbidden; upon the words of our Savior, Mat. 5.21.22.
etc. and 1 Ioh. 3.15. To this let us add the heavy sentences, judgments, and
curses pronounced by God against those that suffer, and do not oppose
themselves against the open enemies and contemners of God and his laws. Judge.
5.23. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the
Inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help
of the Lord against the mighty. So Judge. 8. shows how severely Gideon
punished the men of Succoth and Penuel, for refusing to help him in his pursuit
of Gods enemies: so Judge. 21. is set forth the fearful judgments so terribly
executed upon the men of Iabes; because they came not to help the Israelites,
and to assist them in the punishment of that great sin committed, and
maintained by the Benjamites: Wherein also is to be noted, that that holy man
Phinehaz was at that time alive, and was high Priest, without whose advise they
did nothing. So Ier. 48. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently or deceitfully.

Ioh. 10. He that is an hireling (says our Savior) and not the Shepherd, and
whose own the sheep are not, sees the Wolf coming, and leaves the sheep,
and flees, and the Wolf catches and scatters the sheep.

Zach. 11. Woe to the idle Shepherd that leaves the flock, the sword shall be
upon his arm, and upon his right eye; his arm shall be clean dried up, and
his right eye shall be darkened. I know a spiritual understanding may be of
the arm, and the right eye. But are not the judgments of God many times
corporally executed? And many a man (without offense) ask how the Pastors of
some Churches, wherein Images are set up, do by their eyes?

Revel. 2.20. I have a few things against thee; because thou suffer that
woman Iezebel, etc. So the common Rules and Maxims of all Laws.

Consentientes and agentes pari paena constringantur.
Bis peccat qui peccanti obsequium accommodat.
Qui non vetat peccarecum possit, jubet.
Let the consenter and the actor receive equality of punishment.
He is a double offender who abetteth an offense.
He who sorbiddeth not an offense when it lies in his power, commands it.
And of the several kinds of consents, Lyra in Praeceptorio.

Consulo, praecipio, consentio, provoco, laudo,
Non relego culpam, non punio, non reprehendo,
Participo, defendo, reum me talia reddunt.
I counsel, bid, consent, provoke, commend,
I suffer, punish not, nor reprehend,
I share in, I defend a crime; these bring
Me into judgment for the self same thing.
So Anstas. Damasus, and Innocentius in Decret. Error cui non resistitur,
approbatur; and veritas cum non defenditur, opprimitur: Negligere quippe cum
possis, perturbare perversos, nihil est aliud quam fovere. Neque caret scrupulo
societatis occultae, qui facinori manifesto definit obviare. An error which is
not resisted, is approved; and truth when it is not defended, is oppressed: For
to neglect the opposition of the perverse when it lies in thy power, is no
other than to maintain them: Nor is he free from the censure of private
consent, who withstandeth not a manifest offense.

Aug. and out of him the Decree.

Vterque reus est, and qui veritatem occultat, and qui mendacium dicit; quia
and ille prodesse non vult, and iste nocere desiderat. Both are guilty, as well
he that concealeth the truth, as he that tells a ly; because the one will not
do good, the other desires to do harm.

Chrysostom and the Decree. Non solum ille proditor est veritatis, qui
transgrediens veritatem, palum promendacio Loquitur, sed etiam ille qui
veritatem non libere pronunciat, quum libere pronunciare oporet, aut non libere
veritatem defendit, quum libere defendere convenit.

He is not only a traitor to truth, who transgressing the truth tells a
lie; but he also, who freely speaks not the truth when it is needful, or
does not freely defend the truth when it is expedient so to do.

Augustine again, and out of him the Decree.

Ecce (inquiunt ut dicit Propheta) Recedite and exite indo, and immundum ne
tetegeritis; Quid est immundum tangere, nisi peccatis consentire? Quid est
exire inde, nisi facere quod pertinet ad correctionem? quantum pro unius
cujusque gradu atque persona (salva pace) fieri potest?

Behold (say they as says the Prophet) depart and come out from thence, touch
not the unclean thing. What is meant by touching the unclean thing but
consenting to sin? what by coming out from thence, but doing what
appertains to its reformation? as much as without breach of peace may be
done, according to every man's degree and person.

Hereupon our Church in Hom. 3. against. Idol. p. 75. thus concludes. Ye have
heard it evidently proved in these Homilies against Idolatry, by Gods word, the
Doctors of the Church, Ecclesiastical, Historyes Reason and experience, that
Images have bin and be worshipped, and so Idolatry committed to them by
infinite multitudes, to the greater offense of Gods Majesty, and infinite
danger of souls; and that Idolatry cannot possibly be separated from Images
set up in Churches and Temples, gilded and decked gloriously, and that
therefore our Images be indeed very Idols; and so all the prohibitions, Laws,
Curses, threatenings of horrible plagues, as well Temporal as Eternal contained
in the Scriptures, concerning Idols, and the makers, mainteyners and
worshippers of them, appertain also to our Images set up in Churches, and
Temples, and to the makers, mainteyners, and worshippers of them. And all those
names of Abomination which Gods word gives to the Idols of the Gentiles,
appertain also to our Images set up in Churches and Temples, being Idols like
to them, and having like Idolatry committed to them. And Gods own mouth in the
Holy Scripture calls them vanities, lies, Deceits, uncleanness, filthiness,
dung, mischief, and abomination before the Lord. Wherefore Gods most horrible
wrath and our most dreadful danger cannot be avoided without the destruction
and abolishing of all such Images and Idols out of the Church and Temple of
God. Which to accomplish, God put into the minds of all Christian Princes. And
in the mean time let us take heed and be wise, O ye beloved of the Lord, and
let us have no strange Gods, etc. So the Homily of our Church.

Bishop Jewels Reply. pa. 517. The best remedy in this behalf, and most
agreeable with Gods word, is utterly to abolish the cause of the ill.

So the godly King Ezekias took down and brake in pieces the brazen Serpent,
notwithstanding Moses himself by Gods special commandment had erected it,
notwithstanding it were an express figure of Christ hanging upon the Cross:
notwithstanding it had continued so many years, notwithstanding God by it had
wrought so many miracles.

So the godly Bishop Epiphanius rent in sunder an Image painted in a cloth, and
said, it was against Gods Commandment, a thing superstitious and unmeet for
the Church and people of God, notwithstanding it were the Image of Christ. So
the godly Emperor Theodosius made his Proclamation over all his Dominions in
this sort: Signum Servatoris nostri quocunque loco reperitur, tolli jubemus: We
straightly command, that the Image of our Savior be taken down, in what place
soever it shall be found; notwithstanding it were the Image of our Savior. So
it is decreed in the late Council of Mogunce, that when Images happen to be
abused by the people, they be either notably altered, or utterly abolished.
Neither does God through all his holy Scriptures any where condemn
Image-breakers, but expressly and every where he condemns Image-worshippers,
and Image-makers: yea he says, they are snares to catch the ignorant: He
knows the inclination of the heart of man; and therefore he says, Accursed
be he, that leads the blind out of the way; and accursed be he, that lays
a stumbling block to overthrow the blind. So concludes the reverend and
learned Bishop Jewel, and all our Church with him.

So all the holy Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs Doctors, and Saints of God now
triumphant in heaven, who shall sit upon Thrones as Assessors with our Savior
Christ, and judge the world, (as the Scriptures speak) in their books and
monuments which they have left behind them to testify their minds, do
unanimously pronounce the like sentences unto us. And if we could hear them
speaking in heaven, we should hear their voices as loud as Thunders, or
Trumpets proclaim, that we must not imagine that they will speak otherwise in
heaven, than they did upon earth.

Let me therefore conclude with that holy Doctor S. Augustine, and that most
blessed Apostle S. Paul in the name of all the rest. Ergo fratres mei, quot
quot habetis inter vos, qui adhuc amore saeculi praegravantur, avaros,
perjuros, adulteros, inspectores nugarum, etc. quicquid inter vos malorum esse
nostis, quantum potestis improbate, ut cord recedatis; and redarguite, ut
exeatis inde; and nolite consentire, ut immundum ne tangatis. Therefore my
brethren, as many as you have amongst you, who are overcharged with the love of
this world, coverous persons, perjurers, adulterers, beholders of vanity, etc.
whatsoever evils you know amongst you, reject them as much as you can; depart
from them in your hearts; reprove them, that you may come out from amongst
them; and consent not unto them, that you may not touch the unclean thing.
Come out from among them (says the Lord) and touch not the unclean thing; I
will receive you, and ye shall be my sons, and my daughters, says the Lord
God Almighty.

Christo Gloria.
FINIS.

