A DECLARATION Made by the Lord Marquess of Hartford, and other Lords and
chief Gentlemen of the County of SOMERSET.

Showing their intention of coming into that County, to be (only) to settle
Peace, and not to offer the least violence or disturbance to any His Majesty's
loyal Subjects, either in their Persons or Estates, (contrary to what has
been falsely suggested) and which has bin manifested by all their actions ever
since.

And which does farther appear, by the examination and confession of one
Captain Preston, a principal Captain of the Trained Band of that County.

Whereunto is added, A Letter from the Governor of Sherbourne Castle, to his
worthy friend in London; truly relating what has passed betwixt the Marquess
of Hartford and the Earl of Bedford, since he came before Sherbourne.

LONDON, Printed for H. B. 1642.

A DECLARATION of the Lo: Marquess Hartford and other Lords and chief
Gentlemen of the County of Somerset, being now at Sherbourn, made the 12th. of
AUGUST, 1642.
FInding our Countery in so great distraction, we have thought it necessary to
communicate to our good friends and neighbors the cause of our present remove
to this Town. We came some days since into the County of Somerset, with
commission from His majesty to mustre the trained bands of the County, wherein
we have done nothing but according to the Law: but although such as were
summoned to the muster yielded obedience or a lawful excuse, yet contrary to
our expectation, we found that great multitudes of people were poisoned and
enraged against that service by false and scandalous suggestions, as if the
intent of the Commission were to enthrall the people and to take away great
part of their estates, which we are confident never entered into His Majesty's
thoughts, and are certain there was nothing tending that way in the Commission:
So we pray all men to be assured, that it was impossible to have made us the
instruments of so great an oppression. By which and other false reports of
malignant and factious spirits. A great number of people were on friday last
gathered against us near Wels in warlike manner, not only out of that, but
out of other neighboring Counties, and that as we are credibly informed, with
promises of pillage of the Country, as rifling of the Palace of Wels does make
manifest: Where they threatening to force us in that Town, and we being willing
to prevent as much as was possible all occasions of shedding blood, which they
would have enforced. We retired to Sommerton, receiving yesterday advertisement
from several parts, the Sheriff of the said County had issued out warrants to
levy the power of their county upon us his Majesty's Commissioners, without
any warrant at all from his Majesty, as we are very well assured, for seeing
the mischiefs that would necessarily have followed upon our forced defense if
we should have stayed there, we thought fit to retire out of that County,
expecting that in time our Country men will be satisfied of our integrity, and
reduced to the obedience they ought to yield to his Majesty and his Laws.

Lo. Mar. Hartford, Lo. Pawlet, Lo. Seimer. Sir John Pawlet, Sir John Stowel,
Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Charles Berkley, Sir Hen. Berkley, Sir Ed. Berkley. Sir
Ed. Rodney. S. Fran. Dodington, Sir Fran. Hawley. Ed. Windham, Esquire Tho. Smith,
Esquire Ed. Kirton, Esquire


The examination of Cap. John Preston, who conducted some men out of the West
Countery, was taken prisoner by some of my Lord Mar. HARTFORD his Company.
JOhn Preston Esquire said that he with others, by their approbation to the number
of about 300. men came yesterday from the West part of the county with Arms,
viz, muskets, pikes, powder, bullets, and match, and as he believes, with an
intent to lodge the said men in Glastenbury, that night, but whither to go
farther he did not know, but thinks they intended to march next morning up to
Mendip hill, and further said, that finding Sir John Stowel and Sir John Paulet
in their way, received a message from the said Sir John Stowel and Sir John
Pawlet, by M. Sanders of Petherton, which was in effect to desire them, to return
as he has heard it delivered to him, to which M. Pyne returned answer at
first, that they should go on, but at last he held it convenient that they
should return: but the people pressed to go forward, having received
encouragement, from words uttered by some of their company, that they were but
a few horse and would run away, but what particular persons spoke those words,
he remembers not: And he further says that after the Skirmish was past, and
the horse pursuing the foot, they running away. Sir John Paulet came up to
them, whilst there were some with their swords drawn upon him, who straightly
charged them that they should not kill him, nor offer to spill any blaod of the
poor fellows, upon which they departed frm any further execution:

This is the examination of M. John Preston Cap. taken the 5. of Aug. 1642,
before two Justices of the peace. William Passet, Anthony Stocker.

A Letter written by the Governor of Sherbourn Castle, to a worthy friend, of
the proceedings of Sherbourne and Yeavel since the beginning.
I Send you the news of these parts, which have been very active; On Friday
the 2. of September. the E. of Bedford appeared before this Castle, (which I have
the honor to be Governor of) and marched directly toward the towns end,
which is large and accessable in many places; but our Horse, in number 240.
appeared, (his Army consisting of 7000. men, and 600. Horse, with 14. Pieces of
Canon) made a stand: some skirmishing was with the Horse, and we got the
better, brought away diverse prisoners from the face of their Army, and forced
them to a colder lodging them the town, upon the hills; where that night we
gave them a hasty alarm, and retreated, leaving them in Arms, shivering, and
blowing their nails till morning.

On Saturday they attempted again for lodging, and the convenience of the
town, our Horst faced them: They marched toward us a good round pace with
Horse, and a Regiment of Foot; we retreated back to a hedge side, from whence
came a volley of shot, that sent many of them into the other world, and caused
diverse (which that night ran away) to enter into consideration of the
calamities of war.

Then they come with all their strength and Canon. We retreated into the town,
lodged Musketeers in coverts, and behind barricadoes, and they with their
Ordnance battered the town all that day, and skirmished ten hours, with great
loss, and not one of our men lost: In the conclusion we dealt so hardly with
them, that we returned them to the hills, where till Sunday following they
wanted neither cold lodging nor hungry appetites.

Sunday they bestowed partly in hearing rebellion fomented, and stealing of
sheep and oxen, (which they never paid for) by Scripture, affirming it as
lawful as for Christ to gather ears of corn with his Disciples, and not pay
for it.

This night they were kept in alarm, our horse falling in three place, into
their quarters. Monday they battered our Castle out of shot, which not
reaching, they came nearer, and fell to work upon a battery, which my little
drakes soon beat them from, not one of my shots falling in vain.

This night I gave three shot of Ordnance an midnight, which they conceived a
signal, hearing that some Forces were upon the way to us with Squire Rogers:
Whereupon 1000. of them ran away, and the next day they raised their siege.

On Wednesday we followed them to Yeavel, where their whole Army lay: our
whole number was but 150. horse, and 200. Foot. They came out upon us horse
and foot: We skirmished awhile for the two passages, at last they got one,
1000. of their Musketeers beating off ours, Cap. Stowel charged their horse,
which ran away: but another Troop supplied it, which Cap. Digbie and my self
charged, beat it away, and chased it almost to the bridge.

Now on the other passage was a cruel skirmish betvveene the Musketeers; at
last we lost it; and Sir Walter Earls Troop (commanded by his Lieutenant)
fell upon us; The Lieutenant was killed, and that Troop cut in pieces, not 16.
of them returned, and Digbies men brought home 16. of their horses: but their
Musket shot disordered our men, and some of our men ran heartily: but we
stayed them at the top of the next hill, rallyed them, and marched home in good
order, whilst their men likewise quitted the place in disorder, and pursued not
a jot.

But they lost 140. of their men dead upon the ground, buried 9. of their
Commanders next day in the Church, and marched with a few men to Dorchester,
and disbanded the rest of their Army, there being besides many of their men and
Commanders which lie dangerously wounded at Yeavel.

In all this we lost but twelve men. Sergeant Major Banfield is taken; Captain
Hussy, Lieutenant Hall, and an Ensign were killed; and here we are fortifying
this Castle, and now raising men, for all the Country is open to us. So with
my love to you I rest,

Sherbourne, Sep. 12. 1642. Your friend and servant, T. L.

FINIS.

