A DECLARATION OF THE Right Honorable, the Lord Marquis of Hartford, Read in
the House of Commons upon Saturday last: Wherein he does declare his Resolution
to oppose the Earl of Worster and his Army of Papists, and to adventure his
life for the Protestant Religion.

Likewise his Majesty's Command to the Lord Herbert, to apprehend the Marquis
of Hartford, and to commit him to safe custody.

Together with the Desires of the House of Commons to Sir Paul Pinder, with Sir
Paul Pinders Answer to the same.

Also, a great Victory obtained by the Manchester Forces against the Earl of
Derby, where the Earl himself and his whole Troop were put to flight, and 72.
prisoners taken, many of them being Commanders.

Jan. 5. Printed for John Feast. 1643.

Joyful NEWS From the Marquis of HARTFORD Wherein is expressed the
Declaration of the said Lord Marquis, to oppose and resist the Earl of Worster,
and his forces, and the rest of the of the Papists in the Kings Army.
ON the 31 of December last, Letters came to the House of Commons, intimating
that the Marquis of Hartford is resolved to oppose the Kings Army of Papists
and their Confederates, and has declared himself against the E. of Worster and
his Forces, and refuses to join with him, by reason that his Army consists
for the most part of papists and disaffected persons, which are enemies to the
protestant Religion, and the peace and happiness of this Kingdom, whose
endeavors and actions are for the utter dissolving of the Parliament, and Gods
true Religion, tending to nothing else but to bring in popery and superstition
in this Kingdom.

The said Lord Marquis does further Declare, that by the Commission which he
received from his Majesty he was commanded not to entertain any papists, or
disaffected persons, which are supposed to this Kingdom.

And however his Majesty is siner persuaded and wrought upon to grant
Commissions for the raising of papists, and has appointed a great papist to
the Sergeant Major General of the Earl of Worsters Army, and in diverse other
parts of this Kingdom has also put notorious papists in great places, through
whose actions it is a means to bring this Land to ruin and desolation;
unless the Almighty who is the Giver of all Conquests be pleased to aid and
assist us with His strong power and strength.

And therefore for these and the aforenamed Reasons, the Marquis of Hartford
does declare, that he is resolved never to comply with such a Faction, nor be
forced to it either by threats or any other persuasions whatsoever.

And although His Majesty was pleased so Declare his Royal Will and pleasure
against the said Lord Marquis to the L. Herbert, a great papist, and Son to the
E. of Worster, to apprehend the Marquis of Hartford for not obeying his
Command, yet he is resolved to oppose the Lord Herbert, and has set down his
Resolution to sight it out, before he will have any alliance with him, and it
is reported, that they have had a great battle, the certainty whereof will
appear by the next Post.

The Propositions of the house of Common to Sir Paul Pinder.
THe House of Commons having seriously debated and considered of the Motion
lately presented unto them by Sir Paul Pinder, and diverse other Gentlemen, and
after some consultation thereupon, they sent a Messenger to Sir Paul Pinder,
desiring him to come to the House, which he did accordingly, where Master
Lenthall Speaker of the said House of Commons acquainted them with the Desires
of that House, which were to this effect, viz.

That the Army now raised for the Defense of the Protestant Religion were in
distress for want of moneys, there being great want of the same to maintain
the Army; and therefore the House desired that the aforenamed Sir Paul Pinder
would lend the Parliament twenty thousand pounds to be employed toward the
charg of the Army, until the Propositions of both Houses should be agreed upon
between His Majesty and them, that so these bloody distractions may be brought
to a full period.

The Answer of Sir Paul Pinder, to the aforesaid Desires.
SIr Paul Pinder after some consultation of this business, returned Answer,
that the House would be pleased to appoint some of their members to treat with
him concerning it, he would give them a satisfactory answer, whereupon a
Committed was appointed to treat with him accordingly.

The E. of Warwick sent a Leteer to the House of Commons, Declaring unto them
that he has sent 17. chief Commanders unto Gravel-end, which were took near
Plymouth, desiring them that they would take some speedy course for their safe
conduct to London.

Whereupon the House ordered that a Company of Musketeers should be sent down
to fetch them from thence and that they should be committed to safe custody,
upon an accusation of levying war against the King and parliament, which is
high Treason.

The Manchester Forces have given a great overthrow to the Earl of Derby,
killing many of his men at Leigh; and taking 72 prisoners, diverse of them being
Commanders; and put the Earl of Derb^ himself, and his whole Troop to flight.

Those that stand for the Parliament in that part of Lincolnshire near Newark,
are like to be much indamaged (the Cavaleirs having taken the Town, and
strongly fortified the Castle) but the Earl of Lincoln, Sir Edward Aiscough,
and Mr. Grantham, are there with 1500 men, to defend that County.

FINIS.

