Some Reasons tenderly offered to the Serious Consideration of the
Commissioners, for Executing the Poll Act; why such Persons should not be Rated
20 s. as Preachers, or Teachers, who do not receive any Profits, or Salaries
for such their Preaching or Teaching.
1. BEcause in the beginning of the Act, It is said, That all Persons and
Bodies Politic, etc. having Estates Personal, etc. Therefore it does appear,
the Parliament did not intend they should pay that had no Income or Estate.

2. The Parliament has thorough the whole Act seemed to have a tender Care
that none should be rated to this Tax, but such as by their own Estates, or by
the Profits of their Places, were Enabled to pay; of the Reality of which, the
Act it self gives several Instances; As for Example, in page 15. Every Man of
the Degree of a Doctor, is rated 5 l. but in page 16. it is provided, That if
any Doctor of Law or Divinity, has not some Promotion, Benefice or Preferment,
he shall not be rated for his Degree or Title. Again, in page 14. Every
Gentleman is rated 20 s. but in the same page, it is Provided, That any
Gentleman that has not 300 l. Estate, shall not be so rated.

3. It being Enacted, That Every Clergyman who has an Ecclesiastical Benefice
worth 50 l. per Annum, or more, at Improved Value, should be Assessed 20 s. It
appears not Coherent therewith, that any Preacher or Teacher in any
Meeting House, that has no Benesice, Salary, Gain, or Contribution for
Preaching, should be Assessed 20 s. or any Sum on that Account. And there are
such Preachers who have a Conscientious Respect to Christ's Command, and his
Ministers Example, to Preach the Gospel freely, as they have freely received,
and to keep the Gospel without Charge, Matthew. 10. 1 Cor. 9. 18. 2 Cor. 11. 9. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8. 1 Pet. 5. 2. And therefore it appears not Equal or
Just, to Impose upon such in that Case.

4. It being provided in the said Act, that no Person by Virtue thereof, shall
be doubly (or in two Capacities) charged; It reasonably follows, That if any
Person be legally charged as a Gentleman, he ought not to be also charged as a
Preacher, or Teacher, more especially, when he has no Profit or Gain for his
Preaching.

5. And, whereas it is Alleged by some, That the Words, Every Preacher, or
Teacher, in any Meeting House whatsoever, does not mention any other
Qualification than Preaching or Teaching to make them liable; We coneive those
Words, being but a part of the same Paragraph, where Benefices of 50 l. a Year,
is required to make the Preachers of the Church of England liable.

The same Reason runs along thorough the whole Paragraph, being Conjunctive,
and takes hold of Preachers and Teachers in Meeting Houses, who do reap by
Contribution, or otherwise, 50 l. a Year; which very Words were expressed in
the former Poll Act, and not of such Preachers or Teachers, as receive nothing
for the same: For it were against Reason and Equity, to stretch the Words of
that Paragraph against the Tenor of the Act; for a Minister, who has between
40 and 50 l. per Annum, is excused by the Act, much more reason for a Minister,
or Preacher that receives nothing.

6. To Impose a Tax of 20 s. upon such as Preach or Teach in Meeting Houses
freely, only for their Preaching or Teaching, appears Contradictory to the
Liberty granted and confirmed to them in the Act of the late Parliament, to
Exempt them from Penalties on that Account.

7. Lastly, Upon the serious and just Consideration of the Reasons proposed, it
is humbly hoped, that the Commissioners and Assessors, will not insist upon, or
extend the Letter of the Law, contrary to the Reason and Equity thereof,
against poor Men, or Women, or others, merely as Preachers or Teachers, who
reap no Gain thereby; seeing that it is a Rule and Maxim well known, That Equity
and Justice ought to be had regard to, in the Administration of all Laws, and
in many Cases, to be preferred to the Words or Letter of the Law, as appears in
that Ancient and Approved Treatise of Doctor and Student, Chap. 16. Treating of
Equity, page 27, 28. Where its said, To follow the Words of the Law, were in
some Cases against Justice, etc. Wherefore in some Cases, (says he) It is
necessary to leave the Words of the Law, and to follow what Reason and Justice
requires, etc.

London, Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1690.


