THE LORD MARQUESS OF HERTFORD, His Letter, Sent to the QUEEN IN HOLLAND.

Also a Letter from the Committee in Sommersetshire, to the Houses of
Parliament, with a Copy of their Message to Marquess HERTFORD, and his men
assembled in Arms at Shepton-Mallet, his Answer thereunto, and their Resolution
upon the same.

Likewise the Information that both Houses received from a Merchant in
ROTERDAM, Relating how diverse Captains, and other Officers upon a Letter from
the Queen to the Prince of Orange, are by him discharged, and sent over into
England for His Majesty's service in the North; And how the Papists there have
given to the King two hundred thousand pound in money; with sundry other matters
of great concernment.

Whereunto is added, Certain Votes of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for
the apprehending, and bringing up, Sir Ralph Hopton, Master Thomas Smith,
Captain John Digby; Members of the House of Commons, With Sir Ferdinando
Gorges, Sir Francis Dodington, and some others as Delinquents.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That these
particulars be forthwith Printed and published.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliament.

August 8. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscett, and John Wright. 1642.

Madam,
I Am now (imboldned by Your Majesty's commands) to give You the trouble of a
few Lines, which formerly I have done with some scruple, fearing to entrench
too much upon Your Majesty's patience. His Majesty's affairs, are now I hop in
a prosperous way. And the affections of His People, breaks out every day more
and more; who begin to have their eyes open, and will I believe no longer be
deluded with the imaginary fears and jealousies.

The King takes His journey to morrow toward Lincolnshire, invited thereunto,
by a great number of the best Gentlemen of that County: The Prince goes with
Him, But His Majesty has commanded me to return to York with the Duke of York,
where He is to remain until the King comes back, under the charge of the Lord
of Dorset, Because by His M jesties commands, I am with all speed to repair
unto the West, to put His Commissions of Array in execution, which I make no
doubt to perform without any great difficulty; If God prospers Us, as I trust
he will in so good a cause. We shall then shortly (I hope) be blessed and
cheered up with Your Majesty's long wished for presence, And hey then down go
they; And to Our greater encouragement, Sampson is come over to us.

Madam, Your Majesty may perceive I hope well, that I presume to be thus merry
with You; But I hope You will pardon it, with all the other errors and
presumptions of

MADAM Your most humble, most faithful, and most obliged Servant, HARTFORD.
Beverley the 11. of July, 1642.
THE Copy of a LETTER sent from the Committee in Sommersetshire, to both Houses
OF PARLIAMENT.
SIR,
ACcording to the commands of both Houses in your late Instructions, for the
preservation of the peace of this County, since our Letter to Master Pym, dated
the 29. of July in Bathe, Where we gave directions for a meeting this day in
this Town of Shepton Mallet, to issue Warrants to several hundreds, for
preservation of the peace of this County, requiring them not to obey the
Commission of Array, but to be ready from time to time to obey the Ordinance of
Parliament, and such farther dir ctions as they should receive from us,
according to your Instructions; but so it was, May it please you, That under
pretense of a Petition delivered last night to the Lord Marquess of Hertford,
in the name of some of this Town, gotten by the wicked practices of these
Incendiaries, Inhabitants of this Town of Shepton-Mallet, viz. Richard Board,
Hercules Whiting, Nicholas Downton, James Strode, John Walker, and John Coothe
the Parson, (who also did yesterday read publicly in the Church His Majesty's
late Answer to your Petition of Pacification,) insinuating into the people,
That our meeting here was to fire their houses, and make their Streets run with
blood; This morning about eight of the clock, Sir Ralph Hopton a companied with
Master Thomas Smith, both Members of your Home, and Sir Ferdinando Gorges,
Father in Law to Master Thomas Smith, and a hundred horse at least, with
swords, and some with Pistolls, came into the Market place, pretending to read
the said Petition: Master William Strode, one of your Deputy Lievtenants, lying
that night within a mile of the Town, and having notice of some tumult in the
Town; Presently himself, and his son, with his servants, in all, but four
Armed horse, and two unarmed, came into the Market place, and demanded the
reason of the tumult; Whereupon the said Sir Ralph Hopton, Master Smith, and
Sir Ferdinando Gorges came forth to Master Strode, and required him to alight,
and hear a Petition read; to which Master Strode replied, That he came not to
hear Petitions, but to suppress Insurrections and Tumults, And required as one
of the Committee of both Houses, the said three Gentlemen and the rest, in the
name of the King and Parliament, to depart the Town, as they would answer it at
their perils; Whereupon the said Sir Ralph Hopton laid hold upon Master
Strodes person, and his horse, with the assistance of Master Smith, and
arrested Master Strode of suspicion of Treason, Endeavoring to pull him from
his horse, which he endeavoring to avoyde, Sir Ferdinando Gorges struck at him
with a Halberd, and dive s of their Cavaliers drew their Swords, and held the
points toward his Body, and forced him to alight: and then the said Sir Ralph
Hopton, Master Smith, and Sir Ferdinando Gorges, laying hands upon him, The
said Sir Ralph Hopton did their arrest Master (...) of high Treason: And then
the said Sir Ralph Hopton read the abovesaid false and scandalous Petition, and
called for men to make it good; but there only appeared the abovesaid Nicholas
Downton, which they (...) M ster (...) to take notice of, to which Master (...)
replied, That the said Downton was one of the Incendiaries of the said Town, as
they were of the County, and of the Parliament; and did again require them in
the Name of the King and both Houses of Parliament, to depart the Town, and bid
the people obey the King as he was guided and counseled by the Parliament, and
not as he was guide d and counseled by evil Counselors, from whom came this
Commission of Array, both illegal, and destructive to the Kingdom: then they
commanded the Constable to take charge of M Strode, who desired them that he
might go with them to the Marquess; and in this passage, word was brought to
Sir Ralph Hopton that the Country was coming in upon him; whereupon they
seeming to be amazed, and severing themselves, went down the Street, and took
horse and rid to the Swan at the other end of Town, the place appointed to meet
the other Deputy-Lievtenants, but none were yet come; whereupon he rid out of
the Town to meet some of them, having set a good Guard for the safety of the
Town (we had forgot to tell you that whilst Master Strode was in their power,
one of their Cavaliers bent a Pistol on one of Master Strodes servants) Near
unto the Towns end Master Strode met some others of his fellow
Deputy-Lievtenants, with their Company, to whom he related what had passed:
whereupon they all went with their Company into the Town, and up to the
Marketplace, whence Sir Ralph Hopton, Master Smith, and Sir Ferdinando Gorges,
and their Company were departed, and gone in haste a mile out of the Town, and
with them all the Incendiaries above named, together with one Tho. Strode, a
new Captain of Sir Ed. Rodneys, where they endeavored to raise all the Country
about them, to surprise us, and did raise many men, and divided themselves in
Troops or Companies, having sent both overnight and that morning post to
Sherborn, to Captain John Digby, to bring his Troop of Horse to assist them,
which he did accordingly: but meeting about three miles from this Town some of
their own Troops, he was advised to leave Shepton, and go to Wells, which he
did, with his Troops. In the mean time we the Deputy-Lievtenants having seen
the Town all in quiet and peace, went with our Company to our place of meeting,
there to pursue our business, which we did the best way we could: But the
Country hearing how we were like to be surprised, came in without Warrants or
any (...) of ours, with such diligence and affection, both Horse and Foot, that
before noon were above 2000 Horse, though most una med, and about 100 Foot; our
Scouts bringing us word very frequently how they surprised the Contrymen
coming to us, labored to increase their fears, beat and wounded His Majesty's
Subj cts, took away their Powder, Bullets, and other provision they br ught to
assist us. We thought it fit to draw into the Field, and put in order our
people, the best we could to preserve the peace of the Country, where we
publicly made our Instructions: and Mr Henry (...), eldest son to the high
Sheriff, having his fath rs Authority (himself being weak and sickly) was come
to us, and c mmanded as Posse Comitatus, all that were present, and the whole
Country, to assist us for the service of the King and Parliament, and
preserving the peace of the County, which the people with great Acclamation
protested to obey. There was brought unto us a man (...), and we believe
mortally wounded, by one of Sir Ralph (...) Cavaliers, and robbed of his Powder
and Bullets, with many other Complaints, too much to trouble you withal: And
three of the Troops being in our eye, we thought fit to send them the enclosed
Message by Master William Long, and Master Lawrence Bull, two honest Gentlemen
of our County: whereunto is added their answer, and the Marquess is kind of
Proposition, with our answer to it, which we humbly refer to your perusal; and
when our Messengers as we (...), might be with them, we began to draw our
Company toward them also: whereupon they all disbanded in haste, most toward
Wells, and some to their own houses. And having likewise intelligence that the
Mayor of Wells has delivered, by command of the Marquess, the Keys of the
Magazine there to Sir Francis Doddington a Delinquent, and disarmed diverse good
and (...) Subjects within the Town of Wells, and seized on diverse men their
Horses and Arms that (...) as strangers into the Town, and giving out Warrants
(...) the Lord Marquess of HERTFORD, the Lord (...) and the Lord of TROVV^RID
(...) their Hands, (...) Forces into Wells,

We thought fit to give out our warrants for the mustering two Regiments, on
Friday next at Chewton upon Mendip within three miles of Wells. And for the
better enabling us to preserve the peace of the County, we have sent to the
City of Bristoll (who have showed their good affections to us already in this
service) for two field pieces of about 6 pound bullet, which we conceive very
necessary for the present occasion which as you see is dangerous, and therefore
we desire you will speed us the Arms, and helps you have been pleased to
promise us, with what else you shall think fit. And we shall be not wanting in
our best service for the King and Parliament having had great experience
amongst us already of Gods great mercy in bowing the peoples hearts to his
service, and raising their spirits to most gallant resolutions for the Defense
of the King and Parliament, against all opposers; for which we humbly and
heartily bless God, and commend the good success of all unto him. And
beseeching your pardon for this tedious relation, which we conceive very
necessary, do remain.

Yours and the Kingdoms humble servants. John Horner. Hugh Rogers. Alexander
Popham. William Strode. John Pym. Richard Coley. To. Harbyn. John Ash.

Shepton malet the first of August. 1642.
Monday the 1. of August.
THe Message of the Members of the House of Commons, and the
Deputy Lieutenants, the Committee of both Houses of Parliament, for the
preservation of the peace of the County of Somerset sent to Troopers, and
diverse men in Arms gathered in bodies in the fields about Shepton mallet, by
M. Bull and M. Long.

Requiring them to demand of those Troopers and armed men the intention of
their coming; and if it were for peace, then that they should return home to
their houses if not, that then they would take it as an insurrection; and
endeavor to repress it.

Mr. Bull, and M. Long coming with the message, they found these Troopers and
Armed men, etc. commanded by Sir Ralph Hopton, and M. Tho. Smith, to whom they
delivered the message; who told them they could not give them any answer till
they had spoken with the Marquess, and desired the two Gentlemen to go to
Wels to him, and then the said Sir Ralph Hopton, and M. Smith would go with
them, which they did.

And then the Lord Marquess of Hertford gave them this answer in writing by
Sir Ralph Hopton.

My Lord Marquess being informed of a great assembly to meet at Shepton in
Arms this day, not knowing any cause of such meeting, sent me and some other
Justices of the Peace in order to the peace of this County, to know the cause
of such meeting, and to prevent the disturbance of the peace.


When they had received the abovesaid answer, the Marquess gave them in
writing these words underwritten, and desired answer.

I understand there is a great assembly of armed men now at Shepton, which I
conceive is unlawful, and desire to know by what authority they are met; for
that as yet it seems to me a great violation of the peace of this County, and
the Kingdom, to appear so armed; and to receive their answer.


To which the Comittee sent as follows:

After we understood that my Lord Marquess of Hertford came into this County
with Companies of Armed men to put in execution the Commission of Array which
is illegal, and settling himself at Wels, whether resorted many men in Arms,
both Horse and Foot, We to preserve the peace of this County came this day to
Sheptonmallet.


Die Veneris 5 August, 1642. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament.
THat Sir Ralph Hopton, M. Tho. Smith, and Captain John Digby shall be
disabled to sit as Members of the House of Commons during this Parliament.

Resolved, etc.

That Captain John Digby be forthwith sent for as Delinquent.

Resolved, etc.

That Sir Ralph Hopton, Mr. Tho. Smith, Sir Ferdinand Gorges, and Sir Francis
Dodington be forthwith sent for as Delinquents.

Resolved, etc.

That Richard Board, Hercules Whiting, Nicholas Dounton, James Stroud, John
Walker, and John Cooth the Parson of Shepton-mallet be forthwith sent for as
Delinquents.

ORDERED,

THat the High Sheriff of the County of Somerset, and the Deputy Lieutenants,
and Comittees of the same County, and the Forces that shall be sent down to
the assistance of the said Deputy Lieutenants, and Comittee, be all required to
use their best endeavors for the apprehending and sending up to the Parliament
the Delinquents voted of that County.

August 5. 1642.
A Merchant living at Roterdam says, that he came from the Brill in Holland
upon Monday last, and that when he was there he saw two Captains, viz. Capt.
Padget, (as they told him his name to be) and Cap. Gerrard, who were newly come
hither from the Haghe, and were discharged (as this informant was there told)
by the Prince of Orange, to the end they might repair into the North of
England to serve the King; and says, that there were diverse other Lieutenants
and Officers there that were also forthwith to come into England for the same
purpose (as this informant was there told) and should have come over with this
informant in the same Ship, but that it was to come to London.

This informant heard also, that M. Jermyn went from the Haghe to the States
leaguer near to Rhine-berck toward Cullen, in the Queens Coach to the Prince
of Orange, (by whom he was royally entertained) with the Queens Letters to him,
which contained the names of such Officers, as she had pricked, and desired the
Pr. of Oringe to discharge them, that they might come into England to serve the
King. This informant heard there also, that the Papists in Holland and
Frizeland had lent the King 200000. l. And he says also, that he saw at the
Briell, two vessels ( viz a Pinke and a Boyer) laden with Powder, Muskets, and
other ammunition, the one whereof went for Scarborough, and the other pretended
to go for Ireland; and that Master Knolles (a servant of the Kings) went in
that boyer.

Also this informant knows, that Master Jermine came to hire a Cole-ship of
Scarborough being at Roterdam, and of about an 150 tun, to carry over
certain ammunition into the North of England; and the Master of the Ship told
this informant, that when the bargain was made with him by Master Jermine for
the hire of that Ship, Master Jermine told him, it was to carry over Letters
into England, but when the Master understood that it was hired to carry over
Ammunition, he would not stand to his bargain He says further, that upon
Monday was sevennight, news was brought from Flushing to Roterdam, that the
States Admiral had taken nine English ships, which were going into Dunkerk,
and sent them to Flushing, because he found they carried cordage and
Ammunition, and that they said, they had one of the Kings ships to convoy them;
He says also, that he heard it credibly reported there, that young Master
Griffith having been at Paris to seek Master Jermine, and not finding him
there, came to him to the Haghe, where Master Griffith challenged Master Jermine
into the Field, and Master Iermine took Oneale to be his second, and Master
Griffith had a Scottishman for his; and a Frenchman parted them.

He says also, that Prince Robert is at Helvore-sluce, ready to come overwith
the first wind, in the Vice Admiral of Holland; the ship came from the Briell
on monday last to go to Helvore-sluce to take him in.

FINIS.

