ENGLANDS WARNING BY GERMANIES WOE: OR, An Historical Narration, of the
Original, Progress, Tenets, Names, and several Sects of the Anabaptists, in
Germany, and the Low Countries: Continued for about one hundred and twenty
years, from Anno 1521. (which was the time of their first Rise,) until these
Days.

VVherin is set forth their several Errors dangerous, and very destructive to
the Peace both of Church and State: The way and manner of their spreading them:
The many great Commotions: (yea, to the effusion of much blood,) which they
occasioned in those parts, by their opposition to, and resistance of the Civil
Magistrates; And what course was there taken for the suppressing them.

By FREDERICK SPANHEMIUS, Doctor, and Professor of Divinity, in the University
of Leyden in Holland.

Foelix quem faciunt aeliena pericula cautum.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by John Dever and Robert Ibbitson, for John Bellamie, at the
three Golden Lions in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1646.

Englands warning by Germanies Woe, OR, An Historical Narration, of the
Original, Progress, Tenets, Names, and several Sects of the Anabaptists in
Germany, and the low Countries.
CHAP. I. Of the Original, or beginning of the Anabaptists.
PUrposing by the assistance of God, The Proem.
for the confirmation and vindication of the truth, to dispute against the
Anabaptists: for the more full illustration of the matter I have taken in hand;
I thought fit briefly to praemise these things. 1 Of the Original of these
Sectaries. 2 Of their Progress. 3 Of the diverse Sects into which they are
divided. 4 Of the Names by which they are commonly called. 5 Of their Heterodox
opinions.

Concerning the first: namely, the Original, or beginning of this sort of men,
which are most commonly termed Anabaptists; Their first birth is challenged by
the year of our Lord, 1521. when they began to appear on the stage, and to
enter into these parts of the Christian world. Those that are read to be the
first, which helped the world to be delivered of this Sect; were Nicholas
Storch, Marcus Stubner, and chiefly, one Thomas Muntzer, men borne in
upper-Germany; whose pretense was piety, of a civil life in appearance; but
their minds greedy after innovations, ambitious of Honor, and made and fitted
for ungodly enterprises. To their designs a while joined himself Martinus
Cellarius, a Swede by Nation, disciple of Capnion, and one of Melanchtoms
familiars; but who afterward, both by his and Luthers admonition, repented;
and together with his Sect cast of his Country name, taking unto him from
thence-forth the name of Borrhai; under which name he was first placed in the
profession of Philosophy, and afterward of Divinity, in the famous University
of Bazill; where (besides his writings in Logic and Mathematics) by
publishing Commentaries upon some Books of the old Testament, he commended
himself unto the Church of God; until at last being seized by the Pestilence,
he there finished his life, in the Communion of the Orthodox Church, the year
of our Lord. 1564.

Nicholas Storch, and Marcus Stubner, by diverse practices endeavored to draw
the heedlesse people after them; this latter by the fame of his learning and a
certain dexterity he had in expounding the holy Scripture; the former (as
being altogether unlearned,) by his popular eloquence, and report of
inspirations, revelations and secret conferences with God; both by a great
deal of juggling and diverse frauds. These notwithstanding proceeded more warily
and gently; but more violently and furiously Thomas Muntzer, under whose
conduct brake forth that lamentable sedition of the Countrymen, by which in
the former age, upper-Germany was so grievously shaken, and with the same, the
fruits of that new Gospel, wherewith Storch and Stubner had possessed the
minds of the common people. The residue of both whose lives, and their ends,
are uncertain. Of Muntzers further enterprises comes now particularly to be
spoken.

Some fanaticke spirits take occasion of making parties, and rending the Church
of God, upon the words of Luther, in his Book of Christian liberty, which is
extant amongst his works in the third Tome: and was first published in the
year of our Lord, 1520. having read there, that a Christian man is Lord of all
things, and subject to none: which words written by Luther that eminent servant
of God in the best part, and largely expounded; and by a contrary aphorism,
(namely that the same was servant of all, and subject to all,) more fully
declared; were wrested to an ill sense by men impatient both of their own and
others quietness: who upon that occasion, first privately, and afterward
publicly, began to speak evil of the Government of Princes unto the people;
telling them of their exactions, and boasting the liberty purchased to all
under the Kingdom of Christ; and making large complaints, not only of the
Tyranny of the Pope of Rome, but also of many faults still tolerated in the
Church by the first reformers: and so shaking the two pillars of public
order, the dignity of the Magistrate, and the reverence of the sacred
Ministry, and the authority of both. Thereupon consulted about framing a new
and more perfect Church, and concerning its new policy; and on this occasion
thought of a new Baptism to initiate the disciples thereof. But least the
reverence of the Baptism formerly received, should be any hinderance to their
purpose; Childrens Baptism was exclaimed against as vain, yea, unlawful,
being conferred upon Infants, which were incapable thereof; whereas this
Sacrament ought to be administered to none but men grown, and who had the use
of their will and reason. And that the zeal of this new Church, which these
Doctors desired to raise out of the rubbish, might the more deeply enter into
the minds of the common people; they took special care to make great show of
piety themselves, and to press the same upon others. Hence the ordinary
subject of public Sermons, and private Conventicles was. That we must detest
sin, suddue the flesh, stir up the spirit, exercise duties of charity,
bear the Cross of Christ, give our selves to fasting, be plain in apparel,
moderate in diet, compose the dressing of our bodies to neglect, rather then
ornament, and be sparing of speech. It cannot be said, how much the enemy of
mankind, by this slight transforming himself into an Angel of light, and
hiding the depths of Satan, advanced his cause; and how much this mere
outside of godliness and holiness made the minds of men not evil addicted
unto these new Evangelists.

The minds of men being thus prepared; Thomas Muntzer, first Pastor of Cygnea,
afterward of Alstet, a Town seated in the limits of Thuringia and Saxony,
thinking he might now go on with his designs, hardened himself in his
audacious wickedness; yea, resolved in his mind to adventure on any mischief
whatsoever. For when he observed the name of Luther to be famous every where,
for restoring the Churches liberty, and all men's minds to be inclined toward
him: he thought he must by some notable enterprise get himself a name amongst
all men likewise; and to this end was so bold, as to profess that he would
restore the politic or (as sometimes he used to call it) natural liberty;
and deliver subjects from their yoke, and Tyranny, so did this contemner of
Gods ordinance style the Government of Princes and Magistrates: But when he
could not get Luther to join with him, nor prove his fact to be lawful unto
him, with whom he had often meetings thereabout, at Wittenberg: but on the
contrary was rebuked by him, and earnestly admonished not to disturb the
public peace, yea, to submit to the order which God had ordained; he began to
rise up, and thunder against Luther himself, crying out, that Luther was as
much in fault as the Pope of Rome; that it was true, the work of reformation
was something furthered by him, but left still infected with much leaven; yea,
that Luther was worse then the Pope, for that he had published only a carnal
Gospel. Neither left he to exclaim against the Tyranny of the Civil
Magistrate to the utmost, nor to press upon the common people, that all things
by nature were free and common; and that the yoke of Princes was as much to be
cast off as the Popes of Rome: and seeing fair warning was not like to
prevail with them, but they would have both the goods and lives of their
subjects to be tribute to their lusts; it was most just that every one seek to
recover that by force of Arms, which God would have to be common to all. The
commons being stirred up by this Trumpet, and enticed with the seeming
sweetness of a certain new liberty, began every where to imbroyle themselves
in dangerous mutinies. Near the River Acronius uproares are made; in Alsatia
and Sweden, Troops of factious persons gathered together, liberty is every
where pretended, and all reverence and obedience due to Princes contemned, yea,
altogether cast off.

CHAP. II. Of the progress or increase of the Anabaptists.
WHen Satan had by this means endeavored not only to make Schisms in the
reviving Church, and to cast dust in her face; but likewise to render the
reformation of the Temple of the Lord odious to the powers of the world; as if
thereby the just authourity of Princes over their subjects was abrogated; and
the new preaching of the Gospel, led only to faction and sedition; it cannot
be expressed into how much hatred the most holy work of Reformation was
brought, with those men which were still addicted to their former superstition;
For these tumults were not only imputed to their true Authors, a few leaders
of factious persons; but likewise began to be laid to the charge of the Gospel
it self, and all the Teachers thereof. And that so much the more, because
these new Patriarchs of the Anabaptists, had afore-time been familiar with
those, whose service the Lord had used in the Reformation of his house; and for
that they boasted, Luther was of the same mind with them. Hereunto add, that
the multitude stirred up by them, would seem that they minded to stick to the
Gospel, and cleave to the Scripture only: and would maintain the liberty of
their consciences by the sword. But those worthies, which had given sufficient
proof to the Church, of their fidelity and integrity in repairing the Temple
of God; that they might wipe off the blot which was cast as well upon
themselves, as the Gospel; they thought fit by writing, to defend both their
own, and the cause of the Church of God; which amongst the rest, was stoutly
performed by Luther, Melanchton, Zuinglius, Bullinger, Menius, Regius and
others, who sharply inveighed against sedition, and seditious persons;
admonishing rebellious subjects out of the word of God, of their duties toward
the higher powers: reproving those turbulent Preachers, and exhorting all to
quietness, and due reverence toward Princes: and left nothing undone, which
they thought might serve to abate the violence of those men, which with enraged
minds run headlong unto all ungodliness and mischief. Chiefly Luther,
being more vehement against them, contented not himself with exhortatory
writings alone, but likewise set forth sharp Invectives against the unruly:
and by a special Book published against those Country Robbers and
Murderers, himself denounced war against them; exhorting Princes by force
of Arms, to restrain the course of these Robberies, and compel them to be
quiet, which would not be persuaded to it.

These new Doctors, Muntzer and his confederates, being rather made fiercer
then milder by these admonitions, turmoyle still more and more, crying out,
that Luther and those of his party, savoured nothing but the flesh: vaunting
indeed, that they have cut off some of the leaves of Antichrist; but the tree
and the roots remained still untouched; which must also be cut down, and
which cut down they would. And seeing they could find nothing in the written
word of God, to defend their errors, and the tumults which they raised, they
fly to new devices, to maintain themselves and their madness, by boasting of
revelations, inspirations; and always inculcate to the inconsiderate multitude
inclined unto them, that man must live by every word which proceeds out of
the mouth of God, and therefore must not seek to be wise only out of books
and writings, but endeavor according to the prescript of the Apostle, that
they might all Prophecy. Hereupon every Fish monger begins to boast of the
Spirit, feign revelations after the example of Storch and Muntzer, to
counterfeit inspirations: the Pulpit is open to every Cobbler or Tinker; and
what goodly dotage soever the method of deceit had dictated to any, without and
contrary to the written word, was thrust upon men for the word of God; scoffed
at the public Sermons of the reformed, inveighed against the Lutherane faith,
as being void of good works: some of their doctrines and mysteries they would
not reveal, except to those, who gave themselves to minister about their holy
things; others like the cuttell fish, they cast their blackness about, that
they might not be thoroughly discerned; by strange arts, lurked in Houses and
Families, gathering their conventicles in secret corners: profess that they
were sent chiefly to the needy, and those of mean condition; and by all kind
of craft and subtilty, seek to possess and bewitch the minds of credulous men.

Having once opened a wide gate to error, by enthusiasmes; all monstrous
opinions whatsoever, began to be obtruded upon simple people, and those who
were itching after novelties: and turbulent wits are stirred up, to introduce a
new state of things both in Church and Commonwealth, into the Christian world.
And that no regard either of conscience, or fidelity sworn to Princes, might
be an hinderance to them; they began to publish, That Oaths in the time of the
new Testament, were unlawful; and therefore whether already taken, or to be
taken, were altogether void and of none effect. These foundations being once
laid, the common people are over all, as it were set at liberty, by factious
Sermons, conspirations made, and seditious persons armed against their Princes;
and flourishing provinces wasted with miserable civil war, and stained with
much blood.

The chief Trumpet, and kindler of these uproares, was this Muntzer, who
having gotten himself authority amongst the heedlesse common people, began
openly to proclaim, That he was raised up by the command of God, for the
punishment of wicked Princes, and altering of Politic Government. For this
cause, being by Frederick Elector of Saxony, driven out of that Country, and
wandering here and there through Germany and Helvetia, he sowed the seeds of
sedition every where; and at length, being returned to Mulhaysen, a famous
Town in Thuringia, he came to that height of presumption, that by the help of
factious persons, and such as were addited unto him, he put off the
Magistrates, and filled the Court with his Sectaries; yea, challenged to
himself the cognizance of all, both Ecclesiastical and Civil matters;
spreading this Doctrine, that judgments under the new Testament ought to be
framed and administered only out of the word of God. And that the hearts of the
common people might be the more fastly knit unto him, who have commonly but
small revenues; he would not only that all Monasteries should be prey and
spoil unto them, but likewise commanded that all things should be in common,
according to the example of the Primitive Church: and those of the richer sort,
he either by Arguments persuaded to ascent, or by force, and fear of worse
compelled them thereunto. When nothing in show more favorable then this, could
come to the ears of the common people; who had either been burdened with
taxes, or sometime oppressed by the more hard government of their Superious; or
which were in want and penury: and Muntzer by his seditious letters sent abroad
every where by his Messengers, published this doctrine; and withal preached
all manner of liberty: grievous commotions followed in many provinces,
especially in Sweden, Thuringia, and Franconica, where the clownish multitude
arising in great numbers betake themselves to Arms; contemn the commands and
dignity of the Magistrate; pull down all Castles, and fortresses, as the
fetters put upon their liberty. Muntzer yet sets the minds of those men more
on fire, who were already more then enough enraged: calls the Minets out of the
Mines of Mansfield unto prey and tumult, denounces to all, That he is the
servant of God, ordained by Heaven, to cut off the ungodly; and that God had
committed unto him the sword of Gideon? ordinarily using this subscription in
his letters. Thomas Muntzer the servant of God against the ungodly; as also,
Thomas Muntzer with the sword of Gideon. And yet is the mind of this madman,
The Anabaptists enter the field with an Army.
more and more inflamed, by one Henry Pfeiffer, who of a Monk, become a
brawler, counterfeiting a vision from Heaven, gathers forces of mutinous
persons, and brings forth his Troops into the field. The Princes of Saxony,
Brunswicke and Hessen, The Princes of Germany make war against them.
with the Count of Mansfield, being by the Rebels constrained to Arms, prepare
likewise an Army: and after many admonitions spent to no purpose, they set upon
these bands of husbandmen rather then Soldiers, which were set down on the
hill near the Town of Frankenhaysen; whom (quaking before the fight began, and
in vain exhorted by Muntzers trembling voice to courage and constancy) they
overthrow and put to flight; storm the Town of Frankenhaysen: and Muntzer who
had fled thither, and fained a sickness, (as being pined away with long
faintness) being through the singular providence of God, discovered by the
servant of a Nobleman, by certain letters hid in his cloakbagge, near the bed
where he lay, was plucked out of his hole, Munster and Pfeiffer taken and
hanged near Mulhaysen.
and together with his consort Pfeiffer committed to safe custody: where having
by the Rack and Tortures, compeld him to declare the names of his accomplices;
he almost desperate (together with Pfeiffer, who was taken near Isenacke) paid
for his wickedness, and the death of so many thousands; being cut off with the
sword of vengeance, by the hand of the hangman, near Mulhaysen, in the year of
our Lord 1525. Otherwhere also in Sweden, Thuringia, Alsatia, Franconia,
Bavaria, Austria and Stiria, were the Princes Arms victorious; the routed
Troops of the Rusticks, are scattered in every place; the Cities possessed by
these factious men, are either taken by force, or constrained to deliver up,
and by the punishment of a few, many are restrained, all terrified, this
spreading evil stayed; and the former peace and tranquillity again restored to
those Provinces.

These frantic and seditious men, being subdued by force in upper-Germany; and
the spring of rebellion, with the loss of much blood, at last drawn dry: this
evil grew fresh again in Helvetia; and those seeds of Anabaptisme, which had
been sown by Muntzer traviling through these parts; and received with open
ears and minds by some Ministers of the Word; began both in public and
private assemblies to be preached unto the common people. Of which Preachers
the principal men were Foelix Mantzy and Conradius Grebelius of Zurich, whereof
the first had strived in vain to come to the profession of the Hebrew, and the
other of the Greek tongue, and Balthazer Hubmeier, Pastor of the Town of
Waldshut: who when he had not only by word, but also by publishing a book of
Anabaptisme, troubled the consciences of a great many; Huldricus Zuniglius,
that valiant Champion of the truth, set forth a writing, and confuted the
turbulent fellow. And at Zurich, in a solemn disputation with the two former,
for three days together, in the month of November, publicly in the Court
(after two others had with them, in the month of January and March) in the
year of our Lord 1525.) solidly confuted their Arguments, or rather
cavillations against Childrens Baptism, (which they contended was first
instituted by Pope Nicholas) in full demonstration of the spirit, and of power.
Anabaptisme being triumphed over in this disputation, by the help of
Zuriglius, Leo Juda, and Casper Megander, and the truth laid open to the light;
the Senate of Zurich by a public edict establishes Childrens Baptism, and
command the Anabaptists teachers to be silent and quiet. Notwithstanding, as
yet these troubles of the State would not cease, but that in private meetings,
they had not only persuaded Anabaptisme again to many of the Citizens, but
also diverse of them, who had addicted themselves to these new Patriarks, were
rebaptized.

To this thing lend their assistance, Gulielmus Raubli, Panicellus Brotlcin,
George Blaurock, John Denck, and Andrew Stultzy; but above all others Hubmeir:
who having at first taught the Gospel at Waldshut, a Town in the confines of
Helvetia; and afterward turned to the Anabaptists, and so (having set the
Citizens together by the ears, for this diversity of opinions) made the City
again liable to the Arms of the house of Austria, and the Idolatry of the
Church of Rome; had fled to Zurich, and there lurked privily amongst his
disciples, until being apprehended by the Senate, and commanded to answer to
what should be laid to his charge; he was by Zuniglius out of the word of God,
proved guilty of diverse errors. But he of his own accord, promising to make a
public recantation, when he ascended the Pulpit, again preached his errors
unto the people. Being reprehended for this thing, and confessing that it was
inspired into him by Satan, at last after many promises, Hubmeier banished from
Zurich.
and forswearing the Tenets of the Anabaptists, he was banished the City. But
as men are apt to strive for what is forbidden them, and desire the more that
which is denied them; so could not all this restrain the rude multitude, but
that they secretly favored the opinions of these fanaticke men, which were
with much art and eloquence commended unto them by the Teachers of the
Anabaptists, moving them, besides the novelty of the doctrine, a certain vain
affection of pity toward these new Evangelists; who seemed rather miserable
then evil, and more prodigal of their quietness then faith; reputing their
stubbornness for true constancy. Insomuch as the Senate of Zurich was at last
corstrained, to endeavor to prevent the same, by a severe edict in the year
of our Lord 1530. Capital punishment decreed against the Teachers of the
Anabaptists, and fines laid upon those that receive them.
decreeing capital punishment upon the Teachers of the Anabaptists, and heavy
fines upon any that should receive them. The opinion of Hubmeier amongst
others, was, that the spirit of Adam did not consent to sin, and therefore
remained perfect after sin committed; neither did it loose its liberty, but
the flesh only.

The field of Bazill likewise being sown with these unhappy tares, there also
did the Anabaptists make stirs and uproares: with whom O Ecolanpadius a grave
Divine encountering in the City of Bazill, in the years 1525, 1527, 1529. about
the articles of Childrens Baptism, Rebaptising, the Civil Magistrate, and
Oaths; gave abundant satisfaction to the cause, though not to the obstinate
agents thereof; so that by the authority of the most prudent Magistrate, the
zealous assertor of Gods glory, used in suppressing those Sectaries; both the
peace and purity of the Church of Bazill was preserved.

The peace of the Commonwealth of Berne also, was not a little troubled by
those men; especially by Ludovicus Hetser, Joannes Trayer, and Joannes Seckler;
where the Anabaptists being admitted to a public disputation Anno 1528. their
errors were manifested, and their ringleaders confuted by Bertholdus Hallerus,
and Francis Kolbius, Ministers of the word of God. But when notwithstanding the
Anabaptists muttered in corners, that there was as yet no satisfaction given
them, that the truth might openly triumph over error, a solemn disputation was
again appointed, by the honorable Magistrate of Berne, A disputation at
Zosing with the Anabaptists nine days together.
at Zosing in Argovia within the Territory of Berne, in the month of July, Anno
Dom. 1532. which being accordingly performed, between the Ministers of the
Church of Berne, and the Teachers of the Anabaptists; and continued for nine
days together; and taking by public notaries, and published to the world;
was of great moment for the confirmation of many men's minds in the truth, and
recalling others from their errors. And when about the year 1579. the
Anabaptists began again to raise new stirs in the country of Bern; by the
vigilance of the Magistrates and severe edicts, the Sectaries were curbed and
the growing evil repressed.

In Sengall likewise a Town of Helvetia, confederated with the neighboring
villages, no small ado was made by Conradus Grebelius and his disciples; and
by all stratagems, secret suggestions, public serrnons, writings, and all
manner of allurements indeavored, that this famous City might be made a Pella,
and receptacle to these kind of men; But through Gods special mercy, by the
writings of Zuniglius, They are cast out of the City Sengall.
the zeal of Ioachimus Vadianus, and the prudence of the Magistrate, that was
prevented, and these troublesome fellows cast out of the City. Not a little
conduced, to render the Anabaptists hateful unto all good men in this City;
the horrible fact of Thomas Schucker, disciple of Melchior Rinckius that
Champion of the Anabaptists: For he on a time, when a great throng of this
kind of people were gathered together, counterfeiting a rapture and revelation
from heaven; commanded his brother Leonard Shucker to kneel down on his knees,
and ask for a Sword. Being demanded by his father, mother, The Schucker an
Anabaptist cuts off his brothers head in a rapture.
and others that stood by, what he meant by this posture; answered, that they
should be of good cheer, for he would do nothing but what was revealed him
from heaven. The minds of all being attent to this new spectacle, the mad
prophet with his drawn sword, cuts off his brothers head from his body, at one
blow, and tumbles it to the earth; striking exceeding terror into all the
beholders, and drawing from his parents great grief of heart, and many groans.
He is executed for it.
Being apprehended by the Magistrate for this cruel murder; he received the
punishment due to his wickedness; nevertheless showing no sign at all of any
remorse for his crime, but professing on the Scaffold that this was the will of
God, revealed unto him from heaven. This tragical chance happened in Sengall,
An. Dom. 1527. which not a little moved the mind of the Christian Magistrate,
and stirred him up against these furious prophets and their sons, and caused
him to publish Seven Edicts against the abode of the Anabaptists in their City
or dominions. The departure of those men gave indeed rest and quiet to the City
of Sengall, Seven Edicts against the Anabaptists abiding in those parts.
but bred new turmoyles in the neighbor Country of Abbas-Cellonsis; those
restless persons ever wandering here and there, to make innovations, and
trouble the work of reformation there began.

Satan being thrown out of this Theater likewise, would needs erect himself
another, in many of the most flourishing Cities of Germany: and at Straesbourg
by Hosman, at Worms by Cantius, at Ausbourg by one James a Tauner; at Vlms by
Kleiber, and at other places by others, began to spread and sow abroad the
doctrine of Azabaptisme: whose attempts were withstood, both by the Magistrates
and other of Gods faithful servants, the turbulent men suppressed, their
pestilent doctrine in public meetings confuted, and by solemn Edicts
restrained: although always under deceitful ashes lurked the fire kindled by
these raging Doctors, which ever and anon brake out in diverse places.

The Anabaptists being driven out of Helvetia and Upper Germany, many of them
departed into Moravia; and there joined themselves to factious men of this
sort, who were itching after novelties. Having by diverse sleights gathered them
many Congregations there, and sent forth many of their messengers into the
neighbor Provinces and Kingdoms; the same plague brake out in Bohemia,
Poland, Hungary, Austria, Anabaptists beheaded.
and Silesia; which when seditions and disturbances every where followed, some
of them being caught, paid for their unrulinesse with the loss of their heads;
amongst whom was Balthazar Hubmeier, who for having made tumults in Moravia,
Hubmeier an Anabaptist for raising tumults was burnt at Vienna
was brought to Vienna, and there burnt. This being by the Anabaptists esteemed
martyrdom, rather kindled, then quenched or assuaged the heat of their fury:
nor did they cease any whit the more for that, to use all manner of devices,
which either zeal without knowledge could suggest unto simple men, or which the
cunning juggling of their Ringleaders could invent, for the establishing and
increasing of their Sect: of which the publication of the forementioned
doctrine of communion of goods, was not the least; and which was with ready
minds and Ears received of the rude rabble, who had small means of their own,
and all their hopes on other men's. But this a little slackned the progress of
the Sectaries, that (as the wits of men are never at rest) the Anabaptists of
Moravia began to divide into diverse parts, of one Sect becoming two, the one
of the Gabrielists, In Moravia the Anabap. divide into several Sects.
the other of the Hutterians, so named from two of their Ringleaders, Iacobus
Huttering, and Gabriel Schevering, who were the first that lighted ahe Candle
to these Sectaries in Moravia.

As Upper Germany was thus subject to the uproares of the Anabaptists, so
neither was Low Germany free from this spirit of giddines; but the flourishing
Provinces of Westphalia, Friezland, and Holland, were grievously vexed with
these new apostles; by whom, vanting nothing but the word of God, and
revelations from heaven, and insinuating themselves by a certain outward
civility of life, a very great multitude of people were corrupted, and infected
with this leaven of Anabaptisme: but chiefly Munster a famous City of
Westphalia was beset with these new prophets; which they did as it were by
degrees. For when at first by the labor of Bernard Rotmannus the doctrine of
the Gospel began to be taught in this City, a great multitude of people
adjoined themselves thereunto, the Papists in vain storming thereat. Rotmannus
sends to Marpurg, desiring to have some Ministers sent from thence unto his
assistance; by whose help and counsel, the work of reformation so happily
began might be more advanced. There being sent unto him Petrus Wirthemius and
Godfrey Stralen, Rotmannus with his fellows provoke the Papists to a solemn
disputation, sets down their errors in writing, and promises a confutation
of the same, out of the Word of God. But when the Popish Doctors confessed that
they were unable to undergo the encounter, and that they could not defend
their doctrine by the Scripture, they were removed from the office of public
Teaching, and six Temples occupied by the reformed. The Canonicks, and their
followers, complain to the Bishop, of the injustice of those of Munster; he by
letters commands that the new Preachers should be put out of Town, and his
own restored again. But the Bishop having spent many threatenings to no
purpose, and the number of Protestants grown greater then could be contained
in a little room; by the mediation of the Illustrious Laudgrave of Hessen, the
business was compounded; the Protestant Preachers having certain Temples
allowed them; the Cathedral being left to the Canonicks, the Bishop enjoying
his right; and they their ordinary revenues. When from that time forward every
one had followed his own Religion quietly, A Baker, and a Tailor, two Anabap.
get in at Munster and infect the Citizens with corrupt doctrines.
for the space of diverse months; at length there come secretly to Munster
certain of the Anabaptists; in the year of our Lord 1533. of whom the
principal were John Matthijz a Baker of Harlem, and John Bocold a Tailor of
Leyden; who being privily received by some of the Citizens, gather night
meetings in Corners, teach a new Catechism, condemn childrens Baptism; and
not only learn their disciples a new doctrine of Baptism; but make them to
receive it again; and urge community of Goods. When these new Doctors,
especially John of Leyden, had by a certain alluring force of speech, and
fained show of piety (having otherwise a person fit for a Prince,) crept into
the minds of the credulous people, Men in debt, and of low estate, and inclined
to mischief ioyn unto them
in a short space the new sect grew very numerous; seeing all those joined
themselves unto it, whom either their debts pressed, or had but little means at
home; yea all such whose minds were inclined to mischief and mis-rule. To
these were added a swarm of strangers, called thither by the Anabaptists out
of the neighboring Provinces; upon whose coming the new prophets being more
emboldned, they began to contend with the reformed Ministers about childrens
Baptism. Rotmannus and other ministers go over to the Anabaptists.
Rotmannus turning his sail to follow the wind of popular applause, first
faintly opposes himself to the Anabaptists; afterward contrary to his
plighted faith, yields them the victory, and openly goes over unto them; as
likewise do Herman Strapeda, Henricus Rullius, Godfrey Stralen, and more
others. The City being divided into parties and factions; the Senate ordaines a
public disputation concerning the doctrine. There encounter in the month of
August, After a disputation the Anabaptists by order of the Senate, are
commanded to depart the City.
1533. Rotmannus and other of the Sectaries; with Hermannus Buschius, Ioannes
Glandorpius, Petrus Worthemius, Ioannes Holtman, and their fellows. When here
likewise the Truth triumphed over Error; by order of the Senate, the
Anabaptists were commanded to depart the City. They faining a departure, hide
themselves secretly in their holes; and being bold upon the favor of many of
the Citizens, cease not in their private meetings to defend their cause,
confirm and spread their new doctrine. Diverse tumults arise in the City, grave
persons and those that favored the Orthodox Religion, either foreseeing the
ensuing mischief, or overcome with fear, departed out of the City. From
disputations it came to fighting; and those which before were forced to hide
themselves, They rise up in arms against the reformed. They not content with
liberty of conscience, aspire to the government according to their pleasure.
now come forth in battle array against the reformed. At last peace and
liberty of conscience being established on both sides, all controversies are
laid aside; but for a time only. For neither did it seem enough to these giddy
headed men, who delighted in nothing but stirs and novelties, to have obtained
liberty to them and theirs, except they aspire also, to all manner of
licentiousness, to govern and dispose of all things according to their own
pleasure. The new prophets John Matthijz, and John of Leyden, counterfeit
raptures and inspirations, and by sending forth horrible cries about the
streets and cross ways, exhort all men to repentance; many wonders are noysed
amongst the common people; from Osnabrug, Wesell, and Warendorp, and the
neighboring Towns, were called hither all such as were instructed in the
mysteries of Anabaptisme, under the glorious promise of receiving an hundred
fold, for the goods that they left. Most of the Senators go out of Town, They
create new Magistrates
the rest are put off, the face of the City quite altered; new Magistrates
created by the prophets, and amongst the rest Bernard Knipperdolling, an old
Innovator, ready of his hands, and as it were made of purpose for tumults. To
whom Brethren were adjoined, all men of the same order and disposition. Over
the Church assemblies were set, one Julius of Friesland, Rotmannus and others.
The Monasteries and Temples are spoiled; a huge deal of prey is gotten
together, and used in common; yea, by a new ordinance of the Prophets,
community of all goods is commanded upon pain of death; They command community
of all goods upon pain of death, they abolish Schools and Church assemblies.
all books except the Bible are cast into the fire; Schools abolished; yea,
and public Church assemblies: the Prophets often redoubling, happy would that
time be, when all should be taught of God. And when the City was besieged by
the Bishop, the Prophets prepare forces, raise fortifications, cast the Bells
into Engines of war, and parting the work amongst the people; not only
delude them with vain words, but tire them out with hard labor; and by
cruelty confirm their authority toward the gaine-sayers. John Matthiiz,
rashly falling out amongst the thickest of the enemies, with a small company,
being cut off, and the Citizens minds much troubled thereat; John of Leyden
thinking it concerned him to repair this mischance, tells them that his death
with the manner thereof, was long since foretold him; and so he and Rotmannus,
raise them all up, in new hopes, and expectation of a miraculous deliverance
from the siege; and repulsing the enemy, who diverse times assaulted the walls
without success, gained credit to their praedictions. Then as being taken with
an ecstasy, and drunk for three days, at length proclaims, that by the
command of their heavenly Father, twelve (factious) men, must be set over this
new Israel, reserving to himself as the Prophet of God, authority to declare
unto all what was Gods pleasure. They establish Polygamy and rage against those
that oppose it, they practice tyranny.
To cover his own adulteries and monstrous lusts, he establishes Polygamy,
rages against those that dissented, and by the slaughters of a great many
strengthens his Tyranny; so that upon the pleasure of this ungodly man,
depended not only the fortunes, but even the lives of every one of the
Citizens. Whosoever durst but speak a jest word of the Prophets, was accused of
Treason, and made a Sacrafice to the lust of these miscreants; and all divine
and humane right trodden under foot. Yea, so far proceeded the madness of
this villainous fellow, John of Leyden set upon a Kingly throne
that by the craft of a Goldsmith of Warendorp, suborned by him, who fained a
revelation and inspiration; and the blockishnesse of the bewitched people; this
scum of the earth, was set upon a Kingly Throne, and exercised a stage player
like Kingdom, in an oppressed City, prepared himself princely furniture and
attendance, uses all manner of cruelty, with whordoms, He distributeth
principallities and dukedoms at his pleasure to his followers
murders and unheard of Tyranny; distributed amongst his followers,
Principalities and Dukedomes at his pleasure, and by his messengers published
abroad the Kingdom of Sion, and every where stirred up the country people to
mutiny and rebellion; yea, attempted such mischiefs, as will scarce find
credit with posterity; ascribing to himself this frantic title: John King of
new Jerusalem, King of righteousness over the whole world. Of which may be
seen at large Ioannes Sleydan in the tenth book of his Comentaries: Lambertus
Hortensius Manfortius, lib. de tumultibus Anabapt. and Ioannes Wigandus Bishop
of Pomezania, in his volumne published of Anabaptisme. This Stage Play, or
rather Tragedy endured so long, until the City was brought to the utmost
misery; and (the Citizens too late acknowledging their own vain credulity and
the madness of their Prophets) was by a stratagem taken of the enemy, and John
of Leyden, Knipperdolling and other of the principal being caught, after some
fruitless conferences, Anno 1536. had between them, The Ringleaders of the
Anabaptists are pulled in pieces with burning pinoers, and John of Leyden hanged
up in a Cage.
and Antony Corvinus and Ioannes Kymaeus, divines of Hessen both of them; with
other consorts of their villainy, received the most just reward of their
wickedness, being plucked in pieces with burning pincers, and diversely
tormented, as those which had deserved more then one kind of death: and John
of Leyden at this day hanging up in a Cage, teaches posterity to learn
righteousness, and not to despise the Deity.

Notwithstanding, neither with these horrible fruits of Anabaptisme, nor yet
with the calamity of Munster, were the minds of the Anabaptists dismayed, in
diverse Provinces of the Netherlands; and though many of them protested that
they disliked the madness of the Anabaptists of Munster, yet it is certain that
their chiefest Teachers in diverse Provinces, were such as were sent out from
them; and Memo Simonz although he disapproved of many things in those of
Munster, nevertheless acknowledged them for brethren though weak ones; and
professed that their calamity notwithstanding, they might find God merciful
unto them. And indeed, this Memo Simonz came out of the School of Vbbo
Philipz: and he out of the School of Bartholomew Compactor, whose Apostleship
is referred unto John Matthiiz, that famous Prophet of those of Munster; by
whom he, Theodoricke Cuyper, Claesvan Alcmaer, and others, were first sent
forth. But how much this factious spirit stormed in Friesland and Holland, what
uproares he raised, especially at Amsterdam and here at Leyden, yea throughout
all Holland and Friesland, and what dangerous plots he contrived for the
destruction of those Cities, is at large declared by Lamberous Hortensius in
the book before cited. And although these tumults always fell on the heads of
their Authors, and their madness and erroneous doctrines, were both by the
Magistrates and Ministers of the word, every where resisted: notwithstanding so
deep roots have this kind of men taken in these Provinces; and their
counterfeit show of much simplicity, sincerity, humility and charity, and
special reverence toward the word of God, so bewitched the minds, especially
of the common people, and does still bewitch them; that many which are no evil
men, but zealous of godliness, join unto their party; and turn the loose
life of many of those which are of the reformed Churches, into a prejudice of
their Doctrine. Yea, at this day their doctors, by confessions, and writings,
partly doctrinall, partly defensive, and partly confutatory, stand in the
maintenance of their errors: So that it concerns us to endeavor by all means
to hinder the same, and to provide by all diligent care for the regaining of
those souls unto God, who are either led away with this error, or bred up in
the same; and for preserving those from contagion, whom this pestilentiall
star has not yet infected.

Now as the builders of ancient Babell, by the confusion of their tongues,
published their own wickedness, and deserved punishment; so in like manner,
God would not only that the Anabaptists should be stricken with a fingular
blindness, but likewise that their tongues should be divided: and by his most
just judgment permitted, that these Sectaries should not only dissent from
one another, The Anabaptists divide into several factions, and they
excommunicate one the other.
and rend into diverse parts, but also that they should with spiteful hearts
and pens like so many new Midianites fight one against another, and with
mutual execrations tear out their own bowels. For not only the Anabaptists
of Moravia depart one from another, but likewese those of the Low Countries,
divided amongst themselves, thunder one family against the others, and for
frivolous matters excommunicate one another.

CHAP. III. Of the diverse Sects of the Anabaptists, and of the names by which
they are called.
TO search out the names, governments, and tenets, of all the Sects into which
this Kingdom is divided, and wherein they dissent one from another, would be
of an over-tedious enquiry, yea scarce possible to any, except tainted, yea
nourished up in their Religion: this indeed is confessed, that many sorts of
the Anabaptists were numbered of old, and are at this day, which drew their
names either from the Doctors whose opinions they chiefly followed; or from the
kind of life which they professed, or else from the places where they had their
resort.

Concerning the first rank, As first, Muntzerians.
some were called Muntzerians; who inrolling their names under this seditious
Doctor, or rather Captain, entangled themselves with his ungodly doctrine and
mischievous practices. Others are called Huttites from John Hutt; 2. Huttites.
who according to their masters example, called themselves the corporal Israel
of God; vaunted visions and inspirations (but ruefull and tragical) cried out
that all the Canaanites must be cut off with the sword; that the day of
Judgment was at hand, and the Angels Trumpet began to sound. Hereupon many of
them began to waste away their means, as being an unprofitable burden for the
world to come; but who afterward bidden to begin long hopes, perceived
themselves brought to extreme poverty; and found all too late, that their own
vain credulity, and their masters mad promises, had cost them very dear.
Others were named Augustinians, 3. Augustinians
from one Augustine a Bohemian; who besides many other opinions common to the
rest, affirmed that the souls of the faithful enjoyed not the sight of God,
nor had heaven open unto them until the day of Judgment.

Others were called Hosmannians. from Melehior Hofman, a wily fellow, 4.
Hosmannians.
and furnished with popular eloquence; who began to be famous at Straesburgh,
and drew away a great company of disciples after him. To this Patriark is
usually ascribed the first planting of those Anabaptists, who so multiplied in
Lower Germany. For coming to Emden, An. 1528. when he had there with much
polishing and a smooth tongue which he was excellent at, thrust off his
counterfeited wares, he got great confluence of such people as itched after
novelties, and mightily increased this new Sect; and this our new Evangelist
purchased so much authority, that by his disciples, he was judged to be Elias,
which shall be sent into the World before the day of Judgment. Returning to
Straesburgh upon the prophecy of an old man of Friezland, and there publicly
professing Anabaptisme, he not a little troubled the Church in that City.
Whereupon a Synod being called in the Month of June, An. 1532 he was admitted
to a public disputation with the Ministers of the Word, by whom the opinions
and dreams of the frantic fellow were confuted. When as yet he would not be at
quiet and the Anabaptists bragged that Straesburgh was new Jerusalem, in which
a new Kingdom of Christ was to be erected, and joined Cornelius Polterman, as
an Enoch to that Eliah, and began to make uproares; Hofman taken by the
magistrate, and imprisoned.
Hofman is taken by the Magistrate and clapped into prison. Out of which the
Anabaptists boasted he should come with 144000. sealed ones, which should
smite the earth with a curse, and break through all the bars which were set upon
him. That their Elias and Enoch should be the two olive trees, and the two
candlestickes which no man could hurt; and if any man should attempt it, fire
should come out of their mouths, and consume their enemies. But when these
sons of the prophets, had in vain expected the deliverance of their Elias at
the time foretold by other of their prophets: Hofman fearing least he should
lose his credit, or his disciples their confidence, began to write out of the
prison; that they must be still for the space of two years after the example of
Ezra and Haggai: whose ondevours for restoring the Temple of God, were in like
manner stayed until God raised up the spirit of Cyrus. Continuing thus
obstinately in his errors, at last dying in the prison, he deceived all the
hopes of his followers. The principal tenets of Hofman were, Hofmans opinions.
that the word did not take flesh of the Virgin Mary; whose flesh was infected
with sin, and accursed: That Christ had only one nature; That the means of
attaining salvation was in our own power: and by our free will was either
imbyaced or rojected: That childrens baptism was not of God, but rather of the
enemy of God and man. To this rank pertain likewise the Gabrielites, 5. and
6. Gabrielites, and Hutterians. 7 The Mennonites.
and Hutterians, Anabaptists of Moravia, who took these names from their
Teachers before mentioned. So were other of the Anabaptists long since, and are
at this day termed Mennonites from Menno Simonz, a famous apostle of the
Anabaptists: who borne in a Village of Friesland near Harlingen, came indeed
out of Popery, but into the errors of the Anabaptists over head and ears: not
only embracing diverse heresies concerning the humane nature of Christ,
Childrens baptism, the office of the Magistrate, and other points of that
nature, but likewise by word, conferences, and writing, sowed the same abroad
every where: and although in a solemn disputation with Martin Muronius, An.
1554 he could not with all his sophistry either elude the force of the truth,
nor avoid the same; notwithstanding he persisted in spreading, and defending
his errors, till, that in the year of our Lord 1559. between Lubecke, and
Hamburg, (or as others will have it at Old slo An. 1561.) he ended his days,
aged more then 60. years. The unconstancy and contradictions of this
brainsick Doctor; both the writings of Menno declare, and the Orthodox Divines
have enough and more then enough manifested From this Menno, many Anabaptists
of the Low Countries, are now commonly called Mennonites, although all of them
do not follow his opinions. The Mennonites properly so called, are likewise
gone into diverse parts, and some of them are called old Mennonites, other new,
or latter Mennonites.

Amongst those Anabaptists which received names from their teachers, are used
to be reckoned by some; 8. Servetians. 9. Georgians. 10. Swhenckfeldians.
Servetians, Georgians, and Swhenck-feldians, because they oppose childrens
baptlsno; and hold baptizang again, Inspirations, and many other erroneous
opinions common with the Anabaptists. The Servetians are so called from Michael
Servetus a Spaniard, who for his execrable and unheard of blasphemies most
obstinately belcht out against the sacred Trinity, and the Son of God, and
other heinous crimes; was not only by the procurement of Calvin that most
learned and pious Divine, (which of mere malice is reported by some) but upon
mature consultation, and communicating the matter with the Commonwealths and
Churches of Helvetia, burnt at Geneva; Servetus burnt at Geneva.
pouring out his ungodly soul amidst most horrible blasphemies in the very
fire: and was as well by the judgment of Papists as Protestants held most worthy
to perish, in the revenging flames.

The Georgians were so named from David George of Delph in these Netherland, a
most notorious Impostor, and patron as well of most horrible blasphemies, as
abominable and unnatural lusts: who came to that height of presumption and
impiety, that besides diverse other opinions wherein he conspired with the
Anabaptists; He gave himself out for the Christ of God, The opinion of David
George.
preferred himself before the eternal Son of the Eternal God, applied unto
himself the prophecies spoken by the holy men of God concerning Christ; and was
so audacious, as to exalt his wicked and frantic opinions, above Gods holy
Word, a most odious fellow, yea, a monster and shame of mankind. Which
blasphemies, together with other dotages of his; he has gathered into his
Book of wonderful things; where he likewise teaches, that the doctrine
delivered in the Scripture is unperfect, yea, childish, and carnal, and
delivered as it were in the infancy of the World. And although one would think
that these blasphemies could not be persuaded to any in the World: yet it is not
to be said, how great a multitude of men this most vile wretch drew to his
party, chiefly by two means. How he brought his followers to embrace his
opinions.
1. An outward show of an holy life and seeming continual, and ardent pouring
out prayers unto God. 2. By a wary and crafty way of scattering, and instilling
his opinions into others; making himself way by little and little from one
degree to another, and by strange means creeping into the minds of credulous
men, and procuring credit and authority to himself. Nor would he reveal those
his horrible mysteries, except to those only, whom he had made wholly his own,
and that secretly also. By which wiles and with a certain comely and majestical
frame of countenance, he inveigled the minds of innumerable, and by the
powerful working of deceit, seduced abundance of people for many years, and
withal cozened his disciples of their money: He cheated them of their moneys.
until at last fearing the deserved punishment of his blasphemies, seeing he
was sharply reproved by Menno Simonz, and Melchior Hofman, and other of the
Anabaptists; forsaking his ancient name, and taking upon him the new name of
John a Bruck, he thought it safest for him to depart to some other place, where
he was neither known by name nor face. He chooses the noble ^ity of Basil,
whither to transfer the seat of his affairs: He changed his name and fled to
Basil.
and seeing persecution was very hot against the reformed Churches in these
Provinces of the Netherlands, professes himself of the number of those
exiles, which were forced to leave their Country for the cause of Christ; and
so with his Family, and some of his Sectaries, was received of the pious
Magistrate; who took pity upon such as were for Christ's sake, feign to go
into banishment. There the crafty fellow a long while hid his venom, and
plighting his faith to the Magistrate, frequenting the Church assemblies, and
by diverse good offices winning the minds of a great many; and by his homely
habit, liberal table, honest attendance, and prudent and civil conversation,
gaining the favor both of high and low: he lived both safely and gallantly;
having gotten himself, besides a spacious dwelling in the City, an house of
pleasure likewise in the Country: till in the year of our Lord 1556. about the
month of September, rather by the gnawing worm of Conscience, and fear of
imminent punishment, Where he pined away and dyed.
then with any great sickness he pined away; when he perceived that by
certain strangers of the Low-Countryes, continually flowing to Bazill, his
vizard began to be plucked off, and the minds of his Sectaries began likewise
to waver. But which is wonderful notwithstanding, it was three years after the
death of the Impostor (who was honorably buried in Lawrence Church) ere the
veil was withdrawn, and the story discovered. Then were the blasphemies of
the ungodly man brought before the Senate, his Sectaries called into the Court,
question had with them concerning the name, Country, life and doctrine of the
deceased. The houses and cabinets of David and all his followers searched;
their letters and books gathered together, and every thing delivered into the
hands of Divines and Lawyers, to discuss the same. The blasphemies and
cozenages of this deceiver being detected, by a solemn ordinance of the
Magistrate, all his books and papers are burnt by the hand of the common
hangman; the picture of the naughty man, His books and papers burnt by the
common hangman, and his Corpse consumed to ashes.
after it had been carried about the Streets, in the malefactors Cart, was cast
into the fire; his infamous corpse, brought in his Coffing into the public
place of execution, and there consumed to ashes. Those of the Sectaries, which
had aforetime been familiar with the Impostor, that protested, they had, and
did abhor the blasphemies of their Master, had their lives granted them of
the Senate, by whose piety and wisdom, the contagion of this heresy was
hindered from spreading any further; all ways of sowing it abroad being stopped
up, His disciples forswear his opinions.
and they forswearing publicly in the Church the communion and doctrine of
this false Teacher are admitted to partake of the holy things. The rest which
pertaines to this history, is performed by Ioannes Wygandus Bishop of
Pomezania, and the author of the History of David George, lately here
published by the reverend man Iacobus Revius.

The Swenckfeldians were so named of Caspar a Swenckfeld of Ossiga, a Knight of
Silesia, descended of a noble family in the Dukedom of Lunenburgh, who
professed, that he was ordained by God for the teaching, and propagation of the
true Orthodox Religion; and for his singular gravity, care to live civilly, and
fervency in prayer, made the minds of many inclined unto him; especially
Valentine Craut-Waldius and Sigismund Wernerus, Professors hnd Pastors of
Lunenburgh, whose assistance he used in spreading abroad his opinions.
Schwenckfeld and his followers, are reckoned with the Anabaptists, for many
positions which they held, partly the same with the Anabaptists, and partly
allied unto them. He taught amongst other things, Swenckfeld opinions.
that the humane nature of Christ was no creature, but deified flesh, or
swallowed up of the Divinity; said that those which defended the contrary
opinion, were creaturists; that the Scripture was a dead letter, and those who
taught other wise were voculists and litter alists; that illuminations and
revelations ought to be highly esteemed. To these opinions may be added those
concerning. Childrens Baptism, the Civil Magistrate, Oaths, and calling of
Ministers, of which Schwenckfeld wrote 80 books in his own Language. But
being banished by Frederick, Duke of Lunenburgh, in the year of our Lord 1527.
He is banished.
he travailed through most of the principal Provinces of Germany, and spread
his doctrine at Noriberg, Ausburgh, Vlms, Straesburgh and other places, and by
his fine tongue, and show of singular holiness of life, gained the minds
chiefly of the Nobility, and so possessed them, that at this present in many
places of Germany, and especially in the noble families, there sticks a kind
of secret veneration to the memory of these opinions received from their
forefathers. He dies at length in Sweden, Ann. 1561. aged more then 70 years,
being honored with this commendation. That he wanted a well governed head, but
not a good heart.

From the diverse kinds of life and professions, 11. The Apostolicks, why so
called.
likewise several Sects amongst the Anabaptists received their names. For
others were called Apostolic, others separate from the world, or merely
spiritual; others Catharists, others Silenciaries, others Euchites, others
Adiaphorists, others Enthusiasts, others Libertines, others Hamaxarians,
Borborites, or dungwagons. The Apostolic were so called, because they
professed to be imitators of the Apostles, left their Wives, Children,
Vocations, and Handy-crafts, wandered about without shoes, scrip, or money in
their purses, washed one another feet, (whence they were also termed
feet-washers) and commanded that all things should be in common.

The separate from the world or spiritual were so named, 12. The Separate from
the world why so called.
for that they would in nothing fashion themselves like to the present world,
but in their clothing, feeding, sleeping, walking, affected, special holiness
and singularity; detested public meetings, solemnities of weddings,
feastings, music, and such other worldly delights; yea, by the order of their
Sect, avoided all laughter themselves, and reproved it in others.

Those were named Catharists, 13. The Catharists, their opinions.
which not only affirmed that Infants were without sin, but likewise that
men grown of their Sect, might and ought to be such, and contended that the
Church consisted only of such.

Those were called Silenciaries, 14. The Silenciarians, their opinions.
which not only thought that much talking must be avoided but also private
disputations about Religion, nor was there any more use of public preaching;
for that the door was shut, and the times evil, and the world unworthy to
have the Gospel preached unto it.

The Euchites were so named, 15. The Euchites, why so called.
because they ascribed all force of keeping away evil, and attaining good
things unto prayer only, and contended that we ought to give our selves to
them alone, and not seek means necessary unto this temporal life, but expect
all things immediately from the hand of God.

Those amongst the Anabaptists are named Adiaphorists, 16. The Adiaphorists.
which reckoned Childrens Baptism, Oaths, administration of Civil Offices,
cutward preaching of the Word, giving and receiving of the Sacraments,
confession of Faith, and things of the like nature, to be things indifferent,
teaching that the Spirit supplied the defect of outward things, and that no man
need to hazard his life for the profession of his faith.

Enthusiasts are those, 17. Enthusiasts
which boasted above the rest, of divine inspirations, ecstasies, and secret
communication with God, obtruding their Prophesies for the word of God, and
preferring them before the written Word: yea, contended, that that was to be
judged by their dreams.

Libertines those are called, 18. Libertines.
who gloried that they were freed by Christ from all laws, both Divine and
Civil; and feared not to proclaim, and by their practice to confirm
communion of wives, and such other uncleans doctrines.

Others are called Hamaxarians, 19. Hamaxarians, or Dungwagon.
Borborites, or dungwagon, because they making a schism from the old
Mennonites, by reason of the severity of excommunications, received all other
which were excommunicated by the rest of the Sects into their communion, and so
scraped all manner of dirt together. The Authors of this Sect were Henry
Naeldeman, and George Heyns, The Authors of this Sect.
in the year of our Lord 1555. The former number was yet increased by three
new Sects which arose up amongst the Anabaptists of Flanders a few years
since, which with several excommunications rage one against another. They
excommunicate one another, the causes thereof
The occasion of this new divorce was the subtilty of one Thomas Beenkens,
Bishop of the Anabaptists of Franener; who publicly offering a certain house
to sell, deceived the hopes of a friend of his, which had intended it for
himself; he being by the craft of a cunning chapman put off from the same.
This sale was approved by many of the Anabaptists as lawful and without fraud,
and especially by Jacob Petervander Meulen Bishop of the Anabaptists of Harlem;
others disapproved it, and not only condemned the batgaine as deceitful, but
also thought that it deserved excommunication. Upon this occasion they depart
one from another, and both sides find their followers. These being thus
together by the ears, comes in a third-sort of middle-men or neuters, who
indeed condemned the bargain as fraudulent, but thought that the sin was not
so great as deserved excommunication. In the mean time, these three Sects
albeit they agree in the principal articles of faith, grievously
excommunicated one another, and obstinately denied to join in mutual
communion.

For the third rank of Anabaptists, such as were named from the places and
countries of which they were, or in which they nestled and found entertainment;
they have been of old distributed, into Germans, Helvetians, Moravians,
Netherlanders. The Germans again subdivided into Swedes, Franks, Saxons and
those of Munster; The Netherlanders into Fries, Flemmings, Hollanders and
Waterlanders; The Fries are divided into Elder and Latter: Yea, sometimes they
take their names from Cities; as those of Antwerp, Embden, Franequer,
Leeuwaerden, Zirckzee, etc. To set forth particularly and curiously, wherein
all these do agree or disagree were to no purpose, nor is it easy to be done,
seeing nothing can be more fickle then these kind of men are, and points of
Divinity are turned up and down by them like dice; they using likewise
doubtful and uncertain phrases; and wrapping up their meaning with manifold
obscurities; as also for the slightest matters (especially for the opinion and
exercise of excommunication) dividing one from another, and making more parties.

These things being beforehand considered, it is now manifest by what names
these Sectaries are called, and for what cause they are given them: and they
are either general or special; The general are, Anabaptists, Catabaptists,
Enthusiasts, Fanatics and Libertines. It Is evident also, that they are called
Catabaptists, because they inveigh against Childrens Babaptisme, and will have
it banished out of the Church of God, as being not only unprofitable, but
altogether unlawful. Anabaptists, because they will have those Baptized
again, which were either Baptized in their tender years, or in their riper,
if out of their assemblies; and do actually perform it, in those that come
over to their Sects. It appears likewise that they are called Enthusiasts, for
the Enthusiasms, raptures and other such like things, which they give out for
secret and divine inspirations; and for which, they will not only have place
given to their own dreams, either in exposition of the Scripture, or
determining points of faith, or in direction of the especial actions of a man's
life, but (at leastwise diverse of them) ascribe thereunto uncontrollable
authority; for which cause also the name of Fanatics was given them. It
appears also that many have the name of Libertines either from their Tenets
only, or else from their Tenets and practice both. Wherefore of Libertines
amongst the Anabaptists, some might be called Doctrinall only; other Vuruly,
Factious, and Epicures; of whom some have risen up against the State, some
practiced the use of Wives in common, and other such like impure and carnal
deeds. To these general names may be added also the special, taken either
from their Teachers, manner of life and profession, or places of habitation:
all which may be gathered out of what has been before spoken.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Erroneous opinions of the Anabaptists.
NOw for the Erroneous opinions of the Anabaptists, they are so many by reason
of the many Sects into which they are divided, that their number can scarce be
cast up. And although they might be divided into those which are common to the
Anabaptists, with other Heretics either Ancient or Modern, and those which
are peculiar to them only: notwithstanding for better order sake I think fit
to reduce all and every of them, to certain common places of Divinity. And I
shall comprehend in this division, not those opinions alone, which all the
Anabaptists or Catabaptists have anciently maintained, or which all of them do
maintain at this day; but those also which many of them, or at least some of
them, have anciently, or do at present defend; that so the partition may be the
more perfect, and that I may present the Reader with the whole body of the
Errors, which they have hitherto erred, and as yet do err. Notwithstanding I
shall not touch the Errors of David George, or Michael Servetus, (from which
the Anabaptists for the most part protest, they ever have been, and still are
free) as neither the idle dreams of Schwenckfeld.

I make two general Classes, unto which all the Heterodox opinions of the
Anabaptists may be referred: for they either concern the sacred rule of Holy
Scripture, or else the doctrines of Faith and ordinances which are taught in
the same.

What concern sacred Canon, the Anabaptists err. 1. Errors against the
sacred Canon of the Scriptures, by detracting from the Scripture.
1. About the matter of the Holy Scripture. 2. About the Form. About the
matter they offend.. 1. By detraction therefrom: while they reject the
writings of the Old Testament as delivered to the Jews only, and not to the
Christians, and as being unprofitable for them; and imagine that only the Books
of the New Testament must be the rule of our Faith, and walking; neither will
they have proofs of the Articles of Faith brought out of the Old Testament, to
be received; except when they are not contrary to the doctrine of Christ,
supposing that those two writings are in many things contrary one to another,
or that the Old Testament is of less authourity then the New. Colloq.
Francothall, and Leovard. and Confess. of the Mennonites.

. 2. By addition thereunto. 2. By addition to the Scripture.
1. While some of them equal the Apocrypha Books, with the Canonical
Scripture, and think that points of Faith may be proved out of them likewise.
So Menno Simonz sometimes opposes the Apocryphal books of the Holy Scripture
to the Canonical; and the Mennonites his Sectaries in their confession, ground
their Tenets upon the books of Ecclesiasticus, and the wisdom of Solomon. So
Reineir Wybrandz in his Catechism published at Amsterdam, Anno. 1640. divides
the Books of the Holy Scripture into those of the Old and New Testament; and
the Books of the Old, into Canonical and Apocryphal; although in this point
he is not very constant to himself, and others of the Anabaptists seem here to
be of the same mind with the Orthodox. 2. while they teach that not only the
written Word of God is to be hearkened unto; but also revelations, enthusiasms.
dreams, and the immediate voice of God, and according to these, the government
of the Church, and all our actions, yea even very rash and perilous ones ought
to be regulated; as appears by the doctrine and practice of those of Munster,
and the conference of Antony Corpinus, and Ioannes Kymaeus, Divines of Hessen,
with John of Leyden at Beve^ga, An. 1536.. 3. By alteration thereof; while they
contend that the doctrine of Faith delivered in the Old and New Testament is
diverse in substance, oppose Moses and Christ one to another, and teach that
Christ in the New Testament has proposed a new doctrine of faith more perfect
righteousness, and not only earthly and temporal promises as were under the
Old Testament, but moreover eternal. Colloq. Emba. and Leovard.

About the form of the Holy Scripture the Anabaptists offend two marmer of
ways. 3. About the form of the holy Scripture.
1. About the internal form, while they will admit only that sense of the Holy
Scripture for lawful, which is expressed in so many letters and sillables, and
(at leastwise some of them) will allow no place to consequences, and inferring
one thing out of another; which appears partly out of the conferences had with
them, concerning the exposition of the words, Ioh. 1.14. The Word was made
flesh; where they will have the words and letters urged precisely; partly out
of their complaints, yea, triumphing that Childrens baptism cannot be proved
out of the Holy Scripture in express words. For the same reason Peter Ioannes
Moyoerus will have the word (...), or the same essence hissed out; in his
conference with Daniel Radeus. 2. About the external form, while because of
their ignorance and unskilfulnes, they will have us adhere to the common
Translations of the Scripture in our mother tongues; and not to compare them
with the Original; and contend that the Orthodox Teachers ought not to have
recourse thereunto. So in the conference of Embden, the Anabaptists urged that,
three persons should be proved them in express words, out of Luthers
Translation, and because the Name Jehovah was not found there, they would not
be pressed therewith. 3. While they thrust upon us, for sound, the
interpretation of their own Teachers, especially of Nicholas Biscer which is
many ways corrupt; as by diverse conferences had with them appears.

The Second kind of Errors spreads it self very far abroad; to wit which
they err about those doctrines of Faith and Ordinances, 2. Errors against the
doctrine of Faith, and Ordinances taught in the Scripture.
which are drawn out of the Holy Scriptures; which for better distinction
sake, we shall distribute into things to be believed, and things to be done;
and these latter, either in a public estate, or private life. Things to be
believed we shall pare. 1. into those things which they will have believed
concerning God. 2. Those which they will have believed concerning the Mediator
between God and man. 3. Those which they will have believed concerning man
himself; and that either in the state of integrity, misery, restoration, or
his estate after this life. Things to be done we divide also, into those which
they think ought to be done and observed of the whole Church in common, or of
every member in particular; and those either public, as in the policy, the
civil Magistrate, and in the Church, those which dispense the Ordinances: or
private, as are the rest of the faithful.

This general Anatomy, contains under it almost innumerable heads; for as one
error begets another, and one absurdity being granted many more follow, so
has the same happened to the Sects of the Anabaptists. A whole Sea of Errors
have flowne into the Christian Church; and by one, a step made unto another,
since the Anabaptists would have place given to their Enthusiasmes and dreams;
like as the same happened in the Church of Rome, when they once had let out their
streams of unwritten Traditions. Although we would have observed, that there
is great difference between the Sects of the Anabaptists, which either have
been of old, or are found at this day, and some of them err more grievously
and dangerously, others less. Neither were of old, all the same opinions
maintained by them all; nor are at this present; but some of their Tenets are
defended by them all, some by many, some by certain of them only: wherefore
we will not have all laid to the charge of every one of them; but intend only
to show, how far the licentiousness of those frantic men, which have given
their names to this Sect has proceeded, since they have departed from the
Church of God, and made Schisms and Divisions

About the first general head, namely, the things which they will have
believed concerning God; 1. Errors about things to be believed concerning God,
1. against the name of God.
the Anabaptists offend. 1. concerning the names of God. 2. concerning his
nature. 3. concerning the persons of the sacred Trinity. 4. concerning the
Essential properties of God. 5. concerning Gods decrees. About the names of
God they err. 1. By contemning the name Jehovah, which denotes the Divine
Essence, and which God will have proper to himself alone; supposing that it is
not in the Scripture, because it is not to be found in many of their
Translations. Colloq. Embd. and Confess. of the Anabaptists. 2. While they
teach, that the persons of the Sacred Trinity are called by the name of God,
rather for the dominion which they have, then for that they have the divine
nature. Jacob Outerm, in Articles. 3. While they contend that the name: (...).
i. e. of the same Essence, ought to be exploded, as being both ambiguous and
without the Scripture. Idem. in the same place; and Confess. of the Anabaptists.

Concerning the nature of God, the Anabaptists offend. 1. Negatively while they
deny that the Father, 2. Against the nature of God.
Son, and Holy Ghost have one and the same Essence; and affirmatively, not
only indefinitely teaching that there are diverse, but definitely making three
Essences. Jacob Outerm. in Artic. and Apology; and Cornel. Cuyper in Apol. 2.
While they distinguish the Essences of the persons by distance of place,
teaching that at Christ's Baptism the Essence of the Father was in Heaven, and
the Essence of the Son on Earth exclusively. Jbidem. 3. While they restrain
the unity attributed to God, to unity of Will, Consent, Doctrine, Operation,
and Dominion, like as two Kings are said to be one, which command the same
things; and as the Disciples of Christ and all the faithful are said to be
one, Ioh. 17.21. Gal. 3.28. Jacob Out. in Artic.

Concerning the Persons, the Anabaptists offend. 1. While they hiss out the
name Person, 3. Against the Persons of the Godhead.
as fained and ambiguous. Confess. 2. While they maintain that the Name of God
is principally ascribed to the Father alone, and that he is therefore called
the only true God, John 17 3. Confess. 3. While some of them leave it
doubtful, whether the Son of God were begotten of the Father from
Everlasting, or that he is so called because he was foreknowne from Eternal,
and destinated unto us. Yea Jacob Outerman plainly affirms that Christ was
called God by the Prophets, and is the Eternal Son of God no otherwise then
because he was foreknowne for a Mediator for us before the beginning of the
World. So Claes Claess. in simpl. prob. teaches that it is not clearly
declared in Gods Word; whether the Son of God before his Incarnation was
another person then the Father. 4. While the same man, in the same place
teaches; that we are not commanded to inquire whether from Eternal unto the
Incarnation of Christ, there were always Three Persons, indistinct as touching
their Essence or not. Nor ought we to enquire, whether the Holy Ghost be
distinct from the Father or no. Likewise they say, that they divide not the
Persons, but confess that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are indistinct;
nor is it taught in the Holy Scripture that there are Three distinct Persons.
Colloq. Francothat. and Embd.

Concerning the essential properties of God, they err. 1. 4. Against the
essential properties of God.
While they deny the essential infiniteness, and omnipresence of God;
affirming, that not the incomprehensible Essence of God does fill heaven and
earth; but his divine power and gifts; and that the former is falsely avouched.
Cuyper and Outerm. in their Apologies. Yea they say that the Son of man was
not then essentially in heaven, when be spoke to Nic^demus upon earth. Out. So
likewise at the Baptism of Christ, the Father was in Heaven, not on Earth, the
Son on Earth, not in Heaven; neither is the holy Ghost in all places. Outerm.
in x. Articl. 2. While they deny the immutability of God; for that the Son of
God (say they) was changed; the Word being changed into flesh; that Christ in
his Incarnation forsook his divine life and glory, and left to be like unto
the Father as well in essence as properties. Idem, and Twisck. in Answ. 3. While
they deny the invisibility of God: for Outerman teaches that God the Father
shall be evidently seen with the Son at the day of Judgment; So was the
second person seen when Christ was made man, and so men saw the glory of the
only begotten Son of God. In like manner Cuyper teaches that the Holy Ghost
was seen; for that John saw not a Dove, but the Holy Ghost in the likeness of
a Dove. Touching the decrees of God, the Anabaptists offend.. 1. About the
general decree of Gods providence. 5. Against the general decree of God.
1. While they overthrow the largnesse thereof; denying that God has determined
concerning all things by an eternal decree; or that he does direct all things;
yea affirming that it is absurd to say, that God from Eternity ordained all
Events which are to come to pass; or the manner and means by which they are
to come to pass. Knuyt in Pref. to his prayer Book, and Outerm. in demonstr.
2. Denying that Gods providence extends unto Evils, and the direction of them;
for that so God should be made the author of sin. Outeim. in demonstr. Knuyt
in Pref. prayer Book.. 2. While they take away the firmness and
unchangablenesse of Gods providence; teaching that the same decree is not so
immutable but that men can resist it, and hinder the execution thereof, yea
that the contrary is absurd, and against the nature of Laws, Rewards, and
punishments; and that these last should otherwise be unjust. Outerm. Knuyt
ibid. and Claes Claess. in Epist.

They offend also about the special decree of Predestination: And that
concerning Election. 6. Against the special decree of Gods predestination, as
1. in election.
. 1. souching the moving cause thereof. 1. While they deny the free Election of
some particular persons to life eternal. Confess. of the Mennonites; affirming
that Election to life depends upon foresight of faith and obedience, and
final perseverance in them both, to wit, that those are Elected to life, whom
God foresaw from Eternity, would believe in Christ, and obey him, and continue
in their faith and obedience unto the end. Confess. Menno. and Outerm. in them..
2. Touching the firmness of the same; teaching that it is not such, but may be
changed according as man carries himself; for when it is grounded upon a
changeable condition, it cannot choose but be changeable. Idem. and John Ries in
Confess. of faith.

In like manner do the Anabaptists err about the doctrine of reprobation.. 1.
2. In reprobation.
Touching the moving cause thereof. 1. Denying that God out of the most free
pleasure of his own will, purposed to leave some of fallen mankind in their
corruption. Ibid. 2. Teaching that reprobation is grounded upon foresight of
infidelity, impenitency, and obstinacy in the same; and consequently those are
reprobated of God, whom he fore-sees will be unbelievers and impenitent, and
persist in their infidelity and impenitency. Ibid.. 2. Touching the firmnes
thereof; while they feine the decree of reprobation to be changeable, as well as
the decree of Election, as being conditional, and by reason of the mutability
of the condition, the decree to be such likewise; so that the number of the
Elect and reprobates may be increased or diminished. Ibidem.

Touching the Mediator between God and man, Incarnated, the Anabaptists err
many ways; whether we respect his Person, office, 7. Against the mediator-ship
of Christ.
or twofold Estate. In the doctrine of the person of Christ they err.. 1.
About the Original of Christ's flesh. 1. While they deny that the Son of God
was made flesh by assumption of the humane nature; but that he was so made by
conversion rather; so that the Word it self was turned into flesh. Jacob Out.
in Articl. Yea that the Word was made flesh, even as the water was made Wine in
Cana of Galilee. Anabaptists of Antwerp. Menno Simonz, in his conference with
Mieron, and confer. of Embden. 2. While they deny that the body of Christ took
its beginning out of the substance of the Virgin Mary, but either of the seed
of God the Father, or of his substance, or of the Word of God, or out of some
other unknown matter. Menno Simonz against Mier, and in Confess. 3. While they
teach that it is no matter of faith to know from whence Christ drew the
original of his flesh; neither is the distinct knowledge thereof necessary. In
exhortation of the Church. John de Ries in confess. to the Senate of Rotterd..
2. Touching Christ's humane nature it self. 1. By denying that Christ was made
like unto man in all things, sin only excepted; and affirm that it is
rashness to say Christ is a creature according to his humane nature, and
inferior to God; yea that the flesh of Christ is divine flesh. Jacob Peterz
vander. Menleus Institut. and Math. Ievriaenz. Epist. Christ. 2. Denying that
Christ had a true humane Soul like unto ours. Confer. of Embden. 3. Denying
that there are two natures in Christ with their Essential properties. Apology
of Menno against Mier. and confer. Embden.

Likewise do they many ways offend in the doctrine of Christ's office.. 1.
Concerning his prophetical office. 1. 8. Against Christ's prophetical office.
While they contend that the New Testament was not revealed by Christ himself,
till after John the Baptist, then when he actually and publicly administered
his office. In def. and Apolog. necess. 2. While (in the same place) they
maintain; That the doctrine of Christ, before his Passion, ought not so much to
be observed, as touching all parts of it as after his death; for that Peter
then resisted evil: neither was he cast out of the Church for denial of
Christ; but now it ought to be otherwise. 3. While they will have the doctrine
and Law of Moses so taken away by Christ, as it does not any more obliege us;
for as those under the Old Testament were governed by the Law, so are
Christians to be by the preaching of the Gospel. Cl. Boeckarts sir. Confer. of
Franckendale: and John Pet. Vander. Meulen compar. Script. 4. While they
contend that Christ has reformed the Law of the Ten Commandments, and
ordained a new and more perfect one. Colloq. Embd. and Francod. and Confess.
Mennon. So (for example) do they teach concerning the First Commandment, that
in the Old Testament, God the Father was only called upon: and that Christ in
the New Testament, first taught his disciples to call on the Father in the name
of the Son. Confess of faith. So will they that the Third Commandment is more
perfect in the New Testament, then it was in the Old for that in the Old
Testament oaths were permitted, and perjury only forbidden, but in the new
Testament all manner of oaths are altogether forbidden. Apoll. So touching the
Fourth Commandment, they maintain that in the New Testament, the observation
of the Sabbath, is by Christ made merely ceremonial, and the inward Sabbath
only necessary to Christians Confess. of faith. and Apol. Likewise the Sixth
Commandment permitted revenge in the Old Testament; and the Seventh, divorces,
and Polygamy; by reason of the imperfection of the precepts of the Old
Testament; but under the New Testament these things are not permitted. 9.
Against Christ's Priestly office,
Apolog.

About the Priestly office of Christ, the Anabaptists offend. 1. While they
think it not enough to ascribe to Christ as God, sufferings and death, as the
person which suffered and died: but make the divine nature, that in which he
suffered and died: as if Christ did not suffer and dye according to a nature
truly and merely humane, but according to a divine nature as it were turned
into an humane: so that they either deny Christ to have been true God, or else
turn his passion into a seeming one only, as did the Marcionites. Jacob
Outerm. Answ. and Apolog. For otherwise (say they) we cannot be said to be
redeemed by the death of the Son of God, and God should be deprived of the due
honor we owe unto him for our salvation. Confess. Mennon. 2. While they deny
that Christ felt in his Soul the wrath of God, and the pains of Hell. Confer.
Embden. 3. While they contend that Christ has reconciled all men whatsoever,
without difference unto GOD the Father; making one object of the acquisition of
salvation, and another of the application, that more large, this more strict.
10. Against Christ's Kingly office.
Conference Franckend. confess. Mennon. Jacob Onterm. Claes Claess.

Concerning Christ's Kingly office they offend likewise. 1. While they dream of
a carnal Kingdom to be set up by Christ in the Earth before the day of
judgment. Monast. Lib. de Mist. Scrip. and Lib. Restit. 2. While they deny the
Almighty power of Christ, whereby he constantly preserves all that are his, in
the salvation once purchased for them, and the means leading to the same.
confess. Menn. Claes. Claess. Epist.

About the twofold estate of Christ, they offend moreover. 1. 11. Aagainst
Christ's twofold estate 1. Humilation. 2. Exaltation.
Touching the state of humiliation; by teaching that Christ in his exinanition,
or emptying out of himself, did not hide his divine glory; but verily quit and
forsake it. confess. Menn. Jacob. Out. Apol. 2. Touching the state of
exaltation. 1. By denying that Christ raised up himself from the dead, but was
raised only by God the Father. Cuyp. in Apol. 2. By teaching. that Christ in
his ascension, did not again manifest the glory of his divine nature, which he
had before concealed, but thereby really and fully recover again the divine
glory and likeness with his Father, which he before had lost, Confess. Menn.
Jac. Out.

Concerning man, and Gods fourfold dispensation about him; considered according
to diverse estates, 12. Against mans-fourfold estate. 1. Innocensie.
the Anabaptists do many ways offend.. 1. Touching the State of integrity. 1.
While they deny the holiness of the first man, to wit that he was created of
God, furnished with original righteousness and holiness; but only in such a
disposition, in which he might attain unto both by a holy life. Brief Inform.
2. While they deny the immortality of the first man; and some of them hold,
that he was neither created mortal nor immortal; others, that he was created
mortal of himself, and in his own nature, yea, and should certainly have
dyed although he had been without sin, and that death must have been
necessary unto him, that he might be translated into glory. Ant. and Corn.
Jacobz against Pupp.

Touching man's destitute estate they are faulty. 1. 2. The state of man.
By taking away original sin, denying that all men are by the disobedience
of one, made sinners, the children of wrath, and subject to death; Although
some of them seem not absolutely to deny it. Conf. Franck. conf. Menn. Joh. de
Ries Confess. 2. While others of them plainly deny that there is in Infants,
any inclination and pronenesse to evil; yea, some of them teach, that they are
created in the same estate which Adam was. Others confess, that there is in
children some inclination to evil, but deny that it proceeds from any
original corruption; but that men are enticed to actual sin, only by the
working of Satan, and bad examples; as for the inclination it self to sin,
however it be ingrafted into nature; notwithstanding is not to be accounted
sin, nor is of it self guilty of damnation, but only actual and voluntary
sins. Conf. Men. Brief Inform. Claes Claes. Confess. 3. While they attribute
to our free will in the state of corruption, leberty to good and evil, and
sufficient strength to understand, will and perform that which is good, and
consequently power to convert our selves. Confer. Leonard. and Embd. Confess.
Mennon. Jac. Out. Apol.

Concerning man's restored estate they offend, 1. While they teach, 3.
Restoration by Christ.
that all men whatsoever without exception, whether Jews or Gentiles, whether
faithful and those that shall be saved; or unbeleevers and those which shall
be damned, are altogether reconciled to God by the death of Christ, and
restored into the state of grace. Confer. of Franck. and Embd. and Confess. of
Mennon. 2. While they deny that there was any difference between Jews and
Gentiles in the Old Testament, except in the ceremonies of the Law, and outward
and bodily cleanness and uncleanness. Necess. Vpolog. 3. While they corrupt
the benefit of justification, partly before going, partly in the act it self,
and partly concerning the object thereof. Before going, forasmuch as they
ascribe to man, as proceeding from himself, preparations to justification, to
wit, hearing the voice of the Son of God, desire of, and beseeching for
grace, spiritual hunger and thirst; and forasmuch as they teach that this
working together with God is necessary that a man may be made partaker of
justification. Claes. Claess. Conf. In the act it self, while they teach that
God justifies us by faith, as it is a good work, and obedience performed to
the commandments of Christ. Joh. Pet. Vander Menl. Instit. Christ. Claes.
Claess. Confess. Concerning the object, they likewise corrupt the doctrine of
justification, while they teach that all men whatsoever are justified by the
righteousness and obedience of Christ. Jacob. Outerm. Colloq. Embd. Necess.
Apol. 4. While they corrupt the benefit of Sanctification, partly before-going;
teaching that God does not work regeneration in us without our cooperation.
Apol. Fund. Jac. Outer. Demonst. partly in the act it self, while they ascribe
perfection of holiness to us Pilgrims here in this life, insomuch as we can be
free from all sin whatsoever. Brief Informat. partly consequently, while they
teach that the grace of Sanctification may be cast off, and wholly lost by the
children of God; and therefore those who are truly and properly such, do
sometimes totally and finally fall away, and incur everlasting damnation; and
that this is manifest by the exhortations to perseverance, by the carfulness
which is required of the regenerate, and by diverse examples. Confess. Mennon.
Conf. Cl. Claess. 5. While they err about faith; partly touching its
original, denying that God alone works the same in us, without our working
together with him, but that faith is the work as well of man as God. Jacob.
Outer, demonst. Cl. Claess. Confess. partly touching the act it self, while
they deny that faith is a firm trust of the remission of our sins by the
grace of God, for the merit of Christ; but confound it with obedience to the
commandments, teaching that faith consists partly in eschewing evil, partly
in doing good, Joh. Pet. Vand. Moul. Pref. to his Christ. Instit. Treat. of the
7 Artie. confirmed by Menn.

Touching man's estate after this life, the Anabaptists err. 1. 4. The state of
glory.
Concerning the place of Souls, teaching that the souls of the children of God,
loosed from their Bodies, are not received into Heaven, before the day of
judgment; but are until then held in unknown receptacles, not expressed in
the Scriptures. Confess. Menn. and Claes. Claess. 2. Concerning the state of
souls, teaching that the souls of Gods children, enjoy not the sight of God,
yea, sleep with their bodies until the last day; or at leastwise like those
that are asleep, are deprived of all knowledge, both intellectual and
sensitive. 3. While they deny that the souls of the wicked presently after
death, are cast into Hell, and there punished, for their wickedness before the
last day of judgment; ye say, that they cannot be punished before. Colloq.
Embd. Confess. Menn. and Claes. Claess. 4. While they do not only deny the
resurrection of the same bodies which were buried, but contented likewise that
they shall be turned into Spirits, and deny that the dead shall arise having
feet, hands, flesh and bones, because flesh and blond cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God. Conference of Frackendale.

And as the Anabaptists maintain grievous errors about things to be believed,
Errors about things to be done.
so do they not a little offend about such things as are to be done; whether
we consider the whole body of the Church in common, or its members in
particular, and those either public as in the policy is the Magistrate, and
in the Church are the Pastors; or else private as are every one of the
faithful, which profess the Christian verity in the Church of God.

What concerns the whole body of the Church in common, 1. Concerning the whole
body of the Church.
the Anabaptists err while they imagine that those which are not perfect, are
to be kept out of the Church, supposing that the Church consists of none but
those that are perfect, and according to these ought to be judged of. Cl.
Claess. Conf. Menn. Sum. 2. While they will indeed have the Sacraments
administered by the Pastors, and received by Christians: but withal, will have
them taught that they are but only naked signs of the passion of Christ and
badges of Christians; but not seals of our communion with Christ. Conf.
Leeuward. Menno Simonz book of the fundam. Theod. Phil. 3. While they deny
that the Infants of the faithful, ought to be admitted, or accounted for
members of the Church. Confer. of Franck and Embd. 4. While they will not have
Ministers administer Baptism to Infants; nor Infants brought unto them for
that end; yea teach, that it is an abuse of Baptism, and an abomination before
God. Colloq. Francothal. Embd. and Leov. Menno Simonz de fundam. Theod. Phil in
Enchirid. 5. While they teach that Baptism conferd upon Infants, is by the
Pastors, to be repeated again: and by such Baptized to be admitted, yea,
earnestly defired: and those likewise ought to be Baptized again, which were
Baptized in other Christian Churches; so that they will have even those of
their own party rebaptized, if they go over from one Sect to another. Colloq.
Embd. Menno Sim. in his Summary. Theod. Phil. in Enchir. 6. While they teach,
that the Lords Supper was instituted for none but pure and perfect ones; nor to
be administered to any others then such, nor to be sought for, but by such. John
Pet. Vand. Meul. Christ. Instit. 7. While they condemn public prayers
pronounced with a loud voice, and think that all the Psalms are not fit to be
sung in public assemblies. Frans. Knuyt. Pref. Cl. Claess. Ep. demonstr. 8.
While they will have Ecclesiastical discipline exercised against offenders, by
all the members of the Church promiscuously, and that without either convenient
admonition before going, or consideration of their repentance following. Coll.
Embd. Leov. and Conf. Menn. 9. While they teach, that when the sentence of
excommunication is pronounced against any, all rights and duties both natural
and civil, are to be broken off toward them, and that such as are cast out,
ought by no means either actively or passively to be communicated withal; so
that for this cause a divorce ought to be made, between Parents and Children,
Husband and wife, Brothers and sisters, Masters and servants, Col. Emb. Conf.
Men. Jac. Out. Apol. 10. While they teach, that those which are unequally yoked
with unbelievers ought, (notwithstanding their repentance) by perpetual
excommunication to be shut out of the Church, until the unbelieving party be
either converted or dead. Coll. Embd. 11. While they imagine that Oaths, ought
neither to be taken nor required of any under the New Testament. Coll. Franck.
Leeu. and Embd. confess. Menn.

As concerning the members of the Church in particular, 2. Errors concerning
the particular members of the Church.
the Anabaptists err, both concerning those which are public, whether Civil
or Ecclesiastical, and those wrich are private. 1. Touching the public
Civil persons. 1. While they teach, that no man under the New Testament, can
with a safe conscience exercise the office of a Magistrate: and that those
things cannot stand together to bear the office of a Magistrate, and be a
member of the true Church. Coll. Franckend. Embd. confess. Menn. Cl. Claess. 2.
While they deny that the office of the Magistrate extends to both tables of the
Law. Coll. Embd. conf. Menn. 3. While they deny that it is lawful for a
Magistrate under the new Testament to proclaim or make war. Cl. Claess.
conf. Dordr. confess. 4. While they deny it to be lawful for the Magistrate to
punish any man with death. For say they, as under the Old Testament civil
punishments were inflicted, without the discipline of the Church, so in the New
Testament, Ecclesiastical discipline ought to have place, not civil
punishments; for that one kind of government only, ought to be practiced in
each. Joh. Pet. Vand. Meul. in declar. Much less is it lawful to inflict
capital punishments, either upon a guilty person repenting, when he ought to
be received into favor, or upon one unrepentant, least it tend to the loss of
his soul. Menn Sim. and Coll. Wis. cum Mior.

Concerning public Ecclesiastical persons, the Anabaptists err, 3. Errors
concerning the officers of the Church.
1. While they teach, that Ministers of the word, are not to be brought out of
Schools and Universities, or brought up in the study of the Arts and Sciences.
Coll. Embd. confess. Menn. 2. While they will have the election and calling of
Ministers of the word, to be in the power of all and singular the Members of
the Church without exception. Coll. Embd. 3. While they take away the equality
as well of the office as authority of Pastors: and will have Bishops so
distinguished from Pastors and Teachers, that those have the care of diverse
Churches, yea of an whole Province assigned unto them; these only of one
Congregation; these have only power of teaching; those both to teach and
administer the Sacraments. Coll. Embd. Menn. Sins. contra. Mier. 4. While they
deny that the Ministers of the word ought to receive a yearly and set stipend;
but only a contribution for necessary uses as occasion shall require. Claes.
Caes. confess. Coll. Embd. 5. While they make the virtue of Gods word, and the
Sacraments, to depend upon the worthiness of the Ministers. Colloq. Emb.

Concerning the private members of the Church in specall, the Anabaptists err.
4. Errors concerning the private members of the Church.
1. While they teach, that it is unlawful under the New Testament to go to law
with others, and to contend before the Magistrate. Coll. Embd. Cl. Claes. 2.
That it is unlawful to bear Arms under the same, either defensive as in
watching, or offensive in war, and either to hire out, or lend our assistance
unto him. Colloq. Leeu. and Embd.

All these opinions which we have reckoned up, are maintained by the
Anabaptists, some by all of them, some by many, some by certain of them: and
all which we do not only think to descent from the holy Scripture, but to
offend most grievously against the Majesty of God, and his revealed will
concerning our faith and conversation; yea, amongst which many are pernicious,
and do altogether exclude from any hope of salvation, all those that embrace
them, and continue in the same unto the end. Wherefore although the Anabaptists
may seem seriously to observe those things which pertain to the second table
of the law, or the offices of civil and outward charity and justice, which we
owe unto our neighbor; yea, and that beyond many, which profess the purer
Religion: yet seeing they transgress so hainously, especially against the
first table of the law; we hold that they do not only err beside, or about
the foundation; but errors which overthrow even the very foundation of
salvation it self; and are heartily sorry that many which seem to be good
men, and careful to lead an honest and civil life, should be so deceived by a
certain outward vizard of holiness, charity and modesty, that they will walk
in the way which leads unto destruction, and renew many Heresies condemned in
the Ancient Church: which that we may not seem wrongfully to accuse them of; we
shall briefly demonstrate both.

That such as profess the doctrines abovementioned, The foregoing errors do
overthrow the foundation of salvation.
do overthrow the foundation of Salvation, is manifest by this. 1. Because they
withdraw men, that would be saved from the knowledge of themselves. 2. Because
they withdraw them from the knowledge of the Mediator through whom they should
be saved. 3. Because they with draw them from the knowledge of God, who should
save them, and to whom they should be brought.

The first head is evident by this; because they deprive a man of the true
knowledge of his first Estate in which he was created; 1. Because they deprive
a man of the true knowledge of himself.
of his second Estate, into which he cast himself headlong through sin; and of
his third, unto which he was restored. Of the knowledge of his first estate
they deprive a man; while they will not let him acknowledge the benefit which
he received from his Creator, either of virtue, that is holiness; nor happiness
following the same, that is immortality. The knowledge of his second Estate
they withold from him, while they either deny or extenuate the corruption
inherent in him from the beginning, and take away the guilt adherent unto him;
and consequently oppose our partaking of the first sin. Likewise they withhold
from him, the knowledge of his third estate; dividing the benefit of his
reparation between God and him; yea ascribing the principal part thereof unto
man; and building his salvation upon Gods forcknowledge of his good
cooperation began, and continued unto the end: yea putting man's obedience in
place of the acceptance of the obedience of his Savior. Wherefore a man
possessed with this Divinity, can neither know how great is the benefit of
nature, which he at first received from God: nor how great is the evil both
moral, and natural, which he drew upon himself; neither how great, or of what
nature is the benefit of grace which was bestowed upon him from heaven:
insomuch as he can neither humble himself as he ought, nor exalt the goodness
of God.

The second head appears out of this; 2. They offend against the person and
office of the Mediator.
because they offend as well against the person and office of the Mediator, as
the benefits obtained by him. Against his person; while they verily overthrow
his divine nature; converting the same into a nature subject to passion and
death; and his humane nature like unto ours, while they deny that it had the
same beginning and substance with ours. His office moreover they corrupt, while
they deny those attributes to his Prophetical office which are due unto the
same, and ascribe those unto it, which do not agree thereunto, as appears by
their Errors above related. So do they corrupt Christ's priestly office,
touching the act of satisfaction, both intensively and extensively considered.
Intensively, by that very thing denying the truth of his sufferings, that they
contend he under-went the same in his divine nature. Extensively, by extending
the same unto innumerable unprofitably, and to no purpose. Likewise do they
corrupt Christ's benefits both of Justification and Sanctification, as does
appear by what has been above-spoken.

The third head is evident by this; because they turn the true God into an
Idol. 3. They turn the true God into an Idol.
1. Overthrowing his nature, and in stead of one, make three divine Essences,
distant in place one from another. 2. Robbing him of his attributes, by denying
partly his infiniteness, partly his unchangeablenesse. His infiniteness,
while they allow him only omnipresence of power, but not of Essence: his
unchangeablenesse, as may appear out of their doctrine of the Incarnation and
passion of Christ. 3. Of his operations, restraining and cutting short the
providence of God; while they teach, that neither are all things actually
governed by him: nor that Gods providence does any thing about evil; nor that
men are so straightened thereby, but that they may go contrary thereto, and depart
from the same. By these things it is manifest that the Anabaptists preach
another God and another Christ, and consequently another Gospel; and lay
another foundation besides that which is laid.

Moreover that they do reduce many Heresies which were long ago condemned in
the ancient Church, 4. They bring in many heresies long since condemned.
and again induce them into the christian church, we shall now go about to
demonstrate. 1. With the Manicheans they inveigh against the Old Testament,
would have it abrogated, and strive that there are things delivered in the Old
and New Testament contrary to one another. Epiph. in Panar. her. Lxvj. Where he
observes that the Manicheans compared the law and the Prophets to old and
withered Trees. How great this Error is, the same Epiphanius learns us very
well. Haeres. Lxx. Those (says he) which cast out the Old Testament are not
any more of the Catholic Church. 2. With the Audians, and Anthropomorphites,
they will have us stick to the letter of the Scripture only. Epiph. Haeres.
Lxx. 3. With the Tritheites, they multiply the divine Essence. Niceph. Lib. 18.
Hist. Eccles. cap. 49.4. With the Samosastenians, Photinians, and Arrians, they
oppose the Deity of the Son of God; while they refer the places which speak of
the Unity of Essence, of the Persons of the sacred Trinity; to unity of will,
not of Essence, like as the aforesaid Heretics contended, such places were to
be understood of the likeness of Essence, not of the Equality. With the Arrians
also they will have the words (...) and (...). i. e. of the same Essence,
hissed out, as not being in the Scripture. Epiph. Haeres. Lxix. which words
were likewise had in suspicion, by the Semi-arrians. Haeres. 73. With the same
likewise they contend that the Name of the true God is ascribed to the Father
alone: and when as Christ calls God the Father, his God, they conclude that he
is not equal with God; which to be done likewise by the Arrians, Epi. teaches
Haeres. Lxix. See also August. cont. Maxim. and Felician. the Arrians. Tom. 6.
With the same also they call in question the eternal generation of the Son of
God; and consider not (as Epiph. notes in the same place) that God the Father
begat the Son after an unspeakable, incomprehensible, and most holy manner. 5.
With the Noetians and Sabellians, they either deny the distinction of the
persons, or at leastwise make it doubtful. Epiph. Haeres. Lvij. and Lxij. To
whom Epiphan opposes the faith of the Ancient Church. We do not says he
bring in a plurality of the Godhead, but preach its unity; and while we preach
one God, we err not on the other side, but confess the Trinity; Unity in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; one Godhead of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. 6 With the Pagans, and Manicheans, they limit God to a certain place,
and deny the infinitenes of the divine Essence, including it in the Heaven, or
defining it below the same. Damas. dial. de haeres. Manich. 7. With the
Sabellians, and Patripassians, and other Heretics, they make the unchangeable,
and unalterable God, mutable and subject to passion. Philaster. lib. de haeres.
and Rufin. in exposit. Symb. Apost. quae intor opera. Cypr. So with the
Tropites they fain that the Word was turned into flesh. Philastr. 8. With the
Audians, and Anthropomorphites they oppose the invisibility of God. Epiph. And.
Haer. Lxx. 9. With the Carpocratians, Appellejans, Valentinians. Apollinarists,
and Prodianites, they deny that the flesh of Christ was made of the substance
of Mary. Philastr. and Epiph. haeres. XLIV. 10. With the Apollinarists, and
Dimoerites, they defend, that Christ verily forsook his divine glory. Epi.
haeres. Lxvij. Lxix. Item, that the Word was changed into flesh and bones, and
hairs, and a whole body, and altered from his own nature. Epiph. haeres.
77.11. With the same they teach, that Christ in his divine nature it self
suffered his passion. Zozom. lib. 6. cap. 26. Niceph. lib. 12. cap. 4. And
that, that which was nailed to the Cross, was the very substance, which was
the author of Nature. That those which profess such things ought to be
accounted christians. Athanasius denies, Epist. ad Epict. Corinth. Episc. apud
Epiph. Haeres. Lxvij. 12. With the Anastasians, and Nestorians they oppose the
personal union of two natures in Christ. Socra. lib. 7. Hist. Eccles. cap. 32.
and Evag. lib. 6. cap. 11.13. With the Eutichians, they deny either the
distinction of the two natures in Christ, or of their Essential properties,
and that Christ's flesh is of the same substance with ours. Evagr. lib. 1. cap.
9. Niceph. lib. 4. cap. 12.14. With the Apollinarists, and certain other
Heretics, they deny that Christ really took an humane Soul. Philastr. lib. de
haeres. Nicep. lib. 12. cap. 4.15. With the Marcionites, they deny that Christ
felt in his Soul the wrath of God. Tertul. cont. Marcion Ign. Epist. ad Tral.
16. With the Marcionites, and Manicheans they contend that the New Testament
was first published by Christ, when he was on Earth, and that the commandments
of the Two Testaments are diverse, yea contrary. Epiph. haeres. 66. contrariwise
Epiphanius teaches in the same place, that they make one and the same harmony.
17. With the Jews, Cerinthians, and Chialists, ancient Heretics; they feine
an Earthly Kingdom of Christ, and a Church without calamities. Instin. indial.
eum Triph. Iud. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 33. and Hier. in cap. 7. Dan. 18. With the
Sarnosatenians, and Photinians, they attribute the raising up of Christ to the
power of the Father only. Epiph. Haeres. 65. and 71.19. With the Apellejans,
and Origenians, they speak doubtfully of the Resurrection. Epiph. haeres. 44.
and 64. 20. With the Catharists, Novatians, and Donatists, they constitute the
Church only of perfect ones, and corrupt the exercise of the discipline of the
Church, by too much severity toward those that are fallen. Epiph. haeres. Lxix.
21. With the Manicheans, they convert the Sacraments into bare signs, and
lessen the necessity of them. Epiph. haeres. Lxvj. 22. With the Donatists,
they make the worthiness of the Sacraments to depend upon the holiness of the
Ministers that administer them. Aug. Tom. 7. cont. Cresc. and Gaudent. item
cont. Lit. Petil. and in Epist. passim. 23. With the same and the Parmenians,
Marcionites, Eunomians, Montanists, and diverse other Heretics; they repeat
Baptism, administered out of their congregations. Ibid. and Epiph. haeres.
xlij. and Eposit. Cath. Fid. Tom. 1. Zozom. hist. Eccl. lib. 6. cap. 26. and
Philast. lib. de haeres. 24. With the Donarists, Eunomians, and other
Heretics they condemn childrens baptism. Aug. lib. 6. cont. Donat. cap.
23.24.25 and Council. Milev. can. 11.25. With the Catharists, and Donatists,
they will not have the Lords Supper administered, unless to pure and perfect
ones. Epiph. haeres. 59.26. with the Nicolaites, Basilidians, and
Carpocratians, some of the Anabaptists teach both communion of wives, and
goods, others this latter only. Epiph. haeres. xxiv. and xxvij. 27. With
those of whom Jude speaks, verse. 8. and other unruly, they speak evil of
Governments. 28. with the Cataphrygians, and Gnostics, they boast of prophets,
dreams, and visions. Phil. lib. de haeres. 29. With the Pelagians,
Semipelagians, Socinians. Papists, and Arminians, they err most of their other
errors, about the threefold estate of man, of integrity, corruption, and
restoration, and either extenuate or pervert the benefit of original
righteousness, blemish of corruption, grace of restitution, and the benefits
following the same, as by comparing the Articles above mentioned, with the
doctrine of the other Heretics, may appear.

It it evident moreover, that the enemy of mankind has labored by
Anabaptisme; that the order both of Church and state, being overthrown, or at
leastwise disturbed and brought into contempt, the good government of christian
Churches and commonwealths might fall to the ground. From hence came it, that
the authority of Ecclesiastical order was weakened by the licentiousness of
Enthusiasts, venting their own dreams and inventions: and the choice of those,
who should attend the holy things, committed to the rude multitude; the sacred
keys also, which ought to be born by the representative church, exposed to the
pleasure of every one, and so a kind of Anarchy and intolerable disorder
brought into the House of God. With how many, and how lamentable tumults
commonwealths have been shaken, since this kind of doctrine began to be spread
and practiced, the records both of high and Lower Germany do testify; which
could not be extinguished or quieted without a great deal of blood. How much
also they derogate from the authority of the Magistrate, and how much they
lessen his dignity, appears both out of their Tenets, and the practice of the
Muntzerians, those of Minister, and others of that kind. And indeed how is it
possible, that the Magistrate, can preserve his honor and renown with the
common people, when they shall weigh these Aphorisms in their mind. That he
which exercises the office of a Magistrate cannot be a member of the
Apostolic Church. Colloq. Franck. That Christ has forbidden all his, to have
any civil government. That in the New Testament there is no place for the
office of a civil Magistrate. Cl. Claess. confess. Mennon. That it is doubtful,
whether a Magistrate can be saved. Colloq. Embd. That christians are not
obliged to give their oath to the Magistrate. Coll. Embd. As neither to bear
Arms, or keep watch, when we are invaded by the Enemy. ibid. which how
perilous and destructive it is to commonwealths, needs not to be showed. For
neither can any thing be more powerful to expose both public and private
estate, to the Tyrany of an Enemy, and to turn all things upside down, then
when this bewitching, colored over with a fair show of Religion and piety,
has possessed the minds of men; and it is held not only indifferent, but even
unlawful to resist an Enemy that invades our country. Which opinion, least
it should seem now to be abolished, and grown out of date, was confirmed by a
late and notable example, of the Anabaptists, which heretofore had their
habitation in the country of Zurich. For when a few years since, the German,
and Rhetian war waxing hot, no small danger seemed to threaten reformed
Helvetia, and especially the Territory of the commonwealth of Zurich; it
seemed good to the honorable Magistrate, to ordain the usual musters, and
viewing of Arms. The Anabaptists being called to these exercises, they began,
not only to refuse obedience to the command; but also to inculcate into others,
that war was sent from God being offended as a punishment. That a Kingdom was
not defended by Arms, but amendment of our manners; That it was not lawful for
a christian to bear Arms, nor to be armed to defend his country. With which
divinity, and other the like precepts, some being infected; they thought that
they must rather forsake, country, wives, children, fortunes, and all things
whatsoever; then by most just Arms, to drive the Enemy out of their country.
The religious Magistrate of Zurich used all means to inform and instruct these
men, and to recall them to their duty; searching out, and confuting at large
all things wherewith they professed they were troubled; so as he left them no
cause of any more scruple. Men chosen out of both orders, civil and
Ecclesiastical, eminent for prudence and experience confer with them; and
take very good heed, that nothing fall from them which might carry any show of
cavillation, or more violent proceeding But so far were they from departing
from their foresaid assertions, that being demanded whether he that bears the
office of a Magistrate, and in the same believes and lives as a christian
ought, could be saved? they would not assent. There are proposed to them most
easy conditions. That they should be freed from the usual form of an oath,
and the Magistrate would be content with their simple promise in giving their
faith; that they should be released from the use of Arms; if they would but
assist their country, with prayers, good wishes, and such other godly ways and
means. They should indeed be obliged to come to the Sermons, yet with this
condition, that they should freely testify their dissent from any thing
delivered, either to the Pastors, or other officers of the Church: and for any
thing else, they might promise themselves all favor, courtesy, and
protection, from the Magistrate. When neither this gentleness of the Senate of
Zurich, was able to overcome or assuage the minds of these obstinate men; they
are desired, of their own accord, to depart some other where, that neither by
their doctrine nor example, the safety of their Country might be endangered;
and leave was given them to take all such things with them, as should be
necessary for their sustentation. But if they would not have some of their
wives and children (free from their errors) to go out of the country, they
should leave for them an equal portion of their Estate to the administration
of some Citizens, which either they themselves should choose, or whom the
Magistrate should judge faithful; least the departure of some, might be to the
damage of others of theirs, or to the burden of the Commonwealth; That all
things should be faithfully administered; yea, restored unto them again, it so
be, they returned to a better mind. When this was likewise in vain propounded
unto these stubborn men; they are condemned to bear part of the public
expenses, which they had been the cause of, and some fines are laid upon them,
although small and very tolerable. But it is not to be said, how much they
began to abuse this mildnes of the Magistrate, to withdraw their obedience
accuse the Magistrate of Tyranny, and heap calumnies and reproaches upon him.
At length the patience of the Senate being quite overcome, least this
stubbornnes should be turned into an example of licentiousness, and rebellion;
it was decreed that the goods of these obstinate men should be forfeited to the
Commonwealth. This drew not only murmuring and complaints from them; but even
made some of them in the mind to trouble the public peace, and by night
meetings to stir up tumults; yea to that height of impiety, did their
obstinatenesse proceed, that they expressly prayed unto God that he would by
plague, famine, and other such like general calamities, restrain the rage of
the Magistrate, whom they so most unjustly accused. Which hardening in their
evil, constrained the Magistrate to this, though unwilling, that he clapped some
of the rebels, who were most unruly into prison; yet allowing them sufficient
liberty. Upon which occasion, they were diverse times dealt with, both by
principal men of the Magistracy and likewise by diverse other faithful
servants of God, learned and reverend men; that they should cast down those
proud stomachs, and consider seriously of their own and their Countries
safety; but there could nothing be gotten from them, but presumptuous and
crooked answers, and cunning equivocations: yea, by secret practices they came
to this, that by the use of false keys, they brake out of the Prison, and got
themselves out of the power of the Magistrate. Being taken again, and now kept
somewhat straighter, (yet still having much liberty) as being put into a
spacious and pleasant Monastery, they are set to handy-workes, the richer are
bidden to provide for themselves, the rest are taken care for, by the
liberality of the Senate; yet being weary of this restraint also, they bring
their keepers asleep by unlawful means, brake through the wall, and about
midnight of the next day after Easter, in the year 1636. violating even the
safety of the walls; they escape all out, saving some few. And though it was
hoped, that they would at least wise get them out of the Country of Zurich:
notwithstanding they return again, and fall to making stirs and tumults,
with as much perverseness as before. Neither yet was there any greater
punishment laid upon them; the Senate thinking rather by their mildness to
overcome the wickedness of th^se men; so that besides closer imprisonment
nothing more was done unto them. Nor were the Ministers of the word wanting to
do any thing they could, but by instructions, admonitions, entreaties,
carefully indeavored, either to make them leave their errors and stubbornness,
or else to depart out of the Country some other where. They urged nothing but
liberty, and protest that the faithful ought not to plead their cause in
Bands, and in them to render a reason of their faith. And although they seemed
to require a conference, nevertheless all things being offered them, that
seemed requisite to a lawful disputation, they at length deceived the hopes
and wishes of all; and again breaking out of the Prison, in which they were
detained; escaped away all, excepting three or four; which could not follow
the rest. Of whom, two bound themselves with a most unheard of Vow, that they
would never do any more work, nor taste a bit of meat, nor drop of drink. And
which is most wonderful, one of them was so obstinate that he starved himself
to death: by whose example the other being terrified, he followed better
counsel. Which obstinacy of mind is so much the more execrable, for that these
men might every hour have obtained their liberty, if they would but only have
promised the Magistrate to have departed out of the Country of Zurich. Those of
them that got out of that Territory staying a good while upon the borders of
their Country, and heaping up reproaches upon the most patient Magistrate,
doubted not to accuse him unto forreiners of most unheard of cruelty; when he
notwithstanding, although he had found the Ringleaders of them guilty of most
heinous offenses, which any other of the Citizens had publicly suffered for;
would at no hand, show any example of severity toward those kind of men;
least it should be imputed rather to the hatred of the Sect, then to the crimes
of the Sectaries. Yet some of these men would rather go over to the Papists,
and join themselves unto Idolatrous assemblies, then be accounted amongst the
Orthodox. All which being written out of the public Records, and by me
faithfully related, I thought fit here to insert, that I might give a character
of the Anabaptists, and that the patience of the Orthodox Magistrate of Zurich
toward the seducers and seduced might hence appear. The whole History of this
business is contained in an Epistle of a learned and grave divine, to a worthy
and reverend Pastor of the French Church at Amsterdam.

Out of all that has been said, it is evident, Aplication of all.
how needful it is both for the Church and Commonwealth, to join the labor
of the Universities, with that of the Church for the confutation of the
Anabaptists; and with united hearts and hands, endeavor to h^nder this
doctrine, which brings so certain destruction to Church, Commonwealth, and
our own souls: both that the consciences as yet addicted to the truth, may not
be drawn unto deceit and error, by their fair shows, and counterfeit vizard
of innocence, holiness and simplicity; and that those who have hitherto been
deceived, either by the flattery of the Sectaries, or the whited face of the
Sect, may be stirred up in the fear of the Lord, to take this matter into
serious meditation; and consider with themselves, how many horrible and
pernicious Tenets, and how hurtful both to public and private quietness,
lie hidden as it were behind a curtain, under this simple name of
Anabaptists. To whom we wish from the Lord with all our hearts, the knowledge,
love, and practice of that truth which by the special grace of God is
preserved in the Orthodox Churches; and therewithal both present and
perpetual happiness. Neither do we go about to stir up the Magistrate
against those men; nor would we have any force offered to their consciences;
but think those means only ought to be used, which may conduce to the
information of those that err, the reproving of their errors, and confirmation
of the truth, so far as it may stand with Christian prudence and charity.

FINIS.

