SOME QUERIES Propounded to the Common Council, and Citizens of LONDON,
concerning the Armies Demand of having the Militia of London of the 4th. of May
changed.

Wherein the unreasonablenesse and great danger of that Proposal, and the
Justifiablenesse of the Cities refusal both in Law and Conscience, are fully
demonstrated.

1 Samuel 13. 19. Now there was no Smith found throughout all the land of Israel:
(for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make them swords or spears)

20 But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man
his share, and his coulter, and his ax, and his mattock.

22 So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither sword nor
spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with Saul and Jonathan.

1 King. 21. 3. And Naboth said to Ahab, The Lord forbid it me, that I should
give the INHERITANCE OF MY FATHERS UNTO THEE.

1 King. 2. 22. And why do thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? ASK
FOR HIM THE KINGDOM ALSO.

Prove. 30. 21, 22. For three things the earth is disquieted, and for four which
it cannot bear:

For a SERVANT when he reigns, and a FOOL when he is filled.

Nulli deterius dominantur quam servi.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1647.

O Foolish Citizens of London, who has bewitched you? what spirit of madness
has possessed you, that you should believe any of the lying and fained words
of the Army, and not see slavery and destruction coming upon your selves, and
posterity, as travail upon a woman with child, which you cannot escape, if
once you give up your Militiae upon the Demand of the Army? O London, London,
thou have befooled thy self already almost irrecoverably by thy compliances and
Treaties with the Army, by thy interposing for the Army with the Parliament to
grant several things: as that all Listings might be forborne, that the
Reformadoes might be put out of the Line of Communication, with divens other
things, whereby that wicked party in the Army that rules all, Cromwell and his
Fellows have forced by their threatenings the 11. Members to withdraw from the
House, many others to go to their own homes, and so all things whatsoever are
carried according to the will and pleasure of that Sectarian faction in the
Army, and in the House of Commons, both joined together to destroy Religion,
Laws, Liberties, and to enslave this Kingdom by bringing it into the condition
of the Turkish Empire, to rule all at pleasure by an Army, Cromwell being
turned Turk, the Sectarian faction must be as the Janissaries to uphold him.
The strange, daily and endless Proposals from the Army of having all the
Forces of the Kingdom in the hand of Sir Thomas Fairfax, of having all the Laws
of the Land concerning Religion taken away, of releasing Lilburne, Overton out
of prison, and all persons whatsoever for matters of conscience (unless proved
Papists) though Antiscripturists, Antitrinitarians, Blasphemers, with the
demand of changing the Militia of London, are clear and evident proofs of full
intentions to destroy Religion, Liberty, Property; and to rule all by the Sword
and a Council of War.

O London, London, would to God thou knew even at least in this thy day the
things which belong unto thy peace: Behold now is the accepted time, behold now
is the day of salvation, preserve thy Militia from being changed, and show thy
self this once to stand upon thy rights and liberties, and thou may yet
break the neck of all the cursed designs on foot, and be the Savior of the
King, Parliament and Kingdom, and shall be called, The Repaiter of the breach,
the Restorer of paths to dwell in. But suffer thy Militia to be thus taken
away, and now altogether hold thy peace, sitting down and loosing the present
opportunity, and thou art lost for even according to humane help; and thou
shall find that verified of thee, Time was, Time is, Time is past; and thou
shall repent when it is too late. And, O thou London, and thou Kingdom of
England, to make you sensible, and to stir in time, know assuredly the work now
on foot by chief Agents in the Army, and some of the House of Commons, is not
of yesterday, nor a business of not disbanding till full Arrears, and an Act
of Indemnity for the Soldiery (however these have been held out as pretenses,
and made use of to draw the Soldiery in, to carry on their designs long
before laid) but it is a Design and Plot that has been laid these four
years last past, by force of Arms,
an Army of the Sectaries modelling, to bring into this Kingdom a General
Toleration of all Religions, to destroy the Civil Government in the
fundamental constitution of King, Lords and Commons, and to bring King Charles
to Justice (so they call it) as the grand Delinquent in all the three Kingdoms;
the Common Law and Statutes of this Kingdom, the Ministry, the Reformed
Churches, to possess themselves of, and be Masters of the City of London, to
get to themselves and their party all the estates, riches, and great places of
the Kingdom, and to rule all by an Arbitrary new modelled Government of their
own setting up, and by a perpetual Army: for the full Demonstration of which,
besides that their daily actions and Proposals of getting all Power into their
hands speak as much; there are two Books already Printed called, The total and
final Demands of the Army, and Works of Darkness brought to light, that give
a great deal of light in diverse of these particulars: and there are two other
Discourses ready for the Press, written by Authors that have observed and
laid all things together both in the Army and the House of Commons by that
Party, that will more fully prove every part of this Design, by laying down
all the Preparations to it, and all the Proceedings in it; and how there is
nothing wanting to the perfecting and completing of it, but to have the full
power upon the City of London,
and the Navy in their hands. Only in the interim till those Gentlemen's Books
can be Printed, I will give two or three proofs of the Design of the
Sectarian Party to bring the King to Justice (as they phrase it) and to take
off his head.

To say nothing of the many speeches spoken by some of that Party both in the
Army, House of Commons, and City of bringing the King to Justice, nor of the
many wicked passages printed to that purpose: I will only relate three
passages that have come lately to my knowledge. The first, that presently after
the King was seized on by the Army, two persons here in London, one a great
Agent of Cromwels, and very intimate which him; the other a great Agent of
Rainsboroughs, told an understanding Citizen, that the Design of taking the
King, was not to join with him against the Parliament (however they held fair
with the King and his Party) but to bring him to Justice; for if he ever came
in again, and had any Power,
there were so many of the malignant party in the House of Commons, that they
joining with him, no honest man should keep his head on his shoulders; and
without this, neither such as belonged to this Army, nor any others could be
secured. Secondly, since the Army have gotten the King, diverse of their party,
Members of the House of Commons the Kings most mortal Enemies, have, been with
one Mr. Willingam, who keeps all the writings of Windebanks, and other Papers
of State, to look out, and peruse them for that end, to see what matter they
might find against the King to make a Charge of; and this Mr. Willingham has
been sent to, and written unto by the Army about these Papers, and to come down
to the Army. Thirdly, Mr. Marshall and Mr. Nigh coming from the Army (too good
friends to Cromwell and that party) said to diverse Members of the Assembly,
asking them about the Armies Propositions, that the King should never have any
Power more, the Army would look to that: he should for his own Family, and in
his Chapel, enjoy the liberty of his Conscience, but have never more to do in
the Government of the Kingdom.

And I would ask any reasonable man, seeing they have agreed and declared thus
much already, that the King shall have no more power, how long time he thinks
when they have gotten all the Power of the Militia into their hands, and have
new modelled the House of Commons, as they have done the Army, he shall enjoy
his Conscience, or his life?

And therefore, O Common Council, and Citizens of London, and all who love the
King and his Posterity, the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, the Privileges
of Parliament, the Reformed Protestant Religion, part not with your Militia,
give not such a Sword into the hands of brutish unreasonable men, to destroy
your selves, and all that's dear to you with; And that you may lawfully, and
with a good conscience keep your Militia for the year, and that to part with it
at the pleasure of the Army, is very unsafe, and most dangerous: I desire these
following Quaeries may be well considered of.

1. Whether an Ordinance made by Parliament in a time (unquestionably) of
Freedom and liberty, and in full Houses, upon mature deliberation, and after
many days debate, after answering all objections against the persons and
things, and after scanning upon every particular person contained in the
Ordinance, and this done upon the desire of the City to the Parliament, and
their nomination choice of the persons to be approved by the Parliament, be to
be judged more valid binding, or an Ordinance made after Members driven away by
the threats and approaches of an Army, and upon the Demand of an Army, and in a
thin House of Commons, and concluded upon on a sudden?

2. Whether or no, if the Parliament by Ordinance after mature advise and
deliberation in full Parliament had given the City of London toward the
payment of their debts, five hundred thousand pounds, and thereupon the City
had been in possession of the money, in case the Parliament upon another
Ordinance made upon the desire of the Army, after threatenings and driving away
Members, should have revoked this money, whether would the City hold themselves
bound in Law or conscience, to part with it? and if not, as I suppose, they
would not. Then, I conceive, they are less bound to part with their Militia as
being much more to them; without which, they can neither keep their Estates,
lives or liberties, but all they have, as the case stands, is exposed to ruin.

3. Whether it would not have been judged, and cried out of in the King, as
great injustice, breach of the liberty of the Subject, etc. when he had given
the grant of any thing for life, or for term of years under the great Seal, he
should upon his own will, without any fault in the persons, have taken it from
them before half the time expired? And if it would be so in the King, what is
it in the Parliament to recall the Militia before half the time be out?

4. What is any Ordinance of Parliament worth, or will be accounted of by any,
if as soon as it is granted, it may be thus recalled? And upon what a slender
foundation, or broken reed, will not men say they have built on all this while,
in lending those vast sums of money to the State, and in acting for the
Parliament, if Ordinances by the Parliament it self be so easily made void, and
broken? will ever men venture their lives and estates upon Ordinances?

5. Whether the Armies desire of having the Militia thus changed, and putting
the Parliament so upon it, to take it away against the will of the Common
Council, and persons entrusted, without any reason at all given, or
unfaithfulness found in them, be not to put the Parliament upon exercising a
mere Arbitrary Power, and to rule by will, and so against the Common Rights and
liberty of the Subject, so much complained of by the Army in all their
Representations, Remonstrances, Declarations, Letters, and made the ground of
their refusing to disband, and of all the late differences between them and the
Parliament?

6. Whether in the judgment of any indifferent men, it can stand with the
honor, Justice, Authority, and Gravity of the supreme Court of Judicature, and
the great Council of a Kingdom, when upon mature deliberation, and weighty
reasons in the most legal way, and with the best security they have granted a
thing to persons highly deserving of them, and of known fidelity to them, and
the public, to take it away of a sudden without giving any reason at all, or
indeed there being any just cause for so doing, but rather much to the contrary?

7. Whether or no, according to the judgment of the best Reformed Divines,
both foreign and English, it is not held lawful for Subjects, when by their
Princes a Power is given unto them of Cities, Forts, Castles, and Militia, for
their safety and security against an opposite party in the Land that would
destroy them, to hold and keep them for their defense against Edicts and
Commands of Princes requiring to give them up; yea against Armies sent to take
them away by force? And whether all Divines who allow of any Defensive Arms in
any Cases to Subjects, yea, See Bishop Abbot, De Antichristo, and especially
Bp. Morton in his Sermon preached in the North, before the K. of subjection to
the higher Powers, and against resisting. Authority even then when the King
went against the Scots, how he excepts that Case of keeping Forts, Militia,
given on purpose for security, which I conceive he did on purpose according to
the judgment of other Protestant Divines, to free the Protestants in France,
and the Rochellers from R^bellion, in standing upon their own defense in those
Towns and Cities given them for their security against the bloody Papists.
Bishops the most tender of Subjects disobeying the Commands of Princes, or of
taking up Arms, do not in that controversy of Defensive Arms, grant it lawful
in this case of having Forts, Castles, Militia given them for defense, to keep
them, as the Protestants of France in the case of Rochel; and if this be so,
whether is it not much more lawful for the City to keep their Militia now for
the time according to the grant of Parliament?

8. Whether or no, many learned Divines beyond the Seas, as Pareus, etc. who
are for Subjects Defensive Arms; and others at home, as Bishop Bilson, Bishop
Abbot, Bishop Beadles, Doctor Willet, etc. though they hold it unlawful for
private persons who are not Magistrates, nor have no part in the Civil
Government, to take up Arms against the higher Powers; do they not hold it
lawful, in some cases, after Petitioning, and using all other means and
remedies, for inferior Magistrates the next in Power and Interest to the
Supreme, to take up Arms to defend themselves and the People in their rights
against certain ruin; which if it be so, then certainly the Magistracy of the
City of London, the Lord Mayor, and Court of Common Council being the greatest
Power next the King, and both Houses of Parliament, and having, next the King
and the Houses, the greatest Interest in the Kingdom; and being the most
considerable part of any City or County in the Kingdom, for the safety of the
whole may lawfully when the King is seized on by an Army, and kept against his
will, the Parliament overawed, and the whole Kingdom in danger of ruin, keep
the Power of the Militia settled upon them in their hands, for the preserving of
the King, Parliament, themselves, and the Kingdom?

9. Whether or no, if a Father, Master, or a Friend should give his son,
servant, or friend a sword into either of their hands to defend Father and
himself, if another servant should come with a sword to the Master, and by
holding the sword over him, and by threats work him to command the other to lay
down his sword, and to give it to him whereby either to kill both Master and
servant; or else to put upon them what conditions he pleases: may not the son,
or the servant in such a case lawfully refuse such a command, and keep the
sword both to preserve his own life, and his Fathers? And if so, whether this
be not the case now of the Armies demanding of the Parliament the Sword they
gave to the City; and of the Cities humble desire to keep it for the safety of
Parliament and themselves?

10. Whether if that this Power of the Cities choosing and having their Militia
in their own hands, being one of the Propositions upon long and mature
deliberation passed by both Houses, and agreed on by the Commissioners of the
Kingdom of Scotland, to be presented to the King to be confirmed, should be
thus taken away by the Parliament presently after passed by an Ordinance; may
it not give an occasion and ground to the King to break this and other
Propositions after signing them, saying, the Parliament more engaged to the
City for their adhering to them, then I was to the Parliament or City, broke
with the City, and that in the principal the Militia: and and why may not I
then break with the City?

11. Whether or no may not the City of London justly allege for their keeping
the Militia, and not giving it up upon the desires of the Army, a true real
necessity of self preservation; and not only a pretended necessity as the Army
did for not disbanding, as also the liberty and freedom of the Subject, the
solemn League and Covenant for Reformation, etc. which the Army in all their
Remonstrances, Declarations, etc. never so much as once took notice of, or so
much as pretended, as indeed intending to destroy it, and revoke it; as appears
by their last Proposal, of revoking all the penal Statutes for matters of
Religion, and full freedom for all private meetings for religious Exercises.

12. Whether the City of London in their humble refusal of giving up their
Militia in this juncture of time to the will of the Army, do not perform an
high act of faithfulness to His Majesty's Person Crown, and Posterity? And
whether the delivering it up were not putting a sword into the hands of mad
men, to destroy the King and his Posterity with?

13. Whether if the City of London should part with their Militia at this time,
they do not, in as much as in them lies, betray, and give up Religion, the
King, and his Posterity, the Parliament, Laws, liberties, the whole Kingdom,
yea the three Kingdoms to the wills, lusts, and Revelations of an unreasonable,
brutish, Anabaptisticall Army? And are they not guilty of fearful breach of
Covenant, and of putting a sword into such hands to destroy all with?

14. Whether or no, considering all the Demands hitherto of Sir Thomas Fairfax,
and the Army under his (I would say Cromwels) Command, as to have the command
of all Forces, Garrisons, etc. in England, Ireland, as to have all Statutes for
Religion repealed, etc. and in this now of asking for the Militia of London,
may it not be said as Solomon of Adonijah, And why does Sir Thomas ask the
Militia of London, let him ask the Kingdom also?

15. Whether or no, so soon as the City shall have parted with their Militia
according to the desire of the Army, and the Armies Deputies Titchburne,
Estwick, etc. shall be a little in possession, shall not a good part of the
Army come into the City to guard the Parliament, keep the Works, put out the
Reformadoes, suppress tumults, and all to prevent a new War, and make an
happy Peace?

16. Whether after the City have quitted their Militia, shall not London be the
head quarter for Sir Thomas Fairfax, Cromwell, and the other great Officers,
the general Rendezvous for all to come to? And whether must not the Aldermens
Houses, the great Merchants and rich Tradesmen be for quarter for them, their
wives and children; and especially for the great Colonels, Huson, Pride, Okey,
etc. who have no houses of their own fit for their Honors to dwell in?

17. When London's Militia is in the power of the Army, who shall pay this
meritorious glorious Army of Saints all their Arrears, some behind 50. weeks,
some 30. weeks? And who shall maintain them for the time to come? shall not
London be forced to it? and shall not whoever refuses to pay the great sums
laid upon them of thousands and hundreds be plundered, sequestered, judged
Malignants, enemies to the Saints, that will not contribute to them who have
saved the Kingdom from Tyranny; and by whose means alone they enjoy all they
have?

18. When the Army has possession of the Militia of London, whether or no may
any Presbyterian or ill-affected person keep a sword, gun, or any weapon in his
house, for fear of raising a new war?

19. Whether may any Citizen of London, whatever his sufferings shall be, once
dare to speak a word against, or complain of the godly Army? And if they do,
shall they not be tried by a Council of War and the Gentlemen Agitators for
their lives? can any thing less then this be expected, seeing diverse Sectaries
here in London, before the Army has the Militia, have threatened diverse well
affected persons for but questioning some of the Armies proceedings, that they
will complain to the Army of them; and that they shall be fetched away with a
Troop of Horse, and such like.

20. Whether if once the Army have the Power of the Militia, of London,
shall not the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council be all put in by the
Army, and all or most of the old ones be put out? And whether we must not have
a Court of Aldermen and Common Council all of the Armies Saints, and gifted
Brethren, Alderman Stasemore the old Brownist, Alderman Kiffin the young
Anabaptist, Alderman Clement Wrighter the Antiscripturist, Alderman Overton the
Seeker, Sir John, Lilbugne, Lord Mayor: and in case any profane Presbyter
should be in that number, shall there not be a charge from the Army to put them
out?

21. Whether all the Demands of the Army hitherto both to Parliament and City,
of not listing, putting out Reformadoes, disbanding those Companies that came
from the Army, of requiting all the Forces of England and Ireland under oue
Command, of the Cities Militia to be changed, with all their actions and
proceedings of entertaining into their Army all sorts, of seizing on
Ammunition, of sending of Agitators into all parts of the Kingdom to draw the
Souldery, Navy, and all Countries into combination with them, can tend to any
thing else but the getting of all power into their hands, and leaving Kingdom,
Parliament, City naked of all help; that so all lying at their mercy, and every
man's head being on the block, they might either submit to their conditions
whatsoever they be, or else have their heads presently chopped off.

22. Whether when the City has parted with their Militia, and the Army be in
possession, how long shall the City enjoy their Orthodox Preachers; shall they
not be quickly turned out, or else daily affronted in the discharge of their
Ministry by every rude Soldier, and Mechanic, standing up in the time of
Preaching, Prayer, as they have done in other places, Bristow, etc. shall they
go quietly in the streets for them? shall not every Pulpit be filled with
Troopers, and all sorts of ignorant Mechanics? and will not this City instead
of sound Doctrine, have all kind of heresy, blasphemy, and error broached in
Pulpits, and every street? Will not all the frogs and rabble of Sectaries from
all parts of the Kingdom come up hither, and London become the fink of all
errors and confusion? And shall they not all by the power of the Army have free
quarter,
and be maintained of the rich men's estates for preaching to them? O London,
thy glory will depart from thee as soon as the Army has thy Militia; and thou
must bid adieu to the Gospel, and thy faithful Ministers, Mr. Caelamie, Mr.
Roberts, Mr. Cauton, Mr. Case, etc.

23. Whether for this last six weeks a Council of War consisting for the most
part of Officers, illeterate Mechanics, and broken fortuned, and of Agitators
common Troopers, and Soldiers, has not been the supreme Judicatory of this
Kingdom, putting conditions and Laws on King, Parliament, City, and Kingdom?
Nay whether have not King, Parliament, City and Kingdom been all true and
honest Prisoners to the Army? And whether has any thing been done in
Parliament, or City, unless within these few days, but to confirm and execute
the Votes and Acts of the Council of War?

24. Whether or no this City of London, and the Magistrates thereof, have not
just cause, when once their Militia is gone, and the Army has power of the
City, to expect their case and condition will be as the City of Munster was
when possessed by the Anabaptists, or rather worse? Read but the story of the
Anabaptists at Munster as it is in Sleidan and as the History of them was
written in English in the first year of this Parliament, and the Citizens will
see what to trust to, if ever this Army be Misters of London.
Whether shall they not be ruled by Revelations? whether the great wicked men
must not be turned out of all, that the Saints may inhabit the City? Whether
will not Mr. Peter's preach then as he has done lately in the Army, that the
beginning of Christ's personal reign is come, and that he will put his Kingdom
into the hands of his Saints? Dan. 7.18.

25. Whether can any wise understanding man, when the Army is possessed of the
Militia of London, and the Navy, but look for strange things to be moved and
acted, which yet they forbear out of Policy? Whether will they not then quite
put down the House of Peers according to the many books they have printed, and
speeches they have spoken to that purpose? Whether shall any Member of the
House of Commons, who is Presbyterian, and for the public, sit there any more?
How long shall the Kings Majesty be uncharged, and unproceeded against by the
Army, and the House of Commons of their new modelling, what shall become of His
royal Posterity? Whether shall we not have Revelations of William Sedgwicks,
Saltmarshes, Dells, that the day of Judgment to the wicked is begun, and that
new Jerusalem the glorious state of the Church is come, wherein Cromwell must
be the King of Nations? And after this Army has subdued all the wicked great
Men, King, Nobles, Gentlemen, rich Citizens, etc. then he must go with this
Army to the gates of Constantinople and conquer the great Turk; and his
Council of State of 21. must be Lilburn, Overton, Heuson, Paul Hobson, Pride,
Okey, Joyce, with so many of the Agitators as will fill up that number.

26. Whether does this City of London yet sufficiently confider and foresee the
infinite dangerous consequences that must and will necessarily follow upon
their giving up the Militia, what it is to be at the mercy and in the power of
an Army, whose Commanders are generally men of mean parentage, breeding,
estate; an Army not ruled by principles of war, their General and Commanders;
but by Agitators chosen by the common Soldiers, and accountable to them: an
Army that contrary to all their Oaths, Covenants, Protestations, have betrayed
their trust, and turned head against their Masters; an Army that keeps to no
principles nor rules, but their will and lusts; an Army whose principles for
Religion, Civil Government, liberty, property are prodigious, that change
all their principles according to their fancies and advantages; an Army that
hates this City to the death for their Remonstrance, Petitions for
Presbyteriall Government, change of the Militia, etc. are these men fit to be
trusted with the lives, estates, liberties of this City, yea of three Kingdoms?
and they having gotten the power by tyranny, force, and treachery, will they
not as Tyrants sine Titulo, as guilty persons and cowards, maintain their power
by tyranny, force, till they have taken all persons and things out of the way
they fear may do them hurt; will they not plead for all necessity, self
preservation, preventing of a new war, the peace of the Kingdom?

FINIS.

