An Exact SURVEY of the MICROCOSMUS. or LITTLE WORLD. Being an ANATOMY, Of the
BODIES of MAN and WOMAN Wherein the SKIN, VEINS, NERVES, MUSCLES, BONES, SINEWS
and LIGAMENTS, are accurately Delineated. And curiously pasted together, so as
at first sight you may behold all the outward Parts of MAN and WOMAN. And by
turning up the several Dissections of the Paper take a view of all their
Inwards. With alphabetical References to every MEMBER and PART of the BODY.

Useful for all Doctors, Surgeons, etc. As also for Painters, Carvers, and
all Persons that desire to be acquainted with the PARTS, and their NAMES, in
the BODIES of MAN, or WOMAN.

Set forth by Michael Spaher of Tyrol. And Englished by John Ireton,
Surgeon. And lastly Perused and Corrected, by several rare Anatomists.

LONDON. Printed by Joseph Moxon, and sold at his shop in Russel street, at the
Sign of Atlas. MDCLXX.

posterior view B


anterior view A


A View of Humane Bodies. And first the Figures B A on the left hand
Representing the Skin with its Vessels or Veins under it.
FIGURE A.
a The outward ingular vein, climbing outwardly the hinder part of the head,
and inwardly entering the mouth. b A branch hereof to the check and nose. c The
Forehead vein joined to the other of the other side. d The veins of the
Temples. e The vein of the Ear. f g Branches from the Axillarie. f The Head
vein. g The Liver vein. h The middle vein, made of the branches of the head and
liver veins. i Branches of the liver vein, dispersed through the palm of the
hand. k k The Musele vein. l l Veins reaching to the Breasts. m m Small veins
coming from the branches of the hollow vein. m Branches climbing from the
Epigastrique vein. o p r The inward Crural vein, or the Saphena. o Branches
from the aforesaid veins, reaching unto the Lesk. p Branches of the same vein
running on the inside of the Thigh. q The inner Leg vein: called Tibea or
Poplectica. r The Saphena. s The head vein by the Thumb. t The Spleen vein by
the little finger. u The outward branch of the Crural vein. x The Calf vein y
The Hip vein.
FIGURE. B.
a The vein of the hinder part of the Head: or Vena Puppies. b The mediane as
in Fig. A h. c The division of the same where its branches are mingled with
others in the back of the hand. d The Head vein, as in Fig A f. e Its branches
by the Wrist, which irrigate the whole back of the hand. f Its branch in the
Thumb, often times opened for the Head vein. g The Milt vein. n The outward
Crural vein, made of the branch of the middle and Liver veins. h h Circles of
the vein muscle. i The veins of the Sholders. k A branch on the side of the
Breast. l Diverse branches from the Loin veins. m Veins coming from the outter
branch of the hollow vein to the muscles and skin of the Buttocks. n A branch
from the outter Crural vein to the Hipps. o Branches rising upwards by the
hinder part of the Thigh. p The inward Crural vein, as in Fig. A. o p r. q The
inward Ham vein, as in Fig. A. q.
FINIS.
A Dissection of Humane Bodies. Visio Prima.
The first Table in the first Vision: Fig. A. represents
a c The Head. a e b The hairy scalp. a The fore part of the Head. b The Crown
of the Head c The binder part of the Head. d The Temples. e The Ear. * The
Forehead. * f g i The Face. f The Cheek-ball. g The Cheek-puf. h The upper lip.
i The Chin. k The neck. l l The hollow of the neck. m m The Patel bones. n The
Chest: or pit in the Chest. ^ p q r s The Fingers. ^ The Thumb. p The Fore
finger. q The Middle finger. r The Ring finger. s The Little finger. t The
bending of the Arm. m a i The Trunck of the Body. m n x y a The whole Chest. u
u The Breast. x x The Ribbs. y y The Breasts, or Papps. x The Duggs, or Nipples
of the Breasts. a The trench of the Heart. This part is anointed for the mouth
of the Stomach. a A e (...) i The lower Belly. b The right Hypocondria: or
Praecordia: The outward Liver. Remedies are applied to this place. c The left
Hypocondria. d The Epigastre, or upper part of the lower Belly. A The Navil, or
the root of the Belly. e e The Sides. f The Watercourse. g g The Flancks. h h
The Lesk. i The region of Man's and Women's Privities. k k The forepart of the
Thigh: where Cupping Glasses are applied, to bring down Women's Courses l The
Whirl-bone of the Knee. m The Knee. n The Leg. o The Instep. p The Instep. q
The utter Ancle. r s t u x The Toes, or Fingers of the foot.
FIGURE. B.
B The Navil. a a The white line. b b The oblique Muscles descending in the
lower Belly. c c The Fibers of those descending Muscles * * The productions of
the rim of the Belly. d d Muscles descending obliquely. e e The right Muscles.
f f f The right Intersections. g g The piramidal Muscles. h h The transversal
Muscles. i i The Glandules, called Prostates a The second Muscles of the Leg. b
The 8th Muscle of the Thigh. c Part of the sixth Muscle of the thigh. These 3
on the other side are marked with k k k. l o l The first or longest bender of
the Leg. Also e d. m The 4th extender of the Leg, or the right Muscle. Also i.
n The first extender of the Leg: called Membranosus. Also f g. p The 3d
extender of the Leg, called Vastus internus. Also m. q The second extender of
the Leg, or the Muscle called Vastus externus. Also k. r The first extender of
the Foot, called Gastrocnimius internis Also p. s The second extender of the
Foot, called Gastrocn^mius externus. Also q. t y y The extender of the Toes. u
The first bender of the Foot, called Tibeus anticus. x The second bender of the
Foot, called Peronaeus. 1. y y The tendons of the Toes. x A transverse ligament
above the Foot. h The second extender of the Thigh, called Glutaeus medius. l
Part of the first Muscle extending the Thigh, called Glutaeus major. n o The
extender of the Instep. r The first bender of the Toes. * The second bender of
the Leg, called Gracilis. s The second bender of the Toes, called Flexor
magnus. t The third bender of the Foot, called Peroneus secundus. u The head of
the Thigh. x The first Circunactor, or the muscle leading the Thigh about,
called Obturator internus. y The Muscle called Crurius. z The Thigh bone. a The
fore part of the Leg. b The fore part of the Brace. c A ligament placed between
the bone of the Leg and the Brace. d d Bone-bound muscles. a a The Pectoral
muscles. b The lesser Saw muscle. c The greater Saw muscle. d d The Intercostal
muscles outward, to which the inward are joined. e e The bare Ribs without
flesh. k n q The broad muscle, under which lies. f The fourth muscle of the
bone Hyois. g The first muscle of the bone Hyois. h The first muscle of the
Jaw. i The muscle of the bone Hyois under the Chin. k The grinding muscle, or
second of the Jaw. l The muscle of the upper Lip m The temporal muscle. n The
Forehead muscle. o The Almons of the Ears. p q Two beginnings of the seventh
muscle of the Head. r s The second muscle of the Arm, called Deltoides. t The
second muscle of the Cubit, callad Brachiaeus. u The first muscle of the Cubit,
called Byceps. u y The first muscle bending the neck, called Longus. z The 2d
incliner of the Wand. a The second muscle bending the Wrist. b The first
incliner of the wand. c The muscle in the palm of the hand. d Its Tendon
divided. e The transverse Ligament of the Hand or Wrist. The first bender of
the four Fingers The Tendons of the same, separated from the muscle. g The
second bender of the four Fingers. * The Tendons of the same, perforating the
rest. f f The implantation of those Tendons. h The bender of the Thumb. i The
bone of the Sholder bared. k The short muscle of the Cubit or the second
extender. l The 5th extender of the Cubit. m The round incliner of the Wand. n
Benders of the Wrist o A Ligament in the midst betwixt the Elbo and the wand p
The first supinator of the wand r The first Pronator of the wand called
Quadratus. s The wormy muscles. t Certain benders of the Thumb.
Of the Veins. Fig. C 1.
o a * p r The hollow Vein. o a * The ascending trunk of the hollow Vein b p r
The descending trunk of the same. c c Roots of the Port vein. d The trunk of
the port vein cut asunder. e e e Roots of the hollow vein in the Liver. * The
Midrif veins cut asunder. a The orifice of the hollow vein gaping into the
Heart h The crown vein of the Heart. i i i i i The vein Azigos, or Non paril. m
m m The intercostal veins by the Azigos. n The division of the hollow vein into
2 subclavean trunks near the Jugulum under the Breast Bone. o The upper
intercostal vein by the Sides. o q The subclavean branck tending unto the Arm,
called by some Axillaris. p p The descending Mammary vein unto the right
muscles of the Abdomen, x x in this Figure cut asunder to avoid entangling. r
The upper Chest vein. s The lower Chest vein. * t The external vein of the arm
called Cephalica. * The upper muscula descening. t Ascending called by some
Humeraria. u The Basilica in the right Hand, called Hepatica. x x Branches,
whereof the first coming from the head vein, and the 2d from the Liver, joining
together make the middle vein or Median. z z A branch of the head vein by the
little finger. a a A branch of the Liver vein divided some what deeper. b A
branch of the Liver vein to the Thumb. c. c The inner Jugular vein. d d The
external Jugular vein divided, whereof certain branches are employed unto the
Face. e The Forehead vein. f The branch of the Jugular reaching unto the Face.
g The 2d and 3d union of the inner Jugulairs, with the sinus of the Brain. h
The first sinus of the Brain. i The fourth sinus or hollowness of the Brain. k
The subdivision of the outter Jugulair. l The third sinus of the Brain. The
second sinus of the Brain f f The fatry veins Adiposa g m The Kidny veins,
Emulgent. h i k The Loyn vein. Lombaris. l The upper muscle vein. n n Circles
of the Emulgent by the Kidneys. o The Uriture proceeding from the Kidney. p p
The right and left Spermatick vein. The middle muscle vein. r The division of
the Trunk of the hollow vein, descending at the fourth rack-bone of the loins
into the Illiack branches. s The holy veins. t The Illiack bifurcated into an
outer marked t u, and an inner marked t * u A propagation of the Illiack
unites, with its branch in progress or going forward x x x x The Epigastriques
cut assunder y y The small Sciatique vein. z The Crural vein, here also the
inward and outward muscle vein ioyns. a The Trunk of the Calf vein, and its
division. b The outer branch of the Calf vein, whose under propagation goes
toward the brace and its upper, to the Leg-bone, and so mingleth it self with
the circles of the Ham-vein. c A branch of the Ham-vein, which waters the
whole foot d The great Sciatique vein, (sprouting from the inward trunk of the
Calf vein) about the muscles of the Calf of the Leg e The Saphena spread over
the top of the Foot, and is in its passage to the great Toe diversely divided. f
The inward branch of the calfvein by the back part of the Leg. g The
conjunction of the Hamvein with the Calfvein.
Of the Art^rie^. Fig. C 2.
o l r The great Artery. n The orifice of the great Artery with the crown
arteries gaping into the left Ventricle of the Heart. n o The ascending Trunk.
o The division of this Trunk into subclavian branches. The upper Chest artery,
from which the upper intercostal Arteries proceed. o p p The Mammary descending
unto the Navil. q q Muscula, or a branch attaining to the backward muscles of
the neck. * The Scapular Arteries. s The lower Chest Artery between * and l its
inward branches reaching to the armpits, but its outward is the Sholder
artery. * u The Axillary artery. a a Two branches of the Axillary artery. b
These branches go to the Hand c The neck artery which attaineth the Skull
through the processes of the rack-bone. d The Carotis, or sleepy artery. g g
The division of the sleepy arteries. k k The wonderful net in the foremost
ventricles of the brain. k t The Trunk of the great artery descending. m m m
The lower intercostal arteries. l The original of the Caeliacal branches which
is divided into right and left branches. n Certain Circles of the left
branches, chiefly about the upper part of the Stomach. o Circles of the same
branch to the Milt. 4 Circles of the right branch to the hollow part of the
Liver and the neighboring parts. p r r The right and left Stomach and Kall
artery s s s The Misenterical arteries. * The arteries of the Midrif. f f The
fatty arteries. g m The arteries of the Kidneys. n n Certain branches of
arteries in the Kidneys. o The Spermatical arteries. r The bifurcation of the
great artery into two illiack trunks. s The arteries called Sacrae, or Holy. t
t The subdivision of the illiack trunk, where the lesser inner branch makes the
Muscula inferior: but the outward runeth toward the foot and sprinkleth its
branches therein. x x The Epigastrick artery climbing upward joins its
branches about the region of the Navil, with the artery of the Papps. z a g
The utter illiack or crural branch etc. The other branches not marked in this
Fig. retain the names of the veins set out in the former figure.
Figure D.

Reader Be pleased to take notice that this figure D is by the Graver
unadvisedly cut from-wards, excepting the roots of the hollow and port veins
sprinkled through the Liver, which are placed as they ought.

Further, This figure represents the Veins and Arteries as they are joined
together throughout the whole Body.

a * p The hollow vein. a The ascending trunk of the hollow vein. * The Midrif
veins. b The descending trunk of the hollow vein. c c c Branches of the
Gate-vein, dispersed through the Parenchyma of the Liver. d The trunk of the
Gateve^n cut assunder. e e e e Branches of the hollow vein in the Liver. f The
fatty veins and arteries. g The Emulgent veins and arteries. h i k l The Loyn
veins and arteries. l m The Uriter cut assunder. m The dilatation of the
vessels in the Kidney. n The distribution of the vessels through the Kidney. o
The Spermatical arteries and their original. p The Spermatical vein, which
arises from the Emulgent at the letter g. q The original of the Arteries which
are led to the Intestines by the Misenterie: Here cut asunder. r The division
of the great Artery and hollow vein into branches. s The holy Veins and Art.
ries. Or Sacrae. t The devision of the right Illiack branch into an outward and
inward branch. u Muscula superior, or the upper muscle vein. x The Epigastrick
vein and artery; here cut assunder, which about the Navil meets with the Pap
veins and arteries. y Muscula inferior, or the lower muscle. z The Calf vein,
divided into three branches, with its artery descending even to the end of the
Foot. a The destribution of the Calf vein. b The great Sciatique. c Branches
from the great Sciatique. d The Ham vein. e The Saphena, which is opened by the
Ankle. f A production of the Calf vein. g The conjunction and union of the Ham
and Calf veins. h The mouth of the hollow vein gaping into the Heart i i ^ i i
Branches from the vein Non paril. k The hole of the great Artery, divided from
the Heart. l l The descending Trunk of the great Artery. m m m The intercostal
branches. n The ascending trunk of the great Artery. o The ascending hollow
vein. p The Mammary, above which the outward Jugular is. o q The Subclavian
branch at q. Some call it Axillaris. r The Chest veins, and Arteries. s A
branch along the side of the Chest, spent chiefly into the broad muscle. t t
The Head vein, or Cephalica. u The Basilica, or Liver vein. x x Branches
forming the Median, whereof one is opened for the Head vein, the other for the
Liver vein. y The middle vein, or Median. z z A branch to the little Finger. a
a The devision of the Liver branch or Basili^x. b A branch nourishing the skin.
c The inward Jugular, with the sleepy artery. d d The outward Jugular vein. e
The meeting together of the Jugulars. f g Propagations to the hindermost part
of the Head. h The Sinus of the Dura matter. i The fourth Sinus of the Dura
matter. k The wonderful net out of the sleepy arteries.
Of the Bones and Sinews. Fig. E.
E The Forehead bone. a The Yoke bone. b The upper Jaw bone. c The lower Jaw
bone. 1 2 3 etc. The Rack bones of the Spine, 28. which are 7 of the neck, 12
of the Chest, 5 of the Loy^^s, the Holy bone 4 or 6. d The Collar bones. e The
Sholder blades. f The top of the sholder, and upper process of the shold^^
blade. g The bone of the Arm, or Tunnerus. h The lower bone of the Cubi^, or
the Ell. i The upper bone of the Cubit, or Want. k The Wrest. l The after-wrest
or Palm of the hand. m The Fingers. The Breast bone. * The Cartilage, called
Rusiformis. p p p p The 7 true Ribs in the 7 upper Rack bones of the Chest q q
q q The 5 false Ribs in the lower 5 Spondils of the Back. r The Holy bone, made
of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 Bones. s The extremity of the Holy bone, called Coceyx
or Rump. with its Cartilage. t u x Bones opposite to the Holy bone. t The
Haunch bone or Ilium. u The Hip bone, or Copendix. x The Share bone, or Os
pubis. y The Thigh. z The great process of the thigh. a The lesser process of
the thigh. b The Whirl bone of the Knee. c The inward greater bone of the Leg.
d The outward lesser bone of the Leg or the Brace. e f The Ancles or processes
of the Leg, the innermost at (...) the outermost at f: below these the Heel. g
The Boat bone, or Os Navi^^lare. h The Toes of the Foot. i The after wrest, or
sole of the Foot. k The wrest made of 7 bones, whereof 4 have names in the
joints of the Fingers and Toes. Nature has placed diverse small bones (like as
here may be seen) called Sesamoides, or. Seed bones.


Of the Nerves.
a Shows the Nerves produced from the marrow in the Skull, with the brain and
after-brain. c b The length of the marrow (included within the skull, the rack
bones, and the holy bone) covered with its membrane. o o n n c c Nerves
produced from thence; and passing through the bones; coming out are cut off. d
The marrow within its ^oat, as it is divided into filaments. e A Nerve boring
its membrane, and coming out with others makes the Crural Nerf. f The membrane
(investing the marrow) opened and laid on the sides. m n o p q r Nerves out of
the rack bones of the Neck; and first Spondils of the Chest attaining the Hand,
and are called Brachici. m The first Nerve of the Arm. n The second. o The
third Nerve of the Arm. p The fourth. q The fifth. r The sixth. o o The
intercostal Nerves from the Rack bone of the Chest cut assunder. n n Nerves out
of the Rack bones of the loins to the muscles of the paunch, out of which the
1st, 2d, and 3d, nerves of the knee. s The fourth and thickest crural nerve,
proceeding from the coalition of the nerves out of the holy-bone. t The
devision of the 4th Crural nerve into the ham nerves. u The branch of its
outward trunk. x The inward branch of the same trunk, under the skin
replenishing the Calf of the leg. y Another inward branch under the skin
creeping along the inside of the leg. z The remainders of the nerves spent in
the forepart of the foot.
The second Table, or Facir, in the first Vision. Figure A. represents the
Woman.
a The forehead. b The ey. c The nose. d The mouth shut with the upper and
lower lip. e The neck. f The throat. g g The top of the shoulder. h h The Arm.
i The elbow. k The Cubit. l The ell. m The wrist. n The after-wrist or palm of
the hand. o o The Shoulder blades. p p p p The back. q q q q The spine of the
Back. r The arm-hole. A The loins or region of the kidneys. s s The place of
the hipps where we apply remedies for the Sciatica. t The place of the holy
bone. u The place of the rump. x The buttocks. y The back parts of the thigh. z
The ham. a The calf of the leg. b The foot. c The utter ankle and heel, the
hollow of the foot. d The heel. e The sole of the foot.
In these two following Figures the skarf-skin, the skin, the fatt, the fleshy
pannicle are all removed.

Figure B.
B The skul bared. a a The two pair of the muscles of the head, or the two
complexi. b b The first muscle of the head called Splenius. c c The second
muscle of the shoulder blade, called Cucullaris, or the monks hood, or
Traperius the table muscle. d The second muscle of the arm, called Deltoydes. e
The fourth muscle of the arm. Or the greater round muscle. f The under spine
muscle. g The fifth muscle of the Cubit or his extender. h The 5 of the arm,
called Sepers Capularis inferior. i A part of the muscle called Biceps. k The
extender, Longus. l The third muscle of the Cubit or short muscle. m The fourth
muscle of the Cubit. n The long muscle of the wand. o The first bender of the
wrist. p The upper extender of the wrist, composed of a double tendon. q The
lower extender of the wrist. * The transverse ligament of the hand. 1 The first
extender of the four fingers. 2 The third extender of the four fingers. 3,3
Their tendons. The second extender of the four fingers. 4 Its tendons. 5 The
first extender of the thumb. 6 The fourth extender of the four fingers. s s The
third muscle of the shoulder blade, Rhomboides. t The seventh muscle of the
head called Mastoides. u The fourth muscle of the shoulder blade or the heaver.
x The back saw or the fourth muscle of the chest. y The third muscle of the
neck or transversal. z z The muscles of the back, a little bunching out. a a b
b The fourth muscle of the arm, or Latissimus. c c The first muscle of the
thigh. Or the first author of the buttocks. d The third bender of the leg,
called Seusi-nervosus. e The fourth bender of the leg, called Biceps. f The
fith muscle of the leg, called Semi-membraneus. g The second extender of the
leg or Vastus internus. h The third extender of the leg, called Vastus
externus. i The cavitie in which the Crural vessels pass through. k
Gastrocnimius internus; also in the figure C k. l Gastrocnimius externus; also
in the figure C l. m The heel, Also in the figure C m. n The third bender of
the toes, or the second.
Figure C.
C C The back saw or the fourth muscle of the chest. a a The lower back saw, or
fith muscle of the chest. b b b b The first muscle of the head or the
splinters. c c The upper oblique muscles or fifth pair of the head. e e The
lower oblique muscles or the sixth pair. d d The greater right muscles or the
third pair. s The transverse process of the first rackbone of the neck. g The
process of the second rackbone of the neck. h The fourth muscle of the neck,
called Spinatus. i The second muscle of the back, called Longissimus. k The
sixth muscle of the chest, called Sacrolumbus. l The outward intercostal
muscles. m m The ribs naked. n n Part of the oblique muscle of the paunch
descending. o o Part of the muscles of the paunch. p p Part of the overthwart
muscles. q The first muscle of the back, called Quadratus, under which lies the
third of the back, called Sacer, or holy. r The fourth muscle of the back or
Semi-spinatus. s s The extender of the thigh, called Gluteus minor. t The back
of the haunch bone bared. u A membranus ligament occuping the perforation of
the share bone. x The fleshy pouch adhering the compassing muscle of the thigh.
y The muscle leading the thigh about, or the Obturator externus. z Part of the
third extender of the thigh. a The second up-lifter of the thigh. b The first
bender of the thigh, called Lumbalis. c Vastus externus or the second extender
of the leg. d The fifth extender of the thigh, called Triceps. e The fifth
bender of the leg, called Semi-membranus. f Part of the second extenders of the
leg. g The seat of the bone of the thigh bared. h The muscle moving the leg
obliquely, called Popliteus. i The first brace muscle. Or second bender of the
foot. n The four wormy muscles. o The backside of the shoulder blade bared. p p
The four muscles of the blade or heaver. q The third ligament of the shoulder
joint. r Part of the monks hood. s The upper Supscapular. t The greater round.
u The shorter incliner of the wand. x The second extender of the thumb. y A
ligament betwixt the ell and the wand z z The bone-bound muscles.
Figure D.
D The Skul. a The temple bone called Squamifermea. b The fore part of the
head. c The space between the nostrils. d The lower jaw bone. e The orb of the
ey. f f The 30 rack bones of the spine. g g The shoulder blades. h The bone of
the arm called Brachieus. i The wand. k The ell, or cubit. l m The afterwrist
or Meta carpium. m The wrist of brachiale. n n n The true and false ribs. o The
holy bone. p p q q The hip bones. p p The haunch bones. q q The huckle bones of
the share bones, which cannot here be demonstrated. r The thigh bone. s The
shin bone, or bone of the leg. t The brace bone. u The metapedium or afterwrist
of the foot.
The third Table, or Facio; in the first Vision. Figure A. represents,
A The belly of a woman great with child, near about the time of her
deliverance. a The nipples or breasts. b b d f g The privities opened. b The
woman's yard. d e The skinny caruncles. e The orifice of the womb or hole of the
cleft. f f The mount of Venus. g Hymen, a membrane, the lock of virginity.
Figure B.
a The breast. B The breast flayed. b The greater glandule to the Breasts. c c
Diverse lesser glandules. d Veins through these glandules.
Figure C.
a The spoon of the heart. b b The ribs bared. c The stomach. d The Liver. e
The guts. f f The share bones. g A Cartilage growing between the share bones. h
The bladder of urine. i i i i The umbilique vessels. k The navil. C The womb
great with child, with the after birth which we have opened or dissected. l The
fore part of the neck of the womb. m m m m The thickness of the womb. n n o o
The hollowness of the womb. p That part of the womb to which the cake liver is
growing. q q A line distinguishing the bosom of the womb. r s t The
afterbirth of the infant. r s The membrane Chorion encompassing the infant. t
t t Vessels dispersed in this membrane. u The liver of the womb. x x The humors
retained in the membranes of the infant. y y The conjunction of the umbilical
vessels as they are compassed with their coat resembling a gut. z z The
membrane Amnios, or innermost coat. a a The infant ready almost to be born
demonstrated in its posture.
The fourth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
a The cake of the womb in the chorion. b The outside of the chorion. c The
inside of the chorion. d The collection of the umbilical vessels. e e The
outside of the Amnios. f f The inside of the Amnios. g g The umbilical vessels.
h The knot in the umbilical vessels. i i The infant bowed together, and sitting
in the womb.
The fifth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
a An Embryo of twelve days. b The umbilical vessels cut asunder. c Their
entrance at the navil.
Of the Ey. The sixth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision. Figure A.
represents,
a b b i The ey. a The greater or inner corner of the ey, where are the weeping
caruncles, and the two holes, or passages. b The lesser or external angle of
the ey. c c The white of the ey. d The moveable ey lid, or the upper ey lid. e
The immovable ey lid, or the lower ey lid. f The apple of the ey, with the
rainbow. g g Tarsi, or the comb. h h The hairs of the ey lids. i The hollowness
of the upper ey lid. k The ey brows. l The hollowness of the under ey lid. A m
m The right muscles of the eyes. n n The fat between these muscles. o o o o The
optic nerves cut asunder. p The meeting together of the optic nerves. The
other letters are explained in the first Table.
Figure B.
B The utmost coat called Adnata. a a a The vessels of this coat. b b The hairy
processes.
Figure C.
C The horny coat called Cornea. a a The several vessels dispersed through the
coat. b b The apple, the black, or window of the ey. c c The rainbow, or crown
in the ey.
Figure D.
D The grapy coat called Uvea. a The hole in the grapy coat, where the apple
is.
Figure E.
E The upper optic nerve stretched out. E The under optic nerve clothed in
his membranes.
Figure F.
F The thin Meninx clothing the nerve. a The Christalline humor. b The ciliar
ligament. c The glassy humor.
Figure G.

What the former-Figures have showed each part, this explaineth and sets
down together.

G The Christalline humor. a The glassy humor. b The watery humor. c c The
utmost coat called Adnata. d The shady part of the horny coat. e The brighter
part of the horny coat. f The grapy coat. g The netaipe coat called Retina. h h
The fat between the muscles. i The optic nerve clothed with both the
membranes. k k The two right muscles. l l The other two right muscles. m The
oblique muscles.
Of the Ear. The seventh Table, or Facio; in the first Vision. Figure A.
represents,
A The Ear. a a f g The outward Ear. a a The circumference of the ear, called
Aelix. b The interior swelling of the ear, called Anthelix. c The boat of the
outward ear. d The he-goat, in this part there grow hairs. e The cavity of the
Ear which is next unto the hole of hearing, called Alvearium. g The lap of the
ear. f The part opposite hereto.
Figure B.
B h d The stony bone. a The appendix of the temple bone called Stiloides. c
The hole of hearing. e f g The drum head. e The small membrain of the drum head,
unto which the three bones of the organ of hearing, as the hammer, the anvil,
the stirrup and the bony ring are set about. f The cavity of the Timpane or
drum head. g A muscle in the Timpane or drum head. h Three little burrows or
holes of the two cavities. i i The labrinth in which are diverse chambers. k The
snailshell in the stony bone. l l The cavities dissected of the stony bone.
The eight Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
The snailshell with the labirinth.
The ninth Table or Facio in the first Vision.
The three bones of the organ of hearing joined together, and showed on the
contrary side.
The tenth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
The three bones of hearing taken asunder, the first called the Hammer, the
second the Anvil the third the Stirrup.
The eleventh Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
a c c e The misentery. a The center of the misentery where the vessels are
tied to the rim of the belly. b b A glandulous body set for security under the
distribution of the vessels. c c c Diverse glandules placed in the misentery. d
The lower membrane of the kall. e A part of the misentery tying the right guts
to the back.
The twelfth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision. Figure A. represents.
A A a h The mouth spard open that the inward cavity and chops may be seen. A A
The cheek puff. a The nose. b The palate. c c c c The teeth. d The Gargareon.
e The after tongue. f f The gullet. g The tongue; beneath which may farther be
seen. * The bone Hiois on the foreside The cavity of the foreteeth where under
the tongue lies the notable veins called Ranivae. h The chin. i i The
Cartilages of the rough artery. k k The recurrent nerves. l l Strings of the
sixth pair, which joining together make the recurrant nerve. m m Nerves of the
sixth pare. n The venal artery. o The arterial vein. p A passage from the
arterial vein and the great artery. q The Ascending trunck of the great
artery, out of which the subclavian branches do arise. The descending trunck
of the great artery. r r The sleepy Artery. s s Branches of the rough artery
cut asunder. t t The hollow vein. u The great artery, or Aorta magna. x The
hole of the hollow vein into the artery. y The right ear of the heart. z The
left ear. a y b c The right side of the heart. a a a The crown vein and
artery. * The inward cavity of the right ventricle of the heart, in which the
three-pointed floodgates tied to the fleshy parts with their ties, as also the
floodgates Sigmoides are to be seen. c The point of the heart. d d The purse of
the heart cut asunder and turned aside.
Figure B.
B The heart cut over thwart. a a The left ventricle of the heart. b b The
right ventricle of the heart. c c The internal substance of the heart.
Figure C.
C The heart cut according to its length. a The right ventricle. b The left
ventricle.
Figure D.
D The left side of the heart. * * Vessels from the crown vessels. a The great
artery. b The arterial vein. c The venal artery. d The hollow vein. Here a
part of the substance of the heart being taken away the left ventricle of the
heart appears: these following letters signifying.

a The three pointed floodgates placed about the great artery. b Fleshy
portions to which the ties of the floodgates are bound. c The ties of the
floodgates. d The internal cavity of the heart. e The floodgates Sigmoides
added to the venal artery.
Figure E.
E The inside of the purse of the heart. a The veins of the purse of the heart.
The thirteenth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
a c f The overthwart partition or the midriff. a a The membrane or nervous
part of the midriff. b b b The fleshy part of the midriff. c The perforation of
the midriff where through the great artery and the branch Azigos are
transmitted. d The right perforation through which the hollow vein ascends. e
The left perforation giving way to the gullet. f f Two fleshing originals. g g
Vessels through the Diaphragma.
The fourteenth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
a a a The tongue. b The cartilage of the aftertongue. c The upper hole of the
gullet dissected. d The ligament encompassing the throat.
Of the throttle. The fifteenth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
a b b The bone Hiois. b b The process of the bone Hiois. c c c c A
cartilagineus height where to the bone Hiois and the shield gristle are
fastened. d The cartilage of the aftertongue. e The inside of the shield
gristle. f f The ewregristle. g The hinder part of the ring-gristle. h
Membranes like ties filling and shutting together the ring of the muscles of
the throttle. i i The muscles of the Larinx or throttle.
The sixteenth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
a The upper side of the muscle of the Larinx. b The lower side thereof.
The seventeenth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
a b c The ring-gristle. a The circular region below of the ring-gristle. b The
ring-gristle on the side. c The internal cavity of the ring-gristle.
The eighteenth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
a b The ewregristle. a One part thereof. b The other part thereof.
The nineteenth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
a b c d The shield-gristle. a a His upper processes. b b His lower processes.
c His bosom into which the aftertongue is joined. d His outward face.
The twentieth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
a The face of the after tongue regarding the palate. b The tip of the
aftertongue.
The one and twenty Table or Facio; in the first Vision.
a The benders of the four fingers. b The prunitendons of the benders of the
four fingers cut asunder. c c The commixtion of those tendons. d The first
bender of the wrist.
The two and twentieth Table, or Facio; in the first Vision.
a The first bender of the toes. b The tendon of the great bender of the toes
divided. c c The commixtion of the tendons. d The second bender of the toes.
FINIS.
anatomical figure Visio Prima
Quid est HOMO quod memor es e^^ aut filius.

Hominis quoniam visitas eum? Min^^^ti eum paulo minus ab Angelis. Gloria and
Honor ^oranasti eum

Sanctus Sanctus Sanctus Deus Zebaoth

Et con^^in^sti eum super opera manuum tuoru^ omnia subiecisti sub pedibus eius
In eo enim quod omnia ei subiecit nil dimisit non subiectum ei Psalm. 8: v: 5
etc s^^d Hebr: 2. Pallor more sedet, macies in corpore toto Orid (...). Pind:
8. Ode Nem Stro^^



same anatomical figure, viscera revealed

A Dissection of the Body of Man. Visio Secunda.
The first Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Figure A. represents,
a The Forehead vein. b The vein of the temples. A The head vein, or uttermost
of the Cabit. c d The Basilick or liver vein. * The middle vein. Observe that
this vein c is oftentimes (but unrightly) opened for the middle vein: also
ordaining to open the lower branch Salvatella, from the vein d here and at the
little finger. e The Salvatella, or miltvein. f The head vein in the hand. *
The utter leg vein, called Tibas. g The inner leg vein. Also. h The Sciatick
veins. i The vein of the ankle, called Saphena. Also A. k The vein upon the
great toe commonly called the head-vein. l The vein of the little finger. The
valves growing to the sides of the veins, make those knots here to be observed.
m p q The Man's member, or Priapus. m The hair of the privities. n The man's
yard. o The prepale, or upper skin of the yard p The nut of the yard. q q The
testicles in their purse.
Figure B.
a B b c d The rim of the belly. a a a The upper part of the membrane of the
rim dissected. b b The white line B The navil. c c The productions of. the rim
of the belly. d d Veins and arteries from the mammaries. e e Veins and arteries
from the epigastre. f f Branches of veins sprinkled in the sides of the rim.
Figure C.
C The midriff.
Figure D.
D The forepart of the stomach. a The gut Duodenum. b The common passage of the
gall
See more in the third Vision and the tenth Table.

Figure E.
E The liver. a a a a a a The body of the liver. b b The bladder of gall. A
portion of the umbilique vein.
Figure F.
F The navil. f f f The surface of the midriff, compassed with the Pleura. The
umbelique or vein of the navil a a The umbelique arteries. b A ligament of the
bladder, called Urachus. c The bladder of urin. u The bladders of seed, or
glandulous body which retains the labored seed.
Figure G.
G The upper membrane of the kell. a a a a Vessels covered with fat.
Figure H.
H The guts. a The seat, here the muscles of the fundament. b The gut Ileam, or
small gut. c The empty gut, or Jejunem. d The blind gut, or Caecum. e H e The
colic gut, or Colon. f The right gut, or Rectum.
See more in the third Vision, Table five, and Table thirteen.

Figure I.
I The truack of the gate-vein. a The splenick branch. b The meseaterick
branch. c c The milt. d d The sweetbread, or Pancreas. e e The mesentery with
his veins freed from the guts; and what else is joined to him in the Body.
Figure K.
K The cavity of the lower belly. a The descending trunck of the hollow vein. b
The descending trunck of the great artery. c The fatty veins out of the
trunck. d The kidny vein and arterle. e The fatty vein out of the kidny vein. f
The keens or kidneys. g The ureters, h The loyn veins, and arteries i The upper
muscle vein and artery. k The division of that vein and arterle, into the
illiack branches. l l The holy veins and arteries. m A devision of the illiack
branch into an outward, and an inward. n The right Spermatick veins, out of the
trunck of the hollow vein. o The left Spermatick veins, out of the Emulgent. p
p The Spermatick arteries. q s The contiguity of the Spermatick veins, and
arteries, so sliding by the productions of the rim, into the purse of the
testicles. r The mascles of the testicles, called Cremasties. s The Spiry
bodden vessel, called Varicosum, made of the wonderful implication of the
veins and arteries. t t The testicles. u The Parastatae, or Epididimis, a
crumpled vessel. x A leading Vessel of the seed. y The reflection of this
vessel. z The Man's yard.
See more in the Table of the second Vision; these parts exempted from the body.

Figure L.
L The purse of the heart, called Pericardrum a The mediastinum torn from the
breast bone, and lying upon the purse of the heart. b The ascending hollow vein.
c The asconding great artery. d The descending great artery. e The devision
of the ascending truncks at the Jugulum. f The original of the vein Azigos, out
of the hollow vein. g The left subelavian branch. h The right subelavian
branch: here it begins to be called the Axillary, or vein of the arm-holes.
i i The Jugular with the sleepy arteries. k The upper Axillary branch. l The
lower Axillary branch. m The arterial vein and his beginning out of the heart.
n The venal artery coming from the heart. o o o The spreading of these through
the lungs. p The descending trunck of the great artery. q The implantation and
entrance of the hollow vein into the heart. r The descending branch of the
hollow vein.
Figure M.
M The rough artery. Or weazon pipe. a b b c g h i The head of the rough
artery, or top of the throttle. a g The after-tongue, at g, his cleft. b b The
shield gristle. d M l k The pipe of the rough artery. c c The glandules, or
almonds. N d i l The semi-circular gristles between which the membranous
ligaments. e e The devision of the rought artery, and its branches unto the
lobes of the lungs. f f Circles of the rough arteries through the lungs. g The
back side of the aftertongue shuts the cleft. g h i The hinder part of the
throttle h h The cavity of the shield gristle. (...). The ring gristle. k k A
membranous ligament filling the circle of the crop. l l The muscles of the
crop. x x m The upper right lobe of the lungs y n The lower left lobe of the
lungs. z z The space between the lobes, where they seem to be disjoined.
Figure N.
N The great artery going out of the heart aloft, cut. a The vein Azigos cut
off. b The hollow vein aloft cut off, which passing through the midriff, is
marked in the lower belly with e and about the liver (from which it is here
fed) with some roots torn out, is marked with e f, which letters betoken as
follows. e e The roots of the hollow vein torn out which otherwise grow in
the Parenchima of the siver f The same hollow vein separated from the liver,
whose one trunck climbeth, the other descends. c c A branch of the Azigos in
the left side. d d d Branches of the Azigos resected, which are led to the rib.
Figure O.
O The rack-bones. a a a a a a The ribs. b b The trench of the heart, or pit,
or spoon. c c c c c c The intercostal muscles. d The upper part of the breast
bone, to which the collar bones are brought and fastened or Articulated. e e The
glandules placed at the hollow of the neck higher. f f The surface of the
midriff compassed with the Pleura. g g A portion of the Mediastinum torn away,
by which you may see the cavity of the breast within.
See further in the first Vision, Table 12.

The second Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Figure A. represents,
a d g The outward surface of the skul and the upper. A The bone of the
forehead. a a The temple bones with the skaly appendices. b The nowle bone. c c
The coronal suture. d The sagittall suture. e e The landal suture. f f The
bones of the sinciput. g g The yoke bone.
Figure B.
a a f B B The upper part of the brain bare from the skul and covered with the
Dura matter. a The first sinus of the brain or Rillet. b The second sinus of the
brain. c The third sinus; in the concourse of these three is the fourth, which
is hidden within. d The place of the after-brain. e e Certain small veins and
arteries, running through the Dura matter, or hard membrane. f A line of the
hard membrane existing the coronal suture. g h The skul from which the upper
part is taken away, by the help of a saw. i Vessels through the soft membrane.
k k The upper part of the brain, (still covered with the soft membrane) with
its anfractuousness. l l The brain turned to the sides. m The callous body. n
The process of the Dura matter resembling a sithe. l m m The after-brain.
Figure C.
C C The inward marrow the substance of the brain, from which the upper part,
so well on the right, as on the left side is taken away. a a The bark of the
brain investing its marrow. b The callous body. c c The arch in the middle of
which a partition distinguishing the former ventricles of the brain. d d f f
The former ventricles of the brain. d d The upper part of the former ventricles
of the brain. e A vessel from the fourth rillet, lying under the Arch which
goes into the third ventricle. f f The lower part of the former ventricles of
the brain. g g Arteries from the sleepy arteries making the thumb or Plexus
Chorroides. h h Small veins through the ventricles of the brain. i Yet a part of
the former right ventricle. k The third ventricle of the brain of which the
former passage goes to the basin, the hindermost into the fourth ventricle. l
l The sides at the third ventricle of the brain. m m The testicles of the
brain. n The pinal glandule, or the yard of the brain. o o The buttocks of the
brain. p The fourth ventricle of the brain. q q The spinall marrow. r r
Portions of the marrow from which the after-brain is cut off.
Figure D.
D a c f h The inner and lower surface of the skul. D The greatest hole of the
nowle-bone by which the spinall marrow descends. a a The two hindermost
rillets of the skul. b b Diverse sutures in the base of the skul. c c c Diverse
holes in the base of the skul, for the ascent, and descent of the vessels. e
The cavity in the wedge-bone, in which the phlegmatic glandule rests. f f The
wedge-bone. g h h The spungy bone or sive. g The partition of the spungy bone.
h h Small holes and cavities in the spungy bone.
The third Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Explicateth the wonderful
Net.
a b c d e The wonderful Net. a The phlegmatic glandule. b c The arteries
going under the brain and making the wonderful net. c c Other branches unto
which Propagatums of the Net are committed.
The fourth Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Of the Head Veins, and
Arteries.
a The internal Jugular. b The sleepy artery arising with the Jugular. a h.
The first vein in the first bosom, some, from which branches to the
neighboring parts. b h The first artery in the first bosom. c The forward
second vein in the sinus. c The backward third vein in the sinus. d d A
distribution of the third vein and artery. e A branch of the first vein and
artery, (into the muscles of the neck) cut off. f The second artery in the
sinus, or bosom g The third artery, here entering the scul, and is divided. h
The first sinus of the hard membrane. i The second sinus of the hard membrane.
k The fourth sinus, (being made of the concourse of the other three) hidden. l
l l The third sinus of the hard membrane. m m Branches scattered to the left
part of the membrane, here cut off. n n Branches sprinkled to the right part
of the membrane. o o o The fourth sinus led along by the sithe. p p Circles
from this leading, going upwards. q r The upper branch of the fourth sinus, the
lower also about k, which being parted in two, sends the one sprout fore out
to the thumb, the other after, out to the afterbrain. s A notable vessel into
which the fourth sinus ends. t The parting of this vessel in two. u Branches
of the third artery, which on the left side go to the soft membrane, and on
the right side, to the right ventricle of the brain. x The wonderful Net. y A
branch of the third artery to the buttocks of the brain. z A branch to the
Eyes.
The fifth Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Shows the Liver.
A The hollow part of the Liver a a The bladder of the gall opened. b Three
valves of the neck of the bladder. c The passage of gall opened. d d The
concurrence of the neck of the bladder, with the passage of gall, making one
chanale e e e Small branches leading the purer gall into the bladder. f The
umbilique vein. g The trunck of the gate vein asunder. h h Part of the hollow
vein. k k k The inner substance of the liver, being cut in the middle, where
likewise are the holes of the roots of the hollow and gate-vein cut open. l The
flat side of the liver. m d A portion of the hollow vein. n n The midriff
veins. o A ligament by which the liver is fastened unto the midriff.
The sixth Table, or Facio; in the second Vision.
a The bladder of gall like as it is situated in the hollow part of the liver.
b A cavity, unto which the valves do cleave. c The neck of the bladder of gall.
d The passage of gall. e The common way of the passage of gall, and the neck of
the bladder. f The gate of the stomach. Or Pilorus. g The gut, Duodenum. h The
same opened that the insersion of the common passage of gall might appear. i
The artery through the liver and bladder. k A nerve for the liver and bladder.
l l The Castique twins. m m Branches or ways of the gall.
The seventh Table, or Facio; in the second Vision.
a The mammary veins and arteries descending. b The Epigastick veins and
arteries ascending. c c The concurrence of the extremities of these vessels.
The eight Table, or Facio; in the second Vision.
a The Balon lifted up. b The phlegmatic glandule. c c c c Four passages to the
letting out of phlegm.
The ninth Table, or Facio; in the second Vision.
a b d f g k l n o p p q t t u x Are expressed in the same manner, as the
aforesaid in the first Table, and Figure K. c The bladder of urine. e e The
seed bladders opened. h The entrance of the Ureters. i The vessels of the yard.
m The common passage to the seed and urine opened.
The tenth Table, or Facio; in the seccond Vision. Exhibiteth the Womb, with
its neck turned upwards.
a The whole Womb. b b The neck of the womb foulded in it self, and drawn
upwards. e A part of the bottom womb, like unto the nut of the yard, swelling
into the upper part of the neck of the womb, in the midst whereof the orifice
appears. d The neck of the womb.
The eleventh Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Sets out the
Ramification of the Hollow, and Gate Vein through the Liver.
a b c The hollow vein. a b The ascending trunck. b c The descending trunck. d
d d d Roots of the hollow vein, through the substance of the Liver. e e e e
Roots of the Gate-vein, through the hollow part of the Liver. f f f An
Inocculation of the roots of both the veins. g The Trunck, or the Gate-vein cut
asunder, which in the third Vision, and fourth Table, is marked with a, and is
there farther described.
The twelfth Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Exhibiteth the Bladder with
its Ligaments,
a The Navil. b The back side of the bladder of urin. c The concurrence of the
leading vessels. d The ureters, or pipes of the urin. e The Glandulca
Profiatae. f The two bodies of the yard. g The Sphincter muscle of the bladder.
The thirteenth Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Shows the left
ventricle of the Heart, opened about the great Artery.
a The great artery cut asunder beneath the which, the arteriall vein, and by
the which the crown arteries. b The orifice of the great artery, or its
original from the Heart. c c c Three valves in the artery, called Sigmoides. d
The partition of the Heart. e Two floodgates of the venal arteries. g The left
ear turned inwards. h f i d c b The cavity of the left ventricle. i The fibers
of the valyes here refected. k k The external substance of the Heart shuting up
the left ventricle.
The fourteenth Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Showing the right
Ventricle of the Heart, opened by the Arterial Vein.
a Portion of the great Artery. b Portion of the hollow Vein. c The valves of
the hollow Vein. d d The Fibers, or Filaments. f g e t e The orifice of the
arterial vein opened. f g Small holes of the branches, into the arterial vein. e
e e The three valves, called Sigmoides. h h The partition of the Heart.
The fifteenth Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Shows: the Heart freed
from its purse, and dissected in the middle.
a The ascending trunck of the great artery. b The left Axillary artery. c
The ascending trunck of the great artery, above which lies the hollow vein. d
The right Ear. e f The arterial vein opened. e A hole gaping into the hollow
vein, with its valve: in Infants it is open: but in Men grown to years it is
grown together. g g The outside of the Heart. h i k Pieces of the Heart. h h
The insides of the Heart. i i k k The cavity of the ventricles of the Heart.
FINIS.
anatomical diagram Visio Secunda
HOMO vanitati similis factus est. dies eius sicut vmbra. praetereunt Psalm:
144. v: 4 Vt colchicum floriscit marcidum: sic and HOMO. graminis instar. (...)



A Dissection of the Body of a Woman. Visio Tertia.
The first Table, or Facio; in the third Vision. Figure A. represents,
a The forehead vein. b The vein of the temples. A The head vein. c d The liver
vein. * The common middle vein, or heart vein. Observe that this vein c, is
oftentimes, (but that untruly) opened for the middle vein, also ordaining to
open the lower branch Salvatelle, from the vein d, here and at the little
finger.

e The Salvatelle, or vein of the milt. f The head vein in the hand. * The
utter leg vein, called Tibeaea. g The inner vein of the leg, or Tibeaea
interior. h The Sciatick veins. i The vein of the ankle, called Saphaena, also
A. k The vein upon the great toe, commonly the head vein. l The vein of the
little finger. The floodgates of the veins growing to their sides, make that
these knots here are to be cared for.

m The hair of the privities. p m p The orifice of the womb, or privities. n
The slit. o The Woman's yard, or Clitoris. p p The little hillocks on both sides
the slit. Fig. B The rim of the Belly. Fig. C The Midriff. Fig. D The Stomach.
Fig E The Liver. Fig. F The Bladder. Fig. G The Kall. Fig. H The Guts. Fig. I
The Gate-vein. Fig. K The cavity of the lower Belly. Fig. L The Heart. Fig. M
The rough Artery. Fig. N The great Artery. Fig. O The rack Bones. K The cavity
of the lower Belly. O p q The Womb. p The bottom of the Womb. q The neck of the
Womb. m m The Spermatick veins and arteries. n A branch of the Spermatick,
attaining the rim of the belly. r r The lower branches of the Womb creeping to
its neck. s s Vessels from the Spermaticks to the neck of the Womb. t The
trumpet, or leading vessel of the seed. u Vessels unto this trumpet or leading
vessel. x x The stones, or testicles. y y The lower ties of the Womb, or
hanging muscles of the Womb ending in the privities.
The other letters have the same signification with these: expressed in the
first Table, or Facio; in the second Vision. Figure K.

The second Table, or Facio; in the third Vision. Figure A. represents,
b f k The outward and lower surface of the Skul. a The hole of the Occiput or
hinder part of the head. b The heads of the nowle bone particulated, with the
two first rack-bones of the neck. c c The process Stiloides, or bodkin. d The
cavity of the temples for the articulation of the lower jaw. e The Prominence
of the upper jaw by the temples. f The yoke bone. g The nowl bone. A h The
processes like unto Bats wings. i The Palate. k k The teeth of the upper jaw.
Figure B.
A a b The brain turned inward and coverd with the Dura matter. A The residence
of the phlegmatic glandule, under the Turkey saddle. a a a The Dura matter, or
hard membrane. b b b Vessels sprinkled through the Dura matter.
Figure C.
Cack^ The brain turned inward, freed from the Dura matter. C The meeting
together of the optic nerves. a a a The brain with his Convolutions as yet
whole. b b The coats of the Ey from the membranes, into which the optic nerve
is displayed. c c The Mammillary processes. d d d The original of the optic
nerves out of the spinal marrow. e e e The spinal marrow. f A branch or nervous
tie seeming to be a peculiar nerve, and happily taken for the eight nerve of the
brain. g The motive nerves of the Ey. h The three pair of nerves, or the lesser
root of the three pair. i A little branch of the fourth pair into the coat of
the Palate, or rather rising from the third nerve. k The fourth pair of
nerves, or the greater root of the third pair. l The nerve of hearing stretched
out in the cavity of the stony bone, or the fifth nerve, or the fifth pair. m
The sixth pair of nerves. n The seventh pair of nerves. o o The after-brain. p
The Plexas Chorroides or complication of vessels in the forward ventricles of
the brain. q q q q The cavity of the right ventricle, which is therefore opened
that his magnitude might appear, but on the other side the left ventricle is
shut up. r r r The breaches of the brain which shut up the lower ventricle. s s
The substance of the brain under the marrow.
Figure D.
D i l m The inward and outward surface of the Skul. D i i The cavity of the
bone of the Sinciput. k The cavity of the nowle-bone. l The sinus or bosom, of
which there are diverse, and in which the veins do flow. m The cavity of the
forehead bone. n u n The skaly cavities as it were between the bones of the
skul. o o o The thickness of the bone of the skul.
The third Table, or Facio; in the third Vision.
a b The inside of the womb dissected. a The right bosom. c The left bosom. c
c The thickness of the coat of the womb. d The inward orifice of the womb. e e
A portion of the binding membranes of the womb. f The neck of the womb. g The
neck of the bladder.
The fourth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision.
a The trunck of the gate-vein. b The Cistique twins. c The right Stomach vein.
d The Bifurcation of the gate-vein's trunck. g The great Gastrick-vein from
this. h The crown vein of the stomach. i The right Kell vein. k The hinder Kell
vein, whose branches are l The right. m The left.
n n n The Splenick branches distributed through the milt. o The short or venal
vessel. p The left stomach and Kell vein. q The midriff branch. r The right
stomach and Kell vein. s The gut-vein t The divarication of the mesenterical
branch, from which u u u The Meseraick veins; and from x His left, or the left
Mesenterick vein. y y z z The inward Emrod vein, which runs by the end of
the Chollick gut, under the right gut to the fundament.
The fifth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision.
a The end of the small guts, here cut asunder and bound. b The blind gut. Or
Caecum. c c c The colic gut. Or Colon. d e The right gut. Or Rectum. e Here
the Man's yard and the womb of the Woman are bound, or fastened. f The Sphincter
muscle. g The fundament with the muscles of the yard.
The sixth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision.
a b c d f The after-brain lying upward, from which the marrow is separated. a
The right part of the Corthel, or after-brain b The left part of the
after-brain. c d The middle of the after-brain. e e Portions of the
after-brain, unto which the marrow alike grows. f The sinck of the
after-brain, which with the sinus of the marrow make the fourth ventricle.
The seventh Table, or Facio; in the third Vision.
a The brain. b The risings of the brain, or swelling. c The after-brain. d The
marrow cut asunder, where it begins to fall into the rack-bones, and is
called Spinal. e The Mammillary processes serving the sense of smelling. f g
The optic nerves or first pair of nerves. g The coat in which this nerve is
dilated. h The two pair of mo^vers of the Eyes. i k l m * The third pair or the
lesser root of the third pair. k A propogation of the third pair serving the
skin and muscles. l Another propogation in the upper jaw. m Another propogation
spending it self into-the temporal muscle. n Another propogation to the coat of
the nostrils. o i The fourth pair or the lesser root of the third pair. p A
propogation of this somewhat written. q A propogation of the same to the gums,
and another to the upper teeth. r Another to the under jaw whose circles reach
unto the teeth. s s The spending of the nerves of the fourth pair into the
coats of the tongue and pallat. t u The fifth pair or the auditory nerve. 1 2 3
Branches of the fifth pair. 1 Attaining the face, may here rightly be taken for
the eight pair. 2 The second upper branch joining with the first nerve. 3 The
third lower branch joining with the first nerve.
x The sixth pair of nerves; here a propogation of the seventh pair, (which
attaineth the upper part of the throttle) cut asunder. y y The progress of the
sixth and seventh nerve. z The branch of the sixth pair unto the neck. a A
branch from the seventh pair unto the chops. b The seventh pair of nerves c The
union of the sixth and seventh pair. d A branch of the sixth pair to the
throttle. e The bifurcation of the same nerve. e f l The inward branch
attaining the rack-bones. g The upper branch to the collar bones and breast
bone. g g Branches beneath to the coat of the lungs. h Little branches of the
right nerve, which make the recurrent. i The left recurrent nerve. k k The
stomach nerves. m m m The distribution of the sixth nerve through the lower
belly and all therein contained.
The eight Table, or Facio, in the third Vision.
The former wormy process.
The ninth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision.
The hinder wormy process.
The tenth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision.
A The backside of the stomach toward the back. a The gullet or orifice of the
gullet in the chops. a c d The length of the gullet or Aesophage. b b The
tonsils, or glandules, or the sides of the gullet. c The glandulous body at the
fifth rack-bone. d The right or upper orifice of the stomach, where the gullet
is inserted or connected. ee Nerves from the sixth pair unto the stomach. f The
left or second orifice of the stomach, called Pilorus. g The gut, called
Duodenum. h The passage of the bladder of gall into the Duodenum. i i i i The
vessels of the stomach cut asunder. k k m m The inmost coat of the stomach. l
The middle-most coat of the stomach, torn off. B e e The cavity of the stomach.
a a A round swelling of the right orifice. b b The inside of the Duodenum. c
The left orifice, or Pilorus. d d A round swelling of the Pilorus his circle.
The eleventh Table, or Facio; of the third Vision.
a A portion of the hollow vein whence arises the Azigos. b g g The vein
Non-paril, or Azigos. c A devision of the branch Azigos unto the seventh and
eighth rib. d d The right intercostall veins. of The left intercostal veins.
The twelfth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision.
a a a Part of the skul covered with the thick membrane. b b Portions of the
optic nerves. c c The sleepy arteries. d The basin hanging downwards. e The
phlegmatic glandule. f Portions of the second pair of nerves.
The thirteenth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision.
* A portion of the guts cut out near the blind gut and laid open, where may be
seen the floodgates hindering the return of the excrements into the smaler guts.
The fourteenth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision.
a The descending trunck of the hollow vein. b The descending trunck of the
great artery. c A branch from the spermaticks to the rain of the belly. d The
emulgent vein and artery. e The bladder opened f The reins. g The ureters. h
The trumpet or leading vessel of the seed. i The vessels to the trumpet from
the spermaticks. k The division of the vein and artery into illiack branches.
l Vessels from the spermaticks creeping by the bottom and neck of the womb. m
The womb. n The right spermatick vein out of the trunck of the hollow vein. o
The left spermatick vein out of the kidney vein. p p The spermarick arteries. q
The contiguity of the spermatick veins, and arteries, in which agreement they
slide in to the purse of the testicles by the production of the rim of the
belly r The neck of the womb. s The lower vessels of the womb embracing the
neck of the same t t The testicles or stones. u u The ligament or ty, called
Cremasteres. x The privities.
The fifteenth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision. Shows the Ventricles of
the Heart divided in their length.
a The descending trunck of the great artery. b The Axillary artery. c The
ascending trunck of the grert artery. d The venal artery. e The hollow vein.
f i The right ventricle of the heart. h The left ventricle of the heart. g g g
The fleshy substance of the heart dissected.
The sixteenth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision. Shows the Heart laid
open by the venal Artery of the left Ventricle.
a The great artery resected. b The arterial vein resected, c c The orifice of
the arterial vein opened. d The left ear of the heart inverted. ee The two
floodgates of the venal artery. f The outward substance of the heart shuting
the ventricle. g g Certain filaments growing as well to the heart, as to the
valves, and marked with 1. h The wall or partition betwixt the ventricles. k
The point of the heart, called the (...) and Mucr^.
The seventeenth Table, or Facio; in the third Vision. Shows the Heart opened
by the right Ventricle and hollow Vein.
a b f The hollow vein. b c d e The hollow vein opened. b The place where the
hollow vein gapeth into the right ventricle of the heart. c A circle benching
out in the orifice of the hollow vein. d The orifice of the descending trunck
of the hollow vein. e The orifice of the ascending trunck of the hollow vein. g
h Two valves of the hollow vein, but the third on the side is not here
discovered. i Certain fleshy portions unto which grots. k k The filaments of
the floodgates or valves. l The point of the heart, or Apex cordis.
FINIS.
anatomical diagram Visio Tertia
Dies nostri quasi. vmbra super terram, and nulla est mora i Paralip: Cap: 29.
v: 15 Vt Phoenix uiunt comoushis: sic and HOMO quifumi instar. Cinis.




