THE GVILTY-COVERED CLERGYMAN UNVAILED; IN A plain and candid REPLY unto Two
Bundles of Wrath and Confusion, wrapped up in One and twenty sheets of Paper.

THE ONE Written by Christopher Fowler and Simon Ford of Reading; The other by
William Thomas of Ubley in Somersetshire.

Wherein all their malicious Slanders and false Accusations, which they cast
upon the Truth, are clean washed off; Their weapons with which they war against
the Lamb, broken over their own heads; and they, with the rest of the
Tyth-exacting Teachers, proved to be the great Incendaries, and Mis-leaders of
these Nations.

In which also there is made a brief and sober Application, to the Magistrates,
and other Inhabitants, within the City of Bristol.

By THOMAS SPEED, a Friend to all that tremble at the Word of the Lord; But an
irreconcilable Enemy to the mysterious Deceit, and monstrous Hypocrisy of
those that do Teach for Hire, and Divine for Money.

Jer. 10.21. The Pastors are become BRVTISH, and have not sought the Lord,
therefore they shall not prosper, and all their Flock shall be SCATTERED.
Sense. Tragoed. Sequitur superbos ulter a tergo Deus. Juven. Sat. 6. --
nihilest audacius illis
Deprensis, iram atque animos a Crimine sumunt.
LONDON Printed for Giles Calvert at the black Spread-Eagle at the west end of
Paul's 16^^

To the Parliament of England now assembled at Westminster.
SIRS,
ALthough I dare not give you flattering Titles, with the pen of a Sycophant;
yet I can truly say that I love you (as you abide in the fear of the Lord) with
the heart of a plain-dealing friend. Job. 32.22.
Its recorded in the Scriptures of truth, that imperious Haman (flushed with
his advance to his short-lived honor) did strenuously endeavor to have cut off
the necks of thousands of innocent Jews, upon Mordecaies stiff knee: The
murderous design being laid, the subtle old serpent that ruled in this man of
blood, was not to seek of an expedient to bring it into execution. Let but the
Kings approbation and Decree be obtained, and then this proud Courtier makes
sure, of satisfying that lust upon the Jews throats, which he could by no means
effect upon Mordecaies knee. To this end Ahasuerus his ears must be filled with
suggestions, as full of falsehood as malice. These harmles people are
slanderously represented to him, to be very evil members of his body politic;
Est. 3.8
both by reason of the diversity of their Laws from all other people, and also
their disobedience to the Kings Laws. And therefore it could not well consist
with the Kings profit, to indulge to such a heterodox generation (within any of
his Provinces) the benefit of breathing in the common air.

Although Haman be dead, yet that foul spirit by which he was acted, survived
him throughout all generations, unto this very day: When Christ the Sun of
righteousness, began to rise in the brightness of his glory, and so out shine
the faint glory of all the Jewish Rites, Worships, Services; the Rulers, Mat.
26.4.
Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and the people also (by the Chief-Priests
persuasion) conspire his death. The life appears, but the letter would
destroy it; the power is brought forth, but the form stands ready to devour
it. But Christ is innocent, 1 Pet. 2.22.
there being no guile found in his mouth. And therefore since he cannot be
impeached (as an evil doer) for matter of fact, he must for matter of Opinion,
Judgment, Principles. Although he has done no evil (being in his conversation
holy, Heb. 7.26. Mat. 26, 61.
harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners) yet it is by them presumed
that he thinks evil, because they judge him to have spoken evil, viz.
dangerous words about their Temple, Verse. 65.
nay blasphemous words against God; and therefore (by the consent of
Priest-ridden Pilat) he is hurried to the cross to suffer as a Deceiver.
Eccles. 1.9.


Is there any new thing under the Sun? Is not the same spirit of pride, and
persecution (clothed in the garb of seeming zeal) found walking openly in the
streets of our Cities, Towns, and Villages at this day? Are not the innocent
(now as of old) traduced to you both by Press and Pulpit, under the notions of
Quakers, Heretics, Blasphemers, and Deceivers? And where malice cannot reach
them as transgressors of the Civil Law (being thereunto obedient for conscience
sake) are they not (with Daniel) ensnared concerning the law of their God? Dan.
6.5.
Have not the impetuous instigations of the Pulpit of late, had that
destructive influence upon many in authority, that (contrary to the righteous
law of this Nation) it has been made matter of crime unto many peaceably to
travel upon the high ways? Nay have not several persons, One and twenty in a
few days taken up by armed guards and sent to Exon Goal, of which one died
there.
that have been constantly faithful to the States interest, been violently
surprised, as they were traveling about their lawful occasions, and cast into
bonds, among Rogues, and Felons, for no other transgression but this, that they
did own but the name, or the person, of one that is called a Quaker? An unheard
of inrode upon the liberties of English men; and a practice rarely to be
paralleled in the times of the forest persecutions that history makes mention
of;

It Is storied of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, Eusebius. Hist.
a Roman Emperor, that (in the time of the fourth persecution of the
Christians) being reduced to a great exigent, both because he and his Army were
straightly environed by their enemies in the midst of Germany, and had also
wanted fresh water for the space of five days. And having called (but in vain)
upon his Country Gods for relief, he sends for a number of Christians;
against whom (at their first approach) he was not a little enraged, for that
they came (says Antoninus himself) without either Weapon, Munition, Armor, or
Trumpets, as men abhorring such preparation, and furniture, but only satisfied
in trust of their God, whom they carry about with them in their CONSCIENCES.
These, falling prostrate upon the ground, prayed to a God (says he) UNKNOWN of
me; upon which there fell pleasant showers upon Antoninus his host, but a storm
of hail mixed with much lightning, upon the host of his enemies; by which means
it came to pass, that he, and his, were refreshed, and his adversaries
discomfited. Whereupon he writes an express to the Senate and people of Rome,
in these words; If any shall apprehend one that is a Christian, only for that
cause, I will that he being apprehended, may without punishment have leave to
confess the same, so that there be none other cause objected against him, but
that he is a Christian; but let his accuser be burned alive.

I write not this (the Lord is my witness) as desiring fire from heaven, upon
those that thirst after mine own, and the blood of thousands in this Nation,
because we cannot worship the image, which they would set up; but only to mind
you, that, even among the heathens, it was deemed unreasonable, that, where
men's conversations were otherwise honest (being compared with the just laws of
men) they should notwithstanding suffer for what they did believe, and
practice, concerning the law of their God. Nor is it my design to blunt the
edge of the sword against the transgressor. The righteous law was made for the
unrighteous person, 1 Timothy 1.9.
and upon him does the stroke thereof justly fall. Whilst your sword is born
against the evil doer, its the sword of the Lord: But beware of turning the
edge thereof against the innocent; for then its no longer the sword of God, but
the executioner of your own lusts.

I do well know how passionatly ye are invocated (by those that long to be in
the Chair) to enact Laws to establish Church Government (as they call it) and
punish Heretics; that is, in plain English, to make every Parish Teacher a
Bishop, to give Laws to yours and other men's consciences. Neither am I ignorant
with what longing expectation, many that call themselves Ministers of Christ
(though none of his Ministers ever persecuted any man) do wait to receive
Commission from you, to exercise the matchless cruelty of that villainous
Tyrant, in stretching all that are too short to the just length of their bed,
and cutting all those shorter who in length do exceed it. But however they may
incessantly urge you (pretending a vision from the Lord) to establish laws to
bind the conscience; yet know, that it is Christ's prerogative to give laws to
that; and you will be in his esteem but Usurpers, whilst you undertake to rule
there, O. P. In his Speech to the Parl. in the painted Chamber. Sept. 12. 1654.
where he is of right sole King, and Law giver. He spoke truth, who said, That
liberty of conscience is a NATURAL right. So that he that makes an
intrenchment upon that, does (what in him lies) bereave me of my birth right.

Sirs, Deceive not your selves, nor let the lips of any false Prophet deceive
you; Page 30.
for I say plainly to you (and you shall one day witness what I say to be true)
that it will neither be for your honor, or your peace in the great day of your
account, that any Act shall be found enrolled among the Laws of your
establishing, whereby the holy one of Israel has been sought to be limited
Which of you can mean sure the waters of the great deep in the hollow of his
hand? Isa. 40.12, 13.
or mete out heaven with his span, or comprehend the dust of the earth in a
measure, or weigh the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? Or
which of you has at any time directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his
counselor has taught him? O how then is it, that you should but once think to
pale and limit (within the scant circumference of man's cloudy reason) that
Sovereign WIND, which blows when, and where, and how it lists? Genesis 17.14.
There is a time when circumcision is commanded upon pain of death; there is a
season when the same thing makes Christ unprofitable to the user. Gal. 5.2.
There is a time when swearing by the name of the Lord is commanded; Deuteronomy. 6.13.
and there is a time when the great Lawgiver (whom under penalty of being
destroyed we are commanded to hear) cuteth off all exceptions, and says swear
not at all. Act. 3.23. Matthew. 5.34. (...) "OLOS.
Take heed of forbidding where Christ commands, and of commanding where he
forbids. In the counsel of the Lord stand, and you will find direction near
you. The hand of grace does hold the candle of the Lord (a measure of the light
of Christ which you have received) in all your Consciences; Joh. 8.12.
being guided by which, you will be safely led on to enact laws (according to
that Royal law written in the heart) for God, and not against him. At this
Oracle, the spiritual light of Christ (so despised by the wise among men) you
may take counsel in your greatest streights, and find certain resolution. You
shall neither stagger nor err, for its conduct is in the sure and clean paths
of peace, not contrary, but according to the Scriptures of truth, which were
given forth by the holy men of God, who dwelt in the same light of Jesus. Take
heed of acting that thing for which the witness of God in your consciences do
condemn you; for if that condemn you, God is greater then the conscience.
Finally, Remember that whilst you abide faithful with the Lord, he will be with
you, but if you forsake him, 1 Chronicles. 28 9. Isa. 59.10.
he will forsake you; and then you will be left to grope as in the dark at noon
day, and stagger in your counsels as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit. And
know, Isa. 19.14.
that as all powers in this nation have stood firm, whilst they stood for God
so it has been, and will be, the certain forerunner of their sudden ruin,
when once they begin to clash, or contend, with the Lord, or his people. The
Lord God Almighty be your sun and your shield.

I am Yours in the love and service of the Lamb against the Dragon. THOMAS
SPEED.

To the honest Reader.
READER,
I Have now (through the crowd of my other necessary employments) brought forth
this ensuing Reply, to Two large and fiery Pamphlets, both written in Answer to
a short Epistle, directed to the public Teachers of this Nation. The after
part of one of which, written by Christopher Fowler and Simon Ford, concerns
not the said Epistle, but the Book to which it was prefixed, and therefore to
that I have not now made my Reply, In the Epistle to his Reader.
being threatened with a sudden Answer to the whole Book by William Thomas, and
then I shall Reply upon them both together. Or in case of William Thomas his
silence, I shall then undertake them singly; nothing doubting but that in the
strength of truth, by the power of the Lord, I shall be made able to repel all
the furious assaults which they therein make, upon the Lamb's followers. In the
mean while, having once cast thine eye upon this ensuing Reply, be at the
expense of so much pains as to read it through; lest by a cursory or partial
view thereof, thou should wrong me or mine Adversaries. Whilst thou art
reading shut prejudice out of doors, and set singleness, and sobriety, as
Watchmen at the doorposts of thy heart, to keep it out; so will thou be kept
from passing rash or unrighteous judgment upon the truth, or me. The God of
Wisdom give thee understanding in all things. Farewell.

THOMAS SPEED.

THE Guilty-covered Clergyman Vnvail'd, In a Reply to two Pamphlets, The One,
Written by Christopher Fowler, and Simon Ford of Redding. The Other, By William
Thomas of Ubley in Somersetshire.
Christopher Fowler, and Simon Ford,
UPon the sixteenth day of the month past (called July) I received (by the
hands of a Friend) a Pamphlet with a scoffing inscription written upon it,
subscribed with both your hands, and directed to my self, which I have perused,
and seriously weighed, and do find it to be a monstrous birth, begotten by the
Prince of darkness, conceived in the womb of your own guilt, and brought forth
by the vigorous assistance of that great Red Dragon, Rev. 12.4, 5.
which stood before the Woman ready to be delivered, to devour her man child,
as soon as it was born.

Since which time, I have met with another heap of anger, and confusion, come
forth under the name of WILLIAM THOMAS of Vbley; a piece which is found having
on it, the same stamp of enmity with yours, only with this difference, that
whereas you have subtly couche, and covered your malice under the deceitful
paint of smooth words, he has thrown out his scorn, and disdain, both against
the truth, and mine own person, under a thinner covering, in the view of all
men.

To both these Pamphlets, I shall now apply my self in a way of Reply; not
thereby to gratify either of your wills, or lusts, nor to vindicate my self,
who could (the Lord is my witness) gladly sit down in silence, wearing your
reproaches as a crown upon my head, and (through the power of his grace who
has saved me) esteem it my honor, not only to suffer affliction, but to die,
(bearing testimony against their wickedness) under the merciless hands of your
bloody generation. But for the truths sake which you so profanely trample
upon, and for the innocents sake whose blood you so eagerly thirst after, and
for the simples sake whom you so miserably delude, I may not keep silence. But
before I speak either to the Title or the Contents of either of your Papers, I
shall premise these five things.

1. In my Reply, I shall principally direct my Speech to you two, yet so as
that I shall in passing on take notice, of what ever William Thomas has spoken
Which is but very little.
worthy of an Answer. Who in his Epistle directed to the Reader, and prefixed
to his Pamphlet, declares his resolutions to have no further to do with me;
although in his following Book there be scarce a Page, in which he does not
mention me with scorn and contempt.
A rare demonstration of his truth and ingenuity! to throw as many stones at me
as the hand of his rage could well lay hold on, having but just before told his
Reader, that he would have no more to do with me. 2 Take notice, that I shall
not make it my business to trace you in every unsavory and impertinent
expression throughout your Books. I esteem my time more precious, then to
squander it away in raking into all that mire and dirt, that is closed up in
those one and twenty sheets of paper; However you may esteem of time, who live
by the sweat of other men's brows, eating the fat, and drinking the sweet; with
me, I must let you know, it is more precious then plenty. 3 What ever of dung or
filth, you have cast on the truth or my self, I shall quietly wipe off, not
lifting it back again upon your own faces, but let it fall into the Channel,
whence you may perhaps spend your spare hours to take it again, to bespatter
the innocent with in you next. 4 Whether it may prove an irritation, or an
allay to your fury, I am not solicitous, but from me you may not expect
flattering language: As the Scripture does, so shall I study to give every
thing its true denomination, by calling a lie, deceit, hypocrifie, by their
proper names; which I prefume you will judge railing, but I (according to the
Scripture) plainness. 5 Whereas throughout that Epistle (which sticks so sorely
as an arrow in your guilty breasts) I did speak to those of your Function under
the name of Teachers, waving that of Priests, being willing to cut off every
shadow of a just exception, now I shall occasionally make use thereof, in this
my following Reply, and that for these two Reasons.
First, Because your selves do own the name, and do call your selves and your
Brethren thereby in page 13. at the close of the 12 Section of your Book: So
that you cannot rationally take it ill that I give you what you take to your
selves.

Secondly, Because you lay confident claim to their maintenance (viz.) Tithes,
which the Ministers of the Gospel, sent out by Jesus never claimed; and
therefore it is but reasonable, that a distinction should be kept betwixt you
and them, as well in your names as practices.

These things being premised, I shall pass on to your Books. To both which, I
must justly charge you with prefixing lying Titles: You say, A sober Answer to
an angry Epistle; whereas neither was my Epistle angry, nor your Answer sober;
as all that live in lobriety will (upon perusal of both) truly judge. You had
showed some honesty in speaking truth, if you had (vice versa) said, An angry
Answer to a sober Epistle. William Thomas is more notorious in his --
transgressing the limits both of truth and honesty, calling his bundle of
ignorance and passion, by the name of Railing rebuked: A swelling Title,
thinking thereby to beget his reader into a belief, that he had to do with some
monster of a man.

What a furious piece is a guilty Priest when his sore is rubbed? Let truth hit
him but upon the seat of his guilt, and you rouse a Lion from his sleep. In
what a strange Region of flattery, and filthy complements, do those men breath,
with whom truth in plainness of speech, is railing, and the express language of
the Scripture, reviling?

You proceed in your Title page to charge me with revolting from being a
public Teacher, to merchandise. To which I reply, that the understanding
Reader may easily conclude, how far your Book is from being a sober Answer,
when as you have the confidence to prefix so egregious a lie in the very front
of it. For that those that know my manner of life can testify, that for many
years together, whilst I was a Public teacher (as you style me) I did
merchandise; and therefore did not revolt from the one to the other. That I am
still a Merchant is true, in which calling I esteem it my duty to abide
faithful, not making my self burthensom unto others, as your troublesome
generation are to the whole Nation at this day. So far am I from esteeming the
name of a Merchant, a term of reproach to me, that I do in heart prefer one
honest Merchant, before a legion of Tithe-exacting Priests; and must withal
tell you, that, did the Commonwealth reap no greater yeatly advantage from the
industrious Merchant, then it does from the devouring Priests, they that sit at
Helm might at each years end, write down their names, in the books of their
greatest accounts, in worthless Ciphers.

You charge me further, with using Jesuitical equivocations, etc.

Rep. This is a stone that every sorry thing in black (to use your own
expression) has to cast in his face, who has so much honesty and courage, as
to bear testimony against the wickedness of your Pharisaicall generation. If
any man does appear with strength of truth and plainness, to decry the deceit
and unrighteousness of teachers and people; every ignorant Priest is presently
crying out a Jesuit, a Jesuit, thinking by that brand of reproach, to render
those just accusations that are brought against them, less credible in the
judgments of the simple. But do not decieve your selves, in thinking that I
shall be scared from discovering your uncleanness, by your great words, I am as
irreconcilable an Antagonist, to the Antichristian principles, and practices,
found among the Jesuits, as I am to the same found among you; from declaring
against which, I shall never be dissuaded by either bribe or fear.

The rest of your scorns, and unsavory scoffs in your Title page, I pass over,
as being unwilling to defile my thoughts, or my pen, with such filthy rubbish.
I now pass to both your Epistles.

And first, I cannot but take notice how you walk in the old path of begging
Patronage to your deformed Pamphlet. Christ. Fowler and Simon Ford 's Epistle
to Col. Sydenham, examined.
You have some mire and dirt to throw upon the innocent, out of the raging Sea
of your inward guilt, and what then? that you may act your design with the more
authority, you must crouch and cringe to Col. Sydenham, and tell him that you
are his Honors affectionate Servants, that under his shelter (as you phrase it)
you might shoot out the bitter arrows of lies and slanders (with which your
Epistle and Book do abound) with the greater hope of credit, among those that
live in the same spirit of wickedness with your selves. Had you writ naught but
truth, that would not have needed the shadow of any man's wing for its shelter,
and patronage. I once knew Colonel Sydenham dwelling in a spirit of prudence,
and moderation, in which if he yet abides, and be not Priest-ridden into
passion, and prejudice against the truth (which I should be sorry to
understand) I doubt not but he does discern and loath that spirit of fawning
and flattery upon which you offered up to him that polluted sacrifice of an
Epistle.

You begin it with a high (but a lying) Accusation charging me with Apostasy to
damnable doctrines; To which I say, That he that says that of me which he
neither does, nor can prove, is a liar; and such do I charge you Two to be, who
have most maliciously dealt with me both in this Epistle and the Pamphlet, as
your Predecessors (the Roman bloodsuckers) did with the poor innocent
Christians in those days, viz. cloth them with the skins of some ugly
creature, and then cast them to the wild beast to be devoured. But I doubt not,
but that I shall (before you and I part) give the sober Reader a true
representation of such Doctrines and Practices, of yours and your Brethrens, as
will make his ears to tingle.

You tell Colonel Sydenham that in my Epistle I challenged all the public
Teachers in the Nation, and you in particular.

Rep. Now whether this be true or like the former, Col. Sydenham, and all
honest readers may determine, upon perusal of my Epistle, in which there is not
a word of any challenge, or any thing like it: But how does it appear that I
did challenge you? your proof is because (you say) I sent you each a Book by
name. To which I shall only say, That the person that delivered you a book
from me, utterly mistook me. For why I should particularly direct a book to
either of you, whose faces (to my knowledge) I never saw, nor ever exchanged
word with you, let the reader judge. This is the pretended ground of your
undertaking; but I rather judge the real rise to be, from a mixture of your
guilt and ambition, that you might at once give the world a proof of your
abilities, both in painting and sophistry. But your coverings are too short,
and to the most weak-fighted of the children of light, is your nakedness
manifest.

The next thing you suggest to Colonel Sydenham, as a motive to your
undertaking, is, that you dared not to betray the truth, and the glory of the
Lord Jesus, nor the precious souls of the people.

Rep. Did not your hypocrisy stare in your faces, when you were penning these
fained motives? Are you not known to live in a professed enmity to the truth of
Christ, appearing in his Saints, and yet pretend a zeal for it? Are not your
conversations a stain to the very profession of hi^ ^^me, by living in pride,
covetousness, by your persecution, nay (what in you lies) drawing his blood in
his innocent Lambs; and yet you tender of his glory? Besides, how can you
absolve your selves from being betrayers of precious soul, who cry peace,
peace, where the Lord has spoken no peace; Jer. 6.14.
and do slay the souls that should not die, who do reach for doctrine, Ezekiel. 13
19.
the traditions of men, drawing poor souls from their true guide, to listen to
your corrupt dreams and divinations, and keeping them fast in the snares of
Satan, do lead them down hood winck'd into the chambers of death.

I shall pass from yours to William Thomas his Epistle, Will. Thomas his
Epistle to his friends. etc. in and about the City of Bristol scanned.
in which he makes a great cry, to little purpose. He directs it to his well
beloved Friends and Neighbors, in and about the City of Bristol, those in
particular of his own charge, and in special those that have sadly, and
dangerously declined from the Scripture path.

Rep. I will not quarrel at the sense or rather the -- of this inscription. I
shall speak to the thing intended. It seems that William Thomas has those of
his own charge, that have sadly, and dangerously declined from the Scripture
path. And do they not therein demonstrate themselves, to be teachable
Disciples, in following their Pastors practice? Sure I am, he is far wide from
the Scripture-path, both in his principles and practice; and if you call to him
for Scripture, to prove what he says, or does (as I have sufficiently done)
he will give you one of his own meanings, or wild deductions instead of
Scripture; which if you refuse to accept, then an outcry is presently made,
here is one that denies Scripture, an Heretic, an Heretic.

He tells his friends in Bristol (among many other notorious untruths) that I
will needs be his adversary.

Reply As if (from a busy mind) I had been the beginner of the present
contest betwixt us. Will. Thomas the beginner of the present Contest.
Whereas I was quietly abiding in my calling not designing to write, or print,
any thing to him, or touching him. Neither can I say, but that I might have
gone to my grave in silence, without writing or printing ought that related to
him, or his vexatious generation; but that he first began with me by writing,
to which I returned him a plain and sober Answe, upon which he reported things
(...) touching me that were (as formerly I have said) both false and
scandalous, which reflected much upon the truth, and others that were innocent.
The knowledge of which necessitated me to put pen to Paper, and prepare that
for the Press, which otherwise might never have come to public view. And now
that I am engaged, I am resolved in the strength of the Lord, never to desist
(while I have a tongue to speak or a hand to write) from discovering the
monstrous wickedness, of the Romish Whore, decked with a glorious profession.
And when ever it be, that by the hand of violence my mouth shall be either
stopped, or my Pen obstructed, I shall then esteem it my mercy from the Lord,
to be made able and willing, to offer my life unto death, bearing witness
against all the abominations of that blood-thirsty company of false Prophets,
who in cruelty and oppression both upon the bodies and consciences, of Christ's
righteous servants, have exceedingly outdone their Fathers the Bishops, and
the generation of evill-doers that have gone before them.

William Thomas farther tells his friends that his Adversary (meaning my
self) has his abode in Bristol, where many of the same apostatizing, and
erroneous way with himself, are entertained and countenanced, which he cannot
but present as matter of deep humiliation to that City.

Rep. A charge like to that of his brethrens of Redding; but (as to Error and
Apostasy) not the shadow of truth in it. Reader, let William Thomas appear,
(and I shall be free to meet him) before any that are sober in public, or
private in that City, and by the Scriptures of truth, let me be proved the
Apostate, or he the Lier. But why is it matter of Religion is the pretense, but
domination is the thing intended.
humiliation that I have my abode in Bristol, and have with others
entertainment and countenance? May not Thomas Speed and other peaceable
Citizens abide in their proper habitations in Bristol, as well as William
Thomas in that which is none of his at Vbley? What would this angry man have?
does he desire our throats should be cut, or our persons exiled, because we
dare not profess Subjection to the imperious dictates of every Lordly Priest?
Is it matter of humiliation that we have the privilege to breath in the common
air?

Has he and his brethren been pulling, and preaching down Bishops, and
Tyrants, and praying and fighting for liberty of Conscience, these fourteen
year past? and is it now become matter of humiliation, that they that are more
deserving then themselves (because more faithful to the Commonwealth) should
have the liberty of a quiet abode, among men, and that just countenance which
the laws of the Nation do afford to all free born Englishmen? To what height is
this proud Priestly spirit ascending, which has not elbowroom enough
throughout the Nation, unless it can justle all others (that in Conscience do
dissent) out of the land of their nativity? Reader, mind what I shall say, and
remember that I told thee of it before hand, that black and cloudy will that
day be (and especially to many professors, who now sit and laugh at others
sufferings) when as that hellish Synodical principle, shall be reduced into
practice (viz.) if any will not conform, let them choose to themselves either
bonds, or banishment.

He proceeds in his anger, calling my Book an ugly monster brought to Bristol
Fair. To which I reply, that it was so in part is confessed, for that which it
contained of his untruths, slanders, and contradictions, made it such. Ay, but
it was brought to Bristol Fait.

Reply. This is matter of great discontent to him: The folly and filthiness of
the priests must not be brought to too public view. Do but honor them before
the people, giving them the cap and the knee in the marketplace, and you may
call them by their proper names in private. But was not William Thomas his
Misshapen Birth (to which I am now making my Reply) brought first to be showed
at Bristol Fair? and has not Thomas Speed, as much right to have a just
vindication of the truth and himself, brought to that Fair, as William Thomas
has for his heap of wrath and slanders (to say no more) to be first brought to
the same place? Reader, when ever thou do meet with any Priest, that has but
so much ingenuity, as to give the same liberty he would have (for with one so
qualified, I could never yet meet) I desire to hear of him, assuring thee that
I shall highly esteem of him, as far as he abides faithful in the practice of
that principle.

There are two sorts of persons, to whom this poor enraged man addresseth
himself in his Epistle, which is made up of gross untruths slanders, clinches,
causes, considerations, remedies, means, and such other Babilonish stuff, as
his usual preachments are compounded of.

The first sort are such, who (as he expresses it) have held fast those things
which they have received, Who they are that the Priests do esteem to stand firm.
and heard from their teachers, etc. These he calls in the precedent lines
(in the third page of his Epistle) such as have stood firm. The English of
which I shall give the Reader in these following particulars.

1. They in the estimation of these men do stand firm, who can worship and
adore them in all companies where they come, as great Scholars, able Divines,
and such at whose lips they are to seek counsel. 2. They that can esteem what
ever their teachers do Magisterially dictate to them, as the Oracles of God;
not presuming to deviate therefrom, under the penalty of being reckoned among
the despisers of Gods messengers. 3. They that stand ready to become
executioners of the Priests wrath, upon all those as Heretics, whom they
condemn for such in their pulpits. 4. He that can spend the first day of the
week, devoutly listening to his Minister, crying out of pride, covetousness,
malice, etc. and yet (finding him guilty of some or all the same crimes in his
practice, the whole week following) can notwithstanding before others that
condemn him, endeavor to cover over his wickedness with the vail of humane
infirmity, alleging on his behalf, that the purest gold must have allowance of
some grains, and that he is a very precious able Minister, albeit that he be
attended with many (gross) failings; such a man stands firm in their
accounts. 5. He that can drudge, and toil, and sweat, the whole year about,
making more conscience of paying the tenths of all his labors to the Priests,
then he does of avoiding open profaneness, not daring to reserve to himself a
sheaf, or a lamb, or an egg, or a Pig, or a Goose, to which his Minister lays
claim, under the penalty of being condemned for one that does sacrilegiously
rob his God. 6 In brief, they that have miserably ^esigned up themselves to the
deceitful guidance of their Priests, to see with their eyes, hear with their
ears, and walk with their feet, blessing where they bless, and cursing where
they curse, these are those poor deluded hearts, which in the esteem of William
Thomas and his brethren, do stand firm, and do hold fast those things which
they have received from their Teachers.
The second sort of persons, to whom he addresseth himself in his Epistle, are
such as are revolted, and as he expresses it in the next page) are Godless,
without a teaching Priest, and without a law.

The reproachful appellations of Revolter and Apostate, are (as I have said
before) stones that every Idol-Shepheard has ready to cast in the face of him,
who durst refuse subjection to their corrupt wills; What revolting is in the
esteem of the Priests.
but whom they do particularly intend (when they so speak) the Reader may
understand from what follows, viz.

1 Such as have long lived under the deceitful, and comfortless teaching of
their blind guides, do at length (through the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness within them) come to discern, and deny all their false,
hypocritical ways and worships; these are in their esteem Back-sliders,
Revolters, and Apostates. 2 Such as disown all those for Ministers of Christ,
who say and do not, bearing testimony against all Preachers and Professors who
(glorying in the form) are strangers to the life and power of godliness. 3 Such
as (knowing they must believe for themselves, because die for themselves, and
account to the Lord for themselves) do refuse to own the dumb hirelings, as
Dictators to their faith, Lords over their consciences, or guids to their
precious and immortal souls. 4 Such who finding them that call themselves
Christ's Ministers, to be out of Christ's Doctrine, builders of Babylon, and
enemies to Christ's cross, dare not put into their mouths, nor feed them with
the Tenth of all their increase: 5 If any Magistrate there be who has been
fierce, and furious in executing the Priests decrees against the innocent, but
does at last return to himself and consider, that he has to do only with the
regulating of the outward man, but Christ only is to sit, and rule in the
Throne of Conscience, and give laws to she inward man, and thereupon does
forbear to entrench upon Christ's Prerogative, by persecuting any man for
conscience sake; refusing to hang and draw, where the Priests do pronounce
sentence of condemnation, I say such a Magistrate shall soon have a troop of
Priests about his ears, crying out a Revolter, an Apostate, an Apostate. Their
Feasting houses, and their Pulpits, shall ring of this repenting man, as if he
were a person rejected of God, and to be despised by men. 6 Take a man that
lives in the vanity, and sinful customs, and perhaps the profaneness of the
world, if he can but cry up the Priests, and decry those that deny them, if he
can but feed them and feast them, and admire them as able Divines; such a man
shall be blessed by them as an Orthodox, and a firm standing Christian; but if
the same person (by the shining of the glorious light of Christ in his heart)
come to deny the folly, and filthiness of his former conversation, and to
witness redemption from the vanities, and sinful customs, of this present evil
world, and thereupon does bear testimony against the same unrighteousness,
found among those Teachers that formerly had him in esteem, presently he is
branded with revolting and apostasy, as one given over to deceit, and strong
delusion.
Now if after all this, this very man (so changed) can be but prevailed with,
rindx;
by the subtilty of Satan, and the wiles of the Priests, to return to his
former vomit, and wallow in the mire he once lay in, crying out he was deceived
and deluded, subjecting himself again to the guidance and government of his
former Teachers, he shall presently be cried up to be a raised and a recovered
man; though indeed, he be only become^ seven fold more the child of Satan,
then he was in his first condition. These things I write not upon hearsay, but
upon certain knowledge, grounded upon strict and serious observation; and who
so are not blinded, with passion and prejudice against the truth, or do not
shut their eyes at noon day, may see sad and frequent demonstrations of the
truth of what I have now written, before their faces.

What tender heart is there that does not lament to hear the Teachers of this
Nation, generally crying out to their congregations, which oftentimes do
consist of proud men, covetous men, malicious men; nay, drunkards, swearers and
profane men, charging them to take heed that they be not seduced and deceived
by Heretics. Whereas, what have such poor hearts to be deceived of but their
iniquities? And who are those Heretics they must beware of, but such as (in
love to their precious souls) would be instrumental to pull them out of their
sins, and abominations, and pluck them from out of the snares, in the which
they are held captive, by the lying visions, and the strong delusions, of their
Idolshepheards? Thus much touching the two sorts of persons to whom this
Epistle is directed.

As to the matter of it, it is principally made up of malice, and slanders,
partly out of his own creating, and partly of such as he has borrowed from
others, that are of his confederacy, and live in the same spirit of violence
and bitterness with himself. With which is intermixed his grave pastoral
advice, to his Friends and neighbors in and about the City of Bristol to stand
firm; that is in plain English, to continue in darkness, passing away their few
days in a pleasing dream of happiness, admiring their Teachers, putting into
their mouths, receiving what drops from their lips for divine Oracles, and in
the close to bid defiance, and offer all manner of injury to such as would
awaken them out of that sleep of death, into which they are rocked by those
fair-speaking destroyers of their souls.

Toward the conclusion of his tedious Sermon, preached in his Epistle, he
proposes his last means of revocation of revolted Christians (as he expresses
it) viz. that they would come again to prayer and fasting Urging this as his
motive, for that would cast out all evils and Devils.

Rep. If this be true, why then is it that all evils and Devils are not cast
out of himself, and his polluted generation of hirelings? Sure I am that he,
and many others of them, have within these twelve months past, been frequent
practitioners of that which they call fasting and prayer; and are they not out
of their own mouths condemned for notorious hypocrites, in what they did,
since so many monstrous evils and raging Devils, are yet remaining uncast out
from among them? If they had been sincere in their prayers and fastings, could
those things which should by them necessarily have been cast out, be left still
standing, and predominate. But Reader, I would further demand of William Thomas
whether he will honestly stand to what he has here asserted, without evasion
or recanting? if he will, then I must needs let him know, that he does here
preach, what in his book he does most furiously condemn, viz. perfection in
this life, for where there is no evil nor devil, left uncast out, there is
absolute perfection: He that is quit of all evil may confidently be proclaimed
clean and perfect. Thus does the burning blind zeal of guilty hearts, make men
say, and unsay; assert a thing, and contradict it; bring forth a hasty birth,
and murder it with their own hands.

I could here give the Reader at large to understand (in many particular cases)
what use these men make of their prayers, Fasting and prayer made a cloak for
iniquity.
and mock-fasts, viz, not to cast out, but to cover over evils and devils, lest
they should be too clearly discerned. I could tell him (of which I presume he
is not ignorant) where mischeivous designs have privately been carried on by
his brethren (it is well if his hands were clear) under the specious and pious
vail of fasting and prayer; and I do confidently believe, that more mischief
has bin hatched and brought forth, by that generation of men, under their
pretended religious covering of fasting and prayer, these fourteen years past,
then can be paralleled by many by past ages. I should not envy, but honor
them, would they once cease to fast for strife and debate, Isa. 58.4.
and to smite with the fist of wickedness (as at this day they do) and come to
use that fast which the Lord has chosen, viz. To loose the bands of
wickedness, Verse. 6, 7.
to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and break every
yoke, etc.

William Thomas concludes his Epistle with a supplication, That the Lord would
give a blessing to what he has written.

Rep. The Devilish intentions, and attempts, of Balaam (that covetous
hireling) to curse innocent Israel, must be covered over with the religious
vail of a Sacrifice, with the oblation of Bullocks and Rams; and Balack was not
without hope, but that God might give a blessing to such pretended religious
enterprises, Number. 22.40. and the 23.1. Verse. 27.
for the obtaining of a causeless curse upon that beloved people. But they
shall miss of their aims; for Israel shall be blessed. Can William Thomas ask
(with any hope to obtain) a blessing upon all the falsehood, slanders, and
bitter words, with which he has bespattered the innocent in the day of his
rage? Let him not deceive himself in thinking, that, although he and his
brethren in iniquity in Somersetshire, have appointed their several Mock-fasts,
sometimes in this Parish and sometimes in that (as that hypocritical Soothsayer
did the places for his sacrifices) therefore the people of their anger must
presently be accursed. For they that abide in the fear of the Lord, shall be
sure of a blessing; yea, they shall be altogether blessed.

And now that Willam Thomas has in so large an Epistle, to his Friends and
Neighbors, in and about the City of Bristol, uttered so many words, without
either Sobriety or Wisdom; I shall also dip my pen in my tears, and in a few
words unburden my oppressed spirit, to my fellow Citizens within that populous
City.

Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night, for all your unlovely struglings, and strivings against
your maker. To the Citizens of Bristol.
The Lord is my witness that my heart is pained, and my bowel; are even turned
within me, whilst I do sadly behold your strayings from the way of your own
peace. Your blind Leaders have caused you to err, by drawing your minds from
your true Leader. My hearts desire and prayer, to the Lord for you all, is,
that (returning) you might be saved, and being awakened to behold the Lord of
life, whom you have ignorantly pierced and crucified, you may come to mourn for
him, as one mourns for his only Son, and be in bitterness for him, as one
that is in bitterness for his first born.

And first, I shall speak a few words to you that are Magistrates.

SIRS,
Your temptations are many, your standing slippery, your souls are precious,
your days but few, your account great, your Judge righteous, To the Magistrates
of Bristol.
and having once set foot within the gates of eternity, there is no place left
either for repentance, or return.

Come therefore let us reason together, and, Oh, that I might prove an
effectual Remembrancer, for the advantage of your immortal souls, before you go
hence, and be no more seen.

1. Consider, that the sword is not put into your hands to wound, but to guard
tender consciences. You are Usurpers upon Christ's prerogative, not Magistrates,
whilst you undertake to be Judges there, where he sits as sole Lord, and
Lawgiver. And the blood you draw thence will have an ill savor in his
nostrils, in the day that he shall enter into judgment with you. 2. Be not
hurried on by the fierce out-crys of your clamorous Pulpits, to the execution
of your own, or others wills and lusts upon the innocent; but be ye
executioners of the righteous law upon the evil-doer. So shall you indeed give
demonstration that you bear the sword for the Lord, by being a terror to the
transgressor, but a praise to them that do well. 3. Do not rashly draw out your
sword against those harmless ones, whom your bloody Teachers (having naught
wherewith they might justly stain their holy conversations) do cloth and
represent to you, in the ugly garb of Blasphemers and Deceivers. Remember (oh
remember so as to learn) that the Son of God, who suffered at Jerusalem, was
not crucified by the strict, outwardly religious, preaching, professing,
Priests and Teachers, as an innocent,
or a just man, but as a BLASPHEMER and a DECEIVER. 4. Be not prevailed with to
release Barrabas, and give over Jesus to be crucified, to gratify the
murderous appetites, either of your priests or the multitude; considering, that
although you may (with Pilat) wash your hands, and (to those eyes that are
dazzled with fury, and prejudice, against innocent Jesus) appear clear from his
blood, yet before the pure eyes of the Lord, will the condemning stain thereof
be found upon you so fresh, that you will by no means be thence cleansed, but
by the same blood, which you so cruelly shed. 5. Consider that naked must you
one day stand before the Lord (who is righteous in judgment) to render an
account of all your deeds done in the flesh, whether they be good, or whether
they be evil. And then no plea will find acceptance, but innocence; nor will
any covering shelter you from the wrath of the Lamb, but holiness. When the cry
of the innocent, which have been by you persecuted, and imprisoned, shall come
up before the Lord, little will it then avail you, to offer this for your
Apology, viz. That you were told by your Teachers, that you ought to punish
Heretics, and that you should do God service, in killing them whom they
represented to you as Deceivers. Out of his own mouth will Priest-ridden Pilat
be then condemned, who was not only forewarned, that he should have nothing
to do with that just man; but also had a witness for Christ in his own
conscience; That he had committed nothing worthy either of bonds or of death.

A few words more to all, To the Inhabitants of Bristol in general.
as well people as Magistrates within that great City, and I shall close this.

1. In the fear of the Lord live, and abide. And to that of God in all your
consciences take heed, which is your day and night-companion; which follows
you to your Beds, your Tables, your Fields, your Shops, your Closets, your
Counting-houses; (and will also to your Deathbeds and your Graves;) secretly
checking you for those miscarriages, to which no eye is privy but the Lords,
which does often smite you when in your dealing, you do either lie, flatter,
defraud, or overreach your neighbor; I say to this, take heed, for it is the
candle of the Lord to search you; give ear to it when it convinces you of sin,
and cries to you for amendment; turn not your backs upon it, when it calls
upon you to repent ere it be too late, and to turn from lying vanities, to
serve the living God. 2. Resign not up your precious souls, to the miserable
guidance of those your. Teachers, who say and do not; that you should condemn
what they condemn, and approve what they approve. But be as wise for the
eternal concernments of your souls, as you are for your outward man; see with
your own eyes, hear with your own ears, and walk with your own feet. Pass not
away the few days of your pilgrimage, in listening to their strong delusions,
suffering your selves to be lulled asleep, by those pleasing Dreamers even upon
the brink of eternity. 3. Awake, awake, ere the King of terrors seize upon you,
and consider whether you are able to stand in judgment before the Lord at his
coming. Suppose with your selves every hour, That that impartial executioner
stood at your doors, ready to pull down your earthly Tabernacles, and strip you
naked of all this worlds glory (the husks on which you do now so contentedly
feed) and seriously think, whether your foundation be sure, and your building
upon the Rock; that the violence of storms, and winds you can abide, and not be
removed. 4. Remember, oh, remember, that through the gates of death must you
pass for your selves; and to the Lord must you render an account for your
selves, and not another for you; Therefore lean not upon your blind guides
(those Egyptian reeds) whose pleasing songs of perishing glory may satisfy
your souls for a season, but neither shall they die for you, nor give up your
account for you, in the great and terrible day of the Lord. Let not their fury
drive you, nor their persuasions allure you, to any thing, for which, the the
witness of God in your own consciences will condemn you. Do not at their
instigation cry out for Jesus to be crucified; But first ask, what evil has he
done? neither be ye hasty (at their request) to take the blood of those upon
your selves, and your children, whom they do decree as Heretics and
Blasphemers, The Jews had as high an esteem of their Leaders (the Scribes,
Pharisees, and High Priest) for wisdom and godliness, as you can have of yours;
and yet the blood of Christ, which they so confidently begged might be put upon
their score (being condemned for a BLASPHEMER) has proved a grievous burden,
under which their posterities backs have bowed, for these Sixteen hundred years
past. 5. Stumble not at the meaness of Christ's coming, because not attended
with worldly pomp and glory. The Jews of old did split themselves against this
rock. They expected their Messiah to be some outwardly illustrious Potentate;
that should be admired for his earthly greatness and splendour, that should
rather advance, then decry the glory of their Temple, their Worships, and
Sacrifices, etc. But when they saw him come as a root out of a dry ground,
having no higher descent (that they knew) then from Joseph a Carpenter, and
Mary a mean woman his Wife, having for his followers, Fishermen and Publicans,
etc. they were offended at him, and saw no form nor comeliness in him, wherefore
they might desire him. If you ask your Teachers at this day, where Christ is to
be found? They will tell you among the wise and the learned, the Rulers and the
great men. And where he is spiritually worshipped? They will tell you in the
populous conventions, and their gay Steeple Houses, where it must be religion
for poor hearts to sir, and hear their railings, and contradictions, instead of
Divine Oracles. But alas! how different are the ways and works of the great
God, from the ways and works of vain man! He chooses not many wise, 1 Cor.
1.27.28
not many mighty, not many noble; but on the contrary the foolish, the weak,
the base, the despised pieces of the Creation does he choose to manifest himself
in.
Therefore when your Teachers cry out unto you, Lo here is Christ, lo there,
believe them not. He is near that saves you. Look not for him in the Palace,
he is persecuted thence; in the Inn, there is no room for him; but in the
Manger you may find him: The contrite heart is the place of his habitation, and
the broken and humble spirit, are the throne of his glory.

In truth of love to your precious souls, have I written these things to you;
which howsoever you shall interpret, yet herein have I peace, that my
conscience have I faithfully discharged toward you, as in the presence of the
Lord. Oh that my fellow-Citizens of Bristol, would in the cool of the day, sit
down and seriously consider what I have said; and the God of all grace and
mercy grant to you all, that in this your day you may know the things that do
belong to your peace, before they be hid from your eyes.

I shall now pass from the Two Epistles to the Two Books; principally applying
my self (as I have before said) to you two Christopher Fowler and Simon Ford.

And first, The Preamble to C. Fow. and S. Ford's book examined.
Of the Preamble to your book; Which is a mixture made up of the old Babylonish
stuff, viz. falsehood, flattery, and gross hypocrisy. The first you manifest in
charging me with the maintaining of absurd paradoxes in Civility, and
blasphemous heresies in Religion. Whereas I am content to appeal to any sober
reader, which shall read my Epistle, and your Answer, whether there be any such
thing to be found, under my hand in the first, or proved upon me by you in the
later: But you say, So you dare call the Doctrine that I undertake to shelter,
etc.

Rep. Admirable poof! Thomas Speed is indicted in the face of the Nation, for
maintaining absurd Paradoxes, and blasphemous Heresies; How is this proved?
Ipsi dixerunt. Christopher Fowler and Simon Ford, dare call his doctrines so,
therefore they are so. Rare ingenuity! Who can escape the sentence of these
men's lying lips? when as they are so brasen-fac'd as to avouch a man in print
to be a Blasphemer, a Seducer, and what not; and then offer this to their
Reader for evidence, that they dare call him so. You have the impudence, that
you dare go up in your Pulpits, and call darkness light, and light darkness;
good evil, and evil good; truth error, and error truth, and must your hearers
therefore take your assertions for demonstrations; that the things are indeed
such, because you dare call them so?

You go on with an hypocritical insinuation, telling me, how compassionate you
are toward me in this sad delusion I am under.

Rep. I might justly be concluded to be under a sad delusion indeed, should I
credit your pretenses of compassion toward me. Can that black spirit of rage
and violence, cruelty and blood, that rules in you extend pity toward me,
who do appear bearing public testimony against it? Horrible deceit! palpable
hypocrisy! like to the Egyptian darkness that might be felt! I am as far from
believing you, as you are from having a witness in your consciences to the
truth of what you pretend. Had you but opportunity, the world would soon see
that your compassions are merciless, and your mercies cruel. And should the
Lord ever permit the false Prophet (as a plague upon this Nation) by the help
of the beast, to be re-mounted upon the Throne, I do then expect no other
fruits of your compassion toward me, then such as your Fathers, Bonner and
Gardner, did extend toward honest Bradfords, at the stake in Smithfield.

But you have a fained ground of your compassion, viz. The repute which I had
(till of late days) for soundness, and orthodoxy in doctrinals, and some kind
of moderation beyond others of my Brethren in separation, etc.

Rep. Whilst I dwell'd in silence, and did not remove the Priests covering,
that so the people might come to behold their filth and nakedness, I was sound
and orthodox in doctrinals; but now that I am weary of forbearing, and
necessity is laid upon me to cry out against the abominations of that polluted
generation, I am presently become unsound and heterodox. Reader, observe, and
look throughout the Nation, and thou shall find, that, let a man be of what
practice or opinion he will, if he can but speak well of the Priests, and
contend for them as Christ's Ministers; they will court him and cry him up for
an orthodox, and a sound Christian. And on the contrary, take a man that is in
his conversation sober, holy, and unblameable. that is not only painted with
the profession, but does show forth the power of godliness; yet if he cannot
strike sail to the lusts and corrupt fancies of the Priests, the pulpits shall
presently ring of him, as a man of corrupt principles, unsound, and dangerous
opinions.

You further tell me, that by your putting pen to paper in this quarrel, you do
not intend to take the cudgels out of the hands of that reverend man.

Rep. Cudgels? an instrument that I never find in the hands of any Minister of
Jesus Christ throughout the Scripture; but a sit weapon for the hand of a
foolish Shepherd. It becomes such as are strangers to the weapons of Paul's
and Peter's warfare, to strike with cudgels. This Synodical club is an
unanswerable argument to enforce belief, and submission, when truth fails. But
how came William Thomas to be a Reverend man? Are you not ashamed to court one
another with false and flattering titles? He styles you in the Epistle to his
Reader, his Reverend Brethren; and you him, That reverend man. Is this the
language of the Scripture? did Paul or Peter ever mention each other by the
name of reverend Brother Paul, or reverend Brother Peter? Ye shameless and
presumptuous ones, who durst assume that title to your selves which the Spirit
of Truth in the holy Scripture, appropriateth to the Lord alone, saying by the
mouth of David, Psalm. 111.9.
Holy and REVEREND is his Name.

The greatest part of the residue of your Preamble consists of a high
Encomium of William Thomas his excellent Ministerial Qualifications. To which I
shall only say, That when you have said all you can in commendations of him,
and he of you, by your fruits will you still be known, and by the same shall
you be judged by the righteous God, who accepts no man's person in judgment.
You may please your selves for a season in painting one another in the view of
men with the usurped Titles of Reverend Brethren, and Reverend Brother, but be
not deceived (although men may yet) God will not be mocked; as you sow, so
shall you reap, and if the blood of the innocent be found upon your heads; and
consequently, you do appear to be brethren in iniquity, the wages of blood
shall you receive from the hand of him that is the avenger thereof.

SECT. 1.
In your first Section you quarrel with me, because I prefixed seasonable word
of advice out of Seneca, in the Titlepage of my book; seeking to eclipse the
worth of his grave counsel, by branding him with the odious names of Heathen
and Pagan:

Rep. To which I reply, That however it be among men, yet before the Lord; it is
not the name, but the nature, that makes the distinction. He that is not born
again and made partaker of the new nature, although he may be gilded over with
the name of Christian, yet in the judgment of truth, he is but a Heathen. He
that brings forth the Paganish fruits of lying, slandering, envy, pride,
covetousness and the like, cover him over with the fairest vail you can, he is
still really but a Pagan. Rom 2, 26, 27
If Seneca's uncircumcision kept the righteousness of the Law, shall not his
uncircumsion be counted for circumcision, and judge you and many hundreds
called Christians, who by the letter and circumcision do transgress the Law?
And further, let me say, that if Seneca dwelt in the enjoyment and possession,
as well as the profession, of those many excellent principles, that are reputed
his, I would choose rather (in the great day of the Lord) to be Seneca, then to
be (unless they repent) either Christopher Fowler or Simon Ford.

SECT. 2.
In your second Section you tell me that you suppose I will give you leave to
be so ingenious as to leave the answering of my Book to William Thomas his able
pen:

Rep. I wish you were once so ingenious as to leave your lying, and let your
sayings and doings agree together; who not only here, but in the Fifty seventh
Section of your Book, do say that you will wave the answering of my Book
because you are advertised that William Thomas intends to take that task in
hand himself, etc. And yet (contrary to your several sayings) you have
undertaken the dispute with me, touching many of the most substantial things
contained in my Book, as the Reader may at large see by perusing yours and mine.

You proceed in the same Section, to con me thanks for the charitable advice I
begin my Epistle withal, promising with a great many Lamb. like words to take
warning, etc. Instead of which William Thomas does most bitterly revile me,
calling me False witness, Novice, one that do cast reproach upon Gods servants,
etc.

Rep. It was not without cause that William Thomas told his Reader in his
Epistle to his Pamphlet, that his and (yours) his Brethrens meditations were so
directed that you should walk in something a different way in one and the same
work, and yet without difference. For in your seeming disagreement you agree.
You smite more in the dark, he more openly, in your work you agree, which is to
support your tottering Babel, one Master do you serve, and you shall receive
your wages. In your way of prosecution you differ, just as much as a wolf in
sheeps clothing, from the same creature in his proper shape.

SECT. 4.
You begin your Fourth Section with a Query. Whether I do believe in earnest,
that those Prophets of whom Michah speaks that teach for hire, and divine for
money, or those whom Christ notes for doing their works to be seen of men, etc.
are characters suiting the men of my indignation?

To which I answer. That I retain indignation against no man, looking upon
every man's person as the workmanship of God; but against that evil spirit that
rules and rages in you and your brethren, do I bear a perfect indignation.
And I do believe that to all Idol Shepherds in this Nation, that are acted by
that spirit, do the Characters given both by Michah, and by Christ, most aptly
suit, of which more in the next Section. And whereas you charge me with a
desire to reduce you to voluntary contributions. I say, if you are Christ's
Ministers, why should you not be contented with Christ's maintenance? who that I
can find in Scripture never ordained any other but this, freely ye have
received, Matthew. 10.8.
freely give, and I never read of any of his in Scripture, that found their
allowance too scant. But as for such as you who do feast it, and brave it among
the people, who must have for your lusts, as well as for your necessity, its no
marvel if you refuse a confinement within the limits of his maintenance.

SECT. 5.
Your fifth Section beginnneth with a high-flown expostulation, demanding of me
in the height of your spirits, who I am that do judge your hearts? Why? because
(say you) I tell you what you aim at, and set up as your end in preaching.

Rep. That I did appeal to you in my Epistle whether you were not guilty of the
same crime (of teaching for hire) with Micha's hirelings, is true. But it
seems your own guilt made the application. Neither had I judged your hearts,
but your works, if I had been positive in my charge against you. May not a
common drunkard (with as much strength of reason as you, interrogate me) demand
of you, when you call him by his name, who are you that do judge his heart? Do
not his fruits manifest what sort of tree he is? If you are not indeed such as
do preach for hire, and divine for money; Tyth-exacters proved to teach for
hire.
tell me, why is it that when you first begin to set up that trade, you do so
earnestly covet to get into that place which yields the largest maintenance,
most Tithes, most acres of Gleab Land, or the greatest augmentation? And when
you are settled, why is it that you are so easily removed thence to a richer
Benefice? Moreover, I have seen many sore contentions among you Teachers, who
should get into a Parish endowed with a large Revenue; but how is it that you
never contend, who should come among a people, from whom there might be
expected little money, and small maintenance? In brief, do you not settle and
remove just as Tenants do (for outward advantage) from a hard to a better
bargain? And is it judging your hearts to ask, whether such men as these do not
teach for hire, and divine for money?

William Thomas says, Page 5.
that he and his Brethren do take that which Christ says they are worthy of.
How is that proved? Luke 10.7.
by Christ's words in Luke, The labourer is Worthy of his hire: whereas neither
are they Christ's Laborers (because persecutors) nor do they take his hire; for
in the same verse, Christ commands his laborers to eat and drink such things
as were given them; which way of maintenance they despise under the notion of
voluntary contribution.

SECT. 6.
Your Sixth Section smells so rank of loathsome hypocrisy, that it cannot but
be abominable in the nostrils of any sober reader. Whilst you pretend to adore
that gracious providence which keeps you out of the reach of my malice;
otherwise (strange things would follow) you are assured you should not be long
Without persecution, etc.

Rep. What pious and peaceable Martyrs, would you have your Reader to judge you
two to be? who dare so devoutly adore that providence, who keeps you from the
reach of his malice, who never yet exchanged word with you, nor saw either of
your faces, nor had ought to do with you in his life time, and who does as much
abominate that spirit that persecuteth, as he does the foulest devil that ever
came out of the bottomless pit; Nay, who for this very thing sake, principally
does deny you, and your outrageous generation.

But you say that you have already your shares in the persecution of the
tongues, and hands, of those of my fellowship and communion.

Rep. To which I reply two things: First, Whereas you do often throughout your
Book, in scorn make mention of me, and my Fraternity; me, and my Sister-hood;
me, and my Quaking generation; me, and my companions, etc. I say, that I am of
no sect or faction, nor do I profess my self of any other generation but of
those that fear God, Acts 10 35.
and work righteousness. And whatever name of reproach your venomous tongues
do, for the truths sake, cast upon such, I do esteem it my honor to wear with
them as my crown.

Secondly, You mention three things that these persecuters do to you. 1.
Impoverish you and your families 2. Detain your just and legal subsistence. 3.
Disturb you in the exercise of your public Worship. To the first, I ask, Is it
truth, or is it a lie that you say? are you and your families indeed
impoverished, who do live high, fare deliciously, and vaunt it among men? Why
sirs, are you past all shame, that you can aver things so notoriously false? 2.
Your second is like unto this, for I hold communion and fellowship with none
that do detain any man's just and legal subsistence: I do deny all such
injustice, and until you shall particularly point out some of my communion
that do act thus unjustly, you must stand for a couple of false accusers. 3.
The third piece of this your sore persecution is, the disturbance you receive
in your public worship: That is to say, when you have spent an hour, or more
time in your Pulpits, in railing and raging, against such as cannot bow down to
the Image you have set up, some peaceable man or woman appears, crying out of
your deceit, or bidding the people repent, or the like; and what usually
follows? why this, your sheep (according to the precepts and pattern of their
Pastors) fall foul on them, beat them, kick them, oftentimes draw their blood,
drag them out of your Steeple Houses, hurry them before Magistrates, and thence
into some nasty Prison or Dungeon among Rogues and Fellons, where they lie some
two, some three, some four or more months; many of whom have by the unheard of
tyranny of merciless Jailors, been brought to seal their testimony for Jesus
with their lives, and so fallen asleep. Now let all that are not intoxicated with
the cup of rage, received from the hands of their Priests judge, who are the
disturbers, and who the persecutors:

William Thomas urges my own words against me, because I asked in my Epistle,
Page 7.
whether the Bishops did not in their days imprison, and evil entreat many of
them? And then ignorantly demands, why I should ask them, Are you imprisoned?

Rep. The more is their shame, and the greater their wickedness, that, having
so lately gotten their necks from under the Bishops yoaks, they should now
justify the said Bishops in what they did to them, by laying Iron yoaks upon
the necks of others.

SECT. 7.
You begin your seventh Section with boasting. 1. That many of you live upon a
free contribution maintenance.

Rep. What confusion do the inhabitants of Babylon live in! But even now, in
the close of your fourth Section, you did tartly reflect on me, as one
endeavoring to reduce you to voluntary contributions; as that which would soon
reduce you to contempt; and yet here you glory in the same thing. So
industrious is the Serpent to save his head, that he will gladly betake himself
to any shelter. One while being afraid that the Master whom you serve will not
supply your wants by voluntary contributions, you decry them, and despise them;
and yet presently after, to save your selves from being branded with the name
of Exactors, you assert them as the way of your maintenance, and glory in them.
2. You boast what noble volunteers many of you are in the work of your Master,
by your maintaining many Lectures, etc.

Rep. Lectures made a covering.
Were it not for fear of being burthensom to the Reader, I could tell him at
large what trade these men do drive with most of those things called Lectures.
If the Priests have any wretched design to promote in the Country, then a
Lecture must presently be erected, in the the most public and convenient place
for their convening, that under pretense of that they may jointly confer about,
and contrive, the effecting of that mischief which they had before singly
projected. But are you two of the number of these Volunteers? how comes it
then to pass, Simon Ford.
that one of you did some time since erect a Lecture in the Town of Reading,
and finding your free Contribution maintenance, coming in but slowly thence,
did soon let the Lecture fall? Whatever you proclaim of your selves, to those
that know you not, yet the people of the Town of Reading do well know, that you
live by another rule then you pretend to (viz.) no penny, no Pater noster!

But though some of you are thus free of your labor, yet others you confess do
preach by Indentures. For which their practice, I did in my Epistle demand a
rule in Scripture. And you, to save them from condemnation, do offer an
acquittance under Paul's hand, who says, that he that does not provide for his
own is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.
and has denied the faith.

Rep. And is this your rule by which you indent for your wages, before you dare
enter upon your work? What a shameful begging of the question is this? Do you
two pretend your selves to be such great Masters of learning, and eminent
Zealots in Religion, and yet reason like men at once bereft of all honesty and
understanding? Because Paul proclaims him that does not provide for himself,
and family to be worse then an Infidel, does he thereby justify any means
(right or wrong) by which a man may make provision, as lawful and commendable?
tell me by this wild Logic, how you will be able to convince a common Thief
that he does evil? Suppose a poor man should come and steal a bushel of corn
out of either of your Barns, or a bag of money out of your Chests, for the
supply of the necessities of himself and his; if you accuse him for an evil
doer, may he not offer your own rule in evidence for himself, and reason thus;
He that makes provision for himself and family, proves himself not worse then
an Infidel; But I (may he say) by stealing do make provision for my self and
family, Ergo, etc. Nay further will not the most notorious thief upon Salisbury
Plain (who does rob for necessity) find patronage for his wickedness under such
Tutors as you are? Ask him whilst he is taking a purse from a Traveller by what
rule he does act such injustice? By the same rule may he say as the Priests act
by, when they indent for their hire, viz. that I might make provision for my
self and family, and so not show my self Worse then an Infidel, and a denier of
the faith. Now Sirs, reflect upon your selves seriously, and see your covering
pulled off you, and to that of God in both your consciences do I appeal,
whether ever any age of the world afforded Sophisters, that did more palpably
abuse the holy Scriptures to patronize their own lusts, then you, and the rest
that call themselves Ministers do at this day.

You proceed in the same Section to tell me of some of mine, Who Wander up and
down to the manifest and apparent ruin of themselves, and those that they are
bound to provide for.

Rep. Such wanderers are none of mine (for I deny them) but some of yours. Si
accusasse sat sit, quis innocens erit?
Did ever any man or woman, whom you in soorn call Quakers, beg relief of
either of you? or can you quote one of their families that is thus ruined? I
can produce you instances enough of Parish Priests, who have drunk and rioted
themselves and families into poverty; by which character I am sure one may find
many Infidels among your generation, who yet talk much of faith. But who can
escape the stroke of your slanderous pens, who dare preach any thing, print any
thing, and produce no other proof for what you avouch, but this, that you dare
say it is so? Nay, to what height of impudence are you come who dare belie the
Son of God, in saying presently after, that he commanded his to travel about to
declare without shoes on their feet. Monstrons impiety! Mar. 10.8, 9, 10
what is it not enough for you to heap slanders, falsehoods, and reproaches upon
me, but you must attempt to fasten an untruth upon him, who is truth it self?
Read that Scripture again, and then see if you can be so wicked as to say, that
Christ commands that which never proceeded out of his lips, viz. that his
should travel without shoes upon their feet. Reader, what horrible fables
would these men fasten on the Scripture among the ignorant, were they kept
sealed in Greek or Latin? when as they dare even now to assert such things to
be in them, for asserting which, the meanest child that can read English, may
prove them Liars?

Much ado you keep in this Section laboring in confusion, and all to prove
that which I never denied, 1 Cor. 9.6. to 14.
viz. that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. Which
Scripture, you say, the adversaries to Ministers maintenance do pass over in
deep silence; and you expect it will be by me also, etc. To which I say; that I
do subscribe to the truth of what Paul says all along in that Chapter, viz.
That he that planteth a vineyard ought to eat of the fruit thereof; and he that
feeds a flock, ought to eat of the milk thereof, etc. But what is all this to
you? who are not Planters, but destoyers; not Feeders, but devourers of the
flock? or if you were such, what rule is this for your vexatious suits at law
for your maintenance? Does the Scripture say that Paul took those men by the
throats, that gave him not the tenth of all their increase? when you shall come
to do Paul's work, and tread in Paul's footsteps, I shall not deny you Paul's
wages.

You close this Section with as notable a falsehood as the rest, viz. that no
man holds the nine parts by firmer law in these Nations, then the Minister
claims his tenth by.

Rep. If a man purchase ten acres of Land by measure, and pays a full
consideration for each foot of the said ten acres, have you as much right to
the tenth acre, who never advanced penny toward the purchase, as he has to the
other nine, who paid the full value for the whole? If a poor man having a great
family to maintain, do rent five acres of land, and after he has plowed it,
and sowed it, and he, and his, have lived in hope (perhaps with naked backs,
and empty bellies) to receive the fruits of all their labor and toil; have you
as good right to the tenth sheaf, as the poor oppressed man has to the other
nine? Well you may have a law that will own you in such your cruelties in the
Courts of men; but sure I am, you have no law that will justify you in the
presence of the Lord, and that shall you surely one day witness to your shame
and sorrow, without repentance.

Where as I demanded (in my Epistle) a rule in Scripture, by which the teachers
of the Nation did exact the tenth of their increase, who did not hear them, nor
own them for their Pastors? William Thomas answers me by another Query, viz.
Must a Minister be deprived of the members of his Church, and the maintenance
of his place, both at once?

Rep. Is this Query a rule in Scripture to justify their practice! Reader,
thou that art sober, judge, whether this be an answer bespeaking him that gave
it forth, to be a Minister of reason, muchless of the Gospel. These are the men
that do so passionately assert the Scripture to be their rule in words, and yet
being demanded a rule thence for their practice, in a matter of such moment,
are so shameless as to offer a senceless Query instead of Scripture. And thou
may further observe; that throughout both their books they have not produced
any one Scripture, that do prove their practice in the things they are accused
of. But instead thereof do offer the conceptions of their own brains, or else
such meanings and senses as they please to force upon the Scripture; which if a
man refuse to accept of, he is presently condemned for an Antiscripturist.

SECT. 8.
In your eighth Section, both you and William Thomas do confess the matter of
fact, viz. That many of your brethren are found wallowing in the common mire,
etc: And you say also, that you do bewail it. Which I should have some reason
to believe also, were your Pulpits filled with as frequent declamations,
against the abominations of such your polluted Brethren, as they are with
invectives against those, that stand up to bear witness against theirs and your
wickedness. In the close of this Section, you speak of Swearing, drunken, and
otherwise disorderly companions, that frequent the Quakers assemblies.

Rep. To which I say, That I have been often in the meetings of those peaceable
people (and do bless the Lord that I lived to be in them) where I have seen
many drunken, swearing, disorderly companions: But they were not of them with
whom they assembled, though they were among them; but the scabby sheep that
belonged to some Priest or other, that came there to act the same part in those
Assemblies, that their Shepherds do in the pulpits (viz) scoff, scorn,
reproach, and revile the innocent.

SECT. 9.
Your ninth Section is full of venom and bitterness, of taunts and unsavory
scoffs; which (as I said in the beginning) I shall let fall into the Channel.
You accuse me for calling the Scriptures in scorn your rule; For which I can
boldly, and truly charge you to be a couple of malicious liars. For the
Scriptures of truth, I do highly esteem, and do bless the Lord for them;
neither have I, through all my Epistle or Book, mentioned them with that
apparent contempt that you do, calling them in your Tenth Section; your low
Rule, and Section Sixty two, your old Rule. When my pen does drop such
contemptible expressions touching the Scriptures as these are, then write me
down among the number of those that do scorn it with your selves. Until then
know, that the Scriptures I do own against you, and your prating companions,
that do pretend to cry up the Scriptures in word only, serving your lusts upon
them, making a trade to talk of them thereby to get a livelihood; but do most
wretchedly abuse them and trample them under feet by contradicting them in your
practices.

After this, having expostulated with you, touching all your violence, and
persecution, against Christ in his members, minding you of the judgment of the
great Day; you return this in answer, viz Judge not that you be not judged.
Just as if a man should come to an unclean person that squandereth away his
precious hours, in the filth and open profaneness of the world, and deal with
him for his iniquities, and he should return this in answer, Judge not that ye
be not judged. The innecent do not dread judgment, but you that are guilty of
all the violence and cruelty, mentioned in that Epistle, to judgment must you
come, and that before that God who will not accept of a scoff, or an
impertinency, for an answer to what shall then be demanded of you. That which
William Thomas says in this particular, has so little weight in it, that I
shall not spend time or paper to make a recital of it, muchless judge it worthy
of an answer.

SECT. 10.
You need not have told me in your Tenth Section of your readiness to
persecute, Priests wait for commission to persecute.
worry, and imprison others, were you but legally commissioned thereunto. We
very well know you would soon be upon Paul's work, could you but once gain his
Letters. Your Brethren in the beginning of Queen Mary's reign were very thirsty
after blood, but could not drink their fill, until by the Session of a
Parliament, they were legally commissioned to draw it. And should this, or any
succeeding Parliament, put the cup into the Priests hands, and bid them draw, I
do confidently believe (that as far as in them lies) there should not be a drop
of blood left, running in the veins of any true Israelite in the Nation.
Neither will that plea justify you (when you shall be arraigned before the
Lamb sitting upon the Throne) to say, that you have persecuted and worried none
but disguised Wolves. For they that are the Lambs followers never persecuted
any; neither do the Scriptures or any other Histories, represent them to us in
the posture of imposers, or afflictors, but of Bearers and Sufferers. Besides,
is not every man a Wolf in your esteem, who cannot bow the knee to Baal? and is
it not the greatest crime of those, whose blood you so long to be dabling in;
that they are innocent? yea, I bear testimony to it, that he that at this day
departs from iniquity, makes himself a prey to the cruel teeth of the false
Prophet.

To this William Thomas adds his mite, to help you at a dead lift as well as
he can. He confesses that the Parliament was called upon by the Presbiters,
for the settling of a government, etc. That is, that every pragmatical
Parish Priest might have been a Bishop, and the decrees of a presumptuous
Synod, might have been as the giving forth of the Law from mount Sinai by the
mouth of Moses, to which whosoever would not yield obedience, might be cut off
without mercy. Next he would insinuate the badness of the people called
Quakers, and the sadness of their condition, because of the many wise, and (as
he calls them) Godly men, that cannot approve, nor favor them.

Rep. Has this man never read the Scripture? Or has he forgotten how the
wise, religious, devout Jews (both men and women) did with one lip cry out for
Jesus to be crucified? and was that an argument he was a bad man?

And lastly, he suggesteth grave ground of suspicion, that they that have an
evil eye upon the Ministers, will not be long from overthrowing Magistracy:

Rep. How close this poor heart does cling to the Magistrate, whilst he will be
his vassal, and his footstool? Here is the old Court Doctrine, no Bishop, no
King. And as to the fifth Monarchy he speaks of, I say, that I own, or expect
none but this, that Christ may rule and reign, as King in the hearts of men;
and then I am sure the beast and the false Prophet, must both to the bottomless
pit, whence they came.

SECT. 11.
Your next Section is only a Preparatory to what you intend to say in those
that follow; and accordingly I shall reply to it. You tell me, that you dare
not let me alone to cozen the world into a good esteem of my opinions.

Rep. I know the man of sin, whose cause ye negotiate, is very vigilant to
preserve his tottering kingdom, so that if truth has but its current, it will
soon shake the very foundations thereof. And therefore it is, that he does so
bestir himself in you, and others of his instruments, to support that, which
would be the joy of thousands of the Lambs followers to see razed to the
ground. Page 12.
William Thomas tells his Reader, that I drew up the following charge in
jest. But this must be reckoned among the rest of his pitiful mistakes; for I
drew it up in earnest; and because yet I have not, now I shall acquaint the
Reader with the ground of my drawing it up, viz Hearing a great noise and cry
in the Nation, Pulpits on fire, Cities on fire, and many separated
Congregations on sire, and all because of the coming forth of a people in scorn
called Quakers; I began to make inquisition into the rise, and bottom of all
this, and what was in the lives, manners, and declarations of the said people,
that gave occasion to this so great an outcry. And by inquiry I found, that
the rage vented against them both from Press and Pulpits, had its occasion from
those fifteen Particulars mentioned in my Epistle, which I thought meet to
publish unto the world, that all men might see that it was not for thest,
murder, drunkenness, swearing, lying, grinding the faces of the poor, tearing
men's throats for their maintenance, plucking the bread from betwixt the teeth
of the needy, nor for suing men at the Law, and throwing them into nasty
prisons, for the tenth of all their increase, that the teachers of this Nation
were so cruelly outrageous against these men; but for matters that concerned
the worship of the Lord their God.

Now whereas Christopher Fowler and Simon Ford do say that I have not drawn up
all they have to say against them, (wherefore they so eagerly pursue their
blood) but that they have matters of greater moment to exhibit against them;
which they call [The Quakers Doctrines] in their 54th Section I say, that
laying aside the notorious lies, and slanders, coucht in that List; I doubt not
before I have ended with them, to spread before the sober Reader such a true
Catalogue of theirs and their brethrens Doctrines and Practices (which I will
prove to their faces) that will make his heart astonished, and his ears to
tingle.

SECT. 12.
Your 12th Section begins thus; You take it ill to be charged as blasphemers
for affirming that Christ is the light that enlightneth every one that comes
into the world etc.

Rep: Ill? Why is it well that you charge any man to be a blasphemer for
reciting a Text of Scripture? Are not you excellent Advocates for the
Scripture, that would fasten the character of blasphemer, upon a man for the
bare quoting of it? nay you add, that I stand upon my purgation, For what?
because I made mention of two Scriptures in John? is this such a crime that I
need a purgation? Observe Reader, notwithstanding all these men's verbal zeal,
what their bosom thoughts are of Scripture. But what would you have? you say,
you hope I will give you leave to ask me a few questions.

Rep. Why had you not spoke out what is within, and said, what this Speed has
said is plain Scripture, and therefore we dare not (for fear of the people) but
say it is truth; however we will try, if we can, to catch him with our Queries,
and meanings, that we may have some matter to work upon. But hold Sirs, do you
use to bring men to their arraignment at the Bar, and then ask them if they
know ought against themselves whereof you may accuse them? Let the Reader take
notice of the subtilty of these men, that throughout my whole book, where they
find my words so plain and true, that they have naught to answer, they (to
cover over their own guilt) do either first go to making meanings on my words;
or secondly, fly from the matter in hand, and begin to propose Queries, thereby
to amuse the Reader, and blunt the edge of his intention upon what has been
said. Pagei 5.
And therefore it is that William Thomas tells his Reader in his Fifteenth
page, that his Brethren have dealt providently with me in querying me out of my
starting holes. That is to say, out of my plain Scripture into meanings. For
when the truth of plain Scripture, which I quote, do so rub their fore, that
they cannot bear it, then they fall to querying about senses and meanings.

You ask me first, What light that is, with which Christ enlighteneth every man?

Answ. The Scripture bears witness that the work of Christ's Ministers
consisted in turning men from darkness to light, Acts 26.18.
and do you two pretend to have been Christ's Ministers for so many years past,
and yet declare so much ignorance of your work, as now to ask what that light
is? What is that conversion that your preaching have wrought upon your
miserable hearers, more then from one degree of darkness to another, who yet
remain strangers to that light to which they should have been converted.

William Thomas makes a great cry about the light, Will. Thomas his
confession touching the light.
with his meanings, and interpretations, his suppositions and distinctions,
calling (but not proving) it a natural light, and all to stifle it if he could:
Although in the close of his thirteenth page he is made to confess as much of
it, Page 13.
as ever I heard or read from the pens or lips of the men of his anger, viz.
Christ lights every man that comes into the world,
though not by saving illumination, yet by saving revelation (a distinction
which I understand not, but he will explain it) that is (says he) by that
Gospel-revelation that is fit to save them, though diverse receiving the
revelation (do through their own fault) lose the salvation. Let himself beware
that having the reevlation he lose not the salvation.

And now lest you should think I am ashamed to declare what I own touching this
light of Christ, I shall briefly express what I understand of it.

1. This light of Jesus is that in which all the deceit of the Priests is seen,
and witnessed against; and therefore it is that they do so bandy against it,
speaking all manner of evil of it, refusing to come to it, because their deeds
are evil. 2. This light is that which discovers the temptation to evil before
it is committed, and checketh and convinces for sin when it is committed. 3. It
is that which follows many a man, day by day throughout his life, smiting him
for that hidden wickedness he lives in, prompting him to return to his Maker,
which he stubbornly resisting passes his days with a galled conscience to his
grave. 4. It is the same that was in Enoch, Noah, Abraham and Moses, and the
same to which the Prophets, John Baptist, and the Apostles did bear witness: So
that, wherever it is now, it leads not contradictory, but according to the
testimony of the same holy men recorded in the Scriptures of truth. 5. Lastly,
It is that which will be the certain condemnation of all those, who having it,
obey it not, Joh. 3.i9.
but love darkness rathen light.
Here I would close what I have to say to your answer to this first particular;
but that William Thomas has not yet done, being very wrath that I asked, What
need of their teachings? And thereupon insolently demands of me, What need
had Christ to send forth his Apostles, and bid them go and teach all Nations?

Rep. 1. What the Apostles taught was from the living Spirit of Jesus, and not
from liveless traditions; neither were they firebrarnds where they came, as he
and his brethren are, teaching the people to persecute, imprison and destroy
one another, as they do; but manifested the way of peace.

2. They taught men to turn from darkness unto light, but these men ask, what
the light is? quarrelling, fighting, Page 16.
raging against it. Nay as if he himself could not render it sufficiently
odious, he charge his Readers to have a jealous eye upon it.

Some Scriptures there are that do stand much in his way, which I believe he
heartily wishes were razed out of the Bible, and does endeavor all he can to
make them Apocryphal, such as these, They shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, Isa. 31.34. 1 John 2 27.
etc. And that in John, Ye need not that any man teach you, etc. To which
Scriptures (he says) he will for the satisfaction of weaker Christians speak
something.

Rep: Page 17.
I wish he, and the rest of the traders upon Scripture, would let the
Scriptures abide pure as they are, and not hew them, and clip them, and curtail
them as they do; and all to make them speak according to their corrupt fancies.
They must be weak Christians indeed, that must receive satisfaction from
Scripture so racked and manacled as they are before they come out of his hands.

SECT. 13.
Your thirteenth Section shows your readiness to wrangle with me about words,
if you could find any matter to work upon. Something you must have to say to me
(for form sake) touching my second Article. Page 19.
Although William Thomas does so fully assent to what is said therein, that he
passionately says, that if I say the Teachers of this Nation do charge the
people called Quakers, with the bare affirming thereof, it is an untruth. But
if I mean so, or so, then he says, it is an untruth also. So let me say or mean
what I will, if they like it not I must be condemned. In the close of this
Section you come to speak scoffingly of this light; of which take heed and
beware, for a swift witness shall you find it to be against all your
unrighteousness (to your condemnation) in the great day of the Lord.

You say you are little beholding to my principles, who would reduce you to the
condition of Heathens.

Rep. Well were it for a great part of you, that you were in the condition of
those Heathens, whose uncircumcision do fulfill the Law, whilst you, who bless
your selves with the name of Christians, Romans 2.27.
are found transgressors of it.

SECT. 14.
In your fourteenth Section you would be quarrelling with me if you durst, and
could you handsomely quit your selves; of those Scriptures I quote about
perfection, you would proclaim me a Blasphemer. And if that be all I hold of
perfection, yet those of my persuasion (you say) are not so modest.

Rep. If by those of my persuasion, you intend the people called Quakers, (whom
ye seek to devour) I say, that I never found any of them, to preach, or
profess, any other perfection, then such as Christ exhorted to, and Paul and
other Saints witnessed. About which, you and William Thomas do distinguish with
all the art you can, to stop the mouth of the Scripture. But when you have done
all, what Paul witnessed therein, is still wisdom among them that are perfect.
1 Cor. 2.6.
And here again you are craving allowance to ask me a few questions. Because
you can find no flaw in plain truth, you would therefore by questoning find
some if you could.

William Thomas closes his discourse about perfection, Page 21.
with a strange saying, viz. our duty here is to be always perfecting, Heb.
12.23.
but (our labor is in vain for) it belongs to our wisdom to know, that we
can never be fully perfected till the last day, wherein our souls shall be
among the souls of just men made perfect.

Rep. What a thick mist does rage cast before the eyes of the envious? Could
one think that one that pretends himself to have been so long a Minister of
the Gospel, Verse. 22 (...) PPOSE LLY'THATE. Sed ACCESSISTIS. (...). T
ETELEIOE'NON. Ad spiritus justorum PERFECTORVM
should lay down such an assertion, and produce a Scripture for proof, speaking
point blank contrary thereunto? We cannot be fully perfected (says he) until
the last day How does he prove it? Why, by the words of the Author to the
Hebrews, who says to the Hebrews, Ye ARE come to the spirits of the just men
made perfect. Does he say in the future tense, they should come at the last
day? or does he say they are come to those that shall be perfect? does he not
say in the preterperfect tense, they ARE already come, to the spirits of just
men ALREADY made perfect? Isa. 44.25.
is not the Scripture fulfilled at this day, which says, The Lord makes the
Diviners mad, and turns the wise men backward, and makes their knowledge
foolish?

SECT. 15.
In your fifteenth Section you offer little, save a threat what a severe
reckoning you will have with me hereafter: Against which, I doubt not but to
appear so armed with truth, as to be able therewith to quench all the fiery
darts, that you and your Master have ready in your Quivers to shoot at me.

But William Thomas supplieth that wherein you are wanting, Page 23.
in passion and ignorance; exceeding zealous he is in this particular; for
herein consists the life of the Priests trade, in mangling, tearing, and
confounding the Scriptures, which they call Interpretations. The Scripture
witnesses, that none knows the mind of God, save the Spirit of God, and he
to whom the Spirit shall reveal it. Now observe, Ten men do send each of them a
Son to the University, in order to their outward preferment, where having spent
seven or more years, they are called home by them that sent them, and by
crouching, It is the spirit not study in a University, that makes able to
understand and interpret Scripture.
and cringing, and perhaps the help of some of Simon Magus his purchase money,
a Benefice is gained for each of them. Now these men being Ministers in William
Thomas's account, he asserteth it to be their employment, committed to them of
God, to be Messengers and Interpreters. As if they had gained the Spirit, and
consequently the mind of God, by the consumption of a few years in a
University. One of these reads Augustine, another Jerome, a third Calvin, a
fourth Luther, Peter Martyr, etc. their interpretations of Scripture, and then
they come forth to the people and say, this is the meaning, and the other is the
meaning: And is this to interpret by the Spirit? May not the worst of men, who
have not the Spirit but hate the Spirit, nay, may not the worst of Devils, who
well understand the languages in which those Commentators writ, do the same?

Moreover take these ten young Divines, which he calls Gods Messengers and
Interpreters, and give them ten difficult places of Scripture a part each from
other to interpret, and it may be there shall not five of them agree in one
interpretation. Now mind, if these men have not the Spirit of God, they are not
fit Interpreters, because they cannot know Gods mind, without that Spirit. If
they have that Spirit, The Spirit never contradicts it self
I demand, whether the same spirit interpreting in one man, do contradict it
self giving an interpretation in another? If there be but one Spirit of truth,
and that speaks in every man (where it is) the same thing, then it is clear
that these men whom he calls Messengers and Interpreters, do bring forth the
fancies and vain conceptions of their own brains (and not the mind of God by
the Spirit of God) who do so jangle, and contradict one another in their
interpretations. And therefore his charging it as a wicked error (in the same
page) upon those that deny their expositions, and interpretations, is but a
Bugbear to startle the ignorant. I say to thee Reader, Abide faithful in the
counsel of the Lord, and thou shall know his mind. Live in that Spirit that
gave forth the Scriptures, by the mouths of holy men, and the Scripture will
be plain unto thee, for it is that Spirit that unsealeth the mystery. Thy soul
is most precious, therefore let not the false Prophet deceive thee. As I have
formerly told thee, so now I tell thee again, in bowels of love, thou must die
for thy self, and not thy Teacher for thee, and to the Lord must thou give an
account for thy self, therefore look well to thy standing; interpret for thy
self, and believe for thy self, and let not those Dreamers that call themselves
Gods Messengers and Interpreters (but live in pride, malice, covetousness,
etc.) lead thee down hood-winck'd to the chambers of death, whence there is no
returning.

SECT. 16.
I now come to your sixteenth Section, in which you follow your old trade of
deceit, viz. not daring to deny in express terms (although you do in effect)
Christ's unlimited prohibition, of swearing at all; you fall from that, to
asking me questions. Before I answer which, Matthew. 5.34. (...) "OLOS.
I cannot but take notice of your preambular Observations. 1. You suggest that
the Founders of the Quakers Religion (as you express it) are supposed to be
Papists.

Rep. This is such a ridiculous suggestion that the like I have seldom met
with. I have been a diligent inquirer into the principles, professions, lives,
and conversations, of that despised people; and upon inquiry do find, that
there is not a people in the world who in all these, do more directly strike at
the very root of Popery, then they do, and yet the deluding Teachers of this
Nation, do (hoping thereby to contract an odium upon them among the simple) cry
out, O they are many of them Jesuits and Papists. Sure I am, it is no difficult
thing to prove the greatest part of your Steeplehouse-worship to be but refined
Popery. 2. I say, that swearing by the Contents of a Book, and kissing a Book,
is a superstitions, popish invention, and that which was never practiced by the
Saints of old, whilst swearing was in force.

The sum of your two first Queries to me is, Whether Christ spoke or intended
any thing, which might clash with the commands of God? or whether he did forbid
any part of Gods moral worship?

Ans. But that the Lord in just judgment upon you for fighting against the
truth, has given you up to blindness of heart; could one almost imagine, that
two that pretend themselves able Scholars, and eminent Christians, should
propose Queries that have not the least shadow and weight of reason in them?
May you not on the same ground charge Christ with clashing with Gods commands,
in putting an end to all the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies? was not the practice
of their whole worship, taken up by express command from God, Exodus 30.28. Lev.
6.18, 22. Lev. 23.13, 14 Exodus 28.42, 43. Genesis 17.13.
consisting in washings, meat offerings, drink offerings, the Priests
vestments, Sacrifices, Circumcision, etc. Concerning most of which, and many
other Rites it is said by the Lord (which I never read of swearing) that they
should be Statutes for EVER, throughout ALL generations? and yet Christ comes
and abolisheth all these, and not clash with his Fathers commands; Was not
Circumcision commanded upon that severe penalty, of being cut off from the
people, in case of not being circumcised? Genesis 17 14. Gal. 5.2.
and yet Paul tells the Galathians, that if they were circumcised Christ
should profit them nothing. There is a time when it is death not to circumcise,
and there is a time when Paul makes it more then death to use it. Christ in
like manner, yields by way of concession, that there was a season when
swearing was lawfully used, Mat. 5.33, 34.
but I say unto you (NOW) swear not at all. And if he say it, sure I am, it is
not for you to dispute his commands; for it was not only decreed in heaven,
but by the Lords own mouth proclaimed on earth, that he is his beloved Son, and
that him should all men HEAR. Matthew. 17 5.


What you say touching the necessity of Oaths to decide controversies, is but
a lame begging of the question; for, there can be no real necessity supposed
for that, which Christ (the great Lawgiver) forbids the use of. Heb. 6.16.
That the Author to the Hebrews, says, that an oath for confirmation, is to
men an end of all strife, is true: To which I reply three things.

1. That Author writes to the Hebrews (among whom swearing was first
practiced) by way of concession, that it was used among them (who were probably
ignorant of the change of the Priesthood, and consequently of the repeal of
that practife) for that purpose, but he does neither command it, nor commend
it. 2. In that he says that to men, it is an end of strife; it is even thence
clear, that to them who are already come to the end of all strife (being
redeemed out of it) an oath is useless. 3. But lastly, if this Author, or an
Angel from Heaven, had commanded men to swear, yet behold a greater then the
Author to the Hebrews, a greater then Moses, a greater then the Angels (whom
the Father commands to worship him) is here, who says, Heb. 1.6.
swear not AT ALL. And him are we all commanded to hear, in all things
whatsoever he shall say unto us. And every soul which will not hear him, shall
be destroyed from among the people, Deuteronomy. 18.15.
says the Spirit of the Lord, Act 3.22 23.
by the mouth of Moses and Peter:
That prejudice you suggest to which men's Estates would be liable by cheating
companions, in case there were no swearing, is of no force; for he that will
(contrary to the witness of God in his conscience) say a thing falsely, will not
stick to swear it: And he that can affirm or deny a thing falsely with his yea,
yea, nay, nay, will not scruple to seal the same with his oath.

As for the examples you offer of Abraham's requiring an oath of his servant,
Jacob of Joseph, Nehemiah of the Jews; they all fall to the ground (with
Circumcision, and other Rites practiced by the same persons) not only by the
coming, but the countermand of the great Lawgiver, who says, Swear not at all.

Of which being (...) to your selves, you pass from them, and in your closing
Query (by which you thought to have struck me silent) do confidently demand of
me, whether the Apostle Paul did well or ill to swear, who says, Behold, Gal.
1.20.
before God I lie not.

Rep. Monstrous impiety! matchless impudence! What? was it not sufficient for
you to clip, and mince, the commandment of Christ, but you must audaciously
attempt to fasten a slanderous accusation upon innocent Paul, by charging him
for a swearer? (...).
Is Paul's saying, before God, any more then in the presence of God, or in the
sight of God? Do you not know (which induces me to believe that you sin
against the light of Christ in your consciences) that the same Greek word is
used to signify so in more then twenty places of the Scripture? Luke 15.10.
(...).
Does not Luke use the same word when he says, that there is joy in the
PRESENCE of the Angels, over one repenting sinner. Does not the same Evangelist
use the same word for, Luke 1.15. (...). in conspeclu meo Gen 17.1.
in the sight of God, saying, touching John Baptist, that he should be great in
the SIGHT of the Lord?

Does not God command Abraham, saying, walk BEFORE me, and be thou perfect; and
Luke commend Zacharias and Elizabeth for being both righteous BEFORE God? And
did God and Luke swear in these sayings? Luke 1.6. (...)


Nay, by this blasphemous doctrine of yours, how will you absolve Christ
himself from being a swearer? who (besides other instances in Scripture) does
use the same expression three times in one Chapter, saying of the Sparrows, Luk
12.6. (...).
that not one of them is forgotten BEFORE God. And further, he that denies me
BEFORE men, shall be denied BEFORE the Angels of God.

And do you not blush to think, muchless to say, that Christ, (...).
did here swear by his Father, or swear by men, or swear by the Angels of God?
I could tire the patience of the Reader with instances of this nature. By which
all the wise in heart may judge, what a loathsome spirit that is, by which you
are acted, who durst in print belie Paul, and blaspheme the Son of God, by
leaving them upon record under your own hands for swearers.

SECT. 17.
Now to palliate this your contradiction to Christ's command in your seventeenth
Section you undertake to expound Christ's prohibition of swearing, extending it
to our ordinary discourse; but before a Magistrate you assert it lawful.

Rep. Christ says, swear not AT ALL. Christopher Fowler and Simon Ford say
nay, but before a Magistrate you may swear: Now whether Christ or they are to
be believed, let all that fear the Lord judge. Suppose one of your servants
should ask you leave to pass to London on horseback, you tell him nay; he
asks again, shall I go by coach or on foot; you reply nay, thou shall not go
at all. If this servant shall, notwithstanding this prohibition, presume to
pass to London by water, whether will you not esteem him disobedient, having
given him a universal denial, although he was not particularly forbidden to
pass by water. The application is obvious to those that are serious.

You tell your Reader in the close of your sixteenth Section, that this
doctrine of the unlawfulness of swearing in any case, is a fragment of the old
German Anabaptists.

Rep. Were Christ, and the Apostle James, German Anabaptists, who do expressly
forbid men to swear at all, or by any manner of oath? But what would you inser
thence? why this, that it concerns me to look to it, that (as the Magistrates
then saw cause to dispute with the sword of justice against them, so) the
Magistracy of England may never have the like provocation, to do the same
against the Quakers, and other Sectaries among us.

Rep. Mind Reader, what spirit these men are of, and what they hunt after, Aut
Caesares aut nulli.
blood, blood, Quakers and other Sectaries? That is to say, all those that
cannot subject their neeks to the Priests yoke. But stay, Sirs, was it a
Quaker, or Sectary, or was it a Priest that lost his head by the Sword of
Justice upon Tower Hill? Christoph. Love
Were both your hands clean from the wickedness of that bloody design? if they
were, its well. But sure I am that so considerable a number of your impericus
generation, were concerned in that piece of Treason, that had the State
disputed it with you according to the provocation given them, they might have
found sufficient cause to have cut many a Priest in this Nation shorter by the
head.

And being now engaged in this discourse, I cannot but freely declare my mind
to the whole Nation in this particular, viz. all plots and designs, together
with all plotters and designers, against the peace of the State under which
they live, I do utterly deny; for the grace of God which brings salvation,
teaches me to live peaceably and soberly, in this present evil world.

And be they of what name or profession soever, that are found agitating any
design for the spilling of blood, let the hand of justice find them out, and
let them reap that just reward that is according to their doings. And whatever
these men of blood (whose ambition it is to have their seet upon all others
necks) do suggest to the Magistrate, yet I can freely say, that I do not know
any one person in the Nation called a Quaker, but will readily set his seal to
what I have now declared.

I have been the larger in this particular about swearing because of that great
(but groundless) flourish you make in the close of your seventeenth Section
touching it, viz. that who so can reconcile Christ's prohibition, to the
precepts and examples quoted by you, shall gain the cause; a thing so easily
effected, that there is none, but he that is wilfully blind, but will see the
seeming discord, fully reconciled by what has been before said.

All that William Thomas does about this particular, in mangling and
confounding Christ's plain precept, and clipping that of the Apostle James, by
leaving out in his quotation those words, nor by any other oath; I say, Jam.
5.12.
it is all abundantly answered before, and not only his creature-swearing, Page
25.
and his common swearing (as he expresses himself) but all swearing falls to
the ground by that universal injunction of Christ's, swear not at all.

SECT. 18.
Your eighteenth Section is made up of fained words, and false suggestions;
when you have a mind to belie me, then you quote not my particular expressions,
but tell your Reader that the sum and upshot of them is such and such; and so
instead of my words, do produce the idle conceptions of your own brains, and
then spend time to answer them; just like children that fight with their own
shadows. You pretend to have a great weight upon your shoulders, whilst you own
the work of builders, but it is but of Babel; Sowers, viz. of tares, strife,
and sedition among men; Planters, but it is of that which must be plucked up;
Husbandmen, and yet briars, and thorns still standing in your fields;
Shepherds, but not Christ's, for they never devoured the sheep; Watchmen, but
very blind ones; Soldiers, but not under Christ's Banner, for such fought not
with carnal weapons; I doubt not but you have a good mind to this last
employment, had you but an opportunity to fight Presbytery into the Chair.

You tell me in the same Section, that it is my Law, that those that have been
bred to study, must have no subsistence, but by handy work or begging.

Rep. What a yoke of impudent Liars are you, who durst in print to father that
expression upon me, which never proceeded out of my lip? If you preach lies to
the people, with that confidence with which you print them; let all that fear
the Lord judge what maester you serve, whose Ministers you are, and whom you
may call your Father. That it is your declared doubt, that you should be
reduced to beg or work, in case you had not your maintenance ascertained to
you, is clear to all that observe any thing for why else is it that you do make
such firm indentures with the people for your wages, before ye dare enter upon
the work? At the close of this Section you seem to lament the hard measure you
should have from me, in case, I could compass my fifth Monarchy.

Rep. This suggestion has been once offered before, and now repeated, to beget
(if possible) a jealous eye in the State upon a people trodden down, and
trampled upon in the streets by all, and who are as far removed from a spirit
of fighting, as these men are from the Spirit of truth, which is as far as
light from darkness, or Heaven from Hell. And therefore I tell you again, that
I do neither own, nor expect any other fifth Monarchy but this, that Christ
Jesus should rule and reign in the contrite heart, which is already begun in
the hearts of thousands in this Nation.

You further boast how you should trust God in case you were reduced to that
condition, etc.

Rep. What admirable faith have these men, who can speak so largely of trusting
God for food and raiment, with full bellies, and well- clothed backs? and have
firm dependence on him for their maintenance, whilst their bags and barns are
well filled, and have a power from without to force the people, where they will
not freely give down their milk.

SECT. 19.
You entertain your Reader in your nineteenth Section with a few jests, and
then come in the close to bless God that provides for you; telling your
Reader, that you dare not take Gods gifts, and throw them back into his face,
by contemning the gracious allowance of his providence.

Rep. Is the tenth of poor men's labors that you cruelly exact from them, the
gift of God? and is your forced maintenance which you tear out of peoples
throats, the gracious allowance of his providence? Was this the reason why one
of Christopher Fowler.
you did arrest several poor Gardners in Redding (to the number of twelve, as I
am informed) for the Tithe of their TVRNEPS and CARRETS; that he might thereby
quit himself from the guilt of throwing Gods gifts in his face? etc. Do not
think to cover over the venom of your hearts and practices, with such
hypocritical pretenses as these; and know, that although you may for a season
blind the eyes of men, with such mists of the bottomless pit, yet the righteous
hand of the all-seeing God will find you out, and surely reward you according
to the wickedness of your doings.

SECT. 20.
And now I am come to deal with you touching your great Idol, Tithes, about
which you and William Thomas make a great cry, as they in behalf of their dead
Goddess, Acts 19.28.
Great is Diana of the Ephesians but prove nothing. Sometimes you fly to the
example of Melchisedeck, for patronage in your requiring Tithes, sometimes to
the Law of man. And because you judge it too Jewish to claim them as Successors
to Levi (though Gods command for Tithes, and the institution of that Priesthood
were of equal antiquity) you run thence to Melchizedeck his receiving them of
Abram, hoping thence to gain something for a covering to your practices not at
all warranted by any example of the Ministers of Christ in the Scripture. But
if this be the firmest prop you have to support your Idol (and upon that you
lay the stress of your swelling Argument in your 24th Section) I doubt not but
by what follows, the understanding Reader will conclude, that its no more
able to stand before the strength of truth, then Dagon was before the Ark of
God And therefore to all that you have pleaded in the behalf of Tithes, 1 Samuel
5.4.
from your Twentieth to the end of your Twenty eighth Section, I shall make my
reply in these following particular.

1. Heb. 7.4.
Abram returning from the slaughter of certain Kings, GAVE unto Melchisedeck
(who came out to meet him) the tenth of his SPOILS taken in the War. The
Scripture says not, that he gave them the tenth of his enerease, the tenth
Calf, the tenth Lamb, the tenth Sheaf, the tenth Pig, etc. 2. Genesis 28.22.
We read not that Abram did this by any commandment of the Lords, but as a free
will-offering (such as was Jacobs vow) neither do the Scripture say that
Melchisedeck required or exacted these spoils of Abram, but that they were
voluntarily given him. 3. You cannot show in Scripture that the tenth of spoils
was Melchisedecks yearly maintenance, or that Abraham gave them to him more
then once. 4. Genesis 14 18, 19
Abram gave the tenth of his spoils to Melchisedeck, from whom he received a
blessing, besides bread and wine he brought forth to him; but you do forcibly
extort the tenth of all their increase from them; on whom you pronounce the
curse, whom ye revile, against whom ye rail, and of whom you speak all manner
of evil. 5. Who made you Priests after the order of Melchisedeck; or how came
you to be his successors; who have as much right to his Priesthood, as the
Bishops and their creatures had to make Ministers for Jesus Christ?
By all which, the wise-hearted Reader may perceive, that the example of
Melchisedeck (under which you seem so securely to shelter your selves) does not
afford you the least shadow of countenance in your ungospel-like practices, in
commencing suits at law against-men for the tenth of all their increase. For
let all men judge what parallel there is; Melchisedeck the Priest of the most
high God, meets Abram returning from the War, blesses him, receives (not
exacteth) and that (not as his standing maintenance) but once, the tenth (not
of all his increase but) of his spoils, which Abram (not by commandment but)
voluntarily gave him. But you (who are not Priests, as was Melchisedeck) do
demand and force for your yearly maintenance during life, from whole Parishes
(even where you curse instead of blessing) the tenth of all their increase. So
that the strongest inference that can be drawn from this example is this; that
when any King returns from the War, if he meet with a Priest of the most high
God that blesses him, he may, if he please, give him the tenth of his spoils;
and what is this to you? unless you can persuade the Protector to grant, that
when the Army or Fleet, do return from War, you meeting them with bread and
wine (which I scarce believe you will do, for most of you do not love them so
well) may receive the tenth of all their spoils. But what a mighty slaughter of
Kings must the Army and Fleet needs make, to gain so much spoil, the tenth of
which must serve to be a standing maintenance to so many Priests, who live so
high, and fare so deliciously, as the most of you do?

SECT. 24.
Whereas you urge that Tithes are due to Christ, being a Priest after the order
of Melchisedeck (and therefore due to you) it is such a ridiculous fiction, as
the like I have seldom heard. For would Christ never have made demand of that
which was his due, nor his Apostles and Ministers after him? As he and they
were faithful in telling the people of other their abominations, so surely they
would not have been silent, and not (at least) have told them of their duty,
and reproved them for their sin, in detaining from them the tenth of their
increase, which was their due by command.

But you say the Ministers of Christ then had not the same legal right, backed
with the power of a Christan Magistrate.

Rep. To which I reply two things. 1: Could they not have made demand without a
Magistrate, and have laid it as a sin upon those that refused payment? 2. But
this is of no weight. for neither had the Tribe of Levi any law to enforce
payment at all; which makes your practice the more wicked, who (supposing
Tithes to be as due to you as to Levi) do notwithstanding horribly transgress
their pattern, in extorting that by Law from the people, of which they only
made demand, by virtue of Gods appointment.

I shall close this of Tithes with these four things. 1. I do demand of you,
and William Thomas, and of every Tyth-gathering Teacher in England, but one
example throughout the Scripture, either of a Priest under the Law, or of any
Minister of the Gospel since Christ, that did ever force his maintenance from
the people, nay, even that maintenance which was given them by Gods, or Christ?

2. Whereas there was but a tenth appointed payable to the Tribe of Levi, and a
tenth given to Melchisedeck, how comes it to pass, that you (who are not of
that Tribe) do demand, and receive a seventh of the people, viz. a seventh
Calf, a seventh Lamb, a seventh Pig? etc.

3. I would demand of William Thomas, whether he did not some years since,
receive of his Parishoners the sixth part of all their increase for one year?
and whether he did not urge them to have continued the same for one year more,
which they refused? if this be true in the matter of fact (for which I can
produce testimony out of his own neighborhood) then I demand, what shadow of a
rule in Scripture, he had for this? and whether (supposing the tenth to be his
due) it be not extortion to receive the sixth?

4. Lastly, There is no clearer demonstration that neither you nor he, are
Ministers of Christ, then this, that you express such clamor about your
maintenance. What fears? What distrusts? what out-crys? Christ is no hard
Master, for where he sends out, although it be without purse, or scrip, etc.
there is no want: Never any that were faithful in his work but had enough; and
were you his servants you would trust more, and fear and complain less.

SECT. 29.
To the contents of your twenty ninth Section, treating about your not trusting
your Master (as his Ministers in Scripture did) but indenting for a
maintenance, I have already made reply in my seventh Section, to which I refer
the Reader.

SECT. 30.
In this Section you charge me with bold censures, because I charge it as
hypocrisy on such as preach against pride, and yet live in it, against
covetousness, and yet are greedy of filthy lucre etc. And you do passionately
deny that matter of fact. Whereas should I charge you two in particular to be a
couple of proud, imperious, domineering persons, I could soon produce many
scores of witnesses, out of the Town of Reading, and the County of Berks, to
give testimony thereunto. And as to the most of your Brethren abroad, who, but
he that shuts his eyes at noon day, does not see that whilst they preach
against pride, and covetousness, they themselves are both proud and covetous?
who more haughty? who more greedy of filthy lucre? I do further charge it as
gross hypocrisy, for men to come in the face of a congregation, pretending to
pray with a great deal of zeal, that God would teach them what to say, when as
they are resolved before hand what they will say. And I do further ask you,
where you read of any of the Ministers of Jesus Christ in Scripture, that
carried about Sermon-notes in their pockets, to the several places where they
preached the Gospel, and putting them in a book, did now and then read, and now
and then speak a few sentences to the people without them? Or whether did they
not occasionally where they came, speak as the Spirit of the Lord gave them
utterance? Surely, were they now upon the earth, William Thomas would damn them
for extemporary Teachers, Page 40.
and Enthusiasts, as in the height of his rage, he does those that have not
Sermon-notes, etc,

SECT. 31.
You charge me in your following Section, with bringing an Indictment of felony
against poor Ministers (as you call them) for QVOTING of the Fathers, and
Expositers of Scripture.

Rep But that you are accustomed to tell your Reader that I say this and that,
which never proceeded out of my lips (thereby hoping to enervate the force of
that truth which I did indeed speak) one would wonder that you should so
imprudently assert so manifest a lie touching me: Let the honest Reader peruse
my whole Epistle, and see if there be such a word as quote or quoting, to be
found therein. And yet I must needs be made to charge your poor Ministers, with
that which I never said. And having laid a lie for your foundation, you proceed
to erect thereon a rotten building; proposing several lofty interrogatories to
me, touching Christ quoting Moses and the Prophets, Peter quoting Paul; and
Paul quoting Aratus, Menander, and Epimenides; and all this while do but fight
against a lie of your own creating, for I never gainsaid any of these things.
You know well enough, that my tenth Article did express the complaint made by
your generation, against the people called Quakers, for that they called those
men Thieves and Robbers who did spend six days in the week to gather together
the words of other men, and then come forth on the seventh day, and bid the
people hearken to the word of the Lord, etc. And did Christ or the Apostles
thus? they spoke from the Spirit, and preached by the Spirit, and as they were
by that directed, they did (where they saw occasion) urge the words of the
Prophets, against those that talked of them, but dwelt in that Spirit that slew
them, as your generation do at this day, preach Christ in words, but yet
crucify him where he appears in power. And this practice of Christ and the
Apostles I never condemned

William Thomas soming out his rage about this Article, Page 42.
is as foul and false in his slanderous accusations, as you. He confesses that
he does spend his time to gather together the words of the Prophets and
Apostles (with their right meanings) and then say, Hearken unto the word of the
Lord. Where by the way we must observe, that the meanings that the Priests do
put upon the words of the Prophets and Apostles, are by this man esteemed the
word of the Lord. And then demands whether they be thieves, because they
receive that from the Lord which they deliver to his people?

Rep. He is not in the account of truth a Thief, that receives that from the
Lord, that he delivers to the people. But must he that makes it his trade to
gather together the Saints words, and thereunto add his own imaginations, and
then come forth and bid the people hearken to the word of the Lord, I say, must
this man presently be said to receive this from the Lord? when as whilst he
talks of the Saints words, he is a stranger to the Saints conditions, and an
enemy to those that witness them? may not the worst of men, nay, the fowlest of
Devils, gather together the Saints words and the meanings of men imposed upon
them, and then talk of them to the people? and will he allow that these Brats
of darkness do therein speak what they receive from the Lord, or that the word
of the Lord comes unto them? Grant but his irrational premises, and this
dismal conclusion will unavoidably follow.

SECT. 32.
In this Section you shufflle off your Reader (according to your usual manner
of answering) with a few scoffs and Queries; and such also, which are not at
all to the thing in hand. My Article spoke of the people called Quakers, their
confident advising the Public Teachers to preach no more to the people, then
the Lord has spoken to them. In answer to which, you fall to querying about
Prophetesses and women's teaching, and others coming into your Congregations;
and Christ's, and the Apostles disputing in the Synagogues, etc. All which were
subjects that my Article spoke not of. But wanting matter of just quarrel or
accusation against me (the Article being plain) you would seek to create some.
To all which your filty scoffs, and impertinent Queries, I shall only say Three
things.

1. Gal. 3.28.
The Spirit of the Lord is not confined to one Sex, neither is there male or
female in Christ Jesus, but all are one. Had learned Apollos been such a
stubborn opinionist as you scorners are, he would have disdained (as you do) to
have received instruction, from the lips of a poor Priscilla. 2. Although
Christ, and the Apostles did preach down the whole pedagogy of the Jews, and
all their Temple-worship (for which they were so exceeding zealous) yet when
they came into their Synagogues to dispute with them, they found even at their
hands, a thousand times sairer quarter, then many poor hearts find from your
Wolfish flocks in your Steeple Houses, for speaking but six words, among whom,
they are oftentimes in danger of life, or limb. 3. Whereas you speak of the
Quakers violating that Article of the Government which allows liberty to all
such as profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ. I say, that this is monstrous
hypocrisy in you; when as that Article of the Government, is not more broken
upon any order of men at this day in the Nation, then upon that suffering
people called Quakers; and that by the hands of the Priests Disciples, and
their persecuting companions; by coming into their peacable meetings, and there
railing, and reviling them, nay oftentimes laying violent hands on them; of
which there is scarce a day but does afford an instance in some part of this
Nation or other? and do you, as the most guilty, begin to complain first?
SECT. 33.
Your Three and thirtieth Section is such a Linsy. woolsey piece, such a medly
of confusion, that there is neither head not tail in it. The advice given you,
viz. to preach no more to the people then the Lord has spoken to you, you say,
were it delivered to you in a sober, private, Christian way (I do well know you
love to be honored before the people) you would take well at my hands, and
practice accordingly.

Rep. Then you approve of the advice as good. And why is it then that you
endeavor in the remaining part of your Section to contradict it, and go about
to persuade your Reader, that I bad mal-advised you, in meaning what I did not
speak? It Is a strange law, that when no fault can be found with a man's words,
being wholesome, he must then be reviled, and beaten, for his supposed meanings.
You further demand of me, to what purpose the Scripture is avouched to be
profitable for doctrine, if you may raise no doctrines from it?

Answ. With what reason, or on what ground this impertinent Query is proposed
(more then to spend your spare time) I profess I cannot conceive, for that
there is nothing spoken in my Article that concerns any such thing. However
since you will needs know my mind in the case, I say, That the holy Scriptures
were given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16.
and are profitable for doctrine, reproof, and correction, is true; but does it
therefore follow that the Scriptures were given forth, for you by the strength
of your imaginations, to raise Doctrines, Reasons, and Uses from them, and then
take them and sell them to the people for money? The Scriptures of truth, as
they were spoken forth by the holy men of God, are pure, but you and your
Brethren (to gain a livelihood thereby) do spend your time to fasten your own
corrupt glosses, and interpretations upon them, in which you are so full of
confusion, and contradictions each to other, that, that which has in it self a
sweet harmony, you make to be a monstrous heap of jars and discord: Your after
discourse about Christ's and the Apostles speaking the words of Moses, and the
Prophets, is vain and frivolous; being that which I never denied, or condemned.
And therefore you have done but as peevish persons, in a deep fit of
melancholy, viz. create images in your own fancies, and then fight with them.

SECT. 34.
In this Section you study how to pick matter of wrangling, about that advice
given you, To preach no more to the people then you your selves witness the
life and power of within your selves. But finding my expressions plain, you
fall (according to your wonted ingenuous way) to suppose meanings upon my naked
expressions. And my meaning must needs be supposed to be that which never came
out of my lips: The ground of this is, because you say others of my brethren do
so, and so. How is that proved? by a discourse had (you say) betwixt two
Quakers related by John Toldervy.

Rep. You appeal to Col Sidenham in your fawning Epistle touching your candor
and integrity in the managery (a very hard word) as you term it, of your answer
to my Epistle. And is this one of the demonstrations of your candor and
integrity, to charge such and such things upon the people called Quakers, and
then offer John Toldervy for proof? this is just as if a man should have come
to the Chief-Priests and Rulers of old, and asked them, is Christ an evil-doer,
and worthy to be given over to be crucified? yea would they say, how is that
proved? Why, Judas says so. And then ask the people of the Jews, what is this
Jesus of Nazareth? why, would they say, he is a deceiver, and a blasphemer; how
is that proved? Our Rulers and Chief-Priests say so. And so betwixt you, and
John Toldervy, the innocent shall no way escape condemnation.

SECT. 35.
Your 35th is made up of malicious slanders, and false accusations; where are
those lazy Lurdens, or Drones (as you call them) who eat the fat, and drink
the sweet? For mine own part, I know none such but the Priests; who yet are
wiser for themselves, then those you accuse of walking up and down the Land;
for that instead of traveling through heat, and cold, drouth and wet, they
love to keep close in one parish, to eat the fat, and drink the sweet. But
where are those that do eat their wives and families out of doors? name any man
that is called a Quaker, that has done so; and if you can (were recrimination
any excuse) I doubt not but for every such one, to name you twenty Priests that
are deeply guilty of the same crime.

SECT. 36.
In your 36th Section you accuse me of setting up the revelation of the Spirit,
in opposition to all humane studies; and why? Because my Twelfth Article said,
That the mind of God is not to be known by study in a University, but by
revelation of the Spirit, who alone knows his mind. 1 Cor. 2.11, 12
And is not this plain truth?

SECT. 37.
Why is it then, that you make such a great noise about University learning;
endeavoring to make Paul and Peter to be Advocates for you in the case? The
first of whom, viz, Paul, did with all his learning fight against Christ, and
drew his blood; as you, and many others at this day do, that pretend highly to
it. And although he came afterward to know and receive, that Jesus whom he
before persecuted, yet, I deny it was at all by the power of his humane
learning, but by the revelation of the Spirit of life. And as for Peter, how
could you but blush (were you not past all shame) to abuse and belie him as you
do, in bringing him for testimony to the usefulness of University learning in
this way; making him to say, that in the reading of the Scriptures it may keep
a man from wresting them to destruction? does not the Scripture bear witness of
Peter, that he himself was unlearned? and will you make Peter to condemn Peter,
Act 4.13.
and implicitly conclude that he himself was a wrester of Scripture having not
that learning, which you say will keep men from wresting them? Moreover, do not
the Pope, his Cardinals, the Jesuits and the rest of your Romish fraternity
abound in University learning? notwithstanding which, do not you and the rest
in England, accuse all those learned ones, for wresting the Scriptures to their
own destruction.

SECT. 38.
In what confusion do your next Section show you to live in? which you begin
with as full an acknowledgment of the impotency of humane learning, to give the
knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom, as I my self have at any time, or
could have made. Your words are these. We acknowledge that all the learning of
the world will not bring saving truth effectually home to the understanding,
and consciences of men; nay, carnal reason, backed with LEARNING, will dispute
the light of the most glorious doctrinal truths of the Gospel, out of men's
judgments, and the most glorious practical truths of of the Gospel out of men's
consciences, as appears daily in those, whose learning Satan makes use of (as
he does of yours and others) to defend, and patronize their lusts. So that
there needs another kind of learning, to settle these truths savingly in the
minds and hearts of men, which the Scripture calls the revelation and
demonstration of the Spirit. Thus are you constrained in words (whatever your
hearts are) to give testimony to the insufficiency of your Idol University
learning, and to the efficacy of the revelation and demonstration of the
Spirit. And yet in the close of the same Section, you cannot but call Schools
of learning, no small props of Christian Religion. Are not they very sure props
of Christian Religion, in which men learn that, which joined with carnal reason
will dispute the most glorious truths of the Gospel out of men's judgments and
consciences. Here is just the image of Babel. As your brethren do use to
preach, so do you print; who oftentimes in their Sermons, do very zealously
assert a thing for truth, and before they close their discourse, do cross the
same thing and contradict it. I could tell the Reader at large what precious
Plants the Universities and Schools of learning, do oftentimes nurse up, but I
shall reserve that until another season. Only for close of this, you being
now crying Hosanna to your Universities, let me ask you this question; How came
it to pass that Simon Ford was (a very few years since) expelled the University
of Oxford? Simon Ford turned out of the University of Oxford.
Was the Mother unrighteous, or was the Son wicked? If for a good deed he was
driven thence, then that prop of Christian Religion, was a persecuter of the
innocent; if for evildoing, then let the Reader judge, how well this man
behaved himself there, that the University (which I am sure heretofore did
rarely administer expulsion to any, but for a very great crime) thought good to
vomit him up as a corrupt member.

SECT. 40, 41, 42, 43.
In the next place I cannot but take notice how much stir both you and William
Thomas do make, about that expression of mine in the Twelfth Article viz. that
Paul and Peter preached that Gospel which Christ by his Spirit revealed in
them. 1 Cor. 2 10. Gal. 1.16.
And here you follow your old trade of making meanings upon my plain words: And
you doubt another Snake in the grass of this fair expression.

Rep. Are you Ministers of Jesus Christ, and know not to this day what it is to
preach the Gospel, which he has revealed in you?

Are there two Gospels? or did Paul and Peter preach two, viz. one revealed in
them and another without them (...) there any other way of knowing the glorious
mysteries of the Gospel, but by revelation made by the Spirit of Jesus within.

William Thomas confesses, that Paul and Peter were instructed by immediate
revelation, Page 44.
which (says he) We are not so presumptuous as to expect.

Rep. Poor blind man! The Lord is, my witness, that my beart was moved with
pity toward him at the reading of this expession, and could even weep over
him thus drowned in ignorance. What has he been preaching these thirty and
nine years (for so long it seems he has been a Teacher) who is so far from
having received, Page 8. confessed.
that he never expected instruction by immediate revelation? Has he only
taught the history of that which others did, and spoke? If so, what has he
done more then the Devils, and many (now) damned spirits, can do, and have
done? Cannot those soul spirits talk of what others have said, and done in the
Scriptures? nay, Mark. 5.7.
do we not find an unclean spirit preaching Christ in words to be the Son of
the most high God? Have not the Pope, his Cardinals and Jesuits the knowledge
of the history of the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, and do preach them in
words? Had not the Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, the knowledge of the letter
of Scriptures, and yet slew Christ? Could not Paul have preached the history of
Scriptures that spoke of Christ, even then (when with all his learning) he drew
his blood, and persecuted him from City to City? Now, what has William Thomas
done more then all these, unless, besides the knowledge of the History, gained
by reading and hearing, he has received instruction by the immediate
revelation of the Spirit in the mystery, as Paul afterward did, and so come to
know the same made manifest which has been hid from ages, Col. 1.26, 27.
viz. Christ in him the hope of glory.

From the manifestation of his ignorance, Page 45.
he proceeds in the next page to cast up a loathsome morsel of his
profaneness, calling that expression, of witnessing the Saints conditions, by
the reproachful name of gibberish. But let the scorner and the scoffer know,
that though he preach and talk of the Saints words (which the evil Angels
themselves can do) until he drop into his grave, if he live and die a stranger
to the Saints conditions, he will be found to be but a liar before the Lord, in
the great day of his account. He may go up in his Pulpit, and make many gilded
Orations, about Paul's being crucified with Christ, and Christ's living in him
(if he will yet acknowledge that to be a truth) and yet, if he come not to
witness the same condition of Paul's to be his, let me tell him, that when the
Lamb comes to judgment, he shall wish with tears, that he might indeed know
that which his scornful pen now trampleth upon as gibberish. Miserable souls,
who pass away their days (and so sink into eternity) under such men's
teachings, who neither have, nor expect to have instruction from the immediate
revelation of the Spirit, and scornfully spurn at those that witness the Saints
conditions.

SECT. 43.
You also have a stone to throw at this expression, calling it odd and uncouth.

Rep. To those that are ignorant of it, even the pearl of great price is of
little value; and so it is to you, who live in blindness your selves, and do
strive to keep others bound in the same chain. And whereas you charge me in the
close of this Section, with speaking scornfully of the righteousness of Christ.
I say you are a couple of impudent liars, who dare print that as mine, which
never was in my heart to think, nor upon my lips to express. Are you Ministers
of Christ, who can scarce write a leaf, without a lie? Beside; the witness of
God in my own conscience, Christ's innocence pleaded against the cry of the
Chief-Priests: Page. 55.
the honest Reader may see that I have my own expression as a witness for me
also in my book, against your filthy stander? in which I spoke of such, as did
talk of a righteousness beyond the stars, and they in the mean time live in
filthiness and pollution, and is this to speak scornfully of the righteousness
of Christ, when as it was not so much as mentioned? They that witness Christ in
them, do not witness his righteousness to be a far off from them, unless you
suppose that Christ can be separated from his righteousness.

SECT. 44.
Your next Section contains little worthy of notice, because you say, that if
I mean as I say, then you mean and say as I do. And yet you cannot forbear to
multiply words, and make a confession of your faith; telling me, that you do
not make your mortification of sin, or resurrection to newness of life, any
part of your righteousness in the presence of God.

Rep. You have little reason so to do; for that would be a strange polluted
righteousness to appear in the presence of the Lord with, which is made up of
such mock-mortification of sin, and resurrection to life, as yours is; who by
your unclean fruits do make it manifest, that you are alive to sin, and dead
unto newness of life.

SECT. 45.
You cannot forbear (being accustomed to it) to add another gross lie, to the
former, in the beginning of this Section also; averting that in my fourteenth
Article, I do confess that I do both publish, and practice, an unmannerly
disrespect of all persons.

Rep. Why sirs, is the dread and fear of the Lord quite removed from before
your eyes, that you are thus audacious in printing, and publishing, such
notorious untruths unto the world? did I, by my recital of the words of the
Apostle James (he that respects persons does commit sin) confess, James 2.9.
that I did both publish and practice an unmannerly disrespect of all persons?
Do you not lay the innocent Apostle under the same condemnation, since the
words recited out of that Scripture, were originally his and not mine? as you
have before pleaded hard for your backs and your bellies; so in this and your
following Section, you do for your honor; being loath to lose the cap and the
knee, and greetings in the Markets. And having here (as formerly) laid a lie
for your foundation, you proceed to tell me, that you will dispute it with me,
whether Religion does destroy civility and good manners? A thing which I never
asserted, and therefore is out of all question with me. True Religion is the
Nurse, not the destroyer of good manners; which good manners do consist, in
doing the things that are honest both in the sight of God and men; not in an
Apish fantastical pulling off the hat, and crying, Your humble servant Sir;
when as oftentimes whilst that complement is upon the lip, there is so much
malice in the heart, as would cut the throat of the person saluted, were there
but an opportunity presented.

You proceed on and say, that you do humbly conceive that the fifth Commandment
is not yet repealed.

Rep. Did I ever say it was? What? always create images in your own corrupt
fancies, and then contend about them? I say according to the Scriptures, that
children ought to obey their Ephesians. 6.1.
parents, and servants their masters, and all people the Verse. 5. Tit. 3.1.
magistrates in the Lord. Which obedience consists in doing all things just,
and well pleasing in the sight of God. Neither do I deny to call persons, or
things, noble, excellent, or honorable, which indeed are so. But what is this
to your crouching, and cringing, and capping, and kneeing it, to the man
wearing the gold ring, and the gay raiment; passing by the poor man in vile
apparel, without any notice or regard? And whereas you justify your selves as
such who do prefer a godly poor man, before any wealthy man, that is not so. I
say, how does this appear? Is it by your insulting and lording it over all
those in the Town of Redding, that refuse to be Vassals to your corrupt wills
and lusts? Let those that are the godly poor in and about that Town, be
witnesses against you in what you have here falsely asserted of your selves.

SECT. 47.
And whereas you demand of me, why I do give the name of Sirs, and Sir, since
you say my brethren do quarrel with the name of Master, or Sir.

Ans. I answer, that for the Readers sake, Acts 7.26. "ANDPES (...) VIRI. Act.
27.10. "ANDPES (...) Viri video. Ver 25. (...) "ANDPES Bono animo estote VIRI.
So verse. 21.
I shall give this plain account thereof; I do use the word Sir, and Sirs, as
Moses used it, and as Paul used it three times in one Chapter, to express no
more then man, or men, for so you do well know (though you conceal it from your
Reader) the word there used does signify, and no more. And whereas you say
that my brethren might know how often the word Master, or Sir, is given and
taken by the Apostles of Christ. I say, I find not in Scripture that ever any
Apostle of Christ gave the word Master, to any Apostle, or other Saint, nor
that any Apostle did use the title of Sir, or Sirs, to the Apostles or other
Saints, by the word ((...)) Kurie, or ((...)) Kurioi, which words do express
Lordship, or Mastership; but when they did use the word Sirs, it was by the
Greek word, ((...)) Andres, which signifies no more then men, and so do I use
it, and no otherwise.

SECT. 48.
You have not yet done with this. But do go on to suppose worse blood in my
veins, then that which boyles against poor Ministers. And you doubt that I that
would strip them (viz. the Magistrates) of their Titles, have too great mind to
their Offices.

Rep. Are you come with this threed-bare suggestion again? Antichrist and his
Ministers throughout all ages, did cleave close to the Magistrates, The Priests
pretend great love to the Magistrates whilst they will serve them.
whilst they would be their servants, and supporters; but when they would no
longer serve their lusts, then damn them to the bottomless pit: Fain you would
persuade the Magistrates what aspiring persons, the people called Quakers are;
which cannot be prevalent with any, but such as are as drunk with rage against
them as your selves; unless it be because they are a people trodden down by
all as mire in the streets. But let me ask you Did the Quakers ever attempt the
overthrow and destruction of any power that would not establish them in the
throne? Or did they ever endeavor to bring into England an army of Scots, to
overawe both Parliament and Army, into subjection to prescripts, and rules of
their creating? such things as these (with many other that I omit) would have
showed some bad blood running in their veins indeed.

I do well remember the time when your Pulpits sounded of little else, but
Curse ye Meroz, curse bitterly the inhabitants thereof, etc. stirring up the
people to join with the Parliament, against the late King, and your forefathers
the Bishops; hoping that the Parliament in conclusion (Bishops being dethroned)
would have made you heirs of their inheritance, of their lands, and revenues,
of their honor, vainglory and domination; and have committed the scepter to
you, to rule and tyrannize, over all other men's consciences. But they denying
you that, your Dialect touching them was soon changed in your Pulpits: and
probably, had you not been timely prevented, you bad given them in requital for
all their pains and travel, naught but a Scottish yoke.

SECT. 49.
In this Section you do not a little insult, and triumph, making a great
flourish, as if you had gained some notable conquest. And all because in my
last Article, I said, that the people called Quakers, did avouch it proper, as
in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, so in English, to say thou, and thee, to any
single person. And was this such a groundwork for you to build so mighty a
flourish upon? Can you and your schoolboy of ten years old, (you speak of) find
me any place in Scripture where the Hebrew word, (...), or the Greek word.
(...) or the Latin word. Tu, are rendered any otherwise in English then THOU?
Or can you, and your young Scholar, show me any place in Scripture, where the
Hebrew word (...), or the Greek word (...), or the Latin word vos, are rendered
any otherwise, then you, or ye? Neither am I so silly (as you are pleased to
call me) but that I do well know, that words in all languages do signify this,
or that, (ex instituto humano) by man's institutior, but when by man's
institution, tu is appointed to signify thou, and vos, ye, I hope its not left
(ad arbitrium) to every man to express ye, by the word tu, nor thou, by the
word vos.

SECT. 50.
And because you would not be left without some reason, why you say thou and
thee, to the great God; you offer such a one as you have, though it be a
pitiful lame one, (viz.) because you address your selves to God in Prayer, in
the unity of his nature.

Rep. Is it not proper upon the same ground to say thou and thee to a single
person? unless you will say that you speak to a plurality of men, when you
speak but to one.

William Thomas says, that to say thou, Page 47.
and thee, to our superiors is offensive, which ought to be avoided?

Rep. Is that language offensive unto men, which he himself does give to the
great God, as often as he prays? or is not the Lord of heaven and earth his
Superior? if he be, why does he not avoid such offensive language? And if to
use the words thou and thee, be to be a perfect Clown (as he expresses it)
then what would he be esteemed, who does publicly use the same to the Almighty
God his Superior so often in his Pulpit?

SECT. 54.
And now I am come to your large list of Particulars, which you call THE
QVAKERS DOCTRINES: In mustering up which you have showed your selves not a
little fraudulent and dis-ingenuous:

For first, upon diligent search and enquiry, I can scarce find one particular
in the whole Catalogue (that is, of any weight) but is either a thing created,
or misquoted. Secondly, Let the Reader observe whose testimony you offer in
evidence to prove those things of which you accuse them (viz.) The Book called
The Perfect Pharisee, John Toldervy, Richard Baxter, etc. If Pilate will accept
of the testimony of the whole counsel of the Rulers, chief Priests, and
Pharisees against Christ (to whom they were professed enemies) can he be
adjudged to be any other then a person worthy to suffer death? If a Jesuit
should come to one of you and impeach you, and those called Protestants for
Heretics, and for proof thereof, should offer in evidence, the testimony of
the Pope, Cardinals, and the whole Romish crew, would you judge it fair
dealing, or would you not reject such his proof as coming from those that are
judges and parties against you? Thirdly, if the things you charge were all
true, (as they are not) must the particular expression of one man be presently
charged as the doctrine of many thousands that are called by the same name, who
do utterly disown the things so spoken? If this be a regular way of proceeding,
what Monsters of men could I soon prove you two to be, and most of the public
Teachers of the Nation, by the many wicked, profane, blasphemous expressions
of your hearers, and followers?
Nay farther, if I listed to charge all that upon you two, which I have heard
from the mouths of sober men, nay, which I find printed touching (not your
sayings only; but) the wickedness of your doings, you would appear so foul and
filthy, that there is no honest heart but would dis-own your fellowship
(without repentance) whilst he had a day to live.

Its not my business not is it my purpose, to contend about other men's words.
Yet that the Reader may judge how you deal with the People called Quakers, in
the rest of your Articles: I shall let him know how falsely and unfairly, you
deal with them in two or three of the Particulars:

1. One of the Quakers Doctrines you say is, That they are equal with God, as
holy, just, and good, as God himself. For proof of which you quote the Book
called, The Perfect Pharisee.

Rep. 1. The two persons upon whom this expression was charged have publicly
enough denied, and disowned it in Print. 2. I do not know any one person that
is called a Quaker, but does (as I my self do) deny and abhor any such
expression. Now then, let the honest Reader observe, whether it be not a wicked
and a horrible thing in these malicious persons, to charge that as one of the
Quakers Doctrines, which not only the persons, on whom it is fathered do deny,
and disown; but also, which is with one lip denied and disowned, by every
individual among those many thousands that are called by that name in these
Nations.

2. Next you say that one of our shee-Quakers being convented before the Major
of your Town, and asked what she was, and what was her name (which is your
false and wicked addition) roundly answered, I am that I am.

Rep. I have thoroughly examined this matter to the bottom, and do find it to be
like your former, a filthy slander and a falsehood. For the said person being
again, and again asked by the Mayor, What she was (not what was her name, at
that time she gave the following answer) answered, I am what I am. And to this
I have the testimony of two credible persons that were then present. And
whereas you mention two Officers of your Town that will attest what you say
upon oath. I say, to convince those two persons either of the weakness of their
memories, or the wickedness of their hearts, let them remember (and let the
Reader take notice of it) that she being accused for saying, I am what I am, a
stander by asked, why, did not Paul say, by the grace of God. I am what I am?
Ay, replied the Mayor by the grace of God? But if she had said, 1 Cor. 15, 10.
I am that I am (which she did not) must the saying of one particular person be
made presently one of the Quakers Doctrines?

3. Another Doctrine of the Quakers you say (in your fourteenth Section) is,
That whosoever expects to be saved by him that died at Jerusalem, shall be
deceived.

Rep. Blush and be ashamed (if you can) ye shameless liars; who durst in print
avouch that for one of the Quakers Doctrines, which is publicly disowned by
them; as all may see who will but peruse their several Books. And where I have
been at their meetings, I have often heard the thing disowned in the hearing of
many hundreds of people; and salvation owned and presented, by none other but
by that very Son of God, that witnessed a good confession before Pontius Pilat,
and offered himself upon the cross at Jerusalem for the sins of the world. The
Accuser of the brethren, which rules in you, taught you to be so maliciously
subtle, that you quoted no proof for this abominable slander, and therefore the
lie yet rests upon your own heads. And if you can produce any person that
avoucheth any such thing, know, that all the people called Quakers that I know,
are as ready to deny and disown him, as they are to deny the filthiness of such
false accusers as you two are.

I am unwilling any longer to detain the sober Reader, whilst I rake further
into that filthy dunghill of your untruths, and slanders. By what has been
already said to those three particulars, he may easily judge of what stamp the
remainer are, which are comprised in that deformed Catalogue.

And now since you judge it equal to take the particular expressions (and those
for the most part not true, but invented) of certain persons called Quakers,
and charge them as Doctrines upon the whole body of that people that are calby
the same name; I hope you will not esteem it otherwise then just to have better
measure returned back to you, then you have measured unto others, viz. by
presenting the Reader with such expressions, as have dropped from the lips and
pens of one of your brethren, which (according to your own rule) you must give
me leave to call

The Priests Doctrines,
1. That to affirm that Christ is the means, and that there is no other means
of salvation, is an error, if not damnable. Josh. Miller of Cardiff in his book
entitled, Antichrist in man the Quakers Idol, page 13. Did the people called
Quakers, preach and profess such devilish Doctrine as this, I would disown
them in the face of the whole world.

2. That lying is no sin but a change of the mind. Asserted and pleaded for by
the same Joshuah Miller of Cardiff, before sufficient witness ready to attest
it. A wicked principle! and an inlet to all fraud, deceit, and
falss-witness-bearing, and that which being practiced would turn all the
converse of men (which ought to be managed with truth as in the presence of the
Lord) into a continued lie.

Many more particulars I could reckon up, and prove, upon your selves, and some
of your Function, of as deep a die as these two. But I shall spare you for the
present. Only let me advise you, that if your way of proceeding against the
people called Quakers be just and reasonable, in throwing created and misquoted
expressions, as dirt upon the whole body of that people; I know not how you and
all the public Teachers of the Nation will be able to absolve your selves,
from being horrible Blasphemers of the name of Christ, and destroyers of the
beauty of all humane converse.

Thus have I made my Reply to that part of your Pamphlet that concerns my
Epistle. To the after part thereof (wherein you rather seek matter of quarrel
with me, then answer ought that concerned you) I shall not be wanting in making
a particular return, in case I hear not further from William Thomas, whom that
do more especially concern.

In the mean while return into your selves, and consider what you are now
doing, and whose errand you are posting upon: And know that neither you, not
your weapons formed against the Lamb shall prosper before the Lord. Consider
whether Satan does not make the same use of your learning, In your 38. Section.
which you confess he does of some men's, viz. To defend and patronize your
lusts. You may for a season, with fair words, and specious pretenses, deceive
the simple; persuading them that you are Ministers of Christ, because you
preach and profess him in words, though you persecute and crucify him where he
appears in power. But though men may be deceived, yet God will not be mocked.
As you sow, so shall you also reap. Whilst you sow to the flesh, bringing forth
the corrupt fruits of Pride, Envy, Covetousness, Oppression, etc. It is not
your gilded profession that will cover you over in the presence of the most
high God. In the pure light of Christ, that despised light, that light which
you so furiously decry and trample upon, search and prove your selves. For I
bear record to it (and you shall one day witness the same to be true) that a
swift and dreadful witness will it be against all transgressors, in the great
and terrible day of the Lord. It will then assuredly speak, by no gift will it
be bribed, nor by the tongue of an Orator, will it be enjoined silence; but an
impartial cry will it make before the Lord for justice upon the the evil doer,
and he himself shall put his seal to it, that the cry thereof is just.

I am A Friend to your Souls, but an unalterable Enemy to your deceit. THOMAS
SPEED.

A TESTIMONY FOR TRUTH, AND A Caution to all that profess it.
TO live in the fear of the Lord, is the beginning of true Wisdom, from which
whosoever departs, does at once lose both his Rock and his glory. Whilst the
earthen vessel is made the habitation of the Lord, it is all beautiful, and in
him, and for his sake, to be honored among the Saints; but he being withdrawn,
what is man, but a dark temple of clay, whence the glory is departed? Man
abiding in the truth, shines as a Star in the Firmament, but turning his back
upon that, he becomes an unsavory snuff whose light is extinguished. Whilst
Aaron listneth to the Lord, I will hearken unto him; but when he gives ear to
the seducing charms of the people, to make new Gods, I will leave both him and
them to worship the molten Calf, which he has set up. How illustrious is the
Throne of Solomon, while he abides faithful with the God of his Fathers? but
forsaking him, and turning unto strange women, his wisdom becomes foolishness;
his strength, weakness, and is brought by the subtilty of the Tempter to bow
his knee to those dead Idols, Ashteroth and Milcom; But the true God, whom
Aaron once served, is not to be blasphemed, because he is now found sacrificing
to an Idol. Neither will the wholesome words given forth by the mouth of Solomon
from the Spirit of the Lord, cease to be truth throughout all generations,
though Solomon's heart be turned from his God, and he prevailed upon to worship
those things that are no Gods. Cursed be that lip that speaks evil of the
pure light of the Lord, because some starting from it, are found wandering in
the perilous paths of darkness. They that abide in the light, walk safely, but
who so turns from it, walks among the rocks. Who is he that despises the
light of a candle in a dark night, because another who turns from it,
stumbleth and falls? Or where is he among all the Sons of men, that will
refuse to walk in a clean path, because some straying from it, are found having
their feet stocked in the mire and clay? Look well therefore to your standing
all ye that fear the Lord; and whilst ye think ye stand, take heed least ye
fall. Let not your faith stand in the wisdom or excellency of man, but in the
power of the Lord: Walk humbly with your God, so will you walk safely. Forsake
not the blessed fruit of the tree of life, to eat of the shining fruit of the
tree of Knowledge. Stumble not, because another falls, but be the more
watchful over your own steps. And to all you that rejoice at another swerving
from the truth, I say, beware how you condemn Christ for a deceiver, or his
doctrine for deceit, because Peter denied him. If Peter return to himself, and
repent, his will be the joy, but yours the shame. What gain will it be to you,
O ye men unwise, if over one that is fallen, you your selves stumble and fall
to your own destruction? He may be raised by power of the Lord to praise him in
the Land of the living, when as you, being hardened by the sliding of his feet
will be sealed up under the chains of eternal darkness.

FINIS.

