A LETTER FROM UTERCHT, TO THE ASSEMBLY of DIVINES AT WESTMINSTER: SHOWING The
conversion of Church Lands to Lay-uses, to be condemned by Luther, Calvin,
Knox, and the whole Assemblies of Scotch Divines, as a detestable Sacrilege
before God, and provoking his heavy judgments.

Sent in a Letter to Doctor BURGES in June last, to be presented.

A Copy whereof coming accidentally to the hands of W. B. was by him commended
to the Press.

MAT. 10.26. There is nothing covered that shall not be revealed: nor hid, that
shall not be known.

Printed in the year, 1648.

A LETTER FROM VTERCHT TO THE ASSEMBLY of DIVINES AT WESTMINSTER.
THe filial duty we owe our natural parents, excuses, nay commands all our
endeavors for their preservation; and 'twere sin to think my self (though but
a Layman) less indebted to our Spiritual Mother the Church. Therefore I
shall not need to apologize for this my address to you in the behalf of her
to whom your selves are more obliged: For besides our equal adoption as
Christians, your selves are tied in your particular as Ecclesiastiques,
naturalized in her womb, nursed with the milk from her own breast, fed with
the shewbread from her Altar. Next, as persons appointed by the two Houses of
this present Parliament to consult her welfare, guard her indemnity: But
chiefly as Shepherds and Watchmen appointed by God over his flock, and good
Shepherds do not only keep the sheep, but their fold safe and entire, as their
best outward preservative. For if the wolf enters while ye sleep, are ye
innocent? if while ye look on, are ye excusable? But if ye open the door to
him, let your consciences rather then my pen tell ye your guilt. See therefore
that while ye abolish Episcopacie, ye do not open wide the door to ravenous
Sacrilege, that shall at once devour the patrimony of Christ and his Church;
for can ye expect Laborers in the Vineyard, when ye suffer not the Lord to
have wherewith to pay the penny? ^. Mat. 27. ^. John 19.
Remember that the Roman Soldiers (though Heathens) divest Christ, only while
they scourge him, and then restore his deposited garments, and he wears them
till crucified; nor then does any share them, but such as were active in his
death, and of them the meanest soldier. None seize the Vineyard, ^. Mat. 27.35.
^. John 19.23.
but those that murdered the heir, wicked husbandmen; and will ye look on, nay
I fear with Saul, keep their clothes while they divide the garment, ^. Mat.
21.35.
share the Vineyard, sell the Church Lands before Episcopacy be abolished? for
God be thanked it is not yet, and I hope the King will see it never shall be
enacted.

Are not ye Sons of Zadock, Ezekiel. 44.15, 23
Priests that should teach the people the difference between holy and profane
things? and are ye silent in this matter? Shall I re-act Phormie, and tell ye
this is Sacrilege, and ye ought prevent it? But perhaps some of you may doubt,
therefore though I will not urge ye with the opinion of Fathers, lest some
style them Papist; nor the result of Councels, lest some term them Popish; yet
let me remember and press ye with the opinion of the Angels of those (ye hold
the best) Reformed Protestant Churches; and according to whose pattern ye have
covenanted to reform ours, as the Geneva, German, and Scotch Churches.

It Is said to be Sacrilege (says Calvin) to convert Ecclesiastical Revenues
to other uses, Calv. de ne^es. Eccles. reform. fo. 66, 67. Edit. 1619.
and I agreeing it. If I should say we have not sinned in this kind, I should
lie, they accuse our Princes to have taken and mis-imployed to profane uses the
patrimony of Christ and his Church, I excuse it not. That the Churches Revenues
are not employed to the uses to which they were dedicated, I confess
displeases me, and with me all good men will grieve that our Princes take to
their use what was taken from the Friars and Priests, and I confess a heavy
judgment is pronounced against them that spoil the Church. To Farrell he
writes thus, Call. Epist. 66.
In the Senate often, in the Pulpit without cessation, I tell them what heavy
judgments hang over them for this Sacrilege: Nor think I while I prevail
not, that I have d^scharged my duty. And to Viretus thus, Epist. 108.
Papam fuisse furem and sacrilegum videndum (says he) ne simus successores. As
if to abolish Papal authority and Liturgy, and yet mis-imploy the
Church-patrimony, were no Reformation, but a continuance of theft and
sacrilege. And he concludes, that With Balac in vain we seek a Balaam to
bless us, while we continue in this cursed estate. Thus Calvin.

Luther says, The Devil has two ways to spoil Christ's Church, Luth. in Gal.
cap. 6. ver. 6. fo. 433.
Heresy and Poverty. To effect which, he stirs up the wicked Magistrate in the
City, and the ungodly Nobility and Gentry in the Country, to take and convert
to their own profane use the Churchrevenue: For then (says he) men will
neglect the Ministry, for ye had rather your children embraced wealthy trades,
then beggarly Divinity. And he says, For the sin of Sacrilege were the
Churches of Galatia and Corinth (as he believed) so infested (as ours) with
many false teachers.

Knox and the whole Scotch Clergy solicit the Lords Regents of Scotland, and
with we dare not flatter your Honors, First Book of Discipline, fo. 51. Land.
1641.
press them with reasons to restore the Lands of Chantries, and Friars, etc.
to the Church. Knox on his deathbed writing to the General Assembly of
Divines at Sterling, having advised them not to suffer unworthy men to be
thrust into the Ministry, which (says he) will be a hard battle, Declar. of
the Church of Scotl. fo. 7.8. Land. 1642.
yet the second part will be harder, that ye withstand the merciless devourers
of the Church patrimony. If men will spoil, (says he) let them do it at
their own peril and condemnation, but communicate not ye with their sins,
neither by consent nor silence: But with public protestation make known to
the world, ye are innocent of such robberies, which WILL ere long provoke Gods
vengeance.

The National Assembly of Divines at Edinburgh demands of the Queen the Lands
rf Hospitals, Knox Hist. of the Reformat. of Relig. in Scotl. fol. 410. Land.
1644.
Fryeries, etc. with all rems, annuities, alterages, obites, and other duties
belonging to the Priests, to be employed to pious uses. Knox in his History of
Reformation of Religon calls the Nobility The unjust possessors of the Church
patrimony. Ibid. fo. 252.


The Assembly at Edinburgh, Declar. of the Church of Scocl. fol. 10.
1576. declares the patrimony of the Church to be Jure Divine: And what is said
to be the patrimony of the Church, the second Book of the Discipline of the
Church tells you in these words, Under the patrimony of the Church, we
comprehend all things given to the Church, as Lands, Houses.
Biggens, possessions, Rents, etc.

At Glascow they declare, Ibid. fo. 13.
That to convert the Church patrimony to the particular and profane use of any
man, is a detestable Sacrilege before God: and by that Assembly all Ministers
are directed to preach against that Sacrilege: Ibid. fo. 21.
But nothing prevailing with men for restitution by fasting and prayer
commanded by the Assembly at Saint Andrews 1582. Ibid. fo. 15.
they condole the mis-imployment of Church-rents.

Did these, the brightest Lamps of those ye call the best Reformed Protestant
Churches, and whole Assemblies of Divines in Scotland, labor for a restitution
of Church Lands, though given as ours) by Papists (as ours) to Popish Priests
and Friars, but not employed as ours now, for support of Protestant Divines?
did they yet acknowledge a heavy judgment threatened against the spoilers of
the Church Patrimony? Did they write, preach, fast and pray against this
Sacrilege, lest they should endanger their own and others souls? and can ye,
as careless of both, with safety to neither, sit silent, not preach, not
write, not fast, not pray, not speak against a more horrid Sacrilege?

Can ye see the godly Onias and all the Priests prostrate before the Altar, 2
M^c. 3.15.
weeping and praying to prevent one single Sacrilege, but a hac
vice-tantum-Sacriledge, only the Plunder of a little money out of the
Temple-Treasury; and will not ye, not one of ye weep, nor write, nor speak one
word to prevent the ruin of a whole Church, and consequently Nation? As many
Sacriledges as ye and your children shall number days, and persons
mis-imploying Church-Revenues. Will no example neither of Jew nor Gentile,
Papist nor Protestant, and of these, the best of those you term the best
Reformed Protestant Churches? will none move ye? Though neither they, nor the
very many and heavy worldly judgments in our own Nation, upon the families and
estates of our own Nobility, our own Gentry, and Commonalty stir ye not; yet
let the view and contemplation of one spiritual judgment, yet only (God so
stint it) upon a foreign Nation. Let that awake and fright ye.

See the now darkened Palatinate, which flourishing, seized all the Churches
Patrimony, setting that first bad copy of Sacrilege, which unhappy Germany and
miserable We unluckily followed. See there how after the Sword had (as with us)
long raged, depopulating (as with us) the Country, destroying (as with us) all
estates, both sexes, all ages, and then to add misery to their affliction,
their candlestick (may the Parallel never hold) their candlestick is removed,
the most glorious Protestant Religion suprest, and Popery, (which ye seem so
to fear) re-planted, as if God were less offended with the superstitious
vanities of Papists, then the contemptuous Sacrilege of Protestants.

This weighed, if ye will be Ezekiels Watchmen, Ezekiel. 33.6.
See the Sword coming, and not blow the trumpet, that men may be warned: if
any man die in this iniquity, shall not his blood be required at your hands?
But on the other side, Ioshuah 6.
if with Joshuah's Priests (which I hope and pray for) ye blow the trumpet
seven days, Deuteronomy. 28.
and then seven times, even till ye level the walls of this Jericho with the
ground. May ye be blessed in the City, and in the field, blessed in the fruit of
your body, and the increase of your cattle, blessed when ye come in, and blessed
when ye go out. May all the blessings in the Old Testament be doubled upon ye,
and all of the New crown ye, that ye may bless our Israel, and in them, him
that prays for it,

Utercht, 4. June, 1647. Still. Angl. CLEM: SPELMAN.

JOEL 1.9, 10, 11. The meat offering and the drink offering is cut off from the
house of the Lord, the Priests, the Lords Ministers mourn. The field is
wasted, the Land mourns; Be ye ashamed, O ye husbandmen.
FINIS.

