CERTAIN QUERIES Propounded To the most serious Consideration of those Persons
Now in Power. OR Any others whom they do, or may concern.

By JOHN SPITTLEHOUSE, (late of the Army) whom the Lord has stirred up (in the
absence of Mr. Feake, Mr. Rogers, etc. now Prisoners of the Lord Jesus) to mind
our present Rulers and Army, of their Persecutions and Apostacies; and what is
likely to follow them for so doing, if they repent not.

Lev 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart, thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.

1 Samuel 2.13, etc. And he said unto them, why do ye such things? for I hear
of your evil dealings by all the people. Nay my Sons, for it is no good report
that I hear, ye make the Lords people to transgress, etc. Notwithstanding they
hearkened not to the voice of their father* Because the Lord would slay them.

Ezekiel. 18.24. When the righteous turns away from his righteousness, and
commits iniquity, and does according to all the Abominations that a wicked
man does -- shall he live -- all his righteousness that he has done, shall
not be mentioned, in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that
he has sinned, shall he dye.

1 Timothy 5.20. Them that sin, rebuke before all, that others may fear.

London, Printed for Livewell Chapman in Pope's Head Alley. 1654.

Certain QUERIES Propounded to the most serious Consideration of those persons
now in Power, or any others whom they do, or may concern.
THE PREFACE TO THE QUERIES.
MOses and Aaron assembled all the Elders of Israel together in Egypt, and
that in order to their deliverance from that Bondage, Exodus 4.29. and yet was
not Imprisoned by Pharaoh for so doing.

And Jehu the Son of Hanani, told Baasha from the Lord, saying, Forasmuch as I
have exalted thee OUT OF THE DUST, and made thee Prince over my people Israel,
and thou have walked in the ways of Jeroboam, and have made my people Israel
to sin, to provoke me to anger with their sins -- Behold, I will take away the
posterity of Baasha, and the posterity of his house,. And I will make thy house
like the house of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat. Him that dies of Baasha in the
City, shall the dogs eat, and him that dies of his in the field, shall the
fowls of the air eat, 1 Kings 16.1, 2, 3, 4. And yet he was not Imprisoned
by Baasha for so saying.

Elijah also could tell wicked Ahab to his face from the Lord, saying, Because
thou have SOLD THY SELF to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord.
Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and I will take away thy posterity, and I
will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut
up and left in Israel. And I will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the
Son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the Son of Ahijah, for the
provocations wherewith thou have provoked me to anger, and made Israel to sin.
As also concerning Jezabel, saying, The Dogs shall eat Jezabel by the walls of
Jezrael. Again, Him that dies of Ahab in the City, the Dogs shall eat, and
him that dies in the field, shall the fowls of the air eat. And yet so far
was wicked Ahab from imprisoning Elijah for these expressions, as that in ver.
27. he is said to rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and
fasted, and went softly, etc.

Again, Jonah, albeit A STRANGER, proclaimed the destruction of populous
Nineve in the open streets thereof, and yet so far was the King of Nineve from
imprisoning Jonah, as that he forthwith proclaimed a Fast, and arose from his
Throne, and laid aside his Robes from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and
sat in ashes, and caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineve by
the Decree of the King and his Nobles, saying, Let neither man nor b^ast, heard
nor flock taste any thing, let them not feed, nor drink water, but let man and
beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God, yea let them turn
every one from HIS EVIL WAY, and from THE VIOLENCE THAT IS IN HIS HANDS, who
can tell whether the Lord will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce
anger, that we perish not?

The Consideration of all which, any rational man would think were sufficient
to deter such Governors as at least pretend to profess Christianity, from
Imprisoning such persons, that the same Lord has now stirred up to acquaint
them with their like notorious sins committed in the presence of God, Angels,
and Men. And this I premise, not our of any confidence that I shall fair any
better then others, who have borne the like testimony before me, albeit I put
the Queries, I shall propose, not only to others, but even to their own
Consciences to judge of the truth and equity of what I shall lay down in them.
Viz.

The Queries.
1 WHether the Resignation of the Powers and Authorities given and received by
Oliver Cromwell (mentioned in the Oath taken by him, December. 16. 1653.) from the
major part of the people (there mentioned) called by him to sit in Parliament
(if true) did in the least invest the said Oliver with a more Legal power to
Govern the Commonwealth as a single person, than he had before he called and
empowered them. And if not, then --

2 Whether it be not exceedingly necessary to make diligent enquiry what
persons they were, who drew up the Instrument, entitled, The Government of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, etc. And who it was that Authorized and Empowered them so to do --
And if it appear to be from an usurped power of their own or others, then --

3 Whether the said persons be not guilty of High Treason against the
Commonwealth, by inslaving it to the Government of one single person, as in
Article 1. where they positively conclude, that the Government of this
Commonwealth, etc. shall be and reside in one single person; as also in
Article 33. where they likewise assume the boldness, as not only to nominate,
but also to institute and invest Oliver Cromwell to the exercise of the said
Rule and Government.

Whereas an Act of Parliament, Anno 1648. (not then repealed) says, That it
shall be High Treason to set up Charles Stuart, or ANY OTHER PERSON Chief
Magistrate in England, or Ireland, or any of the Dominions thereunto belonging,
etc. It being also quite contrary to the Armies Declaration, June 14. 1647. p.
8, 9. where they positively affirm, That Arbitrary or Absolute power in Any
person, etc. during life, does not render that State any better than Tyranny,
nor the people subject thereunto, any better than Vassals.

4 Whether the said persons be not also guilty of breach of well known, and
fought for privileges, a few of which take as follows. (1) As in Article 12.
where they injoyne the Electors and Elected of them they say shall be
Parliament Men, to indent with each other, That the Elected shall not have
power to alter the Government as it is by them established -- whereas it is
well known what power the old Parliament exercised in reference to the Kingly
Power it self. (2) As in Article 22. where they say, That the persons chosen
and Assembled (as aforesaid) or any sixty of them, shall be, and be deemed the
Parliament of Engl: Scotl: and Irel: and the SUPREME LEGISLATIVE POWER TO BE
AND RESIDE IN THE LORD PROTECTOR, etc. whereas the Armies Declaration of June
14. 1647. p. 9. says, That they are so far from DESIGNING, or COMPLYING to
have an ABSOLUTE or ARBITRARY power SIGNED or SETTLED for CONTINUANCE in any
person WHATSOEVER, as that if they might be sure to obtain it, they could not
wish to have it so in the persons of Any whom they could MOST CONFIDE IN, or
who should appear most of their OWN OPINIONS OR PRINCIPLES, or whom they
might have MOST PERSONAL ASSURANCE OF, or INTEREST IN. (3) Article 24. where
they say, That all Bills agreed unto by the Parl: shall be presented to the
Lord Protector, FOR HIS CONSENT, etc. whereas in the Armies Remonstrance,
Albans, p. 66. they propose to the Parl: then sitting, that they would declare,
That as to the whole interest of the people of England, the Representatives
thereof, have and shall have the Supreme power and trust of making of Laws,
Constitutions, and Offices, for the ordering, preservation, and Government of
the whole, and as to the altering, and repealing, or abolishing the same, the
making of war or peace, and as to the Highest and Final judgment in all
civil things, WITHOUT ANY FURTHER APPEAL TO ANY CREATED STANDING POWER. And
that all the people of this Nation, and ALL Officers of justice, and MINISTERS
OF STATE as such, SHALL in all such things be ACCOUNTABLE AND SUBJECT
thereunto, and bound and concluded thereby. I might also instance in many other
particulars, but these shall suffice at present to show how the Army has
Apostatized from their Principles, and that to their Eternal infamy, without
Repentance; for certainly they will one day find that God will not be mocked,
and that it was not a Childish sport they were about when they used those
solemn expressions in behalf of themselves and the Common wealth, whose
SERVANTS they then were -- All which being seriously considered -- then --

5 Whether all the aforesaid persons may not justly expect to be called in
question for all such their actions, when God shall in justice give an
opportunity to his people (and yet untainted freeborn persons of this
Commonwealth) so to do, and that according to the Armies own principles, as
in the Breviate of their Remonstrance, Albans page: 8. where after they have
laid down several presidents of Gods people fixing solemn punishments on wicked
Kings, they present Asaph, Psalm: 83.11. Praying that Nobles, and Princes
Enemies to Gods people, may be used after former examples, whereupon they draw
this conclusion.

That as this kind of men is opposing Christ in these last times so are they by
him and his people to be punished; alluding to Psalm: 1. and Psalm. 1 ^o. 5.
(viz:) The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through Kings in the day of thy
wrath, in Psalm, 149.8, 9 to bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in
fetters of Iron, to execute upon them the judgment written. And Rev: 19.17, 18.
The fowls are invited to eat the flesh of Kings, and Captains slaughtered by
the Lamb. As also in page 9. where they say to punish Instruments, and let the
head go free, leads to endless trouble: besides it seems a most unequal, and
partial way of Justice; and the same principle that exempts Kings from justice,
would absolve their inferior Ministers (or what they do in pursuance of such
Commands. And hereupon they urge the example, 2 Chro: 23. ult. and the City was
quiet after they had slain Athaliah with the sword. And Numb: 25.4, 5, 9. in
the case of Baalpeer, where the Lord said unto Moses. Take all the head of the
People, and hang them up before the Sun, that the fierce anger of the Lord may
be turned away from Israel -- And Moses said unto the Judges of Israel, slay
ye every one his men that were joined to Baalpeer, at which time (say they)
the chief men guilty were first hanged, being a thousand, and then inferior men
slain, being twenty three thousand, 1 Cor. 108. both making 24000. -- As also
page 7. where they urge Job 34.30. that the Hypocrite Reign not, least the
people be ensnared, these are their own words in reference to the late King,
and his party, in point of Justice against them, and so consequently applicable
to all such as are, or shall be found imitators of them. And if so, then --

Charles Stuart which the army termed one of the ten Horns, (they say) the Lord
made them instrumental to destroy, (as in their Declaration to Scotland page:
38.) as being guilty of the blood of the Saints, can be thought by any rational
man, to be that Government, they then Jehu like 2 King: 10.16) so furiously
contended for, and that against the very same party they now join hands with
all, ( viz. this particular illustrated at large in a Book lately published,
Titled, an Image of our reforming Times, or Jehu in his proper colors, and are
to be sold by L: Chapman at the Crown in Popeshead-alley. And if not, then --

etc. has not played the hypocrites in a most high nature, by their now
adhearing unto the present Government.

And whether in so doing they have not also clearly declared themselves Rebels,
and Traitors to Jesus Christ; and that from their own expressions (as in their
Declaration to Scotland, page: 36, 37, 38, 39. where among other words to this
purpose they demonstrated to all the world, that the Lord made them
Instrumental to vex all in his sore displeasure that took Counsel against
Christ, whom the Lord has Anointed, and decreed King. And that they themselves
had not only PROCLAIMED Jesus Christ King of Saints to be OUR KING, but that
they would submit unto him UPON HIS OWN TERMS, and admit him ONLY to the
exercise of his Royal Authority,) and thereby have made themselves not only
liable to the aforesaid temporal punishments instanced by them, but also to the
eternal wrath of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who will render vengeance in
flaming fire to them that are so obstinately disobedient to his Royal Commands,
2 These. 1.8. etc. And if so then --

high time for them to entertain that Governor, whose Right it is, (both as
Creator, God, King, Lord, Savior, and Lawgiver,) to govern the Person, or
Persons now Governing, as any other person, or persons in the Commonwealth. --
And whether this can any otherwise be done then by a general submission to
those holy, just, and perfect Laws, Statutes, Judgments, and Ordinances which
Jesus Christ himself (whom they have already so proclaimed to be King of this
Commonwealth,) has constituted, and appointed to Govern his Subjects by,
(whether in reference to the outward, or inward man,) as they are recorded in
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and that without any mixture of
the depraved light of Nature, 1 Cor. 2.14. and Ephesians. 2.3. or vain Heathenish
constitutions, or traditons of men as now practiced among us. -- And that
according to the Armies own acknowledgment, as in page 6. of their aforesaid
abridgment, where they say -- The Kings of Israel must know the Law for a Rule,
Deuteronomy: 17. And Josiah being seven years old, had a Crown put upon his head, and
the testimony in his hand, Note the Law of God a Rule from Heaven. If for all
Rulers then why not a rule for our present Rulers. Are not men's Laws then
consequently unjust, and so from the Devil.
2 Kings 11.12. that being elder he might remember the Rule which David
avouched to be FROM HEAVEN, as a RULE for ALL RULERS. 2 Samuel 23.3. He that
rules among men, must be just ruling in the fear of God; as also in page: 8.
where they raise this assertion, (viz:) That just Laws being from God, (Themis
the Daughter of Jove,) who is not ever under them, owns not his subjection to
God And if so, then --

our present Rulers he under the subjection of God, or whether it be possible
for them to make up the vast devastations, and breaches already made by them,
both on the behalf of the Lord Jesus, and in reference to the privileges of
this Commonwealth, (under the common pretense of necessity) then by joining in
Covenant with all the people of God to set up the aforesaid Laws, Statutes,
Judgments, and Ordinances of King Jesus, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
And whether it be not the alone way to reconcile all past and present
differences throughout the Commonwealth, and to stop the mouths of all gain
sayers whatsoever; as also the only expedient to take off all the present
burdens, and oppressions which the generality of the people of this
Commonwealth lie under.

1. For who dares be so impudent as to oppose the Government of him they do
acknowledge their Creator, God, King, Lord, and Lawgiver, as they relate either
to the inward, or outward Man, and consequently renounce all other Governments
whatsoever, and those that strive to support them, as Charls-Stuart, or any
other person or persons whatsoever.

2. What need shall we have then of a standing Army, when we have all
unanimously Covenanted with our God to set up his well-beloved Son, and our
alone Savior upon his Royal Throne, by prof^ssing and practicing his Laws and
Ordinances, but that when need shall require, we may imitate the ancient people
of God, (whilst Governed by that Law) by rising unanimously to the assistance
or defense of each other when there shall be an occasion, so that the present
Army may be spared to make further way for the promoting of the interest of the
Lord Jesus, even to the ends of the world, and over which they acknowledge him
to be King, and themselves appointed to vex all that will not yield obedience to
him, as aforesaid.

3. Touching the Antichristian oppression of Tithes, what need will there be to
pay them, when Gospel Ministers shall, and will be contented with Gospel wages,
or maintenance, and not exact the hire of a Harlot.

4. Whar need will there be of the devouring Lawyer, when we shall have Judges
as at the first, and Rulers as at the beginning, (viz) when such persons shall
only be employed as Advocates, and Judges, or shall be found qualified
according to the will and pleasure of the alone Lawgiver, such as are valiant
for the truth, men fearing God, and HATING Covetousness.

5. Whether it will not also be the most probable means that ever was, or ever
is like to be to convert the Jews to the Christian faith, seeing that our
Gospel is only a complement of their Laws, Matt. 5.17, 18, 19, etc. which when
they are once convinced of, will doubtless be as willing to embrace the one, as
we the other, in such of them as are not abrogated by our Ld. Jesus, as the
moral, and judicials relating to their civil state, by which means both Jew and
Gentile may be brought into one fold, and under one Sepheard and consequently
see the accomplishment of all those glorious Prophesies to that purpose.

by making good their former protestations, and Engagements in the behalf of
the Lord Jesus and his people. Seeing they say themselves, Abridg: Rem: Albans
page: 10. That even a servant by the civil Law may accuse his Master as guilty
of Treason; and that God bates all workers of iniquity. Psalm: 5.5. And
accepts not the pers^ns of Princes, nor regards the rich more then the
poor, nor honors not the person of the Mighty. As also that Reformation were
better begin at the Majoraties, then the Minoraties, Numb: 25.27, 28.

a desperate principle, of persecution of such of the people of God, (as are
resolved by the assistance of the Almighty to persevere in this public Cause
of Christ, until they shall see the accomplishment thereof, it being no more
then the present Army has all along Declared for as aforesaid.) And whether by
so doing, they will not run themselves into the most abominablest wickedness
that ever was committed by the Sons of Men, (as they pretend to Christianity)
seeing the Armies Declaration of June 14, 1647. page, 7. says, That it is no
resisting of Magistracy to side with just principles; as also in their
abridgment of their Remonstrance Albans page: 8. where in the case betwixt David
and Saul, they say, that David did not forbear Saul merely out of reverence to
his Authority, And how much more where the person is not lawfully called to his
Office: Exce Mr: John Goodwin, and consider these expressions.
for he took up Arms to defend himself against him and would if that part would
have joined) have used force against Saul. As also in page: 6. where they
affirm, that a person assuming a hurtful power never committed to him, and
takes away the foundations of Liberty, and redress such person, (all be it
lawfully called to his Office,) sets the people free to take their best
advantage, and proceed in judgment against him, and this they back with two
Arguments, the one drawn from Rom: 13.3.4. where they say, Paul speaks of
Authority, and Magistracy in its constitution, (not of a person abusively
exercising it,) to be Gods Instrument of good to every one, and an incourager
of good in every man, and an enemy to evil. The other from 2 Chro. 21.10. Where
Libnab (say they) which is a City belonging to the Priests, Josh. 21.13.)
revolted: Ne subjecta esset ei, from all subjection, (to Jenoram their lawful
King,) because he had forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers, (in English because
he had Apostatised from his former engagements,) a fair caution one would think
for all Apostates, and especially for those of them, that have made use of
those Arguments not only to accuse, but also to execute Judgment upon persons
for so doing. I need not here mind them of the late president.

In brief.
Whether persons so deeply engaged as the Army to set up the Laws and
Ordinances which are from Heaven, in their primitive purity, at contained in
the word of God, or holy Scriptures; and after by the Temptations, and
suggestions of their own evil and corrupt hearts within, and a multitude of
fawning parasites without, are drawn to Apostatise in so foul and shameful a
manner from their former resolutions, ought not upon a full and perfect
knowledge, and admonition thereof by their fellow Brethren, (yet abiding in
their integrity,) rather cry peccavi, and so repent of such their misdeeds,
then by a most vile and desperate resolution to justify such their Apostacies,
by persecuting their faithful Brethren, (because they will not comply with them
in their evil actions,) and so bid an open defiance even to the Lord God
Almighty, through their confidence in an arm of flesh, (notwithstanding their
large experience of the vanity thereof,) and thereby fill up the measure of the
wrath of their Predecessors, and so bring upon their own heads all the
guiltless blood that has been shed from the blood of righteous Abel; unto this
present time.

The Lord in much mercy set these words home upon the spirits, and hearts of
those whom they do or may so nearly concern, least when with Esau they seek
Repentance, and that with tears, they shall not find it.

POSTSCRIPT.
Mr. John Goodwin is here again desired to consider whether the Saints of the
most high, during the time of the little Horns Dominion, Dan: 7. who are to sit
in Judgment upon it, ver: 22. and to take it away, and to confume and destroy
it for ever, ver: 26. -- Are to yield their subjection thereunto, or whether
they are to worship the Beast mentioned Rev: 13.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
When as the Spirit of God, Rev: 14 9, 10, 11. says expressly, That whosoever
worshippeth HIM, or HIS IMAGE, or receives his mark in their fore head, or in
their hand, shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God which is powered without
mixture into the cup of his Indignation; and shall be tormented with fire and
brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb;
And that the smoke of their Torment shall ascend for ever and ever; And that
they shall have rest neither day nor night.

Some will wonder that I write thus as I have, seeing I have lately vindicated
the actions of the Army in reference to their Dissolving the old Parliament. --
My Reply is, -- I am therefore the more Engaged to write as I do, least such
should think by my silence that I also approve of their Apostacies since that
time, which that I do not.

Quod Scripsi Scripsi.
FINIS.

