The Speech of their Excellencies the Lords AMBASSADOVRS EXTRAORDINARY FROM
The High and Mighty States General of the United Provinces of the Netherlands,
taking their leave of both the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT assembled at
Westminster.
April the 10th. 1645.
Translated out of French into English: And Printed by their Excellencies
Order. STEPH. TAILOR. Secr.

Right Honorable.
TWO things have moved Our Lords and Superiors to send Us their Ambassadors
Extraordinary into this Kingdom, viz. Their Duty, and Your Service.

The first, consisted in their Power, and in the resenting of the present
Distractions. The other, being altogether in Your choice to accept, if You
should like of it.

We have long ago, and diverse times spoken unto Your Honors of the one, and
the other: as likewise unto the King, who has honored so much Our State, as
to have accepted the offers of Our Interposition. But We are still with Your
Honors upon the same terms We were at the bginning, without any certitude,
or likelihood to be accepted.

We have already obtained Our leave from the King, and have left His Majesty
full of good will, and disposition for a just and reasonable Accommodation:
Likewise We parted from Him well satisfied, concerning the point of the
Evangelique-Protestant Religion, upon the Offers He has lately permitted us to
make.

And as concerning the Royal Rights or Prerogatives, the Liberties and
Privileges of this Kingdom, and the Parliament, and of all the Subjects, no
doubt when that His Majesty shall be satisfied, His Majesty will also satisfy
every one.

But Sirs, We can stay no longer here, unless Your Honors accept of Our
Interposition, without which We are useless: And from hence it is, Our Lords
and Superiors have charged Us, in such a case, to take Our leave, and return
to Our own home. In performance of which last Duty, We are here come before
You; Assuring You, We shall never cease to wish unto this heretofore
flourishing Kingdom, an Accommodation and Peace; which is, and ever will be as
profitable, as necessary.

London, Printed by T. Badger. 1645.


