A SHORT Scriptural Testimony Concerning the Person, or Humanity OF CHRIST.
Showing the great Necessity of Believing in the LORD JESUS Inseperably, as he
is both GOD and MAN; according to the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures: By way of
Epistle to all faithful Friends and Brethren.

John 3.15.16. Whosoever beleiveth on him, (i. e. the Son of Man) shall not
Perish, but have Eternal Life.

For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not Perish, but have everlasting Life.

LONDON, Printed in the YEAR, 1696.

PAGE 12. Line 2. for whereby read hereby.

A Short Testimony Concerning the Person (or, Humanity) OF CHRIST.
DEAR Friends and Christian Brethren, every where Scattered up and down, who
have been Beleivers in the Lord Jesus Christ of Naazreth (who is both true and
Perfect God and true and Perfect Man) in whom our Life, and Eternal Hope of
Salvation, purchased For all those that shall truly believe in his Name; who in
the appointed time of the Father, gave himself a Sacrafice once for all, for
the expiation of the Sins of the whole World, bearing them in his most Holy and
Glorious Body upon the tree of the Cross: thus in his Person (or Humanity) he
became Sin for us, that had no Sin, reconciling us to God the Father in his
most Dear and Precious Blood, in whose saving Name I dearly salute you every
where, beseeching you (my Brethren and Friends) to call fervently upon him, and
approach near unto God the Father by his Mediatorship, who sits at the Right
Hand of the Majesty on high, continualy making intercession as our Heavenly
Advocate and High Priest for us, teaching us by his Spirit how to Pray, and
then offering up the Incense of our Prayers to God the Father, and praying for
us who always beholds the face of the Inapprehensible Majesty of God, to whom
no mortal eye can approach.

The exortation that lives in my heart toward you is on this wise ( viz) To
exhort you to let the remembrance of those Gospel Truths which have been often
sounded as an alarm in your ears by the Lords faithful servants and
Messengers, dwell weightily upon your Souls is the earnest desire and Travail
of my Spirit unto God for you as for my own Soul, Oh! Prize it, with all the
other precious Truths in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, recorded
for our Learning and instruction; Oh! you that are in any measure awakened out
of the sleep of Ignorance and Unbelief, strive by the asistance of Gods Holy
Spirit more and more, to obtain a true and living Soul Saving Faith, in our
for-ever Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who is both the Son of God and
the Son of man, the Son of God by an Eternal Generation, the Son of Man by
Incarnation. In time prize ye the Mercies of God in Christ both Spiritual and
Temporal let them never be obliterated out of your Remembrance; let time be
often set a part by you to read the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
praying for the assistance of the Holy Spirit, to help and unfold those deep
Mysteries of the Kingdom of our God and Christ therein contained, let them not
be slighted by you, as they have been by some in Years past, through their
Ignorance, and Blindness, which is a grief to my Soul, to think of with
reluctance of mind in that case, but when I look at the good Hand of the Lord,
my Soul is drawn forth into an Admiration of his inexpressible Love and
Kindness, who has been so Good and Gracious unto a small Remnant of the sinful
Sons and Daughters of Men, in that he has been so pleased to raise up among
us, or rather brought back from a remote Place of the World, one unto us whom
he, in his great kindness, has made instrumental in his hand to the awakening
of our Souls, who were as I may so say, at ease, and had taken up a false Rest
by the way; but now I trust, seeing the Lord has been pleased to further
Illuminate the Understandings of some, they are resolved by his assistance to
travel on in his Name and Power until they arrive at the desired Port, or Haven
of Rest, even the Heavenly Canaan: In the Sense and Remembrance of which, my
Soul blesses the Lord, and all that is within me praises his most holy Name,
who is wholly and alone worthy of the same for Evermore.

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom; and a good Understanding have
all they that do thereafter. And the way to have true Wisdom is to fear the
Lord, and ask it of him, who is the Father of Lights, from whom comes every
good and perfect Gift, (who is a Bountiful Father, that gives liberally unto
his Children, and upbraideth not, etc.)

Prove. 2. v. 23, 4, 5, 6. If thou lucline thine Ear unto Wisdom, and apply
thine Heart to Understanding: Yea, if thou criest after Knowledge, and lifts
up thy Voice for Understanding: If thou seek her as Silver, and searchest
for her as for hid Treasure, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord;
and find the Knowledge of God. For the Lord gives Wisdom; out of his Mouth
comes Knowledge and Understanding, etc. Seek aright and then thou will have
the true Knowledge of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who, in the
days of his Flesh, expressed himself after this manner; (viz.) Not every one
that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he
that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven: Matt. the 7th and 21st. The
will of God is that we believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, whom he has sent, as
he is both true God and Man, that is to believe in him truly as we ought to do,
and not to divide his Humanity from his Godhead, but to believe in him
inseperably, to be our complete Savior, who said unto his Disciples; Ye
believe in God, believe also in me, John 14. v. 1, etc. Who also said elsewhere
unto the Jews; Except ye believe that I Am he you shall die in your sins -- and
whither I go you cannot come. John. 8.24, 28. Then said Jesus unto them, When
you have lift up the Son of Man, then shall ye know that I am He, -- but now ye
seek to Kill me, a Man that has told you the Truth, which I have heard of God,
etc.

So here is a great necessity, for all to believe in the glorified Man Christ,
not excluding his Manhood from being jointly concerned therein, I shall cite
thee some Scripture Testimonies, whereby thou may see the necessity of
beleiving in the Lord Jesus Christ, both to his Humanity as well as his
Divinity; and also to confess him before men, who said, Matthew. 10.32, 33.
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before
my Father, which is in Heaven; but whosoever shall deny me before men, him will
I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven. Therefore let all Flesh dread
and Fear the Lord, and have a living Faith in the inward and blessed Appearance
of the Lord Jesus Christ in their Hearts, as also his outward Appearance in the
Days of his Flesh, who Died and Suffered for us, and is ascended into Heaven as
an Advocate with the Father for us, who also shall come again at the last and
great Day of general Judgment, to judge both Quick and Dead; and happy will all
those be to whom the Sentance shall be pronounced of Come ye blessed, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you, etc. For the Mystery of the true Evangelical
Faith is hold in a Pure Conscience, 1 Epist. to Timothy the 3d, 9. and 16. And
without Controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness: God manifest in the
Flesh, Justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, Preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the World, received up into Glory. A great and glorious Mystery
indeed it is to know Salvation by Jesus Christ, who said, Matt. 11.19. The Son
of Man came eating and drinking; and they say, behold a Man Gluttenous, a
Winebibber, a friend of Pulicans and Sinners: but Wiscom is justified of her
Children. Matthew. 12.8. For the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath Day. --
32. verse. And whosoever speaks a Word against the the Son of Man it shall be
forgiven him, etc. -- 40. verse. For as Jonas was three days and three Nights
in the Whale's belly, so shall the Son of Man be three days and three nights in
the heart of the Earth. Matt. 13.41. The Son of Man shall send forth his
Angels, etc. Matthew. 16.27. For the Son of Man shall come in the Glory of his
Father, with his Angels, etc. Matthew. 17.9. Tell the Vision to no man until the
Son of Man be risen again from the Dead. verse 22d. The Son of Man shall be
betrayed into the hands of Men. Matthew. 19.28. When the Son of Man shall set in
the Throne of his Glory; yea, also shall set upon twelve Thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel. the 20th Chapter, 18, 19 v. And the Son of Man shall
be betrayed unto the chief Priests, and they shall condemn him to Death, to
Mock, to Scourge, to crucify him, and the third day he shall rise again.
[Mark] The Son of Man shall rise again, our blessed Lord and Savior's own
Words; therefore let it shame those who deny him to be risen; and affirms, what
he took of the Virgin he left in the Grave, and never went Bodily into Heaven,
etc.

Matthew. 24.27. For as the Lightning that shines from the East unto the West,
so shall the coming of the Son of Man be.

Mark 8.28. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and my Words in this sinful
Generation, of him also the Son of Man shall be ashamed, when he comes in the
Glory of his Father, with the holy Angels, etc.

Luke 1.35. Therefore also that holy Thing which shall be born of thee, (i. e.
the Virgin Mary) shall be called the Son of God. A saying sufficient to satisfy
that our Lord and Savior is both God and Man, who remains in the presence of
God for us, being a continual Intercessor with the Father.

John 6.27.53.62, Labor for that Meat which the Son of Man shall give unto
you, for him has God the Father Sealed, etc.

Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no
Life in you. Whose Blood the Author to the Hebrews, in the 12.24. directs unto.
And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant; and to the Blood of sprinkling,
that speaks better things than that of Abel. And what if you shall see the
Son of Man ascend up where he was before, John 1.30. This is he of whom I said,
after me comes a Man which is preferred before me. verse 34. And I saw and
bare Record that this is the Son of God.

Here thou may see the beloved Disciple of our Lord Jesus Christ declares him
to be both God and Man: O comfortable saying indeed! Who can declare the
Height and Length, and Breadth thereof! whose matchless Love is beyond all
Carnal apprehension.

John 3, 13, 14, 15. And no Man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came
down from Heaven, even the Son of Man which is in Heaven. And as Moses lifted
up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up,
that whosoever believes in him should not Perish, but have Eternal Life.

These Scripture Testimonies are cited for the information of those who in any
wise have slighted the Humanity of Christ, in hopes thereby they may be
awakened to see that they ought not only to confess Christ, but also to believe
in him Inseperably, who is both true God, and perfect Man; (viz.) For there is
one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a Ransom for all, to be testified of in due time. The first Epistle of
Paul to Timothy, the 2d Chap. verse 5, 6.

Therefore let shame cover the Faces of those that deny the Humanity of Christ,
whose Ignorance of the Scriptures greatly bewrays them to be unsound in the
true Evangelical and saving Faith; who say, and boldly affirm, That our blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is only to be Preached a Light in every Man; and
that there is not such words as the Man Christ in all the Scriptures, etc. But
thou may see by the following Scriptural Citation as well as the aforegoing,
that the Author to the Hebrews calls him, (i. e.) our Lord Jesus, by the term
of Man; Heb. 7.24, 25. But this Man, (i. e. the Man Christ Jesus) because he
continues ever, has an Unchangeable Priesthood, who is able to save to the
uttermost, those who come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
Intercession for them: But this Man after he had offered one sacrifice for
Sins, for ever sat down at the right Hand of God, etc.

Heb. 10.12. Be it known unto you therefore Men and Brethren, that through this
Man (viz. Christ) is Preached unto you the forgiveness of sins. Acts 13.38. God
commands all Men every where to Repent, because he has appointed a Day,
(Acts* 17.30, 31.) in the which he will Judge the World in Righteousness, by
that Man whom he has Ordained; whereof he has given assurance unto all Men,
in that he has raised him from the Dead.

Here you may plainly see our Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth is Preached by his
Holy Apostles, both God and Man, a complete and entire Savior to all those
that shall believe in his powerful Name; Whose Name is a strong Tower of
Defense, and the Righteous fly thereunto and are in safety, where none can make
Afraid.

And thus to have a living Faith in him is precious indeed to all such
Beleivers, whereby the Glory of our blessed Lord's Divinity cannot be Ecclipsed
by those whose Faith are thus established in him, who is the Rock of Ages, and
the Foundation of many Generations, who alone is worthy of all Honor and
Praise.

So thou art hereby earnestly desired to read these Scriptures herein inserted,
with others, which we have omitted for brevity sake. O let none be ashamed to
confess their Redeemer! and hide their Faith of him shut up within their
Breasts! but let every one who have believed in his glorious Appearance, be
Zealous and Fervently concerned in their Stations and Capacities, to Preach
their holy Faith of the Lord Jesus Christ, both in Doctrine and godly
Conversation, for the information of all those who are seeking the way to Sion,
with their Faces thitherward.

Seek him that is able to lead you and conduct you in the true and living Way,
etc. I am the Way, said Christ, the Truth, and the Life, he that believes in
me shall have everlasting Life, he is the Light and the Life. Whose
Indwelling-presence fills Heaven and the whole Earth, whose Bright Glory shines
in the midst of Nations, to the end that her Sons may come from far, and her
Daughters from the ends of the Earth, to sit down at Wisdoms-gate, in the
Temple of which is the Ministration of life where the Unity of the Spirit and
true Bond of Peace will be known; in the Remembrance whereof, are prayers
offered to the living God, That he would be pleased in his own appointed time
and season to hasten what he Promised by the mouth of his Prophet Zephan. chap.
3, 9. For then will I turn unto the People a Pure Language, that they may all
call upon the Name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent, in which desire
we Travel with an expectation of seeing the same fulfilled, however the will of
the most high God be done, in Earth, as it is in Heaven Amen.

Says a Lover of all Souls, who is known by the Name of John Spire. junr.
London the first of the third Month, called May, 1696.
A POSTSCRIPT.
Friendly Reader.
BEing Religiously and Conscientiously concerned and grieved, to see and hear
how some, under the Profession of the Blessed Truth, slight and undervalue the
Person, (or Humanity) of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who is the
Immaculate Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the World.

It being matter of great Grief and Lamentation to many, to see the Doctrine of
Christ together with the Testimony of the Holy Scriptures, exposed to reproach
in such an evil and perilous Day, and time wherein we live. I could do no less
then seriously recommend unto thee the before going Testimony, (if happily thou
may be recovered out of that evil State in which too to many are fallen
into,) and also exhort thee to have a care of rending, tearing, and diviling
the Doctrine of Christ's Humanity from his Godhead, which ought to go
inseparably together; therefore see to it, that thou may be clothed whith his
Seamless Garment; that is woven from the top to the bottom; for as Christ is but
one, his truth one, his Garment one, so ought his Church and People to be one,
which that it may be so with every one, while one this side of the Grave is my
earnest desire, that when days and time to us shall be no more, we may have our
dwelling and Habitation with the Lord, Eternally in the Heavens above: So I
Commend you with my self to the Lord Jesus Christ, whom we have in any measure
Believed, and to the word of his Grace, which is able to save us; Farewell.

J. S.

FINIS.

