CHRIST'S Innocence PLEADED: Against the CRY of the CHIEF PRIESTS.

OR, A Brief and Plain REPLY unto certain Papers received from William Thomas
(called) Minister of the Gospel at Ubley.

By THOMAS SPEED, a servant of that Jesus Christ, who was at the request of the
bloody Crew of Chief Priests, and Teachers, Crucified at Jerusalem.

Mat. 23.27. Woe unto you Scribes, and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye are like
unto whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within
full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleannes.

John 8.39. Jesus says unto them, if ye were Abraham's children, ye would do
the works of Abraham.

Verse. 40. But now ye seek to kill me, a man that has told you the truth,
which I have heard of God, this did not Abraham.

Seneca de vit. Beat. Quaeramus quid optime factum sit, nen quid usitatissimum:
and quid nos in posessione felicitatis aeternae constituat, non quid vulgo,
veritatis pessimo inter preti, probatum sit.

LONDON: Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle, at the West end
of Paul's. 1656.

To all the public Teachers in this Nation, who are by themselves and the
world, called, Ministers of the Gospel.
SIRS,
THE night is far spent, the day is at hand; and blessed, yea blessed from the
Lord are all they, who are found walking, not as children of the night, but of
the day. The hour is coming, and now is, that all coverings shall be removed,
and the vails plucked from off all faces; and lamentation, and woe, will be unto
all them, who are found covered, but not with the covering of my Spirit, says
the Lord God. Awake therefore, O ye Shepherds, Awake, Awake; stand up,
seriously consider of, and prove, your coverings; make diligent inquisition,
and search, whether you are covered with power, or profession; with the
substance, or with the form; with the Spirit, or with the letter only. To
lean upon the Lord, and say, is not he in the midst of us, (as Micha's
hireling Teachers, and Prophets did,) crying, the Temple of the Lord; the
Temple of the Lord, will not serve the turn, in that terrible day in which the
righteous Judge of all the Earth shall enter into judgment with you. The
Scripture of truth do bear record Mat. 22, 23.
of a people, who shall at the last day make their solemn appeal to the King of
glory, avouching themselves undoubted Christians; pleading that they have given
signal testimonies that they were such, by their Prophesying casting out of
Devils, and doing many wonderful works in his name; on whom he will then
pronounce that dismal sentence of departure, as such whom he never knew; for
that (though they had been much in preaching and profession, yet) they were
real workers of iniquity. You do all pretend your selves servants to the Son
of God, and to be Ministers by him called forth to preach the everlasting
Gospel: from the bottom of my heart do I wish, that I were able truly to say
of every individual of you, that you are found walking worthy of such a
Master, and bringing forth fruit worthy of that high and holy calling, with
which you pretend your selves called. I shall not undertake rashly to judge
you, or accuse you unto the world; let your fruits demonstrate what trees you
are, and let your works judge you. You pretend the Scripture to be your Rule:
come therefore let us plainly reason together, and see if your own Rule will
condemn you or absolve you. The Spirit of the Lord by the mouth of his Prophet
Micha, Mic. 3.11.
accounted it among the abominations of the Priests and Prophets of those
days, that they taught for hire, and did Divine for money; and as an
aggravation of this their wickedness, he farther testifies, That they even
prepared Mic. 3.5.
war against him that resused to put into their mouths. Let these Scriptures be
your indictment before the judge of all the Earth; and to the Light of Jesus
Christ in every one of your consciences do I appeal, whether you are able to
plead to it, not guilty? And if guilty, how then can you escape the same
sentence, and condemnation, that fell on those Priests and Prophets, who were
found in the same transgressions? Jesus Christ the true and great Prophet of
his people, denounces the woe against the Mat. 23.5, 6, 7.
Teachers in his days, for that they did their works to be seen of men,
standing praying in the Synagogues, and the corners of the Streets, as also
because they loved the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and the chief Seats in the
Synagogues, and greetings in the Markets, and to be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi.
View your selves in this glass also, and let the Light of Christ in all your
consciences judge, whether these spots are not manifestly to be seen in your
garments: and if so, who can absolve you from being sharers in their woe, who
are found pertakers with them in their evil works? The Scripture Joh 15.19.
witnesses, that the Sheep and the Shepherds of Jesus Christ were not of the
world, because by him chosen out of the world, and therefore by the world were
they hated, persecuted, imprisoned, stoned, beaten in their Synagogues, dragged
before Rulers, and Magistrates, for his names sake; cast out as the (...) 1
Cor. 4.13.
sweepings, and off scouring of all things. Stand to the bar, O ye Shepherds,
before that righteous Judge that cannot be bribed, and in the presence of him
that searches the heart, and tries the reins of all men: give true answer to
what I shall demand of you. Are you by the world hated, or are you haters of
others? Are you persecuted, or persecutors? Are you imprisoned for truths sake,
or are you imprisoners of others? Are you stoned, or stoners? Are you by the
world beaten in their Synagogues, or do you your selves beat, or cause others
to be beaten? Are you brought before Rulers, and Magistrates, for Christ's
names sake, or do you dragg, or cause to be dragged others before them? Are
you by the world cast out as the filth, and offscouring of all things, or do
you so cast out others that do refuse subjection to your lusts? If these be
indeed the fruits you bring forth, (as who is he among you that can wash his
hands and say he is innocent?) then whether you are of the number of those that
say they are Apostles, and Ministers of Christ, but are found to be liars; let
all the wife in heart judge. The Scripture farther bears record, that the
messengers of Jesus Christ, when sent out to preach the Gospel, did freely
give, as they had freely received; they coveted Acts 20.33.
no man's Silver, nor Gold, nor Apparel, and yet (serving a faithful Master)
they wanted nothing. We never read that Paul, or any of the Ministers of Christ
in Scripture, did so much as claim a maintenance from those without, much
less did they commence suites at Law against the world, or the Saints, for the
tenth of all their labors. Are you the Messengers of Christ? and is the
Scripture your Rule? How is it then, that you dare not engage to preach, having
not first made firm Indentures for your livelihood? Or why is it that you
fill the Courts of Justice with your actions against those that refuse to pay
you the tenth of all their increase? nay by what Rule do you exact it of those
that never hear you, nor own you for their Pastors? Moreover the Scripture
manifestly declares against all the works of the flesh; such as are,
drunkenness, swearing, hypocrisy, covetousness, etc. and are your hands all
clean from this filth? are not a great part of you found wallowing in this
common mire? And among those of you that have escaped that open pollution of
drunkenness with wine, are you not yet intoxicated with wrath, and rage
against the innocent? Let me ask you farther, (and let your anger be turned
into a serious consideration of what I shall say) Is there scarce a Prison this
day in the Nation, in which some servant of the living God or other is not
prisoner to your unsatiable fury? Does not Jesus Christ as truly lie bound in
many nasty holes, and Dungeons, in England by your instigation and procurement,
as he did by the procurement of ^aul and Damascus? If any poor Jeremiah come
from the Lord to bear testimony against all your abominations, is there wanting
a Lordly Pashur among you, who (in case the Magistrate be so honest as to
refuse) will not with his own hands put his feet in the stocks? Now then to
your Rule, Is it any where upon record in Scripture, that the true Prophets and
Ministers of the Lord did persecute, or imprison, any that were differing from
them in things of Religion? Are they in the esteem of Jesus Christ Shepherds
or wolves, who worrie the Sheep in steed of feeding them, and beat his poor
Lambs in stead of cherishing them, and carrying them (after his example) in
their bosoms? Now then let me desire you singly, and honestly, to compare your
lives, and your actions, with those of the Ministers of Christ in the
Scripture, and let that of Christ in each of your consciences judge, whether
that Spirit that acted in them, do also bring forth the same fruits in you. I
know you have many distinctions to offer, by which to save your selves from the
condemnation of false Prophets and Ministers of Antichrist; but let me tell
you, however you may thereby quit your selves among men, yet it is ill
distinguishing with that God that is terrible in judgment: In that day in
which the book of all consciences shall be opened and every man judged
according to his works, will a distinction save you? Think sadly of that hour
in which the Son of man shall come with his holy Angels, sitting upon the
throne of his glory, and shall expostulate with you and say, O ye Shepherds of
England, I was an hungered Mat. 2^, 42, 43.
and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me no drink, I was a
stranger and ye took me not in, naked and ye clothed me not, sick and in
prison and ye visited me not; nay which is worse, When I had meat, and drink,
and clothing, ye sought to bereave me of it; when I was a stranger ye did not
only not take me in, but ye hindered those that would, and evil entreated them
for my sake; when I was well and at liberty, ye did case me into bonds, and
into prisons, and glory in so doing: O what will you reply, when the Lamb shall
thus reason with you, and command you to plead positively, either guilty, or
not guilty? will you be able to shelter your selves from his wrath by a
distinction? will it be a sufficient plea for you then (because it seems to
have some weight among the simple ones now) to say, That you have persecuted,
and imprisoned, none but Blasphemers, Heretics, and Deceivers? Did not your
Predecessors, the Scribes, and Pharisees, and the Priests, in those days,
under the same notions, persecute and crucify the Lord of life, and thousands
of his precious Saints after him? Will not that plea justify your fathers the
Bishops, who did in their days imprison and evil entreat many of you, and
hundreds besides in the Nation, called Puritans, as Blasphemers, Heriticks, and
Deceivers? But as it was old so it is now (there being no new thing under the
Sun) the seed of the Bondwoman persecuteth the seed of the Freewoman, the
form fights against the power, and the letter against the life: The
professing religious Jews, they cried out against the Apostles and Saints in
those days, help O Caesar, help men of Israel, for here are a Sect of men
called Christians risen up who turn the world upside down: The late Bishops
they cried out, help O King against this factious generation of Puritans, who
will not have us to reign over them; own us, and guard us with thy sword, for
if thou suffer us to fall, this will be the consequence, no Bishop, no King:
Those called Presbiters, they also invocated the powers late in being, crying
out, help O Parliament, help, against these schismatic Independents, and
Anabaptists, who begin to refuse subjection to those yoaks we would lay upon
them, as we did to those laid by the Bishops upon our own necks But now so it
is at this day, that all the Teachers of all Sects and factions (like as the
Pharisees and Saduces against Christ) do with one lip cry out, and say, help O
Protector, help O Magistrates, help, for here is now a strange generation of
men risen up, that the Earth is not able to bear; such as strike at our very
root, and if we fall, this will be the consequence (if you dare to believe us)
no Minister, no Magistrate. Horrible Blasphemers they are, grand Heretics, and
notorious Deceivers; And that ye may know that we do charge them to be such,
on as just grounds as our brethren the Scribes and Pharisees charged Christ, we
desire you to scan over this ensuing list of their monstrous blasphemies.

1. They blaspheme and say, that Christ is the Joh. 1.9. and 18.12.
light of the world, and has enlightened every man that comes into the world;
and that he that follows that light shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have the light of life, which light is sufficient to teach them and guide them
unto the Father, and then what need of all our teachings? 2. They say, that
that which may be Romans 19.20. and 2.15.
known of God is manifest in the consciences of the very Heathen (God having
revealed it unto them) even his eternal power and Godhead: and that though
they have no Law without them, yet they show the work of the Law written in
their hearts, and are a Law unto themselves. 3. They say, that Christ did not
mock, nor impose an impossibility upon his poor Lambs, when he exhorted them to
be Mat. 5.48.
perfect, even as their Heavenly Father is perfect: and that the same Christ
spoke truth, when as he bore witness of Nathaniel that he was an Israelite
John 1.47.
in whom was no guile: as also that Paul did not design that which was
impossible, when as he labored to present men Col. 1.28.
perfect in Christ Jesus. 4. They do not blush to say, that Christ and the
Apostles spoke as they meant in the Scriptures; and therefore they deny our
meanings, and interpretations, as needless; especially because we differ among
our selves, in our own meanings; and are fallible in our interpretations we
give of them: by which means a great part of our craft, and employment, is like
to fall to the ground. 5. They assert, that Christ did not speak one thing and
intended another, when as he Mat. 5.34. (...) A prohibinon so universal that
it admits of no exception.
command men not to swear at all, but to let their yea, be yea, and their nay,
nay; whereas we that are Orthodox do both swear our selves, and teach men so
to do; otherwise we may happily go without our maintenance, for want of swearers
in Courts of justice, against those Heretics that refuse to pay us tithes. 6.
They are bold to assert, Deuteronomy. 14.29.
that in taking tithes for preaching, we are true neither to the old Covenant,
nor the new: Not to the old, because tithes were the maintenance peculiarly
appointed to the Tribe of Levi, of which Tribe we cannot say we are; and also
the tithes of old were by command to be put into a storehouse, whether the
Numb. 18 21.
stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, were to come and eat of them, and
be satisfied which we practice not: Not to the new Covenant, for that Jesus
Christ has put an end to the Leviticall Priesthood, and consequently to all
the maintenance, and apurtenances thereunto belonging. 7. They call us
hirelings, because we preach by indenture first made with the people for our
maintenance, and do not go forth (trusting our Master Christ) as his Ministers
of old did, carrying neither Luke 10.3, 4.
purse, nor scrip with us; which should we practice, we are doubtful we should
be reduced to one of these two straights (viz.) either to work, or beg; the
first of which we cannot do, and to do the second we are ashamed. 8. They
call us greedy dogs, because we do not walk after the example of those whom
Christ sent out to preach the Gospel (viz.) eat and drink such things as the
people Luke 10.7.
give us; but in stead thereof do force that by Law, even from the poor and
needy (viz.) the tenth of all they get by the sweat of their brows) which by
fair means we should never obtain: A thing they say which the true Prophets
and Ministers of Christ mentioned in Scripture never practiced. 9. They call us
hypocrites, pretending these as the reasons. 1. Because we preach the things we
practice not; accusing us for preaching against pride, and yet living in it;
against covetousness, and yet being greedy of filthy lucre, etc. 2. Because
often times in the close of our Sermons, we tell the people we should have
proceeded farther, if time had not prevented us, when as indeed we had no more
to say. 3. Because in our Prayers before Sermon we frequently beg of God that
he would put words into our mouths, and teach us what to say; whereas even
then, we have our Sermon notes, either in our pockets, or our Bibles, or the
platform of our discourse prepared in our heads. 10. They call us thieves and
robbers, because we spend six days in the week, to gather together the words
of the Prophets, and Apostles, the words of Jerome, Augustine, Calvin, Luther,
etc. and then come forth on the first day and speak to the people saying,
Hearken to the word of the Lord; when as indeed we received it not from the
Lord, but from the writings of other men with whom we converse. 11. They have
the confidence to advise us (see the boldness of these deceivers) to Preach no
more to the people then the Lord has spoken to us, and then we our selves
witness the life and power of within our selves: which if practiced would be
of sad consequence to us; for that whereas most of us are engaged by contract
to Preach weekly, some once, some twice, some three times; if we should Preach
no more then we witness the life and power of, either constant silence, or
rare speaking, would be found in our Congregations; and then what our Sheep
would do for Shepherds, or what we Shepherds should do for hire, let all
that are in Authority judge. 12. They say, that the mind of God is not to be
known by study in a University, but by revelation of the Spirit, who alone
knows his 1 Cor. 2.11, 12.
mind: And that Paul, and Peter, and other the Ministers of Jesus Christ in
Scripture, did not serve an apprentiship in any University to learn the trade
of Preaching; but did Preach that Gospel which Christ by his Spirit 1 Cor.
2.10. Gal. 1.16.
revealed in them: and therefore they charge us to be Ministers of the letter
only, because we Preach the Saints words, but do not witness their
condition. 13. Their blasphemies do not end here, but they proceed on and
declare, both to us and our people, that all our talking, and profession of
Christ, his death, resurrection, and righteousness, in the notion (though
never so Orthodox) shall nothing avail us, or them, unless we witness the
life of Jesus in us, and his eternal power raising us up to newness of life.
14. They do not spare to publish it as truth (and practice accordingly) that
he that Jan. 2.9.
respects persons does commit sin: And therefore it is (heretics as they
are) that will no sooner bow down to the rich man wearing the Gold ring and the
goodly Apparel, then to the poor man that's clad with vile raiment: Of which,
if permitted (O ye Rulers, and Magistrates) this will be the sad consequence,
that you will neither be styled honorable, or worshipful; nor we be called by
the well pleasing titles, of Doctors, and Divines. 15. Lastly, they do avouch
it to be proper (as in H. (...) thou Gr. (...) th^^. Lat. Ta. (...)
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, so in English) to say Thou and thee to any single
person: concluding (see what it is to be illiterate) that because Adam,
Abraham, Moses, and we our selves, do say Thou and thee to the great God that
made the World, therefore the same expressions may be used to mortal men: And
though we do esteem the impropriety proper, for great men, and rich men, to say
Thou, and thee, to a poor man, and a mean man; yet we cannot but condemn the
same (though proper) for a poor man, or a mean man, to say Thou, and thee, to a
great man, and a rich man.
These are the horrid Blasphemies, and damnable Doctrines, against the
Abettors, of which, you do at this day discharge so much passion, and rage,
both from Press and Pulpit; calling to the civil Powers for bonds and
Prisons; nay fire and faggot against all those, who (fearing the Lord) do fear
to call darkness light, and light darkness. But stop a little, and consider
what you are doing, whilst you are upon the full carreer posting to Damascus
upon Saul's bloody errand: Will you not out of your own mouths be condemned
before him that cannot err in judgment? Do ye fulfill, or violate, that
Royal Law of Christ written in your hearts, to do unto others, as you would
they should do unto you? Are not you as notable Heretics in the esteem of
those whose blood you thirst after, as they are in yours? and would you esteem
it just that (were the power in their hands) they should meet the same measure
unto you? If you shall despise it as mine, yet accept of it as the counsel of
Gamaliel, that sober Pharisee, Take heed to your selves, what ye intend to do,
as touching the innocent whom ye now so fiercely pursue, least happily ye be
found even to fight against God. If it were better for him that shall offend
one of Christ's little ones, that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he
drowned in the depth of the Sea, where then will you appear in that great and
notable day of the Lord, who do not only offend, but do offer all manner of
violence and cruelty (to the utmost extent of your power) against those, of
whom you dare not say but they may be of the number of Christ's little ones. Be
not too furious, least in your rage you ask Barabbas, and cause Jesus to be
delivered over to be crucified. And although in your heat you may be content
(upon confidence that he is a deceiver) to take his blood upon the heads of
your selves, and your children: yet know, that it will prove (as to the Jews
of old) a burden too heavy for you to bear. Fear the Lord therefore, O ye
Shepherds, and cease to fight against the Lamb, for no weapon formed against
him shall prosper: Cast off all your coverings that are not of the Spirit of
the Lord: Say not within your selves, we are Preachers of Christ's name; for the
Scribes and Pharisees Preached the Prophets, and yet did shed the blood of
Christ, of whom the same Prophets testified and foretold: Boast not your selves
in that wisdom which you have scraped together at the feet of Gamaliel; for as
that wisdom shall never comprehend the mysteries of the Kingdom; so likewise
remember that Saul (who in learning and knowledge was inferior to none of you)
was not only stark ignorant, but also with his learning fought against Heaven,
and thought he had done acceptable service unto God, in washing his hands in
the blood of his Son: And now what is it in all the world that I (who am become
your enemy because I tell you the truth) do wish unto you Teachers? even this,
that the gracious God would grant you to witness the same change that Saul
did, that the same hand of love that struck him to the Earth, would likewise
bring you down from all your high thoughts, and lofty imaginations, to stoop to
the teachings of that Jesus whom you now persecute, that ye may come to
witness all the wisdom of this world to be foolishness with God, and may be
content to become fools that ye may be wise, that you may cry out (from the
same root of life) with the same Saul, Lord what would thou have us to do?
that you may (not in words only, but in truth) come to witness all your
excellency but loss, and your glory but as dung, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ: And finally, that you may be made able to comprehend
with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to
know the love of Christ that passes knowledge: All which are the hearts
desires of him for you, who is,

A cordial lover of all your souls, and a servant of that Jesus who witnessed
a good confession before Pontius Pilat. THOMAS SPEED.

TO THE READER.
READER;
THou may understand that I writ a former Letter to my Antagonist, in answer
to one sent me by him; from whence he raised reports touching me which were
both untrue, and scandalous: For which cause it is principally, that I have
caused this Reply to come to the Press; that so all that will may read, and
they that fear the Lord may judge betwixt us. Both his, and my former, I would
have Printed with this, but that this would thereby have increased to too great
a bulk; which would have caused it to be unto thee both more tedious to read,
and costly to purchase. Read with a single (...). Prove all things, hold fast
that which is good.

Farewell, Thomas Speed.

A Brief and plain REPLY, Unto certain Papers received from WILLIAM THOMAS
(CALLED) Minister of the Gospel at Vbley.
SIR,
I Have received your Papers, bearing date May 25. which are stufft with much
wrath, and more confusion. Plain dealing I perceive is a great stranger with
you, for that you give it such course entertainment when it comes within your
doors: So accustomed are you to the cap and the knee, to greetings in the
Marketplace, and to be called of men Rabbi; that he is presently become your
enemy, who durst (without a complement) tell you the naked truth: Such smooth
things as you Prophecy to the People, you expect from others, but to have a
Lie, Deceit, or Hypocrisy, called by their proper names, must be at least
railing and reviling. But (be you pleased or be you more angry) I must yet deal
more plainly with you; for terrible is the Lord to all flatterers, and such as
speak deceitfully to their neighbors.

And first I shall begin with the Proem to your Papers.

W. T. I am sorry that what others will think good counsel, has been so ill
bestowed on you; when you have got more piety and humility, you will have other
thoughts; and when you have recovered your civility, you will write other
Letters.


T. S. That counsel that directs my mind toward the true counselor
(though from the lips of my manservant or my maidservant) I dare not despise:
but counsel against truth (under the affrighting notion of error) I esteem not
good. Piety, humility, and civility, it seems I have lost: But why? Because I
did not swallow down what you first writ me, as unquestionable Oracles of
Heaven, but proved what you sent me by the Scriptures of truth, and from them
bore my testimony against your deceit. This is no judging from you, presently
to conclude that man a brute (for so he is that has lost piety, humility, and
civility) that does not presently bow down and cry Hosanna to the mutable
directions of the Pulpit.


W. T. I confess I have been something put to it to determine whether I should
say any thing to you or no.


T. S. Truly as good you had said nothing as to no purpose: neither were you
more put to it, then I have been, what to make my reply to, in your last
Papers; so full are they of confusion, falsehood, contradictions, impertinences,
and gross absurdities, as herein after will be made manifest to any that are
sober minded: And had I not received them signed with your name, I should
rather have judged them compiled by some old superstitious Episcopal Priest,
then by one that professes himself a Minister of the Gospel, and an emminent
Doctor of the times.


W. T. I shall say something to the matter of your Letter, the rather because
in some parts of it you pretend to reason; though much of it be stufft with
that clamor, which is the character of that company with which you close.


T. S. To tell a Clergyman of his wickedness in plainness of speech, is
clamor: Were not Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Micha, clamorous fellows, that
durst cry out against the abominations of the false Prophets, and wicked
Priests of their times? If this be such a black character that renders my
Companions unlovely in your eyes, I shall yet choose those who are more
unlovely. As the fear of God and working of righteousness, are the character of
such whom he accepts, so are they of those with whom I close: But as for
those that cry the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and yet have
their hands full of unrighteousness, that Preach to others the things that
themselves contradict in their practice, with such I desire to have no
fellowship.


W. T. In defense of whom you bring the examples of Moses, and Ezekiel; but
though such men quaked occasionally now and then (as Gods servants still do)
yet you do not find that they received a denomination from it, or made a
trade of it.


T. S. I brought nothing in defense of those whom you intend; I only quoted my
own practice, and the reason of it (viz.) that I did close with such as (from a
principle of holy fear) did tremble before the great God of Heaven and Earth;
such as were Moses, Ezekiel, and other holy men of God mentioned in Scripture.
And was this that which needed a defense? Are you so fierce an Antagonist
against such as tremble at the word of the Lord (as Moses and Ezekiel did) that
they need be defended against your rage? I doubt not but if Moses and Ezekiel
were now living, they would find the same measure at your hands, as they did
at the hands of the false Prophets of old; since they that walk in their steps,
need a defense against your fury. It suffices for me that you grant the thing
that I intended, (viz) That the servants of God of old did, and still
occasionally do quake and tremble before the Lord. But you say they received
no denomination from it, nor made a trade of it.


T. S. Did I ever assert either of these things? if not, whom do you
contradict? to what end do you produce such pitiful stuff as this? for my
part I cannot imagine what you could intend by it, unless it were to fill up
paper, and keep your pen in action. What would you conclude thence? unless you
would reason thus, Because they that now tremble at the word of the Lord, as
Moses and Ezekiel did, are by the world in scorn called Quakers, therefore
trembling at the word of the Lord is a hateful thing. Because we read that the
Disciples from their faith in Christ, and profession of his name received the
denomination of Christians, can that be brought as an argument against faith in
Christ, and a serious profession of his name? And as for making a trade of
trembling, or quaking, I never mentioned any such thing, neither do I
understand what you intend by this impertinency of speech, unless to reproach
those that daily walk low in the fear of the Lord; and if so, I say to you, let
the scorner cease to scorn, lest the dreadful day of the Lord overtake him
unawares, and give him his portion with scorners in the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone. Sure I am that you never read that the holy men of God of
old made a trade of Preaching as you and other men do, who (just as the
handicrafts man makes his wares and exposes them to sale in the Market, so
you) do compile your Sermons, gathering a shread out of one Author, and a
shread out of another, and thereunto add your own inventions, and then sell
them unto the people for money, some for one hundred, some for two hundred,
others for three hundred pound per annum, according as you can make your Market.


So much of the Proem to your Papers: Now to your reasonings, and arguings.

And first you begin with the Scriptures; quoting this as one of the detestable
Doctrines of those called Quakers, that they say that the Scriptures are not
the Saints rule, contrary you say to these Scriptures, Gal. 6.16. James 2.8.
Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33. 2 Pet. 1.19. to which you say I make answer, that no Scripture
that I remember says so in terminis, and therefore its a false charge.

T. S. That which I said was, that I did not find the Scripture in terminis,
so called, in either of those you quoted, and therefore you charged them falsely
in saying they reject the Scriptures, because they deny that which the
Scriptures never said. In which I said truth: for he that charge another man
with the denial of Scripture, because, he denies that which the Scripture no
where faith, I say he charge him falsely. Now let any man of a sober
understanding judge whether any of those Scriptures you produce do speak any
such thing as you would have them to speak, and consequently whether you are
not found bearing false witness, of which you accuse others.


But you reply three things to salve this mistake.

W. T. That is Scripture which is necessarily deduced from it, though it be not
in so many words contained in it; to prove which you produce the example of
Christ, who proved the Resurrection of the dead from that Scripture, I am the
God of Abraham of Isaac and of Jacob.


T. S. So then you grant the thing that I said (viz.) that the Scripture in
words do not say any such thing, and therefore you appeal from the express
Scripture to your own consequences and deductions thence which you make the
lame shift (when the Scripture will not help you any longer) by which to
patronize all your miscarriages, and deviations from the truth. Here is the
refuge that all the blind guides of the Nation make to themselves, when as
they are driven by plain Scripture from their strong holds, and cannot stand
before that which they pretend to be their rule, they fly to their own
meanings, and interpretations; and whosoever durst not own them for infallible
rules are presently sentenced to be Heretics, and deceivers, and denyers of
Scripture. But will you indeed stand to what you have said (viz.) that that is
Scripture which is necessarily deduced from it, though it be not in so many
words contained in it? Then let me ask you, and many others in this Nation, who
have been Teachers, some ten, some twenty, some thirty years; were those
things that you have taught so many years together necessarily deduced from
Scriptures? if not, then by your own confession, you have taught falsehood: if
they were, then all that you have so taught is infallible; for you say it is
Scripture, and the Scripture is infallible; and dare you say that what has
been so Preached by them and you, for these twenty years past, has been
infallible? why do you not then adjoyne all your Sermons to the Scripture, for
if necessarily deduced thence, they are Scripture, and a part of the Saints
rule: But what a sad condition would many poor souls be in, whose small
estates would not amount to the purchase of a Bible? so voluminous would it be
by that time, all the necessary deductions that you and others have made from
the Scripture these many years past, were added to it they must sit down in
despair of ever obtaining that which is their rule, and if they could, what
have they but a pack of confusion and contradictions.

And whereas you quote Christ his proving the Resurrection of the dead, etc.

I answer, that what Christ spoke was infallible, he neither did nor could err
in what he said; and were you as infallible in those meanings and
interpretations which you force upon the Scriptures, as he was in what he spoke
from the Spirit of the Lord, I should readily close with them as the Oracles of
God; but till then, think it not much, that I embrace his interpretations, and
disowne yours. But how long will you deal thus fraudulently with the world, in
crying out against such as deny your meanings, as if they denied the
Scriptures, and yet dare not say you are infallible in the meanings you give of
them? Either say to the people plainly that you are infallible (if you so
esteem your selves) that so they may mind so great a concernment of their
souls, as is the receiving of your deductions from Scripture for true
Doctrine, nay for Scripture it self; or else say you are (what indeed you are
sufficiently) fallible, that so they may take liberty of proving both your
actions, and your Doctrine, and not be damned as Heretics, if they condemn
that in you, which the Scriptures of truth do condemn. Suffer therefore them
that must die for themselves, and account to the Lord for themselves, to
interpret for themselves, and believe for themselves; and not tell them they
must credit your deductions from Scripture as the Scripture it self, when as
you that call your selves Divines do so much disagree in your own deductions.
Take six of you that esteem your selves the most able Doctors, and a portion of
Scripture being given you to interpret, shut your selves up in six several
rooms, and after some time, give your interpretations thereof, to one that
shall receive them from each of you apart from the rest, and perhaps not two of
the six shall agree in the same interpretation: and would you have poor people
adventure their souls on the truth of such men's deductions from Scripture, who
dwell in such vast confusion, and difference, in their deductions.

Next you urge that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33. (viz.) You shall not turn aside
to the right hand or to the left.


T. S. And does this Scripture say that the Scripture is the Saints rule? or
can you without blushing produce it to prove any such thing? could Moses intend
this in relation to the Scripture, the greatest part of which was not then
written? was all, or any of those things that were said, and done, by the
Prophets, Jesus Christ, and the several Apostles, then recorded? if not, what
a manifest wresting is it of Moses words, to say that by them, he mea'nt, that
which was not written, till several hundreds of years after? unless you
exclude all the Prophesies, the sayings of Jesus Christ, and the Epistles of
the several Apostles, from being part of the rule, which I suppose you dare
not do, in word, though you do in a great measure in your practice.


W. T. Add here unto that Gal. 6.16. the word rule ((...)) is expressed


T. S. Because the word rule is expressed in Paul's Epistle to the Galathians,
therefore the Scripture is the Saints rule? Is this reasoning like to such as
should come from a Minister of the Gospel? May not a Heathen Philosopher reason
as logically thus, the word (...), ( Anglice a Rule) is used in Aristotle's
polliticks, therefore Aristotle's polliticks are the Saints rule? If you did
indeed live by that rule the Apostle there speaks of, (viz.) the new
Creature) you would not write and act so irregularly as you do.


W. T. Saints must walk by one rule or another. I ask then, what rule is there
if Scripture be not the rule, etc.


T. S. I know no new rule, nor own none but the same that Abel, Encch, Noah,
Abraham, Moses, David, Paul, and the rest of the holy men of God walked by; to
which I much fear you are a great stranger, for if the tree may be known by its
fruit, your fruits declare a great deal of ignorance thereof. And by the same
touchsone that those holy men proved the light they walked by, whether it were
of God or no, the same and no other do I own still.

Next you spend time in taking exceptions against a word inserted in a Querie I
put you, which was this.

Because they deny them to be the Saints rule, does it follow they wholly
reject them? To which you answer.


W. T. That (wholly) was not my word, it is of your own putting in, and
therefore if you do not like it you must thank your self. That that I said
was that the Quakers in this and their other Doctrins, though they do not
professedly reject the Scriptures yet really they do.


T. S. I did not say it was your word, I only put it in a question to you: And
therefore by way of just retortion I may say to you, you have made work for
your self, and please your self with descanting upon it when you have done; yet
let any sober understanding judge, whether your speech can intend any less
then I asked you; for when you say indefinitely they reject the Scriptures (not
quoting any particulars) whether can it be any other way taken, but that they
throw them off in general: Besides, that you did intend their rejection of the
whole Scripture, I prove thus. The Scripture as the Saints rule you say they
reject, now whether is a part of Scripture, or the whole the Saints rule? If
the whole Scripture be the Saints rule, and you go about to prove they reject
the Scripture because they deny it to be the Saints rule; then nothing more
plain then this, that they reject the whole Scripture. However we will take
your own words with your own interpretations, by which you give us to
understand, that they whom you call Quakers do not reject the Scripture in
general. But forasmuch as you grant that they do not reject the whole
Scripture, and yet have not mentioned any one particular Scripture they do
reject, until you charge them with particulars, I shall take your indefinite
charge for no other then a slander.


You proceed from this to charge me with censuring, because I do affirm that
they do deny the Scripture, who say in word it is the Saints rule, and yet
they themselves deny it to be their own rule, by violating it in their practice.

T. S. If speaking plain truth without complement, or flattery, be censuring, I
shall study to be more a censurer. And whereas you take your self as concerned
in that which you call my censure, as reflecting in particular on you, (it
seems there is something in your conscience cries guilty) you took my words
as they were intended; neither would it be an unjust censure, but a true
charge, if I repeat what I said in my last (Viz.) That while you talk much in
word, of the Scriptures being your rule, you disown and deny them by your
practice, in doing many things for which you have no rule in them at all. And
let me say farther, that you that pretend your selves Ministers in the Nation,
crying The Scriptures, the Scriptures, do of all men most abuse them, by
serving your lusts upon them: Where you have no Plea for your Coveteousnesse,
Pride, and Formality; there you wrest the Scriptures to plead for you, putting
such Interpretations on them as will best serve to Patronize your lusts; and
where they do condemn you, or cross you in your wickedness, there you
strive to divert the stroke of them, either by silencing them, or fathering
your own corrupt meanings upon them.

And that you and all that shall peruse this my Reply, may see that I do
neither passionately, nor groundlesly, but justly impeach you of playing fast
and loose with the Scripture, I shall particularly scan your answer to two
Queries I put you, the first was this.


T. S. By what rule in Scripture do you (pretending to be a Minister of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ) receive Tithes for preaching?


W. T. Faithful Ministers neither preach for Tithes, but for souls; neither
do they take Tithes for preaching, as if that were a fit exchange, or as if
they would leave preaching if that were not.


T. S. The plain English of your Answer, is, That you have no rule in Scripture
by which you take Tithes. Will any, save those whom the Lord has given up to
believe lies, any longer credit you, when you shall avouch the Scripture to be
your rule in words, and yet being asked what rule you have for your practice,
you can quote none. Would you be esteemed such a valiant Champion in behalf of
the Scripture, and yet do that for which no rule is to be found therein? Is,
this less then plain hypocrisy, to go into your Pulpit (where all men lie at
the mercy of your bitter tongue) and there power out damnation on those that
deny that the Scripture says it is the Saints rule, and yet your self in
practice disown it for your rule? But since you wave the Scripture, as that
which cannot speak for you, we shall a little examine what it is that you have
to speak for your self.


Faithful Ministers, you say, do not preach for Tithes, but for souls.

T. S. Then from your own lips I may conclude, That they that do preach for
Tithes, are not faithful Ministers; and how few are there of those many you
make mention of in the Nation, which can escape this sentence? A father puts
his Son to the University for some certain years, to learn the Trade of
Sermon-making, and when he comes thence, what is the first thing in the eye of
the father and Son? why this, where is the best vacant living, the richest
Benefice to be had? When that is found out, then the young Divine must come and
give the people a Sermon, as a sample of that ware he intends to sell them,
when he is settled. The people they like not either his person or his wares, and
refuse to trade with him; Away goes father and Son, hasten to some Committee
or Superior power, and there by bowing and fair speeches, and by the help of
some old Practitioners in that art, they gain that by power which they could
not obtain by the peoples consent. Being once in, to work he goes, for the
Tithes of all their grain, cattle, garden fruits, and for smoke pennies,
summoning such as refuse to satisfy his covetous appetite, before Magistrates;
suing others at the Law, recovering of them treble damages, casting them into
Prison in case of non-paiment: and is this Preaching for Tithes or for souls?
If for souls, surely it is only to lead them down into the pit, by such
wicked examples as these; and to make them seven fold more the children of the
Devil then they were before: Besides this, how few are there of you, that call
your selves Ministers, that are not as ready to chop and change your livings,
as men are their cattle for outward advantage? If any man die posessed of a
rich Parsonage, how many of you have presently a call to it, especially if
there be more plenty of Tithes, and more acres of Glebe land, then in your own
Parish? then days of fasting and humiliation must be kept, pretending to seek
God to know who has the clearest call; and though you are all resolved in your
hearts before hand to get it if you can, yet the name of God and the prayers of
some well-meaning people must be made use of by every one of you, as a cloak,
least your deceit should be too plainly discovered. I know you will call this
clamor, because I speak plain truth; but for all that, I shall not spare to
tell you, that it is damnable hypocrisy for a man to resolve first to remove
from a mean to a rich Benefice, and then seem to consult with the Oracle
whether he shall remove or no. I shall not positively charge you in particular
with trading of this nature, but if report be not an egregious liar, you did
strenuously endeavor to show your self a faithful Minister by your Preaching
rather at Wells for Tithes, then at Vbley for souls. You say farther


W. T. Neither do they take Tithes for Preaching, as if that were a fit
exchange, or as if they would leave Preaching if that were not.


T. S. They take not Tithes for doing nothing, and is not Preaching the
consideration for which they take them? Then either confess plainly that more
then four parts of five of those called Ministers are unfaithful, because they
take Tithes for Preaching, or else take shame to your self for asserting a
thing so notoriously untrue, That they take not Tithes for Preaching; when as
well nigh all the Parishes in England are witnesses against you. But in that
you judge Tithes no fit exchange for their Preaching, I say the same, for that
they are just so much more then they deserve. And whereas you say they would
not leave Preaching if Tithes were not; I presume there are scarce two, among
two thousand, through the whole Nation of your opinion in that, save only
those that are themselves Tithe-gatherers. How few are there of the Teachers of
the Nation that will settle themselves in any Parish until they have made
firm Indentures for their hire? is not what will you assure me of by the year
the first question that is propounded? besides is there any thing more usual
then to remove from that place, where Tithes, augmentations, or some equivalent
maintenance cease? But above all, who is he among you that will in conscience
betake himself to a poor Parish to Preach for souls, where there are no
Tithes, nor other yearly stipend to be had? And what should be the reason that
among all the struglings that are among you Teachers for several places, you
are never found to strive who shall come into a Parish where you can expect no
money? Neither have I ever heard that any man pretended a call to a people, who
through meanness of estate, could give him but a mean, or no reward. So that,
it is more then probable that that vote which shall ever throw down Tithes,
will strike well nigh as many in this Nation dumb, as Sampson did of the
Philistims strike dead, by removing the pillars of the house of Dagon their God.


W. T. Ministers take Tithes because that for the present is the maintenance
allotted them, which they may justly claim and lawfully take.


T. S. But by whom are they allotted them? not by Jesus Christ whom they pretend
to be their Lord; and therefore they ought not to take them, much less can
they justly claim them: neither do the Scriptures you bring at all give
countenance to them that do wickedly extort from the people Tithes for their
maintenace: You do not read that Paul forced a maintenance from any, nor that
he dregged any be Courts of Justice, and Committees, or took any poor men by
the throats, who had great families to maintain, threatening them with bonds if
they would not give them the tenth part of all their labors. Let all that fear
the Lord judge whether you are not condemned out of your own mouth, when as you
say in word the Scripture is your rule, and yet thus trample it under foot by
your practice.


T. S. Whether he that receives Tithes for Preaching do not deny Christ to be
come in the flesh?


W. T. When you prove that the taking a maintenance from the fruits of the
Earth, in that proportion, was a shadow whereof Christ was the body, you say
something, etc.


T. S. Your impertinent Answer does intimate, that I have said something more
already in my Querie, then you know well what to say to; otherwise I presume
you would not so shamefully wave it. This I do say which is according to the
Scriptures of truth, That the Lord of old appointed Tithes as an inheritance to
the Priests and Levites for their service in the Tabernacle, and the Temple;
which being considered, let me ask you three things. 1 Qu: Whether Christ was
not the end of the Leviticall Priesthood? 2 Qu: Whether he that upholdeth that
which was to have an end in Christ, does not deny Christ to be come in the
flesh, and consequently is Antichrist? 3 Qu: Whether they that claim the
maintenance appointed particularly to the Priests and Levites, ought not to do
their work, (Viz.) Prepare the Sacrifices, slay Oxen, Sheep, Goats, etc.


Therefore do you and your brethren either own the name of Jewish Priests, and
do their service, and instruct the people in the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies,
or else for ever quit claim to their maintenance.


T. S. Thus much of your Answer to my first Querie. My second was this, By what
Rule in Scripture do you sprinkle Infants, and call it an Ordinance of Jesus
Christ, who never commanded any such thing, nor was it ever practiced by any of
the Saints after him.


W. T. Inquire again whether you never heard of any Saint since Christ that
sprinkled Infants?


T. S. Does this ridiculous quibble deserve the name of so sober an Answer as
should proceed out of the lips of one that esteems himself a grave Divine?
Was I not demanding of you a Rule in Scripture grounded on the Command of
Christ, or the practice of the Saints there, for sprinkling of Infants? And
could you imagine that I intended the practice of any without the Scripture,
when that only was spoken of? What weight is there in what you say? Or to what
purpose did you produce this senseless inquiry? Unless you intended it to
prove that we may practice any thing that is brought to us by Tradition, though
we can show no Rule in Scripture for it, either from Christ's Command, or the
Saints practice.


W. T. Christ by the Apostle Paul commands to render to all their dues, Romans
13.7.

But Baptism is an Infants due.

Ergo.
T. S. And is this your Rule in Scripture by which you sprinkle Infants, and
call it an Ordinance of Jesus Christ? Do not call it railing if I ask you
whether that Scripture be not fullfilled at this day, Isa. 44.25. which says,
The Lord makes the Diviners mad, and turns the wise men backward, and makes
their knowledge foolish. Consider seriously whether you have not manifested the
darkness of your mind to all the Children of light, to be even like that of
Egypt, which might be felt. If the Lord had not smitten you with blindness of
heart, could you ever produce that Scripture as your Rule for sprinkling of
Infants? Will this be a sufficient Plea for you to produce for your practice,
in the day that Jesus Christ shall ask you, Who required those things at your
hands? If this be all you can say, you will never be able to escape that woe
which is on them that teach and practice for doctrines the traditions of men.

But to your Arguments; and here I must confess my self non-plust, for that
there is such a heap of confusion, incongruities, and illogicall Conclusions,
that I know not where to begin, or where to end.


W. T. We ought to render to all their dues; Ergo, Infants ought to be baptized.


T. S. Was it ever heard, or did it ever enter into the heart of any
sober-minded man to conceive, that Paul intended the 7 Verse of the 13 Chapter
to the Romans, to prove the sprinkling of Infants faces with water, to be an
Ordinance of Jesus Christ? For shame forbear thus to abuse and belie the
Scripture, wresting it to the patronizing of your sond and unwarrantable
practices.

Your Argument runs thus.

If we ought to render to all their dues, Custom to whom Custom, etc. Then
Infants ought to be baptized.

But we ought to render to all their dues.

Ergo. Which Argument amounts to as much as this. Children ought to be
baptized, because they ought to be baptized. And this is your Scripture by
which you throw water on the faces of Infants, and call it an Ordinance of
Jesus Christ.

You said before, That necessary deductions from Scripture are Scripture, and
consequently this deduction of yours is Scripture. When the letter of Scripture
is against you, in any of your will-worships, then you strive to avoid the
stroke of it, by giving your own imaginations for an Interpretation; and where
the Scripture is silent, there you make it to speak what will serve your own
turns; and all the while cry out against such as own the Scripture (but disown
your corrupt interpretations of it) as Heretics. Let me tell you, the Lord is
now discovering the deceit and hypocrisy of all such as say they speak the
word of the Lord, when he has not spoken to them; and of all those blind
guides that have for many years caused the people to err.

You proceed to prove Baptism to be an Infants due, but you attempt it by a
heap of such lame, confounded. Arguments, that there is neither order nor
reason to be found in them.

First you begin with Infants indefinitely, and do endeavor to prove that
they ought to be sprinkled; then you change that term and put in the Infant of
a believing parent; and so as you list you fill up your Arguments with such
stuff as you use to bring forth to your people, whether such language as the
Scripture knows or not, I perceive is all one to you.


W. T. The Infant of a believing parent is a holy Child as soon as it is born.


T. S. Paul says, that he with others were by nature the Children of wrath,
Ephesians. 2.3. But he that is holy is no child of wrath, and consequently no
believers Infant is born a child of wrath. Christ says, That which is born of
the flesh, is flesh: You say that which is born of the flesh is holy; your
proof is, 1 Cor. 7.14.

To which I answer, If the holiness there mentioned be the foundation on which
you build the sprinkling of Infants faces and call it baptism, then may a
declared unbeliever be baptized also; for the same holiness that the Child
had, the unbelieving parent had; (...).
for the same Greek word that is used for sanctifying the unbelieving parent,
is used for the holiness of the Child; which you might have considered, before
you had so rashly asserted the holiness there spoken of to be a sufficient
ground for Infant Baptism. And will you say, that the declared unbelieving
parent had a right to baptism, being holy with the same sanctification the
Child had? Therefore either grant that the holiness there spoken of, does not
render the Child capable of baptism; or else do not barbarously withold the
same from the unbelieving Parent, who might justly claim the same privilege
(as you call it) by virtue of the same holiness.


You go on, and call Baptism --

W. T. That mark by which Gods people are outwardly distingished from heathens,
and the initiating seal of the Covenant, which declares an Infant to be one
of Gods, and solemnly puts him into the number of Gods people.


T. S. Many that are Drunkards, Swearers, and Whoremasters, and professed
Enemies of the Lord, have received this mark; and call you these Gods people?
If so, who are the Heathen they are distinguished from by this mark? Is a
drunken, swearing, covetous, profane Englishman, by this mark distinguished
(as one of the people of God) from a drunken, swearing, covetous, profane
Indian in America, as a heathen? Dare you rank all the wicked of the Land (who
are the people of the Curse, and who are by express Scripture shut out from
the Kingdom of God) among the number of Gods people? This is the saplesse
chafe with which you feed your poor blind people; who, it seems, do seldom
seriously scan what you confidently assert to them in the Pulpit for truth; if
they did, surely you would blush and tremble, to expose such pitiful ware to
sale to them as this is. This is that Orthodox doctrine, which whosoever does
not profess subjection to, must presently be damned as an Heretic. Does the
Scripture any where say that the sprinkling water on the face of an Infant, is
the initiating seal of the Covenant? But you are privileged to put the stamp
of Divine authority upon your own irrational deductions, and sottish
inventions, and call them Scripture.


W. T. Could the poor Infant that is barbarously kept from baptism, and left
like a Heathen, but plead its right, no believing parent would ever be able to
answer the withholding of that Ordinance and privilege from it.


T. S. Could the Infant plead his own right, no better then you do for him,
his Plea would soon be answered: And could the poor Babe speak as well with his
tongue, as his tears, he would impeach him for a barbarous Priest, who durst
cruelly throw cold water on his face in the frosty weather (sometime to the
hazard of his life) and call it his privilege. And as for your calling this
sottish invention an Ordinance, either produce that Scripture which calls it
so, or else be not angry if I say, That it is a shame for one that calls
himself a Minister of the Gospel, to be found with a lie in his mouth.


W. T. While therefore you would fasten this upon Ministers, that they
practically deny the Scripture, either you must bring better grounds, or else
fear the ninth Commandment.


T. S. If to practice that which the Scripture requires not, be to deny the
Scripture, then I do still say, That you and others that would be esteemed
Ministers of Jesus Christ, do deny it; for that you do practice many things,
which the Scripture owneth not; against which, your deceit and hypocrisy, I
do, and ever shall bear my testimony, and not fear the ninth Commandment.
They ought to fear that Commandment, who make Paul, and Peter, and other the
Saints in Scripture, to speak that which they never intended, and wrest their
words to Patronize those things they never practiced.

Thus have I made my Reply to that which concerns your practice, in preaching
for Tithes, and sprinkling Infants. Which Reply you may (if you think good)
show to your Disciples in the Country, to whom (I am very credibly informed)
you have falsely and very wickedly suggested, That I deny the Scriptures: And
let them, or as many of them as are sober-hearted, judge, whether you or I deny
the Scripture; and let your shame and folly be laid open before them, in that
you cry The Scripture, The Scripture, and yet are not able to produce one
Scripture to prove, that ever the Ministers of Jesus Christ preached for
Tithes, or sprinkled Infants.

The next thing that I asked you in my last, was this.

Where is it written that the Scriptures are the ground of Faith?


W. T. That the Scriptures are the ground of faith, is necessarily deduced from
the ensuing Scriptures, John 3.33, 34.


T. S. If the Lord has not given you up wholly to disingenuity and blindness,
I appeal to that of God in your conscience, whether this be an Answer to the
Question propounded? and whether it be not manifest huxtering, and falsifying
the Scripture, to offer your own deductions for Scripture? What shifting and
shuffling is here to support the vain imaginations of your own heart? Either it
is written that the Scriptures are the ground of faith, or it is not; if it be
written, why had you not quoted the particular Scripture in which it is
written? If it be not written, why had you not given a plain Answer to my
Question, and have confessed that it is no where so written? However, taking
your Answer as you have laid it, you thereby grant that which I said, (Viz.)
That it is no where written that the Scriptures are the ground of faith.
Notwithstanding which, you labor much with your dead deductions, and dark
reasonings, and all to force the Scripture to speak that which it never spoke;
in which paths of cloudy confusion, and horrible absurdities, I shall not spend
time to follow you; for the folly and ignorance of your lines will be
sufficiently discovered to any enlightened eye, by the bare reading of them: I
shall only point at some of your most monstrous abuses offered to the Scripture,
and horrible blasphemies against the Lord Jesus Christ; by your setting up the
letter of Scripture above him, and the testimony of his Spirit.

How wretchedly do you abuse that place, 1 John 5.10. in saying that the
record and witness there spoken of, is the Scripture? when as the very
Scripture it self gives you the lie, saying, that the witness and record there
spoken of is within the Saints; which record the very next verse there
expresses to be eternal life, which God has given to the Saints: And is
paper and Ink within the Saints, or are they eternal life? To this you add.


W. T. I must first believe, and ground my faith on that written word, and I
must first believe and rest upon that written word, and I must believe that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God, because the written word tells me so.


T. S. If your conscience be not seared with a hot iron, can you read over
these lines again, and not see the blasphemy that is in them stare in your
face? Was there not faith, and was not Jesus Christ before the written word?
and yet must that be first believed on, and be the ground of faith? Is rest
only to be found in Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God, and yet the written
word must be rested on first? Did not Abel, Enoch, Abraham, and other holy men
of God, believe that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, long before the written
word was, and could they then believe it, because that told them so? What
starved souls have those Sheep whose Shepherd handeth to them no better food
then this? Does not the witness of God in your conscience condemn you for
horrible iniquity, for receiving so much money yearly of your Parishioners, and
give them in exchange naught but such unsavory husks as these?

From this you proceed to put another Scripture upon the Rack, to make it
confess that which is neither expressed, nor was ever intended in it, Ephesians.
2.20. Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner stone.


W. T. There it is said in terminis that the Scripture is a foundation.


T. S. Was the fear of the Lord before your eyes when you penned this Assertion,
so manifestly contradictory to the truth? Is the Scripture so much as mentioned
in that whole Chapter, and yet is it in so many terms called there a
foundation? Is not the foundation there spoken of, that same Jesus which was
both preached, and believed on, by the Prophets, and Apostles, and had you the
impudence to say that it is the Scripture? Could you so confidently give Paul
the lie, who says expressly that other foundation then Jesus Christ none can
lay, and yet you would make Paul himself to lay another? Does not Calvin
Intelligit Jesum Christum cui Testimoniu^ tulere Apostoli and Prophetae. Call.
in locum
(one of your Comentators with whom you trade for matter to sell to the people)
as manifestly conclude you to be a liar? who says in terminis, That the
Apostle does in that Scripture intend Jesus Christ, to whom the Prophets and
Apostles did bear witness? Nay which is more (see the height of your deceit)
do not you your self say but a few lines after, that the foundation on which
the Prophets and Apostles built, and we build, is Christ? You tell me in your
last papers, of my Outcries: But let me say to you, That I shall never cease
to cry aloud against such horrible falsehood and deceit as this. Can you
(without a blushing conscience) accuse others for denying the Scripture, and
yet you your self in the mean while thus trample it under foot, by averring
that it says that in terms, which it does not once mention?

You proceed laboring in the dark, seeking by a coined distinction (which the
Scripture knows not) to prove your own conceptions.


You say.

W. T. There Is a double foundation. 1 Personal, or real, that is Christ. 2
Doctrinall, or declarative, that is the Scripture.


T. S. If the Scripture be no real foundation, is it then imaginary? for that
which is not real is imaginary. Is not the Scripture beholding to you for
calling it a foundation, and yet opposing it to that which is a real
foundation? Is the Scripture acquainted with this distinction? when you show it
me there, I shall speak more to it.


W T. Now enquire again whether I have made the Scriptures assert that which
they no where do.


T. S. I am not now to make enquiry touching that: a little enquiry will serve
the turn, to find you a notorious falsifyer of the Scripture, in saying it is
written so and so, when as no such thing is written. And I do still say, that
were you not past blushing, you would cover your face through shame when you
reflect on your wresting of the Scripture, endeavoring to produce it as a
testimony to your false assertions.

You go on to distinguish between Gods Testimony, and Gods Truth.


T. S. Have you at once lost your honesty, as well as your understanding that
you should create an opposition betwixt Gods testimony, and Gods truth? Is not
his testimony truth? Thus you jumble things together, to fill up your papers,
just as you multiply words to fill up your hour in the Pulpit, whether you
speak things true or false it matters not.


W. T. If the Scriptures be corrupted, they must be purged, cleared, and the
true words and sense held forth, and maintained, which is the Churches Office,
1 Timothy 3.15.


T. S. Would not any man be ashamed, but he that is past shame, to offer this
Scripture to prove that the Scripture must be purged and cleared by the Church,
when it is corrupted? Is the Scripture, or the corruption, purging, or clearing
of it, mentioned, or so much as intended in that Scripture? This is just such a
wild proof as you use to bring for the dead Doctrines you raise from Scripture
in your Pulpit.

But the ground of faith you say may be corrupted; nay you say further, that
faith may be lost.


T. S. Let all that fear the Lord judge whether you speak like a man acquainted
with the faith of Gods elect: Is the faith of Gods elect bottomed upon a
corruptible foundation? and may their faith be lost? The Scripture says that
He that believes shall never be confounded; but if the ground of faith be
corruptible, shame and confusion will certainly cover the faces of those that
believe.

When I tell you that the Scripture could not be the ground of Abel's, Enoch's,
and Noah's faith, because they were before the Scripture was, etc.


You Answer.

W. T. Though they had not those Scriptures which now we have, yet the word of
God was made known to them then, and that word of God is the ground, and was
the ground of their faith.


T. S. I hope you own no other Scriptures then those we now have, and if they
had not those, then they could not be the ground of their faith. And thus are
you constrained to Answer, and confute your self out of your own mouth; for
whereas you have spent much time, and produced many blind Arguments, to prove
that the Scriptures are the ground of faith, now you confess that they were
not the ground of Abel's, Enoch's, and Noah's faith; and if they were not the
ground of their faith, then neither were they the ground of any of the Saints
faith since them: for that they and all the Saints since have the same
foundation, and are built on the same Rock, which can never be removed, nor
corrupted, as you do most absurdly assert.

And whereas you say the word of God was made known to them then, and was the
ground of their faith: what need you have said this? for, whoever denied it?
was this the thing in controversy betwixt you and me? or did ever any of those
called Quakers say, that the word of God was not the ground of Abraham's faith,
and still is of the faith of all Saints? Did you not in your first Letter to me
accuse them for denying the Scriptures, because you said, they denied the
Scriptures to be the ground of faith, and now do you confess, that before the
Scriptures were, there was a ground of faith? Let all that are wise-hearted
judge, what horrible confusion you labor in; for if there were something that
was not the Scripture (because it was before it) which was the ground of Abells
faith, and Abraham's faith, and still is the ground of faith, then what more
manifest then this, that you do most ignorantly accuse those called Quakers
for denying the Scripture, because they assert that which you your self do
here grant, and acknowledge to be a truth.

You proceed hence to tell me of my Outcries; and why Outcries? because I
tell you the plain truth without falttery? I trust I shall never be ashamed to
cry yet louder, against all Idol Shepherds, that eat the fat, and drink the
sweet, and cloth with the wool, but feed not the flock.

When you say that the word of God was ever the ground of faith, even before it
was written: I ask, did you by the word of God intend the Scripture or not? If
you did, then that which I said to you thence does justly fall upon you; if
not, then to what end did you spend half a sheet of paper to prove the
Scripture to be the ground of faith, calling it all along the word of God? And
yet now to save your self out of the mire of confusion, and contradiction, you
create an opposition betwixt the Scripture, and the word of God.

Thus you write as you Preach, say and unsay, in the same hours discourse
assert a thing and contradict it.


T. S. In what Scripture is it written that Christ directs us to look for
life in the Scripture?


W. T. In the present Scripture, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them
you think you have Eternal life.


T. S. You will call it railing if I say again, that it is a shame for one that
pretends himself to be a Minister of Jesus Christ, to be found with so
notorious a lie in his mouth. But esteem it as you will, I must not forbear
telling you plainly of so great a wickedness. To what a height of wickedness
are you arived, who durst belie the Son of God, who is truth it self, in saying
he says that which never proceeded out of his lips? Have not the days of Jer.
6.15.
Jeremiah overtaken us, in which he complains, that from the Prophet to the
Priest, every one deals falsely; and when they had committed abomination, they
were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush?

Because Christ says to the Jews, that they though they had eternal life in
the Scriptures, did he therefore (...) to look for life in them?

Christ tells his Disciples that the time should come that whosoever killed
them should think he did God service; and will you thence gather this Doctrine
(which is as true as the former) that Christ in that Scripture directs men to
kill his Disciples, that so they might do God service? if you have not a
conscience past feeling, how can you consider of this injurious dealing with
Christ, and the Scriptures, and not blush and bewail your folly?

From your abuse of Christ, and the forementioned Scripture, you proceed to
your reasonings, and arguings such as they are; but since they are all grounded
on that which is fasly premised (Viz.) that Christ directs us to look for
life in the Scriptures, I shall not spend time to examine their strength, for
that they fall of themselves, having no better foundation then a gross untruth
of your own invention.


T. S. Is not eternal life to be had in Christ alone, and is the Scripture
Christ?


W. T. Eternal life is to be had in Christ alone, and therefore in Scripture.


T. S. If you did not esteem your self licensed to blaspheme the name of Jesus
Christ, could you thus impudently derogate from his glory, in saying that
eternal life which is alone to be had in Christ, may yet be had in that which
is not Christ? Can that which is alone to be had in him be yet had in another?
whence had you this rare piece of Logic, that that which is alone to be had in
one thing may yet be had in another; nay therefore in the second, because it is
alone to be had in the first? Is not this as good reasoning to say, That
salvation is alone to be had freely by Jesus Christ, and therefore by the works
of the Law; we must pray alone to the Lord that made us, and therefore to
graven Images. Mind feriously if the Lord has not given you up to a spirit of
slumber, that you should write such barbarous contradictions, in stead of
Doctrine, whiles you fight against the truth.


The Reason you give for your bold assertion is this.

W. T. Because the Scripture sets forth Christ alone as the person in whom
life is to be had.


T. S. That the Scriptures do testify of Christ, is true; and that there is
no other Jesus, but that only begotten of the Father of whom they testify, is
as true. But is life therefore to be had in them? Is a declaration touching any
thing, the thing it self? Old Jacobs sons made a declaration to their Father,
of the great plenty of corn in Egypt to keep them alive, and will you
therefore say, that food, and sustenance, were to be had in their declaration?
Many Philosophers have given a description in their writings, of the nature of
bread, and does it thence follow that bread is to be had in their writings?
Plinny, and others since him, have declared the nature of that sweetness which
is in honey, and was ever any man so ignorant to conclude that therefore honey
with its sweetness is to be had in the declarations of Plinny? For shame do
not assume to your self the name of a Divine, nor undertake to teach others
the way to life, whilst you are not able to put a difference betwixt a
declaration touching a thing and the thing it self; and so put the Scripture
for Christ, and the letter for the life.

In the next place you speak of men that cannot or will not put a difference
between word and word, between the Essential word and the Enuntiative word,
and so accommodate themselves for the shaking off of Scripture, as if nothing
were the word but Christ.


T. S. Must he presently be sentenced for a shaker off of the Scripture, who
cannot adore every School distinction as an Oracle from Heaven? Where do the
Scripture make mention of the Essential word and the Enuntiative word? and if
the Scripture knows not any such terms, pray tell us when you received your
commission from Heaven to coin distinctions and father them on the Scripture,
and then accuse men for shaking off the Scripture, because they shake off the
vain imaginations of your own brain?


W. T. I would ask you this one question, whereupon must I believe that Christ
is the true light, that lightens every man that comes into the world, (etc.)


T. S. I ask you again, whether that all the holy men of God, from Abel to
John, who spoke those words, did believe that Christ was the true light? If
they did, then I demand on what ground did they believe it? and on what ground
did John himself who spoke the words, believe the truth of them?


W T. Suffer the Scripture then to be the ground of faith.


T. S. I say to you, and the rest of those that call themselves Teachers in the
Nation, do you suffer the Scripture to abide pure, as it was spoken, and do
not darken it by your corrupt glosses, nor raise imaginations of your own upon
it, which you call Comments; and so make the Scripture to swell into so many
volumes, that a great part of a man's life time must be spent in perusing them:
suffer the Scripture to be that which it declares it self to be, and speak
not that of it falsely, which it never spoke of it self.

You proceed hence in your Papers, to descant on my testimony that I gave
touching the Scriptures; and because you can therein find no matter of
quarrel (taking my words in that plainness they were spoken) therefore you fly
to making of meanings on them, and say, if I mean so, by this and that
expression, then there is truth in it; but if so, then there is danger in it.


T. S. Are you troubled because my words were so plain, and so spend time to
seek a knot in a bull-rush? what would you have, would you make me speak what I
intended not? Let it suffice that I tell you that I spoke as I meant, and did
mean as I spoke: Therefore you may forbear to impose your drousie
Interpretations, on what I declared in words, sufficiently intelligible by any
man whose mind is not darkened with ignorance, or passion. What Lordly spirit
is that which lodges within your breast, that your Probatum est must serve for
a stamp, under which my testimony must pass for truth, and without which it
must be of necessity erroneous? Much more stir you make about meanings and
senses in your discourse; but I shall not trace you in all your wild
divinations, but leave them, to be burned up as stnbble, with the fire of truth.


W. T. But such words as these will serve a turn, being very taking with poor
mistaken and seduced souls.


T. S. You told me but even now of deceit and danger, that were in my words,
but it seems there is no great danger in them, if they are like to take with
none but those who are already seduced; for there is little danger of hurting
them that are already under deceit and seduction.

When as in my last I declared my disowning of any man's testimony that was
found contradictory to Scripture. You answer.


W. T. For ought I know then you must leave the most, or all, of your new
Religion, which is upheld by a pretended inward light, that will never abide
the trial, (etc.)


T. S. For ought I know unless you prove me to have taken up some new
Religion, you may expect your portion among those that are shut out of the new
Jerusalem, for liars and false Prophets. I own no Religion, but that which
teaches a man to fear the Lord, and work righteousness, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted of
the world. Christ is the light of the world, which I own as the foundation of
my Religion, who is within me unless I am a Reprobate; and dare you be so
impudent as to call him a pretended light? You would be very angry if I should
disown you for a Minister of Jesus Christ; but did he ever make such Ministers,
or did ever any of the Apostles that were sent forth by him, in scorn call him
a pretended light? If false Prophets may be known by their fruits, then let all
that know the Lord, and walk in his fear, judge what you are, who do bring
forth such sour Grapes as these.

And whereas you say my new Religion will never abide the trial, as may appear
in part by what has been already said.

I answer, If wresting and belying the Scripture, if contradictions and
confusion, be that, by which you prove my Religion; I must confess my Religion
will not abide that trial; but teaches me to bear my testimouy against all
such Romish filth and Babylonish rubble: But that you may know, that my
Religion will bear the trial of a greater then you, I do hereby declare my
self free, and willing, on seasonable notice given me, to appear in the midst
of your Congregation, or in the presence of the whole County where you live, to
have both my Principles and practices tried by the Scriptures of truth; which
if you shall refuse to do, then take shame to your self for a false accuser.


W. T. In this testimony you have given concerning Scripture, you know your
own meaning and the sincerity of your heart in the declaration of it; I am
afraid it will come to little else (if all were known) then the owning of that
Spirit that breathed it forth, and that is to own the Author not the Scripture,
or the living the life of Christ; and that is to express the effect and work of
Scripture knowledge, rather then to own the Doctrine.


T. S. You told me ere while after you had made a comment on my plain
expressions, that if I meant so and so, then my words did require my second
thoughts: sure I am here are expressions that require your second thoughts; and
if you are not past blushing, you will find in them matter of great shame to
your self: Dare you say that you are afraid that my testimony touching
Scripture will amount to little else then owning the Spirit that breathed it
forth, or living the life of Christ? Can any man be said to own the Spirit that
breathed forth the Scripture, and living the life of Christ, and yet disowne
the Scripture which is the testimony of that Spirit, and that Christ? Does not
he that disowneth the Scripture, disowne the Spirit that breathed it forth, and
disowne the living the life of Christ? and yet whilst you confess that my
testimony amounts to the owning of that Spirit, and the living the life of
Christ, is it matter of fear to you, that I should yet disowne the Scriptures?
do not call it insulting if I ask you, whether ever such a parcel of language
dropped from any sober man's pen? and withal tell you that if you and others that
take the Scriptures of truth to make a trade on, and get a livelihood by, did
truly own the Spirit that breathed them forth, and the living the life of
Christ, you would not Preach and write as at this day you do. For close of
this I shall repeat what I said in my former (Viz.) That I own the Scripture
against all whose sayings and practices are found contrary to it; such are
those who say in word it is their rule but deny it in their works; that Preach
it in the letter, and have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof;
that talk of Christ with their tongues, but abide not in the Doctrine of
Christ; that own him in outward profession, but persecute him where he
appears in life and power. Against such, and all others that live not the
life of those Saints, and holy men of God, that spoke them forth, do I own the
Scriptures.


T. S. For the Supper of the Lord the Scripture makes express mention of it:
but for the word Sacrament the the Scripture knows it not.


W. T. The Scripture knows such words as come very near it, as the word
[signe] calling the old Testament Sacrament (...) a sign, or token, of the
Covenant, Genesis 17.11. 2. The word seal: (...). Romans 4.11. 1 Pet. 3.21. (...).
Heb. 8 5. (...).


T. S. I spoke not of words that come near it, but of the word it self; And
because it is not there to be found, therefore you spend time to prove thence
some words that come near it. May you not as well prove a false Prophet (which
is a ravening wolf) to be a true Prophet, because he is in sheeps clothing,
which comes near the true? But if you never come nearer the truth, then the
words you have mentioned do to the word Sacrament, you will dye very great
strangers each to other. What Scripture is there that calls circumcision the
old Testament Sacrament? if you did not indeed esteem your self privileged to
write any thing without control, you would not so confidently offer the
inventions of men for Doctrine, and avouch the Scripture as your Author. What
if circumcision be called by Moses a sign, and by Paul a seal, does it
therefore follow, that the Lords Supper is by them called a Sacrament? Or what
though Baptism be called an Antitype, and the Priests offering gists according
to the Law be called an example of Heavenly things? will you thence conclude
the other called a Sacrament? Sacramentum ( Anglice, a Sacrament) you do (or
might) know principally signifies that oath by which soldiers of old bound
themselves to be faithful to their Captains, and is there such affinity
betwixt this word, and the words sign, seal, Antitype, and Example?


W. T. What you speak therefore of adding to, and substracting from the
Scripture, savours more of calumny, then of charity, and has in it more of
censure, then of convincement.


T. S. Is it not a manifest adding to the Scripture, to attempt the fathering
of the word Sacrament upon it, when it knows no such term? do not you your
self confess that it is not there to be found, and therefore do labor to
being forth words that are nere it? Is it calumny, and censuring, to charge you
with the truth? I have not so much charity as to call falsehood truth, or
darkness light: and if telling you the truth be an offense to you, expect that
I do more offend you. You are very angry for my speaking concerning those
guides that go with the proud, envious, coveteous, to eat bread, and drink
wine: And you tell me that he had need be of more understanding, and judgment
then my self, that shall undertake to determine what is to be done about
Sacrament admission.


T. S So far am I from boasting of my own understanding, and judgment, that I
shall esteem it rich grace to be content to be yet much more a fool then I am:
And yet you will do well to call to mind, and consider, what Solomon's
judgment is of a man that is wise in his own eyes. And as understanding as you
and others are (whom you call godly guides) about Sacrament admission, as you
call it (a term that Christ and his Apostles never knew) yet this I know, and
am well assured of, that it is no hard thing, to find many Congregations in
which Pastor and people come together to eat bread and drink wine with their
hands full of wickedness; a proud, heady, high minded Pastor, and like
people, coveteous Pastor, and coveteous people, envious Pastor, and envious
people; and is this to eat the flesh, and drink the blood of Christ? or is
this to discern the Lords body?

After this having spoken something touching the Lords Supper, you tell me.


W. T. Your modesty is good in regard of the mystery, but the full answering of
your Queries, requires more leisure then I have, and more willingness to be
informed then you have.


T. S. What a pitiful lame shift have you found to cover over your ignorance
withal? had you not better have ingenuously confessed, you knew not what to
say to the Queries, then offer that for an Apology for your silence, which will
never gain credit from any that do examine the truth of things before they
receive them? will any sober minded man believe that you, that had leisure to
write me three large sheets of paper, had not then, or have not had since, so
much spare time as to answer six short Queries? And as for your assigning my
unwillingnesse to be informed, as another cause of your not answering them;
this is as manifest a pretense as the former; for if my unwillingnesse to be
informed were a sufficient bar against your answering of my Queries, why did
you answer several other of my Queries proposed to you before and after these?
since I have manifested as much unwillingnesse to be informed in those, as in
these, and that is just none at all.


You glance at one of my Queries and say

W. T. All Saints witness Christ to come, though not come.


T. S. Did not Paul and other Saints witness Jesus Christ come, when as he
lived in them, and was in them, their hope of glory, their strength,
their-life, and their peace.

From hence you proceed to speak to what I said in my last, touching Ministers.
My declaration, touching whom, begins thus,


T. S. The Ministers of Jesus Christ, who have received their Ministry from
him, as the holy men of God of old did, I own; (etc.)


W. T. It were some comfort if you would tell us who they be that you judge to
be made Ministers according to the will of God in Scripture, and that are so
precious to you.


T. S. By what I have said before touching Idol Shepherds, you might well
understand whom I judge to be the true Shepherds: But since it will be matter
of comfort to you to know more of my mind in this particular, I shall be plain
in making a discovery thereof unto you: I judge those Ministers of Christ, who
run not before they are sent of him, and do abide in the doctrine of Christ;
who have received that gift (not by expense of money in a University, but)
freely from the Lord, by which they are made able Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the letter, but of the Spirit; who preach him in words, and
own him by their works. But I do not judge those Ministers of Jesus Christ,
who abide not in his doctrine, who instead of being found careful Shepherds
to guard the Sheep, are themselves found Wolves persecuting and devouring the
sheep; who make gain their godliness, who covet other men's silver and gold,
catching those by the throats who put not into their mouths; who maintain
themselves and families in pride, by the sweat of other men's brows; who sue
those at the Law, that refuse to pay them the tenth of all their labors; who
take Christ's words, and the Saints words, to gain a livelihood, bypreaching to
others what they themselves practice not; who tell the people that a heap of
stones is the Church; and call those things the Ordinances, and that the
worship of Jesus Christ, which never were of his institution. These (I say) I
judge (and that according to the Scripture) to be such as have not received
their Ministry from Jesus Christ, but are Ministers of Antichrist, builders of
Babylon, but enemies to the glory of Zion, and the new Jerusalem.


T. S. Where is it written that one was made a Minister by ordinary Call, and
another by an extraordinary?


W. T. The thing is written, Gal. 1.1. Acts 14.23.


T. S. Is there so much as mention made, in either of those Scriptures, of a
Call ordinary, or extraordinary? and have you notwithstanding the confidence
positively to assert, that it is so written in those Scriptures? Must your
dreams, and drowsy meanings, pass for Scripture? and then dare you falsely say
that it is so written? You told me ere while it would be some comfort if I
would tell you who they were that I judged Ministers of Jesus Christ: Truly not
such as belie the Spirit of truth, that spoke forth the Scriptures, by the
mouths of the Saints; wresting them any way to serve their own ends; and to
patronize such practices as have not truth for their bottom: Which thing if
you did well weigh, would be to you no great ground of comfort.

And whereas you bid me consult my own reason, touching the terms of ordinary,
and extraordinary Call.

I answer, My reason is not the Scripture, nor judge thereof; and withal let
me tell you, that to fly from the Scripture (which you would be thought
zealously to assert) when no foundation can therein be found, for notions of
men's creatings, and instead thereof to advise me to consult with my own reason,
is plain shuffling.

Further, you say that this distinction of ordinary and extraordinary Call,
does not make two doors, but two ways of entering in by the same door.

In answer to which I ask you, Does the Scripture know two ways of entrance
into the Sheepfold? Does that testify of any more then one way, and that the
same that is the way, is also the door, even Jesus Christ the Righteous? And
although you passionately deny that distinction to be of your own creating, but
say that it has ever been of use in the Churches of God. I answer, That
forasmuch as the spirit of truth has no where made mention thereof throughout
the Scriptures, it is but just that you should be charged as the creator of it.

And if (to use your own language) you knew and cared what you said, you would
not proceed in your wonted boldness to say that it has ever been of use in
the Churches of God, when as it was never used among any of the Churches
mentioned in the Scriptures. Neither are the words so much as to be found
through all the writings of Christ, or the Apostles: But it does behoove those
that dare not pretend to that Call which they had who were sent by Christ of
old, to tell the people, they have yet another as authentic as that, that so,
though they enter not in by the one true door, yet they may save themselves
from the sentence of Thieves and Robbers, by erecting a backdoor, which the
Scripture never knew, and then style it with the name of another way, through
the same door.

Hence you proceed on, laboring by many words to prove your Call, but all to
little purpose; for when you have said all, the Tree will still be known by his
fruits; and they that are not found doing Christ's will, will never be able to
prove themselves Christ's Ministers


W. T. For our Calling which you and others so much agitate, because it
stands, and will ever stand in your way, and against your erroneous ways, I
shall give this account.


T. S. I own but one way, which also is the truth; against which your Calling
does manifestly stand. But erroneous ways I do utterly deny; and do charge
him to be a liar who does assert that of me, which he neither does or can prove
to be true. Were my ways erroneous, your calling would not stand against them,
since it is such a calling as you received from Antichrist, who is the Patron
of errors. Neither shall it ever stand in my way any otherwise, then as a
Romish ragge, which I shall ever have courage to tread on, as a thing deserving
no better entertainment with me, then the salt that has lost its savor.


W. T. Our gifts, abilities, and fitness for the Ministry (which are Gods
inward Call) were first tried, and testimonialls of our carriage were given.


T. S. Does the Scriptures any where say, that gifts, abilities, and fitness
for the Ministry, are Gods inward call? or that any of the Saints sought
testimonialls of those among whom they lived, in order to their being made
Ministers? Or did Paul, or Peter, keep any Chaplains to try men, in order to
their being ordained Ministers? upon whose approbation they proceeded to lay
hands on them. But who are those that tried you? were they not such as are like
unto your self? could they try your gifts, who had not the gift themselves?
could those that were enemies to the Cross of Christ, try who were fit to be
made Ministers of Christ? Could coveteous, proud, envious men, and such that
were given to filthy lucre, try such as are qualified like unto themselves? or
could such tryers do less then signify to the Bishop, and Presbyters, their
approbation of those men that lived in the same nature in which they themselves
lived.


W. T. And that there might be an outward Call, we were ordained by Bishops
that were Presbyters, and other Presbyters that were not Bishops, who were to
be, and were joined with them in our Ordination.


T. S. You have well derived your succession, and very learnedly acknowledged
your self and brethren (for you speak in the Plural number) to be Romes
Emissaries, brats of Babylon, brought forth by an abominable conjunction of
Antichristian Bishops and Presbyters of their own creating. Is this your Call?
and durst you own it as a Call from Christ? did ever Jesus Christ send those
that were professed enemies to his truth and people, who were so far from
having the power of godliness, that they hated the very form thereof; who
persecuted Christ in his Saints from City to City; who (like ravenons Wolves)
thirsted after the blood of the sheep. Did Christ (I say) ever send such to
ordain Ministers to preach his Gospel. If the Scripture be your rule, show
where any of Christ's Ministers were thus ordained.


W. T. And being so ordained, we have exercised and executed that Calling, not
without such a blessing from heaven upon our labors in this Nation, as was
never given to any false and unwarranted Ministry.


T. S. If it be a blessing from heaven to get money, and grow in riches, and
worldly honor; to advance your estates by augmentations, and grinding the
faces of the poor for Tithes; to live at ease, eating the fat, and drinking
the sweet; having your bags and barnes filled by the sweat of other men's
brows: Then I must needs confess, that you, and many others of your Brethren,
have had as large a share in the blessing of heaven, as any order of men I know
in the Nation. But as for that blessing from heaven which attended the labors
of the Apostles, consisting in turning men from darkness to light, from Satan
unto God, how few are there among you that can boast of this blessing? for who
is turned by your Ministry from the evil of his ways? do not those sins that
reigned among your hearers many years past, remain among them still? are not
they that were proud, coveteous, envious, backbiters, double dealers, many
years ago, still the same? Read those words of Jeremiah, Chap. 23.31, 32.
Behold I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that use their tongues, and
say, he says; Behold I am against them that prophecy false dreams, and do
tell them, and cause my people to err, by their lies, and by their lightness,
yet I sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they shall not profit this
people at all, says the Lord. And are the people profited by your Ministry?
Nay are you not bitter enemies to those who have profited by the teachings of
the Lord? Are not they in the Nation who are (through grace) plucked out of the
snare of the Devil, the chief mark against which you shoot? And as any (seeing
through your thin covering of outward profession) do come to bear testimony
against your hypocrisy, and deceit, is not your fury and rage increased
against them? And are these things a blessing from heaven, and a proof of your
Ministry?

You charge me in the next place with closing with them who wander about the
Nation, leaving their own places, and callings, and employing themselves in a
way of witnessing (much whereof will be found to be a bearing false witness)
whereunto they have no due, nor true call from God or man.


T. S. Is it wandering for any to go too and fro to declare that which they
have heard and seen of the word of eternal life; if so, what were Paul, and
Peter, and many other Saints of old, but wanderers? and that not only about
one, but many Nations, through which they passed, declaring what was revealed
to them from the Lord. With such Wanderers I desire always to close: And if
this be the blackest character of reproach you have to fasten on me, I shall
yet study to become more vile in your eyes; and shall esteem that my glory,
which you intend for my reproach.

Might not the false Teachers of old, on as just ground revile the Saints for
closing with Peter, and others, who left their callings, wandering too and fro,
as the Lord directed them; and for closing with Paul, who (as the Scripture
bears record) traveled through many Nations, and as he went continued Acts
26.22.
witnessing both to small and great, saying no other things then those which
the Prophets and Moses did say should come? As for such as bear false witness,
do but point them out, and prove their testimony to be false, and if I own
them, then charge me with sin; but till then I shall esteem your words but the
birth of a scornful and unsavory spirit.

You are angry (but in vain) that the Lord has raised up so many to witness
against the abominations of the Idol Shepherds in the Nation, who have a long
time caused the people to err, teaching for doctrine the traditions of men;
having on sheeps clothing, but are within ravening Wolves; who are such as
their Predecessors the Scribes and Pharisees were, Painted Sepulchers, all
glorious without, but within full of rottenness. With those that witness
against such do I close, yea and am ready, with thousands more in the Nation,
to bear my testimony against them, even unto bonds, and unto death.

But why do you not come where these false-witnesse-bearers are, as you all
them, and manifest them to be such, that so the People may beware of them? You,
and your brethren of the Clergy, have a rare faculty of conquering men in the
Pulpits, with whom you never spoke, and riding triumphant over those who never
had liberty or opportunity to return you an Answer

You are very excellent at confuting men at the greatest distance, and damning
things and persons for errors, and Heretics, in the absence of the concerned:
And so you meet worse measure to many that are innocent, then Pilate and the
Jews did unto Christ (viz.) by condemning them not only without a cause, but
before they are heard.


T. S. I ask, did you receive that gift by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, which Timothy did, or did you only imitate, (etc.)


W. T. If Timothy received extraordinary gifts in that way, to that we do not
pretend, as being proper to those times, (etc.)


T. S. The gift that I asked you whether you had received, was that which
Timothy received by the laying on of hands, which he was exhorted to stir up,
which the Scripture does no where call extraordinary. And if this be the gift
you pretend not to, I think in that you do well, not to pretend to that which
you never received.

But why do you then pretend to Timothy's Ministry, if you pretend not to his
gift? And as for your distinction betwixt that laying on of hands that did
confer extraordinary gifts, and that which did promote ordinary, I disown it,
as that which the Scripture knows not, but is a distinction of your own
creating. It Is usual with those that call themselves Ministers in the Nation,
when they practice that which the Scripture allows not, to help themselves by
some groundless distinction or other; and if they are demanded touching the
qualifications of the Ministers of Jesus Christ in Scripture, then to disclaim
any pretense to them, as such as were proper to those times; and were not the
holiness, patience, sobriety, meekness, freedom from the love of filthy
lucre, and coveteousnesse, found in the Ministers of Jesus Christ mentioned in
Scripture, also proper to those times? If you lay claim to them, it were well
if you would show that they are indeed within you, by bringing forth more of
the fruits of them, in your conversations, then at this day you do.

You call the ceremony of laying on of hands, a fit sign of your being
appropriated unto God.


T. S. Many amongst you that received this ceremony, are found vvalking in the
paths of the Devil, being svvearers, drunkards, revilers, and openly profane;
and are you not ashamed to say that that ceremony is a sign of their being
appropriated unto God? And as for the most of the rest of you, you are hardly
come to so high a pitch of holiness, as the Scribes and Pharisees (who drew
the blood of Christ) in witnessing the outside of the Pot cleansed.

Is there among the most ignorant, any eye so blind, to whom your spots of
pride, coveteousnesse, envy, oppression, are not visible? And are you yet such
as are appropriated unto God? They that are appropriated unto God, are found
doing the will of God, and working the works of God; but so are not most of
you, who set up your own wills in opposition to the will of God; and whose
works are not such as were wrought by the holy men of God mentioned in the
Scripture.

You say further touching Imposition of hands, that you own it as a very
ancient ceremony, and sign of consecration, and of the blessing of God settling
on them so consecrated.


T. S. Do the Scriptures any where call that Imposition of hands (of which we
were speaking, used on those that were made Deacons) a sign of consecration?
And is it also a sign of the blessing of God, settling on them that receive it?
Has not imposition of hands been used on those that are enemies to God, and
goodness, such as are before mentioned? And does the blessing of God settle on
such? Is the blessing of God, or the woe and the curse to the Idol Shepherd,
and slothful Hireling, that makes it his business to feed himself, and to
persecute the poor flock of Christ? You cannot avoid giving these the blessing
also (who are for the curse) for these also had that mock-shew, and empty
imitation of laying on of hands, by the Bishops and their Presbyters used on
them.

Next you spend some time to prove that laying on of hands is not the
foundation of your call.

To which I shall only say, That you esteem it so much the foundation of your
call, that you judge him no Minister that has not received it; and whosoever has
received it, you presently esteem him a Minister.

After this having demanded of you an example in Scripture, where any of the
Saints or Ministers of Jesus Christ did persecute any man for conscience sake.


You Answer.

W. T. That bad Ministers should persecute, is no wonder, (etc.)


T. S. Then from your own lips we may conclude, that they that do persecute
are bad Ministers. And then how few are there to be found that are good? Is not
the blood-thirsty spirit of Saul, manifestly seen in the generality of those
that call themselves Ministers in the Nation? Have not they who conscientiously
refused to join with them in their will worship for several years past (yea
and at this day) been the objects of their wrath, and violence? And what have
been the obstacle to their execution of as great cruelty on the Saints in these
days, as Saul did on them in those? save that as his commission was of equal
extent with his will, these have had their wills to persecute larger then their
commissions.

And whereas you say that diverse who assume to themselves the name of Saints,
do persecute the general company of ordinary Ministers, and do in their
scolding Books cast all the reproach they can upon them.

I Answer, They who were Saints of old mentioned in the Scripture, did call an
Idol Shepherd by his name, and a greedy dumb Dog by his name; and if any that
are called Saints, do at this day call the same persons by the same names, I
know no reason why you should call it persecution, unless it were persecution
in the Prophets of the Lord mentioned in Scripture who did the same. If any
there be who charge those with that of which they are not guilty, I am no
Patron of them, but do judge them Revilers.

When I ask you in the next place for an Example in Scripture, where any of the
Saints did call to the civil power to punish Heretics, you quote me in answer
the example of Elijah, 1 Kings 18.19, 20.


T. S. It seems that the practice of Christ, and his Apostles, will afford
you no example, that you are feign to go so far back as to the practice of
Elijah, which yet will not at all serve your turn; for, 1 How do you prove the
Prophets of Baal to be Heretics? unless you will say that the poor Indians in
America, who worship the Sun, and Moon, and other pieces of the Creation, are
Heretics. 2 Does that Scripture say that Elijah called to Ahab to punish Baals
Prophets, who was himself a worshipper of Baal? Or does it only say, that he
bid him send and gather them together? And do you read that Ahab did more then
Elijah desired of him? You said ere while, that 'twas no wonder that the
Apostles did not call to the civil powers to punish Heretics, who could not
hope that Heathen Magistrates could do any thing in it: And must it not be a
greater wonder, that Elijah should call to Ahab to punish those who worshipped
the same Idol with himself, with any hope to have his call answered. 3 Besides
the Prophets of Baal were not executed by any order or command of Ahab; but
what was done on them can be looked on as no other then the fruit of that
compact made betwixt Elijah and the Prophets of Baal (with the consent of the
people) signified by their choosing each a Bullock to slay; the consumption of
whose flesh on the Altar by fire from Heaven, should be the cryterion by which
the living God should be known in the view of all the people. Neither can it
be imagined but that if Elijah's God had not that day been known to be the God
that answered by fire, the portion of Baals Prophets had fallen to Elijah's lot.



W. T. But I wonder what calls to punishment you can specify that are suitable
to your complaint.


T. S. Nay I can specify calls both from Presses, and Pulpits, that are much
more then suitable to my complaint; the sound of which is gone up into the ears
of the Lord of hosts, who will certainly avenge the blood of the innocent, that
at this day suffer under the blood thirsty generation of Idol Shepherds in
this Nation. Do you ask me what calls to punishment I can specify? Let almost
every prison this day in England speak, and they will answer for me: where is
there almost one, in which some innocent heart or other does not lie in bonds
for the testimony of Jesus Christ; and that at the instigation and procurement,
of some or other of your persecuting generation? What do your Pulpits more
frequently breath, and belch out at this day, then threatenings against those
that walk innocently, and uprightly in the land; stirring up, and conjuring the
Magistrates to imprison and punish those as heretics, and blasphemers, whom
the Lord does stir up to bear testimony against your deceit and abominations.
Is it not at this day as it was of old? when the single voices of the people
could not, then did the voices of the Chief Priests (added to them) prevail,
for a sentence of death against innocent Jesus; in whom although Priest-ridden
Pilat could find nothing worthy of bonds or of death, yet to gratify the
impetuous lusts of that murderous Crew of Scribes, Pharisees, and Chief
Priests, he must be given up to their merciless cruelties, as a blasphemer,
and deceiver, to be crucified. And as the witness of God in Pilats conscience
(bearing testimony to the innocence of Jesus) made him unwilling to sentence
him to the Cross; but yet was overcome by the incessant urgings of the Chief
Priests and Pharisees: So I doubt not but the same witness of God in the
consciences of most in Authority, would keep them from executing wrath, and
violence, on many that are innocent (as at this day) were they not hurried on
by the clamor and outcries of that same generation that drew the blood of
Christ at Jerusalem. And I do believe, that were the hand that holds the
sword, as ready to strike, as the blind guides of this Nation are to call for
execution, the cruelty of Queen Mary's days would soon be outdone by them;
and as much as in them lies, the name of Israel would be cut off from the land.


W. T. And let me tell you withal that Christians will one day rue the liberty
of these days.


T. S. So difficult a thing is it for any man to have a viperous, persecuting;
spirit lodging in his breast, and not discover it by the fruits thereof. Do you
gnash your teeth for anger, and are you tormented in your spirit, because
others have a taste of that which you enjoy at the full? Would you have liberty
of conscience, and would you not give it? are you of so barbarous a spirit,
that having your self but a few years past, gotten your neck from under the
wooden yoaks of the Bishops, you are now angry that iron yoaks are not
prepared, and laid upon the neeks of others? Are not you of the number of those
who (not many years since) Preached and Printed Parliament and people into
arms and into blood, for the rescuing of you from under the tyranny and
oppression of the Bishops? and are you now acted by so unrighteous a principle,
that being got into the Chair, you would become Judges of what liberty others
should have? to whom you would measure out no more, then would well consist
with the support of your own Diana? Was it tyranny in the Bishops to persecute
those that were in their days called Puritans? and may the then Puritans now
persecute others and be held blameless? were not you and the most zealous of
your brethren, as gross heriticks in the eyes of the Bishops then, as they
whom you invocate the civil power to punish as heretics at this day, are in
yours? And if it were oppression in them, to punish you for conscience sake, is
it not the same (aggravated) in you, on the same ground to punish others? What,
was all that precious blood, and vast treasure, spilt, and spent in the late
wars, hazarded only for the redemption of liberty of conscience, to the
imperious Clergy? will nothing satisfy your unsatiable lusts, unless you can
have the necks of all men under your feet, and become carvers at discretion, of
that to others, in the purchase of which their blood have had a far greater
share then yours? Is it not sufficient that you usurp Authority over men's
estates (contrary to the Law of Christ) unless you can also sit as Lords and
Kings ruling over their consciences? I know no liberty in these days, that
Christians will on juster grounds ever rue, then that liberty, which you and
your brethren assume to your selves, to take away the liberty of others more
righteous then you.


W. T. For though liberty be a good thing, yet it is not good for children; its
weaklings temptation, and seducers advantage.


T. S. Why had you not spoke out plain English, and said, that liberty is a
good thing for us (that are called) Ministers; but it is dangerous for the
people, to have any more then we alot them. When you cried of old to your
fathers the Bishops for liberty of conscience, would you have judged it a
reasonable answer for them to have said, Liberty is a good thing for us that
are Bishops, but its not good for you that are our children of the Presbitery;
for some of you are weaklings (of whom we are woefully tender) and liberty is
your temptation; others of you are heretics, and seducers, and it will be your
advantage; therefore good children be content to have no more of this dangerous
good thing called liberty of conscience then we your spiritual Fathers shall
think meet to allow you. This would have been a stone in stead of bread, and a
Serpent in stead of fish then; but now it is wholesome meat for the children in
these days. But why is not liberty good for the children? is any thing to good
for the children of the Lord? your judgment is very false in this thing, and
not according to truth; for the Lord by the mouth of Paul gives his children
liberty of proving all things, and (on proof) to hold fast that which is good;
and can there be greater liberty then this? I shall close this with this Querie,

Whether do you and the rest of the teachers of this Nation, judge your
selves, to be of the number of those that are children, or not?

If not, your portion is sad, and you are shut out from entrance into the
Kingdom of God. If you are, then neither is liberty good for you; for though
it be a good thing, yet it is not good for children.


W. T. If prejudice have not blinded your eyes, you may see that there are a
very considerable company of Ministers, that through the grace of God, are such
as Paul speaking to Timothy, 1 Timothy 3. requires they should be. I mean as
humane infirmity will bear.


T. S. The Lord is my record, that what I writ formerly, and do now write,
relating to those called Ministers, proceeded not at all from prejudice against
any man's person; but from that deep sense I had, and still have, of all that
deceit, hypocrisy, and abomination, that reigns in the midst of them;
against which I shall esteem it a mercy to be ever found faithful in bearing
my testimony.

And whereas you speak of a very considerable company of them which are such as
Paul in his Epistle to Timothy requires they should be. Let me desire you to
weigh what you have said, and let us prove them by those qualifications, the
Apostle there mentions; and then see, if thousands of Saints in the Nation
will not appear as witnesses against you for speaking a thing so utterly false.

The qualifications there required are, that they should be blameless,
vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitallity, apt to teach: Not
given to wine, no strikers, not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient, not
brawlers, not coveteous. Now do you and the rest of you that call your selves
Ministers prove your selves by these qualifications, and then let that of God
in your own consciences be judge, whether there be a considerable number of
such in the Nation.

And whereas you come in with a save-all at last to help the matter, saying,
that they are such, as Paul requires, as humane infirmity will bear.

I answer, that this has no weight in it at all, for admit that for a plea,
and the filthiest Idol Shepherd in the Nation, may be judged so qualified as
Paul required. For if you meet with one that is full of spots (of which there
is too great a number) he will tell you that he is blameless, as humane
infirmity will bear. Take others that are unsober, and of very evil behavior
(with which the Nation does swarm) and they will tell you they are sober, and
of good behavior, as humane infirmity will bear. Ask a Hireling that is a
common drunkard, or striker, or greedy of filthy lucre, or a brawler, or
coveteous, (from some of all which scarce a corner of the Nation is free) I
say, ask them whether they are so qualified as Paul required the Ministers of
Christ of old to be qualified, and they may all say, they are so, as humane
infirmity will bear. And thus humane infirmity will serve for an Asylum to
shelter the most abominable Priests in Rome, and be for a covering to all of
the same generation in this and all Nations throughout the world.


W. T. Upon the whole let me seriously remember you of this, that it has ever
been the Devils grand design (wherein he has palpably played his part in our
late changes) to throw down the Ministry.


T. S. That Ministry by which the Kingdom of Jesus Christ (who came to destroy
his works) is advanced, the Devil ever designed against; but that Ministry by
which the Kingdom of Antichrist is upheld, and the works of the Devil
maintained, has him for its patron. Where this Ministry is, and whether the
Devil has been an instrument designing the throwing down, or the upholding of
this Ministry, let all that are wise hearted judge.


W. T. It Is not enough for him ( viz. the Devil) that Bishops be taken away
branch and root, unless he root out the Ministry also.


T. S. I never heard before that the Devil took away the Bishops And if it was
he that did it, sure I am he was not alone in the act, but had many co-workers
with him, who do in words bid great defiance to the Devil; I could soon call
more then a cloud of witnesses to prove, that many of the most zealous Teachers
of those times had an eminent share in that work of removing the Bishops; in
which if you allow the Devil also a part, either he wrought by them or they by
him, but whether of the twain I shall leave you to determine.

And whereas you speak of Bishops being taken away root and branch; if you
accuse the Devil for being an agent in the business (as plainly you do) you
do him wrong, in bearing false witness against him; for they were not plucked
up root and branch; if they had, he had sure enough at the same time rooted out
your Ministry also, as a plant of the same root.

No, no, the Devil is wiser then so; if he did take away the Bishops, it was
only as men take away the withered tops of trees, that so a number of young
sprouts might grow in their room. It Is requisite sometimes that old trees
should be removed, which shade and keep down the young plants, that by the
others removeall they may the more thrive and flourish Have there not upon the
removeall of one Bishop in a Diocese, many scores grown up in his room? whose
little fingers prove far heavier then the Bishops loins? so that they that
cannot worship the Beast in the Nation have only changed their taskmasters;
and whereas of old they had but one in many miles, now they feel the scourge of
one almost in every Parish. And if the Devil did play his part in these
changes, he acted like himself (viz.) very subtly, in making a great noise
about the taking away of names, and offices, but leaving the things and power
still standing.

Neither need you fear the Devils designing the rooting up your Ministry, for
he was never found less then a friend to that which is a support to his own
Kingdom: and whilst that the works of the flesh are practiced, and
patronized, his work is not hindered. Certainly the Devil will contribute the
help of both his hands to the upholding of that Ministry, that can cover over
the filthiest lusts, both in themselves and others, of pride, envy,
coveteousnesse, and bitter persecution, with the spetious veil of humane
infirmity.


W. T. I shall wish you so far a Quaker, as to fear and tremble to act this
design.


T. S. Do you wish me evil, or good, in wishing me a Quaker? if evil, you
break the law of Christ, in wishing that to another, you would not have him
wish to you: if good, then it is a good thing to be a Quaker by your own
confession; to fear and tremble to act that which is evil. And how much do
you contradict your self, in striving to make it matter of reproach to me,
that I close with those called Quakers, when as I close with no other then
those that fear, and tremble, before the mighty God of Jacob, which you cannot
but own as a good thing. But what is the design I must fear and tremble to
act? is it to endeavor the rooting out of your Ministry? And why fear and
tremble at it? Is your Ministry such a precious plant, that it may not be
plucked up, under the same penalty as was in eating the forbidden fruit? are you
such holy things, that you may not be touched, but it must be esteemed a
profanation? This is a fine scar-crow to affright ignorant souls from taking
up the skirt of your covering, and viewing your hidden abominations that lie
under. But as for my self, know that my trust is on the Lord for power to be
made able, and willing, to seal my testimony with my blood, against the
horrible wickedness of those that calls themselves the Ministers of Christ,
but are not: who under their fair vizards are full of filthiness, and
polution; who Preach in words against what they approve by their works: and
whose hearts are full of blood, and violence; which they manifest by their
bitter persecution of Christ, in his innocent lambs.


W. T. And let me tell you further, that if God love this Nation, and intend to
show us mercy, you shall find that he will hold these stars in his right hand,
(etc.)


T. S. Stars full of filth, and polution, that shine not with the pure light of
the Lord; that serve rather to set the Nation on fire, then to lead it to
peace, and rest, the Lord holds not in his right hand; for he is of purer
hands then to touch such unclean things: Neither can it be esteemed the fruit
of his love, and mercy, to this or any other Nation, but of his sore
displeasure, that such stars are, and do multiply in the midst thereof. And
let me also tell you, that were not the false Prophets, held faster in the hand
of the beast, then in the hand of the Lord, they would soon drop down from the
firmament of this worlds pomp, and glory, into the bottomless pit, out of
which they did at first arise.

From hence you proceed to mention five Queries, proposed to you in my last; to
which you return no direct Answer, but instead thereof you offer a heap of
impertinent words, and many groundles distinctions: to which (being not to the
things spoken to) I shall not spend time to make Reply; only by the way I
shall note two things with which you falsely accuse me.

1. The first is, that I inveigh against humane learning.

To which I answer, that I neither did, nor do inveigh against humane
learning: Let it stand where it should, and I am very well content. If any man
say a tile-stone is not fit for to make a foundation stone for a building, must
it presently be concluded that he denies the use of tile-stones? The greatest
measure of humane Learning cannot render the carnal man spiritual (which you
your self are constrained to acknowledge) but do leave him still carnal, who
is shut out for ever from discerning the things of God. The Mysteries of the
Kingdom of God are hid from the wise and prudent, and revealed unto Babes.
Paul with all his learning persecuted Jesus Christ (as many do at this day)
neither did all that which he had gotten at the feet of Gamaliell, advance him
one step nearer to the knowledge of the Son of God, of whom he was as ignorant
as the most unlearned person under heaven, until the Lord revealed him unto
him. The knowledge of the father and the Son (to know whom is eternal life)
can never be gained by study: For no man knows the Son but the father,
neither knows any man the father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
will reveal him. There is nothing more manifest then this, that many in this
and the bypast Ages, which have pretended to seek Christ by much study, have
and do imprison, and crucify him where they find him.

2 You accuse me with seeking to justify absurd Tenants.

To which I shall only say, That I seek to justify no Tenants, but such as
also the Scripture does justify: And if you call such absurd Tenants, I do
then indeed seek to justify Tenants that are absurd.

It Is no rare thing with you that pretend your selves Leaders to the people, to
esteem any thing an absurd Tenent (though never so clearly owned by the
Scripture) that crosses your gain or your glory. And therefore (until you can
prove that whereof you accuse me) I shall pass it over as a scandal, that you
have ready to throw upon any man that has so much honesty and courage, as to
bear Testimony against all your false ways and worships.

Many more expressions you add touching Learning, which do not at all Answer
my Queries; repeating again that distinction of an ordinary and extraordinary
Call; to which the Scripture being wholly a stranger, I shall pass it over as
that which deserves no other Answer but to be disowned.

After this you come to speak of the light within, its leading to Justification
those that are taught by it; upon which you come to suppose a meaning, and say,
That the light they speak of, they make to be a light enlightening every one
that comes into the world.

To which I Answer: That if they make no more of that light then the Scripture
makes of it, they are not therein found erring from the truth. Now whether
does not the Scripture testify that Christ is the true light that enlightneth
every man that comes into the world? And also, that he that follows that
light, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life?

And whereas you quote that place, Romans 10.14. How shall they believe in him of
whom they have not heard? You might have found an Answer if you had looked a
little further, (viz.) in the 18 Verse, where it is written, But I say have they
not heard? yes verily, their sound went into all the earth, and their words
unto the end of the world. To which I shall only add these four following
Queries, and close this. 1 Querie. Whether had not the Lord his witness in the
Hearts of those of whom Paul speaks in his first Chapter to the Romans,
convincing them of, and condemning them for sin, though it was kept under, and
held in unrighteousness? 2 Querie. Whether that which left them without
excuse, did not also reveal to them the way to life? which if it had not done,
whether had they not been excusable? 3 Querie. Whether were they condemned,
because they knew not God, or for disobedience against the light they had, in
that they glorified him not as God, according to the measure of light they had
received? 4 Querie. If they had obeyed and glorified God according to that
measure of light and knowledge they had received, whether had they been
condemned?


And now I am come to your last Dart you shoot at me; which you discharge with
so much passion, as if you had reserved the very bottom of the rancor of your
spirit, as the sharpest stone to throw at me; in conclusion, accusing me of
railing, and using groundless and insolent exclamations; with many other
expressions savoring of much fury and bitterness.

Now whether I am become thus your Enemy for telling you the truth, or the
contrary, I shall leave to be determined by all that live in the fear of the
Lord, from what follows.

The thing that I charged you with, was the denial of Jesus Christ to be
within us; which charge I grounded on these words of yours, (viz.) The
Scripture says, That we are justified freely by the grace of God, through the
redemption and righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is not within us, but
without us.

Now the thing in controversy betwixt you and my self is, in which of these
two orders these words must be read; either thus, Which redemption and
righteousness is not within us, or Which Jesus Christ is not within us. You
would have them (to save your self out of the mire) to be read in the former
order, (viz.) Which redemption and righteousness is not within us. Which being
supposed, I demand of you two things.

1 What number is the word Which, the Singular, or the Plural? The Singular
you cannot say, unless you will destroy your Grammar, which says, That many
Antecedents singular having a conjunction copulative coming between them, will
have a relative Plural. This being granted that the word which is the Plural
number: I demand

2 What is the Nominative Case to the Verb Is? for whom you can find no other,
but the word Which, and that being the Plural number, and the Verb Is the
singular number, pray produce me some Rule in your Grammar that allows any
Concord betwixt a Verb of the singular number, and a Nominative Case of the
Plural? So that I do appeal to all that are sober-minded, whether any man
(taking your words plainly and honestly as they lie, without altering or
wresting them) could or can read them any otherwise then as I did, in the
second order, (Viz.) Which Jesus Christ is not within us, but without us.

All which being considered, had you in your last Letter (upon a serious
perusal of what you had written, and of what I had charged you with)
acknowledged your error to have proceeded from your forgetfullnesse of your
Syntaxis, or the escape of your pen; I should have been contentedly silent, (as
knowing my self not exempted from all mistakes) but since you stand to own
the expression as it lies, and do throw much dirt of reproach and false
accusation upon me, for taking your words aright, according as they are
written; let me tell you again, that whatever you intend, yet your lines as
they are written, do blasphemously deny Jesus Christ to be in us. And
therefore you might well have spared your following words, which are these.


W. T. Whereby it clearly appears, that I never said that Jesus Christ is not
within us; but only that the redemption and righteousness of Christ, by which
we are justified, is not within us, but without us; and against that you say
(you can say (nothing.


T. S. Whether you did say that Jesus Christ is not within us, or not, I shall
leave to all that are serious, to be determined: And also, whether your
repetition of your own words be not sufficient evidence against your self. And
therefore I shall spare to speak ought more touching that, and shall admit your
expression to be according to what you say you intend, (viz.) That the
righteousness and redemption of Jesus Christ, are not within us, but without
us.

Against which you say (that I say (I can say) nothing, Of which your
expression I would gladly make the best interpretation: And therefore shall not
take it as intending thus much, That I said I could say nothing against those
words of yours; for that never proceeded out of my lips; and consequently, it
would have been a false Charge. But I shall take it as importing thus much;
That I neither did, nor could say any thing against what you spoke concerning
the righteousness and redemption of Jesus Christ. Which most favorable
Interpretation of your words, do yet argue, that you speak rather from a
spring of presumption, then knowledge; for because I did say nothing against
them, does it truly follow that I could say nothing? Is it fair or sober
reasoning, A non esse, ad non posse? because a thing is not, therefore it
cannot be? This I can say, that in vain does he talk of, or profess Christ in
notion, that does not witness him a destroyer of the works of the Devil
within him. And if you preach Christ in word all days of your life, and do
not witness cleansing and redemption within you, you will dye polluted, and no
unclean thing shall ever enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. It Is a very
pleasing Religion, that helps a man only to talk of a righteousness beyond
the Stars, and he in the mean time live in filthiness and pollution. I know no
swearers, drunkards, covetous, or profane persons, but will embrace that as
very Orthodox doctrine, which teaches them to pretend to a righteousness, and
redemption, a far off from them, when as they cannot witness a washing, and
cleansing, from their mire, and uncleanness within them.

And since you are so confident that I can say nothing against what you did so
peremptorily assert; I shall further offer to you by way of inquiry, as
follows. 1 Qu: Whether Christ be separable from his righteousness? if not,
whether (he being within the Saints) his righteousness Be not there also? And
consequently, whether he that denies the righteousness of Christ to be within
the Saints, does not blasphemously deny Christ to be there also? 2 Qu: Whether
Christ be not made of God unto the Saints, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption; and whether is he so made to them within them,
or without them? 3 Qu: Whether redemption and righteousness must not be there
witnessed, where the seat of sin and uncleanness is? And whether is that seat
of sin and uncleanness within or without? 4 Qu: Whether does not the Scripture
witness, that Christ gave himself for his, that he might redeem them from all
iniquity, and purisie them unto himself? And whether is that redemption and
purisying from their iniquity, and polution, within them or without them?


As you draw nearer the conclusion of your Papers, you wax more fierce and
furious; casting out a great deal of folly, and froth, from your unsavory
spirit, charging me with laying foul hands on you, and reviling of Protestant
Ministers, (etc.)


T. S. To which I Answer, That it was never my Principle, neither is it my
practice, to lay violent hands upon any man. And as for that spirit that
teaches men to revile, I do abominate it, as such, betwixt whom and the
Spirit of the Lord (which is the Spirit of meekness) there is no fellowship.
If I were inclined to be led by example, I must needs say, that I might ere
this, perfectly have learned how to practice both these, from the example of
your brethren of the Clergy, and their enraged Disciples, who are at this day
very frequent in laying their bloody hands on the innocent; beating in, and
casting out of their Synagogues, and haling before Magistrates, and Rulers,
those, that bear testimony against the same deceit, and hypocrisy in them,
that Christ bore testimony against, in their Predecessors the Scribes and
Pharisees, crying out to those in Authority, Crucify them, trucifie them, for
they are not fit to live; foaming out mire and dirt, speaking all manner of
evil causlesly for the truths sake. And are these the Protestant Ministers you
say I revile, because I speak the plain truth of them? You pretend the
Scripture for you rule, then let me ask you (and let that of God in your own
conscience judge betwixt you and me) Does the Scripture judge those to be true
Shepherds, or Wolves, that worrie and persecute the poor sheep? Are they ever
numbered among Christ's sheep, that devour his innocent Lambs? Is it the badge
of the Dove-like Disciples of meek Jesus, to be Persecutors, or Persecuted?
Christ before he left the world foretold what should be the Portion of his
Ministers and Disciples, (viz) They should be beaten and scourged in the
Synagogues, be brought before Rulers and Magistrates; be cast into bonds and
Prisons; hated of all men; nay be killed by those that zealously intended the
service of God thereby. And if this be the portion of Christ's Ministers, and
Disciples, to be thus evilly entreated by others; can they be other then the
Disciples and Ministers of Antichrist, who do themselves beat, and scourge, or
cause others to be beaten and scourged in their Synagogues? who do bring
before Rulers and Magistrates; who do cast into bonds and into Prisons; who
do hate, nay who do (for want of power in their own hands) stir up the
Magistrates to proceed to take away the lives of those, whom they condemn for
Heretics, because they cannot bow down, and worship the golden Calf which they
have set up. Now then judge (if you can) righteous judgment (the Tree by his
fruits) and say, if such as these be your Protestant Ministers, for speaking
truth of whom (without flattery) you accuse me of reviling; and tell me if
these be Ministers of Christ, who do not abide in the doctrine of Christ, who
never persecuted any man, nor gave any such Commandment to those that were
his; but instead thereof, did strive to forearm them against all the sore
persecutions they should undergo from the hands of the false Teachers, and
their zealous Proselytes. And therefore whatever the doctrine of these your
Protestant Ministers be, sure I am, their deeds are evil, and may expect the
reward of those that say, and do not.

Thus have I traced you (even unto weariness) through the dark and crooked
paths of your arguings, and assertions contained in your last Papers. And now a
few words by way of Reply to your Satyricall Monitorie added in your
conclusion, and I shall close all.

In which you charge me very highly, but prove nothing. Specify some of those
ways of practice, or opinion in which I live contrary to the truth, and I
shall soon disown them. Otherwise you beat the wind, in making a great noise
with your Rhetoric touching dangerous Practices, and Opinions; but neither
have quoted, nor can prove any upon me. With comfort and confidence shall I
dye, living in the fear of the Lord, and being found faithful to the teachings
of that Jesus whom you persecute. That many are found passing from one fancy to
another in these changing times (as you call them) is no wonder; for they learn
it from the practice of their Teachers, who own, and preach, some one fancy,
some another. I know no seducers in the Nation, but such as draw men from the
light, love, and fear of the Lord, to listen to their own fond dreams; stilling
him who is the only sure Teacher of the Saints, a pretended inward light. And
therefore (by way of retortion) let me advise you, not to trifle in those
things that are of eternal concernment, calling darkness light, and light
darkness. Put not far from you the Son of God, because of the meannes of his
Garb. Stumble not at his coming, because not attended with the pomp and
splendour of this decaying world. The worldly-wise- Jew expected him from the
Palace, but the great God (whose habitation is in the contrite spirit) called
him from the Manger. This was the stone which the wise builders refused; this
was the Rock against which the learned and the mighty dashed themselves in
pieces. What the Religious Scribes and Pharisees esteemed the (Deliriaor) mad
whimsies in the lives and teachings of the Saints in those days, the same do
you judge now; but the persons and things which they judged base, the Lord has
made honorable; and what proud man would root out of the Earth, or shut up in
the grave of silence, he has caused to flourish as a branch of renown, which
shall outlive all the Idols set up by the wisdom of the World. Therefore look
well to your standing, and build not on that Religion which consists only in
outward profession, crying, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord,
lest you be found in the great day of the Lord, to be of no Religion, but that
which must be burned up as Hey and stubble. I desire you nor to become a
Disciple to any practice, or opinion, because mine, but unto the truth; turn
not unto me, but return unto the Lord, against whom you are now found fighting.
You utterly mistake me, in judging that I endeavor the bringing you over to
any opinion, for I disown that Religion that consists in opinions; and do
desire in singleness and seriousness of spirit, to wait for that power to
which all Opinionists are strangers.

Therefore do not esteem me studious to prevail with you to be of this
Opinion, or that Sect; no, my hearts desire unto the Lord is, that he would
prevail with you to come down from the height of your vain imaginations, and
wait to be made wise with the Wisdom of God, to live low in his fear, which is
the beginning of that Wisdom; to become a fool that you may be wise; and
finally, to abide faithful in that measure of light which you have received,
which would lead you out of the bypath of deceit, and hypocrisy, and bring
you to witness singleness of heart, which leads unto that peace which the
world knows not; and to that joy, which none should be able to take from you.
I wish eternal good to your precious soul, and rest


Your Friend as you own and walk in the Truth as it is in Jesus. T. SPEED.

FINIS.

