SCINTILLULA ALTARIS, OR, A Pious REFLECTION ON PRIMITIVE DEVOTION: As to the
FEASTS and FASTS of the CHRISTIAN CHURCH, Orthodoxally Revived.

By EDWARD SPARK, B. D.

Praise ye the Lord in his Saints.

Psalm. 150.1. Hierom. Non habituri sunt Deum Patrem, aut Christum Fratrem, qui
non habent Ecclesiam Matrem.

Augustinus. Lest ungrateful Oblivion should (through the tract of Time) blot
out the Favors of Almighty God, we Dedicate and Consecrate the Memory thereof
unto Him, in Solemn Festivals, and Set Times of Devotion.

Hier. in Catal. vir. illustr. (...).

Chrysostom. de Parab. LONDON, Printed by T. Maxey for RICHARD MARRIOT; and are
to be sold at his Shop in St. Dunstan's Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1652.

Votum Authoris S. Sae TPIADI.
DEs Pater Extensas Tu Qui moderaris habenas,
Omen Virtutis Nomen ut esto meum:
Ventilet Igniculum, divino Flamine Christus,
Non deerint Populo Lumina tensa Suo:
Scintillam aceend at Coelesti Spiritus igne,
Orba suis Flammis haud erit Ara DEI.
The Epistle Dedicatory TO His Sacred MOTHER, THE CHURCH-MILITANT. Prove. 1.8.
Jere. 6.16. Matt. 18.17 Revel. 12.1.

POEM. 1.
ACcept, Dear Mother, from your meanest Son
These Fruits of Dutiful Affection,
Or but Leaves rather; since too sadly true
Our Oarch-yard's robbed, where all such Plenty grew!
Where could I so deservedly bestow
(Had I ought worth Acceptance) as to throw
It and the Author at thy Feet, whose Breast
First gave us all, both Thriving, Food, and Rest?
Yet (since grown up) thy Sons rebellious prove,
Slighting Maternal, and all Filial Love,
Kicking, like Jesurun, where they should kneel,
No Sympathy with bleeding Mother feel!
While, like Herostratus, some for a Name
Stick not to set thy Temples all on Flame!
And with that Cursed Emperor can sing,
While the best Room is thus a Martyring!
Ready with savage Nero to Dissect
Their Mothers bowels, and her life exact!
But that an Heavenly Promise does thee Guard
From Hell, and Hers, making that their Reward!
These Syllables together spell complaint,
And Title thee too truly Militant!
Mean time, a faithful Spouse of the King of Kings
Thou show Thy self, B.'s echoed Sufferings!
Who from his own, streind Tortures did endure!
And all Those too for his Tormentors cure;
So here the servant fares but like his Lord,
Corforming to his Head, Side, Hands, Feet, Bored!
All waiting on thee, in Red-Garments here,
That once shall with Thee, in White Robes appear.
Thus as Thyn, so thy members Life's a war;
A double one, Spiritual, Corporal Jarr!
That Dragon Vomiting a Flood of Foes,
Against our Mother as She Teeming goes!
The barbarous Crescent, and proud Eagles wings
Wild Boar, Home-Foxes; all breath Threatenings!
Thy Little Flock yet (through their Lyon's aid)
Shall have their Fights, with Crowns of conquest paid:
Then Cheer up, (Honored Mother) cease your grief,
And let me bring your Tears this Handkerchief,
Millions of sons their Duty still Retain,
And at least, Pray for your fair days again:
But though your Emblem were a wayning Moon,
And that too here Eclipsed a while, yet soon
Thou shall be clothed with the glorious Sun,
And be as bright, as now thou seem dunne;
Crowned with the sparkling Jewels of the sky,
The Moon thy footstool, for all change too high:
While thy fierce, numerous, oppressive Foes,
Shall be sequestered to contrary woes!
This Noble Army then of Martyrs, grant
Most due (once Hers) to the Church Militant.
To the Christian Reader.
POEM. 2.
IF such thou art, that chanc'st this Book to see,
From superstition both, and Faction free;
Nor over full, nor empty of thy self,
Through Pride or Ignorance, no bias'd Elfe;
But both by Arts and dispositions fair,
Candid, Serene, Pious, and Debonaire,
It such, thine Heart is welcome, else Avaunt,
Lest wholesome Liquor thy foul vessel Taint.
There was a Garden, which for stately Bowres
Rare Trees, sweet walks, delicious Fruits and Flowers,
Might have the second Paradise been styled,
But Rooters breaking in, All soon was spoy'ld!
Yet in the Fray some slips I did obtain,
And set them in this Nursery again;
Do thou the Be then, not the Spider act:
Thine Honey, not my poison thence extract.
This was Isaiah's vineyard, of such care,
That Engedy with it might not compare;
So Fenced, and Pruned, and watered, that more
Could scarce be super-added to the store;
And yet, alas, those Foxes, Sin and Hate
Have stolen her Grapes, and left her desolate!
These are some Rescued Branches of that Vine,
Give not him vinegar, that brings thee wine.
I saw a Neck-lace late of Pearls so rare,
That scarce in the world Gems of like value are;
This (once) the wearer tying somewhat hard,
The chief string fayld, and all the Chain was marred!
While Ignorance, loose pearls swep'd forth the Door,
I gathered up some of them from the Floor,
Here wyp'd and strung them; Reader be not one
That for such Jewels given, Flings a stone,
But put them on, and wear them in thy Heart,
And They shall Ornament Thee in each Part.
Now all thy further Patience I Will engage
Is, to mind Accent, and the Title Page,
Which speaks but a Reflection (if you mark)
No full survey; not flames, but a small Spark:
And that fully made good, Thou must not look
For Folio Lengths in an Octavo Book.
To rigid Humorists. John 7.24. 1 Cor. 14.19.

POEM. 2.
GRave Sirs, who more with Cato's brow, then wit,
As voluntary Magistrates do sit
On other men's Endeavors, and Arraign,
Condemn, and Raze all in a Cynick vain;
Whose main worth is to Censure, and like naught
But what your selves have Dictated or Taught,
Slighting a Solid, for a Dancing Muse,
Less took with weight, that easy Measures use:
Fume not, if here I Ape you, and express
How justly some retort your Rigidnesse;
Counting you Puft-past men, all blown with pride,
Grand selfish Opinators, where reside
Black tinctures of strong Envy, that belongs
Inseparable to such Bedle-Tongues:
They call you Dogs in the Manger, busy Flies,
That fix on Scabs or Doung, but Flowrs despise:
Your sullen Silence, and reserved Pen
Still laying Ambush for industrious Men!
Parties and Judges both, nay Hangmen too,
If you your selves prove, They Will not bate your Due.
Yet, me thinks, you deserve no such hard measure,
But to ingeuous Writers do a Pleasure;
For, your Capricious Taunts but shadow well
An Authors Draught, and make the Piece excel:
You much advance the Jewel by such Foil,
And Nothing, unless your own Credit, spoil;
Your Roughness but Achilles Lance does prove,
To cure one of that Folly, your self love:
Then whether you Distaste Him, or Commend,
(You see) the Author is your fore-hand Friend.
MARTIAL. Epigr. Carpere vel noli Nostra, vel ede Tua.

A CATALOGUE of the Feasts and Fasts, According to the Order of the Church, and
the Method of this Book.
CHristian Solemnities in General page 1 Advent Sunday p. 7 The Nativity of
Christ 11 S. Stephens Day 17 S. John Evangelist 26 The Innocents Day 34
Circumcision 43 Epiphany, or Twelfth Day 49 Ashwednesday 56 The solemn Fast of
Lent 62 Palm Sunday 75 Good Friday 80 Easter Day 106 Ascension Day 135
Whitsunday 155 Trinity Sunday 177 The Lords Day in General 186 Rogation Week
201 S. Andrews Day 208 S. Thomas Day 221 Conversion of S. Paul 231 The
Purification 239 S. Matthias Day 247 The Annunciation 256 S. Marks Day 265 S.
Philip and Jacob 270 S. Barnaby's Day 277 S. John Baptist 299 S. Peter's Day
319 S. James his Day 330 S. Bartholomew's Day 337 S. Matthew's Day 321 S.
Michael the Archangel 329 S. Luke's Day 339 S. Simon and Jude 346 All Saints
Day 353 The four Ember Weeks 364 The Vigils, or Eves of Festivals 368 The
Doxologie. 371
ERRATA.
In Votum Authoris. line 5. r. accendat. Ad Malignantes Poemata l. 3. r. if. l.
6. r. texts. To Rigid Humorists. l. 22. r. ivgenuous. P. 19. l. 26. for rupis,
r. rapis. p. 136. l. 6. r. Christian p. 138. marg. r. Enar. p. 354. l. 3. r.
Assentation p. 155. l. 26. r. Candid p. 358. l. 8. r. Groat p. 362. marg. r.
Euthymius.
To his valued FRIEND the AUTHOR.
How much I love that Gallant civil man,
Who fears Gods Laws, and does not man's offend,
Yet dares be active, nay does all he can
To vindicate the fame of his dead Friend?
How much more, Dear Spark, must I Honor thee
Who vindicat'st the Churches Piety?
I must acknowledge, I with Reverence look
Upon thy Parts and highly prize thy Merit;
For who impartially peruse thy Book
Shall find thou have an high seraphick Spirit.
Imagine Gold could be from Gold refined,
So is thy soul, from others souls sublimed.
Ad Malignantes Poemata.
I hear some Quarrel Authors that have writ
In verse such strong and sublimated things;
As ^f such subjects for verse were not fit,
Let them know this, God chose the Pens of Kings
To w^e in verse, and Christ alleged them more,
Then all the Text he found in Moses store.
Let them know, learned Moses and wise Job
Writ both in verse before those glorious Kings,
And all the Prophets, called the sons of God,
In verse have written, high mysterous things.
Let them know, who dares on such verse fall foul,
Has but a squint-eyed, ill composed Soul!
Fran. Wortley.

To the Author in contemplation of his Primitive Devotion.
THe Churches Liturgy, Her Discipline,
Her sweet indulgencies, Her love divine,
Her Fasts, Her Feasts, Her Sacraments, and all
That Tongues of men and Angels Order call,
By wholesome Precepts, and choice presidents,
This Author with high Charity presents;
Instructing us the ready Way to know
What to our God, what to the Church we owe.
All moral virtues stand in great esteem
With grave Philosophers; shall not we deem
Diviner Graces much more to surmount?
Yes: To this end, SPARK renders in Account
The lives, and deaths of most refined Saints;
Which he from Times records so lively Paints,
That we by their examples might become
Such as they were in Life, or Martyrdom.
Great Harmony did grace her Pristine State,
Till the red Dragon grew predominate:
In her Meridian thousand souls did bring,
At her Behests their free will offering:
In her eclipse no Herbert, not a Done,
SPARK only sings her Resurrection.
To show my best Affection, and my Zeal
To this good Work, I give Heart, Hand, and Seal.
Thomas Shirley.

In opus eruditum Authoris ingeniosissimi.
CRudeli, lacerare, manu, pia viscera Matris
Infoelix studuit, Nequitiae soboles!
Omine foelici sanavit vulnera Sparkus,
Non passus tumulo saucia membra dari.
Hic petit, Antiquos veris ornare, Coronis
Vates, Angelicos and celebrare Choros.
R. DUKESON. D.D.

To my worthy Kinsman M. Ed. SPARK, upon his Pious Reflection on Primitive
Devotion.
I Were ingrate, should I thy lines ore'-look,
And not repay some tribute to thy Book,
Amongst those virid wreaths of Poetry,
Then interweave one Laurel branch from me.
Whilst thou thy light do through the world disperse;
Accept of this Reflection on thy Verse.
Methinks Thou Have here thy skill in Music shown,
Most fitly to a Land that's out of tune;
A happy harmony of Sions Songs,
Variety, yet no Divisions;
First a plain Note, a Relish then does close,
Each Poem's grafted on a stock of Prose,
How sweetly both the Courteous Reader Greet,
When the Prose runs so on the Verses feet,
Cease Old Religion to lament thy fate,
Here Is yet a Prospect of thy Pristine state.
Though the old lights snuft out, which clearly shone
To other Lands, But dazzled this our own,
Our comfort is, we are not quite bereft:
Here is a SPARK of the old Lamp yet left,
Blown from above into a Holy fire,
Whose flames shall last, when as this SPARK flies higher.
RICH. BETENSON.

On the worthy work of my respected Friend, M. Ed. SPARK.
When Pious Asa with his Fathers Slept,
How solemnly his funerals were kept?
A curious bed's contrived by Arts devices
Filled all with Indian gums, Arabian Spices.
This bed, the case, wherein his corpse, the Jewel
Are for the 2 Chro. 16.14.
BURNING made the precious fuel
As if that Asa's body did aspire
To meet his soul, and mount up in that fire.
Dead Saints, dead days now put into their Urne,
See here a sweeter brighter flame does burn,
Kindled from holy SPARKS, whence does arise
No smoke to hurt, save only envious eyes.
Whilst my admiring Muse at distance stands
Desiring at this flame to heat her hands,
Wherewith emboldned, nearer she presumes,
To steal a Sent of these thy sweet Perfumes.
But I recant my words, and pardon crave,
That I compared thy Book unto the Grave
Or Vrne of Saints, for by thy Pen's perfection,
Saints are not buried, but have Resurrection.
The cozning witch, in counterfeit disguise
Made but a seeming Samuel to rise.
Whom cunningly she did with mantle hide,
To cloak her cheat, which else might be espide.
But who will not thy worthy Work applaud?
No falsehood here, no forgery or fraud;
Thou really do from the dust retrive,
And make not one, but All Saints to revive.
Yea by the pains which thou on them expends,
Easter does rise, Ascension day ascends.
Thy Poetry is pleasant, Pictures fine,
Thy Prose profound; but oh, the prayers divine.
Thus have thou pleased us in every part,
Our fancies, judgments, with our eyes, and heart.
THO. FULLER.

To the Author upon the sight of the first sheet of his Book.
My worthy friend, I am much pleased to know,
You have begun to pay the debt you owe
By promise, to so many pious friends,
In printing your choice Poems; it commends
Both them, and you, that they have been desired
By persons of such Judgment; and admired
They must be most, by those that best shall know
What praise to holy Poetry we owe.
So shall your Disquisitions too; for, there
Choice learning, and blessed piety, appear.
All useful to poor Christians: where they may
Learn Primitive Devotion. Each Saints day
Stands as a Landmark in an erring age
to guide frail mortals in their pilgrimage.
To the Celestial Can'an; and each Fast,
Is both the so uls direction, and repast:
All so expressed, that I am glad to know
You have begun to pay the debt you owe.
Iz. Wa.

Sanctitas Rediviva, or the Resurrection of Primitive Devotion, practiced and
endeavored by a true Friend to Reformation. E. SPARK.
Rude wars, and gilded ignorance, with a rout
Of self conceited humorists, did put out
And quench our holy Fires; Robbing Devotion
Of all her comely dress, leaving her portion
Shame, and Contempt, Vexation to attend her;
Now sick, nor house, nor friend, for to defend her.
Scarce SPARK of Piety or Charity, could be
Seen, or afforded, till it came from Thee,
Who raked up too in Embers, though obscure,
Uncloud'st Devotion to its Luster pure.
William Wimpew.

Ad Amicum suum Authorem EDVARDUM SPARKETIUM.
Adsint Romani, colit and quicunque Novatum,
Inspiciant, tua scripta legant, Collecta revolvant.
Libri Divini flammam, dum murmr cingunt
Corda sua, Antiquo, inspirentur Lumine, vero:
Quaerendo nodos, fiat, laqueantur ut ipsi
Rete tuo Antiquo, passo, captare Novellos.
Eodem ad Authorem.
Dum pia, dum prosint, tuto tua scripta peragrent.
Non rapidos curent ventos, quae folia spargant
Cumaeae Vatis, nec curent Festa, Nefastos.
Omnigeni venti, conspirent flamina Vulgi.
Non Poesin sacram, nec Sanctos urere possunt.
PETRUS VOVVEL.

Upon the AUTHOR, and his Work.
WHen the rude Vulgar in their headlong rages,
Pulled down those sacred things, which former ages
Did hold inviolable; they began
To level Times, and Places, and next Man:
Laid wast those Days, which our Grand sober Sires
Hallowed, to warm their zeal by heavenly fires.
Dispark'd the Churches, and to Barnes did give
Power to contest for the Prerogative.
When the Churches days they with success decri'd,
Next barked at those which Heaven had sanctified.
'Twas time to write when days to Saints assigned
Were all degraded; and the Lords new-coyned.
Our Author (like the wiser few) stood still,
Observes, admires, and lets them take their fiill.
And now in milder temper he begins
TO assert those truths, which their blind rage called sins,
'Twere madness in a whirlwind, to resist
With any arguments, but club, and fist.
Thus God, when all things were in the Chaos hurled,
Did first make Light, and then he formed the world.
The Author so, with imitating Art
Informs the judgment first, then moves the Heart.
Not like the Pseudo levites of this season
That Preach all Use, without Ground, Proof, or Rreason.
His Prose so sinewy, and yet so smooth,
His Verse so full of rhyme and reason both.
His Prayers so heavenly, and his All so good,
Makes him at once admired, yet understood.
The Poets Character he hits aright,
And does at once both profit, and delight.
The ancient Method he does well repair
In this Design, a Sermon, Psalm, and Prayer.
May this Work thrive, that after Times, and we
May keep one Festival to 's Memory,
And Bonfires make, from whose undying flame
Shall rise bright Sparks, to immortalize his Name.
ALEX. BROOM.

To his worthily esteemed Friend E. S. the Author.
MAy David's Harp here be free from his fears,
Whilst with heaven's Music thou charm'st humane ears,
Strung with Hosanna's, touched b' Amphion's Quill,
But more harmonious; for 't not only will
Erect Thebean Palaces, but raise
Our Hearts (more sacred Temples) with due praise
Unto the Lamb, which sits upon the Throne,
And his concomitant perfection:
Which made my yet unpinion'd Muse fly forth,
To snatch a Laurel here to crown thy worth.
But though Icarian Fate my Wreath surprise,
This trivial Offring's still a Sacrifice.
NIC. CHAMBERLAIN.

To his Worthy Friend, the Author.
BRight shining SPARK of consecrated Fire,
That does pure Incense at the Altar burn,
Thy quickening Flame does sacred Heat inspire,
And makes our Souls on the right Axis turn:
How is the World beholding to thy Light,
To draw it forth of a Cimmerian Night?
Nay, Heaven it self thy Debtor is: For blessed
Immortal Tenants, highly memoriz'd
By Ages held the purest and the best,
Would soon grow obsoleted and despised,
Did not thy hallowed Muse, with Rays divine,
Make 'em, like Sol in his Meridian, shine.
Flora displayes not more Varieties;
Red-cheek'd Pomona brings not more Delight,
(When most enameled, each in Childbed lies)
To charm the Senses of Taste, Smell and Sight,
Then Here occurr (in party-Vesture decked)
Profit and Pleasure to the Intellect.
Star-Gazers all, you may be freely bold
TO expunge our Saints; This Calender will do:
You write in Red; Our Author writes in Gold:
You write but Names; He, Names, and Natures too.
Your first of Jane must a fresh Model see:
But This will last to blessed Eternity.
H. DELAUNE.

UPON Christian Solennitas ab eo quod solet in Anno esse, dicitur. S. August.
Sermon. 186. de Temp.
Solemnities in General. Exodus 16. Ps. 112.6. 1 Cor. 14.40.

DISQUISITION 1.
SHall all things have their appointed Time, Eccles. 3.
as the Wise man speaks, and not Devotion? which sure, should rather have a
share in all times whatsoever: For albeit Religion be not tied to Time Confess.
Helvet. c. 24.
; yet can it not be planted or exercised without a due Dividing and allotting
out of Time for it: and forasmuch as it is kindly, to gather all fruits in
their seasons; so too is it for the Church of God to consider each of his great
Benefits, even in the day wherein it was wrought (as near as can be imagined)
and therefore it is well ordered by the true Churches, Ancient and Modern, to
solemnize the memorial of Christ's main Actions and Passion: with the imitable
virtues of his Saints and Martyrs, upon set-times, and annual revolutions,
lest happily, (in a while) those Persons and Things be forgotten, that ought to
be had in everlasting remembrance. To which end, says Saint Augustine, God
has designed weekly. and his Church annual De Civit. Dei, lib. 10. cap. 4.
Commemorations of the Mysteries, Means, and Witnesses of our Redemption; to
preserve a Solemn memory of those high Benefits which either by Himself or any
of his blessed Instrumens he has betstowed upon Mankind. Not that we should
luxuriate in Festivities, (as some do) dedicating Days even to fictitious
Saints, that never were men, or had a name, but in mistaken Calenders: as it is
doubted by the two grand Supporters of the Heterodox persuasion, Bellarmine and
Baronius, Lib. de Beatitudine Sanctorum. cap. ult.
whether there were ever any such man as S. George, or such a woman as Saint
Catherine. The Cardinal does acknowledge that they worship certain Saints whose
stories are uncertain, reputing the Legend of Saint George Apocryphal, for all
it is used in the Missall: Eccl. Annal. Tom. 2. ad Annum 290.
and Baronius confesses as much of Quiriacus and Julitta (to say nothing of
Saint Christopher and others) declaring plainly, that their Acts were written
either by Fools or Heretics. So that they seem much in danger of two places of
Scripture (that worship such) Romans 14.23. and 1 Cor. 8.4. and will hardly come
off from self-condemnation, and flat Idolatry. And whether this, or that other
object of their worship be the worst, (I leave to the Readers Judgment) that
Divifie such as never were holy men, as the Dr Sutcliff examinat. of Romans cap.
7.
Pagan soldier that pierced the side of Christ, by the name of Longinus, the
Millenarian Papias, Becket, Sanders, Garnet, etc. most or all of which stand
Sainted in the Tiberine Calender, (I may say with one, Dr Abbot Antipol. p. 3.
non Martyrs Domini, though in charity I add not, sed Mancipes Diaboli) til
the crowd is so great, that the whole year has too few days to be devoted. Et
tot templa Deum Romae, quot in urbe sepulchra
Heroum numerare licet. --
But confining unto truth and modesty, we understand here such Solemnities as
St Austin speaks of, Festa quae vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel gener alibus
Consiliis instituta, a toto terrarum orb servantur. Which either by the
Apostles themselves As those concerning Christ, etc.
, or by general Councels instituted As those concerning the Apostles. Epist.
118.
, are observed throughout the Christian world; and all these in their proper
seasons, (as near as can be aimed at by Mortality) the Substance clothed with
the circumstances of the Performance; and as on these good grounds, so likewise
for good ends we celebrate them: Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. c. 14.
(...). Not only as a memorial of the Dead (says Eusebius) but for an holy
imitation of the Living: Sancti non servitute, sed charitate honorandi; (would
all of Durandus his side were as ingenuous in that) The blessed Saints are not
to be honored with any worship either of Invocation, or Adoration; but only
with love, and the charity of Imitation; which indeed calls on us to look both
on their Actions, and their holy Passions; sending us also to Prayer and
Fasting, and other duties of Mortification: wherewith (beside the set and
solemn times of devout Abstinence) each of these Festivals is to be attended;
both these Solemnities (as it were) making up the soul a pair of Angels wings,
much furthering her flight to heaven, and even grounded on the law of Nature,
to regulate piously those two reigning Passions, of our Joy and Sorrow, with
which all the Actions of our life are mixed; so that whatever we can do, or may
be done unto us, still the sequel is one or other of the said Affections, and
our Life according. Wherefore the Church of Christ, (that most absolute and
perfect School of Virtue) has (by the special direction of Gods good Spirit)
hitherto inured men from their infancy, partly with days of Festival exercise,
for the framing of their Joy; and partly with Times of a contrary sort, for the
regulation of their Grief: by both These (I say) consecrating the whole life to
God. And here it must ever be remembered, that the intent of the Church in these
her holy Solemnities, is not only to inform us in the Mysteries which are
commemorated; but also, and that chiefly to conform us thereby unto Christ our
Head, and his glorious Members, which is the sum and substance of all our
Celebrations. (...) is the Apostles word of exhortation, Phil. 3.
Phil. 3.10. Conformable unto him: if not thus affected by them, we neither
approve our selves of the number of his Followers, nor of his lively Members:
but these well improved, are multiplied Advantages to Devotion: a Christian
practice, I know not whether of more Piety or Antiquity, Eusebius telling us,
how Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, Eccles. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 19.
above 1400 years ago wrote upon this Argument. And do not all the golden
Fountains of the Fathers (both of the East and West, Coloss. 2.16.
the Greek and Latin Church) flow with the same streams? Quorum saluberrima
est Authoritas, whose Authority's a sufficient conduct in Saint Augustines
Judgment, that there is no fear of falling into Saint Paul's Reprehensions Loco
praecitato.
(either touching Times, Gal. 4.
or Abstinence) no kinn to Heathenish Observations, 1 Cor. 8.8.
or Judaicall Reservedness; but a religious Obedience on better grounds, and
ends of Piety: more claiming interest in his Commendations, 1 Cor. 14.
(...), All being done decently and in Order, and tending only to Gods Honor,
his Saints Memory, and our Edification: Without which, ('it is too visible)
Religion will soon languish, and even die away by degrees As Sir W Ra.
prophesies, de lege Mosaica, prope initium.
, into Profaneness, Heresy and Atheism! But that a Disquisition swell not
into a Volume, I referr your further satisfaction herein to those too Stars of
the first Magnitude in the Church of England, judicious Hooker Eccles. pot. l.
5.373.
, and the learned His defense of Christian Feasts.
Featly.

PNEM 4.
Gods first born People, the selected Jews
By his command Solemnities did use;
New Moons and Sabbaths, and the Sowre-herb-Feast,
Those of Weeks, Tents, of Purim and the rest;
Both fixed Feasts and Fasts, to let them know
When they should humbled souls, when grateful show:
Which Scions, since, the Christian Church transplants
Grafting on nobler stocks, and soil that wants
No pious care to cultivate their Spring
For Christ's advance, and his Saints flourishing.
Two reigning Passions in our Hearts do grow
Sorrow and Joy; both which to temper so
That neither may transgress, the Church has fixed
Her solemn Feasts and Fasts, both duly mixed.
That the most low-roof'd souls, may learn thereby
To tune their Griefs to Sin, their Joys pitch high:
These are the harmless Books of Idiots, where
Without all Superstition, Truths appear;
All else without Book, by such marks may know,
What Lord, such places, persons, times, does ow:
These are Religions Boundaries, where we
The Pious steps of our Forefathers see,
Weekly solemnizing in the Sabbath blessed,
Our grand Creator's Works, and sacred Rest;
Till that Judaick Term, Engraved with his Son,
Rose the Lords day by 's Resurrection:
Whose saving Mysteries of Life, and Death,
By Annual Returns, These keep in Breath;
Lest else in Story, as in Act, forgot
All in Atheistical oblivion Rot,
His humble Birth, his Tragick-Passion,
His Rise Triumphant, and Ascension;
With the Descending of the sacred Dove,
All kept t'augment his honor, and our love.
And as peculiar Feasts tend the blessed Three,
So one the undivided Trinity:
Good offices of Angels are observed
With love to them, worship to God reserved.
And since our Faith (says Truth) is founded on
Prophets, Apostles, sealed with the Passion
Of bleeding Martyrs, those are Registered
As golden Pipes, while we adore the Head.
And least Joy wanton on so numerous Feasts,
The Church sometimes calls us as mourning Guests!
Shifting the Scene, minding our Hopes of Fears,
Mingling our Bread with Ashes, Drink with Tears!
Such is the wholesome temper of her Law,
Each Fast is cheered, and each Feast kept in aw.
What Christian then against such Commemoration?
Gods honor, his Saints praise, our Imitation.
These are the Churches Crown of Stars, as 'twere;
Oh, may they long shine in her hemisphere,
And where set, rise again! still may they grace
The Calender of time, with choifest place.
Advent Sunday.
DISQUISITION 2.
THis day is to the Feastival of the Nativity, as St. John Baptist to his
Master, a kind of a forerunner, to make way for it; somewhat like the Jewish
(...), to the Feast of Easter, a preparation to the grand Solemnity; nay
indeed, this and the three following Sundays of Advent, may in some sense be
called (like the four Evangelists) Quadriga Domini, our Saviors four wheeled
Chariot; carrying the glad tidings of his approach, throughout the Church; as
those do his glory and Salvation through the world: Moreover, here begins
the peculiar computation of the Churches year (though learned Hooker, E. P. l.
5. p. 378.
on some other considerations, take it somewhat higher, viz. From the
Annunciation of Christ his Conception, by Angelical Message.) But the Church
initiateth her solemn service at this Preface to his Birth, and first
appearance of him to mankind: And herein differing from all secular computes
whatsoever; to let the world perceive, she numbereth not her days, and
measures not her seasons, so much by the motion of the Sun, as of her Savior:
beginning and progressing her year, according to the Sun of Righteousness, who
now began to dawn upon the world, and as the day star from on high, to shine on
them that sat in spiritual darkness; and with his beams of light and life, to
chase away the shadows both of sin and death. Lastly, this day, as it were,
inviteth all of us to the Marriage Feast (for the Incarnation was a Mysterious
Match) it calls off the busy world, both from their vain prosecutions and
excuses, admonishing us of our Lords coming Advent speaks as much
; I, and in its four several days, hints Christ's four several ways of coming,
viz. First, his Corporal, by Incarnation; secondly, his Spiritual, by
Inspiration; thirdly, his Ministerial, by Instruction; fourthly, his Judicial,
by Final Sentence, and Determination: The first is a strange Humility; the
second, equal Mercy; the third, his Word and Sacraments; the fourth, is his
last Judgment. Now then, whosoever seriously takes heed to the three former,
shall never need to fear the latter, Romans 8.1. And it is Christ's own
advertisement; Matthew. 24.42, 46.
Watch, for you know not, etc. And blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when
he comes, shall find so doing.

POEM 5.
AS when a mighty Prince of high renown,
With splendour does approach some loyal Town;
The Streets are strewn, the Houses trimmed and decked,
All leave their work, and sit at grave Aspect;
But specially his Palace and Allies
Prepare for him, and look with longing eyes:
So here this monitory Advent comes,
To tell us of Christ's coming, that our rooms
May all be swept and garnished for that King,
who with Him does all grace and glory bring:
Be sure his Palace then, the Heart, I mean,
With Innocence or Penitence be clean:
If Satan's house be dressed so garishly,
Never think that Christ will harbor in a stye!
Then be thy Soul adorned with every Grace,
Let Love, Joy, Hope, Desire, run all apace
To meet Him, and his Majesty attend,
Who highly will prefer them in the end:
Be mountain spirits levelled, rough ones plain,
Dejected valleys raised with Joy again;
Let Lion-fiercenesse henceforth become tame,
And then more fit companions for this same
Meek Lamb of God: Let aspish tongues grow mild,
So shall they All be led by this blessed Child:
Let Temperance sweep out Luxury, and Pride
By rare Humility be laid aside;
Let the Dove temper Serpentine deceit,
And Christ will come, when his path's made so straight:
His Ministerial coming heed, his Word,
And all your Trials comfort shall afford.
He Will come into the Heart, and fill the place
With consolation, and all saving Grace;
Till both to free, and crown his Saints in the end,
His coming glorious splendour shall attend:
When spleeny strifes thus and contentions cease,
Then may the World expect the Prince of peace:
In Mercy then, but going on in Those
Does to his coming-judgements It expose.
The COLLECT PRAYER. The Epistle. Romans 13. from Verse 8. to the end.
The Gospel. Matthew. 21. from Verse 1. to the 14.

Almighty God, give us Grace, that we may cast away the Works of darkness, and
put on the Armor of light, now in the time of this mortal life (in the which
thy Son Jesus Christ came to visit us in great Humility) that in the last day,
when he shall come again in his glorious Majesty, to judge both the quick and
the dead; we may rise to life immortal, through him, who lives and reigns
with thee, and the Holy Ghost, now and ever, Amen.

depiction of the shepherds called from the fields to visit the baby Jesus The
Shepherds. lu: 2.
8 And there were in the same country Shepherds abiding in ye field keeping
watch over ye flock by night.

9 And lo ye Angel of ye Lord come upon them etc.

16 And they came with have and found Mary and Joseph, and ye babe lying in a
manger.

20 And ye shepherds returned glorifying and praising God: etc.


The Plate here.

Upon the Feast of Christ his Nativity.
DISQUISITION 3.
THis is the Foundation Festival, whereupon the fabric of the rest is raised;
and therefore, it is Fundation-like laid very deep, and may well admit of Saint
Paul's exclamation, Romans 11.33.
(...); O the unfathomable Abyss thereof! It consists of an History, and a
Mystery: That which appears above ground, is the story, Luke 2.15.
Luke 2. and the substance thereof is known by the Circumstances. Quis? Quare?
Vbi? Quando? The Time, the Place, the Person, the End. I shall reserve the two
first of them, to the last observable, and begin the History with the time of
his Nativity; and that was a time of peculiar designation (though computations
vary, nor is it much material) Christ not being subjected to the necessity or
chance of time (like others) but as Lord and Maker of it. Gal. 4.5.
Elegit suum Nascendi tempus. He chose his opportunity, took his own time,
wherein he would be born; which the Apostle calls the Fullness of it, Gal. 4.
(...), which was, as most agree (from that old Of Rabbi, Elias observing the
Hebrew Letter (which is the numerical of 1000) six times repeated in the first
of Genesis, and that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 90.4, etc.
Tradition of the worlds lasting just 6000 years) well toward the 4000th year.
Scaliger, Reusner, and Calvin say, Christ was born, Anno Mundi, 3947. Others
say, in the year following. as Func. and Helv. in their Chronologies. Dionysius
the less, with others, think two years after that, being 3950, while others
again Anno 3970. Nor need this variety cause any scruple or distraction (no
more then in the Dominical day) so it be solemnized as near as may be (though
the punctual hours in some cases cannot be retained) and if our very Clocks
accord not twenty fours hours (some striking most, when others fewest;) or
scarce three Neighbors meet in the relation of a story, done among them; how
easily may the most faithful Chronologers, descent a little, about the motion
of the wheels of time, that have been so long, so long a running; besides, that
speech of our blessed Lord, Acts 1.7.
to his Apostles, Acts 1. It is not for you to know the times and the seasons,
etc. Omnes calculatorum digitos, St. Augustine.
(says Saint Augustine) puts all Arithmeticians out of their numbers,
shuffling their Counters into a Bag of Ignorance; The time when Christ born.
and indeed, Pia est ignorantia Dei Arcana non scrutari: Where the Scripture
has not a tongue, it is Piety for us, to have neither Eye, nor Ear: and
therefore, not to follow the wanton Postillers to the very year, nay, month,
and day, and hour of Christ's Nativity, we may with more modesty, and certainty,
collect it to have been about the two and fortieth year of the reign of
Peaceful Octavianus (commonly called Augustus) Josephus telling us, Josep.
Antiq.
that that was the year of the general taxing, and the Scripture telling us,
that that was the time of the Birth of Christ, Luke 2. And therefore then, was
the time for Shiloh's coming. Herod the son of Antipater an Idumaean, being
King of Judea, and so the Scepter departing from Juda, Genesis 49. then, Genesis
49.10.
when all the prophesies were accomplished, all types and shadows substanced,
then was the fullness of time for Christ's Nativity; and then more particularly,
shortly after the Winter Solstice, when night grows shorter, and days longer,
to show, that now shadows were shortning, dark ignorance diminishing, and the
glorious light of divine knowledge increasing, John 3.30. John 3.30.
And here let us borrow time, to glance on the place where the Lord was laid,
and that was Bethlem, as the Pharisees could tell Herod out of the Prophet
Micah. And thou Bethlem, Micah 6.2.
etc. out of thee shall he come, etc. But why there? Is it not a little one?
Yes, therefore he chose it, that chose all the circumstances of his Life and
Death, Vt nos doceret humilia eligere: To teach us to choose the lowest rooms
at Feasts, or Synagogues, and to be contented with our meanest accommodations,
as all exceeding his; whose whole life was a continual Passion; (as one says)
others Die Martyrs, but he was born a Martyr, Christ found a kind of Golgotha,
even in Bethlem; his birth and death as it were, but one protracted act; his
Christmas day, and his Good Friday, Dr. Done, in Festo Nativit.
but the Evening and the Morning of his Passion! Born among Beasts, lived among
worse, died among thieves! Born in the meanest Town, the meanest House, the
meanest Room, the prophets may well call it his coming down; the Apostles (...),
his emptying of himself, etc. Bethlem, an Inn, a Stable; and yet these not
without their intimations. In Bethlem, where Boaz the Jew, and Ruth the
Gentile, were married, Ruth 4.13. There was he born (i.) God and Flesh married,
who married Jew and Gentile into one Flock together. The Inn, domus populi.
Entertains him, that was to entertain all comers, salvator populi. The House of
the people, receives the Savior of the people; and the Stable still more
extends his Grace unto the foulest sinner, so repentant: Again, Bethlem was the
City of David, and Nursery of Kings, of whose lineage he was; and though born in
Bethlem, by occasion of the taxing, yet conceived a Nazarite (thence came this
good, in spite of all ill Proverbs) Luke 1. Luke 1.55.
That Town of Ephrata, which as it signifies fruitfulness, is a Region not
only of Wood, but of Wine, says Adricomius; Adricom. Delphius, f. 41.
and Bethlem signifying an House of Bread, Affords us this comfortable extract,
That the Word made Flesh in the House of Bread, (...)
and Region of Wine, leads us to the Arms of Christ, in the blessed Sacrament,
worthily received. And now to avoid tediousness, let me knit the Person, and
the End together (which indeed, as the Apostle says) is (...), 1 Timothy 3.16. 1
Pet. 9.12.
a Great Mystery; God manifested in the flesh, etc! The Riddle which the very
Angels, as well as men desired, (...). (i.) To pry into (as through the
Hangings) of which we may say, Deuteronomy. 4.32.
as Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. Was there ever such a thing as this? For this Mystery (as
well as the Virgin Mary) the Holy Ghost has overshadowed; yet may we also say
of it (as the Lepers in another case, 2 King. 7.9.
2 Kings 7.) This is a day of good tidings: Maximum miraculorum and
beneficiorum; as it is the greatest of Miracles, so it is the highest of
Benefits, bestowed upon mankind This, wherein the Deity and Humane Nature were
mutually espoused, without either present confusion, or future separation; by
an incomprehensible Hypostasis, and ineffable union Quis enarrabit generationem
ejus? Isai. 13.8.
; for which then, let curiosity be turned into gratitude, and That be expressed
in Hospitality and Devotion joined; least like Israel, we proclaim an Holy day
to Jehovah, and worship a Calf, Exodus 32.8. that so this eminent Festival, may
make up those three wonders Bernard in Festo Nativi.
of the World, viz. God and Man, Mother and Virgin, Faith and our Heart united.

POEM. 6.
Of Heaven and Earth, This the bright Wedding Day.
God spoused Flesh, and thence begot our Joy:
As Light from light, yet in its Fount resides;
So Christ from God, yet with him God abides:
Strange Mystery! as the Eternal Son,
Who shall declare his Generation?
That Eagle in the Clouds, what Angels Pen
Can reach? We trace him but as worm with men!
In whom, when Sin and Misery at strife,
To end it well, Christ took, and laid down Life!
Of spotless and perpetual Virgin Mother,
Made in all sinless sympathies our Brother.
'Tmust be a Virgin-heart Christ's presence wins,
Where Satan has begot no crying sins.
While other's stately housed, an Inn's the best
Room, Earth affords unto this Heavenly Guest!
Whose universal Goodness will again,
(Unless through their own fault) All entertain.
And though rejected of his own, this stranger,
Be sordidly thus cradled in a Manger!
Yet know, and mourn it irrelenting heart,
Thou an Augaean fouler stable art!
Here he that made the Angels, with Beasts lies,
Prophesy'ng him our bleeding Sacrifice!
Yet happy if like them, we own our Lord,
Give him our Crib, that is, our All-afford:
Who so descended from his high renown,
To beat our Pride and haughty Passions down;
And all this did his own free gracious act,
On our part undeserved, opposed, effect.
Light on us therefore, O Celestial Dove,
So with thy Fanning Wings inflame our Love,
That Earth with grateful Harmony may sing
With those Aetherial Spirits, to Heavens King;
That both in complete Consort so aspire,
Till all one Hallelujah singing Quire:
Then they are ill Shepherds, sure, will not always
Together with their Flocks, Christ this day praise.
The COLLECT PRAYER. The Epistle. Heb. 1. from verse. 1. to 13.
The Gospel. John 1. from verse. 1. to 15.

Almighty God, which have given us thy only begotten Son, to take our nature
upon him, and this day to be born of a pure Virgin; Grant that we being
regenerate, and made thy children, by Adoption and Grace, may daily be renewed
by thy holy Spirit, through the same, our Lord Jesus Christ; who lives and
reigns, etc.

depiction of the stoning of Saint Stephen The stoning of Steven, Act: 7*
58 And cast him out of ye City, and stoned him: and the witnesses laid down
there clothes at a voung man's feet, named Saul.

59 And they Stoned Steven, who called on God, and said Lord Jesus, receive my
spirit.

60 And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay* not this
sin to there charge. etc


The Plate here.

Saint Stephens Day.
DISQUISITION 4.
YEsterday presented a Nativity, and this a Martyrdom (like a Deaths-head
served up at a Festival) the Church thereby, first tacitly intimating human
Condition, both our natural and accidental frailty! how near our End bordereth
on our Birth! Finisque ab origin pendet. And yet how many outward dangers
(equalling inward diseases) hasten the pace of precipitating Nature! Vitae
unicus introitus, mill exitus! Our life, for one sole ingress; having many
thousand out-lets! And secondly, expressly desirous (by joining these two
Festivals) that we should all learn to live well, as Christ; and to die well,
as St. Stephen: Ideo natus est Dominus ut moreretur pro servo, In a Sermon on
St. Stephen.
ne servus deficeret mora pro Domino (says holy Austin) yesterday we
celebrated the Birth of that heavenly King of Martyrs born into the World, and
to day the first fruits of Martyrs going out of the world. It behoved the
Immortal (says he) First to take Flesh for Mortals, that so mortal man might
the better contemn Death for the Immortal: Therefore was the Lord born to die
for his servant, that the servant might not fear to die for his Lord. Christ
was born in Earth, that Saint Stephen and his other followers might be born in
Heaven. Christus pro nobis induit hominem, Stephanus pro Christo hominem exuit.
Christ, for us, put on human Flesh; and Saint Stephen, here, for Christ, put it
off.

The story is so obvious, that I shall need only glance on it out of the
Scriptures for the Day, Acts 7. it consisting of two remarkables, Acts 7.
viz. the Jews cruelty, and his Piety: their bloody, and his godly behavior in
his Martyrdom: First here, Mat. 23.
They (retaining their old Title, of Killers and stoners of the Prophets) put
him to death, who endeavored to bring them to everlasting life! by his large
Sermon to them, Acts 7. that sweet (...), Acts 7.
or Recapitulation of the whole sacred Scripture, ( Law, Prophets and
Evangelists) even from Abraham to Christ, whom he would have applied home to
them, had not their fury withstood their conversion, even that they should have
seen him, as he did, at the right hand of God, but that they stopped him there,
with a Constructive Blaspphemy, becoming Accusers, Judges, and Executioners
all at once! presently beginning their persecution with their tongues, and
teeth, v. 54. gnashing on him with, etc. (beside the malice of their tongues)
that they could even tear his Flesh, but that their hands beguiled their
mouths, with as ready and more mortal instruments! The Jews had among them
Quatuor magna supplicia, four special sorts of torments (besides their bonds,
and scourgings, and other lighter punishments) which they had borrowed from
Scythians (the Masters of those Arts) and other cruel Heathens; as the first,
was Burning, Genesis 38.24. Dan. 3.22. The second, Casting to wild Beasts, Dan. 6.
(and St. Paul's Case supposed by many, (...), 1 Cor. 15.32.) Thirdly, Stoning,
Exodus 19, 13. And lastly, Crucifying, Luke 23.21. (as all are frequently to be
seen elsewhere in Scripture) but of all, this of stoning was most ordinary
among them, as the only Deucalion-race of mankind Vnde homines nati durum
genus! ad lapides currebunt, (says Loco citat.
St. Augustine) Duri ad duros. Presently they run to stones, hard hearts unto
hard instruments of mischief, whether for their readiness, cheapness,
fatalness, I argue not; or as the best Emblems of their flinty nature: Sed
Petris lapidabatur qui pro Petra (i.) Christo moriebatur: but with stones
destroyed they the servant of him, who was the chief Corner stone, and Rock of
his Church, Jesus Christ: an harsh and an hard act of a right stony people!
whose obduratnesse to God and man, has turned their memory into a Niobean
monument of shame (not sorrow) while Arator has inscribed this due Epitaph, --
Lapides Judaea rebellis
In Stephanu^ lymphata rupis qua crimine duro,
Saxea semper eris! -- Arator. lib. Carm. in Act.

Rebellious Judah, that did Stephen stone!
For that hard act, shall pitied be of none.
Till at length their Punishment so ecchoed their Sin, that (for their killing
of the Prophets, and stoning them who were sent unto them) Non lapis super
lapidem, inter Lapidatores. Their House was left to them so desolate, that not
a stone was left upon a stone, Matthew. 24.2. O let all their Successors consider
this, not only in Judea, but in England or where ever, that still make the
Prophets cry and sigh (and that as loud as in most times heard heretofore.)
Psalm. 44.22. only with a little cruel variation, For sheep appointed to be
slain, Pastors appointed to be starved! Think of stony Jerusalem, avoid her
sins, and so her Plagues, lest likewise the same judgment follow, and overtake
you: Temporal, your house be left unto you desolate! Spiritual, Christ saying,
You shall not see me henceforth: Matthew. 23.
And eternal, that upon you come not all the righteous blood both of Abel and
Zechariah (i.) both of Laics and Clergy! So Cajet. in locum.
Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia sanguine crevit,
Sanguine decrescit, sanguine finis erit.
Christ's blood did found his Church, and Saints increase:
Which wains in storms, yet in's Foes blood shall cease.


But now to take a glimpse of that which more particularly concerns us, observe
St. Stephens behavior in his suffering, an excellent Pattern to reflect on, at
our deaths; made up of Piety and Charity: a man of an high Character, and and
that by the pencill of the Highest, Acts 6.55
Full of faith and power, and of the Holy Ghost, v. 55. a man of fervent
Prayer, Humiltiy, Reverence, miraculous Patience and forgiveness; all evidenced
in his Christian Deportment. First, his Faith, through his eye, S. Stephen
steadfastly looking up into heaven (there saw blessed visions even before his
death, while here on earth) saw Christ standing at the right hand of God. Mark
that posture of encouragement, our Creed Article tells us of Christ sitting
at the right hand of God; but our St. Stephen here sees him standing, (i.) in a
readiness of assistance, and defense: And if Christ thus stand with his
suffering servants, who shall withstand their happiness? but that as the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, even so also shall our consolation abound
through him, 2 Cor. 1. Prayer is all his shield, v. 59. Calling upon God (He
who is invited to the Fountain, needs not go to the streams) nor using Lord
alone, a name of power, but through Justice not of willingness: and therefore
adding Jesus. Dulce and salvatore nomen, the saving name of Mercy. The good
Angels and blossed Saints in Heaven are willing but not able; uncharitable men
on Earth neither of them. Only Christ is both, and therefore invocated here.
Able because Lord, willing because Jesus. Quem in coelis, quem in terris? Psalm.
73. Whom then have I in Heaven? etc. His Charity's extensive, yet wisely begins
at home (would all men would do so for spiritual charity) He takes care to
recommend his soul to the right owner, Col. 3. Lord Jesu take thine own into
thine own custody (Souls then survive the bodies (in spite of Atheists who
think, but what they wish) and are immediately determined, in their state of
Bliss or Misery, in spite of other Heretics. St. Stephen here, quite contrary
to most, is all for his soul, and nothing for the body. For alas! Quid proderit
mundus? Matthew. 16.26.
as our blessed Lord says, Matthew. 16. etc. the soul being of more price then
all; were there as many worlds as Empedocles and Democritus imagined, Laertius
in vita Democriti.
(i.) Thousands. Save This, and save all, and so the contrary: according to
that Dutch Proverb (one of the wholsomest things I ever heard of from them)
Goods lost, nothing lost; Credit lost, much lost; Soul lost, all lost! Next
unto Faith in God, he adjoyneth Love to Men (the best evidence in Foro
exteriori) without which all the rest had been but (...), a tinkling, 1 Cor.
13.3.
not a well-tuned Cymball. But He, a true Disciple of his great good Master,
Luke 23.34. Qui pendebat and tamen petebat (as Augustine sweetly) who as he
hung upon the Cross prayed, Ignosce pater, etc. So this holy Saint forgives his
enemies, and that is more then to give; he that gives, does it Desuo, of his
goods; but who so forgives, gives De se, something of himself: yet more, he
prays for them, though enemies, mortal enemies, and in hot blood, when he
scarce had any time to think of his friends. Lord lay nt, etc. more sorry for
them, Sermon. 5. de Stepha.
then for his own ruin, (says St. Augustine) because eternal death followed
their impiety; but his Death, eternal life. And was not this the Apex, the
Height of Charity?

And it is remarkable that he kneeled down when he prayed for his enemies (that
stood when for himself) showing the greatness of their sin, that could not
easily be forgiven, and therefore the earnestness of his Piety, Qui plus
illorum dolebat peccata quam sua vulnera, Cajetan in locum.
that did more lament their Sins then his own wounds! Magnus clamor, magnus
amor: his loud voice showed his great affection, and his kneeling down his
reverend gesture in devotion, the God of both parts challenges both.
Exteriores actus demonstrent interiores affectus. Dan. 6.10. Acts 9.40. cap.
26.36. Luke 22.41.
In praying, either stand as a servant before his master, or kneel as a subject
to his Prince. Daniel prayed kneeling, so St. Peter, so St. Paul, so Christ
himself.

And the Centurists acknowledge this gesture the most ancient and most useful
in all sacred solemnities, in all Ages among Christian Congregations:
Magdeburgenses centuria secunda.
And therefore not to kneel, (except in case of corporal infirmity) argues
either Ignorance or Arrogance, or some other worse infirmity of Mind. And
herein it is, Saint Hierom so commends Asella for devotion, Epist. ad Marcellum.
that her knees were grown Brawny, like the knees of Camels, with her pious
Geniculation. Saint Stephen (you see) here used both postures, and kneeling,
for his most earnest and last prayer. Loco citato.
Wherein he was heard (says Augustine) Si Stephanus non sic orasset Ecclesia
Paulum non habuisset: For if St. Stephen had not thus prayed, the Church had
never had St. Paul a Convert. And Fulgentius says, whither St. Stephen went
before, being slain with stones, thither St. Paul followed, being helped with
his prayers. And when he had thus spoken, he fell asleep. Such and so precious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints; asleep in respect both of
Rest, and Resurrection: Graves are grown but Isa. 57.2.
Beds, and Churchyards (...), (i.e.) sleeping places; so here, like Jacob, his
pillow is of stone, whereon lying down, as well as if on Down, Says Damianus
Sermon. de Steph.
he takes rest, and fell asleep. Foelix somnus, it was an happy sleep, being
joined with such rest, that rest with pleasure, that pleasure with eternity.
Thus blessed St. Stephen, as Nissen observes, Oratione de Stephan.
(esteemed the Ring of his persecutors, with which he was enclosed, as his
Crown, and every stone flung at him as a precious one, as a precious Diamond:
so that, that of David might be applied to him, Psalm. 21.3. Thou have set a
Crown upon my head: I, a Crown of Proto-martyrdom upon his Name: and on his
Soul a Crown of Glory. Anno Christi 35.

POEM 7.
STtout Champion of the Truth, who by Dispute
First Rescu'dst it, and did her Foes confute
By Dint of Argument irrefragable,
Which they, to Answer or resist unable,
To harder motives do themselves betake,
Even Threats and Stones (but vain) thy Faith to shake:
Who So through Sphaeres transparent, Christ does Ey,
Begins blessed visions here, nor fears to die.
Captain of Martyrs Thou did lead the van,
Of that same Noble Army, you began
To seal with blood the Christian Faith's defense,
Teaching us to take Heaven by violence:
Thy Soul breathed forth in Charitable groans,
Returned a shower of Prayers, for one of Stones!
Therefore blessed Saint, It Is but a due Renown,
Thy Name and Day, wear the chief Martyrs Crown:
Vouchsafe us, the like Heavenly Visions Lord,
That we to Thee may Tongues, Hearts, Lives afford;
And for thy sake, in mean time, while we live,
May those that stone us, like this Saint forgive.
The COLLECT PRAYER. The Epistle. Acts 7. from verse 55. to the end.
The Gospel. Matthew. 23. from verse. 34. to the end.

Grant us, Lord, to learn to love our enemies by the example of thy Martyr St.
Stephen, who prayed for his persecutors to Thee which live and reignest now
and for ever, world without end. Amen.

depiction of Saint John the Evangelist with books and eagle S. JOHANNES.
It Was Eagle sighted John yt best could pry,
and search into ye mistigue trinity,
earth to ascend, and darkness to fetch light
from heaven, is strange: yet like such was his flight

The Plate here.

Upon the Festival of St. JOHN the Evangelist.
DISQUISITION 5.
THis St. John was one of the sons of Zebede, and had at length (for better
reasons) as much as his Mother asked for him; Matthew. 20.20. Chap. 4. 18.
he was the brother of James, surnamed the Great; where, by the way, take
notice how Christ at first made choice of Brethren, as Matthew. 4.18. Simon which
was called Peter, and Andrew his brother: So afterward, Simon and Jude
brethren, sons of Alphaeus: and here John the brother of James. Hereby
prudently providing against Schism and division, both by corporal and
spiritual correlation: For (what ever it would have been in That) sure in this
Age, one of them had been too little to prevent it. We shall here reflect upon
this Saint first as a Disciple while abiding with his Master; and then as an
Apostle, sent out with Commission from him, St. John his double Notion.
both which I take to be sufficiently distinct Notions. First, as a Disciple,
for so He oftnest styles himself through his Gospel, and it is exemplary
humility, not terming himself a Master in Israel, though one of the first
Magnitude; but a Disciple, yet with some Emphasies, The Disciple, and with a
quem dilexit, whom Jesus loved, John 21. not only one of his Triumvirate,
admitted to Mount Tabor, John 21.7:
Matthew. 17.2. but even the most eminently beloved Disciple, at least Extensive
as the School speaks) though intensively He bespake all of them alike, Aquin.
tom. p. 1. Quaest. 20. Ar. 3.
John 15.9. As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you, Continue in my
love. Which sure St. John did eminently (being the last at the Cross, and the
first at the Sepulcher) besides his amiable sublime graces, and coming unto
Christ so young: for which 'twas certainly, that Christ showed more signs of
favor and familiarity to St. John, then to the rest: For he is said to have
leaned on his breast at Supper; and when St. Peter and all his other fellows
were silent, only he durst ask, Lord, John 13.24.
which is he that betrayeth thee? John 13. When the Eagle broods (says
Plutarch) the Chick that comes of that Egg that lies nearest her heart, is
best beloved of her; and so here, Coloss. 2.3.
our St. John leaning on that breast (in which are hid all the treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge) may well gratefully acknowledge himself honored, with
the Title of the Disciple whom Jesus loved. Whereof his fellow- Disciples had a
kind of jealous emulation, which our Savior checked in Peter, John 21. (the
Dialogue is obvious in the words foregoing) where St. Peter neglecting the
charge given himself both as to life and death) is curious touching St. John,
John 21.19.
What shall this man do? to which Christ's Redargution is, If I will that he
tarry, etc. What is that to Thee? etc. teaching him and all Excentrick Spirits,
to move in their own Sphere, not to examine others, but their own employments,
1 Cor. 1. 1 Cor. 1.25. c. 7.20. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
See to your own calling, and Let every man abide in the same calling wherein
he is called, studying to be quiet, and to meddle with his own business, 1 Thessalonians. 4. (Seasonable cautions for this Age, so over-full of Bees, and Apes!)
all these being parallels to that of Christ, What is that to thee? Confining
all to their professions, and that in all matters Theological, Ecclesiastical,
Political, moral, Oeconomical; for each of them may say each one of another
Function, Quid tibimet? What is that to thee? for neither of them must (...), 1
Pet. 4.15.
as St. Peter's word is, Play the Bishop in another man's Diocese. For What is
that to thee? Advising on the contrary, to do good unto all men, Gal. 6.10.
especially, etc. For else it is easy for the wisest to mistake, as the
Disciples here did that speech of our Savior, If I will that, etc. How
heedfully had we need hear, Heming in loc.
and read the Scriptures? as one notes, when so many Disciples are mistaken,
apprehending an absolute Affirmative in a conditional proposition, If I will
that, etc. as the Vulgar Translation corruptly taking (...) for (...), If for
so, without any reason or similitude, and therefore modest St. John here
retracts that error, that went abroad among the brethren in the same 23. (as
some do that translation) no man so denominated from grace (as our St. John)
will promise himself an immunity from suffering, and especially in such an Age
as he then lived in, or we now. And that (...) is generally interpreted of
Christ's coming in that famous execution on the Jews often mentioned in the
Gospel, Matthew. 23. and 24. Luke 19. and John 21. which John survived thirty
years, continuing not only till Titus his time, but through Domitians and
Cocceius Nerva's, to Trajans reign, above an hundred years after Christ's birth;
and so 30 years after this coming of Christ was past, and by what Irenaeus adds
of the Seniores qui non solum Johannem viderint, sed alios Apostolos. And it is
probable that some other of the Apostles lived to that time of Trajan also.
That St. John wrote this Gospel at the entreaty of the Bishops of Asia,
constituted by him, is affirmed by Eusebius. And yet for all his modesty there
was somewhat in it (what ever fell out afterward, as will appear anon) he was
in present, the Saul among his brethren. -- Inter Delphinas Arion, highest in
his Masters affection; and records it thankfully as his most honorable Title,
and Fount of all his graces, that he was the Disciple whom Jesus loved, and
leaned on his breast. Nay, St. Ambrose says, that Christ too leaned on his
bosom, saying, there was Sinus triplex, a threefold Bosom, whereon Christ did
rest, (who else had not whereon to rest his head viz. in Patre Divinitas, in
Matre virginitas, in Evangelista Johanne Fides, in the bosom of his Father
rested his Deity, in his mothers bosom rested his virginity, and in St. John
Evangelists bosom rested his faith and confidence, bequeathing his dear Mother
to His sole care and affection, and Him to Hers, as a mutual legacy, John 19.
And thus having seen him as a Disciple most beloved, let us now take one view
of him as an Apostle publishing the Name and Faith of his dear Lord and Master.
It Is said Ephesians. 4. that Christ ascending, Ephesians. 4.11.
gave some to be Aposles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Doctors, according to his will, distributing to every man a
several gift. 1. Cor, 12.11. St. Peter was an Apostle, but not an Evangelist;
St. Mark an Evangelist, not an Apostle; St. Matthew both these, yet no Prophet;
St. Augustine a Doctor, but no Martyr; St. Laurence a Martyr, but not a Doctor.
But behold (says one the beloved Disciple was Portan and Petrus de Palude.
all these: in his Epistles an Apostle, in his Apocalypse a Prophet, in his
Gospel an Evangelist, in his Faith and Sufferings a Confessor, in his preaching
a Doctor, St. John the Divine: in his chastity a Virgin, in his readiness and
will to suffer, a Martyr, yea the Protomartyr (says Osorius) suffering
inwardly when Christ outwardly, Osorius in locum.
(St. Stephen will spare him the Figure of a Sympathy) Amans quippe plus in
amato, quam in seipso patitur: ('it is an high complement that a lover suffers
more in his beloved object, then in his own person suffering, yet St. John both
did, and suffered much in his own person also: 1. The same is he that testified
and wrote these things, John 21.24.
v. 24. and is for his piercing sight into high mysteries, well Emblem'd by the
Towering Eagle, Jovis ales right, his quil writing the Divinity of Christ,
against Ebion and Cerinthus, early Heretics, and Grandfathers of Arrianisme,
as that is of Socinianisme and later errors: beginning his Gospel before
Moses, or the beginning of the world, and ending his Revelation beyond all
Historians, beyond Time it self, or the end of the world. He chiefly lived at
Ephesus, where he wrote his Gospel in the 69. year of Eusebius. Niceph. at the
desire of the Asian Bishops by him there constituted.
Christ, whence the neighbor Churches of the lesser Asia were (by that
division made by the Apostolical Synod, Acts 15.) allotted to his Visitation;
for his diligence wherein, and testimony to the truth, he was by the
Pro-Consull of Asia transported to Rome, to suffer about the 90. year of
Christ, where being miraculously preserved in a Chaldron of scalding oil,
Alsted. Chron. Eusebius. Ec. Hist. l. 3. c.
as the three Children in the fiery furnace, he is banished by Domitian into
Patmos, a disconsolate Isle of the Aegaeansea, where the defect of earths
accommodations was advantagiously supplied with heavenly Revelations, and
afterward recalled by Cocceius Nerva home to Ephesus. Cocceius Nerva.
Though some write that he suffered after under Trajan, yet the most and best
write that he died there of an Apoplexy, Anno Christi 104. aetatis 102. Happily
determining the forementioned ambiguity of our Saviors words, according to the
Disciples aprehension of them, Tarrying till his Master came, not by any
violent, but a natural dissolution. And now as Aristotle said, Metal. l. 2. c.
1.
if Timotheus had not been we had not had so much sweet music, but if Phrynis
(which was his Master had not been, we had not had Timotheus: So here, if St.
John had not been, we had wanted much of the Evangelical Harmony; but if our
great Master Jesus had not been gracious to his Church, it should not have had
such a John to ornament it; and therefore in this holy Saint, as in all others,
we honor and praise through the Servant, but his Lord and Master.

POEM. 8.
Celestial Herald, that do draw Christ's Line
No lower then from Pedigree Divine;
And like a Towering Eagle, from above
To drooping Man, describ'st the God of love;
Of love to all, but Thee above the rest,
Because so young, Thou leaned'st on his Breast;
As thou his Honor, so we thine make known,
Must love Thee twice, for His sake, and thine own:
Who soonest comes to Christ, does longest stay;
Nor shall the boiling Oily Chaldron slay
Whom Christ but hints should tarry till he came.
Or Nature summond in her Masters Name:
Though Torture spare him, yet will not Exile;
Malice extrudes him into Patmos Isle!
(What must the Best expect! yet sees he more
There, then in's Asian latitude before;
Into that Angle of the Earth being hurled,
He sees an ample Prospect of the World,
Of Heaven and Earth, and Seas, Hell not concealed;
All future Times and Actions there revealed:
Deserv'dly then of all the Saints thy Birth
We celebrate with Christ's, throughout the Earth,
(His early and late fruit) the rest we sing,
Their Deaths, as Waiters on him Suffering!
Lord, though our Zeal to thee make no such have,
Draw and accept of us among Thy last.
And while ware banished to this Isle of clay,
Do Thou to us thy saving Truths display.
The COLLECT PRAYER. The Epistle 1 Jo. 1. from v. 1. to the end.
The Gospel Joh. 21. from 19. to the end.

Merciful Lord, we beseech thee to cast thy bright beams of light upon thy
Church, that it being lightened by the doctrine of thy blessed Apostle and
Evangelist John, may attain to thy everlasting gifts, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

UPON The Festival of Innocents Day.
DISQUISITION 6.
WHy the Feast of Christ's Nativity is attended with These Saints above the
rest, St. Stephen. St. John, and these blessed Innocents, Johan. Raulin. Ser.
2. de beat. Innocen.
is handsomely conjectured by some, to show his coming into the world for all
sorts of men, of what degree or age soever, and by These severally represented;
or happily, that these here applied rather then other, as having more fulfilled
that of Christ, Mat. 16. Mat. 16. 24.
By taking up the Cross and following him. There being three kinds of Martyrdom
in Christ's Cause (as St. Bernard notes) the first, Voluntatis and operis, both
in will and act, as that of St. Stephen. 2. Voluntatis sed non operis, in will,
Ser. de Innocent.
but not in Act, as that of Saint John. The 3. Operis sed non voluntatis, in
act, but not in will, as this of the Innocents: And sorasmuch as St. Stephens
Martyrdom comes nearest unto Christ's, his Festival is next unto him: and in the
2d. place, St. John's, and in the 3d. These suffering Innocents, all three
making Christ, as in Cant. 5.10. white and ruddy, the chiefest of 10000.
Candidus in Johanne, Rubicundus in Stephamo, electus ex millibus, Ludolp. de
vit. Christi. p. 1. c. 13.
in Innocentibus; And it was impossible to Christen the Day with a Name of a
more vast Reputation, then Innocence: which dares not signify any thing here
below, but the state of the first Man, and that of Children: and sure, he must
have little of man in him, nothing at all of God, the more of the Devil, that
could so break into the Circle of such harmless simplicity, and self-shielding
innocence. Yet this does barbarous Herod! but which of them? (he deserves to be
known, that he may both in person and example be abhorred!) Then not to wrong
the rest (as most do by their not distinguishing) know there were three Herod's,
and all near allied, Mat. 1.4
not only in Name, but in Blood also! 1. Herodes Antipas, that beheaded St.
John Baptist, Mat. 14. Herodes Agrippa, (brother to the former) that killed St.
James, and imprisoned S. Peter, Acts 12.
Acts 12. 3d. and this Herodes Ascalonita surnamed the Great, who was that Fox
worried these tender Lambs, an act reflecting on Christ's humanity, Mat. 2, Mat.
2.13
as being a child and forced to flee; and Herod's inhumanity, in murdering
those, that neither could, nor would have injured him! we must glance on the
first, for Christ was mainly aimed at; I, only that King of Israel; but he is
warned away by an Angel, ver. 13. Gods mercy and his Angels ministry vigilantly
attend his Children in Afflictions, Psalm. 34. and 103, Psalm. 34.7.103.13.
13. yet flight is lawful in their times of danger, Mat. 10.23. though to
Egypt, where Christ at once fulfilleth Prophesies, and gives an earnest to the
Gentiles: Exodus 4.22.
Take the Babe and his Mother: not styled the wife of Joseph, to speak her more
the Virgin, and the child named first, to hint the greatest care for him, as
most designed at, and the greatest duty to him, as most worthy; not as Son
only, but Savior to his Mother. Fly into Egypt, Christ's entertainment was so
hard at his coming into this world, as shows his Kingdom was not of it.
Beuxamis in locum.
He flies, Quia totam causam salutis nostrae occiderat (says one) If Christ
had permitted himself to be slain so young, the whole cause of our salvation
had suffered in it, his work not being as yet done, Joh. 17.4.
nor his hour come, Joh. 17. for which he came into the world. But why into
Egypt? touched before, and thither as the ne^rest opportunity, Aretius
Musculus, Maldonat in locum.
out of Herod's jurisdiction: and to show his spiritual Kingdom should be
translated from the Jews the Gentiles; o the Riches of divine mercy! that even
those places and persons that were malorum officinae, formerly the shops of
villainy, should now become Custodes filii unigeniti, ensafers of Gods only
begotten Son, instead of Persecutores populi primogeniti, opposers and
destroyers of his first born people; but non crudelitate sed credulitate
quaerendus est Christus, Christ is to be sought by faith, and not by Cruelty;
and therefore Herod found him not, for all his project with the wise men, who
were indeed too wise for him, returning an other way, God taking the wily in
their own craftiness, Job 5.13.
Job 5. and Honesty being ever the best Policy, the Mocker was mocked; he
mocked the wise men by pretending Servire, when he intended Saevire, to adore,
when he meant to devour, to worry, not to worship that innocent Lamb, as
appeared by his subtilty turned into fury, Mat. 2.16.
verse. 16. as commonly such usurping Tyrants, when they fail of their
Machiavillian Rhetoric, betake them to the Carters Logic, as here did Herod,
who was troubled much at the first news of him, verse. 3. But when he saw that
he was mocked by etc, verse 16. is all on a flame with wrath and frenzy,
fearing Christ's lineal descent from the seed of David might restore Judah her
own native Successor, Prudentius Hymn. Epip.
as the Christian Poet sweetly chants out Herod's passion. Successor instat,
pellimur,
Satelles i, ferrum rape,
Perfunde cunas sanguine.
Mas omnis infans occidat,
Scrutare Nutricum sinus,
Interque materna ubera
Ensem cruentet pusio.
Which give me leave to Paraphrase. See, see, a Successor's at hand!
That will deprive me of command,
Soldiers betake you to your arms,
And free Me from these growing harms!
Let all the young Males forthwith feel,
The force of your impartial steel!
Snatch them from Nurse, or Mothers breast,
And rock them to eternal rest!
And such as from them will not part,
Let them both suffer the same smart!
Till parents tears, and Childrens blood,
Make up but one never ebbing flood.


Thus, like another Heretales furent, he lays about him, and would not suffer
the King of Heaven and Earth, and of all the world, to reign in Jewry, Heb.
1.8.
if he could hinder it; and to that end, sends out Those that live by others
dying, to massacre all the Bethlemitish sucklings! (as Prudentius excellently)
Loco citat.
Locum minutis artubus,
Vix interemptor invenit,
Quo plaga descendat patent,
Juguloque major pugio est.
Whose swathed limbs scarce yiedled place,
For the Destroyers steel, or space
For gaping wounds, mouths without words!
These throats too narrow for their swords!


And fitted for their errand, they ransack all poor Mothers Beds, and Nurses
bosoms, making their Cradles swim with blood of Innocents! while their small
joints could scarce be handled by the cruel Murderers! and their throats too
little for the Poniards; there is an high aggravation in the number of them (at
least) irrightly recorded, The Greek tradition in the Rubric for the day, and
so the Aethiopick missals.
(...), that is, no less then 14000. whereof his own Son made up the sad
account, (as Baronius tells us out of Philo.) which caused Augustus Caesar to
fix that due proverb on him, Melius est esse Herodit poreum quam puerum; Better
be Hereds Sow then his Son. and Brocardus in his Description of the holy
Land, Macrob. Saturn. l. 2. c. 4.
points us to the very place where they were slain: Adricomius and others, to
the Chapel where they were buried, betwixt Bethlem and Bethany: to which
Prudentius has added an Epitaph. EPITAPH.
Saluete flores Martyrum,
Quns lucis ipso in lumine,
Christi Insecutor sustulit,
Ceu turbo nascentes Rosas:
Vos prima Christi victima,
Grex immolatorum tener,
Aram ante cujus simplices
Palma and Coronis luditis.
The which accept thus Rendered. Hail sweetest Flowers of Martyrdom,
Whose rising was your setting Sun!
Whom Herod's jealousy destroyed,
As Rose-buds by fierce storms annoyed.
You firstborn Christian Sacrifice,
Whose tender Flock for Shepherd dies!
Upon whose Altar as you lay,
You then with Palms and Crowns did play.


I, These were (as St. Austin sweetly) Primitiae Martyrum (as it were) the
Prim-roses of Martyrdum, early witnesses to the Lamb: Non loquendo sed
moriende, (says St. Austin) Not by speaking, but by dying: Jer. 13.15.
Yet was there a voice heard in Ramah, a cry not only of lamentation here
below, of poor robbed, and dispoil'd Mothers! but too in excelsis as (...)
signifies High, above, (that is) even in the ears of God, a knocking at the
Gates of Heaven, Jam. Jam. 5 4.
5 and that as for vengeance on their persecutor (which fell heavy afterward,
Acts 12. (...), Acts 12.23.
eaten of worms before dissolution) so likewise as a song of praise, Psalm. 8.2
Mat. 21.16.
Psalm. 8. Mat. 21. Christ surely got great praise, by the Angelick Anthem at
his Birth, Glory to God on high, etc. and great praise by St Stephen his
Protomartyr, and by St. John that same beloved Disciple (as fore-shewed) but
you see, his praise is made perfect by the mouths of these Babes and
Innocents, who here came to the Haven without knowing tempests, enjoying the
comforts of an other life, Giron. in Fest.
before they knew the miseries of this Qui prius in capitibus Corona^, Quam
capillos accepistis (as one wittily) Blessed babes that have your heads Crowned
with happiness, e're covered with Hairs: Herod's cruelty was turned by God
into a felicity, translating you, from your earthly Mothers arms, in a valley
of tears, to your heavenly Fathers bosom, in his Kingdom of Glory: It has
been a custom, and yet is, else where, to whip up the Children on this
morning, that the story might stick the closer; but this is to act it over
again in kind, by a moderate proportion! Lewis 11. Of France was so seri us a
remembrancer of this Martyrdom, that he would not be inter^upted in it by any
affairs of state how important soever. Phil. de Com.
while all then seem to condemn the literal cruelty of Herod, I wish they
may not imitate him in the Figure snatching them from the arms of their mother
Church, and from her breasts of holy Baptism; and so, as much as in them
lies, killing them spiritually! not regarding Christ's words, Mat. 19.14.
Suffer little children, and forbid them not to come unto me; Mat 19.14.
for of such is the Kingdom of heaven; or his Apostles, 1 Cor. 14. instead
then of injuring them, 1 Cor. 14.20.
become like unto them, for humility, for innocence for obedience, for
dependence; who so humbles himself as a little child, the same shall be great
in the Kingdom of heaven.

POEM IX.
A Double Prophesie's this day fulfilled,
In these young Innocents by Herod killed:
Here Is Ramah's cry, and David's song of praise,
Which from these Babes and Sucklings God did raise:
Whose early virtues, Men, for shame improve,
Their humble innocence, and Docil love;
That how so'ere our Fathers us dispose,
We be submissive, patient, meek as those;
And then though crop'd, like these flowers, e're their Prime,
Bliss shall but sooner Crown us beyond Time:
These infants, by that Tyrants raging mood,
Were baptized unto Christ, in their own blood!
And though unable yet to speak his Name,
Died the first fruits of Martyrs for the same!
Multiplied Persecution, that destroys,
Thousands of Parents lives, wrapped in the Boys!
Yet the impartial wretch spares not his own,
Better his Swine, then Son! a proverb grown:
The Fox worrys the Lambs, and it is the sin,
With which the world will end, as t'did begin!
The COLLECT PRAYER. The Epistle Rev. 14. v. 1. to the end.
The Gospel Mat. 2. ver. 13. to 19.

Almighty God, whose praise this day the young innocents, thy witnesses have
confessed and showed forth, not in speaking, but in dying, mortify and kill
all vices in us, that in our conversation our life may express thy faith, which
with our tongues we do confess, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

depiction of the circumcision of Jesus Christ The Circumcision. Luc: 2.
21. And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child;
his name was called Jesus, which was so named of the Angel, before he was
conceived in the womb.


The Plate here.

Upon the Feast of the Circumcision of Christ.
DISQUISITION 7.
A Lmighty God both before and after the fall of man; before, under, and after
the Law still manifested his will by two things especially, viz. an
understanding Mind, and a perceiving Sense: as in Paradise at first, Adam had
his word, and that witnessed by a double sign, the Tree of life, and that of
knowledge, Genesis 2.
Genesis 2. After his lapse, he had a promise, c. 3.15.
Genesis 3. and thereunto sacrifices added, as outward signs: so after the Flood,
a promise of no more Deluge, and the Rainbow a sign, c. 9.13.
Genesis 9. Arcus sine sagitta, a Bow without an Arrow, or if with any, shot
against himself in his Son; for it stands bent always toward heaven: the
promise of deliverance from Egypt, is sealed with the Pasohal Lamb, Exodus 12.
and that to Abraham, Exodus 12.
of multiplying and magnifying his seed, signalized by instituting this
Circumcision, Genesis 17. Lastly, Genesis 17. Joh. 13.16.
God giving his Son, and by him everlasting life, to believers, confirms all
with two Sacraments, as seals of his grace, viz. Baptism, and the Lords
Supper. Thus the Father of mercies has in all ages provided for man's weakness,
Psalm. 3.149.
that He might taste and see how gracious the Lord is, Psalm. 34. and therefore
those that pretend to be so spiritual, as not to endure significant Ceremonies,
and outward Rites in the Church, run a violent course, quite contrary to the
goodness of God, Apud. Martyr in Romans 4.
and the meekness of his holy Spirit, who does instruct the conceiving Mind by
the perceiving Sense, and by visible words, as Augustine calls the Sacraments;
one of which, was this of Circumcision to the Jews, and that may well appear
in a red Letter; as being their bloody Sacrament; who therefore, when they
Circumcised a child, called him -- Sponsum sanguinis, applying those words of
Zippora unto him, Exo. 4. Thou art a bloody Husband; Exodus 4.25.
because that day, they hold the child is married to the Covenant. There was in
this of the old, (as in the Sacraments of the New Testament) two constitutive
parts, signum and signaculum, both the sign, The two parts of a Sacrament
and the seal of a sacred Covenant: (not only bare badges, as the defective
Anabaptists; nor immediate justifiers, ex opere operato, Hook l. 5. s. 60.
as some others in the excess, sta non tribuunt, quod per ista tribuitur; They
do not confer, what is conferred by them.) This Circumcision here was a triple
sign. 1. Memorative of the promise to Abraham, touching his seed, his
inheritance, and the Messiah to come of him. 2. Distinctive, of the Jews from
all other people; and of the Sex, Males only undergoing it, Females yet being
within the Covenant, Reductive, as sprung from Circumcised Fathers, and married
to such husbands. 3. Prefigurative, of Baptism, and the spiritual Circumcision
of the heart. Again, as Circumcision was thus a various sign, so was it a
Seal also; a double one, on Gods part, as the Paten of Kings, for
confirmation: on Abraham's part, Ardens in locum.
as his obedience and faiths Attestation. Some note a threefold Circumcision,
viz. Carnal under the Law, Spiritual under Grace, Celestial in the Kingdom
of Glory. The first is Nascentium, good in its due time, of children, the eight
day, Genesis 17.
Genesis 17. The second, Renascentium, at all times better, of such as are born
again, and that of the heart in the spirit, Romans 2.29.
Romans 2.29. effected by the sword of the spirit (sharper then all the flinty
knives of circumcision, (...), Josh. 5.2.
Heb. 4.12. The word of God sharper then any two-edged sword, that circumciseth
not only the foreskin, but all the Faculties of the soul, the parts and
senses of the body, the eyes, Job 31.1. Psalm. 119.37.
Job 31. turns away those least they behold vanity, Psalm. 119. The ears and
lips, that they hear, or speak no guile, Ephe. 4. Circumcising the hands
against all Theft and idleness, Ephe. 4.25, 28 c. 5.4.
Ephe. 4.28. the Head from imagining mischief, and the feet from bloodshed,
Psalm. 14.6, 19.13.
Psalm. 14. Circumcising the intellect from curiosity and error, Act. 26.25.
the Will from all presumptuous wickedness, Coloss. 3.2, 3.
Psalm. 19. the affections from inordination, Coloss. 3. even the very thoughts
and imaginations, Isai. 1.16. in a word, Circumcising the whole man, cutting
off all superfluous cares of the world, and lusts of the flesh, even to that
happy Metamorphosis of the old into the new man, Ephe. 4.22.
Ephesians. 4. whence flows the third kind of Circumcision by consequence,
Resurgentium, in the world to come, when all superfluity of sin, deformity,
and corruption shall be cut off utterly, so that we may appear before the
Throne of God, without any spot in our soul, Apoc. 14.5. 1 Cor. 15.53.
or corruption in our body, Apoc. 14. 1 Cor. 15. But in this Circumcision of
Christ, which was carnal only (as needing none of the other) Three
circumstances are remarkable, the Quando, Vbi, Quare, the Time, the Part, the
Reason; the time was the eighth day, Genesis 17.
Genesis 17. ( and Christ then undergoes it, Luke 2.21.
Luke 2.21. coming not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it you see, in every
circumstance) Some say, then, as because that tender age could more easily bear
the griefs, but this is both too dubious, and too general: others say the
eighth day, Chrysostom. and Mar. in Romans 4.
because that was the time of our Lords Resurrection: so Lombard in Romans 4.
seven days, figuratively signifying the time of this present world, and the
eighth day the resurrection, wherein mortality shall be cut off with
immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53. For the Vbi: Circumcision was placed in the
generative part. Aug. in Johan. tract. 30.
1. Because the Propagation of original sin is thence traduced, Per actum
generationis. 2. As a sign of the promise, Martyr in Romans 4. Aquin. part 3.
Quest. 7. Art. 3.
both to Parent and Posterity, Genesis 17.7. 3d. ad diminutionem carnalis
concupiscentiae. Lastly, why Christ undergoes this Circumcision, Luke, 2.21.
[ut supra] more particular reasons to show he was the seed of Abraham, Heb,
Heb. 2.16.
2.16. to demonstrate he had true flesh against Manicheus; not his body
Coessential with the Deity, as Apollinaris; or fetched from heaven, Epiph.
Haeres. 30.
as Valentinus: but as Romans 1.2. Circumcised he was, ut figuram ipsa veritas
finiret, that he, who was the truth and substance, might at once fulfill and
take away the typg of Circumcision: and all this out of obedience for us, Isai.
9.6.
Isai. 9. nobis puernatus, vobis, says the Angel, expounding the prophecy,
Luke 2.11. unto you men: I, for us born, for us circumcised, Gal. 4.4.
Gal. 4.4. made of a woman, and under the Law, hereby giving public testimony,
that he would fulfill the whole Law, (as the circumcised is bound, Gal. 5.2.)
and that he would do all the rest for us, to make up our unwilling Faylures, so
we give but all diligence, 1 Pet. 1.5.10.
1 Pet. 1. This circumcision was the prologue of his Passion, and first rise of
Ezechiels waters c. 47. flowing above the knees, till after, it came to David's
Deluge, Psalm. 99. all the way sponsus sanguinum, Psalm. 99.1.
to keep us from, or at least to sanctifis our bloody sufferings, as is
intimated hence, Mat. 1.21.
by his consolatory and saving Name, of Jesus now imposed, Mat. 1.21. for which
all hearts and knees are obliged unto signal gratitude, Phil. 2.8, 9.
Phil. 2. whose merciful indulgence extends here to our bodies, as well as
souls, tenderly changing this sharp, into an easy Sacrament; and instead of
those knives of flint and stone (prefiguring this Corner stone) commanded,
Josh. 5. saying now but as Elisha, Josh. 5.2.
2 King. 5. to each leaprous soul, wash and be clean, and therefore if the
neglect of That so punished, Genesis 17.14.
Genesis 17.14. how much more the contempt of this more easy Seal of the new
Covenant, whereof such Children are altogether as capable, as of that old;
being indeed still but one, John 3.3.
and the same renewed Sacrament.

POEM X.
SPotless Obedience this day underwent,
The sharp pains of that bloody Sacrament;
And what could They pare off from His pure skin?
Who but Theirs that so cut him, knew no Sin:
Only to Teach us Gods Law to fulfill,
Spared not thus first, and last, his blood to spill!
Yet know, it is not the Pruning any part,
Makes a new Creature, but that of the Heart.
Since it is a day of Presents then, lets give
Our Heart to God, that it with him may live;
Or if he please to send it back again,
It may come mollify'd and cleans'd from stain:
Lord exchange New-years-gifts, for broken heart,
Vouchsafe a sound, for old, new spirits impart.
The COLLECT PRAYER. The Epistle Romans 4. from v. 8. to 15.
The Gospel Luke 2. from 15. to 22.

Almighty God, which made thy blessed Son to be circumcised and obedient to
the Law for man: grant us the true circumcision of the spirit, that our hearts
and all our members being mortified from all worldly and carnal lusts, may in
all things obey thy blessed will, through the same thy Son Jesus Christ our
Lord.

depiction of the Epiphany The Offering of the three Kings. Mat: 2.
10. When they saw the star, they rejoiced. etc.

11. And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary
his mother, and fell down and worshipped him: and when they had opened there
treasures, they presented unto him gifts, Gold, and Frankincense, and Mirrhe.

12. And being warned of God in a dream, that they should not return to
Herod, they departed into there own country another way.


The Plate here.

Upon the Feast of Epiphany or appearing of the star.
DISQUISITION 8.
SEasonably does the Church celebrate the honor of Christ's Epiphany, next
unto his Circumcision, that his glory might be manifested in the Flesh as well
as his humility. Aug. S. 30. de Temp.
And the very Name speaks the Antiquity of this Festival, and its early rise in
the Greek Church; and it is fairly Englished by the day of apparition, or
manifestation of Christ from above; that igrance might no more call it the
Tiffany, as in the Legend, or as one that bidding it holy day, said he knew not
whether 'twere a He, or a She Saint. It reflecteth on three manifestations of
our Savior (and therefore called (...). i. e. The manifestation of
manifestations. The first, Casaub. exe^. cit. 2. N. 35.
(...), being that of the blessed Trinity; all the Three Persons, as witnesses,
sensibly appearing on it, Mat. 3.16. the Father in the voice, the Son in the
Flesh and the Holy Ghost in the Dove, manifesting Christ's glory at his Baptism.
The second (...), D. Boys in Fest.
For that on the same day twelve month after his Baptism (which Baptism was
on the same day 29 years after his Birth) his Glory appeared at the marriage in
Cana, by turning water into wine, Joh. 2.11.
Joh. 2.3. and the most pertinent is this (...). This appearing of the Star to
the wise men, Three main Considerables.
and their holy Pilgrimage to Christ, Matthew. 2.10. wherein are most remarkable,
the Travelers, their journey, and their business: In the first, their
Condition and Country; In the second, their guide and Diligence: In the third,
their Bounty and Devotion. (I must rather touch, then handle each of them.)
First, their condition speaks them at once, Wise and great men: the Name then
of Magus (in that Age when Philosophers did reign) being in greater account
then that of Magnus (says Ludolph and others:) De vita Christi, p. 1. c. 11.
Magi hints their wisdom, and speaks them such among their own, as the
Philosophers among the Greeks, Scribes, among the Jews, Chaldeans among the
Assyrians, etc. e Meliore Luto, of the wisest of their country: that they were
great ones (not to mind the Friars only, Maldonat in locum.
or lesuites who somewhat modester, say they were Reguli, not Princes, but
petite Lords of some small places, like those Kings of Sodom, Genesis 14. etc. and
so sufficient initiatorily to make good that of the Psalmist, Kings shall bring
gifts: Psalm. 62.29.72.10.
but for their names coined in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, as also for their
particular Age, and several Translations, and changing of their scaene,
Constant ex pictura, sed non ex scriptura; Austin. meditat. in Festo.
it is sooner painted on a wall, then proved by the word; and therefore I pass
them, as too uncertain and ridiculous, wondering that men should be so easily
fooled, with an abused story of the wise Men. Their country in general was
Eastern, and so Heathens, the first fruits of the Gentiles, Ab orient ad
orientem (says Chrysologus sweetly;) from the East, S. 156.
they came to Him that was the East, whose name is the East, Zech. 6. Rev. 2.
Zech. 6.12. Rev. 2.8.
and hence the Ancient Christians used their posture toward the East in prayer,
burial, etc. as the Moors toward the South, and Others toward the West. Vnde
dies nascitur, inde fidei initium: Thus whence the light arises, the
dayspring of grace appeared. For the second, their Journey, it had an heavenly
Conduct, a Star (so the Scripture calls it:) what need we strain to think it an
Enthus. Theoph. in locum.
Angel with some, the Author de admirab. Scripturae.
Holy Ghost with others? I am content to think it, with Orat de nativit in loc
cit.
Nyssen and Aquinas, a new one created for this purpose, and differing in place
in the Air; in motion not circular, but like Isreal's pillar of fire: and in
brightness, shining both night and day; as the wise Poet sweetly chants the
wonder of it. Quicunque Christum quaeritis, Prudentius in Hymn. Epiph.

Oculos in altum tollite,
Illic licebit visere
Signum perennis gloriae.
Haec Stella, quae Solis Rotam
Vincit Decore, ac Lumine,
Venisse Terris nunciat
Cum carne terrestri, Deum.
You that of Christ true Seekers are,
Look up, and view this newborn Star;
In which you may discern a Sign
Of everlasting glory, shine.
This Luster has no Parallel,
But does the Sun it self excel;
Lightning the sin-benighted earth
With Gods approach, in humane Birth.


Yet were they led more by an Inward then an Outward light: not as Albertus
thought, only by their skill in Astrology; but as Leo, Veritas illuminat
Magos, infidelitas obcaecat Magistros: Truth illuminateth the Wise men, while
infidelity blinded the foolish Jews, S. 3. in Festo.
whose great Doctors were like the Highway-statues, directing others while
themselves stand still: a Star is their conduct, as holding best proportion to
its object, Lux mundi, Christ the light of the world, and the bright
morning star; to the Prophecies, Number. 27. the Star of Jacob; Number. 27.14.
and to themselves, as being Astrologers, and Stars the capitals of the book of
Nature: and this in particular magnifica lingua coeli, S. 3. in Festo.
as S. Augustine calls it, the eloquent tongue of heaven; and I may add, Psalm.
19.1.
Quae enarrat gloriam Dei, that declares the glory of God, his light unto the
Gentiles. Nor was their Guide more eminent then their Diligence imitable: for
no sooner it appeared, but they followed and attended it, not sticking at the
season, though Winter; or the distance, though some hundreds of miles; or the
difficulties and dangers of it, as through craggy theevish deserts. Faith takes
no notice of discouragements, but persevereth as they did, till it come to
Christ. Where lastly, mark their Business, Matthew. 2.3.
and bate worldly Anxieties, Venimus adorare, We are come to worship him:
practical Devotion; and that devotion exemplarily evidenced in three things:
first, in prostration of the body: They fell down before him; Matthew. 2.11.
(...) a word of most emphatical humiliation: Se more canum prosternere; even
fawning and creeping like Spaniels to their master, Pardon the Metaphor, for
thence it is taken. How immodest then are those that grudge him Hat, or Knee!
Secondly, in adoration of the soul, believing, confessing, worshipping him,
verse. 3. (How these first fruits condemn the later!) V. 3.
And thirdly, both those hightned, and confirmed by an oblation of their
presents, verse. 11. Faith justifies the soul, but Works justify our Faith; as
though their piety and bounty, had been emulous of His they worshipped; who
indeed, gives every good and perfect gift, corporal, spiritual, James 1.17.
temporal; all which they return and echo, in some measure, by their former
actions: the last whereof, were not only enriching treasures, but significant
emblemes, on Christ's part: Gold, as to a King; Frankincense, as to an
High Priest; and Myrrh, as to embalm Mortality: as the Christian Poet sings;
Hic pretiosa Magi sub Virginis ubere Christo, Prudent. Enchirid.

Dona ferunt Puero, Myrrhaeque and Thuris, and Auri;
Miratur Genetrix tot casti ventris honores,
Seque Deum genuisse, Hominem, Regemque supremum.
The Wisemen (here) choice treasures do dispense
To Christ and Mary; Myrrh, Gold, Frankincense:
While she is astonished at this glorious thing,
A Maid, at once, to bear God, Man, and King.


On man's part, the Gold of Faith, the Incense of Prayer, and the Myrrh of
mortified affections. To close up all, the Church this day bespeaks Thee,
Reader, in her Master's language, Go, and do thou likewise: seek Christ by the
guidance of the Star, i.e. the light of his Word: offer the three gifts; thine
Alms, Prayer, and Fasting; which respect God, thy Neighbor, and thy Self: and
then return to thy Country, walking another way, even by newness of life; and
thou shall surely find thy Savior: I say, Do thou likewise honor him with
thy soul, body, and substance, and then thou art truly one of the number
mentioned.

POEM II.
THe Eastern Sages, this day, came from far,
To worship Christ, led by a glorious Star.
None envious Distance then, ought us detain
From Him, where we may still sure welcome gain:
These, as the Earnest of the Gentiles come,
Nay they were the first fruits of Christendom,
Wise men indeed, that so their Savior sought,
And a fit guide, Them to the world's light brought.
If wise, then Travel with them, gain their Friend;
By the way good Company, and Grace at end:
Follow so heedfully your heavenly Guide,
And it will lodge you by your Savior's side.
Sweet Incense, Myrrh, and Gold they humbly bring,
Due Gifts as to a Prophet, Priest, and King;
That we might to all is Offices repair,
With pure Faith, Penitence, and servent Prayer:
Without, within us, naught too dear to bring
To Him that gives us all, an Offering.
O Star of Jacob, Royal root of Iess,
Thou Dayspring from on high, so visit us;
That we, like these Wisemen, may Thee adore,
With Bodies, Goods, and Souls, now evermore.
The COLLECT-PRAYER. The Epistle, Ephesians. 3. from verse. 1. to 13.
The Gospel, Matthew. 2. verse. 1. to 13.

O God, which by the leading of a Star did manifest thine only begotten Son
to the Gentiles, mercifully grant that we which know thee now by Faith, may
after this life have the fruition of thy glorious Godhead, through Christ our
Lord. Amen.

depiction of the fasting and temptation of Christ The fasting and temptation
of Christ: Matt: 4. Mar: 1* Luc: 4.
*12. And immediately the spirit drives him into the Wilderness.

13. And he was there in the Wilderness forty days tempted of Satan, and was
with the wild beasts, and the Angels ministered unto him.


Here the Plate.

Upon the Fast of Ash Wednesday.
DISQUISITION 9.
THis day is Tropicus Christianus, as 'twere, the Christian Tropic, or Term of
Reflection: turning the sensual career and jocularity of the year into a
Christian sorrow and humiliation: For (as Tertullian says) Qui Deum per escas
colit, prope est, ut Deum ventrem habeat: He that worships God only with
Feasts, is somewhat suspicious, of making his belly his god. This day is unto
Lent, as a fair Portal to a goodly building; and is of very grave antiquity,
carrying in its very name emblemes of Mortification, Ashes; and first putting
on us the weeds of sorrow, Genesis 3.19.
sackcloth: a strong and needful reflection on that Genesis 3. Pulvis and Cinis
es: Dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return: checking our extravagancies,
and bringing us into Job's good company, Job 42.6.
chap. 42. that being more sinful, we might be as penitent, and abhor our
selves in dust and ashes! as the Eastern manner was to sprinkle those upon the
head, Chap. 2.12.
in case of deep affliction, Job 2. whence good Christians borrowed, and as on
this day better used those ensigns of Humiliation. Now, I say, the Christian
Church first puts on her Blacks; David, S. Peter, and Mary Magdalene, being now
fittest companions for our Meditations, Not David's harp, but eyes; the noise of
his water-pipes! not S. Peter's confidence, but his penitence! not Magdalene's
sins, but her tears! Davide, nemo constantius; Petro, nemo acerbius; Maria,
nemo abundantius: then David, none ever wept more constantly, Psalm. 6, etc.
more continually, even till he had wept away his sight, and sighed away his
voice; My throat is dry, (says he) mine eyes fail! tears were his food by day,
and his bath by night! then S. Peter, no man ever mourned more bitterly, with
greater compunction of heart, (...), bitterly! then Mary Magdalene, none ever
wept more, for the time more abundantly, even till she almost actuated
Jeremiah's wish, her eyes turned rivers, and her head a fountain! her locks, by
a just penance, of nets becoming towels for the feet of Christ. Quos secutus es
peccantes sequere poenitentes: this day calls on thee, to follow those in
penitence, whom perhaps thou have outgone in wickedness. Hic fluxus oculorum,
ne post haec stridor dentium: We fill the world with sin, and sin fills us with
sorrow, which that it may not be eternal, must be temporal: here must be a
sorrow of compunction, that hereafter none of condemnation. In odore horum
unguentorum (as one says sweetly) we cannot possibly follow Christ in the sent
of sweeter ointments, then of These examples. This is the (...). 2 Cor. 7.10,
etc.
The Other works death; this is the godly sorrow, that by Joel and his other
Prophets, God so earnestly, so often calls for. Not that he is an hard Master,
and delights in his servants affliction, but only as it is the furnace to
burnish his gold and silver, purging out the tin: and you may see the rare
effects of it, 2 Cor. 7.11.
2 Cor. 7. (and Heaven grant we may feel them too) well ushered with an Ecce;
Behold (says the Apostle) this self same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly
sort: what carefulness it wrought in you? yea what clearing of your selves?
yea, what indignation? yea, what fear? yea, what vehement desire? yea, what
zeal? yea, what revenge? in all things approving of your selves to God. Such
are the happy consequents of true Contrition; Circumspection without,
Renovation within, Approbation above, Consolation in all: yet all this
amounts not to any precedent, or encouragement for those Antique Formalites,
and bloody disciplines now used by some, (not only to the impairing of health,
but sometimes to the hastening of death also) and too far approved by some
Casuists: which if free from Delusion, if such be not half Felones de se, or
(...), my charity forbears to Vide Dr. Donne's Pseudo-martyr.
censure. While others think they have no better rise then that of Isai. 1.12.
Quis requisivit? Who has required? and no better close then that of Solomon,
Prove. 19.29. Flagellum sequitur flagitium. Indeed, there was a laudable custom
in the Primitive Church, of a godly Discipline (used about this time) against
notorious offenders, of an open and severe enjoined Penance; that their
punishment being as public as their scandal, it might at once both reform
Themselves, and deter Others (as in her Commination, our Church prays for its
restitution, as we do now for hers) but the voluntary Humiliations were not of
that nature and severity, but only by lessening of Diet, humbling the Habit,
and multiplying of Devotions, by giving up the bodies and souls (...) a
reasonable service acceptable to God, Romans 12.1. But of what kind soever,
certainly they build on sand that lean on any such duties as a satisfaction: to
man, that may be, must be made; to God, it cannot, but alone by God and Man:
there being nothing of proportion (in the very (...) and height of them)
Arithmetrical or Geometrical; either to our numberless offenses, Mica. 6.7.
or the object infinite: Mica. 6.7. Will the Lord pleased with thousands of
rams? etc. Yet however, these duties of mortification must be performed ex
necessitate praecepti, not as the means (that is Christ's merits only) but as
commanded, Isai. 22.12.
Isai. 22. and out of conformity to Christ. 1 Pet. 2.21. who though he humbled,
yet (you know) he tormented not himself, nor did any of his Apostles do so. We
must far Crucem, non creare; i. e. bear his Cross when imposed by him, but
not make our own. We may, and now must with S. Paul (...) subdue the body, by
mortification, 1 Cor. 9.12.
and devout Abstinence; thereby disarming the strong man of the weapons that
our Flesh lends against us; who is indeed most strong, ex infirmitate nostra,
by taking advantage of our weakness. Substract we but the combustible matter,
and his fiery darts will out of themselves, and prove but as Granado's against
a wall of Adamant. Pride and Lust are the devils, not to be cast out but by
such Mortification, Matthew. 17.21.
Prayer and Fasting: of which and all other good works, I may say as S. Paul
does, Heb. 13. (not as the Rhemists, Promeretur Deus, Heb. 13.16.
but) (...) With such sacrifices God is pleased; as is exemplified in Nineveh,
and even in Ahab himself, 1 King. 21.19.

POEM 12.
WElcome sad, glad day, which old time inrouls
Among the exceeding gaudy days of souls:
For though thou be'st ordained the Body's Fast,
Yet art thou the choice spiritual repast:
The soul is gayest when the sable weeds
Of true remorse, o're-spread her blacker deeds:
Ashes and tears are the best food of Saints,
And most revive, who spiritually faints:
Then bate of wonted measures, now go less;
The- Spirit is nimbler when freed from excess:
Pour out thy Soul in prayers, thy sin in tears,
Thy tongue in such confession as God hears,
Thy hands extended too in pious deeds,
That thy Fast may feast others in their needs;
From Bowed Knees shoot thy sighs up, and all this
With Heart sincere; it is the high way to Bliss.
Who such Mortifications but home urge
Upon themselves, shall need no lit'ral scourge;
Such inward zeal renders a Soul more fair
Then all their outward weeds, and shifts of hair:
I, these suppressions more extinguish sin,
Then all vain whips can lash out of their skin:
Poor Childish satisfaction! oh how short
Of wronged Omnipotence, and Heavens Court!
Your inward medicine it is expels the pain,
Whereas all outward ostentation's vain;
Reduce then your Devotions, no more stray
But with heart-sorrow vindicate the day.
Whose Sackcloth too, resembles the black hue
Both of our sin, and sorrow to it due!
Whose Ashes equal Monitors may be
Of our Corruption, and Humility!
Whose blacks, should serve to Chastise our vain dress!
And ashes, to scour off our wantonness!
The Calf of sin that is framed by all the year
This day should Sacrifice to ashes here.
The COLLECT-PRAYER, besides three other pertinent Collects in the Commination.
The Epistle, Joel 2.12. to 18.
The Gospel, Matthew. 6.16. to 22.

Almighty and everlasting God, which hate nothing that thou have made, and
do forgive the sins of them that be penitent: create and make in us new and
contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our
wickedness, may obtain of thee the God of all mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ.

depiction of Christ riding to Jerusalem Christ riding to Jerusalem. mat: 21.
mar: 11.* Luc: 18. Joan: 12.
*7 And they brought the Colt to Jesus, and cast there garments on him, and he
sat upon him.

8 And many spread their garments in ye way: and others cut down branches of
the trees, and strawed them in ye way

9 And they that went before, and they that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna,
blessed is he that comes in ye name of the Lord.


Here the Plate.

Upon the Solemn Fast of Lent.
DISQUISITION 10.
LEnt (which is the Saxon Apellative of the Spring) is so ancient and solemn a
Fast, that, like the River Nilus, we can scarce find the head of it; of very
eminent credit and continuance in the Christian Church: we read of it both in
the Greek and Latin Fathers (though not without some difference of the several
times:) it is mentioned by Epist. ad Philip.
Ignatius and Irenaeus, two of Saint John's Scholars; by Hom. in Levit.
Origin, who lived not long after them: by Cant. 5. de quadragessima.
the famous Council of Nice, little above 300 years after Christ, where they
mention the forty days of Lent as a thing known, and long observed before
their time: by Tertullian, the first of the Latin Fathers (and perhaps too
highly:) so by Saint Cyprian his Scholar; and by that renowned Triumvirate, and
contemporary Pieties, Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Hooker, l. 5. Field, l.
3. Church.
and Saint Hierome, in their writings frequently; besides a whole Cloud of
witnesses since, even down to our own times. Some observe Jejunium triplex,
distinguishing a threefold Fast: Expectationis; the first was a Fast of
expectation; and such were those of the Jews for the Messiah, before the
Bridegroom came: Contemplationis; The second was a Fast of Contemplation. Such
as of Moses and Elias, and others, sublimating the Spirit by unclogging of the
flesh: Refrenationis; The third was a Fast of restraint, Matthew. 24.44.
and bridling in corruptions. The two former directly concern not us (only in
the figure, as to grace in present, and Christ's future coming.) But the third,
the Fast of Refrenation, we all much stand in need of, I, the best of men, the
very Apostles themselves, Matthew. 9.15.
as our blessed Lord himself told them, after the Bridegroom once was taken
from them, then should they Fast; which having him, they needed not; who on all
occasions was a bridle to their extravagancy; whose Eye only, or Word being
present, could do more in them, then all Austerity and strictest discipline in
others: yet after such example and Instruction, they are enjoined Fasting,
after Christ's departure; Then shall they Fast in those days: shall they? how
much more then need We! all whose helps are too little to restrain corruptions!
The first Command we read of laid on man after his Creation, was this of
abstinence, Genesis 2. and you know, Genesis 2.17.
the Law of Justice was given by Fasting Moses, Exodus 24. and so again restored
by Elijah, Exodus 24.18. 1 Kings 9.8,
1 King. 9. The Jews had all their weekly, Monthly, Yearly Fasts, as well as
Festivals, (as showed before) and this duty was frequent among the Prophets,
and holy Saints of God, witness David, Daniel, Esther, Judith, Esth. 4.
the Mothers of Samson and Samuel, the Ninevites, etc. And afterward the Law of
Grace was proclaimed by abstemious John, Matthew. 11.18.
Nec manducans nec bibens, Mat. 11, he and his Disciples Fasted; nor were they,
or the Pharisees themselves blamed by Christ for often Fasting, but for their
boasting hypocrisy therein. Chap. 16.16.
Matthew. 16. in such holy duties He loving cheerfulness, sincerity, and secrecy.
Ocult hominum basilisci operum; the designed eyes of men being the Basilisks of
all good actions. Moreover our blessed Lord himself by his own practice, did
canonize the sacred use of Fasting, Chap. 4.2.
Matthew. 4. fasting forty days and forty nights at the dedication of the new
Covenant, as Moses at the old. In pious Imitation whereof, not emulation, has
his Spouse the Church since derived her Quadragessimal solemnities; yet not as
necessarily imposed from that example, but voluntarily thence devoting some
such time to Christian abstinence, looking at the moral of it, and not at the
miracle, modo possibili, Jansenius de Quadrages.
(as the School) not wholly abstaining a toto, all sustentation, yet at least a
tanto, bating both of the measure, and the manner of our usual diet, Dan. 10.3.
like Daniel 10.3. I was in heaviness three weeks of days (says he) and eat
no pleasant bread, neither tasted flesh nor wine; the better to prepare our
selves for holy duties, by subjugating the flesh, and infranchizing the Spirit,
to liberal contemplations: and this is it Saint Basil intimates, when he says,
Christus noluit tentari, usquedum jejunasset, that Christ would not yield
himself to be tempted, until he had first armed himself with Fasting; yet not
as he could otherwise have incurred any danger, but thereby (says he) to teach
his Church and us what guard to stand upon; that Fasting and Devotion were the
only armout of proof, against temptation; to which end (as Ecclesiastical
History tells us) the Western Churches, Socrates l. 5. chap. 21.
Rome and others, Fasted pertres septemanas inte pasca, three whole weeks
before Easter. Qui autem in Illyria and tot a Graecia sex simul jejunant, and
quadragessimam appellant; but the Eastern Churches, all Greece, Illyrium and
Alexandria, continued this solemn Fast (as we did) for full six weeks, before
the Resurrection-Festival: and it is fit (says one) so grand a Feast, should
have such ample Vigils; and that at this time of the year especially, both for
prudent and pious reasons; now the Body best can bear it, and with most
advantage to the general increase; and it is fit sure some time should thus be
set apart at least once a year for the Soul, for each one to take an account of
himself, as well as of his shop: wherein by Fasting Prayers, and Tears (those
three heavenly companions, Genesis 19.2.
like Abraham's three Angels) to make his peace with his offended God; and none
so fit a season as this, wherein we Celebrate the Passion, Christ sufferings
for sin! the strongest motive to repentance to see their heinousness none
otherwise expiable then by the bloodshed of the Son of God! and now did the
Church humble her self with Fasting and other holy duties, that God would
vouchsafe a gracious acceptance of such as were presented by her, either by
the holy Sacraments or Ordination, both being as about this time more solemnly
performed. This was the convenient tradition of antiquity touching Lent and
solemn Fasting; not as absolutely Commanded, or accepted (of God) barely for it
self, as of some special merit in its own nature (as some strain up the pegs
too high) but respectively, and only for such ends as follow, Psa. 58.
viz. as it is a devout Handmaid both to Piety and Charity, Isa. 58. it sets the
greater edge upon our Prayers, kindles our zeal, and enableth us the more to
every good; The ends of pious Fasting.
testifies to the world our Pensiveness for sin; does as it were amerce and
punish us for former excesses, undermineth the strong holds of Satan, hardens
whom pleasure would melt; it not only relieveth, but encourages the poor to
patience, in that hardship which they see voluntary in others, out of Religious
purposes, and it checketh and admonishes sensual persons, with wholesome
examples of Frugal and severer life; lastly, by these abstemious
contemplations, we here as twere begin the life of Angels, fore taste the
sweetness of that heavenly Manna; anticipate the excellency of that life, which
we shall one day live in heaven, where we shall hunger and thirst no more,
after such outward nourishments; fed only with the beatifick vision of the
Lamb, and the Fountain of living water: yet for all this Antiquity, and
instrumental Piety of Fasting, some are cloyd with it, stomackful at very
Abstinence, and even uncivilly disgorge themselves against it, both in their
practice, and invectives! So that the Church complains with David, Iejunavit
anima, Psalm. 69.10.
my soul fasted and it was turned to my reproach! These Fast-breaking Heretics
are as old as Epiphanius his time (I might have said as Epicurus; (...),
Slow-Bellies (says the Apostle) He means not at their meat; Tit. 1.12.
but to all good inclinations belly- Gods, that think the best Feast-maker the
perfectest Saint (and especially if on an Ash Wednesday, or a Good Friday) and
yet so mere Spirit (forsooth) that all our corporal assistance to devotion,
pleases not. Epiphanius bestows on them his 73 Heresy, Epipha. 73. haer.
Haeres.
and they deserve it (you shall meet their Objections answered elsewhere) I
will not here spoil the Harmony of our speculation, with their discord. Passing
then the Adversaries, look we unto our own practice, lest some as justly
complain of us, as honest Lindanus of the other persuasion, Panoplia. lib. 5.
c. 11.
Jejunta nostra vini copia natant, and piscium varietate carnium delicias
superant! Our Fasts abound with lusty wine (says he) and with variety of
choicest fish; we outvie the luxury of fleshly delicates! Or if not so, yet are
there other abuses of this Fasting; some making it their gain, some their
Physic, some their Art, and (I hope) some their Virtue, The six several kinds.
according to the old verse, Abstinet aeger, egens, cuptdus, Fallax, gula
virtus; the sick man fasts, but it is for for want of appetite; the poor man
fasts, but it is for want of nourishment: the covetous man fasts, and it is for
want too, for want of the gift to eat of his labors; the Poet laughed to see
an Ass laden with Gold, feeding on Thistles; but a good man may mourn to see
this folly among the Sons of men! The Hypocrite fasteth too, twice a week, if
you will believe him; but that fast is a pampered body in a Pharisees dress (a
short hair perhaps, and a sour look) a mere Phantasm, an appearing unto men
to Fast. The fifth is the Gluttons Fast, whose stomach does but Arietare, play
the fighting Ram (i. e.) goes a little backward, as part of a meal, or so, to
return with the stronger Appetite. The last and best, is the Fast of Virtue and
Religion; which besides habitual temperance, is the bodi's parsimonious fare,
for spiritual advantage; and this goes still accompanied with prayer in
Scripture; Neh. 14. Act. 13.3. Matthew. 17.21.
Nehemiah Fasted and Prayed before the Lord: so Anna, so the Disciples; I,
these two together, cast out the worst Devil that is. This is that acceptable
Fast, by which God wooes his people so: Convertimini in Jejunio; to which they
should answer with David, We have humbled our souls with Fasting Psalm. 96. and
then (as Saint Austin says) they would complete each other: Augustine, Cirel,
Hierome, Chrysolog.
Jejunium orationem corroborat; oration Jejunium sanctificat: Fasting
corroborateth prayer while prayer bettereth and sanctifies our Fasting. (...)
Hippocrates his Aphorism is true on both sides: Diseases for the most part both
of Soul and Body, owe their Original to fullness and redundant humors. And
indeed, where Satan tempts one Fasting, he tempts 1000 full. Prove. 30.9. Lest
I be full and deny thee, Prove. 30.9.
and say, Who is the Lord? And, many are the Elogies of such a Fast; it is the
August, i. e. the harvest of the Soul, the tithe of our time an unbloudy
Martyrdom: such a Fast, says Cyril, is a greater Sacrifice then that of
Abraham; for that was to be done upon another Body (says he) but this upon
our own: Scutum contra adversarium (says another) it is the best Shield to
quench the fiery darts of the Devil. Fundamentum virtutum, the foundation of
all other virtues; an Oar, a Spur, a wing to goodness; as Chrysologus notes of
the Prodigal: his Fame pereo brings him to his ibo ad Patem; his hunger makes
him resolve of penitence and diligence: I will arise and go, etc. But lest
while I treat of abstinence, I glut your patience, I here enjoin my Quill
forbearance.

POEM 13.
LEnt signifies the spring, and that of Grace,
Where Prayer and Fasting keep their ancient place;
Which in a treble aspect sometime stood,
To God, our own, and to the Common good:
Gods honor below, principlly stands
In our obeisance to divine commands,
Which often woo Fasting with contrition joined,
Whereof his Church this season has designed;
That all in Penitent dejection throw
Their Souls and Bodies at his Footstool, low!
That Ioels day our sins here so lament,
As may that last and blacker day prevent!
That in Jobs ashes, and our dust abhorred,
We may once find Acceptance of the Lord:
Not as if these could satisfaction make,
Or our unprofitable service take
So far with God, as his least grain to merit,
By whose sole Promise we all good inherit;
But to demonstrate who Commands does Prize
Obedience herein, before Sacrifice.
And as Lent upward so too downward looks,
This solemn Fast sends Christians to their Books,
As other Trades; and at least, once a year
Bids them cast up Accounts, and their state clear:
And if they thrive in Grace, makes them improve
Hence more and more, in Gratitude and Love;
Or if they find decay, and debts increase,
Warns them Compound with God, now make their Peace
By Prayer and Fasts. Mourn but their own stock lost!
And with red- Ink Christ all their debts has cro'st.
Serpents your Fasting spittle kills they say,
And in the figure true, it sins does slay;
It Is your Fed-horses neigh and are unclean;
And when Jews Feast with Quails their soul's most lean!
Fuel substract ill fires will out again,
Satan shall blow his Bellows but in vain:
Whose Piety's their Food, have Angels fare;
Who Fast, and sin as fast, right Devils are!
And as it makes for soul's, so body's health;
A Friend both to the Church and Commonwealth,
The best Phylacticon against each disease,
Most spring from fullness, says Hippocrates.
And this blessed Abstinence may best be born
Now, when the Sun cheers us with his return:
And now most opportunely we give way
For Creatures to recruite their long decay;
Now then to spare earths teeming generation,
Prevents unnatural Depopulation;
And Cheers the Seas industrious patient Trade,
Whose strange varieties not vainly made!
Else while one Element suffers vastation,
The Other may multiply to In-undation!
Thus Souls, States, Bodies, treble detriment
Sustain, that slight this threefold good of Lent.
The COLLECT-PRAYER, being that for the first Sunday in Lent. The Epistle, 2
Cor. 6.1. to 11.
The Gospel, Math. 4.1. to 12.

O Lord, which for our sakes did fast forty days and forty nights; give us
grace to use such abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the Spirit, we
may ever obey thy Godly motions in righteousness and true holiness, to thy
honor and glory, which lives and reignest, etc.

depiction of Christ praying in the Garden of Gethsemane shortly before his
arrest Christ praying in the Garden. Matt: 20: Mar: 14: Luc: 22:* Joan: 18:
*41. And he gate him self from them, about a stones Cast, and Kneeled down
and prayed.

42. Saying, Father, if thou will, take away this cupp from me, etc.

43. And there appeared an Angel unto him from heaven. comforting him.

45. And he rose upp from prayer, and came to his disciples, and found them
sleeping for heaviness.


Here the Plate.

Upon Palm Sunday, being that next before Easter.
DISQUISITION 11.
THis day (for some considerations) bears away the Palm from all the rest, as
beginning the Hebdonioda magna, Sancta, poenosae (as antiquity calls it) the
great, the holy, and the painful week: the great, as being that indeed, wherein
were the most various scoenes and greatest Interchanges of our Saviors life,
and death: the holy, as that wherein our meditations should be such (in
conformity to Christ) by the apprehensions of our sins, and his sufferings: and
the painful, as that wherein was more then personated the last act of our
blessed Saviors Tragedy on the Cross, for the Mortification of our Sins: and
yet the great week, beyond all this again, for the happy Catastrophe of his
Resurrection, both for our Souls and Bodies Justification, Romans 4.2.
Romans 4. And first, this day opens a pleasing scaene, presenting us our
blessed Lord riding in triumph to Jerusalem, and that in some measure of
befitting equipage, suiting (at least) the Prophesies (if not his Majesty)
Zech. 9. yet with general Acclamations of Rex Israel, Zech. 9.9.
and gloria in excelsis, round about him, Behold thy King comes, the King of
Israel, and glory in the highest; cheerfully and with a double Hosanna
acknowledging his Godhead and Humanity, and the dignity of both; where I shall
contract your speculations unto Christ's Actions herein, and theirs, the Jews,
Saint Mat. registereth the History at large, chap. 21. where at the second
verse, Matthew. 21. verse. 2.
Christ sends two of his Disciples for the Ass and the Colt. In the very
circumstances of which Message (as well as in the substance) appeared some
glimmerings of the Deity, foretelling them those future contingencies whereof
Angels have no cognizance, but in the prospect of their causes; and likewise in
his Authoritative sending for those Beasts (whosoever was the owner) this spoke
no less then his divine prerogative; dominium despoticum (as the School
speakeh) the was the grand Master of the whole Creation, by which he might at
any time, curse the barren figtree, command the fish to be his treasurer; send
whom, and whither, and for what he pleased, with a Dominus opus habet; the Lord
has need of him; and therefore non trahendum in exemplum; such actions of our
Savior are no object of our imitation, unless we will become like the Beasts
he sent for; and that was an Ass, both as to the Prophecy, Zech. 9.
Zech. 9. etc. and as to the mystery of his taking our flesh, compared unto
such riding; and as to the Allegory of Christ's, and all true Christians
meekness, laboriousness and patience; this being laboriosum, patiens, and mite
animal; and in this sense it is good to say with David, Vt Jumentum factus sum,
Psa. 72. Psalm. 72.23.
I was even as a Beast before thee. Again it is said, an Ass used to the yoke,
verse. 5. Christ loves no Sons of Belial, i. e. such as cast off the yoke,
whether of Church or State, by rebellion, or Sacriledg; obedience to him being
better then Sacrifice: Psa. 72.23.
and too this Ass used to the yoke, may signify the Jews mancipated to the
Law, whereas the Colt whereon never man sat, till Christ now riding on both by
turns (as is observed) signified the Gentiles used to the liberty of nature:
he thus came Riding that came to save both: and now let us look a little on
their actions, wherein they are grown so officious in attending Christ, The
Jews actions.
as though they would become his Proselytes, rather then his persecutors; and
Jerusalem happily exchange her old bloody title (of stoner of the Prophets) for
an honourer of them, if not an Adorer of their Master; evidencing their
affections by flocking out in throngs to meet him; which when they did, they
cut down branches and strewed them in the way (so hot on it) as they would make
every Tree pay a tribute to his welcome. Luke 19. Mat. 21.
From the story, as described by Saint Luke 19. and Saint Mat. 21. some of the
ancient Church took occasion, as on this day, to go in procession with palms in
their hands, and to denominate it, Dominica in ramis Palmarum (i. e.)
Palm Sunday; and these Trees being Palms (though native to that country) were
nevertheless Emblems emphaticall of his victory, and patience: we too should
strew his way, i. e. our life, with flourishing virtues, breaking down boughs,
from Abraham-obedience, from Joseph-chastity, from Moses humility etc. and then
as David says, Florebit just us sicut Palma. Psa. 92. Psa. 92.12.
The righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree. Besides, as if the Trees
yielded not ornament enough, they even strip themselves to dress his way,
spreading their garments; and so should our charity to his poor Servants, like
Job; casting garment to the poor, that would make him him exchange garments
with us, even the robe of righteousness, wherewith he is clothed, as with a
garment; and then that their hands might not outact, nor their Feet outrun
their Tongues they make a consort of both sexes and all ages, distributing
themselves in roy all Method, verse. 9. The multitudes that went before, and
that followed, singing all Hosanna to the Son of Davd, Psa. 118.25.
as though it had been no other then the solemn Proclamation of the King of
Israel: for the Hosanna. Vocabulum Syriacum ex Hebraeo (...) and (...) quaeso.
Psalm. 118.25. Salvare, aut salvificare, serva quaeso, O Regem Deus-Ex optatio,
similis illi, 1 King. 4 34. Vivat Rex Solomo; as much as God save the King.
word signifies to save, and is taken, Psalm. 118.25. as a prayer for the King,
and like that 1 King. 1.34. God save the King, and this Hosanna was the cry of
both of them, the ante-nati and the post-nati. Those that went before, were the
Patriarchs and Prophets; they that followed after, are the Apostles, Martyrs,
and all pious Christians; all whose praises and gratulations make but up the
same Hosanna (either of acclamation to Christ, or apprecation to themselves;
Salva obsecro, or Glory to the Savior: the Ancients Faith and ours is the
same, though the manner of believing diverse. But alas! how soon the beams of
Popularity are beclouded? Their Sun goes down at noon (as is said in another
case) the scaene again is suddenly and sadly chaged, their acclamations turned
into accusations, their Benedictions into Blasphemies, their Palms into
Thorns, and their Hosaenna into a double Crucifige! no stone so rolling as the
mobile vulgus; it is like its gender with Grammarians; neutrum modo, mas modo
vulgus. So fluctuant and unsteady is popular affection, that David calls it
madness, and parallelleth it with the Seas tumultuousness Psalm. 65.7.
; and there is but one hand only that can still them both; and therefore let
him caution how far to trust it, Psalm. 118. 118.8, 9.
Trust in the Lord, cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils, etc. see
the instability of earthly favor (and learn to scorn it) how aguish the temper
of the many-headed monster, against which, of all beasts, make use of your
Letany, Libera nos Domine; their Magnificat is soon turned into a wronged sense
of venite exultemus! as our Savior this day found (and we have often seen!)
who was never in any great honor all his life, but twice; externally had but
two cheerful days; one was that of his transfiguration, yet there he talked
with Moses and Elias of his death, whereby that was sowred! and here he is
going to his Death indeed, and weepeth even in the midst of his glory! Luke
19.41. and this honor continued but a very little while, Luke 19.41.
so slippery a Pinnacle is the bosom of a multitude, a reed shaken with the
wind; nay like the wind that shakes it! for they that so admired him in the
morning, would none of them vouchsafe him a lodging at night, Matthew. 21.17.
Matthew. 21. fain to go back to Bethany; their affections cooling faster then
ere before they kindled, till their fire became a frost! they that even now
cried him up as the King of Israel, soon after cry louder, We have no King but
Caesar; and they that erewhile cut down boughs to strew his way, soon after
cut down a Tree to hang him on, the cross, the curse! and those that cast their
Garments, now soon cast losts for his! So that the Church, as by her devotions
on it appears, may well call this the passion-Sunday, as being but one step
short of Calvary.

POEM 14.
What means this Multitude? say, what is the News
With this strange concourse? it is the King of the Jews
Inauguration sure; look how they throng
As they to swear Alleagiance to Him, long:
Their Love out-runs their patience; they contend Whose Duty shall him first
and most attend;
Jerusalem runs out of 't self as twere,
To meet him by the way, and greet him there;
The Trees are clambred, and each breaks his Bough;
Nor have their numerous Palms branches enough
To dress his way, their Garments too they strew
To fill the Ostentation of their show.
Mean time behold his humble highness pass
On the meek emblem of a sluggish Ass
To fulfill Prophesies, and meekness teach,
If we would learn, when word and action preach.
Thus Equipag'd they wait on him to Town,
Where of all sorts, what hurrying up and down
To have a sight of him? the windows packt
With Female gazers, He their fair object:
(Somewhat of holy Austin's chief desire,
To see Christ in the flesh ere they expire.)
Now all the way as this King passed along,
What Acclamations both of old and young?
Children their cries into a treble raise,
While the Aged chant the Basis to his praise;
Ages and sexes both in Consort sing,
Jerusalem does with Hosanna's ring.
So should we deck the places Christ frequents,
With inward praise, and outward Oruaments;
All this was right and due, what his desert
Challenged not only from their hand, but Heart,
And from ours too; but both prove Jews! alas
What venomous Serpents lurk in pleasant grass?
All these are holy frauds, in this sweet Calm
A storm wrapped up, and snares in every Palm!
What vanity! what danger! O what Death
Sculks in the loose applause of vulgar Breath!
This very day Christ's passion-week began,
It Was but the Preface to behold the man!
Thus having heard how they their King proclaim,
Next see his Coronation by the same;
Sit but and hear the tragic muse now sing
How these feigned Saints us, d a true Divine King!
The COLLECT PRAYER. The Epistle, Phil. 2.5. to 11.
The Gospel, Mat. 26.1. cha. 27.57.

Almighty and everlasting God, which of thy tender love toward man, have sent
our Savior Jesus Christ, to take upon him our flesh, and to suffer death upon
the Cross, that all mankind should follow the example of his great humility:
mercifully grant, that we both follow the example of his patience, and be made
partakers of his resurrection, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord.

depiction of the Crucifixion The nayling to the Cross. mat: 27* mar: 25 Luc:
23 Joan: 19
*33. And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a
place of a skull,

34 They gave him vinegar to drink, mingled with gall: and when he had tasted
thereof, he would not drink.

35. And they crucified him. etc.


The Plate here.

Upon Christ's Passion, commonly called Good-Fryday.
DISQUISITION 12.
AS an affectionate and Loyal Wife, that has had her most indulgent Husband
wronged, wounded, murdered! tells it ever after, with Tears and sorrow, to
her Friends and Neighbors; So likewise does the Spouse of Christ, As in the
Prophets Canticles, Gospel, and Apocalypse.
the Church, in these her solemn Anniversaries, story to the world her
Welbeloved's Passion; How Sponsus Ecclesiae, Sponsus Animae, that Bridegroom of
the Church, and of each pious Soul, was scourged, thorned, wounded crucified!
and once brought forth by Pilate, (as by Marcus Antonius, sometime the mangled
Body of Caesar) with an Ecce Homo, Behold the man! Bern, in Passionem. John
19.5.
Quotidiana lectio Passionis recordatio: indeed our Saviors Passion should not
only be an Annual, but even a Christians daily Contemplation; this
Christ-cross-row should be our constant Lesson, which we should Read (says
Ludolphus) ad minus septies in die, seven times a Day at least; Ludolphus de
Vitae Christi in Johan. 19.
it being Liber Vitae, a Book of Life to us, although of Death to Christ;
prefigured in Sampson, who was ploughed against by his own Heyfer, and as it
were kissed into the hands of his malicious enemies, who having first cruelly
tortured him, by putting out his eyes, Judge. 14.21.
and binding him with Fetters of Brass, they bring him forth afterward in a
general conflux, led in a ridiculous manner, to exercise their wits and
spleens! And here behold the Body of that Figure! the substance of that shadow
Christ, the true Nazarite and Champion of our Souls, betrayed also by one of
his Bosom, by his own familiar Friend, too familiar so to kiss him into
bloody Hands! who having inhumanly scourged him! bloudily crowned him! and
ridiculously clothed him! they next add scorn unto their Tyranny, bringing Him
forth into the clamourous throng of his insulting adversaries, to be the
subject of their scoffs and fury! Ecce homo! Behold the Man! For that is the
most contracted passage, of this main ground of Christianity, John 19.5.
diffused through both Testaments (the Center of the whole Circumference;) yet
like a curious Perspective, showing the most ample view of Him, even from his
Cratch to his Cross! all the while that he was Man -- Ecce homo! This Usher
going along with him as Ruth and Naomi. Ruth 1.16.
Wheresoever is this Man of sorrows, there is likewise this same Ruthful Ecce!
Behold the man! which I may call a safe, and inoffensive Crucisix, (to be worn
not so much in the Eye or Ear, as in the Bosom, in the Heart:) lively
representing our dying, yet ever-living, our life-giving Savior, to each
faithful Soul: Behold the man! Despective loquendo (faith Ludolphus) vel
admisericordiam provocando. Pilat spoke this in part despisingly, Ludolph. de
vita Christi in loc.
and partly (says he) to move the Jews to pity. Ecce homo! as well it may
bear either sense, either a Qualm of Pity, or a Belch of Envy! St. Augustine
is for his pity (whether raised from any Justice in himself, as seems, verse.
4. or from his wifes caution, it matters not) but that they are words of
compassion, he argues, Behold the man! Vt ejus ludibria inimici biberent and
ulterius sanguinem non sitirent. St. Augustine.
He here cried out to them, Ecce homo! Behold the man! that they might satiat
their malice on his Reproaches, and so thirst no further after Innocent blood!
Si Regi invidetis, jam parcite, quia dejectum videtis, as much as if he had
said, If you envy or fear his being a King, yet be appeased, now seeing him
debased thus below the form of a servant! Non clarus imperio, sed plenus
opprobrio! not swelled with any Ambition, but even like to burst with Grief!
Not glittering with pomp, but sordid with abuses. Fervet ignominia frigescat
invidia, (as that sweet Father warbles on) since then he frieth in such a fiery
trial! let now your Envy cool, (says he and be extinguished. Videte caput
perforatum! faciem consputam! corpus laceratum! look well but on his boared
head! his smeared face! and furrowed body! and see whether he be not likelier
for a Grave then a Throne! Ecce homo! Behold the man! Yet all this is not
enough for Jews, or Jewish spirits! And therefore Venerable Bede, and others,
are for the later, Beda in locum.
and that these words were a Belch of Envy: (whether from fear of Caesar, or to
please the Jews, not much material) and they prove it by the close: Nam quem
absolvit Judicio, crucifigit ministerio. For whom he clears in word, he does
condemn in action. I find no fauls in Him, take ye Him and crucify him! Ecce
homo! Behold the man! so that all the washing of his hands, though he rubbed
neyer so hard, would hardly ever fetch out the steins of this Blood from his
Heart! Behold the man! But here not to build a Mindus ( sorrow loving no
descant, and being but an ill Methodist) I shall briefly resolve this subject
into these 3 circumstances, (reserving the Ecce toattend the Application, if
not rather carrying it along with us all the way) viz. The Quis? the Quid? the
Quare? and consider the Person, the Act, and the Reason of it: Who it was? What
it was? and why it was Christ suffered? All wrapped up in this Ecce homo!
Behold the man!

First for the Quis. Who? as to his being the Son of God, is answered with
another Quis? another Question, Isai. 53. Quis enarrabit? Isa. 53 8.
Who shall declare his generation? Not the Tongues, or Quils, of Men, or
Angels! as he is Aquila in Nubibus, St. John's Eagle in the clouds: Yet may we
look upon him, as Vermis in pulvere, David's worm in the dust, and outcast of
the people. Though we cannot reach his Deity, yet as this Text inviteth, we may
behold the man! And so indeed was he too plainly seen by the eye of an
oppressive world Vir dolorum, no sooner man, then center of calamities, one
acquainted with Griefs! His only Intimates and Familiars, his inseparable
companions! Thus as in relation to his sufferings (our business here) this
word most particularly answers the Quis? with (...), Behold the man! Man, and
Son of Man, our Saviors usual compellation, John 8. and frequently elsewhere,
the Son of Man: and that for weighty Reasons; John 8.28.
As first, to strengthen his Disciples Faith, Whom say you that I the Son of
Man am? Secondly, to demonstrate his Humanity, as his Miracles did his
Divinity: And here most properly Man, as being Passive only in his Human
Nature. Thirdly, called Man, to show Christ was not ashamed of our Infirmities;
but, as the Prophet speaks, has born them, and our sorrows! meaning all those
infirmities that are painful without sin; but none of those that are sinful
without pain, as Lombard well distinguishes. Lombard. 4. Distinct.
And yet withal he is Man with an Article, that imports an Emphasis (...),
(i.e.) among men, as Demosthenes among Greek Orators, or as Tully among the
Latins, or Homer among the Grecian Poets, or Virgil amongst other. The Man
(...), by a Figure of Excellency, Behold the Man! a- Dicier Hic est. Christ
here Emphatically styled Man and by a transcendent singularity above all
others: Not like ordinary men propagated in sin original, and by a double
Parentage; This spotless Lamb having in Heaven no Mother, and on Earth no
Father: No, nor like Adam in his best state, with a Posse labi, with any
possibility of falling into actual. But (...), Heb. 2.17.
the Man in all things like us, but that which is nothing, sin excepted, Heb.
2. It Is remarkable, that none is called Son of man in Scripture, except
Daniel once. But the Prophet Ezekiel, and He so, Dan. 8.17.
near an hundred times, as being more conversant with Angels, and Diviner
Revelations. How much more Christ in that regard, here styled emphatically,
Behold the man! Nor yet is this all his Excellency, He was Innocens,
Benefaciens, Rex, Dei Filius, etc. all easy to dilate on (I can but name them)
He was innocent, and declared so by his Judge: Insons ante Reum, the Dove of
Innocence, the Lamb without blemish, the true Nathaniel: He was the Universal
Benefactor of the world, to all parts doing good, according to their several
Receptivities. He was a King, acknowledged not only by the Scriptures, but also
by his enemies at his Crucisixion, by his Title on the Cross, etc. He was the
Son of God, testified by miracles on earth, and thrice at least by a voice from
heaven, and the Devil himself was tormented to this Truth, Matthew, 8.29. Behold
the man, that was the sum of the whole world both God and Man.

And all this Excellency of Person does in finitly highten the indignity of his
Sufferings, which are the next Considerable, the Quid? What this person
underwent? But soft, let me not promise more then I can perform, alas! more
then can be performed! This being Infandum scelus, infandique dolores! on the
Jews part a wickedness unutterable; on Christ's part sorrows inexpressible! and
therefore fitter here to be Effigiesed like sacrified Ipbigenia, with
Agamemnon's veil of silence! How hard the holy Penmen labor here for
Metaphors? Psalm. 129.3. Isai. 53.7. Romans 4.25. Luke 22.47. Phil. 2.8.
He was ploughed upon, says David; Dumb before the shearers and Butchers,
says Isaiah; given up, says St. Paul, (...), Given up of God, betrayed of
man! Traditus mundo, John 3.16. Delivered to the world, that Scoen of miseries
and vale of tears! Traditus dolori, Delivered up to sorrows. Traditus Populo,
Luke 22. Delivered up to the people, and no wild beast or Sea so raging!
Traditus morti, traditus Cruci! Delivered to Death, even to the death of the
Cross, as the Complement of all Tortures! And this is the general Prospect of
Christ's innumerable sufferings! which come on so thick and fast upon us, that
they will not permit us here to glance upon his Prior passio, (as the Fathers
call Christ's life from his first Birth to the institution ot his last Supper)
his former passion! Cujus tota vita continuata passio, whose whole life indeed
was but one Crimson Thread spun to make us a Garment! But his later Passion now
calls us into the Gard^n, Joh 18. John 13.1.
Where think not of a place of Recreation, but of Passion! Dream not of Beds of
Roses, and delicious Flowers, but think of bitter Herbs, of Rue and Wormwood,
There Ecce homo! Behold the man! there weeping! sweating, bleeding for us! Till
he becomes (...), even a Circle of Calamity, made an Island in his own
inundation of Tears, of Sweat, of Blood! a treble Island! as Bernard
passionatly, Non tantum oculis, Sermon. 3. de Ram. Palmar.
sed membris singulis! Christ wept (says he) not only with his eyes, but with
all the members of his blessed body, to wash away our sins! And whosoever would
scan the supernatural causes of these so unnatural showers, must think well
on the weight of sin, and wrath of God! and then shall find much comfort in
them; shall find the first a Bath of Tears, for every Naaman to wash in and be
clean: The second, one of Sweat, to purge the slothful servant: And the third
of Blood, wherein a murderous David, that can be but as penitent, may white his
purple Soul.

These are the Fountains open to Judah and Jerusalem, for sin and for
uncleanness, the fountains of Christ's Garden: And if you ask me why he chose
no sadder place (no Cave or Desert but thus began his Passion in a Garden? I
answer with Ludolphus, De vita Christi in locum.
Vt medela responderet morbo, that man's Recovery might echo to his Fall, as
it is easy to carry on the Metaphor, but I would fain avoid prolixity. Next,
our Ecce homo is become (...), Luke 22.47.
Behold a multitude of men, or rather, Armed murderers come forth against him,
as if one of their own fraternity! and (as the manner is) no sooner are his
Enemies in sight, but his Friends are out of it: One tarrieth to betray him,
another to deny him! but of the people there was none to help! And he that
ere-while so over-prized a little Ointment, more under-values now the Lords
Anointed! For The Roman penny about our 7. d. or if those pieces were of Silver
Shekels, the single shekel was 15. d. that of the Sanctuary double: at most
then not aboe 3. l. 15. s. Sterling.
thirty pence sells the rich ransom of the World, and with a Joabs kiss seals
up his hellish bargain! But let his Brother Judasses remember what such ill
gain does purchase in the end! viz. nothing but Acheldamah's and Fields of
Blood! 'Twas but a trick of more wit then judgment, in him that Apologiz'd for
Judas, as not acting out of malice, but only out of Hope to cheat the Jews,
both of their money and their expectation, for that Christ he thought) could
easily pass through the midst of them, as he often had done, and conveigh
himself from danger; and so only in derision, bid them hold him fast, etc. But
David's prophecy of Him, and Christ's calling him Devil, does befool this
Fancy, as well, as his own after-game, betraying his own neck into the Halter
of Despair and 'twas the Wit of Justice that he should lose his Bowels, who was
(...) before, and had lost his Compassion. But Ipse viderit, see he to that the
insulting Jews are gone with their self-yeelding Captive, who yet had he
pleased, could with more ease then Sampson, have burst their bands, and cast
away, etc. but only to show Thee, penitent soul, that he who led Captivity
captive, was content himself to be enslaved and bound, to expiate thy loosnesse
and abused Liberty! See next, his traveling Affliction halling him to the Mint
of all his miseries, the High Prieshs The Sanedrim which consisted of all sorts.
Council, where more Mischiefs are showred on him, then he has parts to bear
them! The pitiful sport and Tennis-Ball of those unrighteous Judges, among
whom, Ducitur reducitur, a Judicio in Judicium, de opprobio in opprobrium, a
supplicio ad supplicium! Hurried up, and down from one Tribunal to another,
from Annas to Caiaphas! from Caiaphas to Pilat! from Pilat to Herod! from Herod
back again to Pilat, foot-balled between Jews and Gentiles, all having a hand
in His death that died for all; mean while his Torment like the stream or
snow-ball, Crescit eundo, still gathers by the motion! all tenturing their
inventions for his shames and tortures: Such indeed as -- Siculi non invenere
Tyranni! Perillus his Bull being but a Calfe as 'twere unto their worse then
Trojan Wooden Horse! How unweariedly busy is their malice! as though their
Mouths had not sinned enough before in Blasphemy, they spit upon him! Him, whose
healing Spittle their own ill eyes had need of: and then to make Him somewhat
like Themselves, they blindfold Him, thinking to bufiet forth some new
Prophecy out of him; but when they ask him, Who smote thee? We may well answer
in the words of St. Ambrose, In his Comment. on St. Luke.
Doles Domine, non tuased mea vulnera! Thou smartest O Lord, not with thine
own, but with my wounds! -- Me, me, adsum qui feci! I am the the Jonah, Et
propter me haec tempestas! and for my sake, Dear Lord, is this great tempest
come upon thee! Ecce homo! Behold him next at the Jews strange election! when
Custom more then Mercy, freed one at the Passover, see their unworthy choice,
Not Him, but Barabas! preferring Dross to Gold, the Wolf before the Lamb!
Nolumus regnare, nolumus vivere! We will not have this man reign over us; No,
not to live among us: Quid hoc est aliud? And what else was this prayer, says
Ludolphus, In locum.
then as they should have said, Let him be killed, that often among us Raised the
dead! and let him Live that has and yet will kill the living! Not Him but
Barrabas. If Pilat preach to them his experienced Innocence, they rage at him;
Let him wash his hands, can he not? (but such had need rub hard!) Let the blood
light on Them and on their Children; the Guilt they mean, In locum.
but not the Benefit! and so indeed it did (as our venerable Beda observes)
Haeret usque hodie Judaeis sua Petitio! How closely to this day does their wish
stick to Them in a Double Curse, Spiritual and Corporal! Some Authors
reporting that their Bodies monthly suffer an unnatural flux of blood! but
infallibly fulfilled upon them at that general Devastation of their populous
Jerusalem, where thirty of them were sold for a Penny, who sold our Savior for
thirty pence. Others telling us, what those that bought them did with them,
affirming that the Romans had no such manurance for their Fields and Gardens,
as was the blood of Jews! his blood was so upon Them, even corporally also (God
grant at length its Spiritual benefit may be on them) their own Josephus tells
us, that 1100000. of them there, Joseph. lib. 7. de bello Jud. c. 12.
became as Dongue of the earth! The thought of this (me thinks) should bind all
Hands, and stay the swiftest Feet from bloodshed. This you see out- crying all
sins! and for which God commonly makes Inquisition here, even in this life,
(what ever else he bears with till the next!) each then, with David, cry as
loud against it, Psa. 51.13,
A sanguinolentia Domine! Deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse, O God (whether of
past, or Future Tense) Thou God of my health; It Is for desperate Jews to be so
bloody! For Christians to be merciful, as their Heavenly Father, who will have
mercy and not sacrifice, no bloody sacrifice but this of Christ. Take but a
view of that, and I have done: and here behold obedient Isaac, the willing
Porter of his funeral pile! Loyal Vriah carrying the Instrument of his own
destruction! where (by the Riddle of Tyranny) his enemies make good that double
Crucifige, as 'twere twice crucifying him! once as with a Burden, and secondly
as with a Cross! the Cross the worst of all the Jews four Tortures, which for
their slaves they had borrowed from Heathen Cruelties! And Tully himself is
here at a Nonplus. In 7. Oratione contra Verrem.
To bind a Citizen of Rome (says he) is heinous, to scourge him villainy, a
kind of Paricide to kill him! but Quid dicam? What shall I call it, to put him
on the Cross! O that were (sure a strange Piaculum! what shall I say to this?
The Apostle answers somewhat, (...). He humbled, He emptied himself. Phil. 2.
Christ emptied himself of glory! of Beauty! of Help! of Company! of Life! all
his veins of blood! all his senses of delightful objects, for contrary! Nay,
emptied his soul of Divine comfort, emptied, Phil. 2.7.
humbled himself even to the death of the Cross! that sin might be carried out
of the world as it came in (i.) upon the Wooden Horse! whereon his nailed body
is extended, as the Hieroglyphick of his ample mercy. -- Brachia in amplexus
dimittit, in oscula vultum. What should I here trouble you with the nice
Speculation of some Friars? How big the nails were? whether big enough to make
Constantine an Helmet, Ludolp. de vita Christi in loc.
and a Bridle? What several sorts of wood the Cross was of, and why? with the
strict number of his stripes and wounds? Let Granatensis and Acosta answer for
their boldness, numbering about 500. while more exact Osorius argues from the
Band of Soldiers, full 660. in the Body, 72. in the Head, beside the 5 main
Wounds, in Hands, and Feet, and Side! But -- Pauperis est numerare. Numbering is
but an argument of paucity (though Stars, and Sands, and every leaf in Autumn
score a grief! All this were but a Substraction to Christ's infinite sorrows!
who therefore in his Type assures us, Innumerable troubles have compassed me
about, Psalm. 40. And if any thing in this world could come ought near them, (me
thinks) our Sins were likeliest! O then, let each of Them number out a wound in
him, and find its Cure there! And if they come short, Why, then to reach his
multiplied miseries, to our offenses, add his Enemies, who had they been either
Graves, or Earth, or Rocks, or any thing but Jews, how would they have Opened?
Rent? and Quaked in compassion? and added no more scoffs, and sponge, and spear
unto his Grucifixion? which yet They do, even til the Sun's ashamed! the
Temple's angry! and the Earth's afraid! Insomuch that the very Astrologers of
that Age acknowledged (from that total unnatural Eclipse of the Sun, the Moon
being at full) Aut Deus Naturae patitur, aut machina mundi dissolvitur. That
either the world or its Maker was then a dying! And Josephus tells us of the
Angels valediction, a voice heard in the Temple about that time Transeamus
hinc! Let us fly hence, and pitch our Tents no longer about such wicked
Persons! And now one would think we were near the Consummatum est, his Passion
finished. Indeed of his outward suffering is somewhat opened to you; but I have
said nothing yet of his Internal Passion! The deep impressions of all those
ignominies, and ingratitudes cast on him! Nothing of the Burden of his Fathers
anger, which caused that second Agony on the Cross, (...) My God, My God!
wherein his Soul complains, and even Descends to Hell! and therefore we may
well join prayer with that old Greek Liturgy, (...), By thine unknown
fuffering, good Lord deliver us! And here that Ecce homo, is lost into an Ecce
Agnus Dei. Behold the slain Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the
World. Here I might wind you into the Labyrinths of School-Disputes, Why Christ
so earnestly did deprecate his Passion, with a Transeat Calix, Let this Cup
pass from me! whether out of the Dominion of his inferior will, or no? or only
out of human infirmity! How far then and after, he was Relinquisht of the
Diety? whether only in regard of momentary Suspension, or of any Separation? As
also how his Temporal Passion could satisfy for our Eternal Debts? Whether
by the Excellence of his person, or by the prevention of His graces in us? But
aiming more at the kindling of Devotion, then swelling up a volume, we will
send these Questions back again to School; while with more profit we now apply
the QUARE? The Quare.
Why all this was done and suffered? What David said to his brother Eliab, 1 Samuel 17.29.
1 Samuel 17. when Goliath defied the Host of Israel, is there not a Cause? the
same (me thinks) Christ here answers his brethren of flesh and blood, to
their treble Ecce, of Attention, Admiration, and Compassion, Demanmanding also,
Why came thou down hither? Down from Heaven? down to Earth? down to misery?
down to the grave? nay down to Hell it self? ( ad triumphandum, non ad
patiendu^, an inchoation of his Triumph, after the consummation of his
Passion.) Why is there not a Cause, says Christ? Do not Sins play the
insulting Philistims? and Satan defy the Israel of God? and therefore he
re-encountreth him like David, with the Staff and Sling, of his Cross and
passion slaying the Goliath, Death, and with his own Sword beheading him. Is
there not a Cause? Yes, hence we see a double one! on Christ's part Love, on
man's part danger! on Christ's part not only, ut implerentur omnia, that all the
Prophesies and Prefigurations might be fulfilled, (though even in that sense
also says the Evangelist) ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and
so to enter into his Glory?) Luke 24.26.
but likewise an invaluable love, an incomprehensible Affection to poor
mankind: Non praevisa fides, non opera. Not Faith, or any works foreseen (which
were effects, not causes of this mercy) but only that (...), Ephesians. 1.9.
Ephesians. 1. that same free grace, good will and pleasure of the Diety, of all the
glorious persons of it. Quorum opera ad extra sunt indivisa. Their actions
outwardly being undivided, though distinguished: the love of the Father sends
the Son, John 3. John 3.16. Luke 2.34. John 10.16.
The Holy Ghost overshadowed the blessed Virgin Mother, Luke 2. yet neither
impeadeth the voluntary coming of the second person, who lays down his life
here, none takes it from him, John 10. Misit tota Trinitas. Thus the whole
sacred Trinity wrongth this great work of Man's Redemption. -- Vnicuique
operanti cooperantibus duobus. Whatsoever one works, the other two
cooperating, consenting as here the Father of Mercies, and the Spirit of
Consolation, joined with the Son of everlasting love, specialiter tamen filio
yet is it notwithstanding principally attributed to the Son, the work of our
Redemption, Matthew. 1.25.
because (as his Word witnesses) it was his person that became (...) that is,
God with us, Mat. 1.23. and in whom we have redemption through his blood,
according to the Riches of his Grace: I that only was the Causa (...), both
the leading and impulsive cause of all Christ's woes and sufferings! the sole
Quare? why this good Shepherd left the 99. in the Wilderness, i. the fallen
Angels in their sin and punishment! and died to ransom this one lost sheep,
mankind. Well therefore may the vulgar Latin read that, John 15.13.
Nimia Charitas, Greater love has no man, so great, too great a love, too
great on both sides! The Quare on our part, being the expiating of sin, Romans
4.24.
Romans 4. and conferring of Grace, 1 Cor. 1. Being hereby made unto us Wisdom,
1 Cor. 1.30.
and Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. The Riches of his Grace
paid our Talents, and much more will our Pence, we doing our Duty in mean time,
and giving but all diligence, 2 Pet. 1.10.
2 Pet. 1. satisfied both our Eternal and our Temporal Debts to God,
cancelled Satan's. (...), that black Scrowle against us, and is to us, as the
Angel to St. Peter bound in Prison; as the indulgent Father to the returning
Prodigal; and the very good Samaritan unto the wounded Traveller. For by his
stripes we are healed, Isai. 53. (...), Isai. 53.5.
1 Timothy 2.6. His we are by Ransom, his by Purchase. (...), and his by
Conquest, John 16.33. (...). Be of good cheer, John 16.33.
I have overcome the world. Thus Christ's sufferings were proportioned, to his
Person suffered in, to the sins suffered for, to the Good will he suffered
with, and for the End he suffered to; all Universals and Superlatives, all
inexpressibles! our business is to be (...), Conformed in some measure, Phil.
3.
to his Life and Death, that being partakers of his sufferings, we may be also
of the consolation: and that is done two ways chiefly, St. Gregory.
Cum per abstinentiam affligitur corpus, and per compassionem animus. (We will
mend it somewhat in the rendering) When we beat down the body with Abstinence
and Devotion, and the Mind with Penitence and Compassion. Sit thee down then my
Soul this day, and make it thy Good Friday by application, that was so bad to
Christ by bloody passion! Cheer up to think, with how many Privileges this day
was honored, viz. Sin cancelled, Death subdued, Hell spoiled, Heaven opened,
Scriptures verified, Man redeemed, and all this by thy Savior crucified!

This Meditation would allay all out Extravagancies, and moderate the excesses
of our former pleasures: 'Twould sweeten all our bitter draughts, and fit us in
some measure to pledge Christ in this bitter Cup, if he should please to call
us to that Honor, as we have comfortably seen in Others! This would fortify
us against the worst could happen: Then let not Ignorance (for shame) be more
busy with superstitious Figures of the Cross, then true Devotion with this
frequent Meditation, and the more lively representations of it, in the Word and
Sacraments. For (...) is the Motto of every true Christian as well as
Constantine, Under this Banner shall thou overcome.

From the QUIS, the person of this glorious subject, we may gather, First,
Obedience and Compassion (among many other Fruits on the Tree of the Cross.)
Obedience to God, Heb. 10.9.
Psa. 40. and to his legitimate Vicegerents, Romans 13. And never was there such
compassion. Indeed it is storied of Trajan (that was styled the Good) that he
tore off his own Robes all to pieces, to bind up the wounds of his Loyal
Soldiers, and 'twas a noble pity: But our great Captain here (though Monarch
of the World) throws off his Robes of Glory, and imparts them: Suffers not
his Garments only, but his skin, his Flesh, his very Heart to be all ren and
torn! that through his Death we might have life: though so great love has no
man, yet each may gain somewhat from it, (...). This boundless love of Christ,
with all its Distances, may teach men how to stand affectioned to each other;
Men, I say, 'twixt whom (unless in some few Transitories) there is no
difference, as after a few years, whosoever looks into their Graves, will find but
little difference between their bones! John 15.35.
Love is the Christian (...), the Ear-mark of Christ's Sheep, John 15. And
therefore the Apostle presses it with a (...). 1 Pet. 4.8.
Above all things have fervent love, etc. 1 Pet. 4. and he gives a good Reason,
For love covers a multitude of sins. in utroque foro. by preventing, by
excusing, by forgiving.

From the QUID, what our Savior suffered, we must learn Mortification and
Submission, Phil. 3. Crucifying the Old Man with his corrupt Affections. Phil
3.10.
There is a story of St. Francis (that by austere meditation of the Passion) he
had Christ's five main wounds imprinted on him, and so plain, that many since
scarce know the one from the other: and that Ignatius by the like
mortification, had the Holy Name of Jesus written visibly in his Heart. However
these may stand in credit, I am sure the Apostle cannot fail, who makes
Fellowship of his sufferings the best assimulation unto Christ, Phil. 3. Nay,
Rev. 2.17.
even incorporates us into his Body, and writes that new Name on us, Rev. 2.
And for Submission, remember the demeanor of this Sheep before the Shearers,
and let not each Trivial injury incense thee into such an usual Fury; Look on
Him here, who lost all but Patience, and be not so crucified with a few worldly
losses! What ever is thy Distress, it comes far short of His! Let some of His
Patience bear thee company, and He that gave Himself will not deny thee
succor: mean time accept of his own Legacy, Luke 19. without which no man is
Compos animae, Luke 19.21.
possessor of his own Soul; and we should look to that especially, living in an
Age wherein none knows how long he may possess any thing else! And now the
last Circumstance, the QUARE? Why all this? Hints us to Gratitude, Emendation,
Comfort: Magnes Amoris Amor: Love is the Loadstone of Love. St. Bernard.
Quanto pro me vilior, tanto mihi charior. Let not Christ ask again, Where are
the Nine? Nor forgetful Israel be the Type of us: Disobedient at the Sea, even
the Red Sea, Psalm. 106. Let us not pledge Joseph's Butler in his Cup of
Oblivion, but David rather in his Cup of Salvation, praising the Lord for his
Goodness, and declaring the wonders that he does for the children of men.
Psalm, 106.
(...). (i.e.) Prayer and praise (says the Jewish Proverb) is the sum of all
devotion. If then a single Heart be too barren of Thankfulness, borrow a
Magnificat of Mary. My Soul does magnify the Lord, Jobs grateful ecstasy,
Quid faciam? as if all were too little, what shall I do unto thee, O thou
Redeemer of Men. A Te Deum of all the Saints, We praise Thee, O God, etc. Join
with that grateful Consort, Rev. 5. Rev. 5.11.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power and Riches, and Strength,
and Glory (all outward and inward gratulation) for ever and ever. And because
true Gratitude is Gratiarum actio, not a Thanks-saying but Thanksgiving, it
must be evidenced in our Emendation, our bettered Conversation: Since Sin has
cost so deer, as the dear Son of God, O beware how we come ever so in debt
again! As 'twas our sins that crucified Christ once, so renewed sins will even
crucify him again! Believe St. Paul else, Heb. 6. (...), Heb. 6.6.
at least to themselves, They crucify (and in his honor) the Lord of Glory!
Every unrepented sin is as a Thorn, a Nail, and Spear unto him! In a word,
Those that are the Fleshes Soldiers, crucify Christ; but those that are
Christ's crucify the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof, Gal. 5.24.
Gal. 4. And to close up with comfort (as an effect of all Christ's sufferings)
How can we but rejoice to see our Reconciliation made with God? of Enemies thus
to become Friends, Sons, Heirs, Coheirs with Christ: and all this, says the
Apostle, 1 John 2.2.
through the blood of his Cross, 1 John 2. Oh what a comfort is it to
Spiritual Israel, to see the sinful Pharaoh and his numerous Host all drowned
and overwhelmed in this same Red Sea! St. Bernard.
Well may that Father invite here to a Feast of joy -- Jubilate Coeli, plaudite
Terra, and universitas Creaturae: And let the Apostle English it, unto the
Readers Heart, Phil. 4. Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always; and again I say, Rejoice: Rejoice inasmuch as ye
are partakers of the sufferings of Christ, 1 Pet. 4.
that when his Glory shall appear, you may rejoice. And now to shut up all,
shut up thy Savior in thy Bosom, go act the devout Arimathaean; as thou have
always beheld Christ on the Cross; now take him down from thence, and bury
him in a new Tomb, that is, in the Tomb of a new Heart; embalming him with
sweet odors, that is, of Faith, Prayer, and Good works: and at least so far
imitate the Jews, that you do seal the Sepulcher, and the Seals are his Word
and Sacraments, which if well impressed, will hold him faster then the Grave
and Death! Thus, as stout Luther said, Who takes such care of the Good Friday
of his Death, need never doubt a joyful Easter, of his Resurrection.

depiction of the resurrection of Christ The Resurrection mat: 27:* mar: 16:
lu: 24. Joan: 20:
62 The high Preistes and Pharisees assembled to Pilate.

63 And said etc.

64: comande therefore that the sepulcher be made sure until the third day: etc.

65 Then Pilate said unto them ye have a watch: etc

66 And they went and made the sepulcher sure with ye watch and sealed the
stone.


Here the Plate.

POEM 15.
IF great Sorrows be Dumb, how shall this speak?
Which Heart Strings may as soon as Silence break!
Yet if a little vent may save the Cask
From breaking, I Will adventure the sad Task!
But how shall I begin? With words? or Tears!
Informing of your Mournful Eyes, or Ears,
Or both! Oh where shall I begin this Act?
Plenty does stifle, Copiousnesse distract!
Shall I forthwith (as with an Onslate) scale
The Mount? Mount Calvary, and give you all
His sufferings at once! or shall my Pen
Take sharp Revenge on those accursed men
That so despighted Him? (as this might fit
Sad Subjects, and a Grief-distracted wit!)
Though Sorrow's an ill Methodist, yet we
(Like Him we treat) will grieve more orderly;
And with a needful contemplation
Glance at his first, view his last Passion:
Both which speak his whole life one crimson thread,
From Circumcision to his Cross died red!
His stable, flight, and Travels touched before,
His Dangers and long hardships I pass over,
Hastening to the Garden; but what a sight there?
Our dear Lord turned all agony and fear!
A sad Transfiguration, opposed quite
To that of cheerful Tabors glorious light!
Yet Cure Eccho's our curse, a Garden-plot
'Twas killed our sins (you see) as 'twas begot:
But what strange Fountains in this Garden run?
Of Sweat! of Tears! of Blood! streamed all in one!
Christ is a Triple-Island in all these,
And in cold night! without Sin or disease!
Oh may that threefold Juice of his pressed soul,
Purge sloth, melt hardness, cleanse in us what is foul.
But see an Armed crew, as against a Thief
To ceise him comes, and who commands in chief
But even his own deer Judas? heightning this
With the dissembled badge of love, a Kiss!
Of treacherous enemies, there is none to those
Of our own House; take heed of Bosom foes!
Their Lanthorns (here, their Swords) and Clubs of wood
Discry them sons of Darkness, men of Blood!
Yet Christ accoasts his danger, scorns to flee,
Dares answer, I, as ask them, Whom seek ye?
And if his veiled presence strike to ground,
How shall his Revealed Glory such confound!
But coming to themselves they transport him
(For all is kind miracle to Malchus Lim)
To the High Priests Hall, that Forge of all his woes,
Where he the Wit of Malice undergoes!
He Is harras'd up and down, from place to place,
'Twixt Herod, Pilat, Annas, Cajaphas,
Some Jews, some Gentiles; He Is their Tennis-ball,
Tossed to and fro, and hazard runs for all!
There quite forsaken of his own, they strive
Who shall the most ingenious snares contrive!
Which they begin with Accusations high,
Treason against Caesar, against God blasphemy!
As He, so His traduced! though both act this
Giving to God his own, and Caesar his:
No matter it is so construed, and He Is tried,
It Is voted, He must needs be crucified!
He that had killed the Living must be spared,
But he that raised the Dead, no mercy shared!
Nor is their wrath so kind, as soon to ease
Him of a burdenous life, but Themselves please,
With varying his reproach, his lingering smart,
And fain would crucify Him in every part:
When er'e you would annumerate his woes,
Add to our Sins, his multitude of Foes!
Right Sampsons Antitype, here (in full Court)
Brought forth to exercise their spleens and sport!
They blindfold him, that to all gives Light,
And spit on him, whose spittle restored sight.
And then who buffets him, they make demands?
It needs no prophecy, our wicked hands!
While their Souls naked, or but raged in sin.
They doubly strip him next, of clothes and skin
With barbarous whips, and stripes Jews think enough!
Making long Furrows with the Prophets Plough!
Whence springs a Grain, which gathered as it ripes,
Will nourish Souls, and heal them by those stripes:
Some trouble their own Heads, to torture His,
For which a double Engine studied is,
A Crown his Kingly Office to delude!
And Thorns, his sacred Temples to intrude!
Strange Coronation is it not in mean while?
Where Briers are the Crown, and Blood the Oil!
Thorns too that grew in our own Sluggards Field,
Yet planted There, will us Grapes one day yield.
Others to answer such a Crown, command
A Reeden Scepter into that Right Hand
Which made, and could null all things, with like speed,
But that He will not break the bruised Reed.
On still proceeds unsatiable Scorn,
Which wounds more then either Scourge, or Thorn!
They next a Mocking Purple him cast over,
Fit Emblem of their Guilt, and his Loves store,
Which like a Royal Robe, Christ will cast over
His naked Servants, and all their sins cover.
Thus sadly dight, He Is brought to public view!
As Anthony did mangled Caesar show!
Pilate presents him with -- Behold the Man!
Whether in scorn, or pity, do you scan:
But what e're he did, let us sympathize
By, and for whom all this! Yet wipe your eyes
A while, once more Behold the man again,
Lest of this Spectacle you lose the main:
See willing Isaac bear his Funeral Pile,
That must requite him, in a little while.
Loyal Vriah see, here going on
With the Instruments of his destruction!
Such is the Burden to Christ's shoulders tied,
That He Is with Sin, Load, Cross, thrice crucified!
Making good that ill-cry once Jews doubled,
And Christians by their sins have Ecchoed!
Thus panting, swouning up a tyresome Hill,
Not out of Love, but out of Have to kill,
Another's forced to help! but happy he,
O Christ, that freely bears the Cross for Thee.
Being come to Calvary, that fatal Mount,
Where Adam was interred (as some recount)
And Isaac to have been sacrificed, there
His Cross and Him together, up they rear!
Fixing an envied Inscript, that belongs
To Him, and at once consecrates three Tongues:
Hard-hearted Nails, that Bore each Hand and Foot!
But what, Chide you? Alas you're driven to it.
Ah flinty Jew, that yet remorslesse stands!
But why rate you? our sins helped arm your Hands!
Yet thus much good was done, Thereby (at last)
Sin, Death, and Hell's Hand-writings all naild fast.
They Checquey Taunts, and Tortures! He does call
Eli! and they with Ignorance do all
Conclude, he Courts Elias to come help;
Sure that is the Sire of Blind Devotions whelp.
How well confutes he their Contrary Brave?
Saved not Himself, that he might others save:
He Is numbered with Transgressors, yet one Thief
Steals Heaven at the last, by true Belief.
A good way (never to be of Life bereft)
Is All to become conscious of such Theft.
Hence Christ's dear Mother, and Disciple, He
Bequeathes, as a Rich mutual Legacy.
And then, that naught without a Prophecy
Might happen to him, by a Lottery
They share his Garments, and his Seamlesse Coat
That figured his Church, the Soldiers got!
Whose pristine Glory 'twas, Her to defend;
And for her Patrimony not so contend!
Thus was the Healing Serpent lifted up,
Who to our Health drank off this Bitter cup!
Bitter indeed, as Gall and Vinegar,
Which as last cordial, Jews administer
In spite of custom! which had wont propine
To dying men, some Draught of cheering wine;
As he did unawares, that pierced Christ's side,
To us broached a full vessel ont, whose Tide
Shall know no Ebb, from whence two Fountains ran,
That glads in Life and Death, the heart of man:
With which He takes his leave, bowing the Head
To kiss his Spouse, saying then, It Is finished.
The Story's finished too, his outward woe;
But the Inward to express, what shall we do?
Those sufferings, though Methodicall to sense,
Nothing to these of his Intelligence;
The apprehensions of his Fathers wrath
A Terra incognita, no limits has!
His Body's pain, was but the corpse of woe,
That of the Soul, must for the Soul out-goe!
All those were Feathers to this heavy Load,
Which crushed out that strong cry, My God! My God!
Well then, with the Greek Church may we pray thus,
By the unknown sufferings Lord deliver us.
These may be guessed by those strange Sympathies
That then appeared both in Earth and Skies;
The Rocks did rend, Tut'ring hard Hearts to mourn,
When Seas of Blood this chief Rock did or'eturn?
The Graves did open, either to present
Each of themselves his willing Tenement,
Or else to Bury quick those murderous Jews,
Who so inhumanly their King did use!
The rending of the Temples veil in sunder,
Was both a Mystical, and Literal wonder.
The Earth shook with an Ague, quaked for fear,
Such cursed Burdens, as the Jews to bear!
And Heaven has viewed so long their cruelties,
'Twill look no more, nor longer lend them Eyes!
Both Sun of Light and Glory at once, Set,
And to the world a double Night beget!
Which so unnat'rall an Eclips did make,
Never read, nor reasoned for in Almanake:
The world's in Black, all things in sable weed!
Fit Servants mourn, when as their Lord is dead!
These Prodigies made one o'th worlds wise men
Say, Nature or her Maker suffered then!
Nay, clear Confession then extorted is
From very Jews, The Son of God was This:
This the worlds Altar then, The Sacrifice
For All, unless through their own Nullities:
This kind of Death fell Scythians lent the Jews,
Which they too (once) only for Slaves did use;
And Suidas says, a Cross was set o'th Grave
Of such as chanced some Fatal End to have!
And Cicero himselfe's here at a loss,
Quid dicam? being all he can say o'th Cross!
Which, of all Deaths the Scripture proves the worst,
If not for shame, or pain, yet 'cause accursed!
But as our Misery grew on a Tree,
So does our fruitful Comfort too we see.
Our bitter waters sweetened by this Wood,
Right Lignum vitae for all Nations good.
Then let us not only with his Kin deplore,
But with good Joseph treasure up in store
His Body, Embalmd with Grace, our Heart's a stone,
And therefore (me thinks) fit to make his Tomb.
And being there Buried, let Faith set a Seal;
And Prayer watch, that Him Thence, nothing steal.
The COLLECT PRAYERS. The Epistle. Heb. 10. from verse 1. to 16.
The Gospel. John 18. v. 1. to the end of Chapter 19.

ALmighty God, we beseech thee graciously to behold this thy Family, for which
our Lord Jesus Christ was content to be betrayed, and given up into the hands
of wicked men, to suffer death upon the Cross, who lives and reigns, etc.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, by whose Spirit the whole body of the Church is
governed and sanctified, receive our Supplications and Prayers, which we offer
before thee, for all estates of men in thy holy Congregation, that every Member
of the same in his Vocation and Ministry, may truly and Godly serve-thee,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns, etc.

Merciful GOD, who have made all Men, and hate nothing that thou have made,
nor would the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should be converted and
live; have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics, and take from
them all Ignorance, Hardness of Heart, and contempt of thy Word, and so fetch
them home (blessed Lord) to thy Flock; that they may be saved among the remnant
of the true Israelites, and be made one Fold under one Shepherd. JESUS CHRIST
our Lord, who lives and reigns, etc.

EASTER DAY.
DISQUISITION 13.
THis Festival is as ancient, as the Resurrection of our blessed Lord
himself, and therefore ought to be proportionably sacred to its subject: as it
was highly venerable to the Primitive Fathers of the Church, witness their
innumerable Sermons on it, and most solemn Acts, even of both Sacraments
reserved for the same; however this stolid disobedient Age contemn the
devotions of Antiquity. Christiani sine Christo! as though they would be
Christians, by passing Acts of Oblivion upon the Records of Christianity! But
God has still his thousands in our Israel, whom I shall here greet with the
old Christian salutation, The Eastern and Greek Churches salutation.
(...). Christ is risen, desiring the Reader but to Echo with joy and
gratitude, that same usual Response, The Lord is risen indeed; or to
Paraphrase it with that good Christian, who meeting his enemy, said, Surrexit
Christus, Christ is risen the Reconciler, and therefore let us be friends
again. The first stone of Christian Faith was laid in this Article of the
Resurrection, in this was the first promise performed, Ipse conteret, He shall
bruise the Serpents head: Genesis 3.15. Augustine.
for in this Trophaeum de morte excitavit, He triumphed over Death and Hell.
And the last stone of our Faith is laid in the same, that is, the Day of
Judgment, of which God has given assurance unto all men, (says St. Paul at
Athens) in that he has raised Christ Jesus from the Dead: Acts 17.3.
In this Christ makes up his Circle, in this he is truly Alpha and Omega. His
coming in Paradise in a promise, and his coming to judgment in the clouds are
tied together in the Resurrection; and therefore all the Gospel, all our
Preaching, our Believing, and endeavor, are all contracted into this one
Article of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.14.
1 Cor, 15. and that being all the sign Christ would at any time afford the
Jews, the Pharisees, Saduces, or any that importuned him, the sign of Jonas,
and the destroyed Temple, still turning upon the Resurrection, Matthew. 12.35.
And so true is that of Tertullian, Resurrectio mortuorum, est summa consolatio
vivorum, The Resurrection of the dead, John 4.18.
is the main Consolation of the living; as without which, all Christ's former
Actions and Passions, had been fruitless, 1 Cor. 15. But by which we hold our
hopes of Immortality; 1 Cor. 15.17.
from whence all the Sundays of the year cheerfully borrow new Denomination,
and are as 'twere) new Christened, The Lords Day, in memorial of this happy
Reparation: So that Ludolphus (out of Nazianzen and others) may well call this
day, Solennitas solennitatum, the Festival of all Festivities: Most of the
Learned applying that of David to it, Psalm 118. Haec est Dies quam fecit
Dominus, Ludolph. de vita Christi in Locum. Psalm. 118.24.
This is the Day which the Lord has made, etc. And not only for our
gladness, but also inverting it for his Honor: Haec est Dies quae fecit
Dominum. So St. Cyril in locum. This is the Day which (in a sense) made the
Lord, (i.e.) declared. For hereby (says the Apostle) was he wonderfully
declared to be the Son of God. Wonderfully indeed, the wonder of all
Miracles, wrought by a God, testified by Angels, seen of Men; of Men, not only
as witnesses, but partakers; and yet a no less Benefit then Miracle: a benefit
both Corporal and Spiritual, extending to both parts of Man. And whereas
Christ's former Miracles, (for the most part) tended but to the Bodies good, as
Restitution of Limbs, Eyes to the Blind, Ears to the Deaf, Tongue to the Dumb,
and Feet to the Lame: or else for Restoration of health, as, Healing diseases,
casting out Devils, raising the Dead; This an extensive benefit to both parts
of man.
or for human sustenance, as feeding many thousands with few Fishes,
multiplying the Loaves, metamorphosing of Water into Wine, etc. But this
miraculous benefit, and beneficial Miracle of Christ's Resurrection, extends
it self both unto Soul and Body: And first, it cheereth up the Drooping body,
comfortably telling it, That shall not always sleep in Dust! not ever be the
Food of worms, and companion of creeping things! but shall be one day raised,
raised to incorruption, to the society of Angels, and vision of the blessed
Trinity: that even Flesh and Blood (though not as yet a while) shall one day
inherit the Kingdom of God. So that the Body (now) the Body of every faithful
penitent, may be as confident as ever Job was. Scio quod Redemptor vivit. I
know that my Redeemer lives, John 19.25. etc.
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth. And though after my
skin Worms destroy my Body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see,
etc. And that not only in Calvin's sense, Calvin in locum.
of a Temporal Restitution; but even in Jobs own sense, and the Fathers
Exposition, of a literal and numerical Reinvestion. Again, This likewise
secures the Soul, that she is Christ's holy One, whom he will never suffer to
see corruption: assures Her, that she neither hops nor believes in vain. 1
Cor. 15. This is the Foundation Article. But happy Time, This, happy Day for
us, whereon Christ became the eldest child of the Grave, the First born of the
Dead. (...). 1 Cor. 15.20.
The first fruits of them that sleep, all comfortable Relatives (First still
implying the later) Christ's Resurrection altogether as sure as Death. Romans 4.
Romans 4.25.
Who died for our sins, and rose again for our Justification. For us you see,
Both, not for Himself, but us: and that for both parts of us, Souls and
Bodies. As if your meditation please to draw near the Sepulcher, Luke 24.6.
Luke 24. you shall there meet with two Angels that will witness the Surrexit,
and tell you, Non est hic. Why seek you the living among the Dead? He is not
here, but is risen.

But er'e with Peter and John we enter the Sepulcher, Luke 24.6.
'twill be no uncivil Digression to take notice of the Company we meet with
there, that were the first Evangelists of these glad tidings; and those were no
less then Angels, v. 4. to no greater then Women, v. 10. Some mention but one,
yet St. John expressly tells us of two Angels. Duo propter testimonii
sufficientiam. Two for a full and sufficient Testimony by the Jews own Law:
Witnesses of all sorts, from Heaven and Earth too: Angels tell the Women, He is
not here, but, etc. Angels, I, they were always ready attendants on our
Savior. Et congruum fuit, ut Rex Coelorum Satellitium haberet Angelorum. Most
fit it was, that the King of Heaven should always have such a Guard, such a
Retinue: and had so, at his Conception, Luke 1. an Arch-Angell: at his Birth,
Luke 2. a Multitude of the Heavenly Host: In his Temptation, Mark 1. in his
Agony, Luke 22. Angels ministered unto Him. At his Apprehension, (had he so
pleased) could have easily prayed down more then twelve Legions, (i.)
innumerable company of Angels, (had he meant to countenance Religion propagated
by the Sword) and to come home here to his Resurrection. (And so likewise
afterward to his Ascension) miraculously proclaimed by Angels. And if These to
the Creature, be appointed (...). How much more ought they to be always
Ministering spirits to their Maker, Heb. 1.14. Pennati proceres induti vestibus
albis, Matribus hi Christum jam surrexisse reportant. These winged Mercuries of
Heaven, here tell the seeking women to their joy and astonishment, He is not
here, but is risen. To women then Christ first was manifested, to three women,
and to them doubly, by the voice of Angels, and his own First appearance, John
20. Three pious women Mary Magdalen, Joanna, and Mary mother of James, v. 12.
who to the glory of their Sex) were led by their Devotion, as the three wise
Men by the Star, unto their Savior; for they were seeking Christ, Mark 28.5.
It Is not here worth while to dispute, whether or no Christ first appeared to
his Mother as some contend) since the Evangelists mention not his appearing
unto her at all; but sure we are, 'twas to her Sex, I, and to her Name also,
Mark 16. Mary Magdalen. Apostolorum Apostola. (as Cajetan calls her) she was
the first preacher of the Resurrection, the Apostoless of the Apostles: and
various are the reasons of this Condescension. I pass the fancy of some
Misogynists (as too light) that it was because they are the more garrulous, the
more divulging Sex, to spread a rumor, sticking too rigidly on the 10. and 11.
verses. This might hold, in secular affairs perhaps, but here too contrary to
Christ's humble modesty. -- Nemini dixeris, still prefaced to all those Acts
tending to his honor, See thou tell no man: more probable is that of Ludolphus
In Lenim en doloris. On Christ's part, as an Antidote and Cordial to their
Deeper sorrows. First, he appeared to them, lest by his longer absence, their
griefs should prove too strong a Passion, for those weaker vessels: Woman, why
weepest thou? v. 15. To assuage their sorrow, and comfort them. Then at other
side (says Beda) Quae prima ad culpam, prima ad veniam. Woman that first made
have to sin, now come first to Pardon; She that first broke her Faith in
Paradise, Bedas Reasons in Locum.
first recovereth it at the Sepulcher: Contendit de morte rapere vitam, quae
prius de vita rapuit mortem: That Sex (says he) which first snatched Death (as
it were) out of Life; here contends as much to fetch Life even out of Death.
Aemulemur saltem Foeminas. Though that Angelical Attendance on our Savior,
pass our dull Earths Imitation. (I, our Souls, and their most active Graces)
Yet let us (at least) aemulate these Women's piety. Men for shame, lest that
feebler Sex prove the strongest in Devotion, and Virtue appear so far of the
Foeminine Gender, as not derived a viro.

Again, let Women imitate them, lest (with the Foolish Virgins) they Eclips the
Glory of their virtuous kind, and honor their Sex only with that worst of
Arguments, -- Corruption optimae, est pessima. The corruption of the best proves
the worst. Those that will accompany them, must note, how they came Early, and
not Empty: Early -- Nec ubi mox abiit, nec tamen orta dies. In the Dawning
(says Saint John, while it was yet dark. John 20.1.
No deferring holy Duties, Poenitentia sera, raro seria: Especially delay not
Penitence: Christ himself must he sought Early, in the Day of Life, (Age and
Sickness, being Dies mortis, days of Death) in the morning of this day, (i.e.)
in times of strength and health. Early in this Morning, (i.e.) in the prime of
youth, with Samuel and Timothy; nay, in the very Dawning, (i.e.) in the time of
tender innocence (as Saint Jerome of Eustochium.) Materno lacte. That she sucked
in Piety with her Mothers milk, loving to hear Children -- Balbutire Christum.
Epist. ad Eusiock.
Chanting Hosanna's er'e they well could speak: None ever came too soon to
CHRIST, or can make too much have to Heaven. Many Esau's with too late Tears,
to gain a Blessing. And as early, so these came not empty; reflecting upon that
Nemo vacuus, Exodus 23.15.
Exodus 23.15. None shall appear before me empty (says the giver of all
things) And mind it, you cheap Auditors and Readers. Quaelibet Aromata and
Vnguenta. Each here brought her Ointments and sweet Odours. And such must be
our addresses. -- Odore virtutum, and suavitate Orationum. With flowers of
Virtue, and Fragrancies of Prayer. Revel. 8. With the precious Unguents of Alms
and Hospitality. Rev. 8. Psalm. 141.
All which indeed are like Mary Magdalens effused Ointment, Matthew. 26. And to
close this with St. Bernards sweeter Allegory. Tres mulieres sunt, Men's,
Lingua, Manus. The three good Women (here) bringing precious Ointments, and
sweet Odours, must be (says he) the Mind, the Tongue, the Hand. Sermon. in Loc.
Those of the Mind are Zeal, Compassion, Patience. Those of the Tongue are
Prayers and good Exhortations. Those of the Hand are Charity and Distributions.
Thus having saluted the Company, Observe next the Person, and his Motion: He,
John 1.1.
is not here, but is risen: He, a word of the Person: He that was the Word,
John 1. He that was born among Beasts, lived among Publicans, and died among
Thieves! He whom they attached, bound, reviled! He whom they buffeted,
scourged, thorned! He whom they nailed, pierced crucified! whose Sepulcher they
stoned, sealed, watched! and that with the Garrison appointed to guard the
Temple (says Josephus) yet He (so little the Plots of the impious prevail
against the Righteous) He who sits in Heaven, so laugheth them to scorn, and
Catastropeth all their wits into Dirisions, The Person He.
that -- Ipsissimus. He, the very selfsame Christ awakeneth his Divinity,
which seemed before to sleep, and at once conquereth those Fatal Enemies, Sin,
Death, and Hell! even to a sensible Demonstration, Luke 24. Videte and palpate.
Handle me and see me. Luke 24.35.
When the Priests and Scribes, those grand Counselors at Law, expected from
the Grave an Habeas Corpus, the Body which they gave it, they receive from
Angels, a non est inventus; He is not here, but is risen. Hence then our Faith
and Hope are quickened, sufficiently both confirmed and fortified.

Now, what though Afflictions and Diseases torture, and even crucify our Body?
What though our burdenous Tombstone stop up the mouth of our Grave, and forbid
Re-entry into the world? what though the inviolable course of Nature seal up
our Sepulcher, for Time never to open? what though Corruption set worms and
other noysom creatures as 'twere) to watch our carcasses? yet shall they
(maugre all these the very same (I say) shall one day likewise find themselves
redintegrated, by this powerful Resurrection, we shall not be stolen away,
either by Mortality or Time; then fear no more to trust thy Body, then the
Sower does his Grain unto the Earth: The Grave must come to Restitution, and
give account of each Dust, and Atome committed to her trust and not so much as
an hair of our head shall perish, Luke 21. Luke 21.18.
While the head is above water, no fear of drowning: Mirum esset si caput per
unum, corpus per aliud intraret. 'Twere strange indeed, that the Head should
enter Heaven at one door, and the Body at another! Socinus therefore was but
sottish, to deny the consequent of ours, from Christ's Resurrection: Decet
quemadmodum praecessit caput, Bernard. Sermon. in Resurrect.
sequantur membra. It is but natural proportion, that as the Head is gone
before; we, all the other members, should follow after.

Thus, being acquainted with the Person, observe next his Motion. His
progressive or Egressive motion. Wherein are also those two points of local
motion. Terminus a quo. He is not here; and Terminus ad quem, He is risen. The
first is, whence he rose, and that was, a statu mortuorum, not from any
Poetical Limbus, but from the state of the Dead. a Sepulchro. From the Grave:
From triumphing over Hell it self, as David's (...) And the Septuagints (...) (
pro (...)) will bear it all. Psalm. 116.10.
He is not here: Where our Meditations have overtaken the Disciples, and are
entering the Sepulcher; where we find nothing but the Linen left, and Watchmen
stupefied: But that Agnus occisus jam Leo vincens. That Lamb which was slain,
Terminus a Quo.
is now the Triumphing Lion of the Tribe of Judah: too holy an One to see
corruption: He is not here in Earth, or earthly Elements, that is every where
according to his Deity, and Spiritual Influences: Accedas Saducaee, and
Sepulchrum inspice. Come hither then Atheistical Saduce, and let thine Eye
tutor thine Infidel Heart to a belief of the Resurrection. Mark but the method
of the Linen; Bern. in Fest.
Lineamina posita, and been disposita: That not only remaining, but keeping
the several postures of the parts that wore it, And would a Thief have left
it (think thou?) or left it so distinguished? Or if the World had had a
Thief so Honest: Quam opportunitatem habuisset? What time could he have had of
stripping off those cleaving Sear-Clothes, and bearing forth the Body, so many
Soldiers, so many Watchmen present? No, no, 'twas that same Power only which
loosned formerly Saint Peter's Fetters, made this Winding sheet fall off: the
Deity it self so kept this City, that the Watchmen watched but in vain! In
vain indeed; for the sight of an Angel countenanced like lightning, so
terrified and amazed them, that as though they had been struck with Lightning,
they became (...). Matthew. 28.4.
Even as dead men! Fitter to be buried in the Sepulcher, then to watch it! So
that the envious Sanedrim endeavor to revive them with money (that usual Aqua
vitae of ill fainting Causes) hiring the Soldiers to say, That His Disciples
came by night and stole him away, The Jews strong delusion to this day. O
stulta insania dormientes testes adhibent. Rhemigius in locum.
Alas fond dream of sleeping Watchmen! (says Rhemigius) if they slept, how
could they perceive the Theft? If not perceived, how could they witness it?
Not taken away, and therefore risen, (...). For He is not here. And this is the
strangest Epitaph that er'e was read on Sepulcher! Non est hic. Turn over all
the leaves of Story and Antiquity, become Companions of the Sun, (like Drake
and Cavendish) travel the whole Circle of the Earth, view all the Monuments,
Pyramids and Tombs of Mortals, and you shall still meet with there, a Trophae
of Deaths Conquest, a Stone engraven with an Hic jacet: Here lies such,
Christ's Epitaph.
or such an one. Here he lies, be he a Nebuchadnezzar, a Nimrod, or
Baltshassar! Here the bright Hellen, and great Alexander! Here the wise Cato,
and learned Aristotle! or what ever other Grandees of the world. Here lie their
Bodies; bound in Fetters of Corruption! chambred up in Dust! prisoners to the
Grave, and Captives unto Death! Hic jacet! But in an holy Pilgrimage, come we
to our Saviors Sepulcher, and to our equal joy and wonder, we meet with
Ensigns of Death's overthrow, the stone removed from off his Grave, and there
an Angel penning this his Epitaph! No, his (...), and Song of victory, Non est
hic, He is not Here. He who is Life it self, could not be detained of Death,
(...), (says the Apostle) 'Twas impossible he should be holden of it. But like
his Type Samson, Ruptis Laethi vinculis, He breaks the bonds of Death, and
casts his Cords from him; Nor from himself alone, but from his Servants
also, 1 Corinthians. 15. 1 Cor 15.15.
Where you may see one of them out-braving Death and Hell: Where is thy sting?
where thy victory? To which S. Bernard sweetly alluding, Vbi opprobria Judaee?
Vbi fabulae? Vbi vasa Captivitatis? Where now, thou stony Jew, are all thy
cruelties? Alas! Where are now the sports, the Reed, and Purple of your injured
King; and all those other Instruments of his Captivity? Vbi mors victoria tua?
Bern. in Fest.
Nay Death it self, Where Is now thy conquest? Then alluding to the Answer, as
well as to the Question. Confusus Calumniator, raptor spoliatus; The Mocker is
mocked. He that sits in Heaven, has laughed them to scorn, and Death is
swallowed up in Victory by CHRIST'S glorious Resurrection. Non est hic. He is
not here. Mark (Christian Reader) Christus non quaerendus in Terrenis. CHRIST
is not to be sought for in these earthly Transitories. I am sure, not to be
found there: Not in the Avaritious man his Coffer: Achan found a Non est hic,
in the Golden Wedge, He is not here! Not on the Ambitious Pinnacle; Haman found
a Non est hic. Hest. 4.
In the Chair of the scorner; He is not here! Not in the voluptuous man's bed,
Cant. 6.
The Spouse her self found a Non est hic. In Ease, Idleness, or worse, He is
not here. And therefore (...). Set your Affections on things that are above,
and not, Coloss. 3.1.2.
etc. Coloss. 3.1. and that leads to the Terminus ad Quem. The point to which
Christ rose, ad vitam, unto life and glory.

And here is a comfortable sight to wipe sad eyes: Ecce Joseph de carcere,
Samson de Civitate, Daniel de specu: Jonas e Coeto. Here is the Sun that was
ecclipsed, comes forth like a Bridegroom: That Eagles age renewed, by casting
of his Bill: The good grain sowed, and quickened by dying: The destroyed Temple
the third day repaired: Here is the substance of all those shadows, Surrexit,
CHRIST is risen from the Dead; and yet no Article of our Faith so much opposed;
Satan knows well, that shaking the Foundation will hazard all the Building!
Math. 28.14
But all his poisons are strongly Antidoted several ways, (besides the
mentioned prefigurations) First, by praedictions, Psalm. 72.15. Ezekiel. 37.
Psalm 72. He shall live, etc: Ezekiel. 37. in the vision of the Dry bones. And
the Evangelist applies that of Jonah unto Christ, Matthew. 12. Secondly, by the
Apostles Declarations, Acts 1.3. chap. 2. 24. chap. 13. 34. But thirdly, and
convincingly, by his own frequent appearance (five times on the day of his
Resurrection) 1 Corinthians. 15. from verse 4. etc. and that an eminent Jews
testimony might confirm Christianity, 1 Cor. 15.4.
hear what Josephus says of him, (...). There was at that time (says he) a
certain wise man, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. c. 4.
if it be lawful to call him a man: for he was the performer of diverse
admirable works, and the Instructor of those that willingly entertain the
Truth; and he drew unto unto him diverse Jews and Greeks his Followers. This
was Christ (says he) who being accused by the Princes of our Nation, Josephus
his testimony concerning Christ.
and condemned to the Cross by Pilate; appeared to his Disciples alive the
third day after, according as the Divine Prophets had before testified the
same, etc.

What can be more manifest? Why should Philosophizing Flesh and Blood so stick
at this? Idem numero corruptum nequit reproduci. That the selfsame thing
corrupted, can never possibly be re-intyred: (...). Is any thing impossible
unto Omnipotence? Nay, when as (to say nothing of the Phoenix) we know some
daring Chemists have reduced Flowers at least, to shape and color, after they
had been consumed unto ashes; How much more easy can the Almighty (think you)
recall both Flesh and Sinews, till dry bones live again, Ezekiel. 37. Till they
friendly jog each other, Ezekiel. 37.
as 'twere asking, Live thou Brother? Sure it is as easy to Reduce as to
Create. Author tollit dubitationem; me thinks the very Author then should take
away all haesitation, in that Christ is risen; and that Christ is God, and that
same God Almighty.

For those Praecursores, those Harbingers of CHRIST'S Resurrection, (as Saint
Bernard calls those revived by the Prophets) they were rather to be styled
Raisings then Risings, 1 King. 21. 2 King. 13.21.
Suscitations more then Resurrections, as appears by their Discriminations:
First, Surrexerunt illi morituri. They rose shortly to dye again, and so will
one day need another Resurrection! But CHRIST being risen, dies no more,
(says the Apostle) and in that he lives, he lives unto God, Romans 6.

Again, Illi virtute aliena. Those were raised by the power of another, nay,
indeed, Former resurrections how differing from Christ's.
of CHRIST, who lent that power; but CHRIST here, Virtute propria, by his own
power, by his own Arm, by his own Right Hand has he gotten himself this
victory. He whose mercy hrd formerly bestowed many miracles on others, his
power now works one upon himself: He who by his Word (...) raised Jairus
daughter, Mark 1. who by his Touch revived the Widows son, Luke 17.
Luke 7. Who by his Prayer, restored unto life putrified Lazarus, John 11.
John 11. Sure, with as much ease could his inhabitant Divinity re-animate his
own Body to a Resurrection: and therefore in Saint Luke it is not (...), He is
raised, but (...), He is risen, and actively translated, not suscitatus. but
surrexit.

The Time too of his Resurrection, is Time well spent to contemplate; and that
was the first day of the Week, and the third of his Passion, at once fulfilling
the Prophecy, and translating the Sabbath. Ideo post tres dies (says Austine)
Therefore after three days Christ rose, Lib. 4. de Trin.
to intimate and manifest the Ascent of the whole Trinity, in the passion of
the Son: On the third (says Bernard) that Himself and Prophets might be
found faithful, who foretold it, Hosea 2. Matthew. 27.63. Intra triduum, within
three days indeed; for we know he slept not in the grave above two Nights, and
one whole Day, some 40. hours; and then knitting the end of the first, to the
beginning of the last, hastened, lest tedious sorrow should too much wrack the
minds, and faith of his Disciples. And here the Mathematitians help out well, to
make good that same Type of Jonah (of three days and three nights, which taken
as generally as his death, that is, all parts of the World considered, and then
his burial comes up full to that of Jonah, yet but three days at most, to
teach us, not to bury our desires in the earth, to become Eagles and not Moles,
to spend but two or three days, that is, but some small time and industry to
gain a competency. For Quatriduani faetant. (Think of that) those worldly
Lazar-souls that lie four days interred (that is) all the four quarters of
their lives, grovelling for transitories, stink in the nostrils of the Almighty.
O happy those when Christ with an offended eye, beholds these earthly vanities,
of whose soul he may say, as this Text does of him, Luke 24.6. Surrexit, non
est hic. It is not here, but is risen. And then more and more still rise it
shall, till the Scale of Grace, lodge them among the stars of Glory.

And this Resurrection of our Savior (says Bernard on this Argument) was not
Reditus, sed Transitus, Bern. in Fest.
not any Regress into his former state again, but a kind of Transmigration into
a better: Non rediit in nostram mortalitatem, sed in sublimius aliquid
transiit. CHRIST returned not (says he) into our mortality, and the miseries
of this present life again, but Rose into some higher degrees of perfection,
even to a glorified condition: Yet not as the Eutychian Heretics phantasied:
The Heresy of Entychus confuted.
Humana Natura in Divinam conversa: As though CHRIST'S Humane Nature by his
Resurrection, had been changed into the Divine; sed servatis essentialibus, but
reserving still the Essential properties of an humane Body: it was visible,
palpable, and circumscribed, Luke 24.39.
Luke 24. Qualitas transiit, Natura non defecit. The body was adorned with
refined qualities, but not divested of its former Nature. His corruptible,
here, put on incorruption, The Condition of glorified bodies.
his mortal immortality: Totus surrexit gloriosus. He is risen altogether a
Body glorified. Whose eminencies the Schoolmen are very busy with, (I
confess) and write more of, then even Saint Paul himself durst that had bin
in the third Heaven: I shall mention only the most probable. Claritas,
agilitas, subtilitas, impossibilitas. The first Brightness and Angelick Beauty
which was prefigured by shining Moses, Exodus 34.
and acknowledged in Christ, (by S. Jerome) Stellatum splendorem. Even a starry
luster. And if in his Transfiguration his face did shine as the Sun, and his
very raiment as the light, Mat. 17.3.
Matthew. 17. How bright (think you) how much more radiant was his Resurrection?
Nay, if (as himself tells us) The just shall shine like the Sun, Chap. 83.43.
etc. Matthew. 13. with what resplendent Rays (think you) arose this Sun of
Righteousness, this Sun of Glory himself? whereof all other lights whatsoever
are but beams? Agility.
Answerable to this, the second is Agility and lightsomness of motion, such a
supernatural Activity of Body, as (if we may believe the Schools) gives it an
equal facility of either motion, of Ascending or Descending; such an
imperceptible quickness as made Christ sometime seem invisible; when he
pleased to pass through, or to appear in the midst of the company, John 20.26.
John 20.

But for that which they term subtillity, cui aliud non resistit, as to which
(they say) material things make no Resistance; that seems so destructive to
the properties of a natural body, that I pass it as a mere subtilty indeed,
Subtilty.
but ushering the way to a double Heresy, both in Philosophy, and Religion;
viz. penetration of bodies, and transubstantion. The last condition of a body
Glorified, is Impassibilitas, that is, an incapacity of any further sufferings,
Aquinas in locum.
or indigence of Natures sustenance after the Resurrection, man's body shall not
need the staff of Bread to walk with, nor any other Antidotes of humane
frailty: but did not Christ, after his Arise, Eat? Luke 24. yes, but non in
Nutritionem sui, sed discipulorum Fidei; that was not to nourish himself, but
his Disciples Faith, non ex Egestate sed ex potestate, not out of want, but
power; it not turning to Aliment, but like drops of water sprinkled on fire,
evaporated, vanished: such bodies Hunger no more, and thirst no more. Rev. 21.
Rev. 21. neither They need Sun or shield, for the Lamb to them is all in all.
These are some of the Transcendencies of a glorious body; and to satisfy some
other scruples of flesh and blood, How arise the dead, and with what bodies
shall they come? whether of the same Age? Sex? form? or deformity they died
in? (though these are rather Niceties, then necessaries) yet know it shall be
of the whole Compositum, the whole person; (like Christ here) both parts
Reunited: both have shared here in Good or Evil so shall they in the
Retribution: And for Deformity, Tertullian tells us, All imperfections shall
be done away, Tertul. Rev. 21
from Rev. 21. There shall then be no more sorrow, no more death; and the
lamenesse or deformity of any part is the grief (as 'twere) and death thereof.
So that if death shall then be totally expelled, then by fair consequence, from
each particular member. To this, some add that of S. Peter, Act. 3. (...), Act.
3.21.
till the Times of Restitution, (i.e.) according to the perfection of Adam in
his Innocence: whereupon Saint Augustine says of monsters, that all defects
shall be amended in that second moulding of the great Artificer: Usual scruples
answered.
And for the scars and wounds of Martyrs, that those shall make more for their
glory, and then be in their bodies, like stars in the Firmament, the brighter
parts of all about them; there and then so much more glorious, as they here
have been more dolorous: Non sic impiis; but as for the wicked, it is not so
with them, they shall arise with all their blemishes, with all their
imperfections whatsoever! whatsoever may conduce to the improvement of their
shame, and punishment!

For the Sex, Tertullian again bids us remember, that the same bodies we lay
down, we shall take up, Mat. 22.8.
from that Matthew. 22. where Christ answers the Pharisees, not that there should
be no women, but no wives at the Resurrection, no marrying, or giving in
marriage, but (...), as the Angels: natural relations cease there, Sexes do
not. Lastly, for the Age that all shall rise in: St. Augustine, and from him the
whole Cry of the Schools, proportion it unto the age of Christ, that is, as
about 33 years, asserting it from S. Paul's oracle, Ephesians. 4.13.
Ephesians. 4. and likewise, from that forementioned Reduction, Acts 3. that so, as
in Adam all die, so by Christ (say they) even for the same age also, shall all
be made alive. Yet S. John tells us of a great multitude, he saw before the
throne, both of small and great (whether for stature, or degrees of glory, is
not manifest) and therefore these things I intrude not into the Articles of any
ones Belief, but only present them modestly, as Scholastic probabilities;
fully contented (for mine own part) gratefully to read, That Christ will change
our vile bodies, 1 Cor. 19.
and make them like unto His, etc.

And therefore, to turn Searches into Exhortations, Let us (...), not (...), be
wise unto sobriety, and possess our vessels in holiness, as those that are (you
see) and shall be the Temples of the holy Ghost: Each one therefore now rowse
up his sluggish soul; Surge, mea anima, surrexit Christus: Awake, arise, O my
slumbring soul, for thy Savior is already up: Stand up from the dead; for sin
is the grave of the soul, and that dead in trespasses and sins! buried in the
customs of it! yet Christ shall give thee life, Ephesians. 2. Yea, Ephesians. 2.1.
he lends the same hand unto us, as unto Lazarus, reviving, raising,
sweetning of us, with his fragrant graces. And this may be our confidence of
the second Resurrection, if we give but all diligence to be partakers of the
first, that is, from sin; then no fear of the second death. Rev. 20.6.
Believe Christ's reason of it, Joh 6.54.
John 6. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life,
and I will raise him up at the last day. This is the true Nectar and Ambrosia
(the Poets did but feign such Fare for their Gods) (...), to use Homers phrase,
the immortal blood, the true Nepenthe, that shall make us forget worldly
sorrows; that will Renew our Age better then an Aesons Bath: this the heavenly
Manna, the Living, the life-giving bread: so that the Schools in General, and
many of the Fathers where opinioned (from this John 6.) that there is a kind of
divine seed, infused by the Eucharist, not only into the souls, but into the
bodies also of faithful Receivers; whose (...), or vivifying Quality
inclines, and as 'twere, fitteth them to a Reviviction: non Disputo sed Credo,
ut Credo Edo; how far the words may bear it, I dispute not, but believe him
that said it, John. 6.54. whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

depiction of the ascension of Christ into heaven The Ascension of Christ.
matt: 28. mark: 16. luk: 24.*
*50. And he led them out as far as Bethany, and he lift up his hands and
blessed them.

51. And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and
carried upp into heaven.


Here the Plate.

POEM 16.
Upon this day, as the Sweet Prophet sings,
The Sun arose with healing in his wings,
The Sun of Righteousness; which lately sat
In a Cloud Red as Blood! yet now in state
He reapproacheth, with Refulgent Rays
Cheering our sadness, Lengthning of our Days,
Our declinations of Mortality
Into a Solstice of Eternity:
This day the Lord made, and it sorrow marred,
Nay, This day made the Lord, that is, declared.
His Mercy on others many wonders showed.
But now his Power one, on Himself bestowed.
This stronger Samson breaks the cords and bands
Of death and Hell, with his Triumphant hands;
See honest Joseph here from Prison come,
In Christ Returning from deaths dungeon:
The Gates of Gaza Samson bare away,
But Christ the Gates of death unhinged to Day:
Stout Daniel here, from fierce companions free
While Christ returns from vanquished Devils, See:
Here is that Temple which Jews did destroy,
Yet as foretold, repaired the third day:
Here Jonah too, the whale does cast on shore,
Now the devouring Grave does Christ restore:
Which Morsel has Death's stomach, so sick made,
He Will one day vomit all that's therein laid.
Mean time, the Grave's well Metamorphosed,
Thus warmed by Christ, Fear not to go to bed:
For though what is sown do die! yet see the Grain
With gay advantages revives again;
In stead of mouldring Drought, Green-Flourishing,
Each single virtue many Multiplying:
Christ thus our humane Nature did calcine,
Not Transubstantiate into divine:
But what was natural Spiritualize,
By the exaltation of the Qualities;
More then Angelick Beuty Crowns that Face,
Where the Form of a servant late took place:
That Body new Agility does move,
Who Is Center's not below now, but above,
Enfranchised too, from Earth's necessities
And supports humane, by Divine supplies;
Needs neither Rest, Food, Raiment, as before,
As being to hunger, thirst, and tire no more:
And when Christ fed, since, 'twas not Him to nourish,
But only his Disciples Faith to cherish:
And in his Body raised, those wounds and scars
Became the brightest parts, in their orb, stars:
Such the Prerogative spiritual is
Of bodies glorified, of Christ and His.
First fruits imply the Later; look what he
Enjoyed, we shall for act, though not degree;
Each vessel full of true felicity,
According to its Receptivity;
If we, mean while, but rise from graves of sin,
And Transitories, which most buried in!
If of such Bats, we pitch an Eagles flight;
And to be where this Carcass is, delight,
Then doubt not, but who thus the first partake,
The second Resurrection blessed shall make.
Thus by the resurrection of the dead,
The Living's Faith is chiefly comforted.
The COLLECT. The Epistle Col. 3. ver. 1. unto 8.
The Gospel John 20. ver. 1. to 11.

Almighty God, which through thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ, have overcome
death, and opened to us the gate of everlasting life, we humbly beseech thee,
that as by thy special grace preventing us, thou do put into our minds good
desires, so by thy continual help we may bring the same to good effect, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives, etc.

Upon Ascension Day, or Holy Thursday.
DISQUISITION 14.
We may well say of this Feast, as the Jews of that same Sabbath, John 19.
John 19.31.
(...), That this is an High Day; dies Solennis, a day of Joy to all
Generations, both in respect of Christ our Lord, and of all true Christian
people: as being the first day of Christ's Ascension in the flesh (for his Deity
cannot be said either to ascend, or descend;) this being the first day of his
sitting in joy and glory, rest and triumph, The Proem.
at the right hand of God. And as to our selves; This the first day (as it
were) of our right to Heaven, the first day that our Nature entered there,
whence we have both a Privilege and an Assurance to follow; as this day the
sentence of our corruption was changed; and in stead of that curse in the
beginning, Earth thou art, etc. it was now said unto our Nature, Ascend to
Heaven, and (which never was to Angels) Sit thou at my right hand, etc. Heb. 1.
Sure, Heb. 1.13.
an inestimable happiness was Christ's personal Society, his bodily Presence
while he lived on earth, could the hardened Jews have seen, or seeing, have
perceived it; but Light came into the world, and darkness comprehended it not.
They like the brutish Gadarens, had rather have their swine, then this pearl;
while the devout Saint Augustine, made it, you know, the chiefest of his chief
desires, Romam in Flore, Paulum in Cathredra, Christam in Carne. S. August. 3
chief desires.
To have seen widowed Room in her Virgin Foelicity; to have heard that Divine
Oracle, Saint Paul, out of the Pulpit: but above all, to have embraced his
Redeemer in the flesh; And could then have sung his Swann like Anthem; the Nunc
dimittis, as cheerfully as old Simeon; could willingly have closed his eyes
with that blessed object. How full of joy, needs must his presence be on earth?
in whose presence is fullness of joy in heaven? I, and who still carried Heaven
along with him?

And so filled with this joy of his presence, were his Apostles (he having often
miraculously sed them by Land, saved them by Sea, instructed them both by Sea
and Land) that they could not with patience, endure once to think of his
abscence; or hear of his Departure: and therefore one of them to enjoy him
longer, disswadeth him from his sufferings, Mat. 16. (though he be called Satan
for his labor) the rest in a sad copartnership of sorrow, lament the death and
loss of him. Mat. 16.22.
All his other actions were desiderabilia, but this parting as another death!
here their affections cry out with the Pilgrims of Emmaus, Mane nobiscum Domine
we have now most need of thee. Advesperascit, For now the dark evening draws
on, etc. All of them at his Final valediction, his telling them of his
Ascending to Glory, seem impatiently unwilling to stay behind him. John. 13.37.
John 13. verse 17. Why cannot I follow thee now (says Saint Peter.) He has
done with his Bonum est esse hic: now he thinks nothing worse, then to be
here, his Master gone (...) How can we know the way? says Saint Thomas, John
14. verse 5. how indeed, Thou gone, who art the way? Then says Saint Philip
unto him, Lord show us the Father, verse. 8. heareing Christ speak of going to
Him: Thus all of them in an united Longing, desire either to detain him, or
accompany him! and sweetly Saint BERNARD, In 2 Sermon. in Ascens.
Sympathizeth with them; Quantus dolor irrupit Apostolica Pectora, dum eum
propter quem omnia Reliquerant, a se tolli viderunt! what heartbreaking Grief,
alas! seized on the Apostles, when he for whom they had left all, was now
leaving them! Oh, how could the children of the Bride-chamber choose but mourn,
when the Bridegroom was to be taken from them, Mat. 9.15
Matthew 9. verse 15. And if so irksome be thy corporal absence! Oh CHRIST,
Let us never know how unsufferable is thy Spiritual, thine eternal
separation! but since for his corporal Absence there is an Oportet, Act. 3.21.
Acts 3. for the heavens must contain him till etc. and an Expedit, John 16.7.
Joh. 16. that it was expedient he go to the Father, for else the Comforter
would not come; see how like a tender Parent, he goes about to wean their
affections, and 14.1, 2. etc.
John 14. Little children (says he, admonishing them to be such, in the best
sense) yet a little while, and I am with you, (our longest abode here is no
better, Job 14.2.) but let not your heart be troubled: Cur turbaretur cor, cum
tantum deserit oculos? What need your heart be troubled, when he only leaves
your eyes, and not at all your heart? Therein I am with you to the end, and
therefore be not troubled, either to think what shall become of you hereafter;
For I go to prepare a place for you, ver. 2. For there was never any place for
humane flesh, til he carried it thither. Nor fear your selves left desolate in
present, for you shall not lose, but change your comfort, etc. Orabo Patrem,
that is his Office, Intercession; I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, you shall rather have two, then lose any one: I pass my
word, whose word shall never pass, John 14.18.
Non relinquam, I will not leave you comfortless, John 14.18. to which S.
Augustine sweetly alludeth, Euarg. in Psalm. 46.
Videte ascendentem, Credit absentem, Sperate venientem; sed tamen per
misericordiam occultam, etiam sentite praesentem: Behold him now ascending,
believe in him being absent, expect his second coming, and yet by his inward
mercies, apprehend him present with you. It Is handsomely observed by some
learned August. 157. Sermon. de Temp. Greg. in Hom. in Ezech. 1. etc.
Authors, that those four Beasts, ( Ezekiel. 1. and Apoc. 4.) mystically represent
the four chief Actions of Christ, in his work of our Redemption, the first with
the face of a man, points at his Incarnation: the second like a Bullock,
denotes his Passion: the third like a Lion, speaks his Resurrection: the
fourth of the Eagle, This of his Ascension, flying above the clouds, and
pearching in the highest heavens, at the right hand of God. Though our Saviors
first life on earth (for he lived two, you know, before, and after his
Resurrection) although his first (I say) was but one crimson thread, a mere
debasement, and continued passion! yet was his second as full of Triumph and
Exaltation: whereof there were three degrees or sublimations, answerable to
those three of his later Humiliation: Resurrectio Morti, Ascensio Discensui,
Sessio ad dextram, permansioni in sepulchro; Christ's Exaltation threefold.
viz. his Resurrection, opposed to his Death; his Ascent into heaven, to his
Descent into hell, and his sitting on the right hand of God, to his lying in
the Sepulcher: The first step of this exaltation, was his step out of the
grave; his Resurrection (as before demonstrated:) the second stair of his
Triumphancy, is this which now we contemplate, his translation from earth to
heaven; In Festum.
and this (says Bernard) is Consummatio reliquarum Solennitatum, and foelix
causula totius Itinerarii Christi, as it were the complement of all other
Solemnities, and happy period of Christ's whole Journal in the flesh. S. Luke
describes the substance, and circumstances of it, Luke 24.50. etc.
Luke 24. Eduxit discipulos. Christ now about to take his ultimum vale of his
disciples, He led them forth the city to Bethania; out of the city, to admonish
them, and us, of a Non habemus; that we have here no continuing city, Heb. 13.
but must seek one to come, Heb. 13. and led them forth only a few witnesses;
to show, He was as private in all those actions tending to his glory, as
public in those pointing out his shame: as his Twin-born poverty is laid open
in an Inn, Domus populi: nay, the commonest room, of that same common house, a
Stable! his buffetings and derisions in Pilat's open Hall! his crucifixion in
the eye of Jerusalem, when that was the very Face of the world. But the
glorious attendance on his Birth, that is by night, Luke 2. a multitude of the
heavenly Host. His radiant Transfiguration has but three beholders, Peter,
James, and John. All his miraculous cures he would have gratified with silence,
See thou tell no man. His Resurrection, at first, manifested but only to Mary
Magdalene; and this his most glorious Ascension, but to his Apostles only. He
led them forth, and all this to prick the bladder of vain glory, which so
puffs up the heart of man, especially now a days, so much made of, every
where so be-plush'd and scar-letted! but you see, Ostentatious ones are Christ's
Antipedes; who here contenteth his wonderful preferment, with no more pomp,
then His Apostles company; He led them forth: and that for their own sakes too,
giving them both a Blessing, and a Charge, The Blessing. and the Charge. Luke
24.50.
ver. 50. He lift up his hands, and blessed them; Happy those employments that
are so led on with his Blessing; Romans 10.15. Jer. 23.21.
and so those partings too, that close in mutual Benedictions. Secondly, There
was exite and praedicate, Go ye forth into all Nations, Matthew. 10.5.
and preach the Gospel: there is a double commission for them whom he chooses,
both of Authority, and Ability. This not to be done without warrant, Romans
10.15. Jer. 23.21. the inward Call is best known by the Talents, and both best
made known by the external Call of lawful Authority. And here that former
Edict was repealed, Matthew. 10. Go not into the way of the Gentiles: that was
to be the main way now, to all Nations, to every creature, that is, capable
thereof, or to the System and the Epitome of all creatures, Man, and to whom
they are all subservient; yet this large Commission of the Apostles, is since
again contracted into Provinces, Dioces, and parishes; yet too, with some
latitude of preaching any where, Acts 1.9.
as need or occasion shall require. And when he had spoken those things, he was
taken up, Acts 1. ver. 9. not till then. Observe the God of Order, He would
not leave the World, as it were Forbeares his Glory, until he had first
established all things in a composed setlednesse: it is Christian wisdom, then,
the timely ordering of our Affairs, e're Death prevent the care. Achitophell
was so far commendable, 2 Samuel 17.23.
that He set his house in order before he disordered himself, 2 Samuel 17. It is
counsel worthy a Prophet to give, and a King to receive, Set thine house in
order, for thou must die, 2 King. 20. thy treble house, of Soul, 2 Kin. 20.1.
Body, and Estate: and when he had spoken these things, (...), he was taken up:
the word intimates not any outward aid or supportation (a glorified body
needing no such advantages as is foreshewed) etsi Angelico comitatus obsequio,
Bern. in festum.
non tamen fulius Auxilio. though Angels bare Him company, they bare not Him;
They were his Servitors, not his Porters; and (you know) the Apostles saw them
in the place of Attendance, below him, far behind him, Act. 1.10.
Act. 1.10. Yea, he who of his own Will, laid down his body in the dust, the
same by his own Power, raised it up to Heaven: so the Apostle, (using the
Active voice likewise) (...), Ephesians. 4.10.
He that descended, even the same also is he which ascended, Ephesians. 4.

And (with the affectionate Disciples) now to look a little at the
Circumstances of our ascending Savior: The Time (you know) was forty days
after his Resurrection, Acts 1.3. so long was his second life on earth, --
repressis adhuc fulgoris sui radiis; Moses-like, vailing the splendour of his
glorious countenance, 40 days. His body had formerly been acquainted with that
number, Mat. 4.2.
Matthew. 4. having forty days miraculously abstained all natural sustenance;
and here again, abstaining in some kind, if not somewhat of his celestial
Banquet, yet at least his Banqueting House of Heaven, 40 days. Of all which
time, himself can only give an account. It Is not for flesh and blood to trace
the ways of Immortality: Yet sure we are, The time of Christ's Ascension.
that his stay was not, as some of his Apostles thought, then to restore again
the Kingdom to Israel. S. Bernard calls those, weak thoughts of so well
instructed Disciples. What should an heavenly body do with an earthly Throne?
how poor a business is the temporal Kingdom of Israel, for the King of all
eternity? and me thinks, the fond Millinaries should be cautioned by these
Misprisions: No, a more acceptable reason why our Savior did not immediately
ascend from Golgotha to Paradise, from his Grave to Heaven, per saltum (which
had been all one to his omnipotence) was more fully to convince the diffident
world, of the infallible evidences of his Resurrection, as also more fully to
instruct his Apostles in the mysteries pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Acts
1.3. Acts 1.3.
Yet longer then forty days he tarried not, says Augustine, ne videretur
terrena meditari: least he should seem to affect or meditate on earthly things:
and thereby (I hope) lends our souls wings, to fly along with him to Heaven:
yet by the way, take notice of the place of Christ's Ascension. And therein of a
duplex terminus, the place from whence, and the place whither: the Terminus a
quo, St. Luke in his Gospel tells us, was Bethania, Luke 34.50.
in his book of the Acts, The Mount of Olives. But he will soon be Reconciled
to himself; if we take notice that Bethania in latere Montis oliveti sita, Act.
1.12.
that the village Bethany is situate in the way, and on the side of the Mount
of Olives, both near Jerusalem. This Mount (you know) our Savior much
frequented, so that a Reverend Prelate of our own, calls it his Pulpit.
Bishop Hall.
Thence indeed was his Doctrine wont to distill like the dew, and his Prayers to
ascend as Incense: and this very mount was the place of his Agony! but now the
Hill of his Triumph and victory, once he found it planted with Thorns, Cant.
8.14.
or worse! but now one of those Mountains of spices, Cant. 8. how fit was it,
the same place which had witnessed his Humanity by suffering there, should
likewise testify his Deity, by his ascending thence; the same place for both,
Passionem and Ascensionem Eodem spectare docet, The place of Christ's Ascension.
demonstrates both his Passion and Ascension tended to the same end, man's
salvation. And in that he ascended from Bethania, which signifies an house of
affliction, and obedience; how does it incite us to that better sacrifice,
obedience? and forewarn us, that we must not likewise look to ascend but from
the place of sufferings. Per varios casus, per tot discrimina Rerum,
Tendimus in Latium. --
Through many Tribulations must we enter into that Kingdom, Acts 14.22. Now the
Terminus ad Quem, Act. 14.22.
to which he ascended, was the highest heaven; I, whether else but home to his
own habitation? jam cum se Dominum universorum quae sunt in terra, mari and
inferno probasset! (and says holy Bernard) having already proved himself Lord
of earth, sea, and hell, as the Earth acknowledged him her Lord, when at his
voice, She rendered up his Lazarus, and quaked at his passion: the Sea obeyed
him, when as it became a glassy pavement to his feet, and his treasury for
Tribute. And Hell confessed him Conqueror, when Satan yielded in the
wilderness, and was out-braved by Him. O Hell, where is thy victory! it
therefore now remained, that as Lord of Heaven also, He should pass through all
the yiedling Regions of the air, unto the Glory of the highest Heavens. Old
Philosophy told us of eight several Heavens; Aristot. l. de coelo.
and new has since found out three or four Orbs more; but the safest guide,
Theology, reduces all to three, 2 Cor. 12. 2 Cor. 12.2.
The first taken for that Element of air, Genesis 1. and frequently in Scripture,
the fowls of Heaven. The 2d. for the whole Frame of the celestial Orbs,
viz. the Firmament, and Planets, Psalm. 19. Coeli enarrant Gloriam Dei; Every
Star is as a Golden Tongue materially to speak the praises of their Maker. But
the third is Seeds Beatorum, that Glorious Mansion, where are the many Mansions
of the Blessed, called by some Coelum Empyreum, not as being of any burning
nature, but of a Fire-like, lightsome brightness. Saint Paul, who was wrapped
thither, calls it the third Heaven, in relation to the former two. Saint
Augustine gives another proper Tripartition of Coelum corporale, Saint Austin.
Coelum. 3.
spirituale, and super intellectuale: the Corporal Heaven, (says he) conteins
the Spheres, and whole material Fabric: the Spiritual One is the Habitacle of
Angels, and all blessed Spirits; the Super-intellectual is a Place apart, a
Sanctu^ sanctorum, solely appropriated to the Deity, and thither, (says he)
Christ ascended as the Apostle means, Ephesians. 4.30.
(...) far above all heavens, Ephesians. 4. into that true Paradise, that
habitation of light, that light inaccessible, the Kingdom of Heaven. But read
we not of others that ascended before Christ? yes, but like those that rose
before him, with difference enough. Enoch indeed walked with God, Genesis 5.24.
and was taken away, Genesis 5. and Elijah found a Coach-way to Heaven, 2. King.
2. So me dare not think these bodily ascended, 2 King. 2.
but as it is said of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. that God buried them, no man knowing of
their sepulcher unto this day. Others dreaming that they are still alive,
reserved in some by part of the world, personally to fight with Antichrist; but
sua fruantur insania, let them have their Fancy to themselves; Greg. the
great in locum.
while we here, distinguish with Gregory, Homo purus Adjutorio indigebat;
These, though purest of men, wanted supporters (you see) a Chariot from Heaven,
and Angels to draw it: but Christ by his own power, whereby he first made all
things, lifted himself now above all things; nay indeed, Causa fuit ejus
Ascensio, His Ascension, though later in time, yet in order of Nature before,
was the sole efficient of their elevation, as shall be one day of ours. Next
for the Instruments of his Ascension: Ps. 104 3. Act. 1.9.11.
a cloud (says the text) received him out of their sight; and not
unprophesied, posuit Nubem vehiculum, Psalm 104. He it was that made the Clouds
his Chariots, and rode upon the wings of the wind. I, that cloud was the Canopy
of the King of glory, which the blessed Angels carried over him, while he was
now going to that high Court of Parliament, the Court of the most high, to
treat about a Peace 'twixt Heaven and Earth. A cloud received him out of their
sight, (we cannot without a just Reprehension, pry with curiosity, where God
has interposed a cloud of secrecy,) Act. 1.11. and therefore let not the
Piety of our Affections spend it self in vain desires of an Earthly Pilgrimage,
to see the pretended steps of our Ascending Savior, the Pressures of his Feet
still on Mount Olivet; but rather veiw and trace his spiritual footsteps (I am
sure) more certain, less expensive, in his sacred Oracles of Scriptures; for
thereunto are we called (says the Apostle) 1 Pet. 2. for Christ also suffered
for us, leaving us an example, 1 Pet. 2.21.
that we might follow his steps: though not Passibus aequis, yet Amoris: Ephesians.
5. Ephesians. 5.2.
Be ye followers of God etc. and walk in love as Christ has loved us.

Lastly, the end of his Ascension, was, ut impleret omnia, Ephesians. 4.10. that he
might fulfill all things: all things concerning us, all that concerned himself
for us, to complete the work of our Redemption, and to Prepare each of us one
of those many Mansions, to open the Kingdom of heaven to all believers. The day
of Christ's Ascension.
Pro Nobis facta (says Saint Bernard) Christ his Ascension, was also for our
exaltation, assuring us here with a confirmed hope, that our souls shall,
whenever separated, ascend to him, and at length our soul and body both, like
his, by his to heaven, John 14.3. And as unto himself, to fulfill Prophesies,
Psalm 68. Thou art gone up on high, Ps. 68 18.
have led captivity captive, etc. Also to show an irrefragable Demonstration of
his Godhead, by that exalting his Manhood into heaven: to manifest to the whole
world (to Heaven, as well as earth) that glorious Majesty of his, which by
Divine dispensation had so long lay shrouded in the form of a servan, till now
by entering (...), God and Man into Heaven, such a new Guest, as the glad Angels
never saw there before: and how readily (me thinks) how joyfully did those
Dorekeepers of the house of our God, (...).
open unto him? when he called, Aperite Portas, stand open ye Gates, be you
lift up ye Everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in.

And, if some serious devotions have believed, that at Christ's Passion, the
whole Quire of Angels and Saints were interrupted in their sacred Hymns, and
for a season ceased their Singing Haliluiahs! O what increase of joys, by Rule
of contrariety, may we here imagine, when he returned Triumphantly unto his
Throne of Glory? David, as though he had heard that Music of the Spheres,
awakeneth his Harp and Lute, bears a part with them, Psalm 47. Psalm. 47.5.
Deus ascendit cum Jubilatione, God is gone up with a merry noise, and the Lord
with the voice of Melody. Gone up, I, to the third and highest step of all
his exaltation; and that is the Right hand of God. (And but a touch of that,
which mortals cannot handle) Dextra, Majestratem, Gloriam, Honorem Denotat;
Gods Right hand what?
the Right hand is a Metaphor, expressing Power, Honor, Glory, Empire and
dominion, to all which Christ was here exalted, Ephesians. 1.21. Raised from the
dead, Ephesians. 1.21.
set at Gods right hand in Heavenly places, far above all principalities and
powers, might and Dominion, and every name that is named in this world, or that
to come. Indeed, his Resurrection and Ascension were but Motus ad hunc
Terminum, Only the motion tending to this perfection: This being, Solium
Triumphale; his transcendent Throne of Glory, where (Triumphing over sin,
death and Hell) He shall Reign (says the Apostle) till He has put all things
under him, 1 Corinthians 15. 1 Cor. 15.
And whereas the other two, Resurrection and Ascension, shall be in some manner
common to us with Christ (thorough his infinite goodness) one day to Arise,
and ascend to Glory: but to Sit at the right hand of God in his Kingdom of
Glory, is too high for the most beloved Disciple, Heb. 1.13.
that is only the Fathers Gift, and the Sonns Prerogative, not communicable,
either to Man or Angel, Hebr. 1.13. There he Sits alone, the Posture of
State, of Rest of Judgment (as one pithily, and sweetly) Quiescentis,
Regnantis, Judicantis est. Well is our Redeemer (after his Passion and
Ascension) said to Sit at the Right hand of God (says he) Quia post Laborem
Requiescit, Ardens in locum.
post praelium Regnat, and postquam Judicatus est Judicat, as keeping his
Sabbath of Rest after his six grand His Nativity, Circumcision, Presentation,
Baptism, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension. Raulin in Festum.
Labors: as after Conquest reigning: and after himself adjudged, being the
Judge of all things; and what a comfort is it to have a Friend of the Judge,
before we come to the Bar? and that is our consolation, if not our own
default; Christ is ascended our Best friend, our Brother, our Advocate, and now
we have a Mediator in Heaven. I, till this Peacemaker went up, Sin had set
open war 'twixt heaven and earth, Justice with an unbound Arm fetched a more
heavy stroke! not only on single persons, but upon whole Cities, Genesis 17. Genesis 7
Genesis 19. nay on the whole sinful world, Genesis 7. then no Moses in the gap, no
Jacob there, to wrestle for a blessing! but now (happy day for us) the Angel of
the Covenant is gone up, to hold the hand of the striking God of Abraham: our
Aaron is at the high Altar to pray for the People, Heb. 9.24. The Sanctum
Sanctorum.
Hebrews 9.23. Christ our high Priest is entered into the Heaven of Heavens,
once for all; to make an Atonement for us: what place then is there now left
black Despair, but only Hell? Rouse thee, afflicted soul, and ly no longer in
the groans of Cain! For though the envious man, Satan, be ever pleading
against us at the throne of God, yet now is salvation in heaven (says Saint
John) and the power of Christ, which casts down the accuser of the Brethren,
Rev. 12.10.
etc. Rev. 12.10. There his Intercession cries louder for us, then our sins
against us: Ostendit Patri vulnera, (says Saint Augustine) He is ever showing
to his angered Father those wounds He suffered for our sins! and so, whatever he
be with us, God is in Him appeased. Thus pleads he our cause before the
eternal Judge: an Advocate, 1 John. 2.1.
1 John 2. If any man sin, etc. Yet for all this presume not, Ransomed Soul,
be not high-minded, but fear: God forbid, sin should, because grace abounds.
Desperation, like Saul, slays thousands, but Presumption her ten thousands.
This were even to crucify the Son of God afresh, and grieve the Holy Spirit,
Ephesians. 4.30. Ephesians. 4.30.


Lastly, Though we have now one, yet have we but one Mediator in Heaven: we
dare not admit of that Delusion, that there are as many Saviors as good men,
(Each one meriting for himself, some for others,) and no fewer Intercessours
then Saints and Angels; (since Noah, Job, and Daniel shall deliver but their
own souls by their righteousness, Ezech. 14.) Ezeck. 14.14.
We dare not so rob God of his Honor, nor derogate from Christ's
all-sufficient merits, and intercession; (for all the thin Distinction of
Mediatio Redemptionis and Intercessionis.) Away with cobweb shifts, and Aerie
phansies, Listen to infallibility, 1 Timothy 2. (...). 1 Timothy 2.5.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, even He that was
both, (and none but He,) Jesus Christ: then to close with St. Bernards Counsel,
Ascendit Christus, sequamur Fratres, sequamur Agnum quocunque ierit, sequamur
patientem, resurgentem, multo lubentius Asceudentem, etc. Christ is now
ascended into Heaven, what do we grovelling so on earth? Letus follow, Brethren,
let us follow the Lamb whither soever he goes. Let us follow him suffering,
Bernard. in Festum.
Arising, much more willingly ascending: exaltationem concupiscimus omnes. We
all love to be exalted, born Corahs all, of an aspiring Nature, yet change but
the object, (set Heaven and grace in the place of earthly transitories) and
keep your Ambition still. Si consurrexistis. coascendite, if risen with Christ,
Ascend with him. Borrowing the wings of the Dove, Scalam de vitiis, make a
ladder of your Sins, says Aug. every one of which subdued, is a new stepp
toward Heaven.

POEM 17.
THose three steps of Christ's later Passion,
Were answered in his exaltation
By triple opposites; building him high
As his foundation laid debasingly:
The degradation of his bitter death
Sweetened by Reviviction, Resumed Breath:
His bed made in the dust with worms to ly!
Was fairly opposed by his Ascent on high:
And for his stooping to the infernal Pit,
He now at Gods Right hand of power does sit.
The first step we have trod; Lets now ascend
The rest, and Heaven shall be our journies end:
To th'Mount of Olives then, for That's the place,
(Christ's wonted Pulpit) that must have the Grace
Of this Triumphant wonder; there while he
Instructs and comforts his disciples, see
Elijah in his Antitipe again
Transported thence, in a celestial wain;
The Clouds his Chariot, and the nimble winds
His winged horses, Angels in their kinds
His Train and Lacquayes yet no needed aid,
As is of Enoch, and Elijah said.
Thus stately mounted, his etherial Chair
Glides through the yiedling Regions of the Air
To the everlasting doors, which open wide
To the King of Glory, who brings a spring Tide,
Both of new Joy and wonder to that place,
Where never till now appeared a Humane Face:
And if some serious minds, Christ's Passion thought
Even to Heavens Quire some silence to have wrought,
And for awhile the Saints and Seraphins.
Thence interrupted in their sacred Hymns!
O here, by contrary's, what Flood of joys,
When Christ ascends with such a Raptive Noise?
David as though He Had heard the Melody,
Straight Tunes his Harp, and joins in the Harmony:
Angels and Saints, all one glad Chorus Sing
The Welcome Triumphs of their Glorious King.
Where Gods Right hand being his triumphant throne,
He still for us makes Intercession,
And such as needs no help; who Rivals join,
His honor, and their own success, Purloyn!
As Angels Pry this Death, so let us Scan
What Is said or done to Them, as here to Man?
Then from Christ's Mount, now let our souls take Rise,
Whose Olivet speaks Peace and victories.
Follow our Leader in this holy Fight,
From Earth and Sin, leading to glorious Light.
Follow the Lamb we should, whereso'ere he goes,
Through joys Spiritual, through temporal woes!
Suffering, or Rising follow him; but sure
Ascending, we will easily endure,
Born Corahs all, yet be but Heaven the Hill
We climb, and then keep our Ambition still:
Souls are but sparkles of Coeiestial fire,
O let them to their Center then aspire:
Though Bodies are slow Paced, Let souls ascend,
And bodies will ore'take their joys in the end:
That so a full Beatifying ascent,
As Christ's, may be our Journall's complement.
The COLLECT The Epistle. Act. 1. v. 1. to 12.
The Gospel. Mar. 16. v. 14. to the end.

Grant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, that like as we do believe thy only
begotten Son our Lord, to have ascended into the heavens: so we may also in
heart and mind thither ascend, and with him continually dwell, who lives and
reigns with Thee and the holy Ghost, one God world without end. Amen.

depiction of the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the disciples at Pentecost
The coming of ye Holy Ghost. Act. 2.
1 And when ye day of Pentecost was come, they were all with one accord in one
place.

2 And suddenly there came a sound from heaven ect.

3 And there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like fire, and it sat upon
each of them.

4 And they were all filled with the holy ghost, And began to speak with other
tongues etc


The Plate here.

Whitsunday.
DISQUISITION 15.
THis Day is worthily devoted to the Holy Ghost, the third Person in the
Blessed Trinity, by whom all things, times, and persons, that are such, are
sanctified and made holy: Epist. 118. ad Januarium.
and therefore so devoted over all the world, says Augustine, in memorial of
that day, Acts 2. wherein the Spirit, after a Wonderful and mysterious manner
descended, for the propagating, governing, and preserving of Christ's holy
Catholic Church, unto the end of the world: It Is sometime called Pentecost, as
being fifty days after our Christian Passover, ( Deuteronomy. 16.) The Jewish
Pentecost was a memorial of the Law, which was an hidden Gospel; (...), from
(...). i. e. Fifty.
Acts 2.1.
but our Pentecost a memorial of the Gospel, which is the revealed Law: One
delivered in Mount Sinai, the other in Mount Sion, and sometimes called
Whitsunday, from the glorious light of heaven, that was then shed upon the
earth; as also from a custom of some Christians: Thence clothing themselves
in white, Cyril. Catech.
in token of the joy and solemnity thereof, as Saint Augustine speaks; for
whereas Christ's Birth, and other times, we keep in Honor of his coming in the
flesh; now at Whitsuntide, we should rejoice more for his coming in the
Spirit. Now we have a double joy, Sermon. 133. de Evang.
(says he) Quod abeuntem Christum non amisimus, venientem Spiritum possidemus:
that we have not lost our Christ departed, but yet enjoy the Spirit approached.
I, the Sun of Glory, being now in his height, shines forth on his Apostles in a
Light from Heaven: and knowing the worlds charity would soon wax cold, (as he
foretold them Matthew. 24.) He warmeth them with a shower of Heavens better fire:
and lest great sorrows for his Absence strike them dumb; as ingentes stupent!
He sends each of them for a Token, an inspired tongue. Christ's Promises, O
how worthy confidence! that so in each point answered their necessities, as not
in any thing left them comfortless, John. 14. (...), whereas without him, Joh.
14.15, 16.
and his Comforts, what forlorn Orphans are the best of men? very Apostles,
you see in the Metaphor, here as fatherless children, or widdowed mothers!
Orphanos. In locum.
Hierom renders it, Orbos; so Beza. One of the words speaking a near Allegory
to helpless children. The other to deprived parents! both pregnantly
expressing man's destitute condition without Christ; Christ's Fatherly affection
toward man: Man, who left alone, is the desolatest creature in the world!
especially for Spirituals, how unable therein to help himself, Romans 1.19.
so much as to a good thought, Romans 7. When thus the Apostles without Christ,
are very Orphans, as children, Fatherless, exposed to oppressions, injuries,
and delusions! Let Nature boast of nothing, what are the rest of men without
him, but even worms, as it were, and no men! But on the other side, How
manifestly, did Christ's Parentall care appear to them! that while present,
gathered them as an Hen her chicken, and now absent, set so good a Guardian
over them! Earth could not afford a Comforter sufficient, (no alas, her
miserable ones!) and therefore Heaven shall; nor is any Angel there thought
good enough, to be entrusted with so dear a charge, but even God himself, the
Holy Ghost, who from the sweet effects of his Illumination and Assistance, is
Emphatically styled (...), of all the world, the Comforter; indeed sometimes he
is called (...); John 14.16.
(i. e.) another Comforter; yet not exclusively, but relatively; Christ still
remaining one. Abiit per id quod Homo est, manet per id quod Deus. It Is Saint
Augustines; Christ, though absent in body, yet by spiritual protection, Lo, I
am with you to the end of the world, Matthew. 28. Nay, and so far even
literally, it is made good by Him, Matthew. 28.20.
being personally for ever with our humane Nature: Lo, I am with you, etc. or
else another Comforter, (says Calvin both for distinction of Persons, In locum.
and difference of Gifts: as it was proper to the Son to pacify the wrath of
God, to ransom us from hell, to purchase life by dying: but peculiar to the
Spirit to aply these Benefits; to make us partakers of Christ, and all his
saving graces. I, we have (...): Cor. 12.14.
(i. e.) Diversities of gifts by that same Spirit; or as the same Apostle else
where calls it, (...). (i. e.) the manifold wisdom of God. Spiritus
benignus, Spiritus dulcis, Spiritus fortis: So St. Bernard, He is a Spirit of
Comfort, as various as our Misery; a Spirit of Love, to unite the envious; a
Spirit of strength, to support the weak; a Spirit of truth, to guide the
ignorant; a Spirit of Consolation, to bind up the Afflicted. Psalm. 68.18.
So that David's prophecy is fulfilled here, Psalm. 68. Ascendisti and Dedisti:
Thou art gone up on high, and have given gifs unto men. I, Thou have now given
all good gifts, by giving them the Giver of all, the Holy Spirit. The gifts
bestowed, as upon this day, were of a double considerability: viz. Officia, and
Gratiae, Abilities, or Graces: Either gifts of Edification for the Church,
which are legible, Ephesians. 4.11. He gavesome Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and sme Pastors and Teachers: Or gifts of Sanctification, for the
immediate Benefit of Souls, whose Catalogue you have, Gal. 5.22. The Fruit of
the Spirit, is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, etc. Psalm. 68.18. which St. Paul repeats, Ephesians. 4.8. David's word,
received; and the Apostles. Gave; no opposition, butshewing the Heavenly
Derivation, etc. But what? John 20.22. Dr. Hammon. in locum.
had they not formerly received the Holy Ghost? Joh. 20. (...), yet some say,
This signifies here, not the actual giving of the Holy Ghost: for that came
not on them, till Acts 2. and they are appointed to abide at Jerusalem, Luke
24.29. til they were endued with power from above; which therefore now before
his Ascension they had not received; and when the Spirit came, it would lead
them into all truth: and as yet it appears by their question, Acts 1.6.
Acts 1.6. they were not thus led, but only the confirming to them his former
promise, and by the ceremony of breathing on them, to express the (...), The
eternal Breath and Spirit of God, sealing it, as it were, solemnly unto them;
The Holy Ghost, not received, til now.
and preparing and fitting them for the receiving of it. So says Theophylact,
(...). The words [Receive the Holy Ghost] signify; Be ye ready to receive him:
and again, (...), etc. He breathed on them, not now distributing the perfect
gift of the Holy Ghost; for that was to be done at Pentecost, but fitting them
for the receiving of it; for though in the next words, [Whose sins, etc.] the
Power of the Keys, or Stewardship of the Church, were actually instated on
them, yet not to be exercised by them, til the holy Ghost came down upon them,
as Ephesians. 4.8. It is first, He gave gifts to men, (at the Descent of the
Spirit) and then gave some to be Apostles, etc. v. 11. yet this preparation of
them amounts to what others assert of the Holy Ghost, ver. 11.
formerly given, though in remiss degrees. Per Infusionem non per effusionem:
according to David's begged infusion, not to Joel's effusion, per
Insufflationem, non per Imissionem (says Ludolpus) by Christ's breathing on,
them, accipite Spiritum sanctum, (The pattern of our Churches pious ordination)
Receive ye the Holy Ghost: Spiritum ante, hic plenitudinem: The Apostles (says
he) had received the Spirit before, but now the fullness of it; they receive
now not only it, but Him: not only the Grace of the Spirit, but the Spirit of
Grace himself, by a more personal Immission. Prius Spiritum Fidei, et
Intelligentiae: nunc Fervoris et Illuminationis. Before they had a Spirit of
Faith, and understanding; now One of zeal, 2 King. 2.
and higher Illumination. So that, they had now what Elisha sometimes prayed
for, Duplicatum Spiritum, the Spirit doubled on them, 2 King. 2. I, They had
already Baptismum Fluminis, the watery Baptism of John; but now Flaminis, They
receive this of the Holy Ghost, and of fire; here every of their tongues is
touched with a Cole from the Heavenly Altar; and as of old, God showred upon I
srael the Food of Angels, Tertullian in Festum.
so here he seems to bestow on men, the Tongues of Angels: Thus Christ
ascending up on high, and leaving of the world, that we might be the better
assured of his coming again, (says Tertullian) Took our Pledge, that is, our
flesh to Heaven; and also left with us his Pawn, to wit, his Spirit; which is
therefore called Arrha, or Arrabo, 2 Cor. 1.22. 2 Cor. 1.22.
Who has given us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. And the earnest,
you know, is a Relative to the rest of the Recompense. The Jews, you know, had
three more solemn Feasts, which their Leviticall Law, bound them to observe
Deutr. 16.) viz. (...), (...), (...) (i. e.) first, the Passover, so called
and instituted for a Remembrance, Deuteronomy. 16.
how the destroying Angel smiting the Egyptians, passed over the Houses of the
Israelites. 2. The Feast of Tabernacles, being an humble Memorial of their
living in Tents, in the wilderness after their Deliverance from Egyptian
bondage. The third, This of Pentecost or the Feast of weeks, in Commemoration
of the Law given in Mount Sinai, fifty days after their coming out of Egypt,
and therefore named from the number, and celebrated so many days after the
Passover. Upon this later Festival, (which now we solemnize in this later
Reflection,) the Chorus Apostolicus, or whole Company of the Apostles, being
assembled, Acts 2. (...), as in One Place, Acts 2.1.
so All with One Accord: (Unity is a Preparative for Sanctity, and holy gifts
seldom are bestowed on such as love Divisions) the promised Comforter is
performed to Them: given some ten days after Christ's Ascension, (when
Re-promised.) God often hears prayers, which He not answers presently: ten
days after: Vt Apostoli or ationibus se aptos Adventui praepararent: that in
mean time the Apostles might with prayer, and other pious exercise, prepare for
so Divine a Guest, and render themselves fit Temples for the Holy Ghost. Hodie
visibiliter, apparuit Invisibilis, as on this Festival, the Invisible himself,
appeared visibly: and now, as one observes, all the three Persons of the Sacred
Trinity have, (as it were) bodily manifested themselves to man: God the Father
to Adam, to Moses, and the Patriarcks: God the Son exhibited himself in humane
flesh, to, and for all the world; and here the Apostles are so unanimously, so
devoutly met; as that the Holy Ghost thinks good to be of the Company: where
but observe the Act, and the Concomitants; the Person, and his Attendants:
Ludolphus in locum.
Spiritus Sanctus in variis figuris, pro varietate operationum; The Spirit to
emblem forth his variety of operations, comes here accompanied with several
remarkables: and first, a sudden sound from Heaven begins the wonder Sonus
hic symbolum, Sonitus Evangelii: and this found was but the Symboll of the
Apostles Doctrine: whose sound went into all lands, Psalm 19.
Psalm. 19. I say, the Preaching of the Gospel, through the world after this
Receipt, was but the echo of that sound: next, there was Flatus vehemens, a
mighty wind; and that was the wind that blows where it lists, a carnali
Palea Corda purgare. A wind that is, and need be mighty, to blow away the
chafe of all Carnality, and teach an holy Impetuousnesse, against the strong
holds of Sin: Then after these two Ushers, comes the Spirit himself, in
cloven Tongues like Fire: Three grand Questions.
where I resolve all into these three Queries, Why the Holy Ghost here pleased
to descend in Fire? why in tongues? why in cloven tongues?

First, Why in fire? for to some, it may seem strange, to hear of a fiery
Comforter: Did not Sodom and Gomorrha? 2 King. 1.
did not Elijah's Enemies find that a Destroyer? and were not some of the
Disciples themselves chid by their Master, for such fiery zeal? 2 Pet. 3.
And shall not that same angry Element, make one day a bon-fire of the world?
Talk we then of such a Comforter? yes. When God is in the fire, the veriest
bush shall not consume: and yet mistake not this, as meant of real fire, such
as is comburent, it being but a Tanquam; only like it in appearance. So the
Original (...), (in the Genitive) Tongues, like as they had been of Fire; a
Lapide, and Cajetan: in locum.
and this Tanquam notat similitudinem, non veritatem; this word imports
Resemblance, not Reality of fire: Speciem ignis habens, having indeed a show of
fire for Color, Light, and Motion, but without combustion: And He appeared
like fire, rather then ought else: Propter Lumen pariter and Ardorem: To show,
He gave both Light and Heat to his Apostles; (i. e.) both zeal, and knowledge:
Heat, for God detesteth cold devotion, nay, but a lukewarm one. Nauseam creat,
Rev. 16.3.
makes his stomach rise, Rev. 3. He must have continual fire burning on his
Altar, (much more then Vesta) ardent love, and fervent zeal, always in the
hearts of His Disciples.

2dly, Like Fire for light too, and that a double one, viz. of charity, and
knowledge: to give knowledge of salvation to them that sit in darkness, and the
shadow of death: and too, of good example, to shine before men, that they
seeing our good works, Why in fire?
may glorify, etc. So that this holy Fire commends each of the Apostles to
the world, as Christ did Saint John Baptist, both for a Burning, and a shining
Lamp: and indeed, He that has knowledge or charity without zeal, is but too
like the Glowworm, he has some cold splendor, without heat or efficacy!
whereas, who so has zeal without the rest, (as now a days too many such blind
metled Horses!) They are so far like Hell fire, that they burn, and give no
light! but in whose breast soever they are united, such are baptized with the
Holy Ghost, and with fire: Again, Fire is a bright Hieroglyphick of Grace; I,
those Septem (...). the seven chief Donatives of the Holy Spirit, are not
frigidly demonstrated by Fire: Purgat: Fire, you know, purifieth the Gold from
dross; so does the Spirit by the gift of Love, purge out the old Leaven of
Malice and Hypocrisy, turning all Injuries into a Golden Patience.

Liquefacit. Fire melts most obdurate Metals, and mouldeth them into any
Figurations: The seven Graces of the Holy Spirit.
So does the Spirit by the Gift of Poenitence, dissolve our steely Hearts,
(conforming them to Christ, and the best Patterns,) making them flow through
our eyes, like a Celestial Spring.

Consolidat. Fire constipateth and hardneth the clay, so that no Rain or storm
can injure it: and so does the Spirit by the gift of Patience, confirm and
fortify us against all Afflictions.

Decorat. Fire makes new and burnisheth the Mines, So does the Spirit by the
gift of Knowledge, Adorn and Beautify the Minds of men.

Elevat. Fire carries up vapors, and things of lighter Nature, with its
ascending motion: So does the Spirit by the Gift of Faith, raise our Desires,
and sublimate our Endeavors toward Heaven.

Illuminat. Fire imparteth light to all that are about it: and so does the
Spirit, by the Gift of Wisdom, enlighten the Understanding, and direct the
Practice.

Dulcorat. Fire (you know) sweetneth, and preserves things from corruption: So
also does the Spirit, by the Gift of Prudent Innocence, sweeten our whole life
into a continuail Feast, and keeps Souls entire from spiritual
Putrefaction. In a word, our great God himself is a Fire (says Scripture) to
the wicked (...), Deuteronomy. 4. which Saint Paul translateth (...). Deuteronomy. 4.2.24.
Heb. 12.29.
Hebr. 12. (i. e.) an eating fire (to Sodom and Gomorrha, Nadab, and Abihu, to
such Stubble:) a Consuming Fire, but to the Faithful, to the Poenitent, (as
here) Ignis illuminans, a Light unto their Feet, and a Lanthorn to their
Paths, to guide their steps into the way of Peace; Peace temporal,
spiritual, and Eternal: And now the Question of this Fire, is extinguished,
admit here a few words of Tongues; that is the second, Why in Tongues! the Holy
Ghost was pleased formerly to Appear in the mild Emblem of a Dove: viz. when
he flew down on him, who was as void of Guile, as that same bird of gall: but
now, pointing out the effect, by the external cause, he speaks his presence
in the form of Tongues. But, as before of Fire, so neither must we here
imagine real Tongues, but their Similitude; non carneae linguae (says my
Author) these were no fleshy tongues; Gorran in locum.
no, those had been too gross, incongruous Representatives of the subtilest
spirit; these were of a rarer substance, suppose of purest air condensed into
this shape, and lightened from above: so that as before the Spirit descended
Sicus Columba, Matthew. 3. but in the likeness of a Dove, so here no more then
tanquam linguae; only in the similitude of tongues; Why in Tongues?
and in them specially, ut qui Intellectui Lucem, Ardorem Affectui, Ori verbum
ministraret, in Tongues above all Figures, that he who had given light to their
intellectuals, and fervency to their affections, might now also add a voice,
and expressive faculties to the tongue, without which all abilities are but
like the talent in the napkin, and the napkin hid in the earth! Jewels locked
up in a Cabinet, whose key is lost: Act. 24.
Elocution being the Orators primum, secundum, tertium, expression the
ornament of all; here is therefore opened to them a door of utterance.
Caeperunt loqui variis linguis, Act. 2. They spoke with diverse tongues as etc.
these tongues then betokened the Gift of languages, whereby they were enabled to
perform that great task Christ had set them, Mat. 8.19.
(...), go forth and teach, etc. See, God never gives a burden, but withal
strength to bear it: if he will have them teach, He will furnish them with
Tongues; else the Apostles themselves (you see) were not to go from Jerusalem,
and preach, till they had received the Tongues: yet how many in this daring
Age, praecipitate into the holy Function, before any Receipt of the Holy Ghost
in Tongues? of as many languages, as their Mother, without ever waiting as the
Apostles here, or perhaps, scarce once seeing the place where they are
bestowed, an University! But on the other side, no sooner have the Apostles
here received the Gift, but like good Stewards, forthwith they employ it. Men
ought to make a timely use of their endowments (still moving in the proper
Sphere of their vocation.) And what have They to answer for, that have received
this Gift of Tongues, and yet are dumb? Psalm 39.
I mean not that enforced silence, which now many a David keeps, not without
pain and grief for it! which Sin shall light on its Imposers: but for
voluntary Mutes. I am sure, Isai. 56.10.
the Prophet gives them but a biting Character, Isai. 56. and Saint Bernard,
(as seriously, as wittily,) on that 12th of Matthew. ver. 36. Of every idle word,
etc. Etiam otiofi silentii reddenda Ratio: Bernard. in Mat. 12.36.
as of idle words, so of every idle silence, (says he) must an account be
given: here they immediately began to speak with tongues, as etc. Straight the
whole multitude of strangers, (Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, Romans, Jews,
Mesopotamians, Syrenians, Cretes, and Arabians,) all in a general wonder,
acknowledge them speaking in their own tongues, (...), Magnalia Dei, the
Wonderful things of God: And it may pass for one of those Magnalia, the
sudden Rise and strange Growth of the Church immediately there upon: how from
that Embrio, In Jury is God known, it commenced, as it were, per Saltum, into a
full stature by Proselytes of all Nations, and daily numberless Additions:
This brighter Moon, does wax, and may she know no wayne, These Tongues speak
the converlion of the Nations.
but still increase, til she be multiplied unto her Full of Glory: the Spouse,
(I say) that until then, like Jacob beyond Jordan, was but obscure, and of
small Retinue, able to plead but little visibility; but here, like Him again,
having once passed some bitter waters, can challenge either Stars, or Sands for
Number: singing now, Laudate Dominum omnes Terrae, Praise the Lord, all ye
Lands. I. Quid Linguae Gentium, nisi conversionem Gentium? 1. What else do the
Tongues of all Nations here import, but the conversion of the Nations? Again,
whereas at first all languages save one, were as a curse for sin, Genesis 11.
Genesis 11. a punishment of pride; and none of them, as yet (by some) thought
holy, unless the three inscribed on the Cross of Christ; viz. Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin; why here, were all the other sanctified by this appearance of the
holy Ghost in Tongues? for which Let all Tongues and Languages, Kindreds and
Nations, (especially that enjoy these Fountains open, and not stopped up by
envious Philistines,) ever sing praises to the Lord, and speak good of his Name,
for so affording them his word, in their own language, as a Means and Message
of their Salvation. Lastly, The Tongue too, is an Instrument of Taste, as well
as Speech, Distnguit sapores, sapidum ab insipido, dulce ab Amaro. So does the
Holy Spirit rectify the Palate of the soul, hereby teaching her to relish
Good, and disgust Evil; to prefer a bitter wholesome to a sugered venom: 1 Cor.
2.22.
to taste and see how gracious the Lord is, Psalm. 34. whereby the natural man
(says the Apostle) as wanting this same holy Tongue, Non sapit quae Dei sunt;
Discerns not, savoureth not, the things that are of God.

But one may speak too much even of the Tongue it self: and therefore now I
will cleave off my discourse from the Linguae, to the Dispertitae, The third
Querie? Why the Holy Ghost was pleased to descend in cloven Tongues? And this
Dispertitae, some take to be no more then Distributae, Tongues divided, not in
themselves, (they mean) but among their Receivers. Ita ut Quisque suam habuit;
So as that a Peculiar Tongue sat upon each of them. But there is more in the
word, (...), that signifies such as were divided from the midst, dimidiated,
as it were, by-forked Tongues, in specie Ignis (says Goran.) Gorran in locum.
These imitating Fire likewise in its pyramidall Figure, may easily be
conceived to spread into a Bipartition: And what did the two Branches hereof
intimate, but the equal mixing of the Law and Gospel? for the conversion both
of Jew and Gentile? In the old Law, you know, the dividing of the hoof was an
argument of cleanness, Levit. 11.3.
Lev. 11. and the Serpent also that emblem of wisdom, (to which Christ
schooleth our Imitation, Matthew. 10.) has Linguam bifurcata^, Matthew. 10.16.
a kind of a forked tongue. Here therefore, why may not the cleaving of the
tongue, be an apt Symboll of sincerity? Sure; that tongue which rends it self
off from worldly, and corrupt communication, and setleth to Gods praises; is
one of the Holy Spirit's cloven tongues. For the Devil too plays Gods Ape,
and has his cloven tongues. viz. those that love division, flattery, and
dissimulation, as well as his fiery tongues: viz. such as love lying, slanders,
oaths, blasphemy, and imprecations! And these likewise, I fear, may all
Nations hear: (I am sure our's may, almost in every corner,) speaking in their
own language, Horribilia Diaboli, the fearful works of the Devilll But not to
proportion my discourse of them, (...).
to the Sin of Tongues, lest I be infinite, or rather uncessant: but in stead
thereof, let us take a more necessary glance of the number here, the Holy Ghost
descended on: For we read of 120. assembled, Acts 1.15. But Beza, and some
others, restrain this Advent of the Spirit, Acts 1.15.
to the Apostles only, because indeed the promise was made to them; and He led
them forth at his Ascension, and the Grand Charge was laid on Them, Go forth,
and preach, etc. yet for all this, the stream runs the other way, C.a
Lapide, with a cloud of witnesses, affirms the Holy Spirit shed on all that
Company, but not without Discrimination: In locum. Acts 1. cap. 10.47.
and this argued first from that Question, Acts 10. Who can forbid water that
these should not be baptized, having received the Holy Ghost, as well as we?
besides, we know, more were to preach the Gospel, then the Apostles; Luke 10.1.
He appointed other seventy, Luke 10. and they then had need of tongues; But
then here may be objected, that there must be diverse women in this Company,
besides the blessed Virgin, Acts 1.14.
Acts 1.14. and They (not permitted to speak in the Church) needed not this
gift of tongues: but we may thus salve the scruple; The Holy Ghost here
probably descended on them all, Apostles, and others; men and women: Joel 2.28.
according to Saint Peter's exposition of that place of Joel, Effundam Spiritum,
I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; your sons, and your daughters
shall prophecy, Acts 2.17.
etc. Acts 2.17. (which he there appropriateth to that every business, to take
off the Enthusiasticall Pretenses of this Age,) yet all this, not to the same
end, nor in the same degree; as one that was present there; Saint Paul will
tell you 1 Cor. 12. 1 Cor. 12.8.
To one was given (by the Spirit) the word of wisdom; to another the word of
knowledge by the same Spirit: To others the gift of Faith, to others Prophecy,
to others the Discerning of Spirits, (as was most necessary to their several
conditions) but to the Apostles, and to their Helpers, the higest Degree of
Illumination, Diversity of Tongues, and Interpretation of Tongues, because
they were to convert the Nations. Sermon. 69. de Temp.
So that we may conclude it gratefully with St. Augustine; Spiritum sanctum, a
Christo promissum duodecim Apostalis; datum numero decuplato: O the great
Fidelity and Liberality of Christ, that promised a Gift to 12 Apostles, and
performs it to ten times twelve, which is 120. teaching us to be spaing in
protestations, ample in performances; not like Antigonus, surnamed (...), of
whom it is said, he never denied any thing was asked, nor ever performed any
thing he promised; but like David, to keep our word; though it be our loss,
it shall be our Gain a better way; Psalm. 15.4.
it is a Qualification of a St, and an Imitation of Christ (you see) who here
promised his Apostles only, and fills all of them with the Holy Ghost: And
while they are thus filled with the Holy Ghost, some mockers are so empty of
him, as to say; the Apostles are filled with new wine, Acts 2. Acts 2.15.
If They did not, sure enough, their Successors shall never want Censures and
Derisions: but Saint Peter confuteth them from their own experience, it being
but the third hour of the day, ver. 15. Wine was not their mocker, but the
Jews; yet Saint Bernard confesses it, with a qualification: Vere Ebrii vino
novo. Saint Bernard. in Festo.
They are drink indeed, with new wine, (says He) but such a new wine, as those
old bottles, the unbelieving Jews, were neither worthy to receive, nor able to
contain, being a wine powered out by the true Vine Himself, by Him that trod the
Wine-pesse alone! Vinum Cor Laetificans, non statum, mentis evertens, such a
wine as made glad the Heart, without any disturbing of the brain. The Apostles
had had a sour Drawght on it, by their Masters Absence; now therefore, they
receive the wine of comfort: and this, me thinks, may cheer our patince, to see
it is Christ's Method, to keep the best wine till the last; here then, what if
we must taste of sorrows cup, while we are sure hereafter to have our water
turned into wine; our tears into eternal joy? for what I say unto you (says
Christ) I say unto all: and that is, Non relinquam: John 14.18.
I will not leave you comfortless: To which end let us fervently and
frequently say unto him again in the Prayer of the Church; O God, make clean
our hearts within us, and take not thine Holy Spirit from us.

POEM. 18.
THe Sun of Glory, being now in's hight
Shines forth on His, in a Meridian Light.
And lest Griefs for his Absence strike Them mute,
An inspired Tongue does each of Them salute;
And the World's Charity grown Cold and Dead
With fire from Heaven, is here Re-quickened.
Christ's Promise meets the Apostles Union,
Which Those share not that love Division:
A Spirit of Comfort, various as our Griefs,
Proportioning them all with fit Reliefs;
A Spirit of strength for to support the weak.
And bind up wounded hearts, when like to break!
A Spirit of Amity, and sacred love,
Uniting Lower envies, from above:
A spirit of Aliment to hungry Souls,
Cheering with Manna, and true Nectar bowls.
And now all Persons of the Trinity
Have, at times, to man appeared visibly.
Two Heralds here, usher the Spirits way,
A mighty wind, and Sound: fit to display
The Gospel one, whereof the world must Ring;
Men's carnal chaff, the the other winnowing.
Then does Himself in fiery tongues dispense,
Heaven takes Some, as some That, by violence.
Hither a Question pertinent belongs,
Why he descends in Fire, and cloven Tongues?
A fiery Comforter must needs seem strange!
shall not that angry Element once change
The world to cinders? True, and yet presume
While God's in the Flame it shall not a Bush consume.
The Light and heat of fire best emblem forth
Knowledge and zeal, all true Apostles worth;
Science, without zeal, Ape's the Glowworm well,
But zeal without that, Heat without light's Hell!
The seven chief Graces of the Spirits desire,
Not frigidly demonstrated by fire,
The fire does Gold from its dross purify,
The Spirit does, by love, purge enmity:
Fire melts the most obdurate Mines, you know,
The Spirit by Remorse, makes heard hearts flow!
Fire hardneth clay against the injurious storm,
The spirit by patience, does sad hearts confirm:
The fire makes new and burnisheth the Mine,
The Spirit by knowledge, makes the Face to shine:
By fire, to things ascending, motion's given;
The spirit by Faith too, makes Souls tend to Heaven,
The fire to all about it light imparts
The spirit by wisdom does irradiat Hearts:
Fire too preserves things sweet, not still consumes,
The spirit by Innocence our life persumes.
But why now was this fire shaped into Tongues?
To speak those grand abilities, that Throngs
Converted unto Christ, throughout all lands,
Drawn by such Eloquent and pious bands,
Without which Door of utterance all Gifts Crossed,
And like Gems in a casket, whose key lost!.
But hence all Nations sweetly wooed, do come,
T'hear News from heaven, in their own Idiom;
But Satan too his fiery Tongues has spread,
Whose fire, by Fire, shall be extinguished!
But cloven tongues, these of The Apostles were,
Mixing (that is) Law, Gospel every where:
And by that double Fork'd Reflection
Pointing out Gentiles, Jews conversion:
The parting of the hoof did cleanness show,
The Serpent's too a cloven tongue, we know,
Christ's school of wisdom; then the tongue that's clean
From putrid talk, 's the cloven tongue we mean.
Thus Christ's and David's word, both made good then
When Christ gone up, showered down these gifts on men.
The COLLECT The Epistle. Act. 2. v. 1. to v. 12.
The Gospel. Joh. 14. from v. 15. to the end

God, which as upon this day, have taught the heart of thy faithful people, by
the sending to them the light of thy holy Spirit: grant us by the same Spirit
to have a right judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy
comfort, through the merits of Christ Jesus our Savior, who lives and
reigns with thee in the unity of the same Spirit, one God world without end.
Amen.

Upon Trinity Sunday.
DISQUISITION 16.
Immediately after that admirable Descent of the Holy Ghost forementioned (as it
were) consequently ensued notice of the incomprehensible Trinity; even thereby
given to the Church of God. But as the Apostle says, Great is the mystery of
Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.
1 Timothy 3. and This indeed one of the greatest parts of all that mystery, viz.
the Distinction and yet Union of those three glorious persons of the Deity.
Byssus Abyssum invocat. Here, one deep calls upon another: A Theme fitter for
admiration, then examination: not visible in the Book of the Creature; where
the Deity is seen Vt per speculum, as in a glass, only by reflection: No, nor
presently legible in the Book of the Scripture, where God is seen, Vt per
lucem, by a kind of light, more directly; you know Moses could see but his
back-parts, Exodus 33.20.
(and scarce them neither, they were so glorious) but this Distinction of
Persons is, as it were, His Face; and accuratly to be discerned, is scarce an
adaequate object of this life, Exodus 33. And albeit the Bible begin, and run on
still with his NAME in the plural number (...). that is, Genesis 1.1.
Gods created the Heaven and the Earth. Yet this determines not three Persons,
although it fairly contribute something toward it, and more then intimates
Diversity of persons, Genesis 1. Deuteronomy. 5.
even when applied to God Himself, Genesis 1. and Deuteronomy. 6. And some even out of
the first Book of holy Writ, do probably argue that triple personality, from
that first plural word of Gods created: that there are several persons hinted;
and you know the act of creation, is generally and externally attributed to the
Father ( quod extra, according to us, for else to all the three indivisibly)
God created the, etc. (...)
And in the second verse there is another person Particularized, viz. the
Spirit, The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. (...) that is, by
a cloud of witnesses, the Holy Spirit, and the first of John expoundding this
same first of Genesis, brings in the second person hither, the Word: and says
twice for failing in one verse, All things were made by Him, John 1.2.
and without Him nothing. But to make good my word in Genesis 32. the Angel
wrestling there, and blessing Jacob, is universally interpreted of Christ (to
say nothing of those that came to Abraham and Lot, Genesis 32.
Genesis 19) And then you have all the three sacred Persons of the Godhead though
not positively demonstrated, (for that would be a hard task) yet emphatically
intimated in the Book of Genesis. And this is Effigiatio Ansarum (as one
calls it) as it were, a framing or finding out of Handles, which we
dexterously lay hold of, in so high a Mystery: And others do as much from that
of Job 1.21. Job 1.21.
Arguing the Trinity from his treble Benediction. The Lord has given, The Lord
has taken away, Job 1.21.
Blessed be the Name of the Lord. Three Lords, you see, and yet but one
disposer; there is Trinity and Unity: But this Germinatio Gemmarum, This putting
forth of Buds and Blossoms in the Old Testament, proves Protuberatio mammarum,
a fruitful swelling of the Breasts in the New; where there are frequent and
pregnant attestations: I shall need mention but some chief ones. 1 John 5. 1
John 5.
There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost and these Three are One. What can be more manifestly expressed? For which
Saint Paul is one of them that returns gratulations, 2 Cor. 1. 2 Cor. 1.3.
(at once witnessing the Trinity and praising it) Blessed be God (says he)
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; the Father of Mercy, and the God of
all comfort. In which alone we discern the whole Trinity. Here is the Father,
and Mercy, which is his Son, and the effect of this mercy, the Spirit of
Adoption, and then all three comprised, in the God of all Comfort.

But alas! What is all this to your Rational men (as they call them) the
handsome Complement for our Modern Atheists; who (like Thomas) live not by
Faith, but by Sense and Reason (if they mistake not) which is a way in some
things, quite to destroy the Faith, That being an evidence of things not seen.
And therefore Saint Austin says, Rationem quaero, Fidem abnego? He that will
admit of no Master but Reason, sometime presents a Fool to be her Scholar:
though I know rectified Reason is the work of God, and in it self not
contrariant to Piety, but being ordered and sanctified, is very advantageous to
it; Yet not to be Relied upon, as any fit measure of the Principles of
Religion; Natural Reason how far useful.
especially in such Mysteries, and sublimer parts of it: That too being so
lapsed and depraved! Yet even those Minions of Nature, that is of second
causes, may find some paralels of this sacred Riddle, even among the Creatures
here below: the Snow, the Ice, and Water; and so above, the Light, and Heat,
and motion of the Sun, have each of them a severality of existence, and yet as
'twere an Identity of Essence. And if ought can be found such in Natures
Inventory, why should we so stagger at the like in our Creator? Well, says
holy Austine. Tu ratiocinare, Ego mirer; Tu disputa, Ego credam: Critical
Naturalist, (that leavest the master, and denominatest from the servant) Do
thou argue on, I will admire this Mystery; Do thou dispute, I will believe it:
by his own help, I do both believe this Trinity, and admire it: St. August.
Confess. l.
Mira profunditas, Deus meus! mira profunditas! To go on with that sweet
Fathers warble: These Waters are of infinite depth, O God, unfathomable is
their bottom! The bottom is to profess and to feel the distinct working of,
the three distinct persons of the Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Rara
Anima, Quae sciat, quid loquatur. Not one man, not one Christian of a thousand
speaking of these mysteries, knows well what himself means; and those that
know the most, says he, Contendunt and dimicant, dispute and wrangle,
assisting the common Enemies of Christianity, by their uncharitableness; while
without love and mildness, none ever come to know the Unity of this blessed
Trinity, or to see the visions of Peace; in the presence of this God, of mercy,
peace, and love. And therefore as we receive benefits by apprehending God under
these distinct notions of power, as a Father to protect us; of wisdom, as the
Son to instruct us; of goodness, as the Holy Spirit to comfort us: So now
must we, on the other side, take the more care, that we make answerable
returns, of Love Obedience, Gratitude, and sin not against these Persons in
their several Notions; either by neglect of any of them, in such as God sets
over us; or by abuse thereof imparted to our selves: As David in that
Complicated sin, Psalm 51. where he offended against all the Three! First
against the Father, by abusing that powwer which he had given him: Against the
Son, by depraving true Wisdom into Craft and Treachery: Against the Holy
Ghost, by contemning the Goodness, and Piety of Vriah's refusal: But let us
rather imitate (both for their Contemplation and Devotion) those Crowned four
and twenty Elders, Revel. 4. that incessantly sung that sacred Treble, Holy,
Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, etc. For first, their Speculation proves the
Trinity, and then their Devotion worships and adoreth it. Holy, Holy, Holy,
which Was, and Is, and is to Come: Tenses and Persons both, you see, here speak
the sacred Mystery of Trinity in Unity, Hieron. in Isa. c. 6.
and Unity in Trinity. Per hoc quod ter sanctus Trinitatem significat: per hoc
quod subdit, Dominus Deus, Vnitatem. In that they sing thrice Holy, notes the
Trinity; in that they add the singular, Lord God, notes the Unity. Respons ad
object. Arrian:
Or as Fulgentius. Quid est quod ter Sanctus dicitur? Cur semel Dominus Deus?
What is the meaning of this Hymn so trebled, so singularized, but three
distinct persons, and yet one only Lord God? (according to the Athanasian
Creed, Athanasius contra totum mundum, and e contra.
composed against Arrius, and appointed ever to be read This Day) which Was,
without beginning; which Art, of thy self without means; and shall be, for
ever without end.

Saint John in his Vision beheld one sitting on a Throne, which is God the
Father, and at his right hand the Lamb, which is God the Son; Bullinger in
locum.
and the sevenfold Spirit proceeding from both, which is God the Holy Ghost.
Vnus potentialiter, Trinus personaliter. One in power and efficacy, Three in
personality, etc. Therefore, after all Gods goodness celebrated in other
Festivals, now most worthily does the Church honor the holy Trinity, the whole
Trinity of Persons together, (as elsewhere in severals) Declaring the wonders
that he does for the children of men. Blessing and praising that same sacred
Triad, with Saint Paul, and other Churches out of him, Romans 11.36. Of him, and
through him, and for him, are all things, unto him be glory for ever, Amen.
Lib. Sent. distinct. c. 36. Ex Augustine, de Trinit. l. 6. c. 10
Where Lombard out of Augustine (for as one was the Master, so the other was
the Founder of the Schools) says ingeniously that these Prepopositions, Of,
Through, For, are not to be confounded. For, Ex, does denote the Father, of
whom are all things. Per, the Son, by Whom are all things. And In, the Holy
Ghost, in whom are all things. God the Father is the Fountain of all goodness,
God the Son as the Conduit, and God the Holy Ghost as twere the Cistern. And
therefore Remeent in Flumina Fontes. Let all our streams comfortable Blessings,
return in Thankfulness unto our Fountain. As all our Fresh Springs are in
thee, O GOD, so we desire they should also flow back unto thee. And therefore
turning Contemplation to Devotion, Let us with the four and twenty Elders, here
fall down before him that sits on the Throne, saying, Thou only, (O blessed
Trinity) art worthy to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power; for thou have
created all things, for thy wills sake they are, and were created. Amen.

POEM 19.
Mysterious, Blessed, and Sacred Trinity,
Inspire thy Worm, that it aspire to Thee.
AETernall Father whence all Beings spring,
Deservedly thy Power they do all sing;
Thy Providence too, ecchoing that power,
Supporting, guiding all things made, each hour.
How strong and sweet through all? How bright do st shine?
That while all take their own wills none but Thine.
While All things else then keep their first due Station,
Let not Man fail the End of his Creation;
Since Essence, Life, and Motion flows from Thee,
Lets' gratefully Return back all the Three.
Blessed Lamb, that dumb before the Shearers were,
Give and Accept a vocal grateful Heart;
And let the Golden Fleece of thy rich Merit
Purchase us Heavens Kingdom to inherit;
And loyal to it, make us own thy Power
As Sovereign Lord, as well as Savior.
And thou, O sacred sanctifying Dove,
Descend into our Hearts, with wings of love
Hatching thy Graces there, that once fleg'd, we
May back again to Heaven mount with thee.
To nestle in that Rock, those Clifts of Spice,
And ever chaunt with Birds of Paradise.
Mean time, what gift so fits this Three in One,
As our Triangled Hearts Rendition?
The COLLECT PRAYER. The Epistle. Rev. 4. v. 1. to the end.
The Gospel. John 3. v. 1. to 16.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, which have given unto us thy Servants Grace, by
the confession of a true Faith, to acknowledge the glory of the eternal
Trinity, and in the power of the Divine Majesty to worship the Unity: we
beseech thee, that through the steadfastness of this Faith we may evermore be
defended from all adversity, which live and reignest, etc.

Upon the LORDS DAY in general.
DISQUISITION 17.
ALmighty God, as his mercies are not only private and particular, but public
also and Universal; so will he not be contented only with Family Devotions
(though those he seasonably expects, and accepts) but also he will be
honored in the visible Congregation, of his Saints and Servants: and that too,
not alone in those solemn Anniversaries (which are as Constellations of our
Gratitude, for blessings of the first magnitude.) But also for his Continual
Mercies, which are as the Multiplied Stars, renewed every moment: And
therefore does justly challenge (although he need it not) our weekly returns of
public Piety and Gratulation. And albeit His Glory be capable of no Accession
(by us) or Diminution (according to that of Job, Job 9.15. Psalm. 16.2.
and David) yet his Revealed will which is our Rule and Conduct, and his
outward Name and Honor, claims our best public Worship and Devotion: and
that with a special Memento in his fourth Commandment. Remember thou keep
holy, etc. Where I shall not enter the Lists with the Sabbatarians, and their
Antagonists, which undiscreet Combatants have rather wounded one another, then
rescued the Sanctimony of the Day. Indeed, by their Polemicall Discourses,
making more knots then they have untied; The Doctrine of the Christian Sabbath,
being like a Skein of curious Silk, which with affected Hands they have so
sullied, and beruffled, Athanas. Homil. 1.
that many well-meaning people know not how to make a right use of it: and it
may well be feared, that Charity has lost more by them, then Truth has
gained. And therefore waving the fruitless Controversy, I shall herein keep
the Scope of my Whole Book, and endeavor briefly to vindicate the Piety of the
Christian Sabbath.

The Jewish Term is Sabbath, (...).
the Saxon appellation, Sunday; and the Christian, from Christ's Resurrection,
the (...) (i.e.) The LORD changed the Sabbath into his own day for a Seminary
of the Gospel.
Lords Day; nor need either Denomination inject a scruple to wise men, so long
as All retain agreement in the sanctification of it.

And indeed (as Saint Austine well, though in another case) Desiderant
auditorem, potius quam expositorem. The Commandments are so well known, and so
often expounded, this especially, that we rather want Hearts to practice them,
then heads to understand them. And this, you know, designeth both the Time and
Place of Gods holy public Worship, Levit. 19.30. Not as there were any
inherent holiness in either, or any thing below) but only relative, (i. e.)
as challenged by GOD, Athanas. Homil.
and by Man devoted: And so both are (the Time and Place) Holy Day, and Holy
Place: Holy Sanctuary, holy Ordinances; both equally sacred, Levit. 26.2. You
shall keep my Sabboths, and reverence my Sanctuary, etc.

Now, one that assisted the Reformation of Religion with as much Learning and
Modesty as any, defines this Commandment well, to be Morale praeceptum de
Ceremoniali. A moral precept wrapped up in (...); i.e. The Lord changed the
Sabbath into his own day for a Seminary of his Gospel. Tract. 50. in Johan.
Ceremonials. For sure there was somewhat of both in it, the Ceremonial part
not now in force, is first, the Precise seventh day from the Creation. Which
(in cases of Travel and remote distances) is impossible to be retained, the
same universally. Secondly, the strictness according to the rigid Letter.
Thirdly, the Mode of hollowing it, with Oblations and Ablutions, etc. The
Morality of it chiefly consists in these, First, the fixing of a Time for
Divine public Worship. Secondly, That Time to be (at least) one day of Seven.
Thirdly, that day to be hallowed by corporal rest, and spiritual Devotion, so
that it is Morale quoad genus, Ceremoniale quoad speciem. It Is ceremonial for
the manner, albeit Moral for the matter. And this Precept is hedged in on
every side, lest we should break out of its observance: Fronted with a cautiou
or command (for it will bear both) Imperat and suadet, Remember thou keep
Holy: it injoyns with persuasion; and then backed with Reasons, Reasons from
both parties, God and Man, with some remarkable eminencies above other
Mandates. They run either barely Affirmative, as the fifth; or barely Negative,
as all the other: but in this both parts expressed, beginning with the
Affirmative, Remember, etc. proceeding in the Negative. In it thou shall do no
manner of work, etc. The Breach hereof thus both ways met withal. Again, it is
more extensive, it not only respects our selves, but with a strange
particularity, involves all our Relations even to five several Ranks, viz.
Thou, thy Servants, Cattle, strangers within thy gates; the wife not
mentioned, as being included in the first. Now every Master of a family, hoc
habet Episcopale, quod habet cura^ animarum. has so much of a Bishop in him,
that he has cure of souls, viz. care of those under his charge. As for this
it is God himself commends Abraham, Gen, 18.19. Josh. 24.15.
Genesis 18. as all the good world does Joshua's pious Resolution, Chap. 24.
Lastly, it is more Alluring then the rest, more sweetly exciting, and that not
only with more Reasons, but with Reasons more insinuative (those of the third
and second Commandments, being formidable and menacing but of this wooing and
Allective; as on our part (beside the indulgent Preface, Remember thou keep,
etc. Six days shall thou labor, etc. A permission, or remission of Gods right
who might challenge all) rather then an absolute command. For the Church upon
occasion, says Perkins, may separate some week days also for rest, and Divine
Service, Joel 2. Yet this withal is no Commission (says he) against
idleness, every one being to live by the sweat of his Brows, faithfully in his
vocation, Genesis 3.19. 1 Cor. 7.20.
1 Cor. 7. out of Genes. 3. Six days shall thou, etc. God here as liberal to
us as to Adam in Paradise. Of all the Trees but one; as Potiphar to Joseph,
Genesis 49.
Let us answer with him. How can I deny in this one? Remember thou keep holy
the seventh day: If I indulge thee six for thine own business, says God, thou
may well afford the seventh to my service, and that wholly holy: For as the
Evening and the Morning made the first day, the second, and the rest of the
week, The Reasons of this Precept.
so the Evening and the Morning should likewise make the seventh day.

The other argument, and that a main one, is from Gods own example, who herein
requires no more then Himself performed; his own practice being the
Commentary upon his Law (as becomes all good Leaders) For in six days the Lord,
etc. and rested the seventh day. Rested, This is a (...). A Figure of
condescension to our weak capacities God otherwise not being capable either of
Rest or Labor) and such indeed Saint Austine and others take all the
description of the History of the Creation to be, a (...). Genesis 1.
but a methodizing of it to man's apprehension; for 'twas all one to Omnipotence
to make all the world in a moment, and every Species, as well as the light,
with an easy Fiat, Let there be Fire, and Air, and Earth, and Water, and semel
and simul omnia, all things at once existing out of them) but so marshalled in
the story for our more orderly meditation of them; and our more regular
imitation of this pattern, in our own transactions. (...). Ephesians. 5.1.
Be ye followers of God, Ephesians. 5. (He means in proportionable actions) who
framed the world in six days, and rested the seventh; rested from Creating,
not from governing; from creating of new Species, and kinds of creatures; but
not from making Individua, new singularities: for so is he always working,
John 5. both for Corporals, and Spirituals. John 5:17.
My Father works hitherto and I work. But to hasten, there is Sabbatum
pectoris, and Sabbatum Temporis. That of the mind I shall mention in the close.
The Sabbath of Time, among the Jews was either of days or years: and both
those greater or less, the lesser every seventh day, and every seventh year:
the greater when the Passover fell on the Sabbath (as at Christ's Crucifixion,
John 19) and every fiftieth year which was their Jubilee. C. 19. C. 19.28:
We reflect but upon their less^ Sabbath of days, viz. the seventh day, and
that the Artificial day, as John 11.9. being the space of 12. hours, from the
Sun rising to the Setting of it: and so too may the Jews from evening to
evening be understood. And this too the blessed Apostles altered, and by
consequence abrogated as to the particularity of the day, herein led by the
Spirit of Truth; and (as some think) by Christ's own example, John 20.
Consentaneum est Apostolos mutasse diem: Melanct. Tom. 2. fol. 363.
'Twas necessary, says Melancthon, even for this very cause, that the Apostles
should change the day, to show an example of abrogating the Legal Ceremonies
in the Translation of the seventh day. Which translation from Saturday to
Sunday, is not by Patent in the Bible, but only by pattern; because cause the
blessed Apostles usually met together on this day, 1 Cor. 16.2. Apoc. 1.10.
Act. 20.7. and that assuredly by the dictate of the holy Spirit, and at least
by the approbation of our Savior, again and again, manifesting himself to be
risen on the 8. day. So that however happily some will argue, and others grant,
that an Oecumenicall Council has authority to constitute another day for
public worship (as the second or third of the week) yet sure I am they can
never have so good a Pattern, nor yet so great a reason for another day, as is
demonstrated for this alteration; the Pattern being Christ and his Apostles; and
the Reason our Saviors resurrection even that wonderful work of our
Redemption. Aretius in 4. Mand.
Aretius picks out a mystery out of Christ's appearing on the 8. day. We labor
6 days in this life (says he) the seventh being the Sabbath of our death, in
which we rest from our labors, Rev. 14.13.
Rev. 14.13. and then being raised from the dead on the 8. day, Christ in his
own Body (as then raised) shall reward every man according to his works, C.
20.13.
Rev. 20.13. The Jews then gave God the last day of the week, but good
Christians better honor him with the first: they kept their Sabbath in honor
of the worlds Creation; but Christians in memorial of an higher mercy, viz.
its Redemption, and therefore reason good, the greater work should carry away
the credit of the Day: whose Duties principally consist in these two things,
viz. A Rest from labor, and a Sanctification of that Rest. Non prosunt
singula. Wherein the duties of the Lords Day consists especially.
If either of which be wanting, it makes one but like a Bird with one wing, or
a Boat with one Oar, renders but a lame devotion; but juncta junant. Like two
gloves, the one lost, the other is of little use, yet both together make
themselves complete. First of the Cessation, Thou shall do no manner of work,
etc. (i.e.) No servile works of thine ordinary Calling, much less any works of
sin: it must be a double Sabbath, from labor, and rom sin. And two sorts of
people transgress here especially, First, such as employ Man and Beast upon
that day, contrary to Gods Design of Rest to both, by ordinary Coaching of it
in fairest weather, and the nearest distances; while wise men cannot discern
the Reason, why equal care should not be taken then to prevent all
profanation, as well by land as water. Secondly, such as rest in their
impieties (like Elements in their own places) idly spending this Day in
excess and vanity: So that God is then, more then all the week beside
dishonored. In Rest from Labor.
Thou shall do no manner of work, etc. No? Yes sure, some manner of works are
then lawful, and most seasonable; This day being Mercatura animarum, as it were
the Market Day of Souls. Schola Dei. says Ramus, De Rel. Christ. l. 2. c. 6.
the School day of Christ, the Preachers (as it were his Ushers) and the
Churches then as it were, his open School-house. Then such works are most
lawful as appertain to Gods public worship, as reading Divine Service,
painful preaching, administering the blessed Sacrament, and things subordinate
thereunto, as Ringing of Bells, Sabbath days Journeys, 2 King. 4.23.
etc. Acts 1.12. And beside these works of piety, there are works of Mercy
lawful, both toward our selves in necessary provision, Mat. 12.1. and toward
others, whether men, as our Savior visited and healed, Mark 3.5. or beasts, in
relieving them, What works lawful on the Lords day.
as requisite, Luke 14.5. A third sort of works then lawful are those of
present Necessity, which doubtless may be exercised by Physicians, Midwives,
Shepherds, Mariners, Messengers, and Soldiers, upon visible necessities. To
say nothing of the works of honest Recreation (Men therein being too apt to
indulge themselves) which I advise may be such only, as may cheer not
interupt Devotion: and then that reason given by Christ, may extend to all the
forementioned, The Sabbath was made for Man, Mark 2.27.
and not Man for the Sabbath. But yet not for Man only, but for God chiefly
(or which is all one) for Man spiritually, and to further his eternal Good. It
must not be an empty or an idle Requiescence: for as the Apostle says of
Bodily exercise, so may I here say of Bodily Rest, it profits nothing. Been
vestiri, and nihil agere. We may complain of as well as Leo, Men cloth their
bodies, and not then ornament their souls; they are so fine they are the worse
again: And this the Fathers call Sabbatum Boum and Asinorum, The Ox and the Ass
keep as good a Sabbath as these, and a better then those that St. Augustine
complains of, that do vacare nugis, Theatris, spectaculis and choraeis. That
spend the day in sports and Interludes, Huntings and Compotations, which is but
Sabbatum Aurei vituli, like wanton Israel, to proclaim an holy to Jehovah, and
to worship a Calf, Exodus 32. Exodus 32.
Now this sanctifying of the Sabbath stands principally in our esteem of it,
and improving the opportunities thereof: First, we must count it our pleasure
and delight, Deliciae Christiani generis the Vespasian of all days to us)
Calling the Sabbath our delight, Isa. 58. Isai. 58.3.3.
Not doing our own works, not thinking our own thoughts, or speaking our own
words, etc. But resigning our Heart, Tongue, and Hand. (i.e.) our will, voice,
and practice to the business and object of it: depositing the world, and all
her interruptions, not nauseating the Divine Solemnities (when orthodoxally
performed) saying, Amos 8.9.
When will the New Moons and Sabboths be gone? etc. that we may return to our
Saecular advantages: No, but improving all we can the spiritual, (i.e.)
Prayer, Reading, Hearing, and Meditating the sacred Mysteries of our
Redemption. Prayer is the Jewel of Gods Ear, the Tongue of Angels, the
Dialogue between Heaven and Earth, Genesis 18^
Genesis 18. the Souls Ambassador with God, our Leiger in Heaven, working against
the States of Death, and Hell. it is the Phoenix of the Graces, that still
reviveth into a Bird of Paradise, and makes an Arabia Petrea to become Arabia
Foelix, for stony hearts procures us hearts of flesh, Ezekiel. 11.
Ezekiel. And if God be thus pleased with single piety, how is he importuned
(think you) and as 'twere, besieged with the public worship? Vis unita
fortior. If our Domestic prayer be as a Brand in the corner, and keep fire;
sure the public is as a Bonfire of Incense, a Sacrifice flaming up to Heaven,
the very highest design of Christianity. The joint prayers of the Congregation,
are a kind of reversed lightning, and (as St. Basil said of his Church) their
Amen is like a Clap of Thunder. And therefore David still to set the better
gloss upon his gratulations, tells both God and Man, that he performs them
(...) (i.e.) in the Congregation, in the great Congregation. And that variety
might refresh Devotion, Reading is another means of sanctifying the day; and
therefore the appropriated Chapters are called Lessons, as being then to be
heeded, and taken forth by us. The Word is the best Glass, and mends the
Lookers eye. And therefore Search the Scriptures, John 5. John 5.39.
Those are they (says Christ) that testify of me, in them you hope to have
eternal life. It must be no superficial (much less oftentatious reading) but
(...); (i.) make a scrutiny, search diligently (like Laban for his gods, Genesis
31.33. (...), the very word) he searched the Tent; and to this search there are
some requisites, viz. inspectio Fontium, oculus adscopum, Collatio locoruus,
fervens Oration. Lest with the Eunuch we understand not what we read, there
should be an inspection of the Originals, but especially for Teachers, but for
all, an eye still to the Scope of the Author, a Collation of places ( Scripture
often its own best Expositer: and lastly, Prayer will be an help to all the
rest. And for more safty, keep in the shallows for Scriptures are waters
wherein the Lamb may wade, as well as the Lion swim) and for deep mysteries go
to an Interpreter, (i.e.) attend the Preacher. (Hearing and seeing are the two
Disciplinary Senses.) Romans 10.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10. In hearing
seek out the Wise Charmer, i.e.) the Orthodox Teacher, and be not of more
appetite then digestion. Be not like the Corimandi, a kind of people, whose Ear
covers their whole body, as now-a-dayes all for hearing, little for
meditation, nothing for practice; having, as 'twere, the Rickets of Religion
their heads sweld with knowledge, or pretensions; but their feet not walking
accordingly! And therefore hear but with Christ's caution Matthew. 4. What and
How. Take heed what you hear. Try the spirits, Matthew. 4. Luke 8.
1 John 4.2. as those noble Beraeans did even by Paul himself, Act. 17.11. And
all this practice will make it Otium sanctum, (as St. Austin calls the Sabbath)
an holy rest, and so effect that Sabbatum pectoris, that double Sabbath of the
soul (whereas that of Time is but a figure) viz. the internal rest of
conscience, here in grace, and that eternal rest of soul and body hereafter in
full glory. So be it. Amen.

POEM. 20.
SHall we sing of the Streams, and not the Fount
This Holy of holy Days? which does surmount
The rest, according to their Objects nature,
As the Creator does excel the Creature:
This Day unyoaks the world, and ease bestows,
Suspending of the Curse on sweating Brows;
A Day of unbought Indulgence, and Rest
Of Gods in-acting both for Man and Beast.
Nor yet must This Brute-acquiescence be,
But the Souls Travel while the Body free;
Though Jews of the Sabbath might not, yet We may
Best gather Manna (Now) two showers a day.
Oh let not Plenty and such Choice of Fare,
Make us like Wanton Israel appear,
Loath not this Heavenly Dew, but come and taste,
Let not such Holy water run at wast.
With your old Raining Banquet rest content,
Lust for New Quails, tempts but new Punishment:
Long not for Bethlem Waters, there is no good
Nutrition, in the juice that is price of Blood:
Sweet Festival of Heaven's Beneficence,
Which now keeps Open House, and do dispense
The bounteous Doles of Mercy, unto All
That Piously approach, and for them call.
Great Market Day of Souls, Divinity
On thee (as 'twere) holds a Monopoly:
Come Buyers, God himself turns Merchant now,
Leave Trades of Sin, your selves his Chapmen vow;
For though his Wares are, yet his Price not high,
Pardon for asking, Heaven for Piety;
For Patience Conquest, for Confession
A gracious Act of Heaven's Oblivion.
This is the Souls good Clymacterick Day
Boding her weal, as to'ther her Decay;
If Number have its Virtue, sure This seven
Will most inchant a good Soul toward Heaven.
The Lords Days (me thinks) make up Jacobs Scale,
The weeks the Empty spaces, whereon all
Gods Right and Left Hand Blessings do descend,
And by which Pious Souls to him ascend.
Make then the Sabbath (here) so the Lords Day,
That endless Rest (with him) we once enjoy.
THE COLLECT PRAYER. The Epistle. Romans 15. v. 4. to the 14.
The Gospel Luke 21. v. 35. to 34.

BLessed Lord, which have caused all holy Scriptures to be written for our
learning: Grant us that me may in such wise hear them, read, mark learn, and
inwardly digest them, that by Patience and comfort of thy holy word, we may
embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou
have given us in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

ALmighty God which have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy
Sons Name, we beseech thee mercifully incline thine ears to us, that have made
now our Prayers and Supplications unto thee, and grant that those things which
we have faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be obtained to
the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of thy glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Rogation Week.
DISQUISITION 18.
THis was the Week immediately preceding Holy Thursday, or indeed but the four
days next before it, denominated a Rogationibus, from the extraordinary
Prayers and Supplications then used by good Christians, the better to prepare
their souls at that time, to attend our Savior by a spiritual Ascension, as
God made the Day of Ascension a day of Giving, Psalm. 68.18. so the Church made
the time a week of Asking, as in the Gospel appointed. And therefore this is no
spurious issue of Novell Superstition, but a venerable Institution of pious
Antiquity, and sincere Religion, it being more then probable, that this holy
custom was practiced in the Church in (if not before) St. Augustines days.
Sermon. 173. de Temp. tom. 80.
Witness his Sermon preached on Ascension Eve, and his Titles on some other
Sermons. Magdeburg. cent. 5. fol 693. and 741.
De Dominica in Orationibus, etc. concerning Rogation Sunday, and of the second
and third day thereof; and it is unanimously acknowledged by Authors of both
persuasions, that this ancient Order was either invented, or restored rather by
Mamercus Bishop of Vienna, Baron. Animal. fol. 309.
long before the time of Gregory the Great, Anno 450. the Reasons of which Holy
Custom I find to be of two sorts, viz. from Occasions Natural, and
Accidental: Those of accident were the great Afflictions and Calamities that
befell those times, which made them happly convert their superstitious
Processions to the Tombs of Martyrs, into a better use of Prayer and strong
Supplications for removing Judgments (as things invented for one purpose by
use are easily converted into more:) Socrates, lib. 6. c. 8.
And so it was by the People of Vienna, when such Earthquakes of terrors befell
them, as amazed the hearts of all men! who then began to forsake the City, as
a place which Heaven seemed to have destined to ruin! for then their Bishop
before mentioned (as it became a Christian Prelate, Hooker Ec. P. l. 5.
neither void of council as yet, nor secure in himself alone, under such
common perplexity) earnestly exhorted the remainder of the people, to prevent
portended Calamities, by those virtuous and holy means, whereby others (in like
case) have prevailed with God. To that purpose perfecting and adapting the
Rogations, Reasons of Rogation week.
or Letanies formerly in use, to their present Necessities and sad occasions:
whose good success therewith, afterward moved Sidonius Bishop of Averna, to
use the same so corrected Rogations, at such time as he and his people were
afflicted with Famine, and besieged with potent adversaries; till at length it
was thought convenient by Gregory (the first and best of that name) to contract
the Flower of all the said Rogations into one. And however this Iron have since
got some rust, yet has it been scoured off too, as I shall show anon. And this
I may call (as to usward at least) the Accidental cause of these Rogations;
The general Troubles and Calamities of Nations. But besides these, there are
some Natural Occasions of them (I mean) from Gods blessings on increasing
Nature: and as the first tremble before God as an angry Judge, so these kneel
to him as a Father and a Benefactor. As now (you see) Natures Carpet spread,
enameled with rare variety of flowers, and hopeful blossoms; Jam prata rident.
Now the Fields stand so thick with Corn, (that we hope, in good time, to say on
with David) they shall laugh and sing: Mean time then since our harvest is but
in the herb, how ought we to solicit Heaven with our Prayers, and now to
exercise this part of Primitive Devotion, our Rogation week; the want of which
seasonable prayers, why may we not think, occasioneth unseasonable weather, often
turning the Heavens to brass, and the earth (like our hearts) to Iron? Letting
loose the Meldew, the Caterpiller, Joel 2.25.
and the Palmerworm; with the rest of the Army of that Lord of Hosls neglected!
out of a pretended fear of superstition, men neglect necessary Devotion! Mr.
Josias Shute.
(as a great Gamaliel of our Church was wont zealously to inculcate) Some are
more afraid of a drop of Superstition, then of a whole mass of Profanation!
Now is the season, that hazards are multiplied upon us, both from abroad, now
every where being the time of preparation for War, nor needs this Age any
instances! And at home the blooming Fruits of the Earth being now in their
greatest hazard. All summon us to these seasonable Devotions; whereof (besides
example) the Church has fitted us with admirable pious Compositions; which the
From (...) Prayers, and from (...) to pray.
Greek Church termed Litanies, the Latin called A Rogando. from asking.
Rogations, which were of old the very strength, stay, and comfort of Gods
Church, in all times of afflictions and trouble through the world. And from
Their Days traveling down to Ours, had by the way contracted some soil and
blemishes; as the Addition and Invocation of Saints Names, by some particular
men annexed: Derebus Eccleclesiae, c. de Leitaniis.
which being washed off as a Novelty by Walafrid Strabo's own Confession: our
Church retains the Leitanies of most acceptable Perfection; both for matter and
form, for all Times, Persons, Places, Accidents, and Occasions, above all
platforms, and Churches in the world, Harmless, complete and useful: and
howsoever some most in love with their own ways, object, That these prayers or
many of them) were but temporary, confined to some times and places of
calamity, and no way suiting other Circumstances. Alas fond men! they are so
sensual, that they seem to have forgot that Article of their Creed, The
Communion of Saints, and will pray for none other but themselves! whereas the
mystical communion of all faithful men is such, as makes every one to be
interessed both in the good and evil, Romans 12.25.
in the Blessings and Calamities that befalls any of them, wheresoever.
Beside, Quod cuiquam cuivis! what befalls one place, or person, may befall
another! what dangers, or when imminent, God only knows, to whom only these
prayers are to be put up: Hooker Ec. P. l. 5.
Nihil humanum a te alienum puta. While thou art a man, think no humane misery
but may befall thee! We find by daily experience, that those Calamities are often
nearest at hand, and readiest to break in upon us, which we by circumstances,
may imagine farthest off! or if not so, yet such miseries as being present, all
men are apt to bewail with their Tears, wise and Religious men should
endeavor to prevent with their prayers. And here I have too much cause to
close with that Prophetical Complaint of that As Erasmus called Melancth. in
Epist.
Mitissima anima, that meek and pious soul, that Oxford of Learning, Reverend
Hooker. I am not able to express how much it does grieve me, That things of
principal excellency should be thus bitten at, by men whom God has endued
with Graces both of Wit and Learning, for better purposes.

POEM 21.
SHall not Rogation Week a Blessing crave
Of him that promised, Ask and you shall have?
Yes, if we trace the old Religious Hests,
We must now multiply devout Requests.
Season, Health, Wealth, and Safety crave a share
In our Devotions now, each needs a Prayer:
At this time of the year our proud Hopes swell
Big as the Teeming Earth, then 'twould do well
At once to praise the Author, and to pray
No fatal Blast prevent their Mature Day;
And that the Fruits of the Spirit may keep pace
With those 'oth' Earth, till we have a Crop of Grace.
Now too, the busy World does each way move
On her designs, of Enmity, or Love.
Prayer's then a needful Moat, that none invade,
But that all visit us for Love, or Trade.
But specially that no Spiritual Foes
Surprise us, or prevailingly oppose.
Besides, the scorching Sun does now incline
To the distempers of the Torrid Line,
And we shall need a Letany, since Prai'r
Can (from infection) keep both Men and Air.
But now especially men prone to Sin!
De votions the best Curb to keep us in.
Thus common Welfare claims Rogation week,
And that our God we now more strongly seek;
As the Church Primitive in chief, for These
Solemn Processions used, and Suffrages;
While Superstition now the former Acts,
And Profanation the other disrespects!
Only some Relics left, Perambulation:
But the Religious part ont, 's out of fashion.
Happy that Church (herein) as once were we,
Injoyes an harmless, helpful Lyturgie.
THE COLLECT PRAYERS. The Epistle. James 1. v. 22. to the end.
The Gospel. John 16. v. 23. to the end.

LOrd from whom all good things do come, grant us thy humble Servants, that by
thy holy inspiration we may think those things that be good; and by thy
merciful guiding may perform the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

ASsist us mercifully, O Lord, in these our supplications and Prayers, and
dispose the way of thy servants toward the attainment of everlasting
Salvation, that among all the changes and chances of this mortal life, they
may ever be defended by thy most gracious and ready help, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen, Amen.

depiction of Saint Andrew with diagonal cross (saltire) S. ANDREAS.

Upon Saint Andrews Day.
DISQUISITION 19.
AFter due observing the Constellation Festivals, we come now to scan the
Celebration of particular Saints: among whom Saint Andrew as an humble Lucifer,
first appears in the Horizon of the Church Solemnities; His Day beginning the
Order of the Service for all the other Saints Days in the year; because his
Fast ever falls out to be either next before, or next after Advent Sunday. The
point initiatory of the year Ecclesiastical: and the Reason of that Reason is,
because Saint Andrew of all the Apostles, first applied himself to Christ, John
1.5, etc.
out of St. John Baptists School, soon after Christ's Baptism, as is easily
collected, John 1.40. etc. where the two Disciples Calling him (...), say unto
Christ, Master, where dwell thou? They were presently affected with a desire
to follow him (upon Saint John's Declaration, Ecce Agnus Dei. Behold the Lamb of
God: streit they desire to wait on him, to converse with him, professing (by
their compellation) that they had chosen him their Master, and desired to
receive their Instructions from him.

(...) now Saint Peter was not that other Disciple (by the leave of his
pretended Champions, for though the Scriptures name not who that other was, and
there are various conjectures; yet the text at once manifests Saint Peter's
absence, and his brother Andrews piety; piety in his first address to Christ; I
and charity too, Doctor Done Sermon. 71.
in seeking of him up, and bringing him to Christ, verse. 41. He first finds
his own brother Simon, and says unto him, we have found the Messiah, which is
to say, being interpreted, the Christ, and he brought him to Jesus: so that
here, that distinction does but wrack the text, that says Saint Peter came
first ad Apostolatum, these two ad notitiam and Familiaritatem; that those in
John 1. came first but to an acquaintance and conversation with Christ, but
here in Matthew 4. these were called, Mat. 4.18, 19, 20.
to the Apostleship: yet to that conversation (which was no small happiness)
Andrew came clearly before Peter; and to this Apostleship (here) Peter did not
come before Andrew, S. Peter not the first with Christ.
for the text says they came together; and therefore (I say) the Church
celebrates the memory of Saint Andrew first of any Saint in the year; and after
they have been altogether united in that one Festival of all Saints, Saint
Andrew is the first that has a particular day: he was Primogenitus Testamenti
novi, the first Christian, the first begotten of the New Testament, for Saint
John Baptist was between the Testaments; as Noah between the worlds, a kind of
Isthmus joining both together: he had his conception, as twere, in the old
Testament, for his coming and office in the womb of those Prophecies of
Malachi, Mal. 3.1. Isai. 40.3.
and Isaiah, and so cannot be so intitely referred to the new Testament as
Saint Andrew is. Like him therefore, Conversus, converte; being come to Christ
thy self, call thy brother to him; Thou being converted, strengthen thy
brethren: mos Apostolicus, mos sit Christianus. This was always the Apostles
manner, and it is a very laudable Christian practice; and fortified from the very
law of nature, all things endeavoring to the utmost to assimilate and turn
things toward (if not into) their own nature; as you see in fire, water, earth,
etc. And thus having considered Saint Andrews person, let us not take notice of
his calling; and that the Epistle for the day acquaints us with, Mat. 4. Matthew.
4.18.
As Jesus walked by the sea of Galilee, He saw two brethren, Simon which was
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a Net into the Sea: for they were
Fishers; and in that act our Savior found them, and called them to his
service. Almighty God is wont to bless men especially when busied in their
proper element, when well employed, and in their own vocations: Why Christ
chose such for his disciples.
we see, our blessed Savior ( in whom were hid all the treasures of wisdom,
Col. 2.3) did not choose the grandees of the world, big wits, high degrees, or
authorities thereof; but Seamen, unlearned, and indocil, inured to a
tempestuous element, less capable of civil offices then other men: and why did
Christ take them? (having his choice sure, of all things he made.) First
negatively, not that thereby was any scandal given, or just occasion of that
calumny of Julian the Apostata, that he found it easy to seduce such poor
ignorants as they were; for Christ did (when time served) receive persons
eminent; eminent in learning, as Saul was; eminent in Authority, as Nicodemas;
eminent in wealth and ability, as Matthew, Zacheus, Joseph, etc. But first he
chose such men, that when the world had considered their beginning, their
insufficiency then, and unproperness for such employment, and yet withal, that
greatest work, so far, and so fast advanced by them; nihil instrumentis, they
might ascribe nothing to the instruments, but all unto the power of the workman
(whose school soon rendered them sufficient) and so ever after, might
cheerfully come in unto him, upon any invitation whatsoever: Christ to make his
work the better prosper, in all ages after, proceeded thus at first: S.
Augustine.
nec quaesivit per oratorem piscatorem (as Saint Austin sweetly) he sent not
Rhetoricians to work upon these Fishermen; sed de piscatore lucratus est
Imperatorem, but by these Fishermen has reduced all those Kings, Emperors,
and States, which have embraced the Christian Faith, these 1600 years, choosing
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak things to
overthrow the mighty, 1 Cor. 2.27. Judge. 15.16.
etc. 1 Cor. 2. and Prosper says this was fore-typed, Judge. 15. by Sampson
slaying a thousand with the jaw bone of an ass; when Omnipotence is the Agent,
no matter what the Instrument; of Fishermen, Christ made them Fishers of men;
but first they followed him; they came ad Discipulatu^, before they came ad
Apostolatu^: they were taught and caught by him, before they taught and caught
others; they straightway left their nets and followed him; the cheerfulness of
which obedience, is exalted in this, that it was freshly upon the imprisonment
of John the Baptist, whose Disciple S. Andrew had but lately been; and thence
might easily have been deterred and averted; but the contemplation of sad
examples past, the apprehension of perils future, the sense of persecutions
present, all cannot startle or retard those, whom the love of Christ Jesus
works upon effectually; they followed for all that, and followed at the first
word sequere; and but that one used to them, they left their Nets; they did not
burn them (says one) but at fit occasions again made use of them, John. 21. as
Christ found them after his resurrection. John 21.1.
Perfecta obedientia, est imperfecta relinquere; not to be too diligent to the
world, is the deligence God requires: that we defer not the making our
Reconciliation with him; not sacrificing to our own Nets, of gain or pleasure!
but leaving our Nets, vitia sunt retia (i.e.) our darling sins: multae
relinquitis, Hab. 1.16.
si desideriis renunciatis; you leave your nets, if you renounce your vicious
desires; whether they be covetous, Greg. magn. in Mor.
riotous, or Ambitious; and if Saint Andrew and others here followed Christ so
in his poverty and humiliation; what a sin will it be, not to follow him
sitting at the right hand of God? Saint Andrew followed him, both in life and
death, preaching Christ, first in Scythia, and afterward in the interior parts
of Aethiopia, inured like Jacob to the extremities of heat and cold! and after
that (says Alsted) he preached in Cappadocia, Galatia, Alstaedius in Chronol.
c. 27.
Bithynia, and along the Euxine sea: (nothing difficult to a willing mind, much
less to such a zealous diligence) last of all, in Thrace, Macedonia, Thessalia,
and Achaia, where at length under Vespasian the Emperor, he had the double
honor of dying for his Master, and that on such an Instrument, viz. the Cross!
though a Cross inverted, Alstaedii and Isaacsoni Chronolog.
which made some amends for his sufferings so in his own Country and City of
his Father, the place called Patras, a City of Achaia a region of Greece, where
he was crucified about the eightyeth year of Christ.

POEM. 22.
OF all the Twelve, Saint Andrew leads the van.
Whose Name well suits a stout and valiant Man,
And such was he; who here from Sea to Land
Commands himself and all into Christ's Hand,
Changing his Element, but not his Trade,
Fisher of men (instead of Fishes) made;
The Church is now his Ship, his Doctrine's Nets,
Wherewith to Christ a multitude he gets:
And after all this deligence, he died
As for, so like his Master, Crucified!
Thy call, O Christ, may't with us so prevail
To leave our shrowds of pride, and to strike sail
To thy commands, to quit our nets of sin,
Nearer relation to thee, so to win;
To turn our former hurries, toil and care,
To pious indstury, for Souls welfare;
And if thou please, call for them down to lay,
To follow thee, these vessels of our Clay.
The COLLECT-PRAYER. The Epistle, Romans 1. verse. 9. unto the end.
The Gospel, Matthew. 4. verse. 18. unto 23.

Almighty God, which did give such grace unto thy holy apostle S. Andrew,
that he readily obeyed the calling of thy Son Jesus Christ, and followed him
without delay: grant unto us all, that we being called by thy holy Word, may
forthwith give over our selves obediently to fulfill thy holy commandments,
through the same Jesus Christ our Lord.

depiction of Saint Thomas the Apostle with spear S. THOMAS.

Here the Plate.

Upon the Feast of S. Thomas
DISQUISITION 20.
THat Church (which of all the world) kept to Saint Paul's rule most exactly,
(...), 1 Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and in order, next unto Saint Andrew, that
first Disciple of our blessed Savior, Celebrated the Commemoration of Saint
Thomas; and therefore (methinks) they Austin in his Meditations on the day.
do a double trespass, that say, His memorial is kept last in order, as being
the last, of all the Apostles that believed; whereas he marches in the van of
the Church militant (according to her Regular computation from Advent) he is
one of the foremost rank, and the foremost of it saving one; and that indeed
but worthily, his Haesitation and Confession, being a leading star to our
Devotion; injecting not only a serious apprehension of our Frailty; but (above
all the rest) evincing the confirmation of our Faith: the History of this
Apostle (of all the four Evangelists, is only by Saint John declared; Joh.
20.44, etc.
the rest (perhaps) Nominate him in the Catalogue of his Disciples (as Saint
Matthew. chap. 10.3. and Saint Mark, chap. 3.18.) but Saint John alone records
his story, who indeed best could do it, the other writing but by information,
as Saint Mark and Luke, and Saint Matthew saw but in part; but Saint John
writes by Intuition, and affectionate experience from the beginning; as he
be-begins his first Epistle, 1 John 1.1.
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the
word of life: all his senses were thoroughly informed, having so long
interchanged Bosoms with his gracious Master; and therefore we may well accept
his Testimony in the Gospel, Verse. 24.
for this day, John 20. wherein is recorded (for our caution, and instruction)
both Saint Thomas his frailty, S. Thomas his history consists of his Frailty
and his Faith.
and his Faith: his frailty appears in a double fault, viz. in his absence,
and his incredulity: first, his absence, verse. 24. Thomas one of the Twelve,
which is called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came. Christ had promised
to his Apostles (a little before his Passion, Matthew. 26.32.
his reappearance to them after his Resurrection, Mat. 26. After I am risen
again, I will go before you into Galilee. Now then, according to his word, even
the same day of his Resurrection (the first Lords day that ever was kept) he
came when the doors were shut, into the place where the Disciples were gathered
together, and stood in the midst, and said unto them, Peace be unto you: when
the doors were shut, not while they were shut; Aret. in locum.
meaning, that it was either late in the evening (say some) at what time doors
use to be shut; or that they were opened by some body of the house, unknown to
the Disciples (so Marlorat) but as most acknowledge, In locum.
he came in miraculously (yet not by Penetration as some foundly imagine,
through the wood and Iron of the doors) but, Creatura cessit Creatori, as
Saint Hierome, In Epist. ad Pammachium.
the creature there gave place to the Creator; as did the Gravestone at the
Sepulcher, these doors did here unto our Savior: but as those did to Saint
Peter, Act. 12.9. and to some other Apostles, Act. 5.9. (i.e.) opened of their
own accord, Acts 5.19. Chap. 12.9.
however unperceived by others; and then was the time, our Saint Thomas was not
with them: the Shepherd had been smitten, and the sheep had been scattered, but
here they began to recollect together again, and Saint Thomas is the only
stray, that returns not, (at least, not now seasonably, to the Fold) but his
absence might be involuntary, many occasions might enforce it, and so he might
not deserve all Maldonats censure, In locum.
Per negligentiam aut timorem; that either upon supine neglect, or cowardly
fear (says he) Saint Thomas being absent from the Apostles assembly, lost the
first sight of his Savior, punished with the want of those divine infusions,
which the rest then received. Be diligent therefore in frequenting the
Congregations of the faithful (where the Ordinances are Orthodoxally
dispensed) lest you fail too of Christ's presence, Matthew. 18.20. Bern. in locum.
and remain under Infidelity: they that gather temporal Manna on Gods day
(following their seculars) lose their labor, and themselves, Exodus 16.27.
faller is, Sancte Thoma, faller is, si videre Dominum sper as, ab Apostolorum
collegio separatus: alas, thou art deceived Thomas, His Absence.
very much mistaken, if thou think to see Christ out of his Church, and
College of the Apostles. Non amat veritas angulos, sed stat in medio: Christ,
who is Truth, seeks no corners, no Conventicles; but stands like virtue, in
the midst of his Temple, of his Disciples, of his Holy-Congregation, in the
midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1. Rev. 1.12.
It Is none of his light that is hiden under a Bushel. But albeit Saint Thomas
his absence might be his own sorrow, yet may we be glad of it, his doubt
occasioning our infallible assurance: so that he might invert that speech of
his Master, Joh. 11.
John 11, to the Apostles, Lazarus is dead, and I am glad for your sakes, that
I was not there: to us this Saint may turn it, saying, Christ lives, and I am
glad for your sakes, that I was not there: that you might believe, through my
incredulity: and that is his second fault, we may not call it Infidelity; it
being but a particular act of dubitation, and no habit of Renunciation: Sins in
our Nature, are like Circles in the water, propagating one another, to the
utmost Banks of our life; we need be the more vigilant in preventing occasions
of them: Saint Thomas his former offense drew on this; his absence caused
Incredulity, and that passioonately expressed; Except I see in his hands the
print of the Nails etc. Saint Cyril and others would fain excuse him, Apud
Mald. in locum.
and so return the favorable accident of his dubiety, attributing it all to
sudden passion, and nothing to Incredulity; as being extremely greived that he
lost the sight of his Master, fearing he should never see him again. From those
words which he remembered, John 16.15, Sermon. 156. de Temp.
Saint Austin also says, that these words are but vox inquirentis, non
negantis, the voice of an Inquirer, not of a Denyer. Doceri voluit, Confirmari
desideravit; while he speaks thus (says that Father) he shows he has a
mind to be taught, a desire to be confirmed. Saint Ambrose too says, that he
doubted not here of the Resurrection, but the manner of it. These are
charitable extenuations, but Truth himself reprehends him; be not faithless but
believe, (...) and indeed many circumstances highten the infirmity, if not
carry it above one. As first, He was one of the Twelve, as it were, a Master in
Israel, a well- instructed Disciple. Secondly, that he gave no credit to the
rest of the Disciples (though ten to one) coming within some danger of that of
Christ, Luke 10.16.
Luke 10. He that dispiseth ye, etc. for he beleft neither. Thirdly, By suting
his ill thoughts, with as peremptory words, Except I see, etc. Except I put my
Finger, etc. Except I thrust my Hand etc. (i.e.) Except I measure all (by all
my senses) and find exact proportion, I neither can, nor will believe! And
herein, to see the state of nature, how blind to discern the things of God!
Quid est fides, nisi credere quod non vides? Austin Tract. 20. in Johan. Heb.
11.1. Quo minus Argumenti plus Fidei videbat, Hominem confitebatur Deum. Aug.
in loc.
And specially that hardest Article of the Resurrection, which to the senses (
till Saint Thomas his experience) seemed but a Fiction: (...) the natural man
discerns not the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. He has his Faith at his fingers
ends; and yet for all this, Christ treats him with so mild a Dialogue, working
so mercifully upon him, as that his Sore was made his Salve, his low ebb
became a flood of Faith; and what was in him but as a grain of Mustard Seed,
became a great and fruitful Tree; and let us be of those Birds of Heaven, that
shelter under the branches of it: Let us so shelter, that we neither presume
nor despair: not presume; for if the Apostles had their Slips, we may well fear
falls! not despair, seeing how sweetly Christ here restored Saint Thomas to an
eminent, and most exemplary confidence; My Lord, and my God! and therefore it is
a good caution, Memento peccati, ut doleas: Petrarch I. de Rem. Dialog. 8

Memento mortis, ut desinas:
Memento divinae Justitiae, ut Timeas:
Memento Misericordiae, ne desperes.
Remember sin, to mourn, and mend:
Remember death, that thou must end:
Mind divine Justice, that thou fear;
And mercy, that thou not despair.


Then though thou be a Didymus (i.e) a Twin, and but of half a Spiritual Birth,
dubious, and of a wavering Faith, Christ will make thee a Thomas for
perfection, as that Name signifies) whose Faith shall be a comfort to thy
self, (...) Perfectus, ceu perfectio. Psalm. 37.37.
and a pattern unto others: to which Christ leads him by a sensible
Demonstration, verse. 27. infer digitum (using the method of his own terms, and
exceptions, and thereby much convincing, much attracting him:) bring hither thy
finger, etc. and put thy hand, Verse. 27.
etc. He knew well what Thomas had said, though absent, and that speaks his
Godhead; he condescends to Thomas, and his other Servants weak desires, and
that speaks his Goodness. I shall not think it here, worth while to mention
that needless question, which many make a business of, whether Saint Thomas did
actually touch Christ, or no? when we know it was his resolution, Verse. 25.
verse. 25. and our Saviors offer, verse. 27. and for the Objection, it is said
only Vidisti and Credidisti, Thou have seen, and have believed, an easy
figure of Video pro Intelligo. absolveth the Riddle: to see, and to perceive or
understand, are all one; and so all the senses may see, and interchange with
one another. Videte and gustate, Psa. 34. Psalm. 34.
O taste and see how gracious the Lord is. Let us touch him Spiritually, Col.
3.1, 2. etc. And yet more frivolous is that question, whether Saint Thomas his
words were an Exclamation, My Lord, and my God: some Socinianized
Grandchildren of Arrius, may pretend them to proceed only from Passion, as an
Exclamation, Lord, what is that I touch? etc. but the Text is clear; and by our
Saviors Interpretation, that to be Lord and God, verse. 28. Verse. 28.
Vt brevissima sic and absolutissima Confessio (says Bullinger) it is a short,
Apud Calvin in locum.
but a sweet and absolute Confession, two words involving the two Testaments,
the sum of the Creed: As much honoring Christ's Resurrection (says one) as
those three Kings, or the Wisemen did his Nativity; Austin his meditat. in
Festo.
and with the like three presents (he means sure Spiritual presents) Tu es
Dominus, there he confesses him a King the Lord; Deus, that declares him God;
and Meus, that presents him Man: and we may carry it yet higher, by the
Emphasis in the Article (...) the Lord, and the God: for many in Scripture are
so called, Magistrates and others; besides, in Opinion (as the Apostle says)
there be many Gods, 1 Cor. 8.5.
and many Lords, 1 Cor. 8. but this the Paramount, Psalm. 50.1. a very pregnant
Text against unbelieving Jews, and misbelieving Arrians, Socinians, and others;
my Lord, and my God: and not only God, but Lord also, hinting our submission
to his Golden Scepter, our obedience to him, as well as our belief in him:
They, who are out at the Lord, must never look to be in at the Jesus! He is a
Savior to none, but unto whom he is a Ruler; if in that sense, then may they
in the other say, My Lord and my God: and not only both Lord and God in
general, but in a sweet particularity applied, my Lord and my God. It Was the
frequent speech of Luther, Luther's frequent saying.
that much Divinity was couched in Pronouns; these indeed bring all home in
pious Application: so David, O God, Psalm. 63.1.
thou art my God; and so the blessed Virgin, In God my Savior: so here, my
Lord, and my God; mine by Promise, mine by Stipulation, mine by Oath, mine by
Gift, mine by Purchase, Ferus in loc.
mine by Participation; Toll Meum, and Toll Deum, as Ferus sweetly: take away
this Relative, and it is as if there were no Antecedent; take away this
propriety, and it is as if there were no such Lord in all the world, no Christ,
or benefits by him! and Faith is it must effect this. Pray therefore each one,
Lord I believe, help mine unbelief! that (however weakly) I may yet say truly,
My Lord, and my God; with Saint Thomas, who did not only say it here, but
Preached it to the utmost parts of the earth, becoming afterward Indiarum
Apostolus, the Apostle of the Eastern Indies, converting the Nations of
Tabroban and others, Alstaedii Chronol. c. 27.
to the utmost Ocean of the East (as Alstaedius writes) where (after a long
pains and pilgrimage) he fulfilled his own words sometime spoken to his
fellow-Disciples, Ioh. 11.16.) Let us also go, and die with him: changing only
the Preposition not the Proposition; dying for him, being Martyred in the five
and thirtieth year of Christ his Master.

POEM 23.
SAint Thomas day's among the Festivals
Fit usher to the Natalitials
Of our great Lord 'cause he above the rest,
The Christian Faith, in humane hearts impressed;
Where others Faith leads our Intelligence,
His doubt instructs Belief from common sense;
And what before was wrapped in Mystery,
Is now Transparent, Handle me, and see.
Learn of this Saint Christ's wounds to look upon
As Earnest of thy Resurrection;
His Finger points thee to that open side,
Where thou may all thy Sins, and sorrows hide:
Directs Thee to those Hands of victory
That can protect, and Crown eternally:
And these He to remotest Indies taught;
A richer Treasure then their own, he brought:
Where he to save their better part, did stay,
Till they his worse, with Martyrdom repay!
What more could Man, then Travel, Preach, and Dye?
All which did He, for Christianity.
Perfection therefore justly Crown's his Name;
Whence Christian Faith to such perfection came.
The COLLECT-PRAYER. The Epistle, Ephesians. 2. verse. 19. unto the end.
The Gospel, Joh. 20. verse. 24 unto the end.

Almighty and everliving God, which for the more confirmation of the faith,
did suffer thy holy Apostle Thomas to be doubtful in thy Sons Resurrection:
grant us so perfectly, and without al doubt to believe in thy Son Jesus Christ,
that our faith in thy sight never be reproved. Hear us, O Lord, through the
same Jesus Christ, to whom, etc.

depiction of the conversion of Saint Paul on the road to Damascus The
Conversion of Paul. Act: 9*
*3 And as he Journeyed, he came near Damascus, and suddenly there shined
round about him a light from Heaven.

4 And he fell to ye earth, and heard a voice, saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me.

5 And he said, who art thou Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest, etc:


The Plate here.

Upon the Conversion of Saint Paul.
DISQUISITION 21.
ALbeit this day be not so fine, as others in the Calendar, yet is it a
Festival altogether as solemn in the Church; and though it be not clothed in
Scarlet as the rest, yet is there as good Spiritual entertainment provided for
it; nay, and with this eminence above them all, that the Church Celebrateth the
Conversion of none, but of Saint Paul: and good Reason for it too (though we
read of multitudes, and some of them strange enough, yet no Conversion so
miraculously effected, or so beneficial to the Church of Christ. This glorious
story is recorded in the ninth of the Acts; being somewhat like that old
Effigies in Diana's Temple, Tristis intrantibus! Act. 9
hilaris Exeuntibus; that was sad and Lamentable at the Entrance! but
cheerful, and all joyous at the Exit: or like Jacobs flock, all Ring-straked
and speckled, Checquered (as it were) with black and white: or if without
presumption, I might be his Herald, I should adventure thus to Emblazon his
Coat of Arms: he bears, a white Cross in a bloody Field, with the Wolf for
his Crest, that badge of his own Tribe of Benjamin. A Cross Argent in a Field
Gules.
But to his story Acts 9. where we may consider him as a Saul, and as a Paul;
his Aberration, and his transmutation; his natural disposition, and his
spiritual Conversion: the first appears both by indictment, and his own
Confession; the evidence of the Spirit against him begins the Chapter. Saul
yet breathing out threatening and slaughter, against the Disciples of the Lord;
(...): Rage was as natural to him as respiration: and you see how he breathed
others out of breath, in the former Chapter! a main Actor in that (...), Acts
8.1.
that great Persecution, that took off Saint Stephen and others, Saint Paul's
natural disposition.
and thereby occasioned that sad Dispersion! which yet Omnipotent wisdom
turned to an advantageous Propagation of the Gospel; but Saul here, had a
contrary design, desiring Commissions; not staying till they were sent him,
but like our forward Zealots Petitioning for mischief; Acts 9.2.
to persecute both Sexes without equity or pity; that if he found any of this
way, Inordinate zeal is no better then Fury, and well numbered among the fruits
of the Flesh, Gal. 5.20.
i.e. Christians, whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound to
Jerusalem; thus (...) (as many now adays Translate it) He made havoc of or
was exceedingly mad against the Church! and this is the Indictment of the holy
Spirit drawn up against him; all which upon the matter, he confesses; habetis
consitentem reum. Chap. 22.4.
Act. 22.4. I persecuted this way unto the Death; I bound and delivered into
Prison both men and women: and Act. 26. Chap. 26.11.
I punished them in every Synogogue, and compelled them to blaspheme, (...),
and was exceedingly mad against them, and persecuted them even to strange
Cities! and what could be more said, or worse done? He was (...), a grand
persecutor! yet when he was in his height (as Christ's method is, to come in at
an extremity) even then says Christ unto this Tempest, Be still, and to this
unclean Spirit, Come forth: and in this sense especially does Saint Paul call
himself Abortivum, one borne out of due time, 1 Cor. 15.8.
1 Cor. 15, etc. I say, when he was trooping to Damascus, the Lord of Hosts
encountered him, and conquered him into a more then Conqueror; His Conversion.
when this Sun (in his own esteem) was in his very Zenith, in his scorching
Meridian, then Christ said, Siste gradum, stand still, or go down rather, set
at noon: which was his transmutation (our second Considerable) his Conversion,
Acts 9. and 4. where in the third you have the manner, and in the fourth the
matter of it, Acts 9.3, 4.
suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven; Verse 3.
Divine Illumination is the sole efficient of man's conversion. There is no
Deriding or Censuring of any; no despairing of our selves, or others, touching
Conversion; we know not how soon, or suddenly the light may shine from Heaven;
yet much less is there any presuming on such singular examples (for the case
may differ:) the good Thief was converted at the first Call and Saint Paul here
at the first Illumination: Take heed then of both Rocks, Scylla, and Carybdis;
and thou shall escape Demetrius his Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience;
Verse. 4.
next in the fourth verse, he fell to to the Earth, and heard a voice from
Heaven, etc. Humiliation is a Christians way to exaltation, and brings us even
to a Conference with Christ: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? and mark the
happy consequent of such Antecedents: viz. Remorse Obedience, readiness, verse.
6. Verse. 6.
And he trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to do?
acting according to all those directions following in the ninth Chapter, which
the Church appositely appoints as this day's contemplation.

And here, was a strange Trasmutation wrought, (...) a Wolf, (...) a Man.
a kind of transubstantiation, contrary to the worlds Lycanthropy (whereby too
often one man becomes a wolf unto another) for here ex lupo agnus, a very wolf is
made a lamb; ex vepribus racemus; a Bramble becomes a Vine, and cockle it self,
good wheat: here as twere, Is Grapes of Thorns, and Figs of Thistles, a Pirate
becomes a Pilot; the mouth of Blasphemy, here becomes Christ's Orator, and
Satan's Trumpet the Organ of the Holy Ghost, Quantum mutatus! happy all those
that find but any degrees of such changed Affections, as our Saint Paul did
here, that can say with him, as to evil, not I, but sin that dwells in me!
and as to every good, not I, but Christ that lives in me: Romans 7.20. Gal.
2.20. Romans 9.3.
not to speak of the raptures of his piety, Romans 9.3. that seraphick zeal by
which he could have wished himself an Anathema, for good of others, and
increase of Christ's Kingdom; that it may well be said of him, that ex
novissimo primus, ex abortivo perfectus, that of the last Apostle he became the
chiefest, and of Abortion, a man of the most eminent perfection, 2 Cor. 5. in
Coelis Homo, in Terris Angelus (says one of him) he was a man in Heaven, 2
Cor. 11.23.
not only by his Conversation, but in his rapture, where he heard (...)
unutterable words; and while yet upon the earth, chap. 12.4.
he was a kind of Angel; insomuch Origin says that many thought him to be that
Holy Ghost, which Christ had promised to send after his departure. From what a
lowness was Saint Paul here raised? unto what a height? see, what strange
Changes here Grace can effect? what then can Glory! be therefore like him,
always obedient to the Heavenly vision, whether in his word, or secreet
motions; that so you may be renewed in the Spirit of your mind: till each one
with Saint Augustine, come to his Ego, non sum Ego. I am not now the same as
heretofore; and that so made appear, by redeeming of lost time, and by a
bettered Conversation, as Saint Paul did, 2 Cor. 11. in labors more abundant,
2 Cor. 11.23.
etc. quot verba, tot tonitruae. Hier, his words were like Thunder. And one of
Saint Augustins three chief wishes was, Paulum in cathedra; Prud. Enchirid.
To have heard Paul out of the Pulpit, or seen him in the chair. Hic Lupus
ante rapax, vestitur vellere molli:
Saulus qui fuerat fit adempto lumine Paulus.
Mox recipit visum, fit Apostolus, ac populoru^
Doctor, and ore potens Corvos mutare Columbis.
He Is now a sheep, that was a wolf before,
And Saul being blinded, makes Paul see the more.
His sight received, the Gentiles Doctor preves;
His holy Rhetoric turns Rav'ns Doves.


Thus our Saint Paul, though he arose a Red and fiery Sun of persecution, yet
was his Meridian full of miraculous splendour and Illumination, and his setting
with more blush of penitence, and passion! vindicating his former time, and
mistaken zeal, with multiplied labors, in propagating the true Gospel: so that
while other Apostles had their particularly designed Circuits, totum pariter
Mundum Paulo: He was more then any, the universal Bishop; and had the whole
World for his Diocese, left to his peregrination, and which indeed (as the Sun
in the Apostles Zodiac) he did run through, or the most known parts of it,
viz. Seleucia, Phrygia Pamphilia Galatia, Macedonia, Athens, Corinth, Ephesus,
and the rest of the Grecian and Asiatick Churches; besides the Mediterranean
Islands: Cyprus, Creet, Malta, etc. with the Continents of Spain, and Italy:
in which last (after as large a Catalogue of dangers as Endeavors, he had his
Quietus by the Sword of Nero, about the 67 year of Christ his Master.

Poem 24.
BOld Poetry durst never feign a change
Like this Conversien; yet as true, as strange!
That sings of Men turned Beasts, but this does paint
A Ravenous Wolf turned Man, and that man Saint;
Even Paul himself, that breathed Destruction!
Here proves a Vessel of Election,
Whence flow Balsamic oils, such to restore,
As his wild zeal so wounded had before:
Posting on he is struck down that he might Rise,
Blinded with Light, but yet to mend his Eyes;
First Heaven stoops to him, he next soared to That,
And mounted higher, for being thus thrown flat,
For he that er'st did to Stephens Death consent,
Instructs all to Believe now, and Repent:
And who to Bonds and Death once, Jews betrayed,
Is now great Doctor of the Gentiles made;
And with strange Pains, and Perils does Redeem
His former Actions, Time, and lost Esteem;
Compassing Sea and Land, to effect this
In others, divine Metamorphosis.
O may the same, Celestial Bridle check
Our gallopping corruptions, and pull back
Our ranging hearts! Lord strike us so to ground,
That we (thy Tennis-Balls) to Heaven rebound;
Dazzle us with thy Beams, that we may see
No more the ways of Sin, but better Thee:
That to himself, or others, Each mad Saul
May prove a Penitent, or Preaching Paul.
The COLLECT-PRAYER. The Gospel, Matthew. 9. verse. 23. to the end.
The Epistle, Acts 9. verse. 1. unto verse. 23.

God which have taught all the world, through the preaching of thy blessed
apostle S. Paul; grant we beseech thee, that we which have his wonderful
conversion in remembrance, may follow and fulfill thy holy doctrine which he
taught, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

depiction of the presentation of the baby Jesus at the temple (after the
purification of the virgin Mary) The Purification. Lu 2.
22. And when the days of her Purification, according to the Law of Moses were
accomplished they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord.


Here the Plate.

Upon the Purification of Saint Mary.
DISQUISITION 22.
HOw genuinely does Purification here follow Conversion? This of Apostolic
Mary, that of Saint Paul the Virgin. This Feast is of a fourfold Denomination
(as the Masters of the Ceremonies observe, Baronius in Roman Martyr Febr. 2,
etc.
viz.) the Purification of Mary, the Presentation of Christ, Candlemas day, and
Saint Simeons holy day; for the last, the Gospel appropriated says enough, as
of a witness: for the third, Tertullian in Apolog.
Diem Luceruis non infringimus, since we shorten not our day by lights at noon,
nor force a night before it come; our Church does rather exhort unto the
Metaphor (with that light of the world here presented) Matthew. 5. Mat. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that, etc. Of the two former, I shall give
you some account (let others of the rest) and first of the various Reading;
Doctor Done Sermon. 1. vol. p. 112. and 8.
some Copies having it (...) his Purification (so Erasmus) our latter English,
and old Latin Bibles, according to (...), her purification; and some read
(...), their Purification; because Christ was presented in the Temple, Levit.
12. per totum.
so well as Mary purified: the first part of this was enjoined, Lev. 12. as to
the purifying of women; Exodus 2.21.
the other, Exodus 12. as to the offering up the Males, from both with
Ceremonial duties, our blessed Lord and his Virgin Mother, might have pleaded
just exemption, Col. 2.9.
Himself being the real Temple of the Godhead (as in whom it dwelt bodily) the
very end and substance of that Figure: and she being void of Sin in her
conception of him, that groundwork of Purification (I speak not of her own
conception, and that civil war of the Dominicans and Franciscans thereupon) but
having been overshadowed by the Holy Ghost, Luke 1.35.
Luke 1. she was not obliged by that Law, Lev. 12. according to that judicious
maxim, that where the Reason of the Law cease, the Obligation's ended as
it was here, yet both (here) cheerfully and punctually undergo it, out of an high
obedience, and exemplary lowliness.

Christ being (as this day) presented in the Temple, as it is written in the
Law of the Lord, Exodus 12.29. Luke 2.22.
Exodus 12. (and in the Gospel for the day) every man-child that first, etc.
being a grateful Reflection, grounded on Gods delivering Israel, when he smote
the firstborn of Egypt: and this Reason is rendered by God himself, Numb. 8.17.
Numb. 8. why they should consecrate all their firstborn to him; and therefore
now Christ was presented, as the firstborn by many fair prerogatives; John
3.16. Matthew. 1.25. Ephesians. 5.2.
as 1. of his Divinity, John. 3.2. of his Humanity, Mat. 1.3. the first born of
Grace, Ephesians. 5.2.4. of power, the firstborn of the Dead, 1 Cor. 15.20.
1 Cor. 15. lastly the firstborn of the Regenerate, 1 Pet. 1.3.
1 Pet. 1.3. and therefore (though he were not tied to the Rites of the Law)
yet suffered he himself to be presented in the Temple, to show God the Author,
both of the Law and Gospel; to redeem those that were under the Law, Gal. 4. to
avoid scandal of the Jews, Gal. 4.5.
and to Conciliate many good witnesses of his meekness and obedience, as Anna,
and old Simeon, who sung his Nunc dimittis, his Swan-like Anthem at his
solemnity; which was called Matutinum Sacrificium, Christ's morning-Sacrifice,
his first being offered in the Temple; as that other was called Vespertinum,
his evening-Sacrifice, being offered upon the Cross! in the former, he was
Redeemed; in the latter, he did Redeem, giving himself for us, an Offering and
a Sacrifice to God, of a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2.
Ephesians. 5. thus you have the Presentation. For the Purification, the blessed
Virgin (knowing obedience better then Sacrifice) performed the rites thereof
(though not engaged to them) in every circumstance; for time, Luke 2.22. (i.e.)
about forty days after her delivery: for place, Levit. 12.4.
they brought him to Jerusalem (the standard of Religion) and presented him in
the Temple; the special ubi of Gods presence: and there, not without a due
oblation, God saying none shall appear before me empty; Exodus 23.15. a pair of
Turtle-Doves, etc. fit Emblems of her Innocence and Chastity. A pious David
disdains to serve God of that which cost him nothing, for nothing he may justly
gain by such a service; yet such cheap Votaries are frequent now a days; and
S. Basil might as well now, as ever, Sermon. in Divit. avaros.
complain of such, as perform only that kind of Devotion which is without
cost, as to Pray for fashion, and to Fast for frugality: yet here her Offering
proportioneth her Ability (and so merciful is Gods acceptance) a pair of
Turtles; not the Sacrifice of the Rich, (which was a Lamb) but the poor's
Offering, Lev. 12.8. In locum.
two young Pigeons (so Maldonat and others gloss upon her Penury) however her
representations are since gayer far then ever she was; Sanctified poverty being
indeed richer then splendid vanity: if we cannot give much, God will accept of
little; of a Virgins two Pigeons, Mark 12.42.
of the Widows Mite, Mat. 12. so we belie not our ability: and remember that of
Exodus 23.15. Nemo in Conspectu meo vacum, that none shall appear before me
empty; lest else (as he came) he be of those that are sent empty away. And now
by this precept of Moses, and practice of Mary, Parents are instructed to beget
Children unto God, by pious Education; like Joseph and Mary here, to present
them in the Temple; bringing them to Holy Baptism, and Consecrating their
Infancy to God: as Saint Ierom was delighted to hear Children Balbutire
Christum, Hicron in Epist.
to smatter of Christ before they well could speak; a careful seed time may
well hope a fruitful crop. It Is the wise man's Counsel, Train up a child in the
way he should go, and when he is old he will never depart from it, Pro. 22.6.
Pro. 22.

Lastly, in all the Judicials and Ceremonials (you must know) there was ever
somewhat Moral wrapped up in them, as in that of not taking the Dam with the
young, Deuteronomy. 22. and not seething a Kid in his Mothers milk, Exodus 23. the
Moral was to move us to Pity and Compassion: that of Deuteronomy. 25. Deuteronomy. 25.4.
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, etc. Saint Paul Moralizeth of the
Labourer and his wages, indeed, of the Minister and his maintenance, 1 Timothy
5.13. 1 Cor. 9.10.
1 Timothy 5. So likewise in this Ceremony of Purification, is there something
Moral (i.e.) Competent Reservedness, and due Gratitude, though not tied to the
Jews number of days and particular Oblation; yet most necessary is such a
retirement, for recovery of strength, and restraining of intemperance; and then
that their first public appearance should be in the Temple. to present their
Benefactor, the Christian Offerings of Prayer and Praise, for his preserving
them, in the great danger of Childbirth, Melanct. postil. in locum.
which (as one says) is magnum miraculum, so great a miracle, that they may
well go, and say with David (and that not only by Proxy, and slight Bills put
up at any time) but also by their own serious reponsals interwoven) O Lord I
will give thanks unto thee, Psalm. 139.13.
for I am wonderfully made, Psalm. 139. my fruit is wonderfully made, and I the
Mother of it no less wonderfully saved! I say the blessed Virgin, thus
submitting to the Jewish Rites, it was not for her self, but for our example
(says Saint Bernard) teaching us Pacifick, Bernard Sermon. 7. in. Purific.
and morigerous Spirits; and so far (as peace of Conscience is not interrupted)
to seek the peace of outward Ierulem. Pliny has a story, Plinius not. Hist.
lib. 8. chap. 40.
and it is none of the worst, that he tells of two Goats meeting on a narrow
Bridge, Quae non vim, sed viam fecere; that did not fall a Duelling, and make
away each other, but one make way for the other (by lying down upon his Belly, and
suffering his fellow to pass over him; whereby both escaped the danger of the
Ditch: would God all that are two, like them in some other qualities, were but
as like these Goats in this, although necessitated Prudence, and Humility; for
then surely, would not so many fall into the Ditch, the Ditch both Spiritual
and Corporal! But to close this, Nicephorus and Reusn. report that the blessed
Virgin Mary dyed in Anno Christi 45. that was about twelve years after his
Crucifixion; Isaac. Chronol.
while Bucholcerus places her death three years after; but (among them all) we
hear not any thing of her Assumption: her Spiritual we believe, as confidently
as any; but her Corporal we believe most difficult to be creditably evinced.

POEM 24.
SEe here one purer then the Salmon- Snow,
Yet does the Legal cleansing undergo:
The blessed Virgin to the Temple hies,
To Offer there, her purging Sacrifice;
But what need she these washings, who is the Well
Whence spring these Living waters? but to Tell
In her returning Feasts, our Sinful years
Need the purification of our Tears!
May here Obeisance then to us impart
Endeavors, to be purified in Heart:
She with an Offering to the Priests repaires,
But more to God, with Gratitude and Prayers:
Presenting then her Son and Savior there;
Where should our Firstborn, youth and strength appear!
She that had born the Lamb, presents a pair
Of Turtle Doves, all Hieroglyphics fair
Of that same Spotless Innocence and Grace
That in her Soul and Body both took place;
And those indeed, most acceptable Twins
Being Offered, purify us from our Sins.
The COLLECT-PRAYER. The Epistle, That for the Sunday before
The Gospel, Luke 2. verse. 22. to 27.

Almighty and everlasting God, we humbly beseech thy Majesty, that as thy only
begotten Son was this day presented in the Temple, in substance of our flesh:
so grant that we may be presented unto thee with pure and clean minds, by
Jesus Christ our Lord.

depiction of Saint Matthias with axe S. MATTHIAS.

Here the Plate.

Upon the Feast of St MATTHIAS.
DISQUISITION 23.
THe New and Old Testament being idem velatum and revelatum; That is, but one
and the same veiled and Revealed; we shall meet with in Reading of Them many
mutual Aspects, and frequent sweet Reflections, and one of Them here in the
Election of this Choice Apostle, who was to make up the Fracture in the Number
of the Twelve: For as Gods old Church and People, stood and were Founded on the
Basis of the twelve Tribes of Israel, so Christ was pleased to Found his Church
proportionably upon his twelve Apostles, Himself being the Chief Corner
stone, Ephesians.2.20.
Ephesians. 2. Built upon the Foundations of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being. etc. Alii aliud (says Austin,) De Civit. Dei. l. 8. c. 3^
there are variety of Descants on this Number twelve, but all allow it
mystical, and reflecting on the Twelve Fountains of Elim, Number. 33. while its
70 Palms figure out the 70 Disciples, and their victorious Doctrine. Some make
this number twelve, look back upon the twelve precious stones, appointed for
the Brestplate of Aaron, Exodus 28. Exodus 28. Josh. 3.4.
Or on those twelve Princes chosen out of the Tribes of Israel, Josh. 3. Or to
the twelve stones took out of Jordan, and by Joshua pitched in Gilgall, Josh.
4. As those twelve he put in Jordan were a Type of the twelve Patriarchs. Aug.
Sermon. 106. de Tem.
Lastly, some make This Number to look forward, as on those twelve Gates of
the Heavenly Jerusalem, Rev. 21.12. wherein (as Christ promised) They shall be
Judges of the twelve Tribes of Israel, Mat. 19.28. That is, either in the
Church, by way of Censure and Direction; or at Christ's last Coming by their
Comprobation. But from the Number here made up: To the story of Effecting it,
whereof (in the Epistle for the Day, Acts 1.15.
Act. 1.) you have a short and sweet Account from St Peter's Mouth, verse. 15.
(both as to the vacancy, and the Succcessor) in those days, That is, between
the Ascension of Christ, and the Spirits Descension; Peter stood up in the
midst of the Disciples, and said, etc. whence to Argue Peter's Supremacy of
Power over the rest of the Disciples (as some do) is rather an Extortion of
wit, Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 22.
than any fair Consequence of Truth. He being Elected Prolocutor of their
Convocation, or by the secret Revelation of the Holy Ghost, appointed to this
Exhortation; Calv. and Beza in Locum.
and sure a Speaker, pro Tempore, is not above the Authority designing Him, or
any of his fellow Members save only in a Primacy of Order, which may be allowed
to Saint Peter for his years, as well as for the Vindication of his Repute; as
having most of all denied Christ heretofore, it now most became him (of all the
College) to be the mouth of the Company, and forwardest in such a business,
and in those days Peter stood up in the midst, etc. where He first shows the
vacancy, how Judas his Apostleship became void; and secondly, how needful that
another should be chosen. To the first applying That of Psalm. 41.8. Psalm. 41.8.
Men and Brethren This Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, etc. must
needs, where you must understand, Lorinus in Locum.
necessitas hypothetica (as the Schools call it) not an absolute, but a
suppositionall Necessity; praedictions of Scripture, being (like the Legitimate
Praedictions of Astronomy) not occasional, but Consequentiall intimations.
Oportet esse haereses, 1 Cor. 21. There must be heresies, 1 Cor. 21.19. Mat.
18.7.
it must be that offenses come, etc. Mat. 18. That is, Supposing the malice of
Satan, and wickedness of man, It Is impossible but that such should be in the
world, and thus foretold (like Eclipses of the Sun and Moon) not by way of
Causality, but only of Praevision, as being foreseen in their Causes. Act. 1.
ver. 16, 17, etc.
This Scripture must needs have been fulfilled which the Holy Ghost by the
mouth of David spoke before concerning Judas, Psalm. 41.8.
which was Guide to them that iooke Jesus. For he was numbered with us, and had
obtained part of this Ministry; We see, and Grieve to see it, that the
Eminentest Places may be unworthily supplied (notwithstanding all the
Circumspection of Electors.) The vacancy of Judas office.
Herod and Pilate may usurp the Chair of State, as Annas and Caiaphas may that
of Aaron: and even Judas here a See Apostolical. (Nor are we to abate the
Place it is due, for any such Judignity of Person) Yet this Eminence of Office
exalts the hainousness of Crime, the higher Judas his Station, the lower his
Fall! of an Apostle to become an Apostata, renders him like Lucifer, the
brighter Angel, the fowler Devil! for so he is called John 6. John 6 70.
See what a Metamorphosis Covetousness can make in Man! (...), well called the
Root of all Evil, 1 Timothy 6. For Judas here was caught in a Pursnet! as St
Ambrose says of a Drunkard, dum absorbet, absorbetur, while He sucks in the
Wine, He is himself ingurgitated! So Judas here (for Covetousness is
allegorical Drunkenness) Tenendo Divitias tenetur ab eis; while he has the
Bag, that has Him: du^ Praedo, St August. Ps. 38.
Proeda. And while he would make a prey of others, justly he becoms one
himself, Matthew. 27. being his own Accuser, I have sinned in betraying Innocent
blood. Secondly, His own Arraigner, He brought again the 30. Matthew. 27.
pieces of Silver to the High Priests. And Thirdly, His own Executioner: He
departed, and went, and hanged himself! (as you may read more of this, in the
Disquisition, on Goodfriday) and thus you have the Vacancy. Now see the
Election of his Successor. Succession being one of the boasted (...), (id est)
One of the great pretended Marks of the Church visible (though certainly, the
Church is as visible in Persecution, as in Glory, and perhaps more Conformable
to her Head, and chiefest Pillars, Christ and his Apostles. But yet the
Apostles here (as all good Christians ought) endeavor to continue the
Succession of the sacred Function: and to that end continued with one accord,
v. In locum.
14. not in Supplication only, (says Aretius) but in Consultation also, for
the Real propogation of the Gospel: and here observe briefly, the Person,
End, and Manner of the Election: the Person, v. 21. One of those men that have
accompanied us, men, none of the other Sex, 1 Cor. 14.34. nor any Stripling for
years or Learning, 1 Timothy 3.6. One of the Elders, Christ himself not Preaching
until 30. years of Age. Ardens in locum.
And for Moralls, One of known Integrity and of good Conversation, not a
Stranger, but a Domestical. One of those that have accompanied with us, etc.
all requisite Qualifications of such as are to be Chosen, especially into
Sacred Places; The end in all such, being as here -- (...), to be Witness of
the resurrection of Christ, and that both by Life and Doctrine, lest else one
destroy and pull down, more then The Other builds.

And so to witness That especially, being Primarium Evangelij Caput (says
Calvin) The Resurrection being as 'twere, the Axis, In locum.
or Hinge, on which the whole Gospel moves. Nexus Articulorum, the very Tying
Knot that fastens all the Pearls of the other Articles of our Belief, (as
appears fully in its proper place, the Disquisition on the Resurrection. Now
for the Manner of this Election, it was by Designation of Persons, and casting
of Lotts, the Persons v. 23. described both by their Names, and their Number:
their number two (in fewer could not have been Election, in more might have
been Distraction) their Names Joseph called Justus, and Barsabas also; Bona
Nomina bona Omina.
and Mattthias: Good Names, good Praesages of their Virtues and Endeavors:
These two being two of the seventy Disciples (as is easily collected from v.
21.) and those the fittest Nursery to supply the old Stock of that Orchard of
the Apostles; And these Two, being of equal Piety and Ability in outward
apprehension, the Decision was feign to be by casting of Lots, v. 26. (...),
They gave forth the Lotts; Yet this Act was prefaced with Prayer and unanimous
Resignation of the Event to God, without all Partiality, or Emulation: and this
kind of Sortilegium was usual with Antiquity, such an undeceitful, and
unsuperstitious Lottery: sometime in Temporals, Prove. 18.18.
(according to that of Solomon.) The Lot causes Contentions to cease, and
makes a Partition amongst the Mighty. And sometime in Spiritualls also: for it
is said of Zachariah the Priest, that his Lot was to burn Incense, Luke 1.9.
And therefore for ought I know, Lots lawful so qualified.
that casting of Lotts, may still be used in some cases, and with these
Religious Cautions, viz. That not in Ordinary Cases (as of frivolous Accidents
of Loss, etc.) but only in matters of Moment that are Aequilibrious, and such
as Humane Judgment cannot impartially determine: that the Business be with
all Candor carried, and declared; without any uncharitable Conceits, or
dishonorable Deceits: that nothing be Superstitiously expected from Charms,
Wizards, Fortune, Stars or Devils: or any thing of the Event retributed to
any of them. Lastly, that all herein be done according to the president of this
Day, with Prayer, and Submission of the whole matter to God; as Solomon
exhorts, The Lot is cast into the Lap, but the whole Disposition thereof is
of the Lord, Prove. 16. Prove. 16.33.
this is enough to satissie some; Those that would have more of this Argument,
let them to the Folio's of Aquinas, Bellarm. Marlorat, etc. 2.2ae, Q 95. A. 8.
Li de Clerieis. c. 3. in locum.
Particularly the Lot here fell upon Matthias, v. 20. And Joseph was so just as
to Acquiesce therein as well as The Other, we must likewise be contented with our
Lot, what Ground so ever God has cast it in: whether the Lot of Jonah or
Matthias light upon us, we must say with Eli; Dominus est, it is the Lord, do
He what seems good in his own Eyes, whatsoever it is in ours. With Paul, we
must study Content in all Conditions, Phil. 4.11. (...) Theod. Nathaniel, etc.
the Gift of God, from (...) and (...).
The Lot fell upon Matthias, it was the Gift of God to Him, as his Name
signifies, and signifying his Apostleship (as St Paul speaks of his) to be
not of Man, or by the will of Man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. Gal.
1.12. The Lot here fell not on the Son of Rest, as Barsabas, (...)
intimates, but on the Son of Labor, St Matthias who spread the Gospel
through the scorching Africa, endeavoring to water those Sandy Deserts of
their parched Hearts, with the Heavenly Dewes of Christ, and his most saving
Truth; Alstaed. Chron. c. 27.
all whose pains are at length, recompensed there, with the Prophets usual
Reward here below, that is, He is first stoned almost to Death, and then
Beheaded, Anno Christi, 51.

POEM. 26.
THe God of holy Order did Ordain
Succession should his sacred Tribe maintain;
When therefore Judas by Transgression fell,
And the Worlds Ransom, for few Pence, did sell
With Himself in the Bargain; then his Place
Did St Matthias by Strict Choice embrace;
'Bout which the Apostles meet, and Fast, and Pray,
Such Duties best suit an Election Day:
And having pitched on Twins of Piety,
They leave the Singling to that Deity
Who searches Hearts, and so can best dispense
All, to his own, and their Convenience:
He by a Sacred Lottery permits
Them to discern which of the Twain best fits
His unrevealed Will, and on this Fashion
Has his own Choice, prevents their Emulation:
A Means not rashly now to be required:
Though warrantable then when so inspired:
Deigne Lord Each of our Hearts so to dispose,
As fitted Instruments to serve Thee Chose;
And Let the same Love, thy Church, ours so plant
That Faithful Successors it never want.
The COLLECT. The Epistle, Acts 1. v. 15. to the end.
The Gospel, Matthew. 11.25. to the end.

ALmighty God, which in the place of the Traitor Judas, did cause thy
Faithful Servant Matthias to be of the Number of the twelve Apostles: grant
that thy Church being always preserved from false Apostles, may be Ordered and
Guided by Faithful and True Pastors, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

depiction of the Annunciation, the salutation by the angel Gabriel of the
virgin Mary Lu. 1 The Salutation.
28. And the Angel came in unto her, and said, Hail thou that art Highly
favored the LORD is with thee, Blessed art thou Among women.


Here the Plate.

Upon the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin MARY.
DISQUISITION 24.
THe Pascall Lamb was to be Eaten totally, Exodus Exodus 12.
12. Not only his Head and Feet, but also his Purtenance, And Christ being the
same to us, 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 5.7.
5. And we having already with Mary, anointed his Head and Feet, (id est)
Meditated his Birth and Death: are now Falling to the Appurtenance thereof,
viz. The Angelical, and Evangelicall Annunciation of his Admirable Conception:
which the Church acquaints us with exactly in her Gospel for the Day, Lnk.
1.26.
Luke 1. In whose Story are mentioned three Parties most remarkable (as being
indeed three several Natures) the Party sending, God: the Party sent, Gabriel
an Angel: the Party to whom sent, viz. the Virgin Mary. James 1.17.
This happy Message, as every other good and perfect Gift comes down from
above etc. The Father sends, the Son descends, the Holy Ghost condescends,
missus a Deo, involves them all, sent from God; Dei fortitudo, the Power of God.
The Messenger here is, Mercurius Coelicus, an Angel and that Angel Gabriel,
and that Gabriel signifies the strength of God, a fit Ambassador for such an
Errand, to carry news of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah's Conception, whose
Redemption of the World is expressly called, the Srength of Gods Arm, v. 51. Of
this Days Gospel Chapter, here briefly let us take notice of the Person, and
his Message. The Person was an Angel, that our Humane Nature might be repaired
after the manner it was Ruined. Ad Evam Angelus malus, ad Mariam bonus
accessit, Fulgent. de Not Christi.
as an evil Angel under the shape of a Serpent was sent to Eve, to work our
Woe, So here a good Angel, is sent to the blessed Virgin Mary, with glad
Tidings of our Weal; Our restitution herein happily proportioning our Fall: an
Angel to a Virgin, and most fitly, Why an Angel Here.
for -- Angelis Cognata Virginitas (says one) Angels and Virgins are of some
Affinity, though a great way off, Et Coelibatus, quasi Coelo beatus: was at
least a witty Etymology, (but of this more anon.) An Angel, to show them
Ministering Spirits sent forth for their sakes that shall be Heirs of Salvation,
Heb. 1.14. And therefore we having such a Guard attending us, should do
whatsoever we do, in such a Reverend and seemly Fashion, as always
remembering we are made a Spectacle to Men and Angels, 1 Cor. 4. 1 Cor. 4.9.
And this was summus Angelus (says Gregory) Quia Summum Omnium Annunciabat;
supposed to be an Angel of the Highest Order, as declaring the Conception of
the Highest. But this Ministration of Angelick Natures (both as to the
Messages, and Protection, Degrees and Orders) I shall referve as more peculiar
to the Feast of St Michael. For the Message it self, the substance of it is
out Redemption; The salutation.
it consisting here of a Salutation; And the matter, Christ's Conception. The
first, ver. 28. (...). Hail, Thou that art highly Favored, etc. Salutandi
formula, words that speak only a Form of Salvation, here seasonably used, and
not to be wiredrawn into a Prayer, there being in them nothing either Petitory,
or gratulatory: so that the ignorant and Customary mistake of Them, for such,
made Luther say ingeniously that the words of this Salutation, Diez. Giron.
Ave Maria were made very great Martyrs: As even ingenuous Adversaries cannot
but acknowledge, that consider how profoundly some Friars have derived Ave,
viz. from A. primitively taken, and vae, that is, as without woe; and what
strange Extracts some make from the three Letters of Ave, soil. A. to signify
Altitudo Patris, the height of the Father. V. veritas Filii, the Truth of the
Son. And E. Eternitas Spiritus Sancti, the Eternity of the Holy Ghost; and so
for the Name of Mary (making it more fruitful than het womb) Maria (say they)
involving the five most illustrious holy women in the Scripture; Mary the Sea
of Grace and Virtue.
Michol, Abigal, Rachel, Judith, Abishag; Each, in a Letter of her Name; Maria,
quasi Maria, the Sea of Grace and Virtue: And Ave, being inverted Eva; as she,
the woman Occasioned the worlds woe, so This as opposite, saluted as the worlds
joy, with Ave: Fine airie Speculations, which who so is taken with, may see
Plenty of Them Recited in Dr Boys his Postils; In Festo Annuntiationisop. 662.
etc.
the matter is serious (as the Salutation is Exemplarly courteous.) The Lord is
with thee. Tecum in utero, Qui Tecum in Animo, Tecum in Corpore, Qui Tecum in
Cord. He who is with Thee in thy mind, will be with Thee in thy womb, He who
is with Thee in Thy Soul, will be with Thee in thy Body, v. 31. And it is worthy
of an Ecce. Behold, Luke 1. v. 31. etc
Thou shall Conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall Call his
Name Jesus. He shall be great, etc. As if Gabriel should have said, I am sent
from God, and so the Lord is with Thee much more; per supereminentem quandam
operationem, by some more Eminent Operation. God the Father is with Thee,
highly Favoring Thee, making His, thy Son; God the Son is with Thee, for Thou
shall Conceive him in Thy womb; and God the Holy Ghost is with Thee, for He
shall come upon Thee, Bern. in Festo
and the Power of the most High shall over shadow Thee. And This brings the
Message home unto the Party sent to, and that is the Virgin Mary: The third
part end Party. V.M.
And though sweetened with the Gentlest Address, that could be by the Angel, yet
the unwonted Apparition, and the strangeness of the News both startle the
Tender Virgin, Modesty and Fear were already the struggling Twins of her
Soul: Filial Fear is Ianitor Actionum, a good Porter to give Entrance unto
all our Actions; and Modesty is the Mother of all female Virtues, which makes
the wise man say, Ecclus. 16: 15:
that a modest woman is a Ladder of Graces, Eccl. 26.15.
Eccl. 26. Yet the Angel soon dissipateth her Fears, ver. 30. saying unto
her, Fear not Mary, for thou have found favor with God; Et Qui apud Deum
Invenit Gratiam, not habet quod Timeat; and he or she, that has so found
favor with God, has not indeed whereof to be afraid: Nor therefore was hers
such, as to exclude Belief, that being Confirmed by the Example of her Cousin
Elizabeth, ver. 36. Being the sixth month of her Conception, in old Age and
Barrenness: And therefore Blessed art thou among women; That is, first, free
from their Curses, as wives by bringing forth in sorrow, The Virgin Mother.
and as Virgins by sterility, Blessed art thou among women, that Remainest both
a Mother and a Virgin; a Virgin for Purity, as Gideons Fleece, and Aarons Rod
prefigured her, Virga Aaronis fructum sine Plantatione, Maria Filium protulit
sine Commixtione; That flourished without Plantation, and she brought forth
without Commixtion; blessed among Wives, being espoused, for the Comfort of
both Conditions, as well as for the freeing of all Parties from Scandal; among
women blessed, for the fruitfulness of the womb, above all women bearing the
Messiah, (the old Ambition of all women) O virgo ex Te Author tuus, ex Te origo
Oritur. O blessed Virgin, Thou art Mother of thy Father, and from Thee arises
the Original: And what here the Angel Annunciateth, Isa. 7.14.
Isaiah long fore-Prophesied, Ecce virgo Concipiet, Isa. 7. Behold a Virgin
shall Conceive, etc. Partus and Integritas discordes Tempore longo,
Virginis, in Gremio, foedera Pacis habent.
Virginity and Childbirth Long asunder,
In Mary's womb made a full Truce of wonder.
Behold a Virgin shall bring forth a Son, and his Design is wrapped up in his
Saving Name, Jesus; in Aure melos, in Cord Iubilus: which is Honey in the
Mouth, Music in the Ear, and Joys Elixer in the Heart: And now her Faith
having got the Hand of her modest Passions, she glows into her Part of the
Dialogue, and though she doubt not of the matter, yet desires to be informed of
the means, (...); How can this be, since I know not a man, etc? Which, the
Angel answers with a Spiritus obumbrabit, The Holy Ghost shall over shadow
Thee; which to her was so satisfactory (though still a Cloud to us) that she
disputes no further, but at once Testifies her Faith and humblest Gratulation,
ver. 38. Behold the Handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word.
Quae est haec sublimis Humilitas? admires St Bernard what manner of high
Humility is This? Bernard. in Festo.
That the Mother of Christ calls her self an Handmaid? Foelix est Qui mittitur,
foelix a Quo mittitur, foelix ad Quam mittitur, ut fiat foelix pro Quo
mittitur; Happy the Messenger that here was sent, happy infinitely He that sent
him, Blessed among women the Party to whom sent, That poor Man might be happy,
for whom all This: for which all Generations shall Call her Blessed; (though
not Invocate her for Blessings) making her Garlands of due Eulogies (though not
Rosaries of filattery and superstition) such as more suit her Virgin Modesty,
acknowledging Her the Golden Pipe, through which the Fountain of Living waters
streamed to us, the Cisterne full of Grace; the Top of all her Sex, A star of
the first Magnitude in Glory: Dei-para Virgo, with that famous Council, we
Confess, Contilium Chaltedon.
and Call her the Mother of God from that (...), the Figure of Communication of
Properties; but to Call her Regina Coeli, matter Gratiae, and misericordiae,
Imperatrix Filii; Queen of Heaven, Mother of Grace and mercy, Commandresse of
her Son: Exam. Trident. p. 3. p. 147.
with more and Higher Attributions to her, examined in Chemnitius: I dare say,
that if those blessed Spirits above had but Leisure (from their Glory) to take
notice of these Courtships, to say no worse of Them, The blessed Virgin would
equal that same Angels modesty, Rev. 19.10.
Rev. 19. that Refused St John's Adoration; See thou do it not, for I am thy
Fellow Servants; and They that confess not this of her, and all the other
Saints in Glory, Commend them not so much as we do, yet above the rest, blessed
art thou Perpetual Virgin; and yet again, that was not the Ground of her
Magnificat, not her Virginity, but Her Humility was the ground of that, My
soul does magnify the Lord, etc. the Respexit and Exaltavit, both looked on
This, Thou have Regarded, and exalted the Low Estate of thine Handmaiden.
Despised Humility is above magnified Virginity; to Virginity (says Bernard)
you are Invited, Mat. 10. He that can, Let him Receive it. But to Humility you
are Compelled, unless you become as a little Child you cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God; Matthew. 18. St. Bern. in Feslo.
Without Virginity you may be saved (says he,) but without Humility you
cannot. Concluding with an Audeo dicere, I may peremptorily affirm, that the
Virginity of the Virgin Mary her self, had never been acceptable without
Humility; Matthew. 25.
Chiding the Proud Virgins of his Time, for Glorying in Virginity, and
forgetting of Humility; while the blessed Virgin did here the Contrary:
Recording to Them that Parable, Mat. 26. where of the Ten, there were as many
Foolish ones as wise; but as St Hierom at one side said, Non Damno Nuptias; I
condemn not Marriage; so I at other, Non damno Coelibatum; In Epist. ad
Domnionem.
I discommend not honest singleness, both may be great advantages to Piety,
according to the Temper of the Persons, that improve Them; Let not one of Them
disparage the other, with that Janus Proverb, That Marriage fills Earth, but
Virginity it is fills Heaven; and again, whence is Heaven Filled but from the
Earth? Quote not her Example, to the Prejudice of Either, that was so
transcendently Pious, under both Conditions, both in her Espousals, and
Virginity, Blessed among, Blessed above all women.

POEM. 27.
GOod Offices of Angels, and Degrees.
From this Annunciation, who not Sees?
While winged Gabriel stoops from above
With a miraculous Embassy of Love
To the Sweet Uirgin, and by Her to all
Whom (sharing in her Bliss) They blessed Call:
Of all Judaea's Virgins She Is the Choice,
In whom God, Angels, Men, and all Rejoice:
Of the whole Ring of Israel She Is the Gem,
At once Adornes, and wears Heaven's Diadem:
Of all the Parkes of Jury This the Dear
Singled out, not to Chase, but Chastely bear:
Like Aarons Rod, that without Sap of Earth
Buds, Blossoms, Bears; her News is such a Birth:
The Messenger and Message both so strange,
As in her Virgin-Cheeke work many a Change;
The Angel frights her Roses off, and then
The News Replants Them, Lilies yield again;
What ever her Countenance, yet still her Breast
Disputes not, but Believes her heavenly Guest;
Argues not She, but piously submits,
As in such Mysteries, it all befits:
She yields the Angel here no Adoration,
But yet Returns all humble Gratulation:
It Derogates from Christ, Religion Taint's
To Worship, or Invoke those blessed Saints;
But when Their pious steps our Souls do raise
We Honor Them, in Giving God the Praise:
Thus Christ (like whom Heaven and Earth had none other)
On Earth no Father had, in Heaven no Mother;
Here Mary being She, does most Excel
All Virgins, Matrons, Dames of Israel:
Like Cibele, Sh'hath of her Sex such Odds
That She Is more than feigned Mother of the Gods;
Yet happier the Conception of her Heart,
Than her Corporeal Acting Mothers Part;
For That indeed through Earth spreads her Renown,
But This decks her with a Celestial Crown:
Those Aves wrong her, scarce Sense by the Story,
That Hail her full of Grace, when full of Glory;
Yet Glorying not in any Phansied Power
Over Christ as Son, but in her Savior.
The COLLECT. The Epistle Isa. 7. ver. 10. to 16.
The Gospel Luke 1. ver. 26. to 39.

WE beseech thee, Lord, pour thy grace into our hearts, that as we have known
Christ thy Sons incarnation by the Message of an Angel: so by his Cross and
Passion, we may be brought unto the glory of his Resurrection, through the same
Christ our Lord.

depiction of Saint Mark with books and lion S. MARCUS.
True Doctrine, Charity, Repentance, these
if one but mark these times do seldom please
A Lions voice is reguisite, where men
prefer, before Heavens Palace, Earths close Den.

Here the Plate.

Upon the Festival of St MARK.
DISQUISITION 25.
THe four Evangelists were prefigured, and lively Represented in Ezekiels
Vision of the four Living Creatures with four several Faces; in Homine
Humanitas, in Leone Regnum, in vitulo Sacerdotium, Lyrain Glossa.
in Aquila Divinitatis Sacramentum; That with the Face of Man Pointed out St
Matthew, describing Christ's Humane Nature, his Genealogy according to the
Flesh, (...), as he begins, the Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ, etc.
That with the face of the Ox denotes St Luke, delineating Christ's Priestly
Office, Offering up that universal Sacrifice, upon the general Altar of the
World his Cross, mainely Running on that Argument; That Creature with the Face
of the Eagle, Figured St John, Christ's Divinest Herald, that fetches his
Pedigree from the King of Kings, Proving his Descent from Heaven, that He is
the Son of God, the Quill of this Eagle penning Christ's Eternal Generation.
But that with the visage of a Lion, was to intimate our St Mark here, who
mainly Trumpets out Christ's Regal Office, and his Imperial Sovereignty over
all Creatures in the world; thus Christ is the Center of Them all, though Each
has His peculiar Lines drawn from it, all the four Evangelists have the same
Subject Christ, as was likewise There prefigured in the wheels, Rota in Rota;
running all one within another; but yet Each has his several Predications of
that Subject. Marcus vero, quod est Rex, Ludolphus de vita V^. 2. p. c. 63.
and etiam Imperator omnium; but our St Marke's design is to Prove Christ a
King (says Ludolphus) and to be the Supreme Power of all things; which
appears (says he) almost in every Chapter, in that he Treats still of the
Choice, and most Eminent Passages and Miracles of Christ: frequently
inculcating his Transcendent Power and Greatness. Finitque Evangelium in
Ascensione ejus in Coelum, and Sessione a Dextris Dei. And as He begins his
Gospel with the History of John the Baptist, Christ's wonderful Forerunner
(then whom there was not a greater borne of women) so Closes He his Gospel
with the highest of all Miracles, Christ's Ascension into Heaven, and sitting at
the right Hand of God: all the way (thorough his Book) framing as 'twere this
Syllogism (says Ludolphus) from the Testimony of Christ's Actions, Proving
this Conclusion, That Man whose Power and Virtue, we see Extended to all
Spirits, and to all Flesh; to all Elements, and all Persons; to all Distances
of Times and Places; to all Instructions of Law and Gospel; to all sufferings
with Patience and Victory; to all Passages of Life and Death; to all Comforts
of this World and a Better; That man (surely) that Can all This and more, is
Rex vere virtuosissimus, and Omnium Dominus. He Certainly is truly the most
powerful King of all, nay, the Omnipotent Monarch of the World: But now that
Christ is the same Powerful Agent St Mark fully Proves the Assumption or
minor Proposition, Minorem serio, Deducit Marc. in Evangetio suo. Idem. Ibid.
Quantum ad viginti Conditiones; throughout his whole Book (says Ludolphus)
by at least twenty several Arguments and Instances.

But more Particularly, This was his Surname Mark, Act. 12.25. his Proper Name
being John. He was the Disciple and Nephew of St Peter, his Sisters Son, and
therefore sometime Called His Son, 1 Pet. 5.13.
1 Pet. 5.13. (as the manner of the Jews was to Call their Kindred by words of
nearest Relation, and so James and Jude were Called the Brothers of our Lord)
This St Mark was also Cosin-German unto Barnabas, Col. 4.10.
by whom and St Paul, He seems at first to have been assumed to the work of
the Ministry, Acts 12.25.
Act. 12. And though He Left Them in Pamphilia (Discouraged perhaps with
Tediousness of Travel, and an infirm Body) yet Here He desisted not from the
Propagation of the Gospel, but afterward accompanied his Cousin Barnabas into
Cyprus, an Island of the Mediterranean Sea, and so in the high way to Italy,
Ubi Graecescripsit Evangelium Marcus, Aposteli Peiri Disc pulus; where He was
so highly valued, that They still Retain Him as the Tutelar Saint of Venice.
At Rome He Penned his Gospel in the Greek Tongue, Ludolphus loca Citato.
and most probably from the Mouth of St Peter his Uncle, Anno Christi. 67.
though Eusebius and some others, write Him the Disciple of Saint Luke, and from
Him to have wrote his Gospel; not without the improbability of writing at the
third hand, while St Luke himself wrote but at the second, viz. from St Paul's
Dictation; his Episcopal See was at Alexandria, whence He manured all the
Neighboring Places with divine Cultivation, even from Egypt to Pentapolis:
from whence at Length Returning Home (some say) He died in Prison, while Others
mention other kinds of Death; yet all agree that he wore the Crown of
Martyrdom, being slain at Alexandria, Anno Christi 63. according to Eusebius,
Eusebius. l. 2. c. 14.
but five or six years after according to Alstaedius and others.

POEM. 28.
THe four Evangelists were Figured on
Ezechiels Vision, which on wheels did run;
And as those Wheels were mutually inroul'd,
So Christ These four harmoniously unfold:
That with the Face of Man St Matthew shows,
By whom the world Christ's Humane Descent knows.
That with the Face of the Ox, St Luke descries,
Dissecting Christ as the worlds Sacrifice!
That like an Eagle Typ'd St John's high Pen,
Which his Eternal Birth describes to Men.
But it is the Lion's stately Countenance
Which does our St Mark's Emblem here advance,
As who above the rest, exactly Sings
Christ's Regal Office, Monarch of all Kings,
Judah's Triumphing Lion, whose sole Power
Subdues that Lion seeking to Devour.
The world's a Forest, and This Lion King;
Whose Power Heaven, Earth, and Hell do Rue! or Sing:
Grant Lord, we Loyal Subjects to Thee Prove,
Ruled by the Golden Scepter of thy Love;
Lest else Thou bruise us with thine Iron-Rod!
For Rising against Thee our King, and God!
But yielding to thy Legislative Power,
Owning Thee Lord, may find Thee Savior.
The COLLECT. The Epistle Ephesians. 4. v. 7. to 17.
The Gospel John 15. v. 1. to 12.

ALmighty God, which have instructed thy holy Church with the heavenly doctrine
of thy Evangelist St Mark, give us grace that we be not like children carried
away with every blast of vain doctrine: but firmly to be established in the
truth of thy holy Gospel, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

depiction of Saint Philip baptizing the Ethiopian eunuch Philip and ye
Eunuche. Act: 8.
38 Then he Commanded the Charet to stand still: and they went down both into
ye water, both Philip and ye Eunuche, and he baptized him.

39 And as soon as they were come up out of ye water, ye spirit of ye Lord
caught away Philip, etc


depiction of Saint James the Lesser (Saint James the Just) with club S.
IACOBVS. MINOR,

Here the Plate.

Upon the Feast of PHILIP and JAMES.
DISQUISITION 26.
THe Modesty of the Church Reformed is herein Conspicuous, that to avoid
Excess of Dedications (wherein Others are so burthensom) She sometimes uniteth
(as in their Love, and Labors) two of the Apostles at once in the same
Festivity; as in that of St Simon, and Jude. and This also of St Philip and
James, hinting from hence, among other Graces, Concord, and Amity, from this
Conjunction of St Philip, and St James. Yet for Methods sake, and Yours; Give
me leave, a while to part them, And to begin with St Philip (as supposed the
Eldest of them) and to his Lot fell the Northren Circuii (says Alsted) in
that Apostolical Designation, Acts 15. Chron. c. 27.
So that He preached in Scythia (say Historians) 20. years; Afterward visiting
the lesser Asia, and some parts of Ethiopia (his Zeal warming the cold
Climates, and his Patience contemperating the Hot) where He wrought the
Conversion of that grand Ennuch, named Candaules, one of great Authority under
Candace Queen of the Aethiopians, Alsted Chron. Conv. Pop. c. 27.
as you may read the Famous Story, Acts 8.10, etc.
Acts 8. Where he receives Commission from an Angel of the Lord to go toward
the South to Gaza, v. 26. which he obeying readily, meets with the happy
opportunity of this Conversion. (Divine Providence, and Humane Obedience ever
Conspire the success of a business) and And he arose and went, and behold a
man of Ethiopia, Verse 26.
an Eunuch, etc. for such we know were the chief Attendants of those Southern
Princes, as of the Eastern at this day) and Him St Philip finds prepared ground
beforehand, Subactum Solum, v. 27. making his Chariot his Closet (a singular
Example) Reading there the Prophet Isaias ( Evangelizans Propheta that Evangel
call Prophet, and Prophetical Evangelist) acknowledging his Ignorance, ver.
31. Understandest Thou, etc. how can I except some guide me? And importuning St
Philips Society and Information, ver. 31. Such Humility, and Diligence, is the
best way to Instruction, and all saving knowledge; the Remarkable Place He
Read, was that of Isa 53.7. Isa. 53.7.
He was Led as a Sheep to the Slaughter, etc. A Text, a Preacher, and an
Auditor, so suitable that St Philip so plied, and applied it to the Passion of
Christ, and that unto the Eunuch, that He grew impatient of his irreligion,
Ambitious only of Present Christianity, Verse 36.
ver. 36. See here is water, what can hinder me to be, etc. why, nothing but
Infidelity, ver. 37. and that he first washes off with true Confession, ver.
37. I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; Verse 37.
and then St Philip washed this Black-moore, yet did not labor in vain, ver.
38. And He commanded the Chariot to stand still, Verse 38.
etc. and when They were come up out of the water the Spirit of the Lord caught
away Philip, etc. though They parted without a Complement, yet a Courtier was
mended into a Christian; the Eunuch went on his way Rejoicing, while St Philip
had a better Chariot to Azotus, where he was found, Preaching in all the Cities
till he came to Caesarea. In a word, Verse 40.
This St Philip was a Deacon and Evangelist, Act. 21.9. and is said by some to
have sent twelve Disciples into Britain, Iackson Chronolog.
for the Conversion of This Island, so much are we beholding to him, that we
cannot but Lament the sad Castatrophe of all his Industry and Travells, but
that 'twas the same Fate with his Lord and Brethren!) For in the reign of
Vespasian at Hierapolis, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 25 Isidor, Reus.
He was stoned, and then Crucified together with two of his own Daughters,
about Anno Christi, 53! Alstaed. Chron. c. 27.


His Colleague here was St James, and this James was not the Son of Joseph,
as Eusebius. l. 2. c. 1. but as eminent, Matthew. 10.3. was the Son of Alphaeus
(for there was an other Apostle of that Name, as you may Read in his peculiar
Festival) This was surnamed James the less (perhaps from his Humility, Hieron
in vita Jacob. Justi. Tindal. Prae. Dr Hanmer. Areticus, Calv. Marlorat, etc.
or latter coming unto Christ of the two Namesakes) This James was the real
Brother of Simon and Jude (as they were the reputed Brethren of our Lord being
indeed but his Kindred) This St James was the Author of that excellent Epistle
bearing his Name. Dr. Hanmer. Aretius Calv. Marlorat. etc.
For as the most and best Divines affirm, That 'Tother James the Son of
Zebedeus, was early slain by cruel Herod, about the very Dawning of the
preaching of the Gospel. This St James was the first Bishop of Jerusalem, and
of such upright Carriage toward all, Annno. 63. Baronius ad
as that he was therefore Surnamed Iustus; and of such indefatigable Devotion
in his Prayers, that Hegisippus reports of Him (as St Hierom of Asella) that
his Knees were grown like Camels Knees, hard and Brawny: Nay St Chrysostom. says
as much of his Forehead, that that was hardened through daily Prostration on the
Pavement of the Temple; Hom 5. in Matthew
O how may this Past Devotion, draw a Blush into the Forehead of present
Irreverence, to think how those old Brawny Knees, Eusebius largely relates Him
l. 2. c. 22.
are now adays all turned into Brawny Hearts! To the Charge of this St James,
fell those Confines of Judea, that border on the Mediterranean Sea; his Chair
of Refidence (as I said) being at Jerusalem: where after 30. years Church-work
and Government. Alstedius. Chro. c. 27.
He was made equal to his Brethren. Josephus telling us, that He was stoned by
the procurement of Ananias, Son to the high Priest (who was therefore hated
of the People, and removed) For so great was the deserved estimation they held
of Him, that Josephus numbreth it -- Inter Excidij causas! among the occasions
of Jerusalems destruction, the putting of this St James the just to Death!
Antiq. l. 2. c. 8.
And Ludolphus notes, that Judas therefore gave that Item, hold him fast.
Cavendo a Popule, Cantioning them, that the People did not rescue Him: and that
he was so like our Savior in Countenance, in facie simillimus; Judas Mercator
pessimus, the Worst of Merchants. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 22.
That He used that sign of Distinction to the ignorant Soldiers, --
whomsoever I shall kiss, hold Him fast, etc. at once, hinting both St James
his assimilation unto Christ, and the Peoples strong affection to Saint James.
Yet for all this, the Malice of the Sanedrim was stronger, for after their
Customary Praeface of stoning Him, de suggestu, aut de pinna Templi dejectus!
says Alstedius. Alstaedius Chr. c. 27.
They Headlong'd Him out of the Pulpit (as some still Translate their envy) or
as others say They Praecipitated Him from the Pinnacle of the Temple, as the
Devil would have served our Savior.

POEM. 29.
LO in the Zodiac of our Christian Sky
Philip and Jacob are the Gemini,
Which Sign you know, does ever Rule the Knees,
And for Prayer and Devotion, so do These.
As They present the Glories of the Sping.
So do These Too cause Spiritual Flourishing,
Show flowery Pastures, lead to Pleasant Brooks
In sweet Disclosures of the Sacred Books.
Although this Saint be sirnam'd James the less
And with St Philip but one Feast express,
Yet James the just, and Brother of our Lord,
Who stoutly in those Regions Preached his Word
That from the Mid-Land Seas, on Jury side,
Whose Metropolitan He did Reside;
Where having long Preached, and well Governed,
Thrown from a Praecipice, He Is murdered
At length Ithus in that Prophet-killing Town,
He changed his Miter, for a Martyrs Crown,
And the great Eunuch found Experience
In good St Philip gladding every Sense,
By seasonable Dissolving of that Mist
Which He was quite lost in, concerning Christ:
To whom He leads Him by sweet Isai's hand
Making Him that Praediction understand;
His better Chariot, He carries his Soul
To Christ, by Faith and Baptism: through the foul
And dirty Sin of Pagan Ignorance,
Him soon to Scripture Knowledge does advance;
O happy Travetler that by the way
So meets Conversion; and commands a stay
To Embrace it, and by Baptism to seal,
What Faith did now unto his Heart Reveal:
That when again He Homeward shall resort
He may as't were, Christen Candaces Court
By his great good Example, and Relate
To Them, and us, the Gains of such a Mate;
That we, like Him may piously Dispense
With all Affairs, to hold Intelligence
With God in's Word, and though of never such Place
To join with lower Helps Deem't no disgrace.
Feed on the Plains of Scripture, soar not high
Unless some Philip, or some Jacob nigh.
The COLLECT. The Epistle, James 1. v. 1. to 13.
The Gospel, John 14.1. to 15.

ALmighty God, whom truly to know is everlasting life: grant us perfectly to
know thy Son Jesus Christ to be the Way, the Truth, and the Life, as thou
have taught St Philip, and other the Apostles, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Upon the Festival of St BARNABAS.
DISQUISITION 27.
ALbeit we find not this Saint in the Catalogue of the Apostles, Mat. 10.2. l.
1. c. 12.
Mat. 10. Yet we find Him numbered among the Disciples, though none of the
Twelve, Yet one of the Seventy (says Eusebius.) Cujus persaepe fit mentio. Of
whom there is frequent and honorable mention in the Holy Scriptures: (very
little indeed being to be found of Him else where) and He wants not any
Humane Character, that abounds with so much Divine approbation; And that both
by the Testimony of St Luke in his Acts of the Apostles, Acts 11.22.24. etc.
13.2. etc.
and of St Paul in his Epistle to the Galathians, 2. joining there the right
Hand of Fellowship: Gal. 2.9.
But his Story is more illustrious in the Acts of the Apostles, C. 11. and 13.
Where, upon the Dispersion occasioned by the Martyrdom of St Stephen (which
Divine Providence ordered into an Advantage of the Gospel) the Gentiles came to
hear of, and Receive the Word. This Saint as a special Instrument to improve
the same, Acts 11.18.19.
is sent with a Commission; First, to Antioch, where first began the Christian
denomination, Verse 20, Acts 13.2.
and let the next Verse tell you how he employed it, Verse 21. Who when he came
and had seen the Grace of God; viz. In the effectual working of his Ministry,
was glad; as in such success of their labors all good men use, and such was he
indeed, as it there follows; For he was a good man, full of the Holy Ghost,
and of Faith, and much people was added unto the Lord: Then departed Barnabas
to Tarsus to seek Saul; and having found him, in the 13 Chapter, the Holy Ghost
finds and joins them both, as a pair of Vessels of Election, but with a
special designation there of Barnaby. V. 2. (...). But separate me Paul and
Barnabas; the last being in the Original named first: Select and cull them out,
out of all the heaps of men, For the work whereunto I have called them: And
having with Prayer and Fasting (as such business should be done) received
enlarged Commissions, with cheerfulness they commence their journey, neither
with distances or dangers, any whit discouraged. Verse 4. Acts 13.4, etc.
So they being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia, from
thence sailed unto Cyprus, etc. As your leisure may read, the numerous stages
of their successful travels; or see the perils of them in a glass of Saint
Paul's own making, 2 Cor. 11.26.
2 Cor. 11. Thus, Tanquam jugati boves. These two (as it were) Gods chief yoke
of Oxen, ploughed over much ground, and so manured the Field of Christianity,
that the laborers was not so few, as the Harvest of the Church was great. Acts
13.48, 49.
Verse 48. The Gentiles glorified the Word of the Lord, and it was published
throughout all the Region. These were not like Saint Judes Clouds without
water, but like two plenteous Bottles of Heaven showred their fruitful dews
upon all places where they came, with their streams, making glad each City of
God: (...).
An excellent Spirit being in them (as was said of Daniel) St. Paul of eminent
knowledge and compliant nature. Omnia factus omnibus, Becoming all to all, that
he might gain some, i. e. Dispencing sometimes with things less material, not
serving the times, but observing them to the advantages of Christianity; while
our Saint Barnaby, at other side, carries both ability and sweetness in his
very name. The Syriack derivation speaking him, Filium consolationis, the Son
of Consolation; Fit to bind up the broken souls of Gentile-Penitents, and pour
Christ's blood into their gaping wounds; the Hebrew Etymology naming him the Son
of Prophecy: (...)
i. e. A man of knowledge, fitted for Instruction. Thus unanimously and
profitably, did these two pass over many Countries, and some years together;
and how willingly could I here pass over the difference that fell afterward
between them, Acts 15.37.
Acts 15. as the best Gold must have its grains; and lest they should have
hence been puffed up (as we see daily, what success can do!) This was one of
those Messengers of Satan (and Contention sure one of the worst of them!) This
still is one of the Envious man's constant engines; the like difference between
Saint Jerome and Ruffinus, and many other holy Fathers of the Primitive Church;
and now adays, more of these fire balls are thrown then ever! God grant they be
but as soon quenched, and do as little hurt, as this did here between Saint
Paul and Barnaby; which though sharp, was but short and casual: Only about
Saint Barnaby's desire to take his Cozen Mark along with him; whom St. Paul
fearing would desert them again, as from Pamphylia; he chose Silas, and
departed: This nothing hindering the sacred progress of the work, nor any more
heard of in the Scripture; till both at last, participated, as of the Labors,
so of the Sufferings; though not at the same time and place, yet both for the
same cause enduring Martyrdom; Alsted. Chron. on c. 27.
wherewith Saint Barnaby was crowned, about the Nine and fortieth or fiftieth
year of Christ, his Master and our Common Savior.

POEM. 30.
Thy name and nature sweetly do agree,
A Son of Consolation, speaking thee;
And such indeed thou art, to groaners under
Pressures of sin; but else a Son of Thunder!
Instructing Teachers, with Physicians skill,
To act in order to their Patient still:
A Son of Lightning too sometimes, in jar
Flashing with Paul, thy Fellow Traveller!
Yet where the fault, determine dare not I;
But in the best, lament infirmity!
The currant'st Gold has lowance, the best Grain
Its Chaff, and S^alk, yet fruitful; so these twain
Christ's choicest yoke of Oxen, which his field
So plough'd, that it a plenteous crop did yield.
And as Saint Paul a chosen vessel was,
So separated too was Barnabas.
Since therefore in the Christian Horizon
Sin's Night's so shortened, by thy Doctrine's Sun
Lengthning Spiritual day, we style thee right
For Grace and Glory, Barnaby the bright.
The COLLECT. The Epistle. Acts 11. verse. 22. to the end.
The Gospel. John 15. verse. 12. to verse. 17.

Lord Almighty, which have endured thy holy Apostle Barnabas with singular
gifts of the Holy Ghost: Let us not be destitute of thy manifold Gifts, nor yet
of Grace to use them always to thine honor and glory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

depiction of Saint John holding chalice with snake S. IOANNES.

The Plate here.

Upon the Feast of St. John Baptist.
DISQUISITION. 28.
Sol approprians praemittit Radios.

THe glorious Chariot of the Sun approaching, you know, fore-sends a Lucifer
to chase the shadows, and glad benighted mortals with the news of day; so here
the brighter Sun of Righteousness, the Father of Lights, Christ Jesus, being
now about to rise on the sin-darkned world, Praemittit suum, (...) here sends
his illuminated Messenger before him, viz. Saint John the Baptist, (...), a
shining Lamp indeed by Christ's own testimony, John 5.35.
John 5. As that same King of Stars (I say) so this same Light of Lights (lest
sudden luster should offend weak eyes) dawneth first inpreparative remisser
beams: Praeco Judicis, Tuba Regis, Angeius Dei, Vox Clamantis, (...), Christi.
Chrysolog.
St. John Baptist is the stella matutina, the morning Star of that day Spring,
which from on high has visited us. I, that so high a Birth, as a descent from
Heaven, might not want an Herald; that the Monarch of Kings might not travel
without an Harbinger; nor the Lord of Hosts without his Marshal; nor so mighty
a Conqueror without his Trumpeter; nor the greatest of all Judges without his
Crier, The voice of one crying in the Wilderness. That no Prophecy might want
accomplishment, or any State its decent dignity, In those days came John the
Baptist, etc. Matthew. 3. Matthew. 3.1, 2, etc.
So that Ambrose Sermon 63.
Preaching upon this day, was not a little troubled, where he should either
begin or end, the praises of Saint John the Baptist -- Inopem me copia fecit:
Abundance suffocates expression, as overmuch Corn choaks the Mill from
grinding; for whatsoever was eminent almost in all other, is found in this one
Saint; as being an Angel in Malachi's phrase; Mal. 3.1: Luke 1.76. John 1.6.
Mark 17. Matthew. 3.5.
a Prophet in St. Lukes; an Apostle in St. John; an Evangelist in St. Marks; a
Preacher of Repentance in St. Matthews; a Confessor in Ecclesiastical History;
constantly teaching the Truth, and patiently suffering for the same. I shall
contract all into an Abridgment of his life and death; being in his life a
Miracle, in his death a Martyr: In the first, glance on his Descent, his Birth,
his Name, his Office; in his Death, reflect upon the Motives, Agents, and
Fortitude thereof: In the first place, his Descent speaks him the son of
Zachariah and Elizabeth, Luke 1.13.
Luke 1. remarkable for each of them: Son of Zachary. Christ chooses not his
Officers, as some do Sheriffs, by measure of their goods, but goodness: Saint
John here, not the son of any wealthy Laick, but of an holy Priest, one
descended of the Aaronick line; no contemptible Gmealogy in Josephus his
Herauldry; In vita Josephi.
who proves his own Noble extract, by his being descended of the line of the
Priesthood, both by his Fathers, and his Mothers side, as appears in his life,
written by himself; and too, Son of Elizabeth (there is somewhat in that)
Elizabeth that was called Barren, but shall be called so no more, but Mother of
such a Son, Then whom, there has not been a greater born of Women. St. John
his Relations.
Thus God oft-times turns seeming reproach, into the greater blessing; and does
recompense contented expectation, with more joyful issue. You say, Nullum
tempus occurrit Regi, indeed no time excludes the power of that King of Heaven;
reflect but upon Sarah and Elizabeth, and tell me, What Breasts so dry, that God
cannot make fruitful? And what Soul so barren, but this Giver of increase can
make to bear? To bear like David's happy Trees, i. e. More fruits in their age,
more and better, even fruits of Righteousness and Repentance: Hence then apply
that of David, in both senses, Spiritual and Corporal, Faecundat sterilem, He
makes the barren to keep house, and to become a joyful mother of children,
Psalm. 113. Psalm. 113.9.
And now if we join both together, Zachary and Elizabeth, we have here then, an
holy President for the legitimate and successful Matrimony of Priests. Gravius
peccare sacerdotem, si uxorem ducat qua^ si domi concubinam foveat. Costerus
Inchirid. c. 17.
Blush then all you that go about to stain the Honor of the Married Clergy,
when Christ himself (you see) does both approve, and honor it; choosing
Priests, Zacharies son to be his (...), his Usher, and Forerunner: We envy not
that sinful Liberty, Praestat Scortart, while our Church out of the Apostles
office licenceth the -- Vxorem ducere; the leading about a sister; which is
Saint Paul's phrase for Marriage, as Lib. 3. c. 24.
Eusebius expounds it to St. Paul himself as married, 1 Cor. 9.5. And they that
urge him so hard for Coelibate, 1 Cor. 7.26.
1 Cor. 7. forget the six and twentieth Verse of that Chapter, (...); where he
means, Because of the present distress and persecution: But enough of his
Relation; now for his Birth, which on his own part, was not without some wonder
also: Not a greater among Women, only the Son of a Virgin greater; Ardens in
locum.
Vt mirabiliter natus, mirabilius nasciturum demonstraret: Of such an aucient
man, and of a barren woman wonderfully born, that he might the better
demonstrate him, that was to be more wonderfully born of a Virgin; at whose
approaching to his Mother, Saint John leaped in the Womb, Exultans puer
Prophetavit; that springing of the Babe at the visitation of the Mothers, was a
kind of salutation of the Infants. Quasi intra Matris viscera: As though Saint
John here in the very Womb (if possible) would have cried out, Ludolphus,
Devita Christi.
Ecce Agnus Dei, Behold the Lamb of God, etc. And though he cannot do it with
his voice, yet will he with his motion; which was no ordinary one (says a
Father) but such as causes wonder and expostulation. -- Dic Infans, dic
Prophetarum maxim, etc. Thou great, thou more then a Prophet, say, Whence this
nimble Joy, and strange Exultation? Nondum natus, and Prophetas? Does thy
prophecy forerun thy Birth? Yes, Chrysostom. 7. Hom. in Matthew. 16.
Praesentiam Domini sentiens: As it were feeling the presence of his Lord, by
this accoast, he rejoices in the Womb, in a manner hasting to salute his
Master: And hence it is (says Saint Austin) the Church only celebrates the
Baptist, his Nativity, the death of other Martyrs -- Quia illorum fides post
aetatis accessum, Johannis Nativitas Christum celebravit; Because others indeed
in a full grown Faith, stuck to Christ at their deaths, but our Saint John here
besides that, did with an early confidence, salute him ere his Birth, Luke 1.60.
and so are their Feastivals proportioned to their service: Those as Christ's
followers, Saint John as his forerunner.

Next, (...) From the Root (...) Sig: gracious. The Hebrews usually add the
Letter Jod to proper names, or some other Letter of the name (...)
see a pair of good Omens in his Names; one of them speaking his Person full of
grace, John; and therefore, the other his deserved office, Baptist. Such good
names are or still should be as good Counselors; and to that end pious
antiquity imposed them, significant Compellations are constant Admonitions: And
that as often as we hear our selves named, we might reflect upon our Covenant
with God in Baptism; and who so disparageth a good name with a bad life, may
well be chid as (a Father did) some dissolute Christians, and that doubly,
Ipsum nomen crimen: That even their names shall aggravate their crimes, as here
John Baptists do express his virtues; I, and his office too, our next
considerable, which, some say, was four ways fulfilled; viz. Nascendo,
Praedicando, Baptizando, Moriendo; By his Birth, by his Preaching, by his
Baptism, by his Dying: By his Birth, -- Vtero exiliens praecursionis officium
inchoavit; by his Exultation in the Womb, initiating his Office, and as it were
Preaching Christ's Conception, Ludolph. in Johannem Baptistam.
but of this before: For the second, Saint Matthew describes his Preaching,
with his Text, and other necessary circumstances, Matthew. 3.1, 2, etc.
Matthew. 3. In those days came John the Baptist, Preaching in the Wilderness of
Judea, and saying, Repent, for, etc. He was indeed the first Christian
Preacher; and the same was Christ's Text afterward, Chap. 4.17.
Matthew. 4. An ever needful Subject! Thus what his Infancy began, his riper
years made up, Saint John's Office, and wherein it consisted.
Preaching Repentance, and Baptizing in the Name of Christ; Penitence and
Baptism, a Doctrine and Discipline which the Jews never heard before of (you
may guess how they rellished them) to lay aside their weighty Ceremonies, nay,
their main and ancient Laws, as to offer no other Beasts then their own hearts
for bleeding Sacrifices, but weeping eyes: Nay, and to change that ancient
Sacrament of their Circumcision, so strictly commanded, and so long continued
(above Two thousand years from Abraham unto Christ) so sharply still performed,
or else more sharply punished! Now to persuade them to Baptism, to a little
washing in Jordan, seems no less to them then double Blasphemy, against God and
Moses; as they told Saint Stephen long after, Acts 6. And therefore doubtless,
Acts 6.14.
they raged more against Saint John at first; and somewhat was in it, That he
Preached in the Wilderness (their Cities and Towns not enduring him) witness
their conspirasous Assemblies, more frequent now then ever; the Sanedrim or
High Council of the Jews daily sending their Sophisters to John. John 1.21.
(...); Who art thou? and why Baptizest thou? etc.

Here Saint John's holiest Reformation meets with furious opposition; the best
of asiions must expect affronts, and yet not take them for discouragements: St.
John bates nothing here of resolution; no Jonas he, he waves not his
Commission, but maugre all difficulties, prosecutes his Sacred Innovation; Acts
6.10.
as (it was said of Saint Stephen) all their disputants were not able to resist
the Spirit by which he spoke.

He that sent him, gave success answerable unto his holy courage; his Ministry
wanted not the encouragement of company, Converts, or Disciples, Matthew. 3.
(...). Matthew. 3.4.
There went out to him all Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region about
Jordan, etc. A treble all; as if there were one for each of City, Court, and
Country, (the Grandees were not fuller of Indignation, then the people of Love
and Admiration;) all the Region round about; nor went they out (for novelty
only) as now adays, to see fine Reeds, Reeds shaken with the wind, with every
wind of Doctrine! But in the next Verse (...), Verse 5.
Caught by the Voice of his Doctrine, and Echo of his Life, happy Allurements,
They were baptized of him, confessing their sins: So that it was well, the
Wilderness was his Church, and the mighty River Jordan his Font; lest else he
should have wanted room, or Water for his Baptized Auditors.

One of which, to honor him and his office, was our Lord himself, Verse 13. and
came far to him also; Then came Jesus from Galilee to Jordan to be Baptized of
John: Whose modesty would fain have then resigned his Office; Verse 13.
but for that, Nunc permittas, Suffer it to be so now: I, now, was a fit
opportunity ( before all Jerusalem, etc.) for Christ to Miracle himself, The
Son of God; the Holy Dove descending with a voice from Heaven, etc. Yet was it
not any Nunc of Ostentation, but of Righteousness, etc. Christ's Baptism.
For, Ecce Dominus ad Servum, Magister ad Discipulum: Verifying that, I am meek
and lowly; Learn of me, etc. Beloved, the Lord here comes unto his Servant, the
Master to his Disciple, to be Baptized, and that among the People: But we may
here ask (as Bernard of his Circumcision) Quid facitis Baptizantes Christum?
What do you washing of him, in whom nothing was unclean? Go wash your spotted
Lambs and spare not; 1 Pet. 2.22.
but this Lamb is without blemish: So far from having any, that he knew no sin.
Saint John's modest Answer might have been an Assertion, Thou need not to be
Baptized at all, etc. Nay, one might well with David, Ask Jordan, why it fled
not? etc. And indeed, Consider Christ abstractly, as Totum integrale, (i. e.)
In his own single Purity, a Body by himself, as severed from us; and he needed
then no Baptism, Jordan had more need of him, Lavit aquas, non aquae ipsum: The
Waters were (as it were) Baptized by him, not he by them. Vt aquae nos
purgaturae, prius ipsae purgarentur: That the Waters which were to cleanse us,
by him might first be purified themselves: He received no virtue, but gave the
waters cleanness, and efficacy to the Sacrament. But on the other side, take
him with his Reference to us; this second as the first Adam, Pars Communitatis,
as the Head of the People; and then to fulfill all Righteousness, he must needs
be Baptized: He will need that for thee and me, which for himself he needed
not; for in his Baptism he put on us, as we do or ought, to put on him in ours:
Verbum clamat in voce (i. e.) Christus in Johanne, in glossa Ordin. Gagnaeus in
locum.
And therefore he came to John the Baptist, who was indeed but the Instrument,
Christ himself the Institutor of holy Baptism: Saint John's was a Baptism unto
Repentance, Non peccata tollens, sed eorum commonefaciens; Not taking away
sins, but only admonishing of sinners; but Christ's was a Baptism of Remission,
through his blood; which is our Jordan: For as many as are Baptized
effectually, are Baptized into his death, Romans 6.3. else, all the Rivers of
Damascus, and Judah too, withal the Fullers Soap in the World, cannot fetch out
the least stain; no, He by himself has purged our sins, Heb. 1.3.
Heb. 1. And this is a sensible Demonstration of Christ's yoke being easy, and
his burden light; so changing Circumcision into Baptism; freeing us from bloody
Ceremonies, from costly Sacrifices, and painful Sacraments. It is worth our
thankful Meditation this, and no doubt but many of the Jews, were won by this
same freedom from their burdens; which easy change, John 1.21.
they did somewhat expect, John 1. A blessing quite opposite to that worst
curse of Egypt, wherein God turned their water into blood! But here indulgently
our blood to water; what was their Shambles, is with us a Laver: (...), A Laver
of Regeneration, Tit. 3. Tit. 3.5.
The gentler the Mandate, the heavier the Punishment that waits on the neglect
of it. But of this I have spoke before, in the Feast of Circumcision, and shall
close it with that of Naamans servant; which such Refractories may consult at
their leisure, 2 King. 5.13.
2 King. 5. while we (among the thronging Jews) go forth a little into the
Wilderness, to see the Baptist. (What manner of Person, for Habitation, Habit,
Food, and Raiment) for that is the scaene of his abode and Doctrine, The
Wilderness; as Mount Olivet was said to be our Saviors Pulpit. Regio vasta sed
paucis habitata colonis. Luke 1.39.
What Saint Matthew here calls (...), the Wilderness, St. Luke calls (...); (i.
e.) The Hill-Countrey; being the more barren, the less frequented places of
Judea, yet not disinhabited; for there was Joabs house, 1 King. 2. Nay, Beza
says, 1 King. 2.39.
That there were seven Towns (whereof Joshua mentions fix at his dividing out
the Country) and the seventh was Hebron, John 15.61.
wherein was Zacharies house, Luke 1.40. Where the child grew (says the Text)
waxed strong in spirit, and dwelt till the time of his public Appearing: So
that the Fratres in Eremo, have hence but little cause to challenge Saint John's
Brotherhood, muchless his Patronage, unless also when a very Infant, as above
declared. Maldonat in Matthew. 3.
But here Maldonat is very angry at the Truth, and will prove Saint John an
Hermit, by many Arguments; and first from the Prophecy of him, Isai. 40. Where
by that Wilderness of Babylon, Saint John's is intimated one disinhabited, or
else the prediction there not accomplished; to which I answer trebly: First,
That neither Scripture or himself, does mention any desert of Babylon more
desolate, then that about Jordan; and therefore not to be acknowledged to a
disadvantage, without proof. Secondly, That of Judea being so vast, and but of
so few Colonies, truly retained the name of Wilderness. Yet thirdly, To make it
good in his own sense, Saint John no Patron of Hermitage.
when Zachary was slain (so sacrificed between the Porch and the Altar!) for
affirming Christ born of a Virgin; then was Saint John fain, and his Widowed
Mother, to fly from Herod's cruelty, and the Pharisees; to leave the parts
inhabited, and to go to the remotest of the Desert (and then even in a literal
Wilderness) to a place called Apummim (says Nicephorus) lying between
Jerusalem and Jericho; infamous for Robberies and Murders, as the poor wounded
traveller can tell you, Luke 10.
Luke 10. And here about, they tell us, Saint John lived in a Cave; the very
same, where formerly his Type Eliah was fed by Ravens, drinking the water of
the River Cherith, 1 King. 17. 1 King. 17. Bina Deserta exterius a quo, and
interius circa Jordanem, ad quod venit Johannes, Gagnaeus in locum.
While Gagnaeus tells us, that there was but two deserts in Judea; One, the
inward, from which John came, according to Saint Luke, and that is the
Hill-Countrey, as aforesaid; the other, the outward Desert, to which the
Baptist came, being about Jordan: So that all this contributeth nothing toward
Hermitage, or sullen Anchoretism. St. John if ever in such a Place or Cave,
being not led thither by any voluntary Motion, but driven by blood thirsty
Herod's persecution, not like those, who for some private ends, most part of
discontent, at best of single Piety, Relinquish the Communion of Saints
Militant, Dissolve Society (as much as in them lies) turn enemies to the best
part of Nature, and the common good of Man! choosing rather to keep house with
Birds of night, within some hollow Tree! or to turn Inmates with the Beasts of
Prey, lodging in Dens and Caves! then civilly to converse with men, who
mutually may commerce their Faculties and Talents, to the advantage of their
Master: Such, sure, write more after the Copy of the Cynicks Tub, then of the
Baptists Cave; who though retired here from worldly a vocations (you see)
abandoned not all society; nor like them baulked opportunities of public good;
Witness that Town Bethabara, where He taught and baptized such great
multitudes, and indeed all the Region round about Jordan: Well, the next is to
make it up a threefold Cord, a double Argument, to prove Saint John an Hermit,
Ecce vestis, and esca, solitudinis habitatori congrua: Mald. in locum Matthew. 3.
v. 4.
Mark (says he) his very Habit and his Diet express him such a Pilgrim, Verse
4. This John had his Raiment of, etc. And all this but complying with his
Education and his Office; Inter Judaeos, 3 Sectae. Among the Jews three eminent
Sects (there were) or sorts of Teachers; and therefore so many ways of
Education, viz. Pharisaei, Esseni. Saducaei Dionysius, Carthusi.
The Pharisees, the Sadduces, and the Essens or Nazarites, for those two
differed little; Esseni Rigorissimi; of all, the Essens were the strictest, sc.
Nourishing their Hair, and totally refraining Wine, living solitarily, and
chastely, according to the Customs of the Nazarites: And Mathesius observes of
them, that only these of all the Jewish Factions, no whit opposed Christ; and
therefore Saint John being brought up under their Discipline, after the
strictest manner of the Jews, lived a Nazarite. Secondly, All this Austerity
belonged to his Office, as particularly called unto it, and furnished for it,
with the spirit of Eliah, Luke 1. Luke 1.17.
So that here is as little pattern for voluntary Shirts of Hair, and
Superstitious Abstinence, from Saint John's Food and Raiment, as Fruitless
Solitude before, had from his Wilderness; all which in him, had a Deus
Requisivit; (i. e.) A peculiar Calling for it, while theirs, a Quis Requisivit;
Who has required these things at your hands? But leaving Drones to the Wild
honey of their forced extractions, let us like diligent Bees, suck better Juice
from Saint John's Herbs and Wilderness; learn somewhat of his Temperance, and
Mortification: His Wilderness instructs us to a virtuous retiredness, not to
lie too open, to obvious temptations; to be sometimes apud nos, impregnable to
all allurements; yet to appear at a Baptizing or Proclaiming Christ, else Been
vixit, qui been latuit, is a good Proverb for this Age: And, sure, there is no
wisdom unto that Reservedness, which keeps it self unspotted of the World.
James 1.27. De exuviis immundarum pecudum, Gagnaeus in locum.
Next, Saint John's Habit was a Crier against Pride (there is a voice in that)
he was wrapped in the skins of unclean Beasts, in them to show us our own
likeness: That Girdle about his Loins, Mortificationis in dicium, an Emblem of
the Bodies Subjugation, the Loins, being the Reyns of Concupiscence, must be
restrained, Luke 12.35. His rough Habit shows us, God will accept of a John's
Camels Hair, before a Dive's Purple; regarding not so much the Feathers, as the
Bird (the Lark out rates the Popingay;) Adorn not then the outward only, but
the inward man. Forma decet neglecta viros, A count attire, Luciani, Scommata
in Dialog.
speaks men effeminate; which made Lucian scoff deservedly, (...), Behold She-
Sardanapalus, and Foeminas (...), and Women's Habits not distinguishing their
Sex: Poets are turned Prophets now adays, it seems, among others. The Apostle
gives a better Glass to dress by, if they please to look in it, 1 Timothy 2. 1 Timothy 2.9.
Sure the Absoloms, and the Jezabels of these times, would both bate of their
vanities, did they but sometimes think of John the Baptist; and they might mend
their Fare, if with him too, they would sometimes abate their Diet: His Food
(here) Locusts and wild Honey; his commons short, yet thriving. Pliny tells
us, Lib. 6. c. 10.
That these Locusts were great Delicacies among the Parthians (I know not how
the Cook might mend them) but other Naturalists make three sorts of them, Avis,
Herba, Radix; a Bird, an Herb, a Root so called. Saint Chrysostom thought
Saint John's Locusts of the first kind, St. Chrysostom. Levit. 11.21.
because found among the Edible Fowls, Levit. 11.21. But the stream of Authors
runs (here) for the Herb and Root called Locusts; and his wild Honey, being a
sweet Dew upon them: What ever it was, sure, but a slender Dish, Exampling us
to a Religious Abstinence, condemning this Luxurious Age; in which, old Time
himself has took a surfeit. Epicurus, once deemed such an Heretic, has more
Disciples now then ever. Avidis, Sen. Trag.
Avidis Natura parum: All the four Elements are scarce able to content our
wanton Prodigals; who, if they come not here unto their Husks (without many
penitent drops) may want the cooling drop hereafter! But least I loose intended
Brevity in this Wilderness of matter, I hasten to the sad Catastrophe of the
Baptists Death; wherein I am enforced so far to imitate Herod, as to make but
short work with him: the Motives that first betrayed him unto Malice, was his
Integrity, and reproving Incest, (as it was with Christ) Ye hate me, because I
tell you the truth. His death, whence contrived.
This was the old quarrel, Mark 6.16. (Else Herod reverenced him, and in many
things heard him gladly, Matthew. 11.28.) But Saint John, being as courageous
toward Herod, as his Type Eliah was to Ahab; is first imprisoned, and
afterward destroyed! Herodes Antipas having put off Areta, the Arabian
Princess, his own lawful Wife; and in spite of all Law and Honesty, married
his double Neice, viz. Herodias the Relict of his Brother Philip, and Daughter
of his Brother Aristobulus; Saint John serving a Writ of Non Licet, out of
Levit. 18. Levit. 18.16.
It is not lawful for thee to have thy Brothers wife; is designed for
Execution! from which, the Master whom he served, could many ways have
delivered him, but that in Death, as well as Life, He was to be Christ's
Forerunner! And as there was a Necessity of his being such in Life (besides
that of Type, and Prophesies, by Malachi and Isaiah, Mal. 31. Isai. 40.3.
almost three hundred years before) considering the calumnious Jews, John 8.13.
to bear witness of Christ and of his Doctrine, which elss had been abominated
by them, as frequently he does, Matthew. 3. (...) (as the Fathers call him) a
true Friend of the Bridegroom, preparing of his Spouse. So also was there a
necessity, that this Star now should disappear, when as the Sun was risen; That
he should now quit the worlds Theater, by Death, his Master entering (and be no
longer taken for the Messiah, as he was by some) but make good his own
Prophecy. I must decrease, but he must increase (and that both spiritually,
and corporally of both,) Saint John must be Capite minutus (i. e.) Shorter by
the Head! Before Christ, In cruce extentus; Stretched, and wracked on the
Cross! And to effect this, God permits wicked Agents, Herodias and her
Daughter, to prevail with Herod, (as all such, while they think they act but
their own wills, yet perform Gods) So that all on a sudden, Saint John's Head
must be a Dish at Herod's Banquet, on his Birthday, being danced off his
Shoulders Anno Christi 30. In vovendo stultus impius in soluendo, as said of
Jephta.
Herod seems tender of a rash Oath, yet thinks to wash away Incest and Adultery
with Blood! Herod's Birthday, much like Pharaohs (the only two in Scripture
celebrated) and both bloody Banquets: Pharaoh then hung his Baker, Genesis,
Chapter 40. Verse 22. And Herod here beheads his Preacher, as Prudentius
sweetly. Praemia saltatrix poscit funebria virgo, Prud. Enchinid.

Johannis caput abscissum, quod lance reportet.
Incestae ad gremium Matris, fert Regia donum
Psaltria, respersis manubus de sanguine justo.
The Dancing Girl does of fond Herod crave
The Baptist's Head, as a Reward to have;
Which t'her incestuous Dam she does present,
With Hands deep Died in Blood of the Innocent!


Such Tyrants stick not to reward the dance of an Antique, with the Head of a
Prophet! Josephus, Antiq. L. 18. c. 8. de Bell. Juda. l. 9. c. 7.
But, Sequitur ultor a tergo Deus! Their Vengeance slumbereth not; for Josephus
tell us, That the same Herod Antipas was soon after overthrown in Battle, by
the Arabian; and that, well attributed by the Jews to the same cause (i.e.) His
murdering of Saint John the Baptist; and at last fined and banished, he and his
incestuous Herodias both, Eusebius. l. 2. c. 4.
by Caius the Roman Emperor. And Tradition tells us also of that Virago, how a
while after, dancing on the Ice (a Metal as nimble and brittle as her self)
she suddenly fell in, and was her self beheaded by the breach thereof: Nec Lex
est justior ulla. So just is God, and so recoyling is the sin of Blood! That
oftentimes, we see, the Bullets of Judgment, are cast in the very Mould of Sin!

POEM. 31.
Sweet Phosphorus of Christ, whose Beams fore-run
The healing Rise, of that same Glorious Sun:
Thou art that fair and humble Lucifer,
That usherest the true bright Morning Star:
Thou art the Royal Harbinger, that Sings
The glad approach of that same King of Kings:
Thou art in Isai's phrase, the Trumpetter
Of that same Universal Conqueror.
The Crier in the Wilderness, whose Voice
And Life, commends Austerity to choice.
The strict Eliah's Antitype, whose Skins
And Locusts, damn the Epidemick sins
Of Garb and Diet; both the Antic Dress,
And the Luxurious Epicure's excess!
By thine own Steps leading us as by Stairs,
The nearest way to Bliss, Fasting and Prayers;
Together with our Penitence, for that
Best Jordan is, to be Baptized at.
May he that washed thy Waters, and Prayer hears,
Make us all Anabaptists in such tears;
And then how ever powerful Envy seize
Us Prisoners for Tell-troths, or to please
Some dancing Dalilah, so Justice strain
As to take off a Baptist's Head again!
Yet rest secure in Christ, he is our Head,
Shall speak us better life, our Murderers dead.
The COLLECT. The Epistle. Isaiah 40. v. 3. unto verse. 12.
The Gospel. Luke 1. ver. 57. to the end.

Almighty God, by whose providence thy Servant John Baptist was wonderfully
born, and sent to prepare the way of thy Son our Savior, by Preaching of
Penance: Make us so to follow his Doctrine and holy Life, that we may truly
repent according to his Preaching; and after his example, constantly speak the
truth, boldly rebuke vice, and patiently suffer for the Truths sake, through
Jesus Christ, etc.

depiction of Saint Peter with keys S. PETRVS.

The Plate here.

Upon the Feast of St. PETER.
DISQUISITION. 29.
SAint Peter was one of the Eldest and principal Apostles; and for Order,
perhaps, I might inoffensively call him the Primate of them; who after some
experience of humane Frailty, becomes, in a sense, A Rock of Christianity;
both as it were, Contemperating the gladness and sadness of each other; That in
himself he neither might be puffed up, or discouraged; nor by others either
disparaged, or over boasted of: He was in a divided sense, both a Reed and a
Rock; as I shall reflect a little on him, under both those notions, to acquaint
you with some of the chief actions, and passions of him. He was one of the
first that came to the Discipleship, Matthew. 4. Christ there inviting four of
them together, Matthew. 4.18.
Peter and Andrew, James and John, like whom in some measure, all Ministers
should be; that is, Either Fishing or mending their Nets. Luther observes out
of Saint Hierom Expos. in Gal. c. 1.
, four sorts of Apostles, viz. Some sent immediately from God, as the Prophets
under the Law, 2 Pet. 1.21. Jesus Christ and John Baptist at the beginning of
the Gospel, John 1.6. and 20.21. Some, immediately from God the Son, in his
state mortal, as the Twelve Apostles, Matthew. 10.5.
Matthew. 10. in his state glorious, as Saint Paul, Acts 9. Others are sent by
men only, as those, who unworthy, both as to Life and Learning, crowd
notwithstanding into the Ministry. Others (you see) neither chosen of God, or
called of men (for the choice is known by the Talents) as the false Prophets,
of whom Jeremy complains; Jere. 23.21. Phil. 3.2. John 10.1. Matthew. 7.15.
They ran, and I never sent them, etc. Evil workers, Thieves, climbing into the
Church at the Window, not entering in at the door; Wolves in sheeps clothing,
etc. Lastly, Others both elected of God, and Ordained by men, as the Bishops of
Ephesus, Acts 20. And other Priests and Deacons of the Primitive Church, Acts
14. As all Orthodox Ministers of the Word and Sacraments among us. Now Saint
Peter (you see) was one of the first sort, an Apostle chosen of God, by Christ
himself immediately; with whom, he grew so highly into Favor, that he became
one of Christ's Triumvirate, that is, one of his three eminently beloved
Disciples; not only of his Council (as they say) but of his Cabinet: With him
in all serious transactions; Matthew. 17.
with him in Tabor, Matthew. 17. where he participateth heavenly society, and as
it were, anticipates the glories of the Resurrection; desirous not to change
the scene, Bonum est esse hic, Would fain be building Tabernacles there. It is
good for us to be here, etc. Nor does Christ only grace him with miracles by
Land, but by Sea also, Chap. 14.19.
Matthew. 14. Causing him to take a walk with him upon the waters; and when his
Leaden-Faith, there began to sink him, lent him more then bladders of
assistance; beside, teaching him to angle treasure out of it, to take Fish of
more then their own value, Chap. 17.27.
Matthew. 17. And all this while he seemed to be a kind of Rock, of Power,
Faith, and Favor: But when once out of self-love, or carnal fear, he disswades
Christ from his sufferings, Matthew. 16. Chap. 16.23.
Master be good to thy self; Let not this happen unto thee, etc. Then he seems
a Reed again, and is shaken to some purpose; Christ giving him sharp words;
nay, the very same rebuke, as he did to the Devil, in his temptation, Chap.
4.10.
Matthew. 4. Get thee behind me Satan, etc. and very fitly; for it came from
him, to break the design of our Lords coming, and to obstruct the work of our
Redemption! Yet this Slip he recovered afterward, and his Faith (like a broken
bone, well set again) seemed stronger then ever it was before, Matthew. 26. Chap.
26.32, etc.
Where our Savior telling them, That the Shepherd should be smitten, etc. That
all should be offended at him, and forsake him, makes a bold Catholic
challenge, Though all men be offended, yet will not I; and for all Christ's
subjunction, defieth death it self, to exhort his denial: Stout Rock indeed,
that stands against all storms and billows; nay, and at Christ's apprehension in
the Garden, he began to act, according to this rate; whispering death in
Malchu's Ear, but that Christ by an ex tempore miracle, cured one, and cooled
the other: How sociable was his Master with him, in frequent Dialogues?
especially, that most remarkable in the Gospel of this day, Chap. 16.13, etc.
Matthew. 16. Whom do men say that I am? etc. Whom say ye? And Simon Peter
answered, Thou art Christ, the Son of the Living God: And Jesus answered,
Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona, etc. As if Christ should have said, I am the
natural Son of God, (...)
as thou art of Jona. Non te opinio terrena fefellit, sed inspiratio coelestis
instruxit, Englished in Verse 17. Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto
thee, but, John 6.44.
etc. Faith is the work of God, and no man comes unto me, except the Father
draw him: Upon this Rock will I build my Church, etc. (And now we are among the
Rocks indeed,) many busying their Subtilty and Learning to distort this
passage, to the proof of Saint Peter's lordship over the rest of the Apostles;
and so (though inconsequently) of that Iatalian Phaeton's unlimited
Jurisdiction: To say nothing of Gardners See Fox Acts and Mon. in John Rogers
Martyrd.
Contradictory Exposition of it, in his several Sermons before King Edward the
fixed, and Queen Mary (like many others, being of the Religion of the times) the
stream of the Ancient, and the Orthodox, run otherwise; expounding it of the
Faith of Peter, not the favor; of his confession, (which was Commune symbolum,
the Creed of the Apostles) and not of his person. So Saint Augustine Tract.
124. in Johannem and Sermon. 13. de Verb. Domini.
frequently, Petrus a Petra, non e contra. Peter is denominated from the Rock,
and not the Rock from Peter; as a Christian is derived from Christ, and not
Christ from a Christian: Aedificabo te super me, non me super te. I will build
thee upon me, not me upon thee; I will build my Church, upon my self, the Son
of the Living God. And whereas he did once construe this of Saint Peter, he
retracted that Opinion, expounding it of Christ; as Hierome Comment. in Amos.
, Gregory Moral. 31. c. 34.
, Primasius, Anselm, and others do. Fundamentum Ecclesiae, Fides (says St.
Ambrose Ephesians. 2. in locum.
) His Faith was the Rock, for which Simon was called Peter, and the Foundation
whereon the Church is built; many of the Schoolmen herein, siding with the
Fathers, viz. Hugo Cardinalis, Suarez, Vide Boys Postils, in Festo.
Ferus, Tostatus, etc. And it is a common Axiom Aquin 1. part. quaest. 1. Art.
10.
, Symbolica Theologia non est argumentativa; that is, That in matters of
Divinity, Arguments are of no efficacy fetched from Allegories, Metaphors, and
Similitudes. But not to detain you in these rough Speculations; me thinks it is
evident of the Faith of Peter, and not of the person; from the very Context,
Christ not more highly dignifying him in the Eighteen and nineteen Verses, then
sharply reprehending him in the Three and twentieth (as before expressed) else
what a strange change in Three or four Verses? Besides, alas! For his own
particular, what a weak Rock was he afterward, or a Reed rather! at our
Saviors sufferings, shaken with wind of a Damsels breath! How was he besmutted
at the High Priests fire? For all his former Protestations, Matthew. 26.69, etc.
denying his Master, his own Name, his Country; denying not only his
relation, but his knowledge of him; denying again, and again! And that with
abjuration, and execration! and all the aggravations possible! and all this
too, after Christ's indulgent Dialogue with him. Thou art Peter, etc. O see,
here, and lament, sad humane Frailty! If such Rocks be shaken, what shall
Rushes? if chief Apostles fall? O be not high minded, but fear; and let him
that stands, take heed, least he fall! Yet let us not take notice, of his
foul steps only, but also of his washing them, Verse. 75.
Verse 75. He went out and wept bitterly! bitterly, as ere he sinned! O, that
we could as easily repeat his tears, as sins! and that we could so vindicate
the former acts of our life, as he did, with the latter; being ever afterward a
diligent and most successful Apostle, (as though still a Fishing) Catching
three thousand at a Sermon, Acts 2. till Herod Agrippa seiseth, Acts 2.41.
and imprisoneth him, Chap. 12.
Acts 12. intending to serve him, as he had done Saint James; but that the
Prayers of the Church, fetched an Angel from Heaven, miraculously to release
him. That afterward about Anno Christi 51. at Rome he expugned Simon Magus;
whose imposture had so carried away the vulgar, that they inscribed Altars to
him; Saint Peter and Simon Magus.
Simoni deo sancto, to Simon the holy god: But Simon Peter made him appear the
worst of men; though some have so penned the story, as make the passages rather
seem (...), then (...). (i. e.) More Poetical, then real. Thence passing into
the lesser Asia, he Preached a while unto the Jews, being sometime called the
Apostle of Circumcision, until his Vision of the Feasting Sheet, let down from
Heaven, with all edible Creatures of the Earth, Acts 10. And thence, Acts 10.11.
emblematically instructed, he became a Converter of the Gentiles also; as
Prudentius excellently. Somniat illapsum Petrus alto ex aethere discum, Prud.
Enchirid.

Confertum omnigenis Animalibus, ille recusat
Mandere; sed Dominus jubet omnia munda putare:
Surgit, and immundas vocat ad Mysteria Gentes.
Saint Peter dreaming of that Feast from Heaven
Stored, with all Creatures, eats not of what is given:
God checks his niceness, clean expressing all;
Whence he to Christ, does unclean Gentiles call.


To which end, he went afterward to Antioch, Vide Alsted. Chron. c. 27.
where some write him seven years to have been Bishop; and in Anno Christi 67.
being the fourteenth of Nero, he returns to Rome; there abiding not many
months, and that not as Bishop, but as a stranger; though Damasus writes, that
he came to Rome, Anno Christi 60. which was the seventh year of Nero; and even
thereby confuting those, who affirm him to have sat Bishop there Five and
twenty years, when as Nero scarce reigned full fourteen in all, but there all
agree, he suffered; Eusebius, l. 3. c. 1.
And Eusebius, and others say, That in the Sixty eighth year of Christ, (which
was the last of Nero) Saint Peter, and Saint Paul both, both in one day,
((...)) as they had formerly born the yoke of Labors, Isaacsons Chro.
so now of Torture; or rather were both together unyoked, with the Rest of
Martyrdom: Saint Peter being crucified! Inversly (says Eusebius) to differ
from his Master; and Saint Paul beheaded! by the tyranny of Nero, who hence was
justly styled, Dedicator condemnationis Christianae. The Founder of those Ten
Christian Persecutions.

POEM. 32.
Here you come forth to see, with eyes of mind,
No Reed, but a Rock shaken with the wind!
A Rock of Confidence, and Faith professed,
Shook with a Faint blast of a Damsels Breast!
Yet like a well-set Oak, rooted the more
By storms, and firmer after then before.
This Primate of the Apostles, having been
Longer with Christ, and most his wonders seen,
Deservedly above the rest, he most
Does of his love, and stout adherence boast,
To his dear Lord, who too truly descries
His Champions fall, yet praying for his rise.
He that left Ships, and Nets, and World, and all,
When Christ, and gainful miracles did call;
No sooner sees his Paths bestrew'd with Thorn,
But Peter, like the rest, leaves Christ forlorn!
Christ, who from drowning Waves supported him,
He now leaves in a storm to sink or swim!
But did he not then follow to the Hall?
Yes, to disown him! and augment his Thrall!
Nice to see that High Court, and this strange trial,
But there espied, first wounds him with denial!
Denies (in a bad sense) himself, and next
Abjures his Country, and his Lord perplexed!
Then his poor inch of life to loose, so loath,
That he seals all, with a perfidious Oath!
He, whose unstained Profession all admire,
Was thus besmutted at the High Priests fire!
Was this the Rock, not to be moved by death?
So tossed and staggered by a Maidens breath!
Was this he lived on Miracles? was this
He that saw Tabors metamorphosis?
What is best Flesh and Blood, left to it self?
Faith needs must wrack, when each is his own shelf!
How vain all humane confidence? how faril?
Christains, it is humble Faith and Prayers prevail:
Here Satan winnowed the choicest grain,
Yet our Lords Prayer purged off his Chaff again:
After all this, Christ gave him but a look,
And that the Saint into the Peter struck.
Reflection and remorse met both together,
And made fair after, though first showry weather:
Christ's eye dissolved his frozen heart to tears,
And from those bitter streams, sweet Fruit appears:
The monitory Cock then timely sings
Alarums to his Soul, and lends her wings;
For though his Master, at this time, he fly!
Yet for the same, at length, did stoutly die.
Lord be thy Word, our Chantecleer of sin,
And when we start, let thy Grace eye-us in;
And then such fractures, maugre all complaint,
Well-set again, shall make the stronger Saint.
Who knows so well, what it is to go astray,
The care of Sheep and Lambs best take he may:
Who Heaven most values, by such streights as these,
Seems fittest to be trusted with the Keys.
I, when all is done, this Peter proves the stone,
Which Christ has hewn, to build his Church upon;
And though all Tempests of the World assail
That Faith, yet against it Hell shall not prevail.
The COLLECT. The Epistle. Acts 12. ver. 1. unto v. 12.
The Gospel Matthew. 16. ver. 13. unto v. 20.

Almighty God, which by thy Son Jesus Christ, have given to thy Apostle Saint
Peter many excellent gifts, and commandedst him earnestly to feed thy Flock;
make (we beseech thee) all Bishops and Pastors diligently to preach thy Holy
Word, and the people obediently to follow the same, that they may receive the
Crown of everlasting glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

depiction of Saint James the Greater with scallop shell and staff S. IACOBVS
MAYOR.

The Plate here.

Upon the Feastival of St. James.
DISQUISITION. 30.
THis Saint James was one of the sons of Zebedaeus, Matthew. 20. This was James,
the brother of John, Jacobus Major, and why called James the Great?
surnamed James the Great; and that perhaps in regard of his age, above his
name sake, James the son of Alphaeus; or for that he was elected an Apostle
before him (says Aquinas In Gal. 1. Lect. 5. Raulinster. 2. de Jacobi Major.
) or James the Great, as being more intimate and great with his Master Christ,
then the other, as being one of his Triumvirate, one of the three admitted to
the Transfiguration, and the raising of Jairus Daughter, Matthew. 17. Luke 8.
Lastly, James the Great, for that he was endued with so great courage, as to
tell Herod Agrippa of some reigning sin, as John Baptist did his Brother
Herodes Antipas, though it cost him his life also! and brought him first to
drink of Christ's Cup, and to become Proto-martyr of all the Twelve Apostles.
Vitae merito magnus, sed humilitate infimus. Saint James the Great, in the
virtues of his life and death, yet not without some vices interpolated, or
coming between them; indeed, readily coming unto Christ, Matthew. 4.
at the first call, Matthew. 4. leaving all Employments and Relations forthwith
to attend him (I say) he was one of that first Quaternion of Apostles, that
either was invited, or that ever addressed to our Savior; viz. Simon and
Andrew, Remigius apud Thomam.
James and John: Some of whose virtues are wrapped up in either of their names;
as Simon intimates obedience to the will of God; Andreas speaks a stout man, in
executing his Office; St. John is denominated from Grace; and Jacobus, or
James, hints a supplanter, sc. of vices in himself, and auditory (the
Etymologies are so obvious, I forbear them.) Others affirm the four Cardinal
virtues designed by these four chief Apostles, referring Prudence to Saint
Peter; Justice to St. Andrew; Temperance to St. John; and Fortitude to this
Saint James, and yet this Fortitude, not without some weakness; for as the
purest Gold has Dross, and choicest Wine its Lees; so these rare virtues in
them, were not without mixture of some contrary vices! here visible in James
and John, whom yet we cannot part, being Brethren in the same infirmity, viz. A
fond ambition of some eminent advancement above, all the rest of the Disciples;
which caused in them an unbeseeming emulation, Matthew. 20. Matthew. 20.20. in
locum.
and a complaint of Anselmus, Isti ambitiosi, illi invidiosi, utrique tamen
nobis profuerunt. James and John were carnal in their pride, the rest as carnal
in their envy; so that all the Twelve were faulty, and may so far at least
profit us, as to show, all have their infirmities; that none presume, the best
having their slips; nor any despair, since Christ forgives them, Gal. 6.1.
and enjoins us the like. Gal. 6. If a man fall into an offense, ye which are
spiritual, etc. As here Saint James and John did, in moving of their Mother to
an indiscreet Petition; for that is evinced in Christ's plural answer: Ye know
not what ye ask, Verse. 22. Though her words, it was their own act, and Saint
Mark clears it, Chap. 10. Mark 10.37.
That it was their own suit, yet here the old woman must color the dotage;
Then came to him the Mother of Zehedees children, Matthew. 20.20.
etc. Desiring a certain thing of him, etc. This woman was named Solom, the
sister of Joseph, Husband to the blessed Virgin (as some think, Aretius, in
locum Paludensis
comparing Matthew. 27.56. with Mark 15.40.) Her Petition, Verse 21. seems to beg
for her two sons three things, sc. Ease, Riches, and Honor; Ease, that they may
sit; Riches, in thy Kingdom; and Honor, one on thy right hand, and the other on
thy left: The indiscretion of which request, appears in the discreet answer,
consisting of correction, Ye know not what ye ask, etc. And of direction, Ye
know that the Princes of the Gentiles, etc. Ye know not what you ask; either
for the matter, if you think my Kingdom of this World; or otherwise for the
manner, if you think to sit in my Kingdom, before you have drank of my Cup: And
here the reply, was as confident, as the suit, We are able; Ye shall indeed
(says Christ) he says not ye can (to take them off from their own reliance)
but he enabled them both indeed to drink it. Johannes in persecutione; Jacobus
in passione Remigius apud Paludensem in locum.
! Saint John tasted that Cup in persecution, both of the boiling Caldron, and
the banishment to Patmos; but Saint James drank deeper of it, by a literal
Martyrdom, Acts 12. Acts 12.1, 2, 3. etc.
Where Herod the King stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the Church.
Good Kings are said to be nursing Fathers to the Church, but usurping Tyrants
(you see) make a prey of her. Herod here stretches forth his hands to vex her,
certain of the Church, (i. e.) Certainly the best, and principal, as here
(whether out of any private grudge, or general insinuation with the Jews, as is
most probable, Verse. 3.) He killed James, the Brother of John, with the Sword,
etc. and the murderer here was Herodes Agrippa, otherwise called Herod the
King; not Herodes Ascalonita, otherwise called Herod the Great, that slew the
Bethlemitish Innocents; nor Herodes Antipas, Matthew. 2.
otherwise called Herod the Tetrarch, who beheaded Saint John Baptist, Matthew.
14. Chap. 14.
But here the Grandchild of that Herod the Great made away Saint James, as I
find distinguished in an old Verse, Guide ex Lyran.
that is better History then Poetry. Ascalonita necat pueros, Antipa Johannem,
Agrippa Jacobum, claudens in carcere Petrum.
Great Herod slayes the Males, the Tetrarch, John,
The King kills James, and Peter seiseth on.


Eusebius here minds us of a most remarkable History, Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 8.
and which was generally received as authentic, viz. That the Informer which
brought Saint James unto his Trial, and seeing the undantedness of his
witnessing Christ's truth, was thereby converted (like Saint Paul's Jailer) and
declared himself a Christian; and for the same, became an immediate co-partner
in his sufferings, asking him forgiveness, as they went to Execution, which St.
James expressed by prayer for him, and exosculation; as you may read the story
in Eusebius, together with the signal vengeance on their Murderer Herod Agrippa.

The manner of his death being not expressed in Scripture particularly, is
severally phansied; but most probably concluded by Alstedius (from the mention
of the sword, Verse 2.) that he was Beheaded: Jacobum securi percussum scribit,
Eusebius, l. 2. c. 8.
The hardhearted Nation of the Jews, no doubt, being as dextrous in that art of
Decollation, as any of our Outlandish Neighbors: Thus St. James, somewhat like
Henoch, the shortest lived among the Patriarchs before the Flood, with the
shortest circuit, finished the courie of his Apostleship; Yet ere his death
(say some) he first propagated the Gospel into Spain; for which he is still
owned there as Tutelar Saint, of that grave Country. I say, thus Saint James
drank of Christ's Cup first, Alsted. Chron. C. 27.
Anno Domini 43. And so consequently was the first of all the Twelve Apostles
in Christ's Kingdom, according to his Mothers request, in the Gospel for this
day. But then you may ask, how does that part of Christ's answer hold, Verse. 23.
It is not mine to give, etc. especially when, Matthew. 28.18. it is said, Matthew.
28.18.
All power in Heaven and Earth is given to me, etc. But says Austin, Lib. 1.
de Trin. Ardens in locum.
, and others, It is not mine to give, as man, and allied to you, but as God,
and equal to the Father; so here he gave it: Not mine to give out of any
partial relation to you, being no respecter of persons. Not mine to give you,
now before you have drank of my Cup; but here so soon as Saint James drank
thereof, the boon was granted, to sit in his Kingdom; and granted in a better
sense, then ere desired.

POEM 33.
This Saint of active spirit, at first call
Leaves Kindred, Calling, Friends, Sea, Land, and all
To follow Christ; and to that Master dear,
With passionate affections does adhere:
Yet for all this, within him there reside
Some dregs of uncontrouled wrath, and pride,
Takes after's Mother, and ambitious he
Would know, of the Twelve, who should the greatest be?
Is answered the least, Humility
Being the chief Christian magnanimity.
And then 'cause some would him not entertain,
He would have Hell from Heaven shower again!
But Christ owns no such Prayers as do kill,
And make Religion, Midwife to their ill!
Yet on Christ's check, does so himself abate,
That he proves one of his Tri-umvirate,
And as in Tabor's glory, himself were
With his great Master, new transfigur'd there;
For he at length becomes Christ's brighter Gem,
Cut, Foiled, and Martyred at Jerusalem.
The COLLECT. The Epistle. Acts 11. v. 27. to Cha. 12. in v. 3. at, Then were
the.
The Gospel. Matthew. 20. v. 20. to v. 29.

Grant O mereiful God, that as thy holy Apostle Saint James, leaving his
Father, and all that he had, without delay, was obedient unto the calling of
thy Son Jesus Christ, and followed him; so we forsaking all worldly and carnal
affections may be evermore ready to follow thy Commandments, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

depiction of Saint Bartholomew with knife S. BARTHOLOMAEVS.

The Plate here.

Upon the Festival of St. Bartholomew.
DISQUISITION. 31.
FAin would I add something among the rest, to the honor of this Saints memory,
but where to find any true Records, either of his works or words, is
altogether difficult: For we find him named only in that Catalogue of the
Apostles, Matthew. 10. Matthew. 10.3.
and else, little or no mention of him; insomuch, that one (in his Meditations
on him) being hard driven, applies to him, that of Pliny, touching the
Nightingale, Vox and praeterea nibil, wittily, Mr. Austin.
however the Reason be indeed quite contrary, he being so far from being Voice,
and nothing else, That we hear nothing of his voice, nor any speech of his at
all: For in the whole Scripture (the truest Register of the Apostles Asts)
these two words are all that we find of him, Et Bartholomeus, and Bartholomew,
Matthew. 10. And so indeed four times named in the Scripture, and no more; Matthew.
10.3.
and then but only named without any relation of the least word or deed of
his: not one of the rest of the Apostles, but is described to us, either by
some surname by his Kindred, Country, or else by some, or other remarkable
action, or expression of him: But of this Saint we hear no farther mention,
then his name, in all the Gospel, or other parts of the New Testament; and for
other Authors (without a Canonical Foundation) they are so full of uncertainty
and ambiguity, that I shall think it fitter to give you a short Disquisition,
touching him, then a tedious and dubious Peroration.

Much difference there is, among Writers, about his person, about his
profession, about his name. Setarius Tractat. de Barthor.
One who has writ a Tract concerning the Apostles, takes him for Nathaniel,
and that Bartholomeus was but his surname, as many other of the Apostles had,
viz. St. Jude called Thaddaeus, Bar-Jonah to Saint Peter, etc. And this he is
induced to believe, not only from several Authors that he mentions, but
mainly for that Bartholomew, is ever mentioned with St. Philip, who was the
first bringer of Nathaniel unto Christ, and as he thinks still called by that
surname Bartholomew, and not Nathaniel; and again, John 1.45.
because Saint John, who only mentions the story of Nathaniel, does at
several places, mention all the Apostles saving Saint Bartholomew, while all
the rest mention not at all Nathaniel. But this Baronius dislikes and
disproves, saying, Some have thought Nathaniel to be Bartholomew, Levibus
conjecturis permoti; Anno Christi, 31. Number. 28.
moved thereunto by light conjectures. For Saint Augustine In Johan. Tract. 7.
, whose authority is beyond all of them, affirms peremptorily, that Nathaniel
was none of the Twelve, and he adds his Reason, Eruditum ac peritum legis
neluit Dominus, etc. Christ chose the weak things of the world to confound the
wise, etc. Chose not such learned, and eminent Doctors of the Law; the very
Reason Ludolphus gives, that Nicodemus was not admitted into the number of the
Apostles.

And this, I confess, is rather to show, who he was not, then who he was; and
therefore let us proceed, to see what they say of his Profession? And there,
first, In Matthew. eum c. 10. quaest. 35.
Tostatus Collects him to have been a Fisherman, and a Jew of the Province of
Galilee; and so the Romish Breviary calls him, Apostolus Galilaeus; but others
of great note (as the Bishop of Equilinium Petrus de Natalibus, l. 7. cap. 103,
etc.
, etc.) hold, That he was no Jew, but a Syrian; that he was no Fisherman, but
one of Noble Extract, even Nephew and Heir unto a King of Syria; as his name
intimates (which is our third remarkable of him) (...) (i. e.) signifying the
son of Ptolomeus, as the Greeks and Egyptians speak it; but the Syrians call
Tolmai (says Jansenius.) I confess, the Hebrew (...)
Etymon has an other Aspect, speaks him, Filium suspendentis aquas, the son of
one drawing waters: which I refer rather to Spiritual living waters, and the
Wells of Salvation, then those of a mean Laborer, or Fisherman. Devenere viri
Mose duce, sex ubi Fontes,
Etsex forte alii vitreo de rore rigabant;
Septenas decies Palmas, qui Mysticus Elim
Lucus, Apostolicum numerum libris quoque pinxit.
By Moses conduct Israel their Tents strew,
Where Twelve Founts Elim wash with fruitful Dew;
Where Seventy Palms did mystically grow,
The Apostles conquering Number to foreshew.


For as one Episcop. Hispalensis, Fol. 10002.
observes, Syrium est hoc nomen, non Hebraeum. This a Syrian, and no Hebrew
name, hinting him to have been some great man's son of that name and Country,
usual in Scripture to denominate men, sons of their Fathers, without other
addition: Neither is that Objection enough against it, 1 Cor. 1.16. for it says
not that many Noble, but that many Noble are not called, and one in Twelve is
not many: And this seems to me the more probable, as wiping off that scandal of
Julian the Apostata, That mean Fishermen, and such, were easily seduced; and
therefore Christ did receive persons eminent in Learning, Saul was so; and of
Authority in the State, Nicodemus was so; of Wealth and Ability, Zacheus was
so; and so was Joseph of Arimathea; and then, why not so this Bartholomeus?
From whose deep silence in the Scripture (even in the midst of all the Apostles
contentions, misprisions, or other infirmities; for which, most of them were at
sometime or other, reprehended by their gracious Master.) I cannot but commend
his prudence, meekness, unity, modesty, and taciturnity; that let fall nothing
to the breach of either, and recommend them to your imitation. For as silent
and reserved as he appears in Scripture, yet Ecclesiastic story renders him
loud and eloquent in the advancing of his Masters Gospel; First unto the
Lycaonians, and afterward to the remoter Indians, and lastly, to the barbarous
Armenians, whereby their King Astyages (for converting his Brother Palemon;
that after became Bishop of the place) he was put to death, or rather many
deaths in one! One so complicated, as passed all parallel, but the Barbarity of
that place and Tyrant; being first stoned, and afterward excoriated, Flayed
alive! Giving his kin, and all that he had, Job 1.
not as Job says, for his life, but for the Faith and Truth of Christ his
Master; nor is there yet an end of him; For some write, that they let him hang
on the Cross, till the day following, still preaching Christ, till they
beheaded him (and then indeed that was mercy) An. Dom. 51. And hence it is
called Duplex Festum, A double Feastival; some keeping the Five and twentieth
of August to his memory, others with us, the Four and twentieth.

POEM. 34.
Fair Elims Wells, and Palms, did prerecord
The Apostles, and Disciples of our Lord:
Number and Nature both did signify
Their Doctrines pleasant Fruit, and Victory:
Let us too pitch our Tents, here rather dwell,
That each may have his Palm, and Sacred Well:
May these Palms flourish to the day of Doom
In The hearts of men, and all their sins overcome:
Scriptures are justly called Salvations Wells,
In draught whereof Saint Bartholomew excels;
His Name well suiting, sure the Original
Hence does him Son of Water-drawer call:
What Springs to Fields, to Souls is Bartholomew,
Who to cool heats of sin, brings a cold Dew.
Some think this was Nathaniel, then his style
Runs high, a man in whom was found no guile:
Some think him Princely born, and that his Name
the Son of Ptolomy imports the same:
Whose ere he was, he for his Master gave
His skin, Christ's truth, not his own life to save!
Being such a fruitful Saint then, it is but Reason,
His Feast be kept in such a fruitful Season.
The COLLECT. The Gospel. Luke 22. v. 16. unto v. 25.
The Epistle. Acts 3. ver. 12: unto verse. 17.

O almighty and everlasting God, which have given grace to thine Apostle
Bartholomew, truly to believe and preach thy Word: Grant we beseech thee, unto
thy Church, both to love that he believed, and to preach that he taught,
through Christ our Lord, Amen.

depiction of Saint Matthew with books and winged man S. MATHEVS.
For God to become man, a Virgin soul
for to conceive, bring forth, and yet not foul,
are Miracles; yet these good Matthew brings,
as tidings: fittest for an Anaclls wings
Are to be sold by (...)


The Plate here.

Upon the Festival of S. MATTHEW.
DISQUISITION 32.
OBserving Ecclesiastic order, the first is here become one of the last, scil.
Saint Matthew, the first Penman of all the New Testament, one of the last
among these glorious worthies; but so among the last, as some choice Dish is at
a Feastivall, so of the last, as none of the least remarkable conversions; Mat.
9.9.
and though under his own hand, yet that of the Holy Spirits Guiding, cannot be
suspected of immodesty: and as Jesus passed by from thence, he saw a man
sitting at the Receipt of custom, named Matthew, and said unto him, Follow me:
and he Arose, and followed him. Wherein you have Christ's Invitation, and Saint
Matthews resignation. Our Saviors voice, and his Saints Echo, Psalm. 27.8.
somewhat like David's, Psalm 27. Seek ye my Face; Thy Face, Lord, will I seek.
First, the Invitation, Mat. 9.9. as Jesus passed, He saw, etc. where are the
circumstances, and substance of the call; circumstances, first, of Person,
Jesus and Matthew, Matthew a rich man, a covetous rich man, a covetous rich man
in a corrupt office; stiling himself the Publican; in an Emphatical
acknowledgment (while the other Evangelists call him Levi) and so needing a
Jesus: Mar. 2.14. Luke 5.27. c. 9.56.
Salutare Nomen, the saving name of Him, who to that end, came into the world,
Luke 9. and here passing forth from curing the Palsied man's body, he healed
Matthews soul: it was his business thus to be doing Good, even his meat and
drink to do the will of his Father, who would not the death of a sinner, etc.
his Goodness still more amplified from the place and time, for that he called
Matthew sitting at the Receipt of custom. Other Disciples Christ called as
they were doing good, Mat. 4.18.
(as Peter and Andrew from Fishing, James and John mending their Nets, etc.)
But (O the Miracle of Mercy) he called Matthew when doing hurt and injury,
executing his hateful office: Sitting at the Receipt of custom; and sitting,
the worst posture of evil, the worst of all those three degrees of sin,
Psalm. 1.1.
observed out of Psalm 1.1. Now Matthew was a Graduated Publican, seated in the
chair of the scornful, Genebrard in Psa. 1.
which is worse, then either walking in the Counsel of the ungodly, or
standing in the way of sinners! insomuch, that Publicans and most hated
persons, were grown convertibles (the Jews paying no Custom before their
Captivity, that being indeed always the leader of oppressions) so that
Publicans, we find sometimes joined with Heathens, Mat. 18. sometimes with
Harlots, Mat. 18.17. c. 21.31. Luke 15.1.
chap. 21. but always with sinners. But now to the substance of the Call, He
saw, and said, etc. he saw, not only with Corporal eyes (as he saw many so)
but with eyes of compassion, with eyes of Dilection: Vbi Oculus ibi Amor. Here
Christ's eye, and Affection went together: he saw him as a Pearl on a Dunghill,
as a chosen vessel, for a better office: He saw him, with such eyes as looked
on Israel in Egypt, Exodus etc.
Exodus 3. as looked on Saint Peter weeping, or on Nathaniel under the Fig Tree,
John 1.48. He saw him with a speaking eye, and said unto him, Follow me. Verbum
^ffectivum; This was an opperative word: and spoken not so much unto the Ear,
as to the Heart; which when God is pleased to utter to a sinner, of what
Magnitude so ever, is as effectual as his word was at the Creation. Dixit, and
fectum est. Where, he spoke the word, and it was done. So here it was likewise
with Saint Matthew, immediately without Dispute, without Apology, without any
Hesitation, or delay; He Arose (Saint Luke adds) Left all, and followed Him.
Indeed, a ready and full Resignation: not a Pretension, but an Act of Self
Denial: and that not a single one, His resignation.
but a threefold Cord, a treble Abnegation, Luke 5.28.
viz. Peccati, Mundi, Sui; an Abrenunciation of his wickedness, of the world,
and of his will, (happy those that herein Read, and trace him) for sin: he
arose, arose out of the Grave of Avarice, wherein so many buried, alas! that
never rise!) arose by true remorse, from his old unconscionable course, to
Newness of Life. For wealth, He arose from that by leaving all. Luke 5. (i.
e.) the use of all; yet his Right (...): for he entertained Christ at a great
Feast in his house, Luke 5. v. 29. and so are all the Apostles to be
understood. Omnia Reliquimus, Behold we have left all, Mark 10, 28.
and followed Thee: What therefore, etc. no President here for vowed Poverty,
or voluntary Mendicants, from Example of the Apostles; who albeit they left the
use of all to follow Christ; yet left they not their Right and Possession, as
appears by our Saviors words to them, a little before his Passion, John
16.32.
John 16. Behold, the hour comes, yea, and is now come, that ye shall be
scattered every one to [his own] and leave me alone; and if any think to evade
This, by construing it of Relations, their own Friends, or Country, rather
then of their own Goods, and Accommodations: Our Lord himself puts it out of
question, John 19.27.
John 19.27. by Bequeathing his blessed Mother to Saint John, Who from that
time (says the Text) took her home to his own House. And in this sense also
(besides that of Charity, and Restitution, Saint Matthew here left all to
follow Christ. Voluntary Poverty not warrantable from the Apostles Example.
And yet we further grant, that if Christ should please by any particular
Command (as He did that same young rich man, Matthew. 19.) to call any of us
hereunto; by persecution for his Name and Gospel; the Case is evident (in such
Competition of the Conscience, Luke 14.26.
and the World) we may then, nay must leave all, if we will be his Disciples,
Luke 14. but otherwise, by a vow of Voluntary Poverty, to bind ones self to a
state wherein we must beg, and Receive from others, while we might be able to
do the more blessed work, to give to others; what were this but voluntarily to
incur that curse of the wicked, Let his children be vagabonds, and beg their
bread? Psalm 109.9. Psalm 109.10


Now for his Abnegation of his will, Abnegatio sui.
(that is more peculiarly himself) having thrown off the burdens of Sin and
the World, He makes the easier conquest of his will, now fixing it on better
Objects, saying with Snceca.
Him, Major sum, and ad majora genitus, considering himself of nobler Extract,
then to scrape in Dunghils, and so centers his Heart, right fixes it on
Christ. Privative Righteousness is not enough for Christians. They must exceed
the Pharisees, that will enter Heaven, Matthew 5. And therefore his was Positive,
as Tully said of Pompey, Non solum extra vitium, sed intra virtutem: Not only
without vice, but within virtue, so Christ of each good Christian, He must not
be only innocent as the Dove, in declining Evil, but also wise as the Serpent
in effecting Good. Saint Matthew here not only left all, but you see, followed
Christ, and that (as one observes) celeriter, laetanter, convenienter,
perseveranter, Paratus in Ser. de St. Mattheo.
speedily, cheerfully, seasonably, constantly. Speedily, indeed immediately,
without staying to balance his Accounts, or Ceremonize with his Relations:
Cheerfully, as undervaluing corporal to spiritual Gain, Feasting his new
Masters Body, as Christ did cheer his Soul: Seasonably, He being even drowned
in flowing opulence and oppression: now served his wealth as Mergam te, ne
mergar a te.
Crates did his; and seasonably in respect of Christ, who now invited Him in
Transitu, as He passed by, which had He neglected, might have sat long enough
ere ever He met with such an opportunity again: Christ might have passed by him
in another sense! (...), Time is like the Tide. Reject no proferr'd Grace,
embrace all spiritual Overtures and Advantages, Isai. 55.6. Heb. 3.13.
Seek the Lord while He may be found, etc.

Lastly, He followed Constantly, being first a Disciple, then an Apostle,
afterward an Evangelist, and last of all, a Martyr: As a Disciple, He heard
and learned; as an Apostle, He preached and taught; as an Evangelist, He wrote
the Gospel of Christ; Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 21.
and as a Martyr, He suffered for them! First preaching in Judea and Aethiopia,
(says Eusebius) in the eighth year after Christ's Ascension, being Anno Domini,
43. He published his Gospel in their own Hebrew Language: wherein (says one)
He made Christ a far greater Feast then ever; great as being writ in the most
ancient holy Tongue; great, as being the first and most ample of all the
Gospels; and lastly, great in a Design, showing not only Christ's humane
Genealogy, but proving Him the Messiah, promised by the Prophets, and
prefigured in the Sacrifices of the Law: And having done all this for the
Hebrews, he next traveled over Pontus and Asia, Anno Christi, 51. and having
watered those dry places, He went then into Aehiopia, not to change their
outward, but their inward Hiew, which says Cassaneus, He effected. Catalog.
part 3. Consider. 9.
Aethiopiam nigram Doctrina Fidei fecit candidam. He made those Negro Nations
beautiful in Faith, and their dusky visage, to shine with the purity of
Christianity; that He did so in many, is credible enough; but for the most, we
may justly fear 'Twas otherwise: for having spent twenty years among them, in
washing of the Blackmoore, Alsted. Chron. c. 27.
(as the Proverb speaks) Their Actions suit their Countenance (both somewhat
hellish.) They turn his own Complexion to a Literal Sanguine, Beheading Him,
about Anno Christi. 71.

POEM 35.
MAtthew long at Receipt of Custom sits,
Hoarding up wealth and sin, with streined wits!
For Publicans and sinners, even all One,
And This with Emphasis, The Publican;
Yet He, I say, when once Christ does but call
To follow Him, fairly declineth all,
Sin, Custom, Money; Quits his outward Gain,
Offering, to Any that did wrong sustain,
Large Restitution: O how strong the word,
When Speakers Voice, and Hearers Hear't accord?
Greatness and Goodness meet in One, O strange!
Plenty and Piety here interchange:
For presently, his new Lord to requite
For Spirituals, does Corporally invite;
And by receiving so divine a Guest,
Is entertained himself with better Feast.
Fed with the Bread of life; so Took with Christ,
The Publican proves an Evangelist;
And, 'stead of Counting more the Public Coin,
Sums up the stories of Christ's Private Line,
His numerous Miracles, and Grace bestowed,
The numberless Griefs of his Passion showed!
Thence Counting on, his Raised Lords Victories;
Till his Soul, with Christ's Body, mount the Skies.
Lord whisper us in the ' Heart, with such a Call;
To Remors'd Publicans convert us all,
From Sin and Custom in it; that no Gain
May from Thee, any longer us Detain:
But in Thy Service may our selves Expend,
That we, how'ere began, may Saint-like End.
The COLLECT The Epistle, 2 Cor. 4. v. 1. to 7.
The Gospel, St Matthew. 9. v. 9. to 14.

Almighty God, which by thy blessed Son, did call Matthew from the receipt of
custom to be an Apostle, and Evangelist: Grant us grace to forsake all
covetous desires, and inordinate love of riches, and to follow thy said Son
Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns, etc.

Upon the Feast of S. Michael, And all Angels.
DISQUISITION 33.
ALbeit this Festival in the Vulgar compellation, bear but a particular
Denomination of St Michaels day; yet does the Church herein celebrate the
general Memorial of all Angels, praising the Almighty for the great and
various Benefits, Mankind enjoys both in Soul and Body, by their appointed
Aid and Ministration: And indeed, this is doubly considerable; either as
literal, or allegorical: the first having more of curiosity and Information,
the second more of certainty and Aedification: the literal sense here leading
us to a contemplation of Angelical Natures, which of all Creatures (though we
come nearest to Them) God has been pleased most to shut up the knowledge of, in
holy Scripture. Whereof this may be one reason (all humble reverence reserved)
that Gods design was in those sacred Oracles, to impart to Man, but that which
most concerned him, both as to his voluntary Lapse, and gracious Restitution;
and no more of Angels (concerned in another world) then what only refers to
their Ministry, (...).
and delegated Protection; all other speculations of them whatsoever, being but
fine cobweb-lawn, but rarefied Metaphysical Abstractions, and Tentered
Probabilities of Ratiocination: As that they were the work of the first day,
Gen 13.
created in that Fiat Lux, Genesis 1. Let there be Light: Their manner of
Understanding, by intuitive knowledge, (to say nothing of their The Schoolmen
generally de loquela Angelorum.
Speech, while others perhaps speak too much of it:) their triple Hierarchies,
one above another, with as many Orders in each of them; and that in necessary
opposition to as many of the infernal Combinations: their mode of Operation,
and distinguished Offices, viz. into Instructive, Tutelar, Vehicular, Militant,
Matrimonial Terrestrial and Aquatick Angels. But though these are Niceties, and
a very Coelum incognitum, an embracing of a Cloud for Juno, yet something is
expressed of them more certain (wherein we may requite their prying into the
mystery of our Redemption) viz that they are Natives of Heaven, and eternal,
Angeli dicuntur aeviterni, potius quam aeterni.
a part post (i. e.) shall have no Cessation; yet that not so much by their
Nature, as by Preservation: That they are one of the three Invisibles, scil.
God, Angels, and the Souls of Men; that they are innumerable as to us, Ps.
141.4.
but not so in respect of God, who calls all the Stars by their names, Ps.
103.29.
Psalm. 141. that they are full of Knowledge, (...), full of Power and strength,
Psalm. 103.20. His Angels that excel in strength: that there are Degrees, and
Order most exact amongst them; evident from their several Names; From. (...)
to burn. Psalm. 104.4.
Seraphim, Isa. 6. (...) Sicut puer, as a child.
Cherubim, Ezekiel. 1. Thrones, Colos. 1. etc. Principalities, powers, etc. Ephesians.
1. Again, That they can only be Described, (not defined punctually;) and that
Description one of the nearest, Angelus est Animal Rationale, Hymnisonum,
immateriale; That an Angel is a Rational, immateriall Creature, whose main end
is to chant, and act that Hymn (which their whole Quire sung at Christ's Birth)
Glory to God on high, on earth Peace, Good will toward Men. Which goodwill of
theirs is actuated, in variety of Assistance: for though Omnipotence could act
all that He wills, immediately, in all; yet God sees good to busy all his
Creatures, and make them isntrumental for each other (ordering all things like
a Golden chain, whose links while they depend one upon another are all in his
own hand) and so is pleased to use, and vouchsafe us the Ministry and
protection of Angels (nor is the Glory of the Agent ere the less, while we
love and commend the Goodness of the instruments.) This Guardianship of Angels
some assert Particular, suus cuique Genius; that every one from his Birth, has
his assigned Angel, a Genius or spirit attending and defending him: so Saint
Hierom, Mira Animarum Dignitas, etc. O the wonderful Dignity of the souls of
men! that not one of them is sent from Heaven, Quaevis ab ortu Angelium habet
delegatum. Hierom
without an Angel thence allotted, to accompany it and protect it here on
Earth; and Scripture seems to second him, Ps. 34.7. and our blessed Lord
himself Forbids dispising of his little ones upon this Reason, that their
Angels always behold the Face of God, etc. Matthew. 18.10. and what credit this
had of old, Acts 12.15.
you may see Acts 12. when Saint Peter knocked at the entry door of Mary's
house, (his voice being known, and himself supposed in Prison) many within
assembled affirmed, that it was his Angel. But what scruple we at particular
Angels? when the Scriptures are so evident touching their General Protection
and that the Servants of God have many Guardians, Psalm. 91. He has given his
Angels charge, etc. And in the New Testament, Psalm. 91.10.
Are they not all (...), sent forth to minister for them, Heb. 1.14.
who shall be Heirs of salvation? Heb. 1. And this you may see experienced in
Elisha, 2 King. 6. where being besieged by Syrians, the Mount which He
possessed, was full of Horses and Chariots of fire, Psalm. 104.4.
(i. e.) Angels, Psalm. 104.4. His Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a Flaming
fire: I, thousand thousands of Angels, are daily winging it 'twixt Heaven and
Earth, Millia millium Angelorum jugiter meant inter Coelum and Terram. Anselmus.
like Bees betwixt their Hives and Flowers. Vota offerentes, Dona referentes,
Transporting, and as it were, Merchandising Gods Blessings, and Man's Prayers;
performing their Charge to us both alive and dead: In our Life, by instructing,
Dan. 10.21. I am come to teach Thee, (says the Angel there to Daniel,) by
comforting and chearing us in agonies, as to Elijah, 1 King. 19.7. and unto
Hagar, 2 Kin. 19.35.
Genesis 12. By assisting against Enemies, as to St. Peter, Acts 12. and to
Israel, against Senacherib, 2 Kin. 19. By protection, to keep thee in all thy
ways, and that thou dash not thy foot against a stone. Noe? This is Militia
Coelestis, as it were, Gods Regiment of Horse, while his earthly powers are his
Regiment of foot. The times will bear this Allegory touching the Lord of Hoasts.
how comes it then to pass, so many good men often meet with ill Accidents? and
that not only in their Goods, or Children, like holy Job, chap. 1. but also in
their Person, like Mephibosheth. 2 Samuel 4.4. I, not only to the loss of
Limb, but sometimes of Life also, Luke 13. notwithstanding this Angelical
protection: But the Answer is obvious as the scruple, that God is pleased (for
ends best known unto himself) sometimes to countermand these vice Protectours,
and yet to order and overrule the worst of Casualties, at least, to the
Spiritual advantage of the Sufferers: thus do heavens winged Choristers
befriend poor mortals; inclining them to Good, protecting them from evil,
joying in Heaven, at their conversion, Luke 15.7.
Luke. 15. keeping them in all their ways, All this but conditional.
in viis, non praecipitiis; while in the ways of Piety, not in the Precipices
of sin and irrepentance.

Adcandida tecta Columbae:

The harmless Dove, clean house does love. And then their Charge attends us too
at our end, after we are dead, carrying our Souls into Abraham's bosom, Luke
16. Luke 16.
to bear a part in their own Consort unto all eternity.

Lastly, They shall be Messores, Matt. 24.31. Mat. 24.31.
And from these Generals, now to say something of the Angel of this Day, and
his Particular: yet must it not be that which One adventures on, viz. that ever
since the fall of Lucifer, Saint Michael has been head of all the glorious
Angels, Bellarmin de Romans Pontif. l. 1. c. 9. Thousas Aqui. Q. 124. A. 2.
and not hearing him say any thing how he was chosen into his Room) whereas the
Schoolmen make the Ministerial Order to be of an underling Hierarchy: yet we
find an Eminent mention of him in Scripture, Dan. 13.1. where He stands up
for the People. and from thence, by some held to be that Angel, that shall blow
the last Trumpet, 1 The. 4. 1 These. 4.16. Epi. Jude v. 9. Dan. 12.1. Rev. 12.7.
and He is the only Angel in the Scripture Honored with the Title expressly of
an Archangel, Jude ver. 9, five times named in the holy Book, and always a
Military Angel. So thrice in Daniell fighting against the Persians; once in
Revel. against the Dragon in maine Battalia: and in Saint Jude, in a Duel, with
the Devil, about the body of Moses (the very ashes of Gods Servants, have
Angelical protection, and shall have recollection) and so much excellency is
wrapped up in the very Name of this glorious Angel, that some think it only
competent to Christ, and so brings us unawares to the sense Allegorical, by
the Name Michael, (...)
who is like the Lord? for so it signifies: and here Christ is the Archangel,
the Angel of the Covenant: Quis sicut Deus.
Michaelem intellige Christum, it is Saint Austine: and the addition to
Michael, of His Angels, Strengthens that interpretation, Hom. 9. in Apoca.
as such as cannot properly be said, to be any others then the Angels of God
and of Christ.

2. Satan is the Dragon howsoever, that old Serpent, Genesis 3. Rev. 12.
that great Red Dragon, Rev. 12. and the Church militant is the Heaven, the
Scene of this Battle, ordinarity called Heaven in Scripture, as Mat. 6.20.
Col. 3.2. Phil. 3.20. and our life, as Job says, militia super terram; Job 7.1
(...). Ephesians. 6.12. Genesis 3.14.
is a warfare upon Earth^, and therefore take that whole Armourof God, Ephesians. 6.
So that the Meaning of that Re. 12.7 is but briefly this, that Christ and his
Members fight against the Devil and his; nor can that victory be ascribed to
any whatsoever, but to that seed of the woman, which was promised should break
the Serpents Head, Genesis 3. Yet as Aretius says, Christus (...), Angeli (...),
though Christ be General, yet Saint Michael certainly was a great Commander
under him, and a glorious Instrument in the victory.

But in the last place, what compensation is to be returned by us, for their
assistance, and all their good offices? a Question that comes not within David's
Quid Retribuam? Ps. 116. Psalm. 116.12.
though he had as much experience of their favor as any; Yet, What shall I
render to the Lord for all, etc. no Adoration, much less Invocation due to
them. Genesis 18.23.
If Abraham worshipped any Angel, it was Angelum Dominum, non Domini; It was
Christ in their borrowed semblance, and no Created Angel, whose modest Piety,
justly prohibbits it, and that twice, Revelations 19.10. and that with a strict
Caution, and a convincing Reason, See thou do it not, for I am thy
fellow servants, Revelat. 22.9. Rev. 22.9.
But what then, is our Religion ungrateful? are there no Responsals to such
ample Favors? has so sweet a voice, no echo from us? Yes sure, Love must
flow back, and Commendation, ever making Honorable mention of them, as
Glorious Angels, holy Angels, blessed Angels; entertaining them with care, and
Spiritual Hospitality, for they are Feasted, as it were, by virtuous astions,
and driven away with sin, as Bees with smoke; 1 Samuel 16.14.
and when the good Angles go, the evil ever come! as it was with Saul, 1 Samuel
16.14, Caute Ambula, walk circumspectly, and keep the better Company; invite
not the bad Angels, who always are too ready! Yet all the highest Praise, and
Gratitude, and Adoration must be Gods, even for their good Offices; according
to that Rule of the Civil Law, Quicquid servus Acquirit, Domino acquirit suo:
Whatsoever the Servant purchases, He purchases to his Master. And therefore,
Non nobis Domine, non aut Angelis: Psa. 115.1.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto Angels, but to thy Name, be Glory, and all
adoration.

POEM. 36.
BRight Stars o'th Morning, albeit to you
Worship be not, yet Love and Honor's due;
And Decent Gratitude to your high Merits,
For being to frail Flesh, such aiding spirits;
Though we perhaps, Raise not your Hierarchy,
As some fond Builders, full nine stories high;
Yet we acknowledge you, with Admiration,
The Top and vertex of the whole Creation.
Celestial Natives, since your selves do pry
Into our grand Redemptions Mystery,
Pardon our Contemplations, if so bold
A little your bright Natures to behold.
All Spirit (without clog of Body) ye
Move as the Wind, or Light, or Lightning, free;
And yet each of your Millions, Scripture tells,
The strongest human force in strength excells.
Of Distinct Orders, and yet for the most,
All styled in Holy Writ, The Heavenly Host;
The Horse and Chariots of the Mighty Lord,
Ready for March and Motion, at his Word.
So that in Heaven sometime we read of War,
No marvel then poor Mortals live in jar:
But how got Foes in there? Sure as in Flowers
Serpents do breed, so There degenerate Powers!
There Michael fought with his Traind-bands of Light,
And beat the Dragon down to Endless night.
Yet in the Praecipiece his knotted Tail
Against some of those Splendors did prevail;
And so pulled many thence of that bright Train,
One day (from us) to be supplied again:
Your joy then, at our penitence, we pay
With joy, for Christ's confirming of your stay.
Then since we both but one Church constitute,
Let us be neither Actionlesse, nor mute;
Sith' Angels need not our Good Offices,
Let us to Men, what those to us, express.
Joining above, in the Song of Victory,
Still singing Triple-Holy to the most High:
For if to this words Root we stoop our Mind,
Who Is like the Lord? in Michael we find.
To pray to Angels then, if you mark well,
Is a Mistake, for Christ is Michael;
He the Arch-Angell is, that conquereth
Sin, Satan in us; for us Hell and Death.
Or if another Angel, they withstand
All Adoration, by severe command.
Our grateful love is Theirs, but to dispense
Worship on Them's a Double vlolence.
THE COLLECT PRAYER. The Epistle. Rev. 12. v. 7. to 13.
The Gospel. Matthew. 18.1. to 11.

EVerlasting God, which have ordained and constituted the services of all
Angels and Menin a wonderful order, mercifully grant, that they which always
do thee service in Heaven, may by thy appointment succor and defend us in
Earth, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

depiction of Saint Luke with books and ox S. LVCAS.
He whom the world contains not, and whose court
shines with his glorious presence, to confort
with beasts, and in a manager lodge, we see,
excepts us not without Humility.

The Plate here.

Upon Saint Lukes Day.
DISQ^ISITION 34.
THis Evangelist was by Nation of Syria, by Birth of Antioch, Ecccles. Hist. l.
3. c. 4.
(as Eusebius and In vita Lucae.
Hierom report) by Profession a Physician (says St. Paul) Col. 4.14. Luke the
beloved Physiciau greets you. A Physician, and therefore the more admirable for
his Devotion: being not only a Courtier of Nature, lost in second Causes, but
per scalas Creaturarum; ascending to the first by the Ladder of the Creatures,
Corpus humanum objectum Medicinae.
and teaching others so to climb to Heaven. The Human Body not being the
adaequate object of his study and practice. Medicus totius compositi (being
first cured himself by him that was so far more eminently) he became a
Physician of the whole Man, of Soul as well as Body; and that both for the
Therapeutick and Phylactick part of Physic; first curing their Infidelity and
Impenitence with the Sovereign Precepts and prescripts of his Gospel, and then
preserving that same spiritual temper, with the wholesome Examples and good
Acts of the Apostles. And this Religio Medici, although none can equal, yet
(for the honor of God, and that Profession, I wish more would imitate. To take
off all vulgar imputations, and just occasions of those Ironick Apologues, viz.
How once such an one knocking at Heaven-Gates, Saint Peter demanding who he
was? and that by an enumeration of almost all Religions (art thou a Jew? No,
replieth he. A Christian? Neither, etc. till being asked in general, Of what
Religion hewas? He answered, That he was a Physician, and so at length was
denied for his Denials.

But God forbid so honorable and needful a Profession should suffer for the
Delirations, of some of the worst pieces of it. Perhaps some few Philosophical
Humorists, that are but as the Warts and Wens, and mere excrescenses of that
same Noble Science: whose brains being overheated by their Chymicall
Experiments, may as easily mistake the Truth, as the Philosophers Stone. Quod
ad ab omnibus amatur and tamen virgo est: which though wooed of so many, yet
still remains a Virgin. But for the Profession, Ecclus 38.1.2.
it is the Wise man's counsel, Honor the Physician, etc. And our blessed Lord
himself, at once commends and recommends him, Matthew. 9.12. Jer. 8.21.
Matthew. 9. The sick have need of the Physician. God Himself owning the
Compellation, Ier. 8.22. Is there no Physician there? Christ also imitating
their practice, in the Good Samaritan. But here expressly honoring the
Profession with the Office of an Evangelist, sc. in St. Luke the Physician.
Some think him to have been one of the 70. Disciples from his 24, Chapt. v. 13.
Lib 4 contra Marci.
But Tertullian, and other Ancients say, That he was none of Christ's immediate
Disciples, but only Sectator and Discipulus Apostolorum. A Companion and
Disciple of the Apostles, as indeed himself intimates in the very beginning of
his Gospel. Chap. 1.2. Luke 1.2.
Sicut tradiderunt. As they have delivered them unto us, which from the
beginning saw themselves. Insinuating that he wrote his Gospel by Dictation, but
the Acts of the Apostles by his own observation. But that he writ both, he
attestates Acts 1.1. In the former Treatise, O Theophilus, Acts 1.1.
etc. Which former Treatise being his Gospel, he wrote Anno Christi, 51. Lib. 1.
(says Eusebius.) Others say, Anno 54. from the mouth of Saint Paul, who
thence is thought to use that phrase, Romans 16. According to my Gospel. Romans 16.
And Saint Luke indeed being the constant companion of Saint Paul, in his
double Travels, Acts 16. and so he became both the Masters and the Apostles
Register. His being but a deserved Emblem, viz. The Ox strong to labor, his
Pen as unwearied as his Person, and both proportionable to his excellent
Subject. He becomss an Evangelist before Peter and James, Gal. 2.9.
those Pillars of the Church. Ten of the Apostles are past by, and his Quill
chosen: God sometimes is pleased to effect great Designs by obscure means, and
even by unthought of Instruments: Amos an Heardsman, made a Prophet; Amos 1.1.
Many Fishermen, Fishers of many men; an easier transition then, may make St.
Luke here an Evangelist of a Physician. And it is worth while to take notice of
his Dedication, Most excellent Theophilus, Acts 1.1, etc. which some doubt,
whether it be a common, or a proper Name. And Baronius (though he has tried)
cannot unty the knot. If we take it for a common Appellative, Ad annum 58.
it hints the Gospel written to such as are (...). (i. e.) lovers of God, as
being a Pearl not to be cast to Swine, Matthew. 7.6. But every true Christian is
a Theophilus, and has a Gospel dedicated to him, Explan. Proem. Evang. Luc.
(as St. Ambrose sweetly) Si Deum diligis, ad te scriptum est; si ad te
scriptum, suscipe munus, etc. If thou love God, to thee the Gospel is
written, and if to thee it be written, accept the gift of the Evangelist, the
pledge of such an Heavenly Friend, and treasure up this Jewel in the
retirements of thy Bosom, out of the reach both of Moath and Thief, (i.e.) of
Sin and Error. But more proble it is to be a proper Name, from Saint Lukes own
words, Luke 1.3.
Luke 1. v. 3. It seemed good to me also to write unto thee in crder, most
excellent Theophilus, that thou might know the certainty of those things
Wherein thou have been instructed. Wherein me thinks he does evidence some one
particular person, Maldonat. in Luc. 1.
whom he had catechized formerly by word of mouth And this is seconded too by
the Title, (...), being the same used elsewhere to Eminent Persons,
Theophilact. in Luc. 3.
occasions Expositers justly to conceive it was some Man of quality. Lyran and
Nicephorus think him the then Bishop of Antioch: Others, that he was some
chief Governor in his Commonwealth, because the word (...) imports most
Excellent, or most Noble, as it is translated and applied to Festus by St.
Paul, Acts 26. and by Tertullus, that great Master of words, to Foelix, Acts
34. (...).
and by Claudius Lystus. (...). To the most Noble Governor, etc. And then from
Theophilus we note, That Greatness does not exclude Goodness, but may much
advance it; and so to that end it is not only Equity and Civility to give due
Titles of Respect to personages of Honor, Romans 13.7. Honor to whom honor
belongs. Romans 13.7.


But it is withal a Pious policy for good men to devote their Labors to such
Mecoenasses, as may advance Religion and the Glory of God, rather then their
own private Names and Fortunes, as here St. Luke does unto his Theophilus.

But not to seem digressive, this Evangelist (like his Industrious Ensign the
Ox forementioned, has his time of Vnyoaking also as well as of hard labor.
This holy Physician (after his numerous and double cures) is at length himself
cured of all earthly Maladies, dying in Bithynia (a Region of the lesser Asia,
Hieron in Cat. vir Illust.
now called Anatolia) near Pontus, in the 84. year of his age, and Anno Christi
74.

POEM 37.
HOw fit't is we commemorate Thy Facts,
Who Registerst more then the Apostles Acts,
The Church but gratefully does celebrate
Saint Lukes Festivity at highest Rate.
Because (although a Grand-Physician) He
Deigns to take notice of Divinity.
Nay, and to make his practice of it too,
And that (you will say) is rare for such to do!
He through all second Causes sees the Prime,
And does by Natures scale to Heaven climb,
While others lodge by the way; the Soul's his care,
While some (perhaps) some Bodies do impair!
He lays aside his Apollinean Art,
Or does Heavens Recipe's withal impart:
The Soul-pulse Conscience now he feels, and thus
Christ is become his Esculapius.
Tears are the Critic water he does cast,
Where he discerns Sins danger overpast;
Or if he sees the Symptoms still prove bad,
Applies the healing Balm of Gilead.
And where the Case seems despr' ate, to do good,
Adapts the Balsome of our Saviors Blood
That Panacean Medicine, that all-heal
So careful is He of each Patients weal:
Visits without a Fee, and the more thrives,
Freely he has received, and freely gives.
Whose Gospel is a Shop well furnished,
Where each Grief opened may of cure be sped!
Full of choice Cordials, or Corrosives,
Spiritual Antidotes, Restoratives,
And all these free; List to the Prophets Cry,
Come all that languish without Money buy.
And Lord we come, beseeching Thee grant this,
As Saint Luke, Saint Paul's convert; make us His.
THE COLLECT PRAYER. The Epistle. 2 Timothy 4. v. 5. to 10.
The Gospel. Luke 10. v. 1. to 7.

ALmighty GOD, which calledst Luke the Physician, Whose praise is in the
Gospel, to be a Physician of the Soul: may it please Thee by the wholesome
Medicines of his Doctrine, to heal all the diseases of our Souls, through thy
Son Jesus, etc.

depiction of Saint Simon with saw S. SIMON.

depiction of Saint Thaddeus (Saint Jude) with square rule S. THADAEVS.

The Plate here.

Upon Simon and Judes day.
DISQUISITION 35.
THESE were another pair of Brethren; (as before, Peter and Andrew, James and
John. The Reason of Christ's choice herein, to spread unanimity, and prevent
schism, is expressed in their Feastivals) Fratres Natura, Aquin. and glossa
ordinar.
Fide, Doctrina, Vita. They were brethren in Blood, and brethren in Good;
brethren in Nature, in Faith, in Doctrine, and Good life. Bonum and jucundum.
Oh how happy and pleasant a thing it were, if Ministers were in the three later
but such brethren; that would sent like Aarons Ointments, would be both good
and pleasant, Psalm 133.
and few things that are both! Though Simons here first named, I shall crave
leave to begin with Jude, as most remarkable in Scripture, I, and for Scripture
too, having enriched that Crown with a precious Jewel. viz. An Epistle of
Catholic and universal excellence; and therefore well named, Lebbaeus, Math.
From (...) cordatum fecit unde (...) (i. e. cor.
10.3. from a root signifying the heart, and to make hearty; He having done it
heartily as unto the Lord, not more discouraging the Enemies of Christ, then
animating and cheering his true servants: and for the same reason, not amiss
surnamed Thaddeus. In the place forecited from that Syrio-Chaldaick word,
(...), which signifies a Dug, his Epistle being Mamilla Ecclesiae, as it were a
dug, a Nipple of the Church; yet I think the better Etymology is from the root,
(...), which speaks him Laudantem, confitentem, a confessor, and a Saint
praising God, and so uniting with his name of Jude, streaming in one channel
both, and from the same Fountain; (...) a Radice (...) quasi celebrationis
P^liis.
the most we read of him in Scripture, is from his own Pen, yet that being
guided by the Holy Spirit, we cannot suspect the modesty thereof; where, above
all Titles, he styles himself Judas, the Servant of Jesus Christ. The
honorablest relation, That, the perfectest freedom, therefore all the Apostles
use it. Romans 1.1. 2 Pet. 1.1. 1 Cor. 7.22, etc. I, and the best Christians joy
most in this Title: as the good Theodosius, Eusebius. Ecc. His.
in being Membrum Ecclesiae, quam caput Imperii; Deemed his being a member of
Christ's Church, an higher honor, then that he was Head of the Empire. So St.
Jude in his Exordium; a servant of Jesus Christ: yet adding withal, the brother
of James; mentioning his Kindred, and Allies, partly to distinguish himself
from Judas the Traitor (though Iscariotes, (...) i. e. Vir Marsupii, The man of
the purse, etc.
help well) yet both of a Name, shadoweth out unto us, that in the visible
Church, there will be always some bad, as well as good Professors: Judas a
Devil, ( John 6.) as well as Judas the Saint: the Church in an Ark, and that had
a Raven, as well as a Dove: It Is a Flock like Jacob's all Ring-streaked, etc:
It Is a Net, there will be Fish in it of all sorts: A Garden will have Weeds
as well as Herbs and Flowers: And it is an Army wherein are spirits of all tempers,
it is a Field wherein are Tares as well as Wheat, and so shall grow together till
the Harvest. So that good men may distinguish themselves from ill; and again
may own their best Alliance, for the more credit and advantage of the Truth and
Gospel, as S. Jude does his brother James, being a man of such repute as that
he was surnamed the Just, etc. (as is expressed in his commemoration.) The
substance of St. Epistle of Jue 1.
Judes Epistle consisting of a Salutation, v. 2. an Exhortation, v. 3. and a
Caution, Verse. 2.
v. 4. The first is, mercy unto you, and Peace, and love be multiplied. (i.e.)
Mercy from God the father in pardoning your sins, peace from God the Son, that
Prince of peace applying it; and Love from God the H. Ghost being the Spirit of
love. Or Mercy in pardoning your sins, Peace in calming your Consciences; and
Love joining you to God, and one another. The Exhortation is, Verse. 3.
to continue steadfast in the Faith once given to the Saints. Nay, it is (...).
(i.e.) earnestly to contend for it pro aris and focis, with might and main,
with all the wisdom of the Serpent that may consist with the Doves innocence,
to act (like natural agents) ex extremum virium; to the utmost of ability, all
little enough to countervail the malice, and subtilty of the Supplanter, as the
caution intimates, Verse. 4.
v. 4. Because certain ungodly men are craftily crept in, etc. of whose both
fin and punishment you may read in the sequel of that Epistle. Against all
which we must as S. Jude did, give all diligence, v. 3. to write of the common
salvation. Indeed giving all diligence, not only in his writing, but in his
Travels, and preaching the common salvation, viz. first in Greece, Pontus, and
Mesopotamia; and afterward (say Writers.) with his brother Simon into Persia,
where besides spiritual cures, having restored Abgarus, King of the Edesseni,
Unto whom he was sent Ambassad our says Alstaed infra.
unto health, is ill requited by the Heathenish Priests of that same Country,
being put to death and sacrificed anno Christi 51. propagating the Gospel both
by Life, and Death.

Now, for his brother Simon, Alstaed in Chronol. c. 27.
he was surnamed Zelotes, from his pious heat and prudent zeal; also from his
Country the Canaanite, Simon the Cananite, Mat: 10.3. who like a showring
cloud (one of those compassionate Bottels of heaven) watered with the Gospel
many dry and Desert places, sc. Egypt, Libya, Persia, Cyrene, many parts of
scorching Africa, and diverse other Regions toward the Western Ocean, Simon the
last Martyr of the Apostles.
besides his visiting of some Islands, and among others (if Historians deceive
us not) this of our Britain also (though others attribute that to Joseph of
Arimathaea, Anno Christi 63.) at length returning home unto Jerusalem, Vide
Alsted. in loc. cit.
that Carnificina Prophetarnm, that Shambles of the Prophets (having a while
succeeded his brother James the Just in that See Episcopal) is fastened to the
Cross in the 120 year of his age, and so made the last Sacrifice of all the
Apostles.

POEM 38.
IN Holy Writ it is a Divine command,
That by two witnesses each word should stand,
And here they are, to make the Gospel good
This pair of Martyrs sealed it, with their Blood!
These stood in first relation, each to other,
Yet nearer kin by their Spiritual Mother:
St. Jude, with golden Pencil, does indite
A Catholic Epistle, and does write
Unto the Jews dispersed, and Gentilss both,
To weed up Errors in their early growth;
And were his Cautions fixed in Each Breast,
Nor Sin, nor Faction would be in request:
That Love-Letter to Christ's Spouse, his Heart mused,
His Hand wrote, his Blood sealed, the Church perused,
And as he sent, his brother Simon ran
Bearing Christ's Name to the Remote Ocean;
Adventuring to savage Affricans,
Amongst whom the worst of Monsters, Sin, he tames:
Turning their Black Religion to pure Grace;
Till Sin and Turk, rebarbariz'd the place
Thence sprinkling Lybian Deserts, Egypt's Plains,
Cyrene and Persia tasting of his pains;
Nay, on our British Isles too (story some)
This Cananite bestowed first Christendom,
And after all this returned home and died
Last Martyr of the Apostlee crucified!
Well then is Simon here Zelotes termed,
Whose Zealous life and death, Christ's word confirmed.
And that, nor Sin, nor Heresy obtrude
Against Christian Faith, both wrote, and died St. Jude.
THE COLECT PRAYER. The Epistle of St. Jude, v. 1, to v. 9.
The Gospel, Jo. 15. v. 17. to the end.

ALmighty God which have builded thy Congregation upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the Head corner stone: grant
us so to be joined together in unity of Spirit by their Doctrine, that we may
be made an holy Temple acceptable unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Upon the Festival of all SAINTS.
DISQUISITION 36.
THe former Festivals presented us with Singularities, but this is Festum
Catholicum. It Is, or should be, an universal Holy Day: Whereas, Each of the
former like a Jacobs-staff) gave us the Hight But of particular Stars. This,
like a fair natural Day, shows us the whole Heavens rich varieties: Those, as
Contracted Perspectives, Measuring Them one, by one: but This, like a large
Glass, Ptesenting as 'twere, a Land-skip of All Saints together: Each of them a
Flower, this a Posie; or if they Posies, this a Garden; Sometimes those showed
the Leader, sometime the Wings, or Officers, or peculiar Regiments, of the
Churches Army; but This presents us here with her Camp-Royall, her General
Muster, the Maine Battalia of that Noble Army, the Army both of Saints and
Martyrs: I say, This is the Catholic Solemnity, and not a little mistaken by
Some, who mistake Themselves to be the only Catholics for the most part,
conceiving this Feast instituted, in Contemplation only of the Saints
Triumphant; so carrying on their manner of devotion, Dr. Done, S 45. in Festum.
in consideration of them only: this misprision being grounded (says a
learned Gamaliel of ours) upon Boniface, his dedicating that Pantheon, given by
Phocas, to the Honor of Saints and Martyrs, but of that kind only; yet was
there a better consecration afterward, both of that Temple, and this Festival
(says He) viz. to the Honor of the blessed Trinity, to the Memorial of all
Angels, Saints, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and all Elect Children of God
whatsoever; For indeed, this Feast, me thinks, Ezekiel. 1.1.
is like Ezekiels creatures full of eyes, behind and before, at top, and
underneath; looking upward in a fense, on the Saints Triumphant, and downward
too on the Saints Militant; looking as 'twere, round about the world, uniting
in a devout contemplation, the Head of the Church, God himself; and those two
noble constitutive Parts thereof, the Triumphant, and the Militant; piously
grounding upon that Article of our Creed; The Communion of Saints: and seconded
out of the Epistle for this day, Revel. 7.3.
Revel. 7. where the sealing of the Saints speaks them, the Saints Militant
also; being such, without question, as receive the Seal here, (i. e.) Grace in
their Heart, as well as a sign of of their Profession in their Forehead; and
therefore as these words, so this Festival (in their Intendment, that applied
them to it) is also of the Saints that are upon the earth; and that this Day of
All Saints is not to be coarctated to either, but intimates, Relation, to all
Saints, whether alive or dead; and there is a Latitude of christian Piery, that
(without either Affectation, or Superstition may well reach them all; As first,
Those above; our Communion with the Saints in Glory, consisting chiefly in
these things, viz. on our Part, a glad Apprehension of their happiness, an
Honorable Mention, and Memorial of them; the praising God for such good
Instruments, and our Endeavors for due Imitation: On their part, the
Reflection being Joy at our conversion, with prayer in general, for our
vindication, and for felicitous consociation; And first, we joy in their
foelicity, as men do for their friends in high preferment, to think how they,
like Abraham, are gone up the Hill, (to the top of happiness) while we like
his Servant, and the Ass, remain in the valley, Genesis 22.2.5. Exodus 14.
in this valley of Tears, servilely burdened with sin and sorrow! Yet it is some
mitigation of our misery, thus to apprehend, (not only some few of our dear
Correlations, but) so great a Part of Christ's mystical Body to be in
foelicity; like Israel passed through the Red Sea, safely arrived on the Banks
of Canaan; while we are here either toiling in an Egypt, or passing through the
Waters of corruption, and affliction! that they are Comprehensores, (i. e.)
Possessours of the Land of the Living, wearers of those Robes, and Palms, and
Crowns, Revel. 4. This chears us somewhat, Rev. 4.10.
that are but Viatores! Poor waifaring Pilgrims here, yet rejoicing in hope,
shortly to be Partakers with them in those things which yet eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, nor entered into the heart of man; into all which the Saints
above are entered. And therefore, secondly, We ought to make always honorable
mention of them, (the second branch of our communion with them;) for if the
wicked dilights so to speak well of the covetous, Psalm. 10.3.
whom God abhors; How should the Righteous delight to speak well of the
Glorious, whom God so highly loves; as never to reflect on them, without
worthy and honorable expressions! The righteous Saints, the pious Saints, the
blessed Saints, the glorious Saints: their victorious Name, being as Solomon
says) like the Confection of the Apothecary, Eccles. 7.1. Cant. 1.3.
Eccles. 7. Vnguentum effusum: as an ointment powered out, Cant. 1. which (the
Box of their mortality being broken) should spread the more of their perfumes
among us: so far as concerns us, making good that of David's Prophecy, Psalm.
112.6.
Psalm 112.6. The righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance; and that
Quoad aeternum nostrum, on our part too, as well as on Gods; during all our
Lasting, as well as his Everlasting. And thirdly, As we ought thus to
commemorate them with all Candidid Attributes, and Titles; so must we praise
the World's great Benefactor, Psalm. 150.1.
for sending it such pious Patterns, and so eminent Examples, Psalm. 150. Praise
ye the Lord in his Saints, (so St. Hierom reads it) and praise him for them;
they being Speculum Pietatis, as it were, our Glass of Christianity, whereby
to dress all parts of our Conversation, (...), (as Saint Jude speaks of the
quite contrary) They are set forth as an example, Jude v. 7.
for us to write after their fair Copy; chalking out our to Actions, all the
ways of Innocence and holy candor; and to our Sufferings, the pious
Resolutions of victorious Patience; and this is our Communion with them. These
things are the Ground of all the Churches Celerations, and of this Books
Reflection, Ne volumine Temporum ingrata obrepat Oblivio; Hierom. in Catal.
viror. illust.
Deo, Beneficiorum ejus (Solennitatibus, Festis, and Diebus statutis) Dicamus
Sacramusque Memoriam: "Lest through the Tract of Time, ungrateful Oblivion
blot out the Favors of Almighty God, we Dedicate and Consecrate the Memorial
of his Gifts and Servants to Him, in Solemn Festivals, and set Times of
Devotion."

Nor is that Nobler part of Christ's Church, the Triumphant, so totally
insensible of the Militant, but that They make good this Communion, even joying
at our poenitence and conversion, Luke 15.7.
Lu. 15. There is joy in heaven over a sinner that etc. and sure that is as
properly imputed to them (as any) as most concerning their own species; and if
the Script. say, They joy in such a case, Contrariorum cadem est Ratio.
let the Logic Rule of Contraries tell you whether the Sympathy be not
general; and though above the reach of passion, yet are they not without
compassion toward their militant Fraternity: I, and (in the general) praying
for their vindication, apparent in that same Prayer of the Souls under the
Altar, Re. 6, Quousque Domine, etc.! Rev. 6.10.
How long Lord! how long, holy and true, do thou not avenge the blood of thy
servants etc! I say this universal Sympathy, (for Particularities Hence are
inconsequent) is a main part of the Communion of Saints; Saints Triumphant,
with Saints Militant; and no more Interruption to their present Happiness,
then the Reflection on their own former sufferings: both praying for a full
consociation in Eternal Blessedness: Luke 14.16.
Christ, that King of Glory, and his Guests above, both desiring that His House
may be full, that House where such a Supper is prepared, and so many Mansions,
Revel. 22.20.
Rev. 22. He which testifies these things, says surely, I come quickly; the
Saints of both sorts, saying Amen to it, Even so, Come Lord Jesus, that all
Partners being admitted, and all the Members under that One Head collected, all
their joy may be full, and the Body mystical completed; for this it is, that
the Orthodox Church, does cry to God so earnestly, In the prayer at Burial.
That it may please thee of thy gracious goodness shortly to accomplish the
number of thine Elect, and to hasten thy Kingdom, that we, with all others,
departed in the faith of thy holy Name, may have our perfect Consummation and
Bliss both in body and soul in thy eternal and everlasting Kingdom, Amen.

Now for the Communion of Sts militant, that is more obvious, consisting mainly
in these two, Compatiendo mala, and Communicando bona: by compassionating one
another evils, and communicating what is good, (these indeed, are the two Feet
of Christianity) and first of Sympathy: (...), Romans 12.16.
being of like affection one toward another, (says the Apostle) and that
(...), not only to rejoice with them that rejoice; but also to weep with them
that mourn! An union which the Members of the same Body always challenges.
Christians sure (more then Heathens) should be utriusque Fortunae fidi Comites;
Faithful Partakers of both Fortunes. Rejoicing in another good, As was said
of Pylades, and Orestes.
as in their own; as those Parables of the found sheep, and goat, instruct us:
yet alas, how many Labans are among us, that Envy the fruitful Flock of an
industrious Jacob? And many maligning Ahabs, sick of their Neighbors vineyard!
nay, Psalm. 35.15.
like David's enemies, Psalm. 35. In mine adversity they rejoiced: Such are far
from the Communion of Saints; Naturae difficillimum, I confess it is hard to
Nature thus to sympathize, and not with the Brother of the Prodigal, to envy
the success and plenty of another; but easy it is to Grace, and Christian
Love, with Benjamin's Brethren, not to envy Him, though his Mess be five
times bigger then their own, Genesis 43.34. Psalm. 107.42.
Genesis 43. so David, Videbunt justi and laetabuntur, Psalm. 107. God raises up
the poor out of misery, and makes His household like a Flock, and the righteous
shall see this, and rejoice, etc.

And as the Oil of gladness is increased by effusion, so the bread of
affliction is crumbled away by breaking; Sorrows go less by being divided,
and therefore this Communion of Saints teaches us likewise to mourn with them
that mourn! and though it be not altogether a Remedy, Socios habuisse Dolores:
yet it is a great Mitigation, Fellowship in sufferings; Partner-Griefs, yield
some Reliefs: and he will do little that will not pity misery. The Church is
that Haemorrhissa, Mark 5. vexed with a long bloody issue, Mark 5.
running even from Abel unto Zachariah, and thence down through Christ's, and
all the Apostles veins! even nearer to us, then the Marian persecution! so that
we cannot think it strange (says the Apostle) concerning the fiery Trial. Gal.
6.2.
More need of his advice, Gal. 6. Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill
the Law of Christ. Each Land almost in Christendom, now holds out to us Joseph's
bloody Coat; then how can we chose but melt with Judah? Frater enim est, and
caro nostra; Genesis 37.27.
for it is our brother, and our own flesh! in the body natural, you see, if
any part be hurt or wounded, all the other living united parts smart together,
and seek remedy; but indeed the dead members, and such as are cut off, afford
no sympathy: the Analogy is evident. This (...), this Communion of Affections
is a true touchstone of what metal, of what Body we are; whether fuel for
Gods burning, or Timber for his Building; a Building (now we speak of it) Let
us imitate, for we are Gods Building, 1 Cor. 3.11.
1 Cor. 3. And here the beam out of the timber, and stone out of the wall
instructs us* Lapis lapidem portat; in every Structure, you see, one stone, one
beam bears up another: Sic and in Ecclesia; and so should it be in the House
of the Faith. And to press home the Metaphor, Quo plura propinquior, etc. As
in the material building, that stone which supporteth most, is nearest to the
Foundation, that which fewest, furthest off: So is it in the spiritual
Aedifice, the more or less we have of this same Christian Sympathy, the
further off, or nearer are we to that cornerstone, to that Foundation Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11.
1 Cor. 3. Obdurateness was never sign of Saint, but Tender-heartednesse.
Such as good Job had, c. 30.25. Such as David, Psalm. 35.13. yet Jeremy beyond
them both, Jerem. 9.1.
(...), (as Hierom calls him) the most patheticall of all the Prophets, wishing
himself a wet Metamorphosis, (in behalf of others) O that mine eyes were
rivers, and my head a fountain, etc! Saint Paul too, full of this same
Christian (...), Romans 12.15.
gracious compassion, Romans 12. but above all our blessed Lord, totus in
passionem, and compassionem solvitur, He altogether melted into passion, and
compassion for us, John 11. Matthew. 23. etc. Etiam in Coelis (says St. Austin)
even in Heaven it self, though above the reach of passion, yet full of
compassion for his Saints on earth, both in respect of the evil done unto them,
Acts 9.
Act. 9. Why persecutest thou me? As likewise for the good they do, Matthew. 25.
Ye have done it unto me. Math. 25.
This is potior charitas (some think) the better part of charity, as without
which, all other nothing, 1 Cor. 13. and therefore let Saint Peter prevail
with you, 1 Pet. 3.8. Heb. 13.2.
1 Pet. 3. Be all of one mind, one suffer with another, Love as brethren, be
pitiful, be courteous. Saint Paul seconds him, Remember those in bonds, as
etc. Let not Isaiah, c. 9.13. or Amos, c. 6.3. complain of us; That no man is
sorry for the afflictions of Joseph! if no Communion of Saints here, Matthew.
11.17.
none hereafter; but those shall one day rise up in judgment against us, Matthew.
11. (...), We have mourned unto you, etc. And then our Turn comes, and unpitied
Requital, Depart into the place of weeping!

Yet Passive Communion is not enough for Saints, it must be active, By
communicating of good, as well as by compassionating evil: of Good, spiritual
and corporal. Bona cordis oris and operis.
We must communicate the Goods of the Heart, and of the Tongue, and of the
Hand, (according to the necessity of the object:) and these three are like the
wheel, the Bell, and Index of a Clock. The goods of the heart, are fervent
love, 1 Timothy 15. charitable opinions, 1 Cor. 13.5. Those of the Tongue are
pious Instructions, 2 Timothy 2.24. serious Reprehensions, Psalm 141.5. seasonable
consolations, Isai. 40.1. 1 These. 4.18. And lastly, zealous prayers, Ephesians.
1.16. and these are the brightest beams of charity, yet will cost you nothing;
and therefore according to his gift, let each one minister herein, 1 Pet. 4 10.
Those of the Hand are better known, then practiced: the living God, like dying
Isaac, will feel the hands, Genesis 15
as well as hear the voice (nor so to be deceived by either) Pliny tells us,
Not. Hist.
that the Eagle knows her young ones by their eyes, their perspicacy; and
unless they can outface the Sun, that she rejects them as a Bastard brood; but
I must tell you, God knows his children by their hands, their liberality, and
will own no withered Jeroboams! God requires no costly sacrifice, (as of the
Jews) Pauper est Altar Dei; the calves of our lips, Oblations of our hearts
and hands, is all He looks for; and therefore, to do good, and to distribute,
or communicate, forget not; Heb. 13.16. Heb. 6.10.
for etc. Hebr. 13.16. And God will not forget, etc. Sola misericordia comes
defunctorum; Mercy is the sole companion of the dead: and God has given men
wealth, non tanquam Dominis, sed Dispensatoribus: not as unto Treasurers,
Enthymius.
but as to Stewards. Imitate then the wise one in the Gospel, Luke 16. For to
every one shortly shall be said, Read rationem, Give an account of thy
Stewardship. And believe it, none shall make a more comfortable reckoning at
the Day of Judgment, then the charitable man; if you will believe the Judge
Himself, Matthew. 25.35.
Matthew. 25. who there takes notice only of such Actions, as Feeding, Clothing,
Visiting, Ministering; and those He sets upon his own Account; Mihi fecistis, Ye
have done it unto me; and therefore Himself rewards it with a Venite
Benedicti, Come ye, Blessed, etc. And who thus practice the Communion of
Saints here, need no whit doubt his Eternal fellowship with them hereafter.

POEM. 40.
PArticular Accounts, you have had hither,
Now take the Total of All Saints together.
And that is Communion, Union with the Head,
And all the Members, mutually shed:
Both the Saints Militant, and Those above,
All knit together with the Bond of Love;
So that strong Sympathies thence rise in All,
So far as suits Each State, reciprocal:
Yet not as though we Prayers might address
To our Related Saints in Blessedness;
Or as their joys had leisure to look down
On our poor Accidents of Smile or Frown;
But that in General, both jointly Pray
Still for the Churches Consummation Day.
The Number of the Elect might be supplied,
And All together shortly Glorified.
Thus, Earth's Hosannah (only not so long)
And Heavens Halleluiah's the same song.
Thus, Love's the Cement of the World, the Chain
Links Heaven to Earth, and Earth to Heaven again.
Where Strife is, Hel's begun! but where This Love,
There Is Heaven in the bud below, full blown above:
No Article of Faith Cures more complaints
Then This Communion of All Blessed Saints.
The COLLECT. The Epistle, Revel. 7. v. 1. to 10.
The Gospel, Matthew. 5. v. 1. to 13.

Almighty God, which have knit together thy Elect in one communion and
fellowship, in the mystical Body of thy Son Jesus Christ, our Lord, grant us
grace so to follow thy holy Saints in all virtuous and godly living, that we
may come to those unspeakable joys which thou have prepared for them that
unfainedly love thee, through Jesus Christ, etc.

Upon The four Ember weeks at the four seasons of the year.
The ARGUMMNT.
OF all the solemn Fasts, as Lent holds the first, so these the second place:
times of Dovotion, anciently observed at the four seasons of the year (viz. the
first, being Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday after Saint Lucys Day, December. 13.
the second, being those days aforesaid, after the first Sunday in Lent; the
third being the said days next following Pentecost; Which are the Ember weeks.
the fourth, the same days next after that called Holy Cross, Sept. 14.) and
they were then observed among other, chiefly for these Leo de Jejunio decim.
Mensis. S. 4. Hierom. in Zach. 8. And why then observed?
Reasons. 1. That Christians might not come short of the Jews Devotion, but
improve the same opportunities to better ends, that so consecrating the first
Fruits of each season unto God, the Remainder of the year might all be Holy. 2.
That such Devout abstinence might at once, chastise the exorbitancies of the
ending Quarter, and caution That beginning. 3. That the Devotions of them,
might both Apprecate the Almighties Blessing to the Fruits of the Earth (then
either sown, sprung up, Ripening, or gathered) and deprecate the dangers and
distempers, commonly most incident to those Seasons. Lastly, with ferventest
devotion to Assist the Churches sacred Ordinations, which were of old
Solemnized the next Lords day following Each of These, and which ought (as by
CHRIST and his Apostles) so ever by their successors, to be performed with
Prayer and Fasting, Luke 6. ver. 12. Acts 1. verse 24. and chapter 13.3.

POEM 42.
WHo strictly Primitive Devotion seeks,
Must Rake out of Times Ashes Emberweeks,
And blow them too, into an holy Flame
Of Prayer and Fasting, sinful Lusts to tame.
Next to the soul Feast Lent, these Fasts of old
The Church did every Quarter solemn hold,
That Christians, zealous might as Jews appear,
And Consecrate Each season of the year:
For if first Fruits grow ripe in Piety
(Of Things, or Times) the rest will holy be:
Then let our Janus zeal (at once) lament
The Sins forepast, the following prevent.
The First, in Advent.
First sacred Abstinence makes Preparation
To entertain the Author of Salvation,
Cleansing the Stable, garnishing the Heart,
That he may There reside, and never part.
Such vessels as are full can hold no more,
The Rich go empty, while Christ Feasts the poor.
This true Mortification vices kills,
And it is the the Hungry soul our Savior fills.
The second in Lent.
And now conformity to Christ bids Fast
And Pray, for he did both, and more; did taste,
That bitter cup of Divine wrath for us!
Shall we do nothing, when He suffered thus?
Fasting and Prayer was ever prescribed good
Before a Medicine, and such Christ's blood:
Whom Satan tempting had so foyld a Pull,
That where he tempts one Fasting, Thousands full.
The third after Pentecost.
Now does Religious Abstinence attend
That Sacred Spirit which did of late descend
On the Apostles, and them all inspire,
Requiting Holy zeal with heavenly fire:
Those then that Blessings from above expect,
Must not these Duties in their times neglect:
But if they look for the descending Dove,
Must wait with Prayer and Fasting, Faith and Love.
The fourth, Sept. 14.
And now our Crops are Ripe, we going to Reap,
Has God no Harvest; no part of our Heap,
That gave it all? shall he fill every place,
And our Hearts only empty be of Grace?
No, Prayer and Fasting now will quench excess,
Both sin and sickness of the time suppress:
Let these Devotions then bring up the Rear,
And mak't an holy, and an happy year.
The Churches last, and not the least good sense
Was this (being sacred Orders to dispense
On the Lords day succeeding each of these)
Sought God by Prayer and Fasting to appease.
That so by joint Devotion might be gained
Choice Blessings on her work, and those ordein'd.
That thence (the outward, ecchoing inward call)
Glory to God, Grace might Redound to all.
These are the Churches Rent, which here do pay
To our grand Landlord every Quarter day;
And that shall either here prolong our Lease,
Or House us where our Term shall never cease.
Upon the Vigils, or eves of Festivalls. Mat. 24.42. Mar. 13.35.

ARGUMENT. 2.
AS Lent is the Terra firma of Religious Abstinence, and the Ember weeks (as it
were) the four main Continents Thereof, so are these Vigils and Eves of
Festivals, even as so many dispersed Islands, yet not without their native
Treasures: and because our sinful memories are so bad, that an Annual Monitor
of Lent, or the Quarterly Remembrancer of Ember weeks is not a sufficient
Bridle for our Loosnesse! therefore our pious Mother did Recommend these
monthly, and weekly Admonitions to her Children, ( Wednesdayes, and Frydayes
being Anciently, taken in) that so Abundance of caution might oppose Abundance
of Temptation: we indeed having need of Philips daily Memento, and each morning
to be minded of our Frailty, especially at Festivalls; wherein the world has,
and will ever deserve blame: as Job was not ignorant, that his Childrens
Banquet though it intended Amity, might need a sacrifice. Job. 1. and therefore
these Fasts have been set as ushers unto Festivalls, Job 1.5.
to Caution and Prevent disorder in them; and a very wholesome Method it is,
both as to soul and body: Hierom. Episto. ad Eustochium.
valde absurdum est nimia saturitate velle Honorare Martyrem, Quem scias Deo
placuisse Jejuniis. It were but a fond thing, to think we honor the Memorial
of an Apostle, Saint or Martyr, with excess; whom we know to have pleased God
with Prayer and Fasting; and therefore these are added as frequent
circumspections, to oppose such intemperance and daily incursions, that so
often Payment might make our debts the lighter, and such even Reckonings keep
God and us long Friends, even everlasting Friends in Heaven.

POEM 42.
LEnt is the Mother-Fast, grand-Daughters these,
Wait on Humiliation God to please;
That like the Body of an Army stands,
While these are but particular Trained Bands.
That like the spacious, and the brackish main.
These as Rils flowing Thence, and home again;
That more like Faith, high-flown, strong Pinnioned,
While these as Charity, Distributed.
Many in One Fast are contracted there,
While these dispersedly run through the year;
That Devout Abstinence not only might
Season our Spring, but all Times else aright.
That none Extravagate at any Feast,
Each is attended with an humble Guest.
And because both those few, to Sin and Fear!
More Fasting Days of old too added were,
That so Austereness might Hunt out and seek
That Fox our sin, unkennell him each week:
Nay Sin and Danger's grown so high in force!
That all need now become days of Remorse:
One more (at least) then let each seven impart
(As voluntary Sacrifice of the Heart,)
To make our sorrows weight, and fill our Measure
Of Griefs, in some proportion to Sins pleasure!
And who such unexpected Odours brings
God most accepts, as Free Will offerings.
Since other Fasts then, as Sins Brine appear,
Be these our salt, to sprinkle all the year.
Upon the DOXOLOGIE to the Sacred TRINITY. Matt. 28.19 1 Timothy 1.17. 1 John
5.7. Rev. 8.4,11.

The ARGUMENT.
MY Book draws to a close, and I desire it may end (as all things ought) with
the Glory of God: Nor can I close my sacred Hymns with a sweeter Relish, then
that harmonious DOXOLOGIE, wherewith the Church was ever wont to conclude her
Psalms, and sacred Anthems; and wherein she did but join with Angels in her
Gloria Patri, etc. Ascribing Glory to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as, etc.
indeed so it was in the Beginning. Epist. 7.8.
Nor for the Matter only, but for the Form also; being an Hymn more then
Ancient (says Saint Basil;) As we have Received even so we baptize, and as we
baptize so we believe, and as we believe, even so we give Glory; and all this
we use in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Confessing at once Gods
Excellencies, (...).
all the Persons offices, and Distinctions, and the very Integrity of the
Christian Faith; it being a token of a true and sound understanding for matter
of Doctrine, about the Trinity, when in Ministering Baptism, and making
Confession of our Faith, and giving of Glory, there is a conjunction of all
Three, and no one severed from the other two; in confutation of the Arians (and
their later Spawn) enacted in that famous Council of Magd. Cent. 4. F. 617.
Nice, consisting of 318 Bishops under CONSTANTINE the Great, Anno Christi 320.
It Is (as 'twere) the Abridgment of the Creed; the Epitome of the Gospel, the
business of both Worlds (and the usual Posture of Defense becomes it;) and
therefore as it has been reverently used from the Beginning, may it be so to
the End; as it is here, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost; as it was in the Beginning, is Now, and ever shall be, World
without End. Amen.

POEM. 43.
THese Riv'lets after a Maeander's stray,
Have at length found their Fountain, and repay
Their grateful Streams (here) to the Deity,
That fed their Pipes with Baptized Poetry.
Oh, may the Channel where these waters flow,
Be cleans'd by them, They thence not soyled go.
[1]
That Man at first had an Immortal Frame,
Till he by Sin, self-murderer became!
That then a Merciful Invention
Repaired his Progeny, by the only Son
Of the Omnipotent, who Him thus sent
To change Grace, Life, for Sin and Punishment!
The Glory of all this is only Thine,
Aeternall FATHER of the sacred TRINE.
[2]
And next, for all those high designs of Grace,
Performed by our deer Lord for humane Race,
Combats or Conquests, over Earth, Heaven and Hell,
Whose Life and Death did Miracles excel:
Whose sugered Benefits to all extend
(Unless their own fault) and both lives befriend.
The Glory of all this returns to Thee,
Coequall SON of the blessed Trinity.
[3]
Then for the Noble Army, the Red List
In this small Book of Martyrs following Christ,
Whose Cause and Courage was so strongly knit,
Nor Toil, nor Torture e're could sever it.
One making their Life, far and near, Christ Preach,
While the other (by Death) made them the same Teach,
Hastening unto their Graves as cheerfully,
As Bees unto their honyed hives do fly.
And in the midst even of their flames to sing,
With conquering Patience their Foes torturing.
The Glory of all This is justly paid
To Thee, blessed SPIRIT, for thy sacred Aid
Each Parcel's honor to Each Person be,
And the whole Glory to the TRINITY.
A te Principium --
-- Tibi desinet.

(...).

FINIS.
APPENDIX SACRA: OR, Serious Attendants ON THE Sacred Solemnities.

Alia, per Eundem E. S. B. D.

Mart. Epig. l. 1. Quem Recitas mcus est, o Fidentine, Libellus;
Sed male dum recitas, incipit esse tuns.
The Book thou now perusest Friend, is mine:
But yet if ill thou read'st, it is so far thine.
LONDON, Printed, for Richard Marriot, and are to be sold under St. Dunstans
Church in Fleetstreet, 1652.

Upon Prayer.
DEvotions Hebrew's Prayer, her holy Tongue,
That heaven-born Language Dialogu'd among
God, Angels, Men; by Him best understood,
And for both the other purchasing all Good;
Unto which end, our Leiger it is in Heaven
The soul's Ambassador, to whom is given
Quick Audience, and all Favors that may suite
The Senders necessary safe Recruite:
This Grace, as 'twere, omnipotent, Commands
All Elements, and holds the Almighties hands
From smiting very Sodomites, nor can
Heaven shower down Hell, till praying Lot is gone.
This is the Jacobs Ladder, whereon Souls
And Blessings Trade, 'twixt Center and the Poles;
Sometimes it mounts aloft, as having Keys
To open, or shut Heaven, when it please;
'Thath stopped the foaming Horses of the Sun,
So Garrisoned their Mouths, they could not run:
And sometimes Broached the Clouds, that they might pow:
Into scorched Tellus Lap, a Danac's shower;
Sometime Descending pregnanteth the womb
Of Teeming Earth, or opening the Tomb
Even of the Dead, recalling Those are gone
To a Compendious Resurrection.
Prayer gives the unruly Element command,
Girdling the Ocean with a Belt of Sand;
Nor only limiting, but setting Bars
To the insulting winds and waters-wars,
Making Deeps, dry paths for some Passengers,
While others find them but wet Sepulchers!
Prayer has made Iron swim, and Fire descend,
Whole Towns, and Armies brought to sudden end!
Conquers the Invincible, to flesh turns stone,
An heart obdurate, to a Plyant one:
Till Desert Araby this Phoenix grace
Transform an happy, and a fruitful Place.
What can it not, that may our good procure?
As strong above as e're, if here as pure.
Unto thy Closet then, and shut the door,
But thy heart open, and thy Sins out pour
To him, that for retired Piety
Loves to exchange open foelicity;
Sometimes be with thy self, yet let all share
Throughout thy Family, Domestic prayer
This renowned Abraham, and does Record
That famed Resolve, I and mine serve the Lord.)
Be not rash with thy mouth, But let due care
From wandering looseness guard thee and thy Prayer:
Compose both by the Scriptures, it is well known
Each Place likes best, the Language that is her own;
Yet all affected Eloquence avoid,
Honey was never Sacrifice, but cloyd.
Grave, and expressive be thy words, but few,
And Pharisaick bablings so eschew;
Prayers should like Arrows, unto Heaven fly
Winged with sighs, uninterruptedly:
Yet though such private Prayer have its high praise,
The Public Form it is that design does raise
Even up to Heaven, whither with stronger wings
It Flies, and thence a fuller blessing brings;
Such private Suitors like less stars do shine,
In Constellations while more lights combine;
Those, but like Planets often excentrick move,
But These fixed stars, Heavens Galaxia prove:
Brands that in corners smoke, may have some Fire,
But those that burn together sure, flame higher.
While private prayer but begs, This does besiege
The Towers of Heaven it self, and much obliege
The Governsur to open, or does reach
The Battlements thereof, and make a breach.
Such Prayer is reversed Lightning, and Heavens wonder,
While the joint Amen's like a Clap of Thunder.
But know, each Sacrifice must seasoned be,
And the Lords Prayer is the Salt, which we
Must Sprinkle all our own with, that their Taste
May relish to Christ's Palate, and Repast.
I, then all our Addresses shall appear
As precious Jewels in the Almighties Ear,
Or pleasant Harmony, whose divine Airs
Shall drown the Music of the Rapid Spheres;
And though Heavens starry window do not open
With sudden Answers to our greedy hope,
It Is not for that God listens not to Thee,
But will not interrupt the Melody
With hasty grants, but then at length repaies
With fuller Bounty thy thought-long delays:
Pray on, and He Will not only quit thy Guilt,
But to thy Faith, say -- Be it as thou will.
Upon the Holy Scriptures. Isa. 12.3. John 5.39.

1. LIGHT.
THese are Heavens milky way, wherein combine
Millions of Stars, so many Guides Divine;
While your new spitting lights, those wandering Fires
Lead Ignorants into a Ditch of Briers!
These are the bright Beams of that glorious Sun,
Which Batis of Sin and Error only shun;
As chased shaddows fly the rising Light,
Souls that live under this Line, know no Night.
2. ARMOR.
And as God, so his Word's both Sun and Shield,
Which who so knows but dexterously to wield,
Shall vanquish that Triumvirate of Foes
Which Christian life does constantly oppose.
It Is a Sword also, and that most acute,
To lop off Sin, and Errors Root and Fruit;
It yields that complete Armor, in whose guard,
Safety and Conquest make a full reward.
3. A GLASS.
And as it arms one Sex, it is to others Glass,
Suffering no sinful blemishes to pass
The lookers eye, which still it mends by view;
Who dress by This, sure are of lovely Hiew:
Hereto then, Ladies, each morn Sacrifice,
And it will make your Beauty pasle the Skies:
It Will help adorn you with the brightest fashion,
First Trim you with a Grace, then with Salvation.
4. A GARDEN.
This is a Garden too where both may walk,
And recreate your selves with virtuous talk,
With all choice Flowers sweetly Inameled,
Poses at hand, and Chaplets for the head:
Or if you more affect, here is pleasant Fruits,
All barmelesse, yet such as each Palate suits:
If any Ulcer or Disease within,
Here grow Herbs medicinal for all Sin.
5. A FOUNTAIN.
And in this Garden there is a sacred Well
Which does all Fountains of the World excel;
A true Bethesda, what e're we endure,
But timely enter, and never doubt of Cure.
The Water's strangely sweet, yet red as blood:
Look how it will, That never fails doing good.
Who so pollutes these Streams then, or what is worse,
Seals up the Fountain, runs a double Curse;
You then whom crazy Frame, or feeble age
Sends to the Wells, on yearly Pilgrimage,
Come hither panting hearts, spare pains and wealth,
Drink freely here, and drink Eternal health.
6. A TREASURE.
And mark, it tastes of a rich Mincrall.
That speaks a Treasure hid there, passing all
The precious things that Natures Storehouse yields,
O part with all, to buy these Treasure Fields:
None to the Gospel Pearie, besides whose wealth,
There is a Sovereign Cordial in it for health,
Ophyr's an outside Treasure, and not Thine,
Dig here and soon be rich, 'ts a Golden Mine.
Upon the Sacraments in General. Isa. 17.11. Exodus 12.11. John 3.5,6.35. ver.

THese Some (and may, more largly taken) make seven,
But theirs is an odd sense, the Scripture's even;
The New, being but to old Testament revealed,
Whose Truths, but with two Sacraments are sealed.
These They, save pain and charge; the Churches Twinns,
With double Guard ensafing us from sins;
One, Antidote against Original,
The Other preservative against Actual;
Restoratives for both: the Churches wings
With which each Lark of Heaven mounts and sings.
A Pair of cleansing streams flowed from the Side
Of our dear Lord, when on the Cross he died!
Even Christ's two witnesses, who though not slain,
Yet slay our sins, and fresh his Death again,
Our Brace of Spies that from blessed Canaan brings
News of its cheering wines, and fruitful Springs.
A Mother has but two Breasts, Ours These are,
For spiritual Nutrition thriving fare;
The two Church doors open, to who desire;
First leading into the Body, then the Quire.
The one a Spiritual Matriculation;
The Other such nourishment, and Education:
Then not to Tantalize you, on and Taste
The Delicates, of their Divine repast.
Upon Holy Baptism. Genesis 15.17.11. 1 Cor. 1.16.

1. The INDULGENCE.
CHRIST no hard Master, our Indulgent Lord,
Now for harsh Sacraments does mild afford;
No way ward Zippora need now upbraid
Her Moses bloudinesse, or be afraid
Her Child's life cut, together with his Skin,
That Bloud's turned Water now, but wash thy sin;
His Yoke in deed is easy, Burden light,
Wear't all Life's day, and rest well at Death night.
2. The LAVER.
To wash is ease, but Thereby to do good
Faith must our Water mingle with Christ's Blood;
And then it takes out Stains of deepest dye,
And gives more then our own first Purity:
A Simon Magus else may be Baptized,
And pass for a Disciple, so disguised;
It Is not the Water only, but the Dove
Moving upon it, does the Souls Laver prove.
3. The LISTING.
This is the Military Sacrament,
Giving to each Presse-money from Christ's Tent;
Engaging us to war against Sin and Hell;
Such, and so many Foes! need guard us well;
Mind we our part 'oth Compact, as Christ his,
Who the victorious, Crowns with Grace and Bliss.
But who his Standard cowardly does fly,
You know, by Martial Law, deserves to dye;
But there is a Chancery in our Leaders breast,
That who returns, shall be a pardoned Guest.
4. The ARK.
This is Christ's Ark (as't were) while Floods of Sin
Deluge the World, to shroud his Servants in,
Even in his Churches arms: then no time slip,
To have poor Souls imbarqued in this Ship;
Dispute not Infants Faith, thou graft's thy Plant,
Though in its Youth and Winter, it fruit want;
Commerce of Spirits goes not by age, or acts
External, but where Gods free Grace affects:
And Christ most favor did to such dispense,
Schooling the Gravest to their Innocence;
Forbid not then these Sacramental Rites
To such as (Jews admitted) Christ invites;
His Ordinance and promise who neglect,
Are out of's Arc, and may the Flood expect!
And as for timely entrance Care be taken,
So must there (too) that all in the Ship remain
As Saint Paul cautioned; for offenses foul
Cast Jonah's Lot, on a bestormed Soul!
But after such a wrack, no better plank
Then deep Remorse, to land on Safeties bank.
Upon the Holy Eucharist. 1 Cor. 11. John 6.

1. A FEAST.
TO thy Grand Household Thou Art a bounteous Lord,
For all the World spreading an ample Board,
But specially for Man, at whose feet all
The several Species in subjection fall:
Yet thine own Israel do higher fare,
And Fellow-Commoners with Angels are;
The Rocks are broacht to quench their Thirst at wish,
They doubly Feast, with first and second Dish:
And yet all these but figure in a mist,
The Viands, thou preparest thine in Christ:
The former of thine Alm's-basket are fed,
But unto These, Thou giv'st thy self for bread,
Bread thresh'd, and ground to dust, by Sin and Jews:
As Staff of life' then, let us this Bread use;
Walk with it all our ways, and 'twill sustain
Our hearts from slips in Sin, from falls in pains
The better Jacobs Staff, that guides to Heaven,
From whence this Feast, the Feeder does enliven.
As Grace before, made Thee a welcome Guest,
So let Zeal wait, and due praise close the Feast.
2. The RANSOM.
Our life's a warfare, and our hellish Foes
Too numerous and strong, daily enclose
Us in their fatal Nets, insulting still
Over us as Bondslaves, captived to their will!
But Judah's Lion by victorious power,
Free's his Sheep from those Wolves that would devour;
Christ to our Rescue did descend This day,
And unto Heaven with him bore the Prey:
Nor are we only Prisoners of War,
But of Debt also, and engaged so far,
That all we have or are, can never free
Our Souls be-dungeon'd to Eternity!
Yet cheer up drooping Wights, he that essaid
To Rescue you, and did, has also paid
The Price, believe it, far beyond best Gold,
Your Debts and Forfeitures; and this day told
A Sum so great, could not be understood,
Paid willingly too, though as drops of Blood!
Henceforth by double Ransom then His be,
Whose service is most perfect Liberty.
3. An ANTIDOTE.
How sick does Poison swallowed, make the Heart?
Diffusing Venom into every part!
Within, without, all ulcered! and thus
The Serpents Teeth and Apple, had served us!
But here is a sovereign Antidote made up
Of rare Ingredients, mixed in this Cup
Of Blood and Grace, which who drinks heartily,
Shall be so Cur'a, as live immortally.
4. The CEMENT.
How should These mixed, Tenacious Cement make?
To bind all in a Building should partake
One Common Uniformity, and grace
Each other with proportion in its place?
This ties Christ's Members in a mutual knot,
Never to be rescinded, or forgot:
Unto their saving Head uniting all
In Love and Duty both perpetual:
Till He and They, as in grace here below;
Above in Glory, all one Body grow.
Upon Holy Orders, Or, the Ministerial Function. 1 Cor. 9.11. 1 Timothy 3.1. 2
Cor. 2.16. 1 Timothy 4.16. 2 Cor. 4 7. Chapter 5.20. 1 Timothy 5.17.

Which the Worlds two main Burdens? if you ask,
Truth says the Kingly, and the Priestly task,
Both Heaven-born Functions; but the last all fire!
They Would need all Caution be, who That aspire:
Indeed for Soule-cure who sufficient is?
It startles even a chief Apostle, this!
What Atlas shoulders, nay, what Angels fit
Thus to bear Heaven up? and yet since it
Is Both Gods acceptance, and Decree
This Treasure should in Earthen Vessels be,
We gratefully attend the Divine call,
And then in all obedience before it fall;
But without That (and signalized by those
Who rightly have the Keys on it to dispose)
We stir nor Foot, nor Hand, least Uzzah-like
Some sudden Vengeance our presumption strike!
Must all your Arts and Plants mature with time?
And This which needs most, leap into it is Prime!
Beware bold Flies that buzze about This flame,
Lest your proud wings being scorched in the same,
Your fond Icarian zeal at last fall down
Into that Lake, which Pride shall ever drown!
But you that by both Callings enter fair,
Snuff your own Lights, and take a watchful care,
The Wearer do not holy Vestments stain,
Or to your Master a dishonor gain:
If undeserved Scandal do you spoil,
Those Shafts to their own Shooters breasts recoyle:
Knowledge the Head, the Heart crowns Holiness,
Light and Perfection make up Aarons Dress:
Spiritual, and Corp'rall Charities,
With fervent Prayer's his daily Sacrifice:
Who must have skill in Divine Surgery,
For Lions heart, soft hand, and Eagle's eye,
Both so searched out, and lance the putrid wound,
Whilst the bruised Spirit must be gently bound:
But what need I tell you what God requires,
Who read of Nadab and Abihu's fires;
Yet let me cheer your pains, your Converts may
Once shine as Heaven, but you as Stars for aye.
Upon the great Eclipse of the Sun, Mar. 29. 1652. Math. 16.3. Acts 1.7.

THough the Grand First Cause need no Instruments,
Yet Second He adopts to work Events;
By which though rare productions here are done,
Yet none for vigorous Influence like the Sun,
Whose active virtue, and strong operation,
Is even half Parent of our Generation;
His Trinity of Motion, Light, and Heat
Effecting wonders too, Changes so great,
That most things receive Detriment or Bliss
According to his Approach, or Recesse:
Sure then the Eclipsing of his Fountain-beam
Must be of sad Concernment to the streams!
And that, as the degrees of restrained Light,
Most Dismal when most near a Total Night!
Yet there is more in it, then our Star-gazers tell;
Christ is the Sun in David's Parallel, Ps. 19.

For all those friendly Qualities before,
And some sublimer Influences more,
Our very Light and Life; that to both parts
To Soul and Body Being, Well-being, imparts;
His distances set our passions degrees,
Our Sorrow, Joy, Fear, Hope, as he good sees;
Causing those different Seasons in our Soul,
With whom it is Spring when he does Sin control
And first plant Grace; but when he draws nigh
With warmer beams, it is then her Summer high,
Ripening thereby those Plants of Grace so fast,
That brings a fruitful Autumn too, at last:
But when Sins angry Tropic Him recals,
A Frozen Winter then our Soul befalls!
Our Consolations strait go Retrograde,
Then Sin and Judgment, driving all the Trade!
So that we here Rejoice all, or do mourn,
According to his Absence, or Return:
If his Remoteness then so fatal be,
How Direful his Eelipse (poor Soul) to Thee!
When thy black Sins 'twixt Him and thee disclosed,
With Satan's aggravations interposed!
This is the terrible Eclipse, I This
That horrid hour and power of Darkness is!
The the other Nature, or mean Arts can teach,
And scarce can voluntary Agents reach;
But This concerns no other, and therein
The prime parts chiefly, Souls Eclipsed by Sin!
Wherein benighted, though sometimes we mourn,
Yet let thy beams of Comfort too return,
And then, though We more Frozen then the Pole,
Warmed with thy Count'nance-Light, shall soon be whole.
Away then with your Superstatious Fears
Of that Eclipse, which Natural appears;
Nor startled be with the Bugbear-Praesage
Of the praetending Wisards of the Age;
Whom if Men would observe, as well in the Miss
As in their Hitts, would their Delusions hiss;
Were not our Sins more likely Prophesies,
We might their Ridling Oracles despise:
But with an holy Terror guard your lives
Against This, which Souls of Divine light deprives,
Which, if it happen total, never returns
To light again, but still in darkness burns!
Take Antidotes spiritual, Sins lament
And thereby true-ill-consequents prevent.
Nay, then the beams of grace shall never decline,
Till this bright Sun in glory on Thee shine.
Upon the three Theological graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity. 1 Cor. 13. ult.
1 Pet. 4.8.

ALl Graces are presented in this Trine
That make a Soul here, and hereafter shine.
Faith is the Magna Charta of our souls,
That our chief Evidence for Heaven inroules;
Hope is the Anchor of each floating mind
That in most stormy times does safety find.
Charity's the good Samaritan,
Befriending both parts of poor wounded Man*
Faith is an Eaglet through the Spears can pry,
And there the Son of righteousness descry.
Hope like the dying man, clincheth her Fist
Upon the Promises, fast holding Christ.
Charity more like the hand that lives
In goodness trades, amply receives, and gives.
Faith like the Stomach entertaines the food
The Diet spiritual, Christ's flesh and blood;
Hope the Faculty digestive acts,
And wholesome nourishment from thence extracts:
Charitie's sublimer Chymick Arts
Nutrition distributes to all the parts.
Though all cooperate in our Salvation,
Yet differ they in object, and duration:
Faith, Promises and Threats both comprehends,
Knits past and Futures, Origins and ends:
Hope only at some, Future good, directs
Her Aim, and that with patience too expects.
up; Love so, and round about,
They first set forth, but This holds longest out.
Faith indeed, like the Element of fire,
An Heaven-borne grace, does thither still aspire,
But once there Centred, does for ever rest;
Driving (mean time) but private Interest.
Hope, like the water, has its ebbs and flows,
Muddy or clear as Sun'd or Clouded, shows,
Whose fluid Optatives may more extend,
Yet This too 's some what of a Selfish end.
Charity's diffusive, free as Air;
Whose upper Regions unto Heaven repair,
Her lower embrace Earth; a Grace of the way,
And of the Country both, shall never decay.
These, to the Soul kind Presents needs would give,
And first Faith tenders her a Perspective;
Hope some flowre-buds and Fruit-blossoms does bring,
But Charity it is, gives Perfection's Ring.
Upon a Clock, an Houreglasse, and a Watch. Job. 8.9. Psa. 102.11. Mat. 24.44.
Luke 12.39.

TReble Monitions, me thinks, here we have,
Our life, our Soul, and Body too, to save;
By guiding, warning, arming us for Grave:
Time is the measure of our life, and see
All these the measurers of that time be;
To God, to man, to thy self fit all three,
The Clock speaks loud how fast our time does spend;
The Glass our Frailty whispers as a friend:
The Watch says vigilance, yet, both will mend.
Lament we by the Clock then misspent hours;
Ejecting Sins, as sands through the Glass showr's:
And for the Future, watch against who devours.
The ordered Clock, bids Heart, Tongue, Hand agree;
The Glass transparent, hints fidelity:
The Watch shows low-pitch'd Souls wound up must be,
What oil to Clocks, such unto Hearts is Grace,
Sins are to Souls, what stones are unto Glass;
Watches, and hearts, long must not cleansing pass.
If bodies think, Times be too swift a Rice;
Be Souls as Centerish, and mend their Pace;
Till both haste home, with equal speed, and Grace.
When grief or sickness clip the wings of Time;
Which slowly Creep's with Bodies that decline:
Let Souls the more in Contemplation climb:
That when Times Path may be no longer Trod,
Bodies may rest in their own first abode:
And Souls return unto their Fountain God.
These are a Good man's use of all the Three,
Not Ensigns of Pride, Cares, or Vanity:
But Monitors of Sin, Death, Piety.
Upon a passing Bell. Math 24.31. 1 Cor. 15.52.

HArk, hark! what noise is this; a Passing Bell,
That does our own Fate, in an others tell:
Sounding to each of us a serious caution,
A Timely prayer, and a due preparation:
First, when or wheresoever it Thee find,
It proves, or should, A monitor of the mind;
If in thy Bed it waken thee, There best
It does insinuate thy latest rest;
If as a dressing, it salute thine ear,
It Hints Deaths Livery, Thou once must wear!
And when thou hear'st it in thy cheerful walk,
It seasons with Mortality, thy Talk!
And if you hear it as at meat you sit
Then think it sounds, earth to earth I commit!
In pride of passions if the ^are it beat,
How straight it Damps the wild-fires? cooles the Heat?
And when in Frollicks thou shall hear This Toll,
May it forthwith all sinful mirth control:
To men buried alive, This cheering Bell
Does Liberty infallible foretell:
And unto such as languish in exile,
This sounds a Return home again e're-while:
When most transported in the busy hall
This in thine ear, Thee to thy self does call:
When Earths Affairs Thee from thy self estrange
This tolls Thee Home unto thine own exchange:
What ever our conditions, Good or ill,
This rings us in the ear with that news still
Of Philips Monitor, Remember man,
Or David's Rather, Thy life's but a span.
Thus having rung all in, next let it move
Thine Heart and Tongue to Piety, and Love;
Now show thy Christian Sympathy, and Groan
With them, whom even Bell metal does bemoane;
Do as thou would be done for, that is, Kneel,
And pray as heartily as thou did feel
The burdens of the sick, the worst they Ayle!
Knowing that fervent Prayers still prevail:
And shall, for souls or bodies better state,
For both therefore thy Prayers ejaculate:
From thy sick servant Lord let this Cup pass!
Yet with submission, as Christ's Pattern was:
Be pleased to act their Body's Physician,
Howe'r, be their Souls good Samaritan:
And though these winged Doves should not succeed,
Yet shall they once fly home with happy speed,
And more good company, against thy Turn come,
And pay thy Parcels with a total Sum.
And yet, rely not on that hoped Aid,
But let thy daily Debt be duly paid
To God and Man, Take care Accounts to Even
With jarring Earth, but Chiefly with just Heaven:
This Bell minds Thee of the Church, That of Devotion,
Thy Neighbors Case Spurs on thy preparation;
For thou would take the Hint, did his house burn,
Shall not his Feavour make Thee mind thine urne?
Ensafe thy Goods then at this warning Given,
Remove from the worlds Dangers, store in heaven;
There if thy Deeds laid up, thou can not miss
(Though this world turn to coal) the land of bliss.
Mean time, when thou do such a Soule-Bell hear,
Think that St Jerome's Trump sounds in thine ear!
This triple use then of each passing Bell
E're it pass from him, He that makes, does well.
Upon a Skeleton, or Resemblance of Death. Eccl. 12.1 Ioh. 17.13

Lo here the Frame of a rare Structure stands
Which was a building too, not made with hands,
Although on Earth; where the Creator great
Did an immortal heavenly Tenant feat;
The house then Fitted for such Guest of state
Was built in opposition to all Fate,
Of strong Materials, by Divine art,
For endless Fellowship, and never to part:
But This, admitting Inmates the first day
By their ill usage, soon 'gan to decay!
And then through Rent and Homages neglect,
The Landlord forced the Tenant did eject.
And now like Buildings disinhabited,
That by all storms, and showers are injured!
Where Elves and Satyrs dance, where Bats, and Owls,
And Beasts of prey, keep their Nocturnall howles,
All Shattered, and Forlorn I such is this House
Become through Sin and Death, so Ruinous!
A Rendevouz of worms, and Creeping things,
Where they disport their dusty Traffickings!
Yet Look well on it again and you will descry
In The Ruins of this Pyle, its Dignity;
How wonderfully made? Exact, and even,
Strong, Uniforme, and erect toward heaven!
Let thy Thoughts then dwell henceforth in this place,
For thy Soul does in such another Case!
Here fix thy Meditations, startle not
To think the best Skin, Flesh and Blood, must Rot!
For St Marks Carpenter Can all Repair,
And make this house more firm than e re, more fair,
Strengthening the timber-work with his Crasse wood,
The Mortar tempered with his precious Blood!
While on thy Part, all Trouble and Expense
Amounts but to true Faith and Penitence
Acted in Pious Deeds; and not delayed,
But made good timely, ever too far decayed?
Before the Keepers of the House do Grew
Be-Palsi'd Trembles, and the strong men bow!
E're the Nutrition Grinders become few,
Or what remain, unserviceable Chew!
Mind this, this needful object Early mark,
Before the Lookers forth the windows dark!
This debt pay (as wise payment ought) by Light,
E're Natures stars do set in Ages Night,
Or are Eclipsed by Sickness, Chance, or Grief!
That none of Them Anticipate Relief.
Before the Portals of the Lips do Close,
And every whisper interrupt Repose;
Or ever Musicks daughters become mute.
Nor voice, nor Ear, Consorting sweetest Lute!
Before the Almond flourish, and wax gray,
In that Trees spring, boding the heads decay!
E're all ascents grow tedious, and with Fear
The way still blocked; A load each Grassehopper!
Then This desire, before Desire does fail,
Which with endeavor too (sure) shall prevaise:
Before the Loosing of the Silver Coard,
While Spinall Marrow does Thee strength Afford;
Or e're that Ewer broke, resembling Gold,
Which the Braine's vital Moisture does infold.
Before the Pitcher's broken at the well,
Or veins distempered such a Liver tell;
Before the Head or Phancy's turning wheel,
The Fractures of that Cisterne, the Heart, feel!
Before Man thus Goes to the House of Age,
Leaving his Friends to Mournful Equipage!
Let him here commune often with his Urne,
His Spirit then does, and shall to God return;
By whose kind Power both after some dismiss,
(Never more to part) shall reunite in bliss:
Let outward Prudence then herein control
All slack ill-husbandry for our own soul.
Let Us straight Renew our Lease, or rather buy
This repaired house, whose Rate low, whose Seat high,
Each Faithful Prayer, and Charitable Act
Passes for Current Coin, to this Effect.
In obitum, Effigiem and Librum venerandi Josiae Shute praeconis mellitissimi
ab Authore nuper Editum.
SUrgito Lector, adest Tibimet (...) Anglus.
Scilicet, egregius Shutus orator adest.
Flexanimus vates, Animas Qui traxit in Aures:
Voce docens Sacrum (quod pede pandit) iter.
Malleus (...) constans, and (...),
Qui nequit a Recto (Spe-ve, Metu-ve) Trahi.
Hunc tulit in Partum Dominus, Minitante Procella:
Nec fuerant Tanto Sacula digna viro.
Umbra dat Essigiem, resonat tihi Pagina Mentem:
Assolet ut Reliquis, gratus adesto Tibi.
Here Is that wise Charmer, whose Sweet Airs to Hear
Each Soul delighted so to dwell in the Ear:
Whose Life and Doctrine's Combined Harmony
Familiarized St Paul's Ecstasy:
But now (from growing Evils) mounted high
(Change but the Soul her Seat from Ear to the Eye)
This bright Star still does Lead wise men to Christ
Through this dark Bochim, and Egyptian Mist:
Nay here (what himself does in Heaven behold)
Even Blessed Visions does his Book unfold.
In Eximium Pijssimumque Richardum Holdsworth S. T. P. Theologum Flexanimum.
HIc Celebri Fato Pollenti Claruit ortu
Holdsworth Flos vatum; Cujus Doctrina stupori
Non minus Emicuit, Totus fuit ere voluptas
Et populo plaudente Favus: Cant'brigia Gemmam
Perdit Eximiam! Londini Ecclesia stellam
Fulgentem amisit! vigilans Quemcunque Priorum
Inspice, Praelatum merito Canit, Hippo sagacem,
Urbs Constantini Commendat (...) Auri;
Pagina Scriptores Loquitur Romana Solennes;
Sed nec Pinetum Corili, nec sidera solemn
Aequant; Annals Latios Graiosque revolve;
Prisca Parem ignorans, aequalem postera nullum
Ex hibitura Dies, vates super Eminet omnes
Solus Praeteritis melior, majorque futuris.
Upon the Pious and Learned Doctor Holdsworth.
THis Church, as Isle's a Ring; Holdsworth the Gemme
Too bright for Earth, now decks Heaven's Diadem:
We mourn our Loss, He joys in his Remove
From Envious Men unto the God of Love.
Whose Learned, Pious, high, and steady Soul
No Gainful Transmutations could control;
Nor Hopes, nor Fears, Prisons, nor Liberty
Could move, from Orthodoxall verity;
Nor Storms, nor Calms could warp him, the same Lives,
And like well seasoned Timber, never Gives:
Right owner of his Name, which Sweet shall last,
And Holds 'worth still, in Spite of Envy's Blast,
His Latter Prophesies then, Left behind,
O may we Real, and successful find.
Upon the Early and near Contemporary Death of Diverse learned and Pious
Divines. viz. Doctor Featly. Doctor Somes. Master Browning. Master Symons.
Master Haynes. Master Chestlin,
Eminent all for Pen and Pulpit.
What! now most need, Leave your poor Mother so?
To that Complaint of Jacob in his woe.
Joseph is not, and Simeon is gone!
And must Death too our Benjamin Seize on!
These Prudent Watchmen equal Dangers saw
With that Grave Guide o'th Church of Africa,
Who when the Goths and Vandalls entered There,
Took him to Christian Weapons, Tears, and Prayer;
Importuning The Almighty to Remove
Or Them in Judgment, or Himself in Love;
A Suite which his Great Master not denied,
For Austin soon in Besieged Hippo, died!
As much for These fure, did their Prayers effect,
When all men's Church-Indeavours found neglect:
Early Transplanted from this Scaene of Wees,
Where spite of Virtue, Crimson sin so Grows!
Heaven was their Center, while the Earth whirld Round,
While Classick Synods reeled, These stood their Ground.
These when the Church Like a Bestormed Barque
Where Winds and Seas wage War, and Skies grow Dark,
Like stoutest Mariners Exposed Themselves,
To save the Vessel from the Wracking Shelves,
And Thereby soonest washed off, with fierce Waves
Were snatched away from us, with hasty Graves!
Yet herein happy Fates did them betide
That They for Press, or Pulpit harnessed Died!
And though we mourn their worth when heard or Read,
Blessed Spirits that have Them, smile to see Them dead,
Or rather living in their better Parts,
Above in Souls; below in Divine Arts.
These were a Bunch of Canaans Grapes as't were,
Which to make Wine for Angels, God pressed here,
Who pulls away such Pillars when he means
The Fabric should to Ruinous Extremes!
Yet that it might not always so remain
There Ink's a Cement t'aedifie't again:
God plucks such Stakes out of the Churches Hedge,
When He Will set Sacrilegious Teeth on Edge?
Yet drunk with that Vine Lest to Hell they reele,
These both Disease, and Medicine did reveal:
God calls Home such skilled Pilots from the Helm,
When He will Sin-fraught Vessels overwhelme!
Yet lest a total wrack should us befall,
These framed and left a Card to Steer with all,
And who sails by their Compass cannot miss,
Mangre all Storms and Rocks, the Port of Bliss.
Upon the prudent Dove, and Vindicatresse of Stepmothers.
Mothers in Law justly half-hang'd by Fame,
Are now reprieved by this Indulgent Dame;
Richer in Love to an Adopted Graft
Then others to their Native, usual Craft
Here turned to Sweetness, Bits in stead of Blows
And for Neglect, Good Breeding she bestows.
Some talk of Memphis, some of Jasons Fleece,
Perfumes some think none to their Amber Greece,
Awedge of Gold some boast, a fine new Fashion
Raises in others a strange Admiration.
Kindness Named Thee more then the Law, a Mother;
Earth amongst her Wonders, shows not such another.
A Consolatory to the Deprived of their Dearest Mate, who thus bespeaketh the
Relict.
THough a Right Turtle to thy Living Mate,
Yet now being Sour'd, thou may not imitate
In her incessant moanes, that mournful Dove,
Which thou exceedest in a Spotless Love.
If Nature claim her Tribute, yet let Grace
Christen thy Tears, and Re-possesse her Place;
That Grief, not Love but Envy, does express
Which flows from a Dear Friends Happiness!
Who now is sfe from Grief and Wars,
Above the Reach of Earthly Jarres;
By Christ sequestered happily
From Sorrow, Sin and Misery;
Admitted through his precious Blood
To those Joys here not understood;
Speed on thy Pious Race, and then
We nere to part, shall meet again;
Mean-time, bear Christianly thy Cross
And let not my Gain seem thy Loss;
Fie-Lavish Eyes! Dear, drown not thine
'Cause God, has wiped all Tears from mine!
That God o high Advance for thee,
Himself might now thy Consort be.
Then all the Affections born the Dead
Be on the Living Offspring shed.
In Oculos Catarrho labo. rantes.
PLurima Lascivos intrant dum Crimina Ocellos,
Guttula nec madidis Exeat ulla Genis!
Efficit id morbus, virtus quod debuit una;
Lumina defluxu bina madere gravi!
Culpae digna Lues! Qui non peccata dolerent,
Lumina Diffluerent absque Liquore Sacro!
O tristes oculi vitreos Sic perdere humores,
Fletus and Aeterni, Flendo, Notare Locum.
Foelices Oculi, maculas si spoute dolendo,
Praevenerant Animae Corporis atque Cladi:
Morbus adhuc Foelix magis hic, Medicina vocandus,
St Magdalenae fit liquor iste pius;
Tunc ad Supremi ac Animae Sponsalia, Regis,
In soles oculi, in vina revertet Aquae.
The Epigram upon sore Eyes thus rendered.
While wanton Eyes Sins daily entertain,
And no repentant Tears flow Thence again,
A Disease does what Virtue should effect,
Melts them into a doleful Cataract!
And a just Scourge! those Eyes that mourn not Guilt,
Their Tears should thus in Vain, and Pain be spilt!
Unhappy Eyes to lose such pearly Dews
Which forced, the Place of weeping, but foreshews!
But happy those, which freely Sins lament,
And so both Souls and Bodies Ill prevent:
Yet Happier this Disease, this Remedy,
If Maudlins cleansing Bath it prove to be,
Then at the Nuptials of the Soul's Bridegroom,
Those Eyes shall Suns, that Water Wine become.
Melvinus Poeta Scoticus De Altaris Cultu Apud Anglos.
CUr duo stant Libri Clausi Anglis, Regia in Aul^?
Lumina Caeca duo? Polubra sicca Duo?
Number sensum, Cultumque dei tenet Anglia Clausum!
Lumine caesa suo? sorde sepulta sua?
Responsio Authoris.
PEctore Qui retinet, Claudat merit o ille Libellos;
Et Christus, Pietas ut sit operta, monet;
Scotia dat Tenebras duplices, and Perfida, sordes!
Hinc Anglis praestant Pollubra, Lustra, Libri:
Scotia Testatur Flagrans, non lumina caeca
Anglis, nec penitus Pollubra sicca, nuper!
A Christian paraphrase upon those Verses, Like Hermit poor, etc.
LIke Christian well resolved in place obscure,
I mean to spend the Remnant of my Days,
In unfrequented Paths of Folk Impure,
To meditate on my Redeemers praise:
And at thy Gates, o Death, I Will Linger still,
To let out Life, when God and Nature will.
A mourning Weed my Body shall attire,
My Staff the Cross of Christ, whereon I Will stay;
Of true Repentance, Linkt with Chaste desire,
The Couch is made, whereon my Limbs I Will lay!
And at thy Gates, o Death, I Will Linger still,
To let out Life, when God and Nature will!
My Food shall be of Christian Manna made,
My Drink the Streams flowed from my Saviors Side,
And for my Light, through Earths erroneous Shade,
The Beams of Grace shall be my safest Guide.
And at thy Gates, o Death, I Will Linger still,
To let out Life, when God and Nature will!
Tears and Flowers strewn upon the Hearse of Mrs S. S. Dying Sept. 15. 1641.
SInce it is Solomon that says,
A virtuous woman shall have praise,
Do, modest paper, tell the Truth,
Of my dear Sarah's Aged Youth;
And when thy Inkie-moysture dries,
I will supply it from mine eyes!
So, though of her we are bereft,
Her fair example may be left
To the Imitation of the best,
Wonder, and Envy of the rest.
God the Beginning was, and End,
Whence did her Acts flow, whither tend;
The Scripture was her Book of Books,
Nor only object of her Looks,
But the true Glass by which she dressed
Continually her Head and Breast.
Each day she hallowed, but that same
Which to our Lord owes time and Name,
With knowing zeal, and strictest care
Observed and kept she every where;
Church-publike-exercises led,
Which Home-Devotions Ecchoed:
Strong Prayer was the Lock and Key
To every Harmeless night and day;
Those Arrows winged, and Headed flew
With Sighs, and Tears of Heavenly dew,
I, although not for Sins, nor years,
She was a Magdalen for Tears;
Remembering the great Bridegrooms cry,
I Am wounded with thy melting eye!
An eye that cared not to look
In any, unless Sacred Book;
Wherein if she found Christ's name, there
Fixed her delights and pleasures were:
Nor only Student, Agent she
And Practiser of Piety;
Devotions Handmaid did awaite
Each Day's approaching, and retreat;
Thinking, of all the time God lent,
That best was in his service spent.
That Calling Here, Christ, and she chose.
Which profane worldlings most oppose.
And as she Mary hence appears,
So Martha too for house-Affaires,
Who, like the Egyptian Emblem, right,
To we are her own house did delight:
Oh had she had that Snailes slow pace
In parting from mine Arms Embrace!
No Planet she, that loved to stray,
To see, or to be seen so gay,
But kept Jobs Covenant with her eyes,
And turned them from such Vanities;
A well- Tuned Cymball was her Tongue,
And not a Loud one, loosely rung;
Her Mind still gratefully content,
Envying none for what God lent:
Her Hand was open Evermore
To Good, but chiefly to such Poor;
Sweet unto all, pure at the Heart,
Without the Zeal pretending Art:
Covering the Good Grain she did sow,
That so it might the better grow.
She was a Rose for Sent, and Hiew,
No Garish Tulip, but for view:
Neat without Niceness was her dress,
None of those Isai'h does express;
No Phancy-follower was she,
But of the Apostles D cency;
She was that Merchants ship well fraught,
Not that which Apes and Peacocks brought.
Her Needle did succeed her Book,
And both by course, the whole day took;
What rare does Nature propagate
That her Art could not Imitate?
Old subtle Time could never steal by
Her Active Hand, or studious Eye,
But one Adorned her outward store,
While the other Decked her Mind much more.
And all this ready to impart
With Humble, not Imperious Art:
Nay, even her Recreations were
For Body's so, as Soul's welfare;
Not to be Infinite, the rest
You find in Solomon expressed:
What there he speaks, Prove. 31.10, etc.
is here as true
Of this, as that Good-House wifes due:
Thus like the Sun in her own Sphaere,
Her House she moved, and only there;
Through all whose parts she did dispense
Her Motion, Light, or Influence:
And such a Sun at Noone to set
Must needs a long sad Night beget.
To him indeed whose rest and light
Was in his Faithful Sarah's sight!
Faithful as ever Abra'm's Dame,
For Grace and Love worthy Her Name;
She made a Competency wealth,
And often Nursed Sickness into Health,
By joining to her Skill and Cares,
The Cordial of Prayer, and Tears.
Oh could mine have as much prevailed
When her over hasty Death assailed!
So one, as shade and Body They
Did even together move, or stay;
One will and nill, one Joy and Fear,
One Comfort, unto both, one care;
While others Plough with Ox, and Ass,
The Apostles Yoke here equal was:
One Soul as in two Bodies dwelt,
And both the same Affections felt:
Nor could Death Altogether part
Whom God united so in heart.
His soul with hers to Heaven ascends,
While to her Grave his body tends;
Nor long erect can be that Head
Whose better part's already dead;
Like Thee (best half) I mould away,
I daily haste, and only stay
A while, by God and Thee designed
To Care for one Thou left'st behind:
Earths Joys, for Thee Too narrow were,
More worthy of an Heavenly Sphere;
And too much Heaven 'twas for me
Here to Enjoy both Fruit and Tree!
As dear a Mother, as a Wife,
Thou dy'dst to give Another life!
Delivered by Fates Control
At once, almost, of Child and Soul,
Those Twins of Innocence, yet Thine,
The brighter of the two, does shine:
What, not all virtues prevalent,
Such praemature Death to prevent?
No, God too has his early Fruit,
Which when he will pluck, who shall dispute?
Grace made her Twenty Five, as old
As many that have Fivescore told:
Her years were few, yet her life long,
God's loved Iosiahs often dye young!
This Plant from out Earths Soil of vice,
Has God removed to Paradise;
Yet lest his lower Garden be
Bereft quite of so Good a Tree,
A Branch in Mercy he has Given,
Which, watered with the dew of Heaven,
May it so sprout and shoot up here,
As one day to be planted where
Now its own Stem Grows, never to Dye,
But flourish to Eternity.
Where Tumults, Sin, and Sorrows cease,
Their room supplied with Joy and Peace;
Where short-breath'd-Time Eternal grows.
And Health that no diseases knows!
Where Is the best Company of all,
Even Visions Beatificall!
Where the true Music of the Sphaeres
Does Charm, and Ravish Sacred Ears;
Where Angels and all Saints do sing,
Incessant Hymns to Glories King;
Where only is the Hand can dry
These Tears of mine, and wipe each Eye?
There thou and I again shall meet
Through Christ, In Joys that never shall fleet:
Till when, Dear Sarah, pray will I,
Like Thee to live, like Thee to Dye.
The Epitaph engraven on her Marble.
So gray in Virtue, and so green in Youth
As this Fair Pattern, was a wondrous truth!
Read but of Hester, Ruth, Susanna's Graces,
Add Mary, Dorcas, Hannah; All those Places
History forth to thine, Her Soul Embraces,
Sprung from a worthy Stock, which she Adorned,
Pursuing still a better, this world scorned;
And as in life a Phoenix, so in Death
R eviv'd into Another, but changed Breath!
K indling her Faith with Prayer, she soon became
Even of an Earthly Spark, an Heavenly flame.
(...), Elegiacum in Doctris Checi Theologi pientissimi (...) a se jussam
combustionem.
MAesta (...) vatis, vox illa dolenda est,
Cui magis Artis in est, plusque doloris Ei.
In te vera nimis Fuit haec sententia Chece,
Artibus Excellens, atque Dolor pari!
Aequum esset, Te non tantum Liquisse Dolores,
Ast Arts etiam Docte, dedisse Tuis;
Illae etenim mulcens nostro Medicina Fuissent
Maerori, miseris nunc dolor unus adest!
Litera scripta manet (vetus inter Adagia verbum)
De Scriptis utinam Chece, dicenda tuis.
Heu, sed Doctrina seros beaturae nepotes,
(Scriptoris jussa) Litera scripta perit!
Quae tot Laminibus Mundum irradiare volebant
Prudenti nimium Comperiere Rogo!
An non Foelices magis is it haec Martyrs essent
Chece, tuo si non igne probata, Deo?
(...) poenas temulens luat undique Charta,
Dignaque constructis esto Cremanda pyris;
At tua, (cujus erant omni sine Fell, liquores)
(...) in cineres cur redigenda Breves?
Invidiam Calamus nescivit, Sanguine tincta
Checi haud Lineola est, quaevis amica, pia:
Hinc causa in promptu est, Haec non fert Turpior aetas,
Ferrea pacificam nollet amare manum!
Instar Phaenicis verum, Quem vivere novi,
O utinam poterim noscere, sic que mori;
Faucibus e mortis veluti Te scimus ademptum,
Virtus e flammis sic rediviva siet.
Flemus at id psaltis vir factus quando Cadaver,
Cuncta Sui Cunctis excogitata Cadunt.
Apostrophe ad Viduam.
QUalis pugna fuit Tibimet dulcissima Conjux
Pollicita (an Pietas vicerit) anne Fides?
Scripta premi pietas, Promissio postulat uri!
Vincit Amor, Sponso mox Holocausta datur.
Jacturam duplicem Scribens and Scripta, dedere,
Solamen (Socios si sit habere) Cape.
An Elegy Lamenting the Burning of the Learned and Pious Manuscripts of Dr
Cheek by his own command and will.
It Is a sad truth from the wise man proceeds,
Who augments knowledge, aequall sorrow breeds!
Both which in Thee, dear Cheek, too much fulfilled,
Brimfull of Learning, whom like Dolor killed.
Then 't had been fit, Thou should not only left
The Grief, but Knowledge too, to friends bereft;
For that had now an healing Balsome been
To sorrows wound, which still remains Green.
What Is written once, Abides, (the Proverb's old)
Yet would God of thy Manuscripts 'twould hold;
But thy sweet Lines (alas!) that would have blessed
Our later Nephews, by their Scribe Suppressed!
What to the World might have such Lights became,
Here perish in an over-modest Flame!
But had not these been Martyrs higher prized
If not in fire thus to God Sacrificed?
Let stubble Pamphlets, dry as rotten sticks,
Make fitting Fires and burn as Heretics.
But thy pure Lines being so devoyd of Gall,
Why should they be condemned to Cinders all?
Thy Quil no Envy knew, no Line of Cheek
Blushed in bloud-Letters, but each pious, meek:
Why, that is the Cause; they not with Times Engage;
A peaceful hand suits not an Iron Age!
Yet as I knew Thee Phoenix-like Alive,
So would I might have known thy worth revive:
That as thy Soul has escaped the Iaws of Death,
Thy Learning too might spite of Flames, have Breath.
Here we feel That, when man to Dust does fall,
Be what they will, his thoughts then perish all!
An Apostrophe to his Widow
O What a strife (Sweet woman) was in Thee!
Which should prevail, Promise, or Piety?
The Last Pleads for the Press, the first for Fire.
Love paies the Holocaust to the Deads desire!
Here Is double Loss, for hand, and writings sake!
If Company ease sorrow, solace take.
Upon the Son of Thomas Spark Esquire, by Afra, Sister of Sir Edward Monins
Baronet.
Cordial to all Relations, First to God,
Highly affecting's Tribe, and his Abode
In all Sincerity; Of Parents dear
Claiming deservedly the Palm to bear:
His Friend being more then half himself indeed
Ever found Readiness, and Aid at need.
Such his Heroic Generosity
Proportioned well, a Worthy Family;
As for the World, none did it more Contemn,
Requiting it, not overkinde to him:
Keeping a stricter Guard on Latter days,
Ere He Left Earth, Ensured Heavenly Joys.
On the Daughter of Thomas Fineux Esquire.
A Phaenix was thy Crest, suiting thy Name,
Nearest a kin both, to thy Virtues Flame;
Never more humble Generosity
Adorned Bewty, Sweetness, Piety.
Sparing, yet Bountiful, discreetly free,
Parent of Prudenter Indulgency;
Above her self tendering Relations near,
Regardlesse of her Self, to hold them dear:
Kind, Meek, and Patient; Joying at her end
Even to have born One, does Gods Hests attend.
The Hearse of Mrs M. S. dying July 10. 1650. Bestrew'd and Dew'd.
THe Fire of Grief that hidden lies,
Into consuming Flames does rise!
Sorrows are Floods which without Bounds
Are Fatal to enclosed Grounds!
And Sighs are Winds that without Vent
Breed Earthquakes in their Continent!
Eyes then turn Sewers to my Heart
Both Tongue and Pen some Griefs impart:
Lest those combined Fatal Three,
At once Rend, Scorch, and Deluge me!
Yet Reader, Look for no Curld Muse,
But such plain Dress as Sorrows use;
Here is no Theme for Poetry,
But Virtues Real History!
One that as Christian, Wife, and Mother,
Scarce the World had such another;
The Real Phoenix, From whose Spice
Revived a Bird of Paradise:
God was the Center of her Aims,
Obsequious to all His Claims;
While others single Grace affect
To all his Laws She had respect:
Each Day did open with Early Hymns,
And close with Quire of Cherubins:
No Brayer for Waters of strife,
But Thirster She for Wells of Life;
Wherewith like David's panting Heart,
She often refreshed her better Part;
Those Clusters of the Holy Land
She Gathered with a Daily Hand;
No Angle of that Sacred Book
Escaped Her Judicious Look;
Whose sweet Contents She did digest
Both into Tablets, and Her Breast:
Which, like a Vigorous Stomach sent
To every Part it is Nourishment;
Not like Those whom Fond Appetite
More then Concoction does invite;
Having through ill Digestion
The Rickets of Religion!
Her Head with Pious Notions Fraught,
Which Her mild Tongue discoursed and taught
To all about her, with an Eye
Full of sweet humble Modesty:
To Good She' had still an open Ear,
But most where the wise Charmers were;
Not like Some we now live Among
Being Christians but in Ear and Tongue;
'Twas Her Great Care Real to be
And Uniforme in Piety:
Spotless from the Time-Vices Taint
Whom God, not Her self made a Saint.
Her Palate of such Temperance
As was the School of Abstinence:
Of Lovely Aspect, sweet to all
Candid, Serene, and Liberal:
Her Hands Composed of Charity
And all Exacter Houswifery;
Her Book and Needle shared the Day
And sweetly stole the Time away:
Yet for Her better Speed to Heaven,
She gave God two whole Days of seven,
Besides his part of Each, this She
Which Crowned all, did Constantly.
Her Foot no Novell Paths did Trace,
But in the good Old way kept Pace
Untir'd, Therein still finding rest
Till of Eternity Possessed.
This Gold-Finch of Her Family
Scorning Earths Chafe, thus Soard on high.
Virtue and Beauty were at strife
Which should most set Her out to Life,
Not Galba-Like where a fair Soul
A Deformed Body did enroule;
Nor yet like Specious Absolon
Whose inside was Corruption:
But Her fair Structure, and pure Mind
Like those bright Golden Apples shined
In Silver Pictures, hung upon
The Tents of Royal Solomon:
All Changes Stoutly She Would partake
And Welcome for the Senders sake;
So fixed, that Full or Ebbing state
Could nor depresse Her, nor Elate;
Nor through all Turn's of Mortals Wheel
Did any more Contentment feel;
Thus did our Sublimated Friend
In Christianity transcend:
And by fair consequence, as Wife
Was of a Correspondent life.
A Sarah Srongly Affectionate
And as Respectfull to her Mate.
Right Hannah that did vow her Son
To Heaven, er'e Him thence, Prayers won.
Wise Abigail, which could control
All Passions, with Her Prudent Soul:
And yet stout Hester like She proud,
To defend Truths or Persons, Loved.
Like Happy Jacobs Lovely Mate,
Too-like her in her Teeming Fate!
One of the Apostle's-Matron-Dresse,
Above Fantastic Garishnesse:
A very Dorcas for both Parts
Of Pious Alms, and Prudent Arts;
Therefore bewailed like-her, and Praised,
O could She too, like Her, be raised!
All these Examples, to the Life,
Make up her Character as Wife?
But as a Step-Dame, who can tell
Me, where to find a Parallel?
Prophaner Story yeildeth none,
And Sacred afford's only one,
One Naomi, whose Worth and Fame
Is Treasured in Her Comely Name;
Who, indeed well deserved of Ruth,
For so advertising Her Youth!
Yet She propounded once to Part,
And 'twas the Daughter would not start;
But this Indulgentest of Mothers
Exceeded Her, as She did Others;
Acting that speech, where er'e Thou go
Or make Abode, I will do so;
Thy God too shall be mine, and I
Desire, with Thee to Live and Dye!
So that amongst most Affectionate
Of Native Mothers, seek Her Mate;
Such whose soft Nature Consort bears
Both in their Childrens Smiles, and Tears?
Whose Tenderlings are still well fed,
Yet better Taught, and better Bred;
Who to their wholesome Nourishment,
Add Educations Complement;
Who both in Health, and Sickness can
Act Tutresse, and Physician:
Not trusting Hyr'd, or Borrowed Care.
But their own Selves the Burden Share:
And all this Constant to the Death,
Sealed up with Prayers of latest Breath!
And such Diviner Counsel given,
As still guides Her dear Charge to Heaven:
When er'e Thou can find such Another,
She, She comes nearest to This Mother:
As Spanish Children, they say, Quake
At mention of the Name of Drake!
English, me thinks, should Stilled, and Tamed
Be, when They hear this Mother named:
who thus has Purchased a mild
Retaliation for her Child;
And sure, They Will under Curses dwell
That with her Offspring deal not well!
Whole Nature blushing, as it were,
To see own Mothers passed by Her;
Who Christneth that same Barbarous Name
Of Stepmother, and mends their Fame.
And therefore justly so Admired,
Beloved in Life, in Death desired!
Lest all Relaps, and Step-Dames prove
As bad as er'e, by Her Remove;
Remove, alas! a word of Pain!
To us of Loss! to her of Gain:
For from such Premises, we know,
Can none but Good Conclusions Flow;
Her Sickness was but an Express
Of Her Religious Healthinesse;
The Pious Groans of Her Death Bed
But Eccho's of a Life well Led:
The Grave an Emblem too may be
Of Her Retired Piety:
And Heaven it self the Church, wherein
She triumphs over Death and Sin:
She here, Lying in, a while did stay,
But in Heaven kept her Churching Day:
Now if Love Ground of Sorrow be,
Oh, who to be so mourned as She?
If comfort yet Arise from Bliss
Whose change to be so Joy'd in is.
Whose Life and Death did both Conspire
Her speed to Saints and Angels Quire;
Where we shall once Re-meet, and Sing
Aeternall Hymns to Mercies King.
Mean time (Dear Martha) I shall pray
And strive, to follow the same way.
What in Caesar and Pompey were
Great vices, are great virtues here;
As Wife, or Christian, none Excelled:
As stepmother none paralleled.
And who Conceives not all This true,
Or Her, or Virtue never Knew.
An Acrostick Epitaph.
M ary and Martha both were met in Thee,
As Act and Contemplation testify;
Right Mary thy Soul Sought what did excel,
T hy Body still the Martha Busied well:
Having a while proved both, with upright Heart,
A ll Mary now The have chose the Better Part.
Sprung from that Ancient Generous Finches Nest,
Pursu'dst with wings of virtue, Heavenly rest:
And like a true Spark of the Glorious Sphere,
Right upward tendedst, until fixed There.
Kind as in life, to wonder, so in Death
Expiring but to Give an Other Breath.
The Recommendation of the Book to himself multiplied, Ed. and Sa. Spark.
Dear pledges of my Love and hopes, to you
'Bove all, this Muse should be of welcome view,
As most allied, and sprung from the same Head;
Surviving Monitors, when Author dead;
Partners enough your loss of Mother mourn,
In their spiritual Teeming Rachels urne;
Who so many Benoni's has left here!
That ever shall her Memory be dear:
Then though your Fate's so cruel, to deprive
You doubly thus at once! yet to revive
Both (in a sense) again; here fix your eyes,
And you may see their constant Pieties;
And, though in this sense, borne out of due time,
May here reflect on either in their Prime;
The Churches structure of Devotion,
To persons squared, and Times proportion:
Her Feasts and Fasts freed from all just Complaints,
Commemorating not Adoring Saints:
And Piety (I think it is) not a Crime
(As place, and person) To give dues to Time:
But sure, Religion then must needs decay,
When as it is Christian Landmark's taken away.
To you therefore, that I might Propogate
Something above frail Natures brittle state,
A Christian Map of the world, I sometime drew,
Where, of both Globes you have an useful view:
And for your further Guidance too, you may
Sarah and Hagar's History Survey;
But Chiefly This Peruse, as Goshen Light,
To guide your steps in an Egyptian Night!
Perhaps some others too (as well as you)
May Deigne to take a profitable view,
And as some use by Jewels, value more
These Glories lost, then while Enjoyed before:
Reflecting (from your Duty natural)
On their Matriculation spiritual;
And like the Method on it, or Matter told,
The one because it is New, the the other Old;
And for all Sorts composed, at least excuse
My (though no soaring) yet high fixed Muse.
Then while the Age Reeles in false firing zeal
This Book shall sober steady Truths Reveal,
At one side Scoured from Rusty Heresies,
And Purged at other, from wild Novelties;
Retaining Doctrine Primitve, and clean,
Reflecting on that Churches Golden mean,
Which, like things Eminent, had hardest Fate!
All Envying what they cannot Imitate.
Read then, and Act; this beaten Church way Tread,
And Sure, to Heaven 'twill you, one day, Lead.
FINIS.

