THE SPEECH OF A WARDEN

To the Fellows of his COMPANY: Touching the great affairs of the KINGDOM.

Wherein your Judgment will stand amazed to decide whether his Wisdom or
Learning did exceed.

And doubtless is such a Speech as was never spoken by any Warden since the
City was made a Corporation.

Published by Antibrownistus Puritanomastix.

Printed for N. V. 1642.

The Speech of a WARDEN to the fellows of his Company.
BRethren and fellow Counselors of this never too-wise assembly: Before I
begin my discourse, my duty binds me to render you all humble thanks for your
general Election of me, to wag my beard amongst you this day, for the good of
the Commonwealth: I confess my self as very a Wood-cock as the best of you,
and as far unfit for this great employment, yet (with your patience) I will
endeayour to express the simplicity of my zealous affection to the
Weal-publique, with as much vigor and outrageous spleen, as my shallow
capacity can perform.

The first thing I am bound in conscience to present to your consideration, is
the Liturgy of the Church, which is a thing in these days generally spoken
against and that by our most eminent* grave and orthodox Coach-men, Weavers,
and Brewers-Clerks; nay it is grown odious to our Shee-divines, whose eyes, do
perpetually look asquint with the very thought of it. For my part, what this
Liturgy is, I know not* nor care not, yet as simple as I am, I am confident it
is a hard word, And in my judgment is either Greek or Latin or both; from
whence I must necessarily conclude, that there ought no hard words, no Greek
nor Latin, nor any that know them come within the Discipline of the Church,
nor any Language or Linguist, but plain Hebrew and English. Let us therefore
avoid this Liturgy as a thing whereof we are utterly ignorant, incapable, and
undeserving. And if it concern the Common Prayer (as my singular wife says it
does,) then questionless (if the new Convocation be but endued with wisdom
correspondent to mine,) they will doom it to be burnt with such a fire as will
consume it, yea till it be consumed even as the Loggs in Lincolns-Inn-fields
were. And great reason, for it has been the only cause why the Gospel has
prospered so slenderly under the ministry of preaching tradesmen, and Lay
Clergy-women, who have coupled themselves together, in a joint labor for the
procreating of young Saints to fill up the number of this new faith: To which
purpose how often, and how long have Barnes, Stables, Woods, Saw-pits, Old
Ditches, Cellars, yea houses of Office been their Synagogues, places of
excellent privacy, and free from the eyes of the sinful, and such of the
wicked as will speak worse then they mean, for certainly their speaking is
worse then our doing. But (to come to my subject again, for I had like to have
rambled from it,) if this Liturgy (that heathen word Liturgy) were blotted of
out the Church, what an infinite increase, and multiplication of spiritual
children would they suddenly beget, insomuch that the parishes would even
swarm with them. And that in regard of the Liberty they might then use, for
they are altogether so strong of Spirit (by reason of high sare) and as I may
say so zealously impudent, that I persuade my self, they would go toot even in
the open streets, and never fear or shame to be discovered. But I will conclude
this argument as Goodman Green did in the Hebrew tongue in Hatcham Barn last
fasting day after dinner, quoth he very excellently, Quiquidlibet cuquodlibet,
which according to the best translation is, away with the Liturgy away with
it, and so say I.

The second thing I must vex your patience withal, is the Miliria, which
(although I know not the meaning of it,) yet it is argument sufficient to me to
conceive it absolutely requisite; because the King does absolutely oppose it.
This same Militia is likewise a hard word: And if it be Hebrew (as for ought I
know it may be) I should love it the better; but from hence I must needs
observe, that hard words are fitter for the Camp then the Church: And therefore
I hold it very necessary that those who are Scholars and understand hard
words, should be compelled (as I think they will be,) to apply themselves to
Military Offices; and in their stead those that understand nothing be entrusted
with Ecclesiastical Discipline. And further: Touching this Militia, what a
glorious sight it is to see the Leaders, and their horses armed in gold and
silver lace, Gorgets, and Leading-Staves, of beaten plate, Ornaments of
excellent use in War, for the enemies to make prize on, and is perhaps a witty
policy (in case of surprisall,) to carry their Ransomes in the habit of Armor:
And then again, to see the unstained Buff and Scarlet, never blemished with so
much as one Crimson Drop, the new-painted Drums, and unweather-beaten
Ensigns, and chiefly the courageous Batteries made upon the fresh air, with
full as much alacrity and undaunted spirit as if the enemy himself had been
there ready pitched for an encounter or more, I verily believe. What say you to
me my self that never discharged a piece in all my life before it did my heart
good to hear my gun crack though I could not see it, for indeed I winckt, and
yet I think in my conscience I could have hit the great Tent (durst I have
charged a Bullet,) at more then twenty foot off. Well this Militia is a brave
thing and as necessary an invention to consume powder, and to keep us in weekly
employment in these times of small trading, as heart can wish: In my opinion it
is fit it be encouraged: And that it be ordained (enacted I believe it will not
be) Colonel of all the hard words that ever came into the City since the
valient Conquest of Wat Tyler and Jack Straw, performed by a Citizen and
predecessor of ours.

This Militia (being established,) leads me on to my third argument which I
doubt not but (by your grave favors) to go through, with as much discretion as
I have done the two former.

And that is the extirpation of the Papists. O let us elevate our perspicuous
Noses, to smell out their treacheries that we may be able to root them out,
(but not with our Noses, for that would be swinish:) And rather then be such
beasts let us be hornd beasts, (as our Ancestors and Predecessors in all ages
have been,) that we may yoke our selves together in full strength, and plow
them up, as it were the bowels of the earth: Let us heap so many crosses upon
them till they be afraid to cross the way on us, or to cross the proverb or
to cut any cross Capers, least we interpret every such act, to be direct
Popish superstition. And to perfect this extirpation let all men whosoever that
are not directly and absolutely of our opinion mind habit, (if it had been
possible I would have said wisdom,) be reputed Papists. (And so they are
already,) but I mean let them fall within the limitation and censures of all
laws established against Popery and popish innovasion. And therefore let him
that honors the name of Jesus be reputed a Jesuit, him that takes degrees at
the universities be held a Seminary, and so consequently let them both be hanged
drawn and quarterd for high Treason, for that's the doom my charity can afford
them: Nay let not a woman wear Beads, least we judge she numbers her prayers by
them, (unless it be Pearl-beads in a Hatband because my wife her self (that
impregnable piece of devout obstinacy) has adjudged and followed that fashion
as a decent wearing, and special vestment, to give evidence of the haughty and
vain glorious pride of a Citizens wife. And further, for this purpose; Let us
draw the King (if it be possible) to become no natural man; that is, never to
reflect on any man for his excellency of learning, pregnancie of wit,
affability and sweetness of behavior, fluency of language, or any other
perfection of Art or Nature whatsoever, unless he can likewise give sufficient
Testimony of his affection to Roundheadisme, that he never heard any
Common Prayers, but can pray himself four hours, with more vehemency, than the
best Divine in Christendom that prays but a quarter. That he believes it not
possible, that a Sermon in any language under Heaven can save a soul, except
English and Hebrew. Now truly, for my part I cannot very perfectly speak this
same Hebrew-tongue I mentioned so often; but I honor it, because I take it to
be the language they speak at Amsterdam, where the most famous Lay-Doctors in
all the World do exercise. But I say what a glorious Court would men of these
qualities and says make: the Kings graces before-meat and after-meat would be
longer than his morning and evening prayers are; the reversion of his Diet not
given away, but all eaten, as swiftly as a Cormorant swallows an Eele:
Ambassadors would be answered, before they had an Audience, even by instinct
of the spirit; long locks would be converted to large ears; Masks, and Plays
to Conventicles, and Psalm-singing; the very sight or ugly aspect of them,
would flight these same pretty Taffata-beauties out of the Virge, so that no
sinners but themselves, should come near the Throne of Majesty, whereby they
would be (as their ambition ever was) the prime sinners of the Kingdom. How
fit would these men be for State employment too? would not How the Cobbler make
a special Keeper of the great Seal, in regard of his experience in Wax? Or
Walker the spiritual Bailod-wrighter, become the Office of Secretary of State?
Or the Lock-Smith that preached in Crooked-lane, make an excellent Master of
the Wards? And the Tailor at Bridewell-Docke, might be Master of the Liveries.
Who fitter to be Master of the Horse, than my Lord Whatchicallums Groom? I tell
you plainly, he is able to do more service in the Stable, (besides what he can
do in the Pulpit) then he that enjoyes the place. And would not Brown the
Upholster, make a proper Groom of the Bedchamber? Why, I my self am Warden of
my Company, and could not I think you as well be Warden of the Cinque Ports?
Well, well I, am verily persuaded we shall never attain to these preferments;
but it does me good to build a Castle in the Air with the thought of it, to
think how we should firke the Popish and Malignant party, what now in them is
but Petty-larciny, should then be accounted high Treason; what now is but
Superstition, should then be blasphemy, Innovation should be Heresy, and
Latin in a Sermon should be reputed flat Damnation. O there was never any
Tiger, Dragon, or Eliphant did reign, domineer, rule, and tyrannize as we would
do; we would be very Lions in the Namean woods. Hydraes in the Lernean Fennes,
Eagles in the Skies, Whales in the Seas Pikes in the Rivers and Neroes in the
Empire; nay, all the Devils in hell, Hags, Furies, Witches, and Instruments of
damnation whatsoever, should never parallel us for inventions to plague these
lukewarm Locusts, these Mercurialls of Religion that stand upon Philosophy,
Reason* Sense and I know not what; as if reason and sense, and such fooleries,
were pertinent to religion and the graces of the Spirit. This Rapture had
almost begot an ecstasy m^me but that a proverb amongst the wicked came in the
nick to cool the fumosity of my Chollerick rhume, that the cursed Cow has short
horns: And truly now I think better on it. whatsoever our mad frenzies do
persuade us to imagine our selves, yet we are not the people that must have all
the sway, the Kings part will ^ear half; for let us think what we will of our
selves, the truth is, the wiser sort do hold us but Roundheads, silly
rascals, ignorant coxcombs, indiscreetly zealous fools, yea even Cuckolds, and
know us to be so too, yet I have only intimated my proper zeal, and customary
desires unto you, that you might all with my affection expect this happy
change, which we would call by the name of Reformation, for this (might it come
to pass as it never will do,) were a sure way to banish Popery, and bring the
Kingdom into a way of extemporary preaching, and spiritual blasphemy. And
here I end with the Papists. I should have prolonged my invection against them,
but that I saw the Proclamation for executing Laws upon them, wherefore (Though
I do not love them,) yet I think the better of them because the King pursues
them so eagerly.

The next thing which I will plunder my brains and beat out the very
quintesence of my noddle about, is the design for Ireland, upon which subject
I doubt not but to belabour my invention so strongly, that you would think
Tully were making an Oration against Cataline, or that an Apple-wench were
scolding with a Pedlar in Barthalomew fair about a standing; or that a railing
Lecturer were preaching a Sermon of damnation in a reprobate Auditory: nay, I
fear not but you will crown me Cob-warden of all the Wardens in Europe or
New England; which is more.

The great necessity of this Design appears to my conscience, but in two
particulars only. First, the reparation of our losses past: and secondly, the
expectation of a mighty profit to come; for which two causes only (without any
collateral or other consideration of bloodshed* or any thing else) I do urge
this unto you. As for our losses, they are more then Arirhmaticke can number;
and that is a great deal you will say, yet it is true, though he that counts
it easy to multiply the Sands and the Stars were to be the accountant. And
thus it appears, many of us here present and many hundreds more have wittily
taken the opportunity of the Rebellion in Ireland, to compound their debts
here, under pretense of losses there; which in my judgment is a most
inscrutinous and unsearchable pretense; and he that gave the first example
thereof deserves to be made Master of the Company of Bankerouts; I would have
you all learn it. And I confess, I my self would follow it, but that it does
not agree with the rules of City pride; for then I should be compelled to
forsake my Wardenship, and my wife to give the wall, which would break her
heart, or else breed such a dissension betwixt us, that she would break mine.
But I say, by virtue of this ingeniously mischievous pretense, you might enrich
your debt Books to a treble estate, and never come within the compass of
controlement, and so cozen your Creditors and the Comissioners of Bankerours
with a clenly neat excuse, and invisible piece of knavery, I even tickle with
the conceit of it: you may thereby preserve your money to buy Land in Ireland,
and so after the Conquest, have that estate there in reality, which now you do
but pretend to have. Now truly I thank you all for that loving Him, it is a
most evident token of your pronenesse to take my advice; and I doubt not but to
my glory and your comfort, it will be followed with speedy effect, especially
if the King be not pacified and return home again. The second cause why I
press this Design (as I said before) is the mighty benefit which thereby will
acrew; he that adventures two hundred pounds for a thousand Acres, purchases
for the said two hundred pounds, five and twenty pounds a year at six pence an
Acre per annum, (I made my man Jehos^phat Singularily cast it up this morning.)
And this kind of profit is peculiar only to us money-mungers. The benefit
which will redound to the Soldiers is of another nature, viz. that transparent
and invisible treasure called Honor, the proper advancement of all resolved
spirits: For alas, what should they do with Lands or estates, to hinder their
brave achievements and redoubted under-takings. It is enough they come home
with half their lims, thereby enabled to be Pentioners of the County Treasury,
under the limitation of maimed Soldiers, in genteele rags, and not a louse
that creepes upon those rags, but a gentleman by the Law of Arms; the total
of their whole Revenue consisting of honorable scars, and rusty Whinyards that
will not be pawned; arguments of more validity for them to swagger, and dam and
sink withal, then infinite wealth could be; and may but their idol Fortune
be so favorable as to afford them means to procure Ale and Tobacco, why they
will live as happily as the great Tuk^; though meat and clothes be things
utterly worn out of their memories. And so much for this Design.

Now for my period, my ultimum, my nil ultra, the very Garland of my good Will
to the Public; and that is the fears and jealousies which do now possess
the Kingdom; I will but only grunt you out a modicum, a touch, a relish, a
short twang of them, and then end with the same modesty, gravity and wisdom
that I began.

Concerning these Fears and Jealousies; they are of a most dangerous nature
and high consequence, the greatest that ever was in any Time or Nation; but
truly neither I nor any-man living can tell what they are, or from whence they
should arise: but without all doubt there is great cause, or else there would
not be such talking of them: And it appears by an example here present, for
all you that now snore so loud, could not have been so sleepy had not Fears
and Jealousies kept you waking: Besides, now I think out, there are some
apparent causes, as my self do fear lest Jehosophat should get my Daughter
Dorcas with child, for Jehosophat is a notable boy, and has said prayers at a
Conventickle, and the girl has a strain both of Father and mother in her. You
neighbor Gripe do fear least your wife should know you keep a whore at Putney,
and you brother Brush fear least you should be hanged for speaking high treason
a against the King; and truly we all fear one thing or other. And for our
Jealousies, all of us here present, that have hansome wives are jealous of
them, and not without good cause: and those that have not, are jealous of other
women, and some are jealous of their servants; so that you see there are both
Fears and Jealousies grounded upon considerable causes. Now truly how to
prevent the effects of these Fears and Jealousies, is not within the compass
of my Ingenuity: For it is not the Militia, the stopping of Ports, and holding
Garrison Towns, that can keep our Wives, Daughters, and Servants honest, if they
have a mind to cockolds, or try whether they be able to fructify: No, no
Italian Locks will not do it: nay, for ought I know, your wife neighbor Spider
may be just now at it* for I saw Green the Felt-maker go that way as I came
toth Hal: O tremble not neighbor, she has (no doubt) discretion to do nothing
but what is spiritual and secret, merely to take down the pride of the flesh,
for I Will assure you that Act is as great a help to the mortification of fleshly
desires, as the longest fast that ever was kept. Now there are other Fears and
Jealousies; but as I said, so I say again, I cannot imagine from whence they
should proceed, unless we should fear lest the Devil should too soon take a
swift Vengeance on us for our damnable Extortions, and Cousenage in the sale of
out Commodities: And yet why should we fear that we are already sure on. Well,
since there is no remedy; we will fear still, and be jealous still: And
(without all question) when the Danger comes upon us, we shall know the cause
thereof: In the mean time, I will sit down and fall asleep, and hold my peace.

FINIS.

