Special good News from IRELAND, Being a true RELATION Of a late and great
Victory obtained against the Rebels in the North of IRELAND:

By that pious, prudent, and courageous Commander, Sir Will: Stewart, Col.

The truth whereof being confirmed by three several Letters directed to Mr.
Abraham Pont, Soliciter for the said Sir William in London.

London Printed for Henry Overton, Jan. 27. 1643.

Special good News out of Ireland.
Worthy Sir,
I Arrived in Fairy Road the 11. of this month from Londonderry, after that
blessed, and (almost) miraculous Victory which it pleased God to give your
Colonel Sir William Stewart over the Rebels in Kinnowyer; which I thought good
to impart to you, hearing you were in London, which was thus; Sir William
(getting notice that the Rebels of Fanet and Tarman, were under the leading of
Tirlagh Mac Caffer, and some of the chief of the Met-Swynes, and O Galghonors,
settled somewhat securely near the head of Mulroy) commanded 7. of his
Companies to make a nights march toward them, the beginning of the last
month, and I being a Voluntere in his Regiment since Lambas last, marched
along with them, and came unexpectedly upon them, not being drawn up to a
body, but the darkness of the night befriended the Rogues so much, as we
killed not above thirty of them, the rest escaped to the mountains, and many
of them fled into the Islands in Curraghs and Boats, so that at that time we
only dispersed them with the loss of about 30 of their number, and brought
home to our quarters about 400. Cowes with much difficulty through hot
skirmishing with the enemies all along the way; But Noble Sir William not
being satisfied with that, knowing that the rogues being assaulted again,
would fly to the Islands, caused to provide seven Boats from Newton, with
twenty Musketeers in each boat to go about to Kinnowyer Islands, and directed
five Companies to march by land, and lie in Ambush at such places where he knew
the Rebels (being assaulted by the Musketeers in the boats) would land, and so
it fell out by Gods providence accordingly, for partly of them that were killed
in the Islands, and those that were killed by the Ambushment, there fell of the
Rebels that morning above 300. and some spoil got in the Islands, and all this
without the loss of any of ours, though some wounded; Therefore we marched to
Rosgull and Don, and brought from thence some body of Cowes, no enemy appearing
to any purpose, till in our return, there met us (as some of our prisoners
told us) to the number of 4000. at Kinnowyer woods, where we had a sharp
skirmish with them, at night failing, but through Gods goodness they took the
flight, after which we made a halt till the Moon rose, which was about
midnight, but we had not marched above a mile from the place, when as we were
assaulted afresh, and we continued in hot play with them till four of the
clock in the morning, at which time they fled confusedly from us, leaving
behind them of their slain number, above 300. but we lost our booty in the
dark night, about nine of the Clock they charged us again, and entertained
sport for one hour with us, and so thereafter they fled, but their body being
great, and we but a small number, we got command not to break our order in
chasing them through the boggy woods, but to advance in orderly march, till we
had passed the woods, at which time much about noone, they gave us a fresh
assault, of all the rest the most desperate, which we entertained with
undaunted courage, till about two of the clock, at which time our Troop
meeting with them in rideable ground, charged them furiously, broke and routed
them with an exceeding great slaughter, so that in all there was above 1000
killed, and not above four prisoners taken, by our seven Companies, which was
wonderful in our eyes, but not unto us, but unto the Lord of Hosts give the
glory; Our loss was but of five men, but above forty of our best men wounded,
whereof Captain Mauxwell is one, and not many of them dangerously. The reason
why our prisoners were so few, was because he had no stomach to give such
perfidious rogues any quarter, who keeps none to us. This victory amongst many
other great victories, which it has pleased God to grant Sir William Stewart
and his Regiment, without the help of any other, is much envyed by such who
are his close enemies, whom you know are the Papisticall and Prelaticall
faction, because he is one that abhors all corrupt courses in matters of
Gods worship, and who (I hope) if God spare his days will prove an active
Instrument for furthering the work of Reformation in that l^nd; And now you
may see how the Lord makes his promise good, who honors him. The report is
here that that man who is called the Bishop of Raphoe, is not only walking
securely daily in the Parliament House, but has obtained from the Parliament a
great sum of money which (if true) is very strange that such a grave and wise
Assembly, intending the work of Reformation, should contribute anything to the
maintaining of such as he is, who is notoriously known to be as venomous
against their procedings as any man; and who cannot truly pretend poverty,
having his Rents duly paid him out of his Lands in the Barony of Raphoe,
notwithstanding of this Rebellion; God knows, that Sir William Stewart (who
has not a penney of rent coming to him since the rebellion) (and who before
the Rebellion had near upon 2000 li. arising yearly from him) as is reported
deserves to be considered more then the rest, in regard he has engaged
himself in many thousand pounds for the maintaining his Regiment 23 months
more; If the Parliament had known the true worth of that Honorable man,
without all doubt they would resent his case much more then others there; Many
of their Companies both of foot and horse are become very thin, for want of
pay, clothes and victuals, which the Lord supply in his appointed time, Thus
hoping to see you in this Kingdom at your return, I commit you to Gods
blessing, and rest,

Irwine the 13. of Ian. 1643. Your loving friend to serve you Thom. Marshall.
The news of this Victory obtained by your Colonel, came to Glasgow, as I
hear, 15 days before I landed.



Mr. Pont,
ON the eighth of this month James Ewine of Letterkemy arrived in this Town,
who was within this 3. weeks in Fanet with 7. foot Companies of my Fathers
Regiment, and his horse Troop; The enemy being surprised on a sudden, and not
drawn together in a body, saved themselves by flying in their boats to the
Islands, so that at that time there was killed but about 28. of them, who would
have saved 400. Cowes from our hands, which our Companies brought to their
quarters, though much g^lled by the Rogues their shot, at the South end of
Kinnowyer woods, and though there was at least 1000. shot shot at our men, yet
only 3. were wounded, the one in the leg, the other in the belly, and the third
in the cheek: My father finding by experience, that there was no good to be
done without Boats, provided seven, and on the last of the last month, he
placed 20. Musketeers in each boat, and appointed the rest of the companies to
march by Land on the first of this month, and after the enemies were beaten
out of the Islands (where there were many of them killed by the shot out of the
Boats) they joined themselves with another great body of the enemy, and the
next night at the return of our Companies from Rosgull with some booty of
Cowes, the enemy kept them in continual Skirmish, with little intermission,
till the afternoon the next day, and this was in the woods of Kinnowyer; about
two a clock in the afternoon the enemies fled, upon whom the horse did brave
execution without the woods. This man reports, that there was many more
killed at that time by that part of my Fathers Regiment, then was at Glen met
quin, by the 3. Regiments and 4. Troops of horse: diverse do report that there
was 1200. of the Rebels killed, some above 1000. others not much fewer, yet I
believe verily there were many killed, so that it appears God will never
withdraw his powerful arm, though that of man is. Send my arms, and my other
things with the Ship that transporteth the soldiers Clothes, and me word when
they go, that I may be the Carryer of that good news to those poor souls
who have long expected them, and I will remain

Your loving friend and servant, Will. Stewart.
Glasgow the 16. of December. 1642.
Right worthy Brother,
BY my last, I show you (if it be come to your hands) how matters go here;
Packets from thence, for all you wrote, are opened by the way, yet of necessity
I send this other (else it must lie by me) from my Lady Stewart, whose husband
with his Regiment we hear has killed 1000. Rebels at Fanett, and that with
7. companyes. Trilaugh maccaffer, and the macswynes fought against him, this is
very lately done, and constantly reported for truth, your Colonel Sir William
Stewart Relieved also my Cosen german James Nisbit his goods, which 19. rogues
had taken, and had burnt his house. Sir William with a few in his company came
suddenly upon them, and killed them all save one, whom the dark night
favored, Vt tutus cladis nuntius superesset. This an eye witness reports. I
pray you (if it be possible) purchasse a mandamus for your Colonel and Sir
Robert Stewart, to put away the service book men, as Jabesh Whittaker,
Scyrilaw, etc. as very great hinderers of our Scots that are well affect^^
either to resyde there or to resort thither. Thus praying the Lord that the
Parliament forces may quit themselves like me^ and be strong in him who is
Almighty, and only able to save, and settle peace there, as here, that we may
all praise him joyntl^ with one accord, I bid you farewell, and am

Your assured loving Brother, Mr. John Lockhart.
Edenbrough the 20. of December. 1642.
FINIS.

