PERFVME AGAINST THE SULPHEROUS STINK OF THE Snuff of the Light for Smoke,
CALLED, Novello-Mastix.

With a Check to CERBERUS DIABOLUS, and a whip for his barking against the
Parliament and the Army.

And an Answer to the Anti-Quaeries, annexed to the Light against the Smoke of
the TEMPLE.

Written by JOHN SALT-MARSH, Minister of GODS Word.

WISDOM. 17. 21, and 18, 1. Over them only was spread an heavy night, an
Image of darkness, which should afterward receive them: but yet were they
unto themselves more grievious then the darnesse.

Nevertheless, thy Saints had a very great light.

LONDON, Printed by Elizabeth Purslow, April, 19. 1646.

Perfume against the Sulphurous stink of the Snuff of the Light for Smoke,
CALLED, NOVELLO-MASTIX.
A Finis being put to the Light of the Reverend Taper, (after all it is flames
continued in the light it burnt in) Cerberus barks out a Novello-Mastix, spits
fl^shings of Fire, like a Triple-headed Diabolus; his ambition being highest,
to worrie the harmless tender but honest) Conscience, and swells with malice
at nothing more, then that the Army (where such are) have done so much, and
made so fair a way to dis-throne Antichrist, And because December ends the
year, before his malice is ripe enough, he would have seven days run back to
Taurus.

Viewing his Familiars, he tells Pages, and because C. D. make 600
figuratively, he admits no passages beyond 66. which addition, is that complete
number 666. the second beast.) In which attempt, being vexed with
single-sheeted brats, whose jelly he would drink, but cannot crush, he takes
from Bacchus Sack and Claret, until he chatter himself into a Greek Anagram.

Having pussled himself about questions, and strife, the disturbance and
confusion of his muddie-Cranium in the first part, puts him out of knowledge of
himself in the second; so that if he get but on a Master of Arts Goune, he
think every Willow should swell into a great Oak, and all Rods be sulphur'd
into Thunderbolts, to scourge those that dare to jossle him, and if imagination
do but fancy harm acted, then he Tryumphs, and glories to bring in
bug-beares to fright good men; but his thoughts cheat him, being not able (with
all the Hellish Furies he can raise against them) to dash them out of
countenance to discharge their consciences.

He goes to the School of the Scepticks, where (expecting to find report, but
accommodated with nothing but Dregs and empty Bottles) he transformes his
shape into the Poets Chimaera, with his Triple-head abridged into one, his neck
transformed into an Horses, and his Body beset with Birds feathers, to which is
joined a Fishes tail; but though the Pope, Bishops, and Papal Clergy, would
put on a Protestant Visage, yet nothing but levitie can be hid under it, and a
swarm of Vipers breed in the tail thereof.

Consider the third off spring of the Serpent, and you shall find the section
full of poison, in which, (like Rome the Mother City) the son becomes a slave
to his own lusts; his head is filled with effeminate thoughts in the first,
That to enjoy his wishes he could be transformed to any thing, or wear a
Friars Weed, to get admittance into close favor; so, that he though naturally
incline to ruin honest men, yet lustful thoughts turn his practicke
divisions into loves Theorick; so, that though he would act more mischief
Providence prevents him, yet the Steeds neck is too stubborn to admit a bridle
in the second; because unwilling to be curbed from trampling harmless souls
under his brutish feet, subordination to the Parliament, that is accounted
nothing, conscientious ingenuitie is derided, and to disparage the Parliament,
and discourage their friends, He says, That those who will be disposed of,
only by the determination of Parliament, they will be independent, in respect
of all other Authority. And, in the third place, behold the levitie of his
feathered folly, and you may easily judge how well he deserves the Cap and
Bauble.

But, besides all this, the Chimaeras tail has four stings in it, and he
would cunningly fasten one in the Parliament, one in the Army, one in the
Independants, and one in the Passages of all; but being not able to effect his
will, he plays with children and fools: it is well known where he played away
that reputation, which the fixing of ^. D. cannot regaine. But this only by
way of private check.

View him in matters of breach of privileges of Parliament: First, he thinks
to carry it too high to be apprehended, though openly he tax both their minds
and manners: Secondly, he limits them to M. Buroughs, Irentron: Thirdly, he
brings in Pope Gregory for a Rule: Fourthly, he turns Spy, to observe what is
done, not only in Westminster Hall, and the Court of the Requests, but
presumes into the Painted-Chamber; yea, and peeps into the Parliament House
too, tells his own fancy for News, to traduce the people, and rayles against
what is Printed, because his own invention fancies what is contrary: Fifthly,
he presses confidence to the Cabalaes of his own conceit, barks where he
cannot bite: And then abusing the Assembly of Divins, he wishes, that those he
hates durst stand their judgment: But why the Equipage of the Papal
Holiness, and the Imperial Majesty are brought in for presidents, to have
tender Consciences reproachfully called Independants, confounded? there is the
mystery: And to put us in mind, that four Bishops were chosen to sit with the
Assembly at Westminster, is as strange as the former; though, it is confessed, he
does not say, that D. Usher, D. Prideaux, D. Westfield, and D. Bromrig, were
Jure Divino.

In the next place he appears amongst the Clerks, and there C. D. has no
admittance, but to be Clericus Diabolus, and being received into practice,
fool and knave, is his first employment; he would feign be a gown man, but is
most tormented that he cannot by insinuation get in to serve Cler. Parl* where
finding opposition he breaths Sulphur, and Spits Fire in their faces, and like
one frantic becomes Diabolos to abuse them.

Seeing himself so resented, and (by all honest men) discovered and so
avoided, he rayles and calls those that are employed journey-men, and asperse
those whose worth are far above himself. It may be wondered how he came to be
Master of Arts, except it was intended that C. should Commence, D. Dunce, yet
he is more knave (to speak truth) then fool against those (for sooth) who act
for the Parliament, and yet in the concoction of his Noddle he was quite lost
in Master Saltmarshes quaeries, and so vanished: where leaving him 2 while.

In the next place, this Clericus of the Lake is found (after an objection) to
be transmitted to Pluto, there he pleades propriety of seat, and procures an
accusation.

First, against the Orthographie for impression, calling the acts of honest men
Heriticall Parodoxes: but pleasant flowers are prepared against the stinking
Sulphur of his offensive breathings, the poison of whose spirit is prepared to
ruin others.

Secondly, though his own snuff burnt not till the tedious taper was quite
finished, yet the smoke offended more then the flashes lighted, and his
greatest envy was, that his own deputation was so far behind in so base a
Court, and beheld younger years (through more gravity of spirit) entrusted in
places of Reputation and Honor with good men.

Thirdly, he soars high, and would blemish those he cannot be endured (by
honest men) to be heard to speak against, yet some (he dined at Hell with last
Term) love such sedition, fittest company for him: but he fears a tell-tale,
and so concludes; but let this be a warning, lest all come out.

Lastly, this furious Catch-pole brings in a paper, wherein was written thus:
When other scandalous Books are brought in I doubt not but it (that is Master
Leys Book) will be presented among them: In the mean time, he may do well to
allow Master Merideth something toward his great loss, for Printing so
useless a Book, to lie upon his hands for waste Paper; and giving the lie to
himself, runs back seven days, and falls into the Bull of December the 10.
from whence he had stragled at the beginning; and (to speak truth) there is
many Bulls in his language; but when he falls into thoughts of conscience, he
breaks off his discourse, and (like the lesuits to the Popish Legend) he
refers all to Epistles of those whose testimony he would have to be thought
infallible, and then what he says, it must be Probatum est.

An answer to Novello-Mastix his Anti-quaeries, being the 8. section of the
Additionall papers to Master Leys Answer to Master Salt-march.
1. WHether that man be in his perfest senses, who questions another for
answering that which himself first started?

Answer, yes, Master C. D. of Arts, if the Answers be seditious, you may be
questioned when you abuse the Parliament, or any other Authority by your
scandals, your Answer will not be taken jure divino, except you can Answer men
out of their senses,

2. Whether an Independent Congregation be not as very a Bull in the Church, as
an Independent Army in the Commonwealth?

Answer, yes, the more silly they, that call either of them so to asperse them,
and if C. D. had not been both Calfe and Dunce, he would never have writ so
many Bulls, though he speak little other language: so far as men submit to
Order, they are not Independent.

3. Whether he be not the man that makes the faction, who extols the
Independent Army (by him so called) as doing so much good, etc. wherein others
have done as much or more?

Answer, the Catch-dolt might have said, who and wherein; tell us a president,
and we shall extol them as much: nor do any of those Worthies, who have bin
so active, think it any disparagement, when they hear it said, that this Army
has done extraordinary things; to say many Armies have done worthily, but this
excells them all, will not be to the disparagement of any, but like this silly
Master of Arts (who will never have the wit to be his Arts-Master) to traduce
their proceedings, and call it faction, to commend them for the good they have
done us, averring others to have done as much or more; surely this must proceed
from a Malignant humor, and needs launcing, lest it swell big, and grow to be
a Carbuncle in the Commonwealth.

4. Whether if the Army be reproachfully called Independants, he (that is the
Author of the Passages) be not the man that reproacheth them, being the first
that called them the Independent Army.

Answer, he is either very ignorant, or hypocritical, for that reproach was
cast upon them long before, and it is remembered, what the turn coat said not
long since himself, though now he would (like the Cameleon) seem to change
his complexion into other colors.

5. Whether this Author be such an Ignoramus, as not to know, that some Members
of the Parliament favor the Independants, and some Members of the Assembly be
Independants, though the way and model of the Independants ( it is true) was
never yet made known to the Parliament, nor to the Assembly, nor perhaps ever
will be.

Answer, one part of this Quaere compared with an other, and all with the
second of his own, will afford Bulls good store, without either heads or
tails, except the Monster become abroad to show us some new Hocus-pocus
tricks, to act which though he would be knavish, yet is too much a fool to
attain it high enough.

6. Whether it be not fit to question this Pamphleter?

Answer, truly it is to little purpose to question Novello-Mastix, because the
Dunce is distracted, it is better to reduce his senses first in Bedlam, and try
if that will bring him to his wits; if not, then I know no reason but that he
may be admitted a Brother of Gotham-Colledge, during his infirmity, and if he
prove incurable, then let him never be without the Cap and Bauble.

FINIS.

