A SERMON Preached in OXFORD Before the KINGS Majesty, April 19. 1643.

Wherein is handled the unlawfulness of Non-preaching Bishops, Non-residents,
plurality of Benefices, etc. with the utter destruction of IMAGES.

According to the votes of both the Houses of Parliament, Scripture, Ancient
Writers, and Reason it self.

By Richard Spinkes, Minister of the Word of God, and imprisoned there for the
said Sermon.

I have preached righteousness in the great Congregation: lo, I have not
refrained my lips, O Lord thou know. Psalm. 40.9. For though I preach the
Gospel, I have nothing to glory of: for necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe is
unto me, if I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. London, printed in the year,
1643.

A Sermon preached before the King in Oxford, against the Bishops.
Romans 1.14. I am a debtor to the Grecian and Barbarian, to the wise and unwise.


THe debt which Saint Paul did owe to these Barbarians and Grecians was to
preach the word of God, the Gospel of Christ unto them, for so it is found
added in some of the Syriacke copies translated by Tremellius, where follows
these words, at the later end of the verse, I am a debtor to every man to
preach unto him. And so Lyranus glosseth it, Debtor sum ad praedicandum
Evangelium ex officio Ap^stolatus, As I am an Apostle it is my debitum, my due
to preach the Gospel of Christ. The labor of the Apostle was not limited to
any private Church or Nation, but wheresoever a door of utterance, an occasion
of good did offer it self, they were to apprehend the opportunity. Their
commission is large, Math. 28.19. Go therefore and teach all Nations, etc.
This they were bound to do upon a great forfeiture, the invaluable loss of
their own souls, upon pain of Gods heavy displeasure, and everlasting
perdition, for so much does the word vae every where imply in the Scripture,
says Saint Jerome. Though I preach the Gospel, says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 9.16.
yet have I nothing to glory of, for a necessity is laid upon me, and woe be
unto me if I preach not the Gospel.

The parties which Saint Paul confesses himself to be indebted unto, or
rather Gods assignees (for he is the principal in the bond) are Grecians and
Barbarians, and all the Gentiles; for though some would have the Jews to be
included in the word wise, as they had indeed a form of knowledge and wisdom
in the Law, Romans 2.20. yet I take the Gentiles to have been more properly of
Saint Paul's Diocese, they are both named I confess in the commission, but the
Gentiles first: He is a chosen vessel unto me to bear my name before the
Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel, Acts 9.15. In this Epistle he
is called the Apostle of the Gentiles, because unto him is sud (by a private
compact among the Apostles) to have been committed the Gospel of
uncircumcision, Gal. 2.7. and again Ephesians. 3.8. Unto me who am l^sse then the
least of all the Saints is this grace given that I should preach among the
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ: this was the stock he was trusted
with, the debts which he owes them.

Now whereas all Ministers are successors to the Apostles, though not quoad
gradum and modum ministerii: (id est) not according to the degree and manner of
their calling, yet quoad essentiam doctrinae, (id est) according to the
substance of the errand: and seeing that the preferring of certain men to
several congregations is of divine institution, 1 Pet. 5.2. Feed the flock of
God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof. I may warrant this
observation.

That all Ministers or Pastors are indebted, are bound in conscience to preach
the word of God to the charge they have undertaken. A subject I confess of as
dangerous and untractable an argument as any whatsoever, from discussing of
which I might be deterred with those motives wherewith the Priest in Arist.
Rhetoric dehorted his son from being an Orator; for said he, If thou speak
that which is just men will hate thee: if that which is unjust the gods will
abhor thee.

This incompetition between God and man was enough to put a Heathen to a great
strait, all whose happiness, and the reward of all whose actions consisted in
the good report and opinion of them, but a Christian will soon resolve it,
Acts 4.19. Whether it be better to obey God or men, judge ye. Gal. 1.10. For
if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. It is said of our
Savior by the Spouse in the Canticles, that his lips drop all myrrh, Cant.
5.3.

Truth like this may be bitter, yet it is wholesome doctrine: what therefore
our Savior said to Martha in the Gospel, Luke 10.41. Martha thou art careful
about many things, but one thing is necessary, might well be objected to a
general action of men in these days, who as S. Panl said of James John, and
Cephas, seem to be pillars to bear up a great burden in the Church, and to
take a great deal of pains, but upon proof it will appear that it is
nothing but a cold sweat, or a peccant humor, rather then the symptom of any
true zeal. They have perhaps two Churches abroad, yet are so busy about
reforming one Chapel at home, that should the Lord say to them in a College
as be did once to Eliah in the cave, a King. 19.9. they would answer (I make no
question) in the words of the Prophet, We have been very realous for the Lord
of hosts.

But it is a true saying of Maximus, Tyrius the Philosopher, A good and
religious man is Gods friend, but a superstitious fellow is Gods flatterer, for
with his mouth he shows much love, and flitters himself in his own eyes;
until his iniquity be found out to be hateful Psalm. 6.1. The two Table, Gods
Commandments are the Touchstone or try all of our love: Ye are my friends
(faith Christ) if ye do whatsoever I command you, John 15.14. Now our blessed
Savior has urged this Commandment not less then thrice, Peter, love thou
me, feed my sheep; As thou love me Peter, feed my Lambs.

The second Nicene Conncell that met together for the establishing of Idolatry,
and admitting Images into Churches, being hard bestead for arguments, were not
ashamed to make use of that place in the Psalms. Psalm. 26.8. I have loved the
habitation of thy house, and the place where thy honor dwelloth: but the
enemies of the Lord shall be found to be ^ars. God himself says expressly,
that all such hate him, in the second Commandment, Though alt not make to thy
self any graven image, to bow down unto it, etc. for I am a jealous God, and
visit the finnes of the Fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation of those that hate me. The beauty of Gods house, as Cassidore well
observes in the exposition of that very Psalm, consists not in pulchrnudine
parictum, ant Ministrorum pret to sissimo apparatu, (id est) not in painting
and pargetting of the wall with Mosaic works, not in anticking the windows
with Legends, not in coping the Ministers in sumptuous and gorgeous apparel,
but in the humble and fervent devotion of prayer, the sincere and powerful
preaching of Gods word; the only image that ought to be in every Church, is the
Minister, who if he be painful and religious, is as ( lomens Alexandriuus,
Strom. lib. 5. calls him, A living image of God by whose exemplary carriage
the people should learn to frame and fashion their lives. For such a one
whiles others are mechanically striving to convert Tables of wood into Altars
of stone, does by the blessing of God upon his labors, and by the sacred
Chemistry of the holy Ghost, convert stones into gold; for a broken heart
(says Saint Chrysostom. Hom. 4. in Mat.) is Aureum altar, a golden Altar. How
God is present at others Altars, let them dispute that worship them, but sure I
am that the Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken, and will save such as
are of a contrite spirit. I would they were cut off that trouble you, says
Saint Paul. Gal. 5.12. The truth is there might well be spared a great number
among us, who like fruitless trees do but cumber the ground, and fraudulently
attract the nourishment which would sufficiently releeve and maintain many
others: but it were rather to be wished that those trifles about which they
beat their fellow servants, were utterly abolished. Upon the Reformation of
Religion in Helvetia, Anno 1528. They of Basil pulling down all their Images
out of their Churches brought them into their public market place, there to
be divided for fuel among the poor people, but when they fell a fighting and
brawling about the sharing of them, it was at last generally agreed by the
Counsel of the City, to make one fair fire of them publicly, and to burn
them all together, which day being Ash Wednesday is yet in the memory of that
act celebrated with many pastimes and solemnities.

So were it a happy thing for this Church and Commonwealth if all those
Relics of superstition were burnt together, rather then such combustions,
such heart-burnings, should be fomented and maintained among us, and that all
would jointly set themselves to the preaching of the word, which is that unum
necessarium, many matters of less importance called for with a great deal of
more rigor, are but things of venial indifferency, but this is of an absolute
and undisputable necessity every Priest, every Minister is indebted, is bound
in conscience to discharge this duty. I am to prove it.

1. Reason. First they are bound by the calling which they have undertaken, Let
every man wherein he was called therein abide with God, 1 Cor. 7.24. Every man
ought to have some calling or other, whereby he may be serviceable to God, or
useful to his neighbor. God and man, says Hesido: who have nothing to do,
who idle drone away all their days.

It is well observed by Tertullian, that in all the day works of the Creation,
the Creator is only styled God, God said, Let there be light, and God said,
Let the earth bring forth grass: but he never used the name of Lord till man
was framed, and then it is said, Genesis 2.8. The Lord God planted a garden
Eastward in Eden: and so ten times in that Chapter: but in the very beginning
of the next Chapter, the Devil being to seduce the woman, and through his
subtilty to work the (...) mankind, leave, that out, Genesis 31. Yea has God
said Ye shall not eat, etc. But God in the despite of him and all his
instruments, is the only Lord of all mankind, his Laws do alone bind the
conscience, If he say to one Go, he must go, if to another, Come, he must
come; there must be no pretending of Statutes and Dispensations from Popes and
Princes: It is said to all Christians; 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a
price, be ye not the servants of men.

But above all men Ministers are by special relation and dependancy the
servants of God: so they are termed by the holy Ghost, 3 Tim 2.24. The servants
of the Lord, (that is, the Ministers) must not strive. And in the Parable of
the Talents, Math. 25.14. it is said that the Lord called unto him his own
servants: and therefore if they look for any wages, they must do his work,
they need not be ashamed of it, it is the same which their Lord and Master was
sent to do and was employed about; of whom the Prophet Isaiah foretold, Isa
61.1. and our Savior it to himself, Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord i^ upon
me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel. As my Father sent me,
even so send I you, (says Christ otherwhere) What was his meaning Saint Paul
plainly tells us, 1 Cor. 1.37, God sent me not to baptize but to preach;
that was the maine and of their vocation and this was the employment and
practice of all th^se Primitive Bishops and Martyrs, who sealed the doctrine
they painfully taught, with their own blood. Prodig^i instar erat, as says
^spencaeus, for ^^ny hundred years after (...) he was counted a very prod^gy
of Christianity who took upon him the name of a Bishop and was not a constant
and an assiduous Preacher. And to this day in the form of consecration of
Bishops over Sea is the clause used (I know not how well observed) Vade, and
praedica Evangelium populo tibi commisso: Go and preach the Gospel to the
people committed to thy charge. And in our present form of Ordination of all
Ministers, the Bishop asks the party to be ordained, Will ye faithfully
instruct and teach the people committed to thy charge? he answers, I will, God
being my help: which I take to be an oath, and as much as, God shall help me.
And therefore I cannot perceive how they who have forgotten that promise, can
satisfy their conscience in case of perjury, unless God himself has
disabled them by some corporal infirmity. Neither have some upon the same
reason thought it lawful for those who have taken upon this profession, to
intermeddle with secular ^^^crity or to execute any (...) teth the opinion of
some ancient Divine to this purpose, To confer a place of civil government,
or outward policy upon a Priest, were to reconcile things in their own nature
incompetible to join those together whom God himself has put asunder: when
some in the Council of Trent provided that as the best means to provide for
the residency of Prelates to prohibit them the Courts of Princes, and to forbid
them to undertake any civil Office, or to be Judges, Chancellors, Counselors,
Secretaries of State, or the like, which those mutinous humorists (as they call
them) urged to be expressy forbid out of the word of God, 2 Timothy 2.4. A good
soldier of Jesus Christ ought not to entangle himself with the affairs of
this life. The Bishop of the five Churches, for so was his title, being their
Ambassador for the Emperor opposed that, saying. That if Prelates were forbid
to wait upon Princes (as they were admitted at that present into the Courts of
the greatest Princes and Prelates of Christendom, and there managed the great
affairs of State) it would bring the Church into contempt: and if
Ecclesiastical persons, and lay officers were made incompatible, none of the
Nobility would ever after so much releeve their blond and descent, as to accept
of orders. This was a reason of State, rather then of religion and conscience.
Had Saint Paul been of their counsel, but alas the poor man had he appeared
in the thread bare cloak which he left at Troas, in the midst of such an
Antichristian conventicle of mitred and scarseted Prelates, he would have been
of as ominous a presence as the Owl at the opening at Constance, he would have
been of the same mind that he was, Romans 12.17. Let us that are of the
ministry wait on our ministry, and he that teaches on teaching; he would
never have given his counsel that those who professed themselves of this
calling, should leave the word of God to serve Tables. I do not know how sit
such undertakers are for an earthly kingdom, but that flourishing Aristocracy
of the Venetians, out of just dislike have excluded the Clergy out of their
consultations, for when they go about to advise of matters of moment and
secrecy, the Praeco stands up and cries, Let all Priests depart the room: how
ever I am sure that of the Gospel is true, Luke 9.62. No man having put his
hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of heaven. Saint
Paul tells us of some that work not at all, and yet are busy bodies, 2
These. 3.11. There is no greater idleness then to do nothing to the purpose.
Minister dix^^, hoc age; Preaching is the high work, the prop and maine work
of that high calling, which that worthy and painful Bishop Saint Cyprian, was
so well affected too, as that he was wont to wish that he might be surprised by
his persecutors in the very act. Tanta fuit illa sermonis sacra cupido, as
Pontius in his life relates of him, ut optaret, sic sibi passionis vota
contingere, ut dum de Deo loqueretur in ipso sermonis opere necaretur: That
when he was in the Pulpit his soul should make him like the chariot of
Aminadab, that if the malice of his enemies would give him that honorable
interring, the Pulpit might be made his coffin, and the Church his Monument,
Let others study to gain the name of Politicians, such as he was are the most
faithful and wisest servants that God has. Math. 24.25.26. Who then is a
faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has made ruler over his household,
to give them meat in due season, blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he
comes shall find so doing.

2. Reason. They are in debted and bound in conscience to this duty, by reason
of the gifts and graces which God has bestowed upon them for the discharge of
this service, God never intended any for this calling, but he first furnished
them with gifts and abilities for the conscionable execution thereof. So the
Apostles and Disciples were forbidden to depart from Jerusalem till the promise
of the Father, the gift of the holy Ghost was poured upon them, Acts 1.4. They
indeed were miraculously and at an instant instructed by the Spirit of God, and
it is still the same Father of lights that enlightens every one that comes
into the world, from whom comes every good and perfect gift, who gives a
blessing to our studious endeavors.

For the Church can neither confer gifts necessary to the ministry, nor
prescribe God the parties upon whom he should bestow them, but are onesy to
rake notice of, and choose those whom upon trial and experience of their gifts
they perceive the Lord has fitted, according to the rule of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.10. Let them first be examined, and then admit them.

In justice none ought to be admitted to the Ministry, unless they bring Gods
Conge de estire with them, unless they be enriced by him in all utterance and
in all knowledge, 1 Cor. 1.15. Now these gifts are not in propriety our own
they are called his substance, Math. 25.14. we are but usufructuaries to
improve our talents to the use and interest of our Lord and Master.

All those therefore upon whom God has conferred such gifts, do become
indebted to the people of God, especially to their pastoral charge over which
the holy Ghost has made them overseers: for God gives us them not to please
our selves in the conceit of them, but to employ them to the benefit and
edification of his Church, that Church with which we are betrusted, whether
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, all are yours, says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 3.22. I am
(said the same Apostle, Col. 1.25.) made a Minister according to the gift of
God which is given to me for you to fulfill the word of God. As every man has
received the gift (says Says Peter, 1 Pet. 4.10.) even so minister the same
one to another, as good stewards of the manifold graces of God.

And to show you plainly that it is a due debt, the Lord has given the people
a Letter of Attorney to call for the same, and demand it, Col. 4.17. whence he
bids the people say to Archippus, Take heed to thy ministry which thou have
received of the Lord, that thou fulfill it: that is, that thou preach in season
and out of season, importune and opportune. For what the Scripture says of
that union and mystery of marriage, that the body of the husband is not his
own, but his wives, is true of the spiritual tie and conjunction between a
Minister and his charge, his body, his health, his strength, are not his own,
but the Churches: as Athanasius writ to Dracontius the Monk, who being chose
to a Bishopric, for some inconvemences of air or sicuation perhaps refused
it, Non sibi amplius, sed Ecclesiae utilitati serviendums esse, you must no
longer said that holy and religious Patriarch, serve your self, seek your
own ease and advancement, but the profit and welfare of Gods Church. I cannot
perceive but the City of Corinth was by reason of the proximity of two Seas
situate in as dangerous and obnoxious an air, as any whatsoever: yet this holy
Apostle, though he was called from them, and distracted with the cares of other
Churches, yet he was never Nonresident in heart, 2 Cor. 12.15. I will very
gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more I love you the less I am
beloved.

There is a great deal of prodigality in the Greek, it is as our Anselme
expounds it, Vit on meam, fotritus meos, fanguinem meum effundam, and exhauriam
pro vobis: I would very gladly shed my blood, lay down my life, spend my
spirits to do you good I count nothing too dear or those whom Christ h th
purchased with his own blood, as he other where expresses himself to the
Thessalonian, 1 These. 2.8. being affectionately desirous, we were willing to
have inaparted unto you not the Gospel of God only, but also our own selves,
because ye were dear unto us. If Saint Paul and his painful assistants did
through the love of God shed abroad in their hearts, so highly prize those to
whom they were strangers by country and alliance, as to give their souls for
them.

They have but small love to Christ, what ever they talk of it, who will not
adventure their bodies, nor endanger their healths for the eternal life of
those to whom they have a near relation.

It was a wicked and ungracious speech of those in the Psalms, Our lips are
our own, who is Lord over us? Ministers must know the contrary, they have a
Lord to whom they must one day be accomptable and their tongues are not their
own, for, The Prtests lips should preserve knowledge, and the people should
seek the law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts, Math.
2.7. He that hid his talent in the ground, had as good have stolen it: The Lord
does not only call him idle, but also wicked servant: Idleness is the tutor
of all vice and wickedness. Sozomen. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 18. reports of
Amonius the Monk, that to avoid a Bishopric (for such dignities bring them
places of burden and charge were not so highly prized, so eagerly pursued and
sought for, as of latter times, but were glad to go a begging for able and
sufficient men) cut off his ear, (for such was the superstition of that
minority of the Church, that a corporal blemish and deformity made a man
incapable of that promotion.) Not long after Evagrius a man of known parts and
sufficiency, but emulating the glory of that action, was chosen and preferred
by Theodosius Bishop of Alexandria to the like dignity, did likewise withdraw
himself into the wilderness, till the votes of the people were devolved upon
some other.

It fortuned after that he met with Amouius, and told him that himself had
made a fair eseape, whereas he by cutting off his ear had been injurious to
his own body, and had by violent hands incurred the guilt of selfe-maiming. To
this Amouius modestly replied, At tu non put as te poenas datur^m quod lingua
propter nimium tui ipsius amerem excisa gratia, qua a Deo tibi donata est,
mimme visus? Do thou think to escape the judgment of God, who through too
much self love have voluntarily cut out thy tongue in not using that grace
which God has given thee, to the edification of his Church. No doubtless, for
this very end does God furnish us with knowledge and utterance that we should
impart the truth unto others, Isaiah 50.4. The Lord God has given me the
tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word inseason to him
that is weary. Achan the these was stoned for stealing from Jericho a wedge of
gold. It is in the Original (...) which properly signifies as it is in the
margent, a tongue of gold: their sacrilege (believe it) is not less
punishable, who rob the people of God of the instruction that is due unto them,
the wants of which tend to their utter destruction, and impoverishing of their
souls.

Faith is much more precions then gold which perishes, says Saint Peter, 1
Pet. 1.7. But how should they believe without a Preacher? says Saint Paul,
Romans 10.14. There is gold, and a company of Rubies (says Solomon, Prove.
20.15.) but the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel, and he that wrongs the
owner of them, it is as much as his soul is worth. And therefore I am
persuaded that those who first seized upon the temporals of the Church, were
not guilty of so much sacrilege as in enacting that Statute whereby Ministers
are authorized to discontinue from their livings till forty years of age, had
it been thirty years there might have been some seeming exense and warrant
from the example of Christ, who did not take upon him the Ministry until he
was, as Saint Luke says. Luke 3.23. about thirty years of age: and so Gregory
Nazianz^n would have none to undertake this calling until they be arived to a
perfect age and statute, alluding I suppose to the age of our Savior, whom
Saint Paul calls a perfect man Ephesians. 4.13. and his age, the measure of
stature; and much about the same age was Saint Paul called or God to the
Ministry, for he lived 68 years, of which he spent 35. in preaching the
Gospel, as Baronius reports out of Chrysostom: but 40. years is the rerme of
impenitency which seems in Scripture to put the Lord himself, who is long
suffering and gracious, out of patience with wicked and ungodly men, Psalm.
95.10. Forty years long have I been grieved with this generation, etc.
wherefore I swear in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest. Some
there are who though they be opimerate that they would scorn to come into
competition for learning with many of their industrious neighbors in the
Country, pretend they do discontinue from their charges, and live in some
School of the Prophets, thereby to better their understandings, and to gain a
great measure of knowledge, by hearing of Acts and controversies scholastically
handled: but what Eliab, David's elde^ brother said to him, 1 Samuel 17.28. With
whom have thou left those few sheeps in the wilderness? I know the pride and
haughtiness of thy heart, thou art come forth to see the battle: may (I
fear) be said too truly of a number of such who care not with whom they leave
the souls committed to their charge and custody, that they study rather their
own promotion then the good of the Church, another Benefice rather then to
benefit their understanding.

He that is to be ordained Minister ought to be for the present 1 Timothy 3.2. apt
to teach, fit to teach: that is (as Catharmus a learned Bishop does paraphrase
on the words) he must be one qui sciat docere and non indigeat descere, sed qui
actu doceat plebeculam suam, one who further is able to instruct the flock
committed to him, and need not still himself be taught, let such consider what
our Savior says to his servants to whom he gave the Talents in the gospel, he
does not say (as Stella observes upon Luke) Discite dum venio, sed negotiamim
dum venio, Traffic and employ till I come. For what is Divinity which we
pretend to study? Is it not a science only of disputing acutely and subtly
of every point of controversy, as a reverend Professor of ours, Bako: in his
first Lecture upon Jonas confesses:} but it consuts rather In bona
conscientia, quam in bona scientia; in a good then in abundance of knowledge
and science. And the best way to increase their knowledge, is to be faithful
in a little, to employ that little that they have to the benefit of others, in
the conscionable discharge of their calling, according to the golden rule of
our Savior, John. 7.17. If any man will do his will be shall know his
doctrine, etc. Diligence of Apostles preaching is commended by the Spirit of
God, though at first he knew not so much as his fellows, yet by the preaching
of his gifts he much improved them, Acts 18.25.26. This man being fervent in
spirit, spoke and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the
baptism of John: but in the next verse he met with some hearers, who raught
him the word of God more perfectly: for it is not with this as with other debts
(says Christ) for abroad the debtors shun the creditors, and are loath to come
within his reach. But I follow you and entreat you to receive that which I owe
you, instruction; and that not without reason, for they if they pay their debts
have the less, seem to be the poorer for it, but when I pay you and discharge
this debt of my calling I am the richer for it, for what is my hope, my joy my
crown of rejoicing, These. 21.19. Are not even ye in the presence of the Lord
Jesus Christ at his coming?

Lastly, let such remember how that servant that hid his Talent in the earth,
was doomed and sentenced in the Gospel, Take and cast that unprofitable servant
into utter darkness. He does not say that debauched, wicked, filthy,
malicious, proud, drunken and profane villain, but it was enough to damn him
that he did no good, cast out that unprofitable servant.

3. Reason. Thirdly, Ministers are bound in conscience to preach to their
charges, by reason of the danger which by their silence and neglect will
assuredly redound to the souls committed to them.

Am I my brothers keeper? was the question of the first murderer: Ministers
must make no question of it; the holy Ghost has so plainly and peremptorily
affirmed it, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you; the Greek may
well be interpreted Priests, and submit your selves, for they watch for your
souls as those that must give an account for them. I dispute not here about
the infallibility of Gods predestination, the foundation of God stands sure,
and he knows who are his: but if thou do not build upon that foundation, if
thou do not by all means endeavor to reclaim the most desperate and
incorrigible sinner, his blood shall be laid to thy charge: Non pavasts,
occidisti, that Minister that is not a pastor is a murderer, says Saint
Ambrose: for when the vision fails, the people must needs perish, Prove. 19.18.
And so the Lord tells us of a sort of Prophets, Ezekiel. 13.19. that for a
handful of Barley and a piece of bread (that is) for base and sinister
respects did slay the souls of those that should not dye, by detaining the
truth of God from them. The Lawyers say well, qas causam damni dat ipsum damnum
dedisse videtur. It is as true of damnation, God will easily acquit his Justice
against the most slanderous and blasphemous imputations, when thousands of the
damned shall bitterly curse the idleness of their Ministers, which was the
cause of their ignorance. Son of man, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 3.20. I have made
thee a watchman, if thou dest not warn the wicked to return from his wicked
way, he shall die, but his blood will I require at thy hand. He whom the King
should employ to carry a pardon to a company of malefactors, that every moment
are in danger of execution, should be drink himself drunk by the way, or be
detained by every trivial occasion, were a great deal more cruel then the
hangman. So the Ministers who are, as the Prophet calls them, Mal. 2. the
messengers of the Lord of hosts, and has a pardon in his bosom, the Gospel
of peace, by preaching and publishing of which he might both save himself and
those that hear him. If he begins to eat and drink and to be drunken, Luc.
12.41. if he do not go about the errand that God has sent him (who would
have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth) but be
detained by the way by every shift and pretense, is for all the Laws and
Statutes that can be pretended a most impardonable murderer. Saint Paul who
here confesses himself a debtor, had not he discharged his duty, and got a
quietus est on record to his conscience, other where by the same Logic of the
holy Ghost had concluded himself a murderer: Acts 20.26. I take you to record
this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men, for I have not shunned to
declare unto you the whole counsel of God: but how? by Epistle perhaps, or by
sending some substitute to them, as Timothy or Trophimus, no says he, but
remember how that from house to house, night and day I entreated every man with
tears that he would be saved.

The consideration of this duty and dangerous neglect of the same, put the holy
and industrious Bishop Saint Chrysostom into the same ecstasy with the
Disciples in the Gospel, Lord who then can be saved? I wonder (says he) if it
be possible that ever any Minister or Bishop should be saved. And Saint
Augustine further, Si pro se quisque, etc. Good God (says he) if it should be
so dangerous a trial for every man to give an account for his own soul, and
that the righteous shall scarcely be saved, quid fiet de Sacerdotibus? what
shall become of me and the Priests? that stand chargeable and accountable for
all the souls committed to our oversight. Surely they be not thoroughly
persuaded of the danger who sleep upon both ears (as they say) and purpose to
give up their accounts by a Proxy. But truly me thinks should I hold my
peace, that loud Oratory of blood should be enough to awaken the wretchlesse
security of these times, unto a serious consideration. Scarlet it self which
is usually made the cloak of Nonresidency. should be but a melancholy sight
and sad representation to any that has but the affection of a father; it
looks so like Joseph's coat as if it were dipped in the blood of those whom some
evil beast had devoured.

Cedrinus reports of Constantine the Emperor, that having a jealous eye over
the acts of his brother Theodosius, he forced him into Ecclesiastical Orders,
and got him made a Deacon, and from his hand was wont to receive the Cup in the
Eucharist. But at last fearing that his worth and deserts might make some
faction and party in the Empire, he caused him presently to be put to death,
whereupon he was ever haunted and dogged with the Faries of a clamorous and
accusing conscience and so broken and disquieted in his sleep, that oftentimes
he seemed to see his brother coming to him in the habit of a Deacon,
presenting him a cup full of blood, and saying these words. Bibe frater, Drink
brother.

And tell me thou that stand here idle in the marketplace, pretending thou
art trading for learning and knowledge, thorough thy knowledge shall thy poor
brother perish for whom Christ died? and shall not that imagination of David
wormwood all thy cups, when thou art drinking the Annuities of thy Livings? is
not this the sweat, is not this the blood of those men? Bibe frater, drink
brother, but know for all these things God will call thee to judgment. In the
hand of the Lord there is a cup too the dregs thereof shall all the wicked in
the earth drink. That place of the Gospel would be better considered of a
many, Mark 6.4. When our Savior came out and saw much people, he was moved
with compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a
shepherd and he began to teach them many things. He had compassion on them:
the word in the Original is very emphaticall, and is used by Saint Matthew
upon the same occasion. Mat. 8.36. He had compassion on them. Commiseratione ab
intimis visceribus profectum, so Beza renders it, his bowels yerned within him,
it made his heart bleed to see so sad and rufull a spectacle. He that has
promised to be with us to the end, doubtless sees us, and therefore will
undoubtedly one day make their hearts ache, whose idleness and ambition has
been the cause of so great want as there is in many places, where the
maintenance is large enough. That great Shepherd of the flocks (as Saint
Peter calls him) will have a day of visitation too, in which howsoever now
Conformists speed, it will be a fearful one for Non residents, else that of
the Prophet is not true, Ier. 23.2. Thus says the Lord to the Pastors of
Israel, because you have not visited my flock, therefore will I visit upon you
the evil of your doings.

4. Reason. They are bound in conscience by reason of the Stipend and means
which they receive for their Cure, as they improperly call them. Be not angry
and I will speak but this once. If Saint Paul has confessed himself a debtor
to all Grecians and Barbarians, though no Church communicated with him as
concerning giving, but the Philippians only, Philip. 4.15. Surely then those
Ministers are much more indebted to their several Congregations from whom they
receive yearly such large Pensions and Annuities. It was the old rule of the
Church, Beneficium datur propter officium, he that will not do the Lords work,
cannot with a safe conscience eat punem Dominicam, demand his penny at night;
for he that would not work should not eat. Every idle man is a thief, says
Phocilides. And so our Savior the truth it self is bold to call all those
that are not good and painful Shepherds, John 10.1. that is, as Musculus
interprets it, goodness, do not communicate their grace and knowledge to
others, thieves and robbers: And therefore at the great Assizes and day of
Judgment, when all others are condemned and cast out of heaven, let not
sacrilegious Ministers look to have the benefit of their Clergy: will he
respect your persons, says the Lord of hosts, Mal. 1.9. all their warrant that
Ministers have for that their maintenance by the Moral Law of God (the equity
of which is perpetual) is deducted out of that Commandment in the second
Table, Honor thy father and thy mother, by our Saviors own gloss does not
only consist in a titular or ceremonious reverence, but in real expressions
of maintenance. So that Paul, 1 Timothy 5.4. commands children to requite their
parents: the word in the Syriacke properly signifies Use, Foenus rependant
progenitoribus suis, Let them pay use to their parents; use (I suppose) for the
charge they had been at in their education and breeding: for Solon the Heathen
(Plutar. in Solon) observing how earnestly some men brought up their children,
to the great danger and endamaging of the Commonwealth, enacted this Law, That
no son should be forced by Law to maintain that father in his age, who had
not taught him or brought him up in some Science or Trade, whereby he might get
his own living. By what law and conscience then may many Ministers demand and
exact such large allowance of their Parishioners to whom they show themselves
Fathers in nothing, unless it be by disinheriting them. In Christ Jesus I
have begotten you through the Gospel 1 Cor. 4.15. Ministers can be fathers in
no other respects to them to whom they are set over, but in teaching and
instructing them in the word of God.

The Table of the Shewbread was set in the midst of the Temple, to signify
(says Aquinas) quod Sacerdores in Templo servientes; (...) Templo victum
habere de^^^^, that is, That these Priests that wait unon the altar should have
benefit by it, and none else. That is a considerable place, Numb. 18.28. God
there commands the Israelites whiles they were yet upon their journey to the
promised Land, that when they came there they should give the Lord
Heave-offerings to Aaron the Priest, now Aaron the Priest died in the
wilderness, and was buried, as it is in the next Chapter, which has caused
many Cabalisticall conjecture among the Jewish Doctors but their best
Expositors of Scripture, the followers and adherents of Rab: Ismael do thus
interpret it, That the Lords portion was only to be given to him amongst the
Priests who were skillful and diligent in the teaching and preaching of Gods
Law as was Aaron, the reversion of his maintenance being rather intayled upon
his worth and deserts, then to be challenged by the hereditary descent of any
Loyterer, which opinion seems to be countenanced with the authority of that
place, 2 Chronicles. 31.4. When Hezekiah commands the people to give the portion to
the Priests and Levite, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord,
not to encourage their idleness: and that Apophthegme of Rabbi Raccha in the
Talmud is very famous among the Jews, that he who gives ought to an ignorant,
idle, profane and ungodly Priest, does a worse deed then if he should cast it
to a Dog, or to a Lion for these creatures may be bettered by such alms; they
are of Gods family, and he provides for them, Psalm. 104.21. But if a Priest who
is unworthy, eat of the offerings, it is his poison and thou (said he) art
accessory to his death, by giving it to him. All which he would prove by that
place of Levit. 22.9, 10. The Priests shall keep my ordinances, lest they
bear sin for it, and die if they profane it, if the Lord do sanctify it,
Deuteronomy. 23.8.

I am persuaded verily that that God who would not have the price of a dog to
be brought into his Sanctuary, did never intend, and would never give consent
that the Revenues of the Sanctuary, the childrens bread should be given unto
dogs. So not I, but he that will justify it, calls idle and silent Ministers,
Isay 58.10. His watchmen are blind, they are all dumb dogs, they are all
ignorant, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down and loving to slumber: they
are all Shepherds which cannot understand: they all look to his own way,
every man to his gain from the quarter: that is, they will be sure to demand
their annuities, their quarterages; and how do they spend it? merrily in the
next verse, Come, say they, and we will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves
with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.
And here is the true property of dogs indeed, to return to their vomit, drink
and to it again.

Pliny that great Secretary of Nature, acquaints us with a great reason of
State used in that title but exemplary Commonwealth of Bees, those that are
Drones, and are by the loss of their stings become unprofitable and
unserviceable to the State are not only denied maintenance, but cast out into
disgrace, or severely punished; Cessantium inertiam notant, castigant mox, and
puntunt morte. They take notice of, and censure sometimes with death the
idleness of unusefull Drones among them. Now what is all the means of the
Church, but like the Honey which Sampson found in the carcass of the dead Lion
having been bequeathed by Kings and Potentates at their deaths, or by some
others (who perhaps have got them by rapine or extortion from others) dedicated
to pious uses, the benefit of others, and others souls. And what is an idle
Priest who never preaches a man (as the Psalm says) in whose mouth there are
no reproves; a Drone without a sting (as Hesiod well compares idle persons) to
stinglesse Robbers, who did idely devour the labors of the more industrious
Bees: this ignavum pecus, these idle Drones ought not to be tolerated in the
Church, but should be cast out and excommunicated. There is an old Canon of the
Apostles to that purpose, I fear it is razed out of our latter Editions, but
Franciscus Torrensis, a credible Author, says, that he found it in
vetustissimo libro in an old Manuscript, If any that are Pastors do not abide
with their own flocks, there to instruct them, let them be cut off from the
communion of Saints; if any do so little love the Lord Jesus, as not to feed
his sheep, let him be Anathema Maranatha.

It is strange to hear how declamatory many men are in their discourses for
the maintenance of the Clergy, and that tithes are de jure divino, is the first
Text prosecuted with that passion and vehemence of Rhetoric, as if Arius were
alive again, or the Divinity of Christ once more called into question: But
that Residency and Preaching at their ^ivings is of the like necessity, is
contradicted by many, and questioned by most: In the one are many provisoes,
exemptions, dispensations, and excuses allowed, but none admitted: for the
non-payment of the other a necessity is laid upon the poor people, and woe be
unto them if they pay not their tithes. Mistake me not, I do not go about to
slacken their forwardness, or to manacle their withered hand, too many are
over forward to rob the Church, and there would be more if they could but make
benefit or advantage of any Statute, if, they had any Law to plead for it,
their consciences would be persuaded to detain and sequester their tithes.

But I say to Ministers, as the Prophet to negligent Priests of his time, Mal.
1.9. Now therefore I pray you beseech God that he would be gracious unto us,
this has been by your means. It is the Ministers idleness ignorance, and
covetousness, that has so withered the han^s of the Laity: men are of the
same mould they were of in old time, and perhaps not so comparatively wicked,
neither as those who crucify the Lord of life; yet they at the Apostles
preaching parted with their demeanes, sold their possessions, rather then their
poor brethren, much less then the Apostles should want. Who more freehearted
then our Forefathers were? looking upon the decays and ruins of Churches,
Abbeyes, and Monasteries. I cannot choose but fish out that of the Philosopher,
Vestigia hominum video, or rather the hand of God, for it was the laziness and
luxury of the Church that mortmaimed their liberties.

In many deeds of Feoffement in Fee there was commonly a clause added (says
Bracton, lib 1 fol. 14.) Quod licitum sit donatorio rem datam dare vel vendere
cui voluerit, exceptis viris religiosis, and Judaeis. Land was given and
bequeathed with this condition that the party might give or sell it to whom he
would, unless it were to Jews and Cle gimen. A strange combination in that
Climactericall alteration of the Church, when Kings and Princes, the nursing
Fathers of it did not only weane it, but saw it necessary to let it blood, for
the dropsied superfluity of humors which domineered in the body of it. It is
apparent that the idleness and Non-residency of the Priests was that which
improptiated all our livings. For in Queen Mary's days Cardinal Poole
conventing a Synod of the Clergy in London for the reformation of the Church
(as he called it) beginns the third Decree with these words, Seeing that
judgment ought to begin with the house of God, and reformation among the
Clergy, but among themselves is espied a notorious and scandalous abuse, that
those who have the greatest Livings do not reside upon them, but put off the
cure and charge to a sort of mercenary Hirelings, quae res omnium faeces
malorum in Ecclest a causam at rulit, which thing has been the only cause of
these calamities, and of the Church of late: therefore be it enacted, etc. And
to look a little abroad, especially on that kingdom, the heroical
achievements of which the eyes of all men now ad yes are fixed upon unto
admiration, and after ages will read with unbe^^efe.

Gustavus King of Sweden, Grandfather to that great avenger of blood in our
days, having by the exposing of his person to many dangers, freed his Country
from the Danish yoke and tyrannous usurpation, did likewise to provide for the
future quiet of that Commonwealth, and utterly to defeat the more dangerous
factions of intestine Trayrors, summon a Parliament at V^salia, Anno Dom. 1327.
March 18. where among other things he did demand, that the Revenues, Lands, and
immoderate riches of Bishops and other Clergymen, which was rather the
maintenance of fuel, pride, luxury, and sedition in his predecessors times,
might be reduced to a competent allowance, and the rest transferred into the
Kings Exchequer, for the use and defrayment of the public.

This part of the Reformation the Bishops and Prelates did most earnestly
labor against, affirming that the annuities, privileges and endowments of the
Church granted by the free donation of Kings and Emperors and confirmed by
their Seals and Charrers, could not, neither ought to be revoked and
disclaimed, without incurring the great curse and irrevocable sentence of
Excommunication and consequently of eternal damnation. Here was a judgment
preached, but too late, for to this the Advocates of the King replied, that
true it was indeed, that the Ministers of the Gospel, those that labor in the
Word and Doctrine were worthy of double honor, a due respect, and sufficient
maintenance, but as for those Locusts and Catepillers, those frages consumere
nati, those Caterers for worms, those flow bellies, (as Epimenides calls the
Cretians) who were neither serviceable to God nor man, such ought not to be
maintained of the expense of the Commonwealth; for though his predecessors had
zealously perhaps, but inconsiderately, weakened the kingdom, by conferring so
much upon them, who so ill employed it, his Majesty as he was then Minister of
God too, and bore not the sword in vain, was bound in conscience to cut them
short, and to redress such disorders.

When the Prelate, were demanded what title of Scripture they had to show that
Bishops should intermeddle with secular authority, and where did God in all his
Will and Testament give to idle loyterers such a claim of great allowance.
Alas all their skill was in the Canons, Cretals and Extravagancies, and so
being destitute of other arguments, it was concluded that the privileges and
liberties of the Church were in the Kings power, and that he as the times and
means varied, might augment or diminish the revenues of it.

Upon the execution of which Decree, great stirs and commotions were made,
and many bulls were ban^^ed against the King by the malcontents among the
Clergy, but this being Gods hand, he justified the Man of his right hand, for
he lived religiously, reigned victoriously, and died peaceably. And for ought
that I can hear the tertius haeres, the third heir (God be thanked) thrives
well enough, and the kingdom being sinewed and flesht with the addition of so
much new strength and force, flourishes.

Had it not been pity that that nourishment which is nourishment and relief
of so many distressed Christians, of the recovering of so much ground from the
encroaching of Antichrist of propagating the Gospel of Christ into many
Countries heretofore captivated with a willing unbeleefe, should have been
spent and bezied in the high feedings and surfetted entertainments of Abbeyes
and Monasteries? Had it not been pity that all that should have been bestowed
on Mitre or Crosier staff, which will now buy so many Spears and Helmets,
better a great deal in my opinion bestowed on those men, who (as it was said
of Paul and Sylas) have hazarded their lives for the name of the Lord Jesus;
then those who could not speak a good word for him? All you therefore that
wish the good of the Church, and would see Jerusalem in prosperity all your
life long if you would heap coals of fire upon your enemies heads, and make
the sin of Impropriation Sacrilege, be diligent in the Lords work, and then
you need not be so loud in calling for your wages; for the hire of the labourer
which is kept back by fraud, cries (says Saint James, Jam. 3.4.) and the cry
thereof shall enter into the ears of the Lord of Hosts.

The best way then not only to procure the maintenance, but to secure the
welfare and prosperity of the Commonwealth, is to be diligent in preaching.

The Prophet Isay, a Courtier, one that was near to the King (as it was
thought) both in person and alliance, teaches us this Ecclesiastical policy,
Isa. 62.67.78. Ye that make mention of the Lord, or ye that are the Lords
Remembrancers, keep no filence till he make Jerusalem a praise on the earth.
The Lord has sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength. (it is
the hand and arm in which are the hearts of Kings, much more of the common
people) surely I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies, and
the sons of the strangers shall not drink thy wines for the which thou have
labored, but they that have gathered it, and they that have brought it
together shall eat it in the Courts of my Holiness.

FINIS.

