Gods Ordinance, THE SAINTS PRIVILEGE.

Discovered and proved in two Treatises.

The first, The Saints Interest by Christ in all the Privileges of Grace:
Wherein their right to the use of Baptism, and the Lords supper, even now
during the reign of Antichrist, is cleared; and the objections of those that
oppose the same, are answered.

The second, The peculiar Interest of the Elect in Christ, and his saving
Grace: Wherein it is proved that Christ has not presented to his Fathers
justice a satisfaction for the sins of all men; but only for the sins of
those that do, or shall believe in him; which are his Elect only: And the
objections of those that maintain the contrary, are also answered.

Both written by JOHN SPILSBERIE. And the last transcribed, and somewhat
enlarged, by Benjamin Coxe.

Mark. 13.34, 35.37. The Son of man is as a man taking a far journey, who
left his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his
work, and commanded the porter to watch. Watch ye therefore, etc. And what I
say unto you, I say unto all, Watch.

Ephesians. 1.3, 4. Blessed be God -- who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things in Christ: According as he has chosen us in him,
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame
before him in love.

Licensed, entered, and printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons for Benjamin Allen, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1646.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Wise and Christian READER;
IT is not to be expected in this inquiring age, wherein through the good
providence of God, truth has some liberty to show her face and many also are
travailing in pain to bring forth that man-child; but there will be likewise
a spirit of error as forward and ready to put off his ware in this open
market, as the spirit of truth; and especially in this Kingdom where the
people generally have been so long trained up in the strength of rational
notion, made out by the arts and parts of nature; who will be easily drawn to
trade with such as have best skill to set out their ware upon the strongest
terms of the creatures reason. For he that can present the richest jewel in
reasons treasure, is like to carry away That is, natural affection swayed by
reason in spiritual things.
the fairest daughter that nature has. Which causes so much division and
contention among men professing Religion, as that many of the godly can hardly
tell where to set a foot upon found ground, to the great sadding of their
spirits, and turning of many away from the truth. The consideration of which
caused me to hold forth that light I have from the Lord in these two subjects.

First, That as God has a people whom he calls and owns out of the world, even
so has he among all errors and bypath, a truth, and a true way for such to
observe and to walk with him in, a part from the world and the rudiments
thereof, as witnesses to the truth in the profession of the same, according to
the rule of truth, left to all his in his last Testament; wherein all that
profess him, shall be confessed of him.

Secondly, Unto these Christ has preached, and God has assigned such
privileges as are not common to the world, out of which he calls them to enjoy
the same. As Christ himself; even so all things by him are for such to enjoy as
believe in him, and no more. For as the end was first minded in Gods ordering
of the means, even so in all the causes concurring to effect the same, the end
must ever be minded as the life and strength of the cause; so that as God chose
persons in Christ, and gave them to him to be saved by him, so their sins
were laid upon him, for them he died, rose again, ascended, and appears in
Gods holy presence, presenting them perfect in himself. Unto him all such
shall come as were given to him, and had their sins laid upon him, for him to
give satisfaction for them. All such shall be saved from all their sins by
him; that being the end for which they were laid upon him.

This I believe to be a truth that deserves no aspersion to be cast upon it,
nor tends to cause any division or contention among such as walk by faith in
the light of truth; though the rational strength of nature in her own wisdom
cannot rest here satisfied.

And thus in sum, Christian Reader, I present to thy view the subject I deal
upon, endeavoring to maintain the right and privileges purchased by Christ,
and freely given to all that believe in him for salvation, against such as
oppose the same: who under pretense of seeking the truth, do by cunning and
crastie enquiries undermine the same, and (as they of old did) overthrow the
faith of some: who deny unto such as do believe in Jesus Christ for eternal
life, Church fellowship and communion with Christ in his Ordinances of the new
Testament, for want (as they say) of a Ministry with power from God to call
and fit a people for Ordinances, and to administer the same.

This opinion much oppresses and disturbs the godly, for whose sakes I have
endeavored to hold forth my portion of light, for such as belive to consider
well the freedom and privilege of faith in all the free purchase of Christ,
and gifts of grace; and to hold fast the liberty wherewith Christ has made
them free, and not to be brought into bondage by men. And as none are to lose
any privilege they have by Christ, no more are any so to be satisfied with a
right to all things in Christ, as to neglect their duty to him, in their
confession of him, in holding out an holy fellowship and communion with him in
all those relative properties of a wife to a husband, and a body to a head, in
such order by himself appointed, as may serve to the honor of his crown and
dignity, declaring him to be the first borne among them, and to have the pre
eminence over them. This being the end for which God sanctified him, for him to
call and sanctify a people, to keep him a name and praise in the earth, that
glory might be given to God in the Church y Christ through all ages: and not
for such as believe in him, to give away, as far as in them lies, his glory,
name, and praise, by forsaking of their privileges, and therein denying
themselves to be vessels of mercy, called to hold forth the same according to
the Word, to the glory of his Grace. This caused me to lay all so close to the
try all of Scripture, which disclaims such faith as brings not man to the
obedience of truth, that God may have his glory from man, as well as man his
salvation of God, who has not tied his childrens benefits by Christ's purchase,
to this or that condition and qualification, but given them in the hand of
Grace to a believing heart: so that they lie clear and free from God in his
Word, to faith without exception. For though that all came from God to Christ
for man, and freely through Christ to man, yet all is limited by the Gospel to
a believing subject, and so are all the tenders of the same only upon terms
of faith; which might satisfy such as have faith, that it was never otherwise
minded with God in giving his Son, nor with Christ in his dying for sin: which
faith would soon put an end to all the difference about the general point, if
it might be Judge. But that being grounded upon a rational notion, and strove
for, and strengthened by reason's misunderstanding some general terms of
Scripture, reason falling far short of the mystery of faith, attended with
salvation; faith must either submit to reason, or reason to faith, before the
difference can be ended. And where these seem to be reconciled in one that
professes faith, it is but as of old with such as (according to the Apostles
saying) began in the spirit, and ended in the flesh. But of thee, courteous
Reader, I desire better things, and such as accompany salvation. And so I rest;

Thine in the Lord, JOHN SPILSBERIE.

TO THE READER.
IVdicious and unpartiall Reader, (for such a one I desire thee to be) as I
wish unto thee the blessedness, so I commend unto thee the wisdom of the man
finding that treasure in Mat. 13.44. And because that Parable is by some
applied against us, give me leave here to mind thee of the true meaning of it.
The kingdom of heaven is like to a treasure hid in a field, etc. This speech is
either thus to be interpreted; Jesus Christ (who is to us both heavenly King
and kingdom) is like to a treasure bid in a field, etc. Or rather thus, to the
same effect; It comes to pass concerning the kingdom of heaven, as when a man
finds a treasure bid in a field, etc. So in verf. 24. The kingdom of heaven
is likened to a man which sowed, etc. Yet in verf. 37. it is said, He that
sows the good seed, is the Son of man. Whereas some affirm that the Elect
are this treasure, and the man finding this treasure, in Christ; this gross
absurdity necessarily follows; viz. that we were a treasure, and so to be
looked upon, not only before Christ redeemed us, but also before be any way
found us. To say nothing of this, that it is not agreeable to Scripture Phrase,
to say that Christ sold all that be had to buy the world: but to say that be
suffered death, that he might purchase his Church with his own blood, Acts
20.28. Whereas Christ says in Mat. 13.38. The field is the world: he does not
mean that by the field we must understand the world in every place of
Scripture, or in every Parable, or in this Parable; but only in that Parable
which Christ there expounds. The treasure hid in the field is Christ, and that
treasure of grace which is in him. The field in which this treasure is bid, may
be the Word and Ordinances. There Christ is as it were bid: for although it be
given to the Elect to see him there, yet the world there sees him not. The man
finding this treasure, is an Elect person now brought to see Christ with the
eye of faith. His hiding this treasure signifies his high esteeming of it, and
his care not to be deprived of it. His selling all that be has, and buying
this field, shows his looking upon all things as loss in comparison of
Christ; and his being content to part with all things that be may enjoy Christ
in his Word and Ordinances; and his desire and care so to enjoy him, whatsoever
loss or affliction he must undergo for the same. We have now earnestly
labored in the use of that strength that God has given us, to show unto thee,
if thou believe in Christ, that this treasure is thine, and that thou
ought to take notice of thy right thereunto through Gods gift, and to enjoy
the same as peculiar to thee and the rest of the faithful, and not common to
the world.

I am informed that some offense is likely to be taken at the word adversaries,
used in the second Treatise. If any offense be there given in the use of that
word, I only must bear the blame of it. Therefore permit me to express bow I
understood it, of whom I meant it, and what induced me to the use of it. 1. By
adversaries I understood only opposers, and namely, opposers of our doctrine.
2. I intended not this title to all that do not fully close with us in
judgment; but to those that so oppose us, as that they deny us to preach any
Gospel, to bold forth any true faith, or to administer any true Baptism; who
have openly called us The gates of bell, their common enemy, etc. 3. This
their dealing with u did move me to give them that title; and I conceived, I
had just cause so to do. But now I confess, the case stands with me
concerning the use of this term, and concerning any sharpness that I can now
discern in any passage of mine in this Treatise, as it stood with David when
he had cut off Saul's skirt. But touching the doctrine maintained in this
Treatise, I am so far from recalling any part of it, that I count my self
bound, if the Lord shall call me to it, to seal it with my blood. And I have
cause to bless God for this opportunity which be has given me, thus to
assist in the public asserting and clearing of this truth. And so much the
rather, because I have sometimes not been so clear in the sight of it, as
through the goodness of God, I now am. Yet even then I held and maintained,
that the Lord Christ giving himself to suffer death, intended (according to
his Fathers will from all eternity) by his death effectually to procure the
eternal salvation of all the Elect, and only of them. This I grounded upon
these principles. 1. The eternity and immutabilitie of Gods counsel. 2. Gods
special love to the Elect, and their being saved through the same. 3. The
wisdom and power of Christ, intending what be effects, and effecting what be
intended.

In the transcribing and enlarging of this Treatise, I was much straightened in
time; but I found the Lord more then ordinarily strengthening me: Whereupon I
am the more confirmed, that he means to make this Treatise a mean of good
unto his, when they shall diligently peruse it. Neither do I question his
following of the first Treatise also with his effectual blessing. So
commending this whole Book to thy serious perusal, and thee to the grace of
the Almighty; I rest

Thine, as thou art Christ's, BENJAMIN COXE.

THE SAINTS INTEREST BY Christ in all the Privileges of Grace.
THere be two Questions that are desired to be answered: The first is; Whether
such as believe in Jesus Christ for salvation, may enjoy the Ordinances of the
new Testament; namely, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, now under the reign of
Antichrist. And seeing that all the true and right administrations, according
to the first order and pattern, have been lost through the mystery of
confusion in the world; How we shall now come by a true and orderly
administration of Ordinances according to the first institution; if not by the
same Ministry, with the same calling and gifts of the holy Spirit that the
first Ministry had.

The second Question is; How far the death of Christ extended to the taking
away the sin of man; whether he dyed for the sins of all men without
exception, or for the sins of some only.

Unto the first Question, I shall by the help of God now address my self to
an answer. And first, I say, that such as believe in Jesus Christ in the
Scripture-sense, may and ought to enjoy the Ordinances of Christ's new
Testament, as their own free Privileges by Grace, and part of their
inheritance, as they are heirs of glory, and that even during the reign of
Antichrist; for then have they most need of them, as being Christ's their
Generals colors, and part of that spiritual armor by which they are to
fight against the Beast, and all false ways, Rev. 12. Ephesians. 6.12, 13. They are
the memorialls of Christ's love unto all that believe in him, and look for him
in his absence, Luke 22.19. With 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. And the Ordinances of
Christ's Testament are given to such as believe, for the helps and confirmation
of their faith, and the declaration thereof, and thereby God separates them
from the world, and owns them for his people. And for the same Ministry, with
the same calling, and gifts of the holy Spirit, that the first had; I own no
other Ministry.

But for the better understanding of this truth, I desire that we may consider
well of an answer to some inquiries: thus;

1. What work God had for the first Ministry, above what he has for any now?

2. Whether Christ has left in his New Testament an absolute rule to know such
as are sent of God to the work of the Ministry, and what the same is?

3. If there be salvation now for men, and means thereunto approved, and
appointed of God, then what that is?

4. Whether there be any time in which man is freed from obedience to the
Scriptures, since the New Testament came in force; and if not, then what part
of truth stands now in force to be obeyed, and what not?

5. Whether the New Testament be not of equal Authority with the Old, to
command obedience, and holds not forth a rule for the same, as the old
Testament did?

6. Whether Christ requires not a public confession of him, by all that
believe in him; and if he do, then what the same is, and the rule for it?

Now to each of these particulars. And first, what work God had for the first
ministry or workmen to do above others, either then, or now: Where in
general mind; The work God had for the first workmen, was first, to be
eyewitnesses of Christ's doings and sufferings, death and resurrection; and so
to testify him to be the Son of God, come in the flesh, and exalted to be Lord
over all, Acts 1.1, 2, 3, 4. Acts 10.39. -- 42. Acts 4.33. 1 John 1.1, 2.

2. They were to disanull and make void that typical way of worship, standing
under types and shadows, instituted by God, and confirmed to the people by
signs and wonders, Exodus 19.9. And to set up and establish another way of
worship in the place thereof, that was never known before, and therefore to be
confirmed by signs and wonders, at the first founding of it, as that before
was. Which signs and wonders stand for ever together with the same truth, as
witnesses for the truth, and against all that shall oppose or condemn the same
to the end of the world. And whereas many look and expect for some to come from
God, working miracles, signs, and wonders, let such take heed they be not
deceived by the man of sin, who is set out by God in his Word to come that
way and deceive many, Mat. 24.24. Mark. 13.22. 2 These. 2.9. Rev. 16.14. Rev.
19.20. But where is one word in all the new Testament, that any man shall come
from God in this manner, of working miracles, signs, and wonders?

3. They were to the people then, the unerring Oracles of God, and the
infallible mouth of Christ for all to have recourse unto, for the mind and
counsel of God; whose testimony was unquestionable, being that by which all
things must be tried, Mat. 28.19, 20. Gal. 1.8, 9. 1 John 1.1. -- 7.

4. They were the layers of the foundation, and the ministerial instituters of
the whole state and order of Christ's Church to be observed of all to the end of
the world, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11. Ephesians. 2.20. Rev. 21.14.

Lastly, They were the penmen of the holy Scriptures of the new Testament, in
which Christ is held forth, or set up as an ensign among all Nations for the
obedience of faith, Mat. 24.14. Luke 2.31. Isai. 52.10. By which all both
persons and actions shall be tried and judged, 2 Pet. 3.15. 1 Cor. 14.37. Romans
2.16. 2 These. 1.8. This work God had for the first workmen, or ministry to
do, who bare witness to the same, by signs, wonders, and miracles from
heaven, for the convincing of the world, that the same was of God, Heb. 2.4.
Mark. 16.20. Joh. 16.8, 9, 10, 11. Joh. 17.20, 21. There are now no more
instituters or beginners of any such work; All that men have to do now is
only to learn their way, and to walk in the same, and so to believe and
receive their testimony, Joh. 3.11. Romans 10.16. 2 These. 1.10. And to build upon
the same foundation laid by them, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11, 12. The rule and warrant for
the same, being their word and writings aforesaid. Yet let this be minded, that
some of the work in the hands of the first workmen, namely, the Apostles, was
then, and is now, as proper and common unto others, as to them; As to preach
the Gospel, and gather the Elect of God into the fellowship of Christ's body; to
bear witness to the truth, and to suffer for the same, and the like. All
which as well belongs to preaching Disciples now, as to them then, Joh. 17.20,
21. 2 Timothy 2.2. and 4.2.

If it be said, Object. 1.
where the same work is to be done, there the same workmen are required for
the doing of it, both in respect of Ministry and Gifts, because the Scriptures
hold forth but only one Ministry, appointed and given by Christ, for the work
of the Ministry, which is to continue to the end of the world, where and when
the said work is to be done, Ephesians. 4. Mat. 28.

This I confess and affirm to be true; Answ.
but let us mind in a word what all this is; The work to be done, is to call
home the Elect of God, into the faith and fellowship of Christ. The Ministry,
are men stirred up, and sent by Christ, with gifts and abilities fit for the
work called unto. Which Ministry remains until all the Elect of God are
brought unto one unity of faith and fullness of Christ, as Ephesians. 4 Mat. 28. But
what gifts and abilities are of absolute necessity required by Christ unto
this work, is well to be minded. To gather the Elect of God into the
fellowship of Christ, and to edify them in the same, is the work. And God
inlightening men in the knowledge of the mystery of Christ, in the Principles
of the Gospel, and the Spirit inabling them with gifts of utterance, to preach
the same, for the convincing of sin, and to bring over the heart to believe,
and submit to Christ, and to teach them their duty to God and man; here is now
the workmen, or Ministry, that Christ gave, and is to continue to the end of
the world, Mat. 28.19, 20.

It is said, Object. 2.
The diversities of tongues are of necessity for the Ministry of Christ,
because they are to preach the Gospel unto all Nations, Mat. 28.19. Mark. 16.15.

The Gospel indeed is to be preached unto all Nations, Answ.
that is, to one nation as well as to another, excluding none, as before the
Gentiles were, but now to all, seeing God is the God of the Gentiles, as well
as of the Jews, Romans 3.29. For now Christ by his death has opened a free way
for the Gospel, to go into all the world, to gather the Elect out of every
nation, tongue, and people, Zech. 2.11. Mat. 24.31. Rev. 5.9. Isai. 54.1, 2.3.

But this rather seems to be by some instruments whom God shall stir up in
every nation of their own language, then by all languages in one man; which
thing was never yet known, Isai. 19.18.25. Zech. 8.20, 21, 22, 23.

2. Tongues are of necessity for such to speak unto a people, to whom they
are sent, and Christ never sends any man to preach, or with a message to a
people or person, but he gives him a tongue at the present to deliver the same.
And more then is useful herein, is not of necessity.

3. That all tongues to speak all languages should be so essential to the
Ministry of Christ, that there can be no true Ministry without them: this
lies to be proved; for it is very questionable whether all the several
languages, by which God did confound and scatter the people, Genesis 11.6, 7, 8,
9. were ever yet all known to any one man; and if not, then how shall any man
know when he has them all? But if it be granted, that only so many tongues as
are needful: this I freely confess, must be in the Ministry of Christ, and
no more are required of necessity.

4. Where the diversities of tongues are not of use for the well being of a
Church, they cannot be of absolute necessity for the being of that Church. But
strange tongues are not of use for the well being of a Church that understands
them not, 1 Cor. 14.27, 28. and therefore not of absolute necessity for the
being of it.

5. The first Church of the new Testament, which may be our chief pattern,
consisting of the hundred and twenty Disciples, Acts 1. was neither converted
or constituted by a Ministry of diversity of tongues, and yet by a true
Ministry of Christ. These were in Church Fellowship before the diversities of
tongues were given, who were a Church, Act. 1. To whom the 3000. were added,
and converted by the tongues given, Acts 2.

6. The want of such diversities of tongues will not excuse a man's silence,
much less prohibit the use of such tongues as for the present men have of
God, to declare and publish what light and truth the Lord does reveal, and so
much the more, seeing every man stands accountable of himself to God, for
every gift and measure of light and truth he receives of the Lord, for the
improvement thereof, to the glory of God and good of man, as these Scriptures
compared together do manifest, Luke 19.11. -- 15. Luke 12.40, 41. -- 47. with
Mark. 13.34.37. 1 Cor. 11.26. Which Scriptures speak of the Lords coming, and
the condition both of times and persons the mean while in his absence, with
their work charged upon them, so as that they are at no time freed from the
same, until his coming to take an account of them. And it is a vain thing for
any man to think he shall be excused by his pleading the want of tongues to
speak all languages, and the like, but rather expect to be called to account,
how he has improved that ability and tongue which he has for his Lord and
Masters advantage, as Mat. 25.14, 15, 24, 25, 26, 27. And thus men are to
improve what abilities they have received to the glory of God; and when he calls
them to greater work, he will give them answer able abilities for the same,
whether tongues, or else, as Exodus 4.11.13. Mat. 10.18, 19, 20.

And lastly, The Ministry which Christ has now in his Church, has as many
tongues, and I conceive can speak as many languages, as that Ministry which
converted and planted the first Gospel Church of Christ's new Testament, which
may be well our example. And as God did honor and beautify his Church and
Ministry then, by pouring out of his Spirit in such a measure upon them, so he
may do in his own time upon his Church and Ministry now as the sees
occasion, when the has tried who are the despisers of the day of small things.

It is said, Object. 3.
that by the power of darkness over-spreading the whole world, the true
Church, Ministry, and Ordinances, have all been lost, and a false
Antichristian form come in the place. There must be now as at the first, an
immediate Ministry sent of God, with the holy Ghost and power to restore the
same again.

The Church, Answ.
Ministry, and Ordinantes, are not lost to the Scriptures, the Spirit, and
faith, but only to the world, as all divine and heavenly things are subject to
be, through their opposing and despising of them.

But it is said, Object. 4.
the Administrations of these were lost, etc.

The Administrations were not lost to Word, Spirit, and faith; Answ.
for all the holy things of God lie clear and free in the Word to whomsoever
the Spirit reveals them, and gives faith to believe, by which they become one,
and rise together.

But some may say, Object.
show us now a true Administrator sent of God.

So much in effect said the Jews of old to Christ, Answ.
Joh. 6.30. and the opposers of Gods truth to the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.3. But let
such show us believers approved so by God after Christ's Resurrection, without
which there is no salvation, and then will I by the help of the Lord show a
true Administrator sent of God, which indeed were never apart in Christ's new
Testament, neither ought they to be asunder now. But all the difficulty is, how
to know one that is truly sent of God to the work of the Ministry; and for
this let us see what absolute Rule or way Christ has left in his new Testament
to know such by. Now for any absolute Rule in respect of either gift, power, or
qualification, to note out a man sent of God to the work of the Ministry,
distinct from the same work I know none. But such as Christ stirs up and
sends to the work of the Ministry, they are declared by the work as it
answers to the Rule; for as the Scriptures justify the work, and own that to
be of God, even so does the same Word justify the workman, and owns him to be
sent of God about the same. Thus did Christ appeal to his work for witness
to prove himself to be sent of God, Joh. 10.37, 38. and 14.11. And so did the
Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 9.2. 2. Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. And so are all to be known by
walking in their footsteps and bringing their doctrine, Mat. 7.17, 18. Such as
God enables to preach the same Gospel, and to bring men to believe in Jesus
Christ, and to give up themselves in obedience to his will. Such whose gifts
and abilities improved, do hold forth Christ as an ensign to the Nations, and
gather presons into one unity of faith, and fellowship of Christ: in such
appears the Ministry and spirit of Christ, and this declares them to be sent
of God, Ephesians. 4.11. -- 16. Romans 10.14, 15. 1 John 4.2. 1 John 1.2.3. 2 John 9.
Object. 5.


Some will say, There is not those gifts and abilities for the work of the
Ministry now, as was with Christ and the Apostles, and therefore not the same
Ministry.

As there is not those gifts and abilities for measure now, Answ.
as was then, so there is not that occasion for the same now, as I have
formerly showed. God enables men now with abilities and gifts, as the work
requires, which is to discover and lay out the foundation, and to fit and
prepare the matter, and to build it upon the same, 1 Cor. 3. That is, to preach
Christ crucified, and to bring persons to believe on him, and baptize them into
the profession of him. Mat. 28.19. Act. 8.4, 5.12. Act. 11.20, 21. This was the
work of the Ministry then, and is the same now, done by the same Spirit, who
is above all his gifts. And no greater power, gifts, and abilities was ever in
any, or can be expected, then to bring souls to God, Gal. 2.8. 1 Cor. 1.23,
24. with Joh. 14.12. Which work is done now as truly as ever, and therefore
there is the same power; for now the dead are raised; the eyes of the blind
opened; the Devils spiritually cast out; the same walk; the sick restored to
health; and the poor receive the Gospel: and what more can be required to
declare a true Ministry of Christ? Object. 6.


Such as profess themselves to be the Ministers of Christ, as the first were,
must be so sent, and have the same authority from Christ as they had.

All this is true, Answ.
and therefore, I say, as before, that such as receive a Message from Christ,
with gifts and ability to deliver the same to a people, God assisting his Word
with a blessing and power to bring in the heart to believe and receive the
same; such may as truly be said to be sent of God, as the first were, neither
can we expect any to come from God any other way; and their authority is from
the Lord Christ, who by his Word and Spirit commands to preach, and baptize;
and that upon no other condition or terms but only faith, Mark. 16.15, 16.
Act. 8.36, 37. Joh. 1.12. Joh. 17.20, 21. For where the power of God goes with
his Word to call men to the knowledge of the truth, there is also the same
power to admit such into the obedience of the same, Mark. 28.18, 19, 20. Act.
10.34, 35.47. So that the same Spirit, Word, and faith, brings such as have it
now under the same power and authorities, as one together with the former; as
these Scriptures compared together do manifest, Mat. 25.15. Luke 12.48. Act.
2.17.18. 1 Cor. 12.7. 1 Pet. 4.10. Joh. 1.12. see Luke 12.37. -- 42. with Mark.
13.37. What other sending had Philip that gathered the Church as Samaria, Act.
8. and the scattered Brethren that planted the Church at Antioch, Act. 11.19,
20, 21. and Apollos, who was an able Minister of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 3? All
which the Word holds out to be able Ministers of the Gospel, and preaching the
same. But what sending had they who called them to it? and by what authority
did they do it, more then men of the same Spirit, and faith, have now? Quest.


How can such preach the Gospel order, and receive others to the same, that
never were in it themselves?

If we say, Answ.
How shall men preach truth, that never understood truth? This indeed none can
do, 1 Cor. 2. But if it be said, that none can hold forth, or preach the
Gospel Order, until they be first in it themselves, then it might be demanded
how such came to be in it, and who admitted them unto it? for some must be
first, where there is a beginning. Obedience to God depends upon nothing but
only his word that gave being to order, and the Gospel Order once instituted
stands firm still for all that believe to enter upon it, as living master upon
the foundation, 1 Cor. 3. which is Christ, who calls all such as living stones
to come unto him, and be built upon him, a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood
to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, who has
made a free and open way for all that believe to come with boldness into the
Most holy place, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. Heb. 10. And much more to enjoy all those
privileges of grace inferior to the same, 1 Cor. 3.22. And when any lie short
of truth, as touching the Gospel Order, and the like, it is only the God of
truth that brings up his creaturo to the obedience of truth. And such as God so
works in by his Spirit, as the understanding is enlightened in the truth, the
conscience convicted by it, and the man has faith in it, as his duty to obey
it, with the way open for it, and the Word calling to it. Such by mutual
agreement with truth, are by faith one together in truth; which gives being to
an orderly practice of truth. To such Christ opens, Joh. 10. Such the spirit
guides, Joh. 16. Such God approves, Mat. 18. The word of God commands them, and
faith in them obeyes, Act. 2. And thus by the power of truth, such as believe
come to be one in Christ, with the God of truth, Joh. 17.

The order of Christ's new Testament, is the administration of the gracious new
Covenant, and of the same nature with it, which lies for ever free in all the
branches and privileges thereof, to such as believe, who are the only
true-borne heirs of all that is contained in the said new Covenant. And so of
the order and Ordinances of the Gospel, which are but the Administrations
thereof. Now the heir being once put in possession of his inheritance, with
the privileges thereof, assigned to him, and conferred upon him, free without
any condition, but only his faith; here he is for ever to stand, and keep his
possession. And if at any time he through ignorance, and unbelief, mistake his
freedom, and lies short of his privileges, then when God his Father shall
acquaint him with it, and show him the same, he may, nay ought by virtue of his
first order, enter upon his in horitance, without looking and his or that
condition, or qualification of person, to admit him in, but only that his
inheritance be discovered, and his right to it. That is, an orderly communion
of such as believe, with the Spirit to guide as aforesaid, for there is no
exception by God against such as believe. And faith is the same at one time
that it is at another, and in one person that it is in another, and so are all
the Privileges of Grace the same to such as believe at one time as at another.

The Scriptures hold forth the Administrators to be such as were baptized
persons; Object. 7.
but there is none such now, and therefore not lawful to enter, until there
be a Porter to open.

1. Answ.
What though none but baptized persons did baptize, it does not follow, that
none but such must baptize, except God had so said: we find not Christ
confining the dispensing of Baptism in the hands of baptized persons, and
excluding others: neither is there any example where ever any that did baptize,
were examined whether they themselves were baptized.

2. The Scriptures no where expressly hold out the Administrators to be baptized
persons, the Apostle Paul only excepted; for of none but him does the holy
Spirit any where speak expressly of their being baptized.

3. The word of God holds out such to baptize others, that were not baptized
themselves; as John the Baptist: who was there to baptize him, before he
baptized others?

4. The Apostles, and all the Disciples of Christ were not baptized with that
Apostolical Baptism, Mat. 28. that witnessed the holy Spirit to the come. For
want of which Disciples were ignorant, and knew not whether there was any holy
Spirit, Acts 19.2, 3, 4. Which yet is the Baptism of Christ's new Testament,
into which they bapitzed others, and yet were not so baptized with the same
themselves.

By all which it appears that baptizednesse is not essential to an
Administrator, and therefore we ought not to stay without when Christ the
Porter opens, and invites us in.

The Ministry of the new Testament, Object. 8.
is a ministration of the Spirit, and of gises of the holy Spirit, as 2 Cor.
3.6.8. Acts 8.17, 18. Act. 19.6. But there is none such now.

The Ministration of the Spirit in the new Testament, Answ.
2 Cor. 3. the Apostle opposes to the Ministration of the letter under the
dark shadows of the old Testament; as appears, verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. compared
together. Otherwise, as for them to be agents to convery the Spirit, as from
themselves unto any, this the Apostle denies, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7. but only as in
struments by preaching the Gospel, as 1 Cor. 3.5. with Gal. 3.2. so it is now
as truly as it was then, God giving in his Spirit of life into men's hearts by
preaching of the Word of life. And for the appearing of the holy Spirit by
laying on of hands, as Acts 8.17, 18. Act. 19.6. This was proper only to the
Apostles themselves, as Act. 8.14. -- 18. where Philip, who converted and
planted this Church at Samaria, had not the Ministration of the gifts of the
holy Spirit, which came afterward by laying on of hands by Peter and John, who
were sent by the Apostles from Jerusalem, verse. 14.17. Neither do we find any
in this work but only the Apostles; after whose decease the holy Spirit
appeared not so full and rich in his gifts, as he did in them. As it was of
old, after the last Prophets that wrote Scripture were deceased, there was not
that measure of the Spirit to be found in any until Christ came, that appeared
in them: and yet they held fast still the profession of the name of God under
those instituted Ordinances that they once were put in possession of, according
to what light they had, which was very dark to what they had at the first. And
many things were altered from what was appointed by God at the first; as the
order of the high Priests for one; and this they did under all their
captivities and conditions until Christ came in the flesh. And so are all
believers to do under their captivity by the Antichristian worlds tyranny,
vizs. to hold fast the prosession of Christ under those instituted Ordinances
they were once put in free prossession of, until Christ come again in power,
and the brightness of his glory, and set them fully free, 1 Cor. 11.26. Rev.
2.25. and 22.12. Object. 9.


As of old in Israel there was a cessaion of Ordinances in their temporal
captivity, and chiefly that in Babylon: and at their return there was a
prohibition from eating of the most holy things, until there stood up a Priest
with Urim and Thummim, Ezra 2, 62. Neh. 7.65. So it is to be with the godly now
in their captivity in spiritual Babylon, whereof that was a type. Answ.


It does not to me appear, that in Isreal's captivities there was a cessation
of Ordinances, no nor yet in that of Babylon, but the contrary. But if it were
so, yet Israel in all her captivities was still a true constituted Church under
that instituted Ordinance of Circumcision, by which God separated them from all
Nations in the world, as a people to himself for his great Name, as he does
now by Baptism. Which Israel had still her Ministry, and Ministerial power
and order, and at her return out of Babylon, she came forth with the same,
Ezra 2.36.70. and 3.1. -- 6. Neb. 3.1. And for the prohibition, Ezra 2.62. this
was only of the house of Habajab, Koz, and Barzillai, whose Register could not
be found, and therefore they were as polluted put from the Priesthood, Ezra
2.61, 62, 63. And to these only the words are spoken, and not of the whole
Congregation, who had an high Priest, and a Priestly power and order, Neb. 3.1.
Ezra 2.36. and 3.1. -- 6.

So that if there was a cessation of Ordinances in Israel, it was not for want
of a Ministry, as the case is made with us, but as this is our type, then with
a true proportion from the type to the antitype, we that believe, and so are
true Israel in substance, are not to cease from enjoying of our Ordinances for
want of a Ministry, but to hold fast our true possession and inheritance once
delivered into the hand of faith in all our captivity, as Israel of old did.

Believers now have lost the possession of all Administrations; Object. 10.
for there has been a cessation for these many years, both of Ministry,
Church and Ordinances, according to the first Rule and institution of Christ;
and therefore men are to wait upon God for him to restore the same again in
power, and not to take up ways and ordinances of themselves.

Believers never lost their right to any truth, Answ.
or ordinance of Christ, for they by faith do or ought to possess all truth
once given unto them, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. 2 Cor. 6.10. Jude 3. And if any
depart, and forsake their own mercies through unbelief, they are to return
again to the same by faith; and God prohibits none that believe in his Son,
the use of his Ordinances, ordained by him for their comfort and confirmation
of their faith; but helps them on to the same, by giving his Spirit for their
guide, his Word for their rule, and himself for their warrant, who commands
them to obey him in all truth that he shall make known unto them. Men are
indeed to wait upon the God of truth for him to discover truth. But when he
has not only made it known to them, but also revealed truth in them, and by
the power of it, made the heart one with it, then men take not up truth of
themselves, but are taken up by truth, into the nature of truth, and shall
stand by the power of it; when such as take up truth of themselves, and for
their own ends, shall lay it down again to their own destruction. Object. 11.


God ordained a Ministry in the Gospel which ever was in order first, namely,
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, by whom Churches were planted, and other
Officers ordained for those Churches well-being.

This Ministry I confess, and own, and therefore I say still, Answ.
that men must come from God with truth, and with ability to deliver the same
for the converting of men to the faith. Now when God shall assist his Word with
power, to bring over men's hearts to believe, and obey the same, such the
Scriptures hold out to be true Messengers sent of Christ, declared by their
work as it answers to the Rule. And this way men were convinced, and Churches
planted that now stand under the profession of christ. And thus came Churches
to be planted, and other Officers ordained, by those that God made the first
instruments to bring on the work, in communion with the rest, as to direct and
assist them in the same, Tit. 1.5. Act. 14.23.

The Ministry aforesaid, to bring men to the faith, Object. 12.
was attended with the power of miracles, as raising the dead, healing the
sick, casting out devils, and the like, to confirm their testimony to be of
God, none of which appears now, whereas there is as much need to confirm the
truth of God as ever, among so much confusion as now is. The like miracles are
assigned by Christ ever to attend his Ministry, Mark. 16.17. and confirmed by
the Apostle as an Ordinance of God in his Church, Jam. 5.14, 15. and the first
Principles of Christ, Heb. 6.1, 2. All which are now wanting that should
confirm a true Ministry from God to us. Answ.


That the working of miracles did attend the Ministry of Christ at the first,
and that to confirm the truth then held forth to be of God, this I confess to
be true. But that the working of those miracles should be so essential to the
Ministry, that there can be no true Ministry of Christ, neither in whole, nor
in part, without working of the said miracles; that I deny.

1. John the Eaptist was a true Minister, and sent of God, who did no miracle,
Joh. 10.41. and yet he was more then a Propher, Mat. 11.9. And so was Apollos a
true Minister of the new Testament, who knew only the Baptism of John, and no
more, until that Aquila and Priscilla had further informed him in Gods way,
but was never known to work any miracle, Act. 18.25, 26 -- 28. with a Cor.
3.5. And likewise the scattered Disciples that gathered the Church at Antioch,
Act. 11.19, 20, 21. All which were true Ministers of Christ, and yet not
attended with the foresaid power of working miracles in their Administrations.
It is a Herod's hope to see a miracle, Luke 22.8. And a Pharaohs sign, Exodus 7.9.


2. Miracles can be no true note of Ministry, nor Minister sent of Christ,
because the working of miracles is that by which false Prophets shall deceive
the people, Mark. 13.22. Rev. 16.14. Rev. 19.20.

3. The same miracles that confirmed the truth at the first to be of God, stand
in equal authority, together with the same truth, as witnesses together for
God, and against all that oppose, until the coming of Christ, without adding
more miracles to them, any more then of truth to what is written, Heb. 2.4.
Nothing more is now to be expected, then the holy Spirit for to open the
Scriptures, and enable men to unfold the mind of God in the same; and the same
Spirit working faith in the hearts of the Elect to believe his own testimony of
they mystery of the Fathers love in the Son, through the word, without any
other miracle. So that if Christ inableth men to understand, and to open the
Word, and God opens the heart, and the Spirit works faith; here will need no
miracle to bring such to believe.

Lastly, As great miracles are done now as ever, to cast out Devils out of
men's souls, to open the eyes spiritually blind, to raise the dead from the
death of sin. In a word, to bring forth a new creature, and offer up the same
to God. These are the substance of all miracles to such as by experience know
them, and greater then all, as Christ says, Joh. 14.12. And for Christ's words,
Mark, 16.17. These signs shall follow them that believe, etc. These signs are
there said to follow such as believe, and not such as are sent of Christ to
preach the Gospel. The words are to be taken either literally or mystically. If
mystically, then all those signs are to be taken in a spiritual sense; as to
cast out devils by converting of fowls to God, in preaching of Christ, as
before said; and to speak with new tongues, is in reference to the new
creature, which being of a new nature, he speaks with a new tongue, and so a
new language, as he never did before, 2 Cor. 5.17. according to these
Scriptures, Zeph. 3.9. Isai. 19.18. and 35.5, 6. And to take up Serpents, that
is, in respect of the great work of the Gospel, by which God will alter and
change the Serpent-like nature of men, unto a Lamb-like temper of spirit, Isai.
11.6. -- 9. and the sweet peace God will make for his people with such, Joh.
5.23. And for drinking any deadly thing, it shall not hurt such as believe,
that is, if they drink in, at any time, false doctrine or error, which in it
self is poison and deadly; but God of his grace will so provide that it shall
not hurt them, so as to destroy them, but he will recover, and preserve them by
some way or other, Mat. 24.24. Jam. 5.19, 20. 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 Pet. 2.9.

But if the words be to be taken literally, then consider whether the faith may
not be the same with the signs, viz. the faith of miracles which men might
have, and yet perish, Mat. 7.22, 23. But grant the faith there spoken of to be
faith unto salvation, spoken of in the verse aforegoing, and the words to be
taken literally; yet Christ there only shows how the truth of the Gospel
should then be confirmed by signs and miracles; but does not mean that in
every age, or in that age, none should be accounted believers, but such as
could do such miracles, or show such signs; see 1 Cor. 12.28, 29, 30. As
touching James 5.14, 15. the direction there given is still to be observed
according as God gives in faith into men's hearts to depend upon the promise
there made: and such observation of that direction in the exercise of faith,
will surely be accompanied with the promised success. Neither was it any more
in the Apostles days; for even in that age Saints might and did dye, as well
as in succeeding ages. And for Heb. 6.1, 2. there is nothing at all of any
miracles; but only of laying on of hands.

All therefore that has been objected, makes nothing to prove the working of
miracles a note to declare a true Ministry of Christ, either in whole or in
part, but rather the contrary, now in our days. And again, it is not to the
point in hand, what power any persons were attended with, but to what power or
qualified persons, Christ has confined the dispensing of his Ordinances
absolutely, so that none but only such must meddle with the administering of
them. Either let such as condemn our practice, hold us out, and confine us to
an absolute Rule from the mouth of Christ, or else cease to oppose us, lest
they oppose Christ himself and his Saints portion; and so at his coming be
found in stead of feeding, to be smiting of the flock, Luke 12. As of old, at
the peoples return out of temporal Babylon in the type, was only the simple
call of God without any miracle; even so in the antitype, the peoples coming
out of spiritual Babylon, is only by the simple call of God without any
miracle, as Rev. 18.4.

The Apostles having a Commission to preach unto all Nations, Object. 13.
Mat. 28.19. yet they were afterward commanded to stay at Jerusalem until
they had received power from God to execute the same, Acts 1. Which power they
received, Acts 2. Which shows that none can preach the Gospel, nor are any to
attempt the same, without the like power of the holy Ghost; for if any might,
then the Apostles who had their Commission, but they must stay for power from
God, and so must men now.

This is but the same in effect that I have ever said, Answ.
that if any man goes before he has a Message from God, and power to deliver
the same, such a one goes of himself unsent: but one who has a Message, and
ability to deliver it, God assisting the same with power to effect the work;
this now is one truly sent, as aforesaid. But in a word briefly, let us a
little mind what this power here is, which the Apostles were to wait for as
Jerusalem; this power was the holy Spirit, the comforter, the Spirit of truth,
the promise of the Father, as the Scriptures manifest, Acts 1.4.8. Luke 24.49.
Act. 2.4.33. Joh. 14.16, 17.26. Joh. 7.39. The holy Spirit, in respect of his
sanctifying power and gifts, the comforter, in respect of his evidence in the
mystery of the Fathers love; in which sense he was to supply the place of
Christ, and was not to come until Christ was ascended, Joh. 14.16, 17.26. Joh.
16.7. Joh. 7.39. This holy Spirit and comforter, was the promise of the Father,
received of Christ, and is given to all that believe through Grace, Joh. 7.38,
39. Romans 8.9.11.14, 15, 16. Gal. 4.6. Being the holy regenerating Spirit of
Grace, Joh. 3.5, 6. Joh. 1.12, 13. 1 John 3.9. The comforter that brings the
Fathers love through his Sons death to a cold heart, Joh. 14.16. Romans 5.5.
The witness of all our happiness, and the holy Spirit of promise, that seals
us up in the Fathers love, enabling of us to cry Abba Father, 1 John 3.24. and
5.10. Romans 8.15, 16. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. Gal. 4.6. All which is only one and the
same Spirit, not many, but only one and no more, 1 Cor. 12.4.11. Ephesians. 4.4.
Whose Ministerial abilides I shall reduce unto two heads.

1. Light and knowledge in the mystery of Christ, in the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.3, 4,
5.6.

2. Power or ability of utterance to preach and teach the same, Act. 2.4. Ephesians.
6.19. Col. 4.3.

Let men strive while they will, here is the substance of the Ministerial
power of Christ, and according to every man's talent, and ability, he is to
labor in this work, Mat. 25.14, 15. The manifestation of the Spirit is given
to every man (none excepted) to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. So that the
Message of the holy Spirit is holy and sound doctrine, such as tends to bring
persons to one unity of faith, and conformity to the mystery of God, and of
the Father, and of Christ, 1 John 1.1, 2, 3. Col. 2.2. Ephesians. 4. And the
Messengers are such as the same Spirit stirs up, and enableth to deliver the
same, as aforesaid. Such are, as it were, the eyes and hands, and feet, of the
holy Spirit, to call, and guide, and to go before, and lead on others. And as
God in Christ has received these, so he does others brought to him by their
Ministry.

This was the power or promise of the Father, that they were to wait for, the
Spirit to enable them to lay out Christ dead and risen for a foundation to
bear up the spiritual house of God; and as Lord and King of that Kingdom
preached before to be at hand; and now exalted at Gods right hand, and advanced
to the throne of his Father David; and to hold him forth among all Nations as
the way to life, by faith in his death. All which could not be preached until
Christ was ascended, and the holy Spirit given that must teach the same.

And this in brief was the power the Apostles were to wait at Jerusalem for,
and so is every man now. Though the holy Spirit appeared then more fully and
richer in his gifts then now he does; yet for the essentialls of truth, both
for salvation by believing in Jesus Christ, and professing him under those
honorable titles assigned him by his Father, the holy Spirit does now for
substance appear the same in his Ministerial operations, as ever he did
formerly, Though there be much imperfection and weakness in the creature, this
causes not truth to cease from being truth. Otherwise there can be no
salvation for any man; which is the next thing to be examined.

Having discovered the way how to know such as come from God to the work of
the Ministry, in Christ's new Testament, which is by their work as it answers
to the word of God, which is the Rule of truth;

I come now to the third particular, namely, Whether there be salvation now for
man, and a way or means thereunto approved, and appointed of God; and if there
be, then what the same is.

This being the third inquiry about the Saints enjoying the Ordinances of
Christ's new Testament, I answer directly, that to me it is out of question,
there is salvation now for man, and means to it appointed by God, or else none
can be saved, and so every person in the world must perish. But in a word, note
what I mean by salvation, and that is, for one to be in such an estate here in
Grace, that the word of God justifies to be attended with glory hereafter, as
follows;

1. To believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, ordained of the Father
to be the Savior of man, 1 John 2.22. Mat. 16.16. Act. 8.37. 1 Pet. 1.20.

2. And that Christ is come, and has suffered in the flesh, dyed, and risen
again by the power of God, and is exalted to be Lord over all, 1 John 4.2.
Romans 10.9. Act. 2.32, 33.36. Romans 14.9.

3. And that Christ by one offering has made a free and open way into the
presence of his Fathers love, the most holy place, for all that believe, to
have free access unto the Father by him, Heb. 9.12.24. Heb. 10.19, 20. Ephesians.
2.18. and 3.12.

4. And that by his own blood he has washed away all the sins of his people,
and presents them to the Father in his own perfection; in whom they are all
complete, and perfected for ever, Rev. 1.5. Joh. 17.21, 22, 23. Col. 2.9, 10.
Heb. 10.10.

5. That Christ has not only by his blood redeemed a people from death,
condemnation, and the curse for sin, and so the guilt of sin, but also has
redeemed them from among men, and from a vain conversation, and traditions of
men, to an holy confession of him, according to that rule and order instituted
by him in his last will and Testament, sealed with his blood, Rev. 5.9, 10.
Rev. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Pet. 1.18. and 2.9. Ephesians. 2.13. -- 22. Gal. 1.4. Tit. 2.14.

Lastly, This truth believed of us, is not only by the Scriptures presented to
us, and from thence only learned by us, but also made good upon us, and
revealed in us by the holy Spirit given unto us, who has given us an
understanding to know him that is true, Romans 5.5. 1 John 5.20. Which Spirit of
truth, as he brings light, and reveals love, so by the power of love he
subdues sin, mortifying the flesh, and brings up the new creature to God, and
draws forth the heart in love to man. And thus in brief of salvation that is
now for man, which is a being in the sweet possession of the Fathers love
through Christ, by faith unto eternal glory.

Now the means approved and appointed of God, for this great work of
salvation, is also manifest, which in general is, the Ministerial power and
operation of the Spirit of God, in what instruments soever he pleases to
appear, and to use them for that work, who is limited to none, but commonly
does great things by weak and despised means, that the crown and glory might
rest on his own head, as 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. And yet there is the same means
now to bring men to God in truth and for substance, which has been formerly.

1. For we have now the holy Scriptures of God, which are to us in the place
and stead of the personal presence both of Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.31.
and Christ, and his Apostles; if God please to speak to us by them, as he did
to his people of old by the other. (Who being dead yet speaks, Heb. 11.4.)

2. We heaving this blessed word of truth, to read, search, and study, and
Gods blessing being the same to us, as to his people formerly, he being the
same God still, and Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb.
13.8. we may therefore expect, and do enjoy the same effect with them, which
is to understand the mind of Christ concerning us in the same.

3. We have the same Spirit, who enables men to preach Christ crucified, which
though to some a stumbling block, and to others foolishness, yet to many
appears to be the power of God, by which they are brought to believe in Jesus
Christ for eternal life and glory. And thus we have the same Gospel, the same
faith, the same Christ, and so the same way to salvation as they formerly had;
and these means does God appoint, and approve, and bless, for the effecting
of this great work of salvation to us now, as well as unto others before us,
that we together with them may be provoked to praise and magnisie the great
Name of so gracious a God, that has done such great things for us, to keep
himself a Name, and witness in the earth.

But some demand of us, Quest.
Whether that the Ordinance of preaching the Gospel be now afoot for to bring
men to life; according to Christ's Commission, Mat. 28.19, 20.

There be some that strive against the Ordinances of God, Answ.
by putting nice distinctions in the word Preaching; to bear the simple
hearted in hand, of some great matter therein to be minded, and that in the
Original; thinking that every one is not able to deal with them there. But if
we were minded to cavil, we might demand of them, how they know that to be
the Original? or the some copy Christ and his Apostles did speak or write?
But we seriously demand, whether we may not as well depend upon that
translation in our own tongue, by the help of the Spirit of God, to know the
mind of Christ, in things absolutely necessary for faith, and life, as they
upon the Original, seeing that their Original and our translation hold forth
the same Gospel of Jesus Christ. They make as if none could ever preach the
Gospel but only such as had, and have the same measure of the gifts of the
Spirit that the Apostles themselves had, and yet they are at a stand about
Philip, Act. 8. and confess that he did preach in the proper signification of
the word. But for my part, I freely grant them thus much, that no man can truly
preach the Gospel, but he that has the same Spirit of God that the Apostles
had And so I come to answer their demand briefly thus:

1. As preaching is to deliver a Message received of the Lord, as Romans 10.14,
15. thus it is now afoote.

2. As preaching is a publishing of the Gospel of Christ occasionally, to bring
men to the truth, as Act. 8.4. Act. 11.19, 20, 21. so it is now afoote.

3. As the Disciples were to preach the Gospel of Christ freely to all persons
without exception, as Mark. 16.15. Act. 10.34. thus it is now afoote.

Lastly, As men are to trade with that ability given them of Christ, for their
Lords advantage, as Mat. 25.15. 1 Cor. 12.7. 1 Pet. 4.10. so preaching the
Gospel is now afoote.

For men are now to improve that ability they have received, because that all
men are by the same Word now as well as then, to give account for the same,
Luke 12.41.48. Mat. 25.25, 26, 27.30. All which is according to Christ's
Commission, Mat. 28. and no way contrary to the same. Object. 14.


There is not that converting Ministry now abroad in the world that the Word
of God holds forth; there is one Ministry abroad that converts men unto faith
in Christ for salvation, or justification, but the Ministers labor to keep
such still in the sin of idolatry, or false worship, and then others pretend to
convert these further by bringing them into order as they say, by dipping. But
where is that Ministry that calls Persons out of the world, and plants them at
once in Church Fellowship?

For such a conversion to faith in Christ for salvation, Answ.
as fully leaves the said converts in idolatry, and short of the Gospel Order
and fellowship; I know no such conversion, Christ owning no such faith in him
for salvation, that brings not persons out of idolatry unto the fellowship of
the Gospel. But what though, there be a Ministry abroad that brings persons
but part of the way, and then another that brings the same persons more fully
home into fellowship; This order the Word of God will bear us out in for a
truth, as Joh. 4.37, 38. And also the Jews they made Proselytes; and John the
Baptist, he brought them further; and the Apostles they brought the same
persons fully home into fellowship, Act. 2.10.40, 41, Act. 18.24. -- 28. Act.
19.1. -- 7. The same order was shadowed out in the building of the Temple by
King Solomon, 1 King. 5.6. Where the Sidonians hewed timber and stone for the
house of God abroad; but the servants of Solomon laid them in the building. And
this, I say, that in reference to the means, it is a far harder work to
convert and fit matter for the spiritual house of God, out of Antichrists hard
and rookie frame, then-out of the heathenish and profane world: and yet not
only the best, if I may so say, but the very worst of them, has been from
thence called home, and planted in the Lords vineyard. And there must be as
great a power from God appear to bring these deniers of a believers
privileges of the Gospel, from their selfe-wisdome, and carnal principles,
unto the simplicity of Christ, as ever was to cast out a devil, heal the
sick, raise the dead, or convert any sinner. And yet our weakness through
Gods power has so prevailed, that it has brought off the chiefest of sinners
unto the obedience of the Gospel, and profane persecuters of us have been
convinced, and become lovers of God and his truth together with us; and so as
Serpents have been taken up, and their stings pulled out, and of Lions made
Lambs: and thus has Christ been pleased to honor the Ministry which he has
now in his Church, and leaves not himself without witness against such as
oppose him in the same.

4. Inquiry, Whether there be any time in which man is freed from obedience to
the Scriptures since the new Testament came in force: And if not, then what
part of truth stands now in force to be obeyed, and what not?

For man to be freed from obedience to the Scriptures in general, I suppose
none that fear God will once countenance such an opinion; therefore I come
more particularly to consider what part of the Scriptures is now in force, and
specially to be known, and obeyed. They are those Scriptures that are
necessary to bring God and man together unto a oneness in Christ. And this is
the Gospel, which is called the Word of Reconciliation, the Gospel of the
Kingdom; which holds forth Christ to be King, Priest, and Prophet, and the
only way unto the Father; and brings persons to be of the household of God.
Which household is that composed order, and instituted state of Christ's Church
of the new Testament, with the subjects in that order and state, according to
the same Testament; of which Testament Christ is the Mediator, who has
confirmed the same by his own blood, and sanctified all things therein
contained. All which the Scriptures of the new Testament hold forth, and
therefore they of all others are to be obeyed; for therein the whole Mediator
ship of Christ, together with the effect of the same, and his rule and order
for ever to be observed, is written for our learning. This Testament, and
Christ the Mediator thereof, and man's salvation, are all so inseparably joined
together by the holy Spirit, that the Gospel holds forth no one of these
without the other; so that there is no faith in Christ approved of, apart from
the word of the Testament, of which he is the Mediator. And that faith which is
truly of him, and in him, brings up the heart believing to a professed
subjection to him. Both which together ( viz. faith, and the profession of
faith) do give unto a man both a being, and a name in Christ's Testament, Romans
10.10. Gal. 3.26, 27. Mark. 16.16. Take away from a man either faith, or the
profession of faith, and there is no name found for that man in Christ's new
Testament, Rev. 22.14. Heb. 3.1. Heb. 10.22, 23. None are owned either of God,
or man, to be members of Christ, that are no way under the profession of him;
as appears in Mat. 10.32, 33. 1 John 4.3. And there is now no profession of
Christ according to the rule of his Word, without Baptism, Mat. 28.19. Mark.
16.16. Luke 7.30, Gal. 3.26, 27. Ephesians. 4.5.

By all which it appears, not only in general that the Scriptures of the new
Testament stand now in force, and are to be obeyed of all that do believe; but
also in particular that the word of the new Testament which holds forth
Baptism, and require the use of the same, is still in force, and to be obeyed;
because the clear promise of the saving benefits of Christ's Mediatorship, and
the administrations of the new Testament, whereof he is Mediator, go together
in the Word, Act. 2.38. Act. 22.16. Romans 6.3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 12.13. Col. 2.12. 1
Pet. 3.21.

And here let it be well minded, how Christ encourages us to the perpetual
observation of that rule in Mat. 28.19.20. by this promise; And lo, I am with
you always, even unto the end of the world. And how the Apostle signifies it to
be our duty, in the use of the Supper, to show the Lords death till he come, 1
Cor. 11.26. Is not then the word of the new Testament, concerning the use of
the Ordinances of the new Testament, now in force? Let us take good heed that
we do not diminish from the word of Christ, nor make void the same, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
Rev. 22.19. Psalm. 119.126.

And so I pass to the ext inquiry, which is this;

Whether the new Testament, whereof Christ is the Mediator, Qu. 5.
be not of equal authority with the old Testament, (whereof Moses was the
Mediator) to command obedience: and holds not forth a rule for the same, as the
old Testament did. This will appear to be an undeniable truth, that the
authority of the new Testament is equal with, if not above, the authority of
the old Testament.

1. The instituter, and Lawgiver of the new Testament is of equal power and
authority with the instituter of the old, being the Son of God, who is Lord
over all, Heb. 1. Romans 10.12. James 2.1.

2. The Mediator of the new Testament is higher, and of greater authority,
then the Mediator of the old Testament, Heb. 3.1. -- 6.

3. The whole state, Laws, and Ordinances of the new Testament, are of a
higher and more heavenly nature, then the state and Ordinances of the old
Testament, Heb. 9.2. Cor. 3. Heb. 12. and given with greater authority, and
therefore the neglect of obedience thereunto, is by the holy Spirit laid under
the greater punishment, Heb. 2.1. -- 4. Heb. 12.25.

4. The old Testament was confirmed by the blood, and death of Bulls and Goats,
and the like, but the new Testament is confirmed by the blood and death of
Jesus Christ the Son of God, the Lord of life, and therefore of greater
authority then the old.

Hereby it is manifest, that the authority of the new Testament, is equal
with, if not above the authority of the old Testament, to command obedience.
And touching the rule of the same obedience, this is clear also, being of the
same nature with the Word, or Testament it self; for that which commands a
thing, shows also what it commands. That command by which a man's ways shall be
tried, judged, justified, or condemned; that is the rule given by God of man's
obedience unto him; and this is the word of Christ, as he is the great Prophet
of the new Testament, and consequently the Scriptures of the same new
Testament, Act. 3.22.23, Mat. 28.20. Christ thus commanding obedience with
authority in the new Testament, and holding forth the rule thereof in the
same, dispenses neither with things, nor time, nor persons, Act 17.30.31. Heb.
2.1, 2, 3. Heb. 12.25.

The new Testament requires obedience only of such as are under the same.
Object. 15


The Gospel that declares the authority, Answ.
and government of Christ, is sent out into all the world, and holds up him to
be Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, before all Nations, and commands and
requires obedience and subjection of all, without exception; and makes neither
age, time, person, gift, nor qualification the condition of man's obedience to
the Gospel, and subjection to his Crown.

If all in general are to obey the Gospel, Object. 16.
then all that come at the outward call, are to be admitted to fellowship and
communion.

All that may be judged to come in obedience and faith, are to be admitted to
fellowship and communion. And all ought to come and submit and tender
themselves and their service, that their Lord and King might receive them, who
does not receive any but such as come in faith; neither did he otherwise intend
in the call, but to sever between the good and the bad, Matthew. 25.6, 7.10, 11,
12. Mat. 13, 48. For though many are called, yet few are chosen, Mat. 20.16.
And it is one thing to command subjection, and another thing to bid a man
immediately and directly to believe he shall be saved. By refusing subjection
unto Christ, men pull upon themselves heavy judgments, and dreadful
destruction; and this their destruction shall be from the power and just
sentence of Christ, Mat. 11.23. Mat. 23.34, 35.37, 38. 1 Cor. 10.5. -- 11. Heb.
3.17, 18. Isai. 60.12. 2 These. 1.8, 9. The Lord Christ has a Lordly right and
power in, and over all creatures; and though the same does not yet fully
appear in the effects of it, yet in due time it shall, Heb. 2.8. with Rev.
11.15.17. In the mean time, Christ the Lord demands his right of all men, and
will judge the disobedient for their disloyalty to him, Jude 15. Luke 19.27.
Yea he requires all, both persons, states, and powers, to be under subjection;
who also shall acknowledge him to be Lord, to the glory of God the Father, who
subdued all things under him, Psalm. 72.8, 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 15.24, 25. Phil.
2.9, 10, 11.

Thus the holy Scriptures hold forth Christ's power and dominion, and call for
subjection to the same, of all persons without exception, Psalm. 2.12. And when
Kings and Nations shall acknowledge this, and submit themselves thereunto, then
shall they fit down in peace one with another, and learn to war no more,
Isai, 2.4. Zech. 9.10. And so shall be delivered from those many heavy
miseries and destructions which they suffer one from another, for their
rejecting and opposing the Scepter of Christ, their Lord and King; as the Jews
of old did. And whereas some conceive, that Christ's kingly office, to rule, and
command, is of no larger extent then his Priestly office to redeem, and to
save from sin and wrath. I do believe that Christ by his kingly power
commands and rules over both Angels and Devils, and all his enemies, for whom
he was never a Priest to redeem them, and save them from sin. As David (a
type of Christ) was in some respect King only of Israel; and yet in the
exercise of his kingly power for Isreal's good, commanded and rules over many
heathen Nations and Kingdoms: so Christ is indeed, in some sense, and in some
respect King of his own peculiar people only, who only are they that obey him
willingly and sincerely, and over whom he reigns for their eternal good, to
make them Kings reigning with him; and yet in the exercise of his kingly power
for their good, he rules with might over all the world, and justly punishes
all the disobedience of the whole world. And now I come to consider of the last
enquiery, thus;

Whether Christ requires not a public confession of him, Qu. 6.
by all that believe in him: and if he do, then what the same is, and the Rule
for it.

Now that Christ requires a public confession of him, by all such as believe
in him, is so clear in the Scriptures that I suppose none that believe the
Scriptures will deny it, Mat. 10.32, 33. Joh. 12.42, 43. Romans 10.9, 10. 1 John
4.2, 3.

But for the more full clearing of this truth, two things must be minded:

1. What we mean by believing in Christ.

2. What by confession of Christ.

Touching the first; By believing in Christ, I mean that believing that Jesus
is the Christ, which John speaks of in 1 John 5.1. That believing with all the
heart, which Philip spoke of in Acts 8.37. That believing with the heart unto
righteousness, which Paul speaks of in Rom, 10.9, 10.

Touching the second; The confession that Christ requires of men so believing,
is to confess him in his Name and Titles that his Father has honored him
with, and set him out by, viz. To be a sufficient and only Savior, and the
Mediator of the new Testament; as King, Priest, and Prophet. A Priest to
redeem and purchase his people; a Prophet to teach and instruct that people;
and a King to protect and defend the said people in their obedience to the
truth, revealed by him as a Prophet, and by him as a King commanded to be
obeyed. And as this is to be known and believed of such as expect life by him:
even so it is to be confessed, by a professed subjection to him in the same.
The Rule of which professed subjection and confession, is the instituted order
and administration of Christ's Testament; for no other confession does he
approve of, but that which holds him forth to be Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, come in the flesh, dead, and risen again, ascended, and exalted at Gods
right hand, to the throne of his Father David; and so to be Lord of Lords, and
King of Kings. And submission to the instituted order and administration of
Christ's Testament, is an ordained confession of this believing in him, in a
professed subjection to him. This confession does Christ therefore require of
such as believe in him, and ownes no believing unto salvation in his new
Testament, once confirmed by his death, where this is refused. For the benefits
of Christ as Mediator, and his administration, and the state, order, and rules
of that Testament whereof he is Mediator, and the subjects partaking of those
benefits, go together in the record of Scripture; so that if there be no
baptizing into Christ, then is there not confession of Christ, according to his
appointment, Mat. 28.19. 1 Cor. 12.13. Gal. 3.27. Romans 6.3. Ephesians. 4.5. Luke
7.30. And if not confession of Christ, according to his appointment, then no
faith to salvation by Christ expressly owned, Mat. 10.32, 33. with 1 John 4.2,
3. Joh. 12.42, 43. This I speak in reference to the express word of God,
which ought to be every man's rule to try his way and walk by, because by the
Word he shall be tried, and judged, justified, or condemned, according as he
appears by the same, Joh. 12.48. Romans 2.16.

This makes against the free grace of God, Object. 17.
that saves man, without any condition of obedience, or respect to any outward
external Ordinance, but only to Christ, and believing in him.

1. Answ.
The truth aforesaid no way opposes Gods free grace in saving man through
faith in Christ; for it brings nothing in with Christ to save any man, but lays
out the way that God brings persons into, whom he does save. For they come not
into that way of profession to be saved, but being saved they come to show
their thankfulness to God for the same.

2. This order of truth discovers and sets out the true nature of Grace in its
proper place, and use. Gods electing and choosing persons to salvation is of his
free Grace, but whom he so chooses, he chooses in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. Therefore
to make Christ effentiall to man's salvation, is not against grace, but for it.

3. The gift of Christ, and life by him, is free grace; but neither Christ, nor
life by him is given without faith. Therefore to make believing in Jesus Christ
of absolute necessity to life, is not against grace, Ephesians. 2.8. Faith it self
is the free gift of God, and the work of grace in the heart of man, yet is
there no faith approved by God in his Word without works, James 2. Therefore
to put faith to trial by its works, and to bring both to the light, to try
and to see if it be indeed that which God of his grace has given to man for
life, and the manifestation thereof, and to make them both inseparable
companions, is no way against the free grace of god, that saves not man without
faith, nor approves of faith without works, and tryes all works by his Word.

4. The foresaid truth confirms grace, or faith in grace, by holding forth
from the Scriptures the privileges that belong unto such as believe through
grace, and the freedom thereof in grace to faith alone, without any other
condition at all. As the gracious new Covenant it self is free, which
comprehends all that is between God and man in grace, and requires nothing but
only faith in Jesus Christ to admit persons into the same, which makes them
one with all that the said Covenant contains; whether state, order,
ordinances, administrations, administrators, things administered, or to be
administered, things past, present, or to come. All is theirs who are in the
Covenant of grace, that contains all. And none are in the way of life held
forth in the word of God, that are out of this Covenant. And all privileges
and benefits comprehended in the said Covenant, lie all as free without
conditions unto such as believe, as the Covenant it self. For the Covenant in
general comprehends the several parts in particular: and therefore look what
condition any one part lies under, the same does another, and so all. If one
part be free, all is free, and so indeed it is a free Covenant to such as
believe. And all the particular branches of this gracious Covenant are so
inseparably joined together, that if a man be truly under any one part, he is
under all: if he have Christ, he has all: if he have faith, he has all: if he
have one promise truly, he has all: and if he have right to any one ordinance,
he has the same right to all. So that he that dis-inherits himself of any one
part, dis-inherits himself of all. For grace in the Covenant, and the
privileges therein contained are not divided. And when faith finds the
treasure, she will have also the field, where the treasure is hid, Matthew.
13.44. Thus joining of faith in Christ, and subjection to Christ inseparably
together, as the Scriptures do, (both being branches of one and the same
gracious Covenant) does no way oppose Gods free grace in saving man by faith in
Christ.

If the administrations of the new Testament lie so open and free to all that
believe, Object. 18.
without condition or exception, then any that believe may administer all
Ordinances; and so women, as well as any other.

By pretended absurdities and false consequences, Answ.
the truth of God is commonly opposed and obscured by the adversaries thereof:
yet truth never brings upon it self any absurdity. But absurdities sometimes
seem to follow through the subtilty of men opposing the truth; and sometimes
through the ignorance of men, not knowing how to avoid them, and defend the
truth from them.

Truth always lies within the bounds of order, whither true faith brings in a
man, and there truth makes him free, Joh. 8.32. Truth and order are never
apart, much less oppose each other, how ever men conceive: for God who is one,
is the God both of truth, and of order, 1 Cor. 14. So that wheresoever faith
finds truth, there order also dwells. For as God is the God of order, so his
Word which is truth, is the rule of order; and this Word is faiths foundation,
whereon she builds: which Word is so far from being any exceptive condition
of truth, as that it is truth it self. God calls no man to dispense his truth,
whom he does not fit and enable for the same: and whom God does call and send,
he so sends them that they go in faith. And faith ever attends at wisdoms
gate, and bids not go otherwise then Christ directs. So far is faith from
leading any to any absurdity and disorder, that it keeps them in the hand of
truth, which guides them according to order, and reproves the contrary.

And for women's administering of Ordinances; Gods free love and true faith never
admits or gives way unto any unlawful or disorderly liberty. And I have
endeavored to prove that the free use of ordinances is only to faith, not to
the flesh, and so not in any unseemly way. God who is the God of order, has in
his Word of truth taught women what their duty is: and namely in 1 Cor. 14.34,
35. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12. This rule forbids unto them the administering of
ordinances. And they which have faith, will believe the Lord, and obey his Word.

Again, I have not said, that the administrations of the new Testament are
free for any that believe to administer them. But I have proved that they are
free for all that believe to submit unto them (or rather, to Christ in them,)
without any condition or exception against the same. Therefore it is still the
duty of all that believe in Jesus Christ's, as aforesaid, to hold forth a
confession of this their believing in him, by their professed subjection to him
in the order and rules of his Testament, without which he does not expressly
own any faith in men according to the tenor of the said Testament.

It is said, Object. 19.
Rev. 6.14. That heaven departed, etc. Which must be understood of the Church
and Ordinances, and we do not find when she appeared in the like manner
again.

That this must necessarily be understood of a departing of the Church and
ordinances, Answ.
is not so certain as is imagined. See the like prophecy in Isaiah 34.4. and
note well what went before in ver. 2,3. and what follows in verse. 5, 6. -- 11.
and then consider whether Isaiab did there prophecy of such a departure of the
Church and Ordinances, as is now spoken of. That departing of heaven as a
scroll, spoken of in Revel. 6.14. shall then be when the Sun becomes black
as sackcloth, and the Moon as blood; when the stars of heaven fall unto the
earth, as figs from a fig tree shaken with a mighty wind; when every mountain
and isleland are moved out of their places; when the Kings of the earth, and
the great men, and the rich, and the chief Captains, and the mighty, and every
bondsman, and every freeman hide themselves in he dens, and in the rocks of
the mountains, etc. see the place, viz. Revel, 6.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And then
judge whether it be certain that this prophecy is fulfilled, and the heavens
departing as a scroll is a departing of the Church and Ordinances.

But let this seem as granted for the present; (because heaven in this Book
of the Revelation, does sometimes signify the Church:) But then also mind
that the Churches departing is here set forth by the similitude of a book or
scroll folded together, which before lay open. So then the Church sometimes lay
open in her glory, and her light did shine abroad among the Nations; but now
when that great opposition and persecution did rise against her, she retired
her self in a more private way. A book or scroll is not defaced nor destroyed
when it is rolled up together, but is as perfect in it self as before, only
it lies not so open for every one to look into: and so it is with the Church,
her departing is not from being a Church, but in respect of her obscuring and
hiding of her self from her enemies, as Isai. 26.20. Rev. 12.6.14. For she
only departed as a scroll when it is rolled together, and so continued in her
self a Church, enjoying (as her right) here ordinances and her communion
still. For in the next Chapter, there is the Lord upon his throne, with his
Church and Ministry about him worshipping. The Church then here departed (as
is aforesaid) from her enemies, together with her Ordinances, to a more retired
and obscure condition then before but never departed from her self.

It is said, Object. 20.
Rev. 15.8. That the Temple was filled with smoke from the glory of god, and
from his power, and no man was able to enter into the Temple, till the seven
plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled; Whence it is gathered, that in the
time of Antichrist, and the Beasts reign, there is no entering into any
Church Order, etc.

1. Consider whether it be not a manifest property of an erring spirit, Answ.
to wave clear places of the Scripture, calling for the perpetual use of the
Ordinances of Baptism, and the Lords Supper; as Mat. 28.19. 1 Cor. 11.26. and
other like places: and to choose to walk in the dark, retiring to obscure
places (not yet understood) for a seeming refuge.

2. Consider whether this place do not manifestly allude to that in 1 King.
8.10, 11. and whether that place do import that there was any cessation of
Ordinances in Solomon's time.

3. Take notice that this place in Revel. 15. does hold forth unto us a Church,
and a glorious one too. For here is a Temple out of which the seven Angels go
with their seven golden vials full of the wrath of God against Antichrist, or
the Beast. For this see Revel. 15.1.5, 6. Revel. 16.1. etc. Are not these the
Ministers of Christ, which go forth of the Temple, which is the Church of
Christ? into which men must first come, or else they cannot go out thence: for
no man can be said to go out of a place that he never came in.

Thus this Scripture well considered, shows the weakness of those that take up
the same to oppose the Saints fellowship now, and their confession of Christ in
their professed subjection to his order of the new Testament. This text is so
far from keeping any back, that it rather calls all that have faith to come,
seeing Christ will have at this time (even under the reign of Antichrist) such
a Church, out of which God will raise such notable instruments to encounter
with his enemies.

Though the Church lies sometimes low and obscure, yet God at some times
raises her up again. The Church is as the Temple, sometime open, and sometime
shut: and as the Moon, sometime at the full, and sometime in her change: and
as a wife, sometime sporting with her husband, (as Rebecca with Isaac, Genesis
26.8.) and sometime in travail and pain: sometime singing the song of Moses
and the Lamb, and sometime hanging her harp upon the willowes. And thus she
is made conformable unto Christ her head, who is sometime is blood, sometime on
his throne; sometime in a cloud, and sometime with his face shining as the
Sun; sometime with a rainbow on his head, and sometime in the brightness
of his glory. Therefore although that truth does not always in like manner
appear, yet this frees not man from his obedience unto it when it appears;
but rather engages him the more.

Christ foretells of false Christ's and false Prophets that shall arise and
deceive many, Object. 21.
saying, Lo here is Christ, or there, Matthew. 24. And this is fulfilled in those
that attempt the worship of God some one way, and some another; and yet have
missed the right way. And some perceiving their mistake, have begun again: and
all for want of the infallible Spirit of God to lead them forth at the first.
And as they failed before, even so they may do again.

1. Answ.
Christ's words in Matthew. 24. are an answer to a demand of his Disciples
concerning his coming, and the end of the world; see verse. 3, 4. And Christ
does not answer concerning his coming in the ministry of the Gospel and
administration of his Ordinances; for therein he came not in such a manner as
he speaks of in this Chapter: see verse. 27.30. But concerning his personal
coming; the time whereof was to men unknown: whereupon he charge all his to
be always ready, waiting and looking for his coming continually* see verse.
36.42, 43, 44.

2. The false Christ's and false Prophets that Christ here forewarnes the
faithful to take heed of, are such as shall show great signs and wonders,
ver. 24. How then comes it to pass, that they which hold forth the Gospel and
Ordinances of Christ, are closely insinuated to be these false Prophets, whiles
this is one maine exception against them, That they do not show great signs
and wonders? Surely they prepare men to be deceived by these false Christ's, and
false Prophets, who teach men to receive none as Ministers of Christ, though
they prove their doctrine and way by the Scriptures never so clearly, unless
they show great signs and wonders, and confirm their word and way thereby.

3. The false Prophets here spoken of, are such as shall falsely affirm
themselves to be such Prophets as the Prophets of the old Testament, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, and the rest, were in their time; and as Agabus and some others were
in the Apostles time. And the false Christ's here spoken of, are such as shall
falsely affirm themselves to be Christ in person; as appears in verse. 5. This
therefore cannot be taken up and applied against those that now stand up for
the present use of the Ordinances of Christ.

4. As in the next Chapter Christ teaches his servants not to hide their
talents in the earth, but to trade with the same; that is, to use their gifts
to the gathering of the Elect, and the Churches edification; in which use their
gifts also shall be increased: so in Mark. 13. which is the same in effect with
this present Chapter, he minds his servants, not only to watch that they may
not be found sleeping, verse. 35, 36. but also to consider the authority that
he has given unto them, and the work that he has appointed them, verse. 34.
which must be understood of a ministerial authority, and a work of the
Ministry, to continue till his coming. And in this Chap. verse. 45, 46. he minds
them to give unto his household their meat in due season; which household must
needs be his Church; and their meat, his Word and Ordinances.

5. Do not they in some sort affirm Christ to be in the desert, and in secret
chambers, who affirm the Church to be in such a sort in the Wilderness, as
that there is now no place for the appointed Ministry of the Gospel, and Gospel
Ordinances?

6. As touching the want of an infallible spirit to lead men forth into all
truth; It is true indeed that not only all true and faithful Preachers of the
Gospel, but also all true believers have an unction from the holy One, and know
all things, 1 John 2.20. But this is meant only of some measure of knowledge,
for true believers must still grow in knowledge, 2 Pet. 3.20. And it is meant
only of their knowing all those things, the knowledge whereof is necessary to
salvation. As touching other things, the Spirit of truth does not lead the
Saints into all truth at once. The Apostle Peter and the Church at Jerusalem
was defective in the understanding of the extent of Christ's Commission touching
the preaching of the Gospel to those Gentiles that were not Proselytes, until
God did further inform them. This appears in Acts 10.10 -- 15, 19, 20, 28.34.
Acts 11.2 -- 18. yet was Peter a true Apostle, and the Congregation at
Jerusalem a true Church. Yea it appears that the brethren which prophesied in
constituted Churches were not free from all possibility of mistaking. Note
well, 1 Cor. 14.29. and 1 These. 5.20, 21, 22. David and all Israel with him did
mistake, when they carried the ark of God in a Cart, 1 Chronicles. 13. And were
afterward sensible of their mistake, and reformed it, 1 Chronicles. 15. yet David
was the faithful servant of God, the Priests were the Priests of the Lord, and
Israel was his people: and God did not reprove their endeavor to bring up the
arc to Jerusalem, though he made a breach upon them at the first, because they
sought him not after the due order. Therefore men's mistaking the truth in some
things, does not make void that truth which they have: neither should men
forbear to receive truth, till they can infallibly receive all at once.
Although even godly men be not infallible, yet the rule of Gods written word,
according to which the Saints are to walk, and to judge of ways and
Doctrines, is an infallible rule.

To prevent some further objections, and to make the answers more full to some
objections already minded, consider how the vessels of the house of the Lord
being cut in pieces, the doors of the Temple shut up, the Lamps put out, and
the burning of incense and offering burnt offerings in the holy place unto the
God of Israel, being quite let fall in the days of Ahaz, (2 Chronicles. 28.24. and
29.6, 7.) in the days of Hezekiah the Priests and Levites being encouraged and
commanded by the King, renewed and restored the solemn worship of God; their
authority for the doing of this being not from any worker of miracles, or
extraordinary Prophet in that time, though the Prophet Isaiah was then living;
but from the Law of Moses, and the Word of God by the Prophets that were in
David's days, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. So Zerubbabel and the Jews in his time erecting
again at Jerusalem, first the Altar, and after that the Temple, and so
restoring there Gods appointed worship, had not their authority from miracles
or extraordinary Prophets then raised up, nor from any Priest that then stood
up with Urim and Thummim, (see Ezra 2.63.) but from the Scriptures before
written. Haggai and Zechariah did indeed prophecy unto them; but they did not
first give unto them their Commission and authority, but did reprove them for
their slacknesse, and encourage them in the work; (see Ezra 4.24. and 5.1.)
sharply reproving those that said then, as some do now, The time is not come
that the Lords house should be built, Haggai 1.2. The like is to be noted
concerning the restoring of the right observation of the feast of Tabernacles,
which had been intermitted from Joshuahs time; see Nehem. 8.13. -- 17. If
question be yet made whether the Saints have now authority to restore the
solemn worship of God appointed in his Word for the time of the Gospel, then
mind that they are a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, 1
Pet. 2.9. And that as John the Baptist was greater then the Prophets that were
before him, so he that is least in the kingdom of heaven, is greater then
John, Mat. 11.9.11.

Here also let it be considered, that though all the labor of Hezekiah seemed
to fall to the ground in the days of Manasseh and Amon, and all the labor of
Josiah seemed to be lost in the days of his sons, and in the time of the
captivity, yet God looked not upon it as a lost labor. And though after the
captivity the proceedings were slow, being retarded by many difficulties and
distractions, yet the rebuilding of the Altar and Temple, and the restoring of
the solemn instituted worship, was pleasing to God, and profitable to his
people; notwithstanding that many of the Jews did fall off unto unjust and
irreligious practices; and many stayed still in the territories of Babylon, and
did not come to assist in that building: yea though the glory of the second
Temple was far short of the glory of Solomon's Temple, and there stood not up
at that time any Priest with Urim and Thummim. This well considered, will
easily answer many objections that are now made against those that have
labored, and still labor, to revive the use of Christ's Ordinances, and to set
up again his pure instituted worship.

If many baptized persons do now fall to errors, and some to irregular
practices, and there be among them such divisions as ought not to be; even so
also it was in the Apostles days: yet no godly person will hereupon condemn
the gathering of Churches, and the use of Christ's Ordinances in those days.
And if some godly persons have not had like experience with others, of Gods
effectual blessing following the use of the Ordinances, it may partly be
imputed to some weakness of their says, and partly to their ascribing to the
Ordinance, somewhat belonging only to Christ. And sometimes God here tryes his
children, whether they will live by faith, and wait on him in obedience, even
against present sense. And some Saints have had experience sometimes of the
like deadness in and after prayer, and hearing, and conference: yet these
things are neither to be resused, nor neglected.

Let it also be minded that the same salse principles whereby men are now taken
off from obedience to Christ in the use of his Ordinances, if they be followed
home, will also take men off from obedience to all Christ's commands: for upon
what ground any one command of Christ may be disobeyed, upon the same all may
be disobeyed; see 1 Timothy 5.21. And if the authority of Christ's new Testament
be weakened in one thing, it is weakened in all. To come to particulars. The
same principles will take men off from preaching the Gospel, and from hearing
the Gospel preached to be edified thereby, and from assembling themselves
together, and from joining together in prayer and thanksgiving; yea from
meditation and study of the Word of God: for all these are Ordinances of
Christ, and are no more appointed in the Word for these times, then Baptism
and the Lords Supper.

Many that receive not these Ordinances, Object.
yet do not resuse all Gospel-preaching, conference, prayer, etc.

1. Answ.
This shows that they are not constant to their principles, which discovers
their great weakness to receive such principles as they may not in all things
walk up unto.

2. Though they do not yet resuse these things, yet are they in the ready way
to the refusal of them.

Mind also that as these principles carry men to the denying of a Church and
Ministry, (which denial is most contrary to the Scripture; see Ephesians. 3.21.
and almost the whole Book of the Revelation; and the promise in Matthew. 16.18.
and 28.20) so they carry them by degrees to the rejecting of all the Scripture,
and to the denying of faith and salvation; as lamentable experience has showed
in some. And some upon the aforesaid principles have (with as much ease and as
fair a color, as the no-Church-men dispute from any Scriptures against
Ordinances, though with as gross fallaciousnesse) hitherto wrested our
Saviors words in Mark. 16.17, 18. The answer whereunto does fully overthrow
the maine arguments of the opposers against Ordinances. Indeed if any one of
those three witnesses in 1 John 5.8. were to be excluded and slighted, then
were they all to be in like manner slighted, and so all were lost. But we know
that they are all to be regarded and made use of.

It is also observable by what contrary ways the enemy endeavors to make men
refuse the right use of Christ's Ordinances. Sometimes he persuades men that
Gods people are not yet fit for the use of these Ordinances, because their
light is so dim; because they have so small a measure of gifts, of knowledge,
of faith, etc. And sometimes again he persuades men that they are above
ordinances. He might as well tell them that they are above Jesus Christ, who
commands the use of his Ordinances, and communicates himself unto his in his
Ordinances. Thus any thing shall serve the turn, whereby believers may be
diverted from the right use of the Ordinances of their Lord and Master, and
from obedience unto him. Surely the enemy is mindful of the great advantage
that he thus gets over believers, and how much he makes them herein to sin
against Christ, robbing him, what in them lies, of the glory, and themselves
of the comfort and benefit of his Mediatorship. O that the Saints were more
sensible of the depth of this mystery of iniquity! I am constrained in my
conscience now to speak with earnestness, conceiving the cause to be great;
and remembering our duty to contend earnestly for the faith, which was once
delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. (Where I desire that the force of this word
once, may well be weighed.) I therefore advise, and earnestly exhort all them
that believe, to beware of those doctrines and ways (how fair soever they may
seem to be before they be tried, and what safety soever in these times of
trouble they seem to promise;) which indeed take men off from obedience to
Christ, and from acknowledging the authority of the Scripture. Have no
fellowship with what Doctrine which weakens and questions the power and
authority of Jesus Christ, and the perpetual validity of his Testament;
which disarmes his Soldiers, disbands his armies, and so gives them up into
the hand of the enemy; which empties men's hearts of faith, and deprives the
world of the appointed means of salvation, teaching men to shut up the
kingdom of heaven. Beware of that doctrine which making void the authority of
the new Testament, pulls Christ's Scepter out of his hand, his crown from his
head, and himself from his throne. Remember that the Saints in their communion
and order, are the Lords portion, the declared object of his love in Christ,
and the expressed subject of his promises and blessings: yea they are Christ's
relative perfection, as a wife is to her husband, and the body to the head.
They are his prevailing army against Antichrist; the Standard Bearer to hold
him up before the Nations, and so the means of the worlds conviction, and the
conversion of the rest of the elect. You therefore that believe in Christ for
salvation, hold forth the confession of him before men. Remember that by him
you are made the sons of God, and Kings and Priests unto God, Joh. 1.12. Revel.
5.10. Withhold not your selves then from worshipping God, and enjoying the
appointed privileges of sons. Fear not, but believe: for you being Christ's,
all things are yours; and have you not then a right to his Ordinances? Remember
Christ's love in giving you his Ordinances to confirm your faith. Remember the
need that you have of these Ordinances, and of that effectual blessing with
which Christ uses to follow the right use of his Ordinances. Mind your
communion with Christ, and so be not slow to have communion with him in his
Ordinances. Have fellowship with us; for truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. But specially mind the command of
Christ, and that charge of his in Joh. 14.15. If ye love me, keep my
Commandments.

THE PECULIAR INTEREST OF THE ELECT IN CHRIST, AND HIS SAVING GRACE.
I Now come to the second Question; viz. How far the death of Christ extended
to the taking away the sin of man; whether he dyed for the sins of all men
without exception, or for the sins of some only. My answer hereunto I lay
down in these three Propositions.

1. Christ has not by his death taken away the sins of all men: for the
wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience for their sins, Ephesians.
5.6. But this is that which he declares himself to have effected by his death,
That through his Name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of
sins, Joh. 3.14, 15, 16. Acts 10.43. And it is given to the Elect, and to
them only, to believe in Jesus Christ, Romans 8.29. 1 Pet. 1.2.

2. Christ intended not by his death to save all men from their sins, but
thus to save the Elect only, Joh. 10.15. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Heb. 2.14.
Genes. 3.15. 1 Pet. 2.8.

3. Christ has not presented unto his Fathers justice a satisfaction for the
sins of all men; but only for the sins of those that do, or shall believe
in him; (which are his Elect only.) Rev. 5.9. And if this last Proposition be
granted to be true, the two former cannot be questioned. This therefore I thus
confirm.

1. Those sins for which Christ has presented a satisfaction to his Fathers
justice, he has so fully satissied for, that they are not to be suffered for
again, Heb. 1.3. Heb. 9.26. Heb. 10.10.14. Revel. 1.5. Romans 5.9, 10. Isai.
53.5. Levit. 17.11. It must needs be thus: 1. Because the satisfaction that
Christ has presented to his Fathers justice, is sufficient for the full and
final putting away of all their sins, for whom it is presented. This cannot be
denied. 2. Because Christ dyed as a public person, representing all those for
whose sins he presented a satisfaction to his Fathers justice, 2 Cor. 5.21.
Even as the first Adam fell as a public person, representing all those that
fell by him, and in him; see Romans 5.14. And as the high Priest went into the
Holy place as a public person, representing all Israel, Exodus 28.29, 30. Heb.
9.24, 25. Hence it is that we are looked upon as smitten in Christ, and buried
with Christ, and revived and raised up in Christ, and with Christ, and made to
sit together in heavenly places in Christ; see Hos. 6.1, 2. with 1 Cor. 15.3,
4. Colos. 2.12. Ephesians. 2.5, 6. Now surely they who were thus represented by
Christ, when he presented to his Fathers justice a satisfaction for their
sins, shall not themselves be punished for the same sins. 3. Because else
the satisfaction presented by Christ, would fall short of the type of it,
Levit. 4.20.26.35. and 5.10. and note Heb. 9.13, 14. 4. Because this
satisfaction is accepted of the Father for all those for whom it is presented
by Christ, Isai. 53.10. For Christ the beloved Son of the Father presented this
satisfaction according to his Fathers will. 5. Because it were an unjust and
unreasonable thing that God should receive a satisfaction presented to his
justice for the sins of men, and yet punish the same men for the same sins.
And shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Genesis 18.25. But Reprobates
(or final unbelievers) shall suffer eternally for all their sins; as
appears not only in Ephesians. 5. 6. but also in Joh. 3.36. Joh. 8.24. Mat. 12.36.
Eccles. 12.14. Jude 15. Yea, for their sins considered as breaches of the Law,
as appears in 1 Timothy 1.9, 10. Gal. 3.10. Therefore Christ presented not unto
his Fathers justice a satisfaction for the sins of Reprobates, and consequently
not for the sins of all men.

2. Christ presenting to his Fathers justice a satisfaction for men's sins,
presents this satisfaction as well for all their sins, as for any of their
sins; as well for their sin of unbelief, and the fruits thereof, as for
their sins against the Law, considered as sins against the Law, Levit.
16.21, 22. Dan. 9.24. Heb. 10.14. 1 John 1.7. But even by our adversaries own
confession, it is a clear and certain truth, that Christ has not presented
to his Fathers justice a satisfaction for the unbelief of Reprobates, nor for
the fruits of their unbelief, considered as fruits of their unbelief.
Therefore he has not presented to his Fathers justice a satisfaction for any
of the sins of any Reprobates. The answer of our adversaries here, and the
principal refuge to which they fly, is this: Christ (say they) has not
presented to his Fathers justice a satisfaction for the unbelief of any. But
the falsehood of this appears by the places now alleged: as I shall also
easily manifest, if our adversaries will answer directly whether our unbelief
be a sin, or not. I conceive they dare not say it is no sin, in as much as it
is disobedience against the Gospel, and against the command of God in Matthew.
17.5. and that whereby (so far as it works in us) we cast upon God the
imputation of lying, trusting him no more then we would trust a liar, 1 John
5.10. and our adversaries affirm it to be the only damning sin. Now if it
be a sin, the blood of Jesus Christ does wash us from it, 1 John 1.7. I further
demand; Is our unbelief remitted unto us, or not? If it be not remitted unto
us, our case is most miserable. If it be remitted unto us, it is then done away
by the blood of Christ: for without shedding of blood is no remission, Heb.
9.22. Whereas some say, that we have already suffered punishment for it in the
want of that comfort and joy that faith brings; I demand; Does our sin of
unbelief deserve no other punishment? If they say, No: it shows that they
neither know the nature of this sin, and its ill deserving; neither yet the
glorious righteousness of God, and the declaration thereof in his Word. But if
they say; yea, it deserves eternal destruction; but for all that it is neither
remitted unto us with the rest of our sins, as being washed away by the blood
of Christ, neither shall we be so punished for it: then they will be found to
utter manifest contradictions. Whereas they plead that our unbelief does not
continue, but is broken off; I answer Indeed it does not continue in the reign
of it: but it is enough that it did once reign in us, and that there is a
remainder of unbelief still rebelling in us. And the same (and no more) is to
be said of the rest of our fins and corruptions also: for which notwithstanding
we must have been punished with everlasting descruction, if the blood of Jesus
Christ shed for us for the remission of sins, did not cleanse us from the
same. Whereas they object that there could not have been that unbelief whereby
the Gospel is refused, if Christ had not dyed that he might send forth his
Gospel; and that therefore this unbelief could not be looked upon before the
death of Christ, and the declaration of his Gospel. I answer; 1. That Christ
foreseeing this sin (as he did all other sins) and all the fruits thereof, in
his Elect, did accordingly provide a remedy for the same: otherwise he had not
been unto them a perfect and effectual Savior. 2. That the condemnatory
sentence of the Law, takes hold on men for this sin also, and for all the
fruits of it; because it binds men to obey every command that God shall give,
and to believe every word that he shall speak: without which obeying and
believing, no man can have the Lord for his God, according to the meaning of
the affirmative part of the first Commandment. Therefore Christ had not taken
us off from the Laws condemnation, if he had not presented to his Fathers
justice a satisfaction for this our sin, as well as for our other sins.

3. The Passover (a type of Christ) was not killed for any uncircumcised, but
only for the Israelites, and those that were joined unto them, Exodus 12.
Neither were the Priests to offer sacrifice for any other. All this was
appointed of God to signify, that when the Messiah through the eternal Spirit
should offer himself without spot to God, he should present unto divine
justice a satisfaction for the sins of the Israel of God, and none other.

Whereas it is objected, that many of the Israelites for whom the Passover was
killed, and sacrifices were offered, were unbelievers and perished.

I answer: So also the high Priest himself might be an unbeliever and perish;
yet in his Priestly office he was a type of Christ notwithstanding that
disparitie. So the whole Nation of the Israelites separated from the world to
be a peculiar people unto God, were a type of Gods chosen Israel.

4. When Christ prayed unto his Father that they for whom he laid down his
life, might receive the benefit of the same; he expressly affirmed that he
prayed only for the Elect, and for none other, Joh. 17.9. Whereby he
sufficiently declared that he did not then present to his Fathers justice a
satisfaction for the sins of any other, but only of these.

5. The highest degree of Gods love to man is set forth by his Sons being
given, and giving himself to dye for men's sins, that so he might present to
his Fathers justice a satisfaction for their sins, Joh. 10.11.15. Joh. 15.12,
13. Romans 8.32. 1 John 3.16. and 4.9, 10. Romans 5.8. If then we shall say, that
Christ in his death presented to his Fathers justice a satisfaction for the
sins of all men, we shall be found to extend the highest and choicest love of
God as well to hated Esau, as to beloved Jacob; as well to the seed of the
Serpent, as to the seed of Christ: which doctrine the Scripture will not endure.

6. The whole doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ being delivered unto us in
the Scriptures, it is a sufficient ground for us not to believe that Christ
presented to his Fathers justice a satisfaction for the sins of all men,
because the Scriptures do no where declare this to be a truth; as (through the
help of God) shall be made to appear by our answers to the objections of our
adversaries. For the more easy discovery of the weakness of which objections,
I lay down these ensuing Propositions.

1. The word All in Scripture, does many times signify only some of all
forts, as appears in these places, Mat. 4.23. Act. 10.12. Mat. 3.5, 6. In Mat.
4.23. it is said that Christ healed every sickness, and every disease among
the people; yet the meaning is only this, That he healed every kind of
sickness and disease: see Mark. 6.5. and Joh. 5.3. etc. In Acts 10.12. it is
said, -- wherein were all foure-footed beasts, etc. that is, All kinds of
foure-footed beasts, etc. In Matthew. 3.5, 6. it is said, There went out to him
all Judoaea, etc. And in Mark. 1.5. it is also expressly said, that they were
all baptized of him, etc. Yet this was true only of all orders and degrees of
men coming to John from all the parts of Judaea.

2. The word All, must sometimes be understood with limitation unto the present
subject spoken of. As in Heb. 12.8. -- whereof all are partakers; not all
persons, but only all sons.

3. The word All, does sometime signify only the greater part: as in Philip.
2.21. All seek their own, etc. and in Luke 6.26. Woe unto you when all men
shall speak well of you. Here All cannot take in all the godly, but only the
wicked, which are the greater number. There was not this woe to that Demetrius
which had a good report of all men, 3 John 12. that is, of all godly men that
knew him.

4. The word World in like manner does not always signify all persons without
exception; but sometime only the worser, though greater part of mankind; as
in Joh. 17.9. where the world is put only for persons not elected. Yea, and
when the word whole is added to it: as in 1 John 5.19.

5. Sometimes the word World is put for the Gentiles opposed to the Jews, yea
and with manifest limitation unto those of the Gentiles which did, or should
believe; (which were only the Elect:) see Romans 11.12.15. These Propositions
being thus laid down and proved, the answer to the objections will be the more
easy and clear.

The objection that I will take notice of in the first place, 1. Object.
is taken from Joh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of
the world. Whereto I thus answer.

1. Answ.
Let this be minded, that Christ is here called the Lamb of God, as being
typified by the Paschall Lamb killed for Israel, not for the uncircumcised.

2. It is here declared that it is Christ, and no other, that takes away the
sin of the world. He is the only Redeemer and Savior. The Father saves us no
otherwise but in and by Christ.

3. The sin which Christ takes away, is the sin of the world, being that sin
which is derived to us, and so to all the world, from Adam; and in which all
the world has layen. But the persons from whom Christ takes away this sin, are
only they that do or shall believe in him; and so they are indeed that world
spoken of in Romans 11.12.15. but not that world spoken of in Joh. 17.9. and 1 John 5.19. Our adversaries confess that Christ takes not away the unbelief of
that world: and the Scriptures declare that world to have no part in the
blessedness of those to whom the Lord will not impute sin; see Romans 4.6, 7, 8.

A second objection is drawn from 1 John 2.2. -- not for ours only, 2. Object.
but also for the sins of the whole world.

My answer hereto is as follows:

1. Answ.
Note well the force of the word rendered propitiation, both is this verse, and
in 1 John 4.10. As in these places it is used, it imports that Jesus Christ
makes the Father to be gracious unto us in the free and full pardon of our
sins. Here it is used to clear and prove Jesus Christ to be for us an
acceptable and effectual Advocate with the Father, though we have sinned
against him. And in 1 John 4.10. the highest manifestation of the Fathers love
unto us, is set forth by his giving his Son to be the propitiation for our
sins. This shows it to be the peculiar blessedness of Gods beloved children,
whom he saves for ever, to have Jesus Christ to be the propitiation for their
sins.

2. In 1 John 1.7.9. it is clearly signified that they only are the persons
whom the blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse from all sin, and to whom the Father
according to his faithfulness does forgive their sins, and whom be cleanses
from all unrighteousness, who show their faith by walking in the light, and by
confessing their sins. This also confirms that Jesus Christ is the
propitiation for their sins only.

3. By our sins the Apostle here meant the sins of us believing Jews: (for
to these the Apostle here immediately wrote; as may be gathered from 1 John
2.7. and Gal. 2.9. Yea all the general Eplstles, of which this was one, were
written to these:) and by the sins of the whole world, he meant the sins of
all those that did or should believe among the Gentiles: see Romans 11.15.

The words of our Savior in Joh. 3.16, 17, 18, 19. 3. Object. From Joh. 3. 16,
etc.
are also objected unto us, as if they made against us; we will-therefore
diligently consider them.

Here first were must mind that the same word is sometimes used in diverse
senses in the same sentence; Answ.
examples hereof are to be seen in Joh. 3.6. Romans 9.6. Gal. 4.21. and in other
places. Yea this very word World, is so used in Joh. 1.10. And now let us see
how this word is used in this Scripture, and consider whether this Scripture do
indeed make any thing against us; verse. 16. God so loved the world. By the
World here seems to be meant mankind in general: and Gods loving the world
in his dealing lovingly with the world. This then is the sense; God dealt so
lovingly with mankind, that be gave his only begotten Son, etc. All this
makes nothing against us: for it is not said, that he gave his only begotten
Son to present a satisfaction to his justice for the sins of all men: but that
be gave his mely begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish; but have eternal life. Herein surely God dealt lovingly with mankind;
1. Making a great part of mankind to receive the benesie hereof. 2. Gracionsly
sending this Gospel to mankind; Believe in the Son of God, and ye shall be
saved eternally. This Gospel shows that God is gracious, and deals lovingly,
though men left to themselves reject this Gospel, and so receive no benefit by
it in the end. 3. Sparing mankind a long time, and affording unto them many
benefits by the hand of Christ, for the Elects sake, whiles he graciously waits
and effectually provides for their conversion by the Gospel, and so for their
salvation according to the same. None of which benefits had been afforded to
mankind, if God had not given his Son, that whosoever believes on him, should
not perish; see Prove. 8.15, 16. Joh. 1.9. Mat. 24.22. Acts 14.17. Yet
unbelievers still lie under all their sins, as I have already proved, and as
farther appears in Romans 9.22. and 2 Pet. 2.9. It follows in verse. 17. For God
sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world. God then sent his Son
into the world, when he gave him to be made flesh, and to dwell among us, as it
is said of him in Joh. 1.14. Then he sent him not to condemn the world, nor to
judge the world; (as the Greek word is said here to signify:) But at his
second coming he shall be sent to judge the world, and to condemn all
unbelievers. But the new doctrine of our adversaries makes Christ's first coming
to be coming to condemn the world, in a sense quite contrary to the
Scriptures, whiles they teach, that if Christ had not come and dyed for all,
none could have been damned. Mr. Den in his Dragnet. p. 85.
It follows; but that the world through him might be saved. 1. Here mind that
the pleasure of the Lord did prosper in Christ's hand, Isaiah 53.10. note also
Joh. 6.38, 39, 40. and Joh. 17.2. Therefore Christ did certainly effect what he
was sent for. 2. Mind that the salvation here spoken of, frees men from all
condemnatory judgment. This appears by the antithesis (or opposition) in this
verse. 3. So mind that the world is said to be saved, in that believers are
saved, who are part of the world of mankind, and were chosen out of the rest of
the world, to be saved by Christ; see also 1 John 4.14. compared with the
verses there aforegoing, viz. verse. 9. -- 13. of that Chapter. Our adversarles
not receiving this truth, do sometimes say, hat though all the world be not
saved eternally, because they believe not: yet Christ for his part did for them
all, whatsoever he was to do for the salvation of a^^. But if this were true,
then all must needs be saved. See Jerem. 17.1. For our salvation is fully from
Jesus Christ. We cannot save our selves: neither does the Father work our
salvation, or any thing that concerns the same, any other ways then in and by
his Son Christ. If then Christ as a Savior have done for us whatsoever he is
to do for the salvation of any, how can we miss of salvation? It follows
herein verse. 18. He that believes on him, is not condemned: but he that
believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed, etc. The
believer is delivered from the condemnation of the Law. As for the unbeliever,
because he believes not, he is left to the sentence of the Law, and is already
condemned thereby. All this is with us. It follows in verse. 19. And this is the
condemnation; that is, the cause of condemnation, as being a gross evil for
which men are to be condemned, and a maine cause of that unbelief by which men
are left to condemnation; That light is come into the world, etc. that is; that
light being come into the world, men loved darkness rather then light. The
light come into the world is Jesus Christ held forth in his Gospel. And all
this opposes us not, but confirms the truth that we hold. Thus at the
appearing of the light of truth, the objection from this place is vanished away.

A fourth objection is drawn from 1 Timothy 2.4.6. 4. Object. From 1 Timothy 2.4.6.
answered.
which to our adversaries seems to be of special strength.

In the answering (or rather proventing) whereof we will thoroughly search that
place also, beginning at the beginning of that Chapter, and weighing every
thing diligently that may seem to have any relation to the present Question. 1 Timothy 2.1. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men. By all men in this
place we may not understand all persons, or every person without any exception
or limitation. For under supplications, prayers, and intercessions, are here
comprehended all petitions for all good and needful gifts and blessings for
the persons to be prayed for, put up unto God with all earnestness and
fervency, in which the Petitioners will and must still continue suing unto God
with a holy and humble importunity for those things that they crave: such
Petitions cannot be made in faith for all persons without exception, in as much
as we know that there are many vessels of wrath ordained of old unto
condemnation, Romans 9.22. Jude 4. And there is a sin unto death, for which we
are not to pray, 1 John 5.16. Therefore by all men we are here to understand
all orders and degrees of men. And so the thing to be craved is, that God
according to his purpose and gracious promises would show mercy, and extend the
fruits of his love too all orders and degrees of men; that is, to all those
whom he has chosen to himself out of every nation and kindred, and out of
every order and degree of men and women in the world. This is further confirmed
by that specification or exemplification which follows in verse. 2. For Kings.
Though these were before comprehended under all men, yet are they here more
particularly expressed; 1. Lest the Saints should have been discouraged from
praying for them, by their wickedness. 2. Because God has given Magistrates
to be his own Ministers to us for good, Romans 13.4. And for all that are in
authority; that is to say; 1. Magistrates or Governors in those
Commonwealths that were not ruled by Kings. 2. The several orders and degrees
of inferior Magistrates. That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, etc.
Not that this is the only thing that we are to crave, or aim at: but because
this should in a special manner stir us up to earnest prayer for
Magistrates; viz. that God has given them their authority to this end, that
by means of this authority rightly used, we might lead a quiet and peaceable
life in all godliness and honesty. Verse. 3. For this is good and acceptable in
the sight of God our Savior: viz. That we should thus pray, and give thanks
for all orders and degrees of men; and namely for Kings, and for all that are
in authority. And note how the Apostle proves this in the words following in
verse. 4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of
the truth. In as much as it is the Apostles scope here to prove that it is
acceptable to God, not only that we should pray, but also that we should give
thanks for all men, ( viz. in that sense in which the words all men are used
in verse. 1.) I therefore conceive that he here speaks of Gods effectual will.
And so God wills not that all persons, or every person in the world, should
be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth: as appears in 1. Pet. 2.8.
Jude 4. Isai. 6.9, 10. Romans 11.7, 8. Here therefore by all men we must of
necessity understand only all orders and degrees of men; that is, some of all
orders and degrees: viz. those whom God has chosen to himself out of every
order and degree among men. Thus the great objection from this verse is fully
taken off. It follows in verse. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus. Not one God of Kings, and another of
subjects; one God of Merchants, another of husbandmen: but one and the same God
is the God of all, that saves all that are heirs of salvation, of what order
or degree soever they be. And as the same God has appointed and constituted
the several orders and degrees among men, so he has his Elect whom he will
save, among all those orders and degrees. So also there is not one Mediator
between God and great men, and another between God and mean men: but the same
Christ Jesus is the Mediator between God and all the Elect, of whatsoever
order or degree among men they are.

Verse. 6. Who gave himself a ransom for all. The word All must here be
understood as in verse. 1. and 4. Neither the coherence or context, neither yet
the matter will suffer us to understand it otherwise. For whosoever they are
for whom Christ gave himself a ransom, the same are certainly redeemed from
destruction, and shall for ever be saved. For where a ransom is paid and
accepted for any, the ransomed is thereby freed and made safe, Exodus 21.30.
Exodus 30.12.-15. Psalm. 49.7. Jer. 31.11, 12. And the everlasting salvation of
the ransomed of the Lord is clearly held forth in Isai. 35.9, 10. and 51.10,
11. Hos. 13.14. with 1 Cor. 15.54, 55. Therefore these AB for whom Christ gave
himself a ransom, are only (as aforesaid) men of all orders and degrees;
even those many spoken of in Mat. 20.28. Mark. 10.45. Those whom Christ has
redeemed to God by his blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and
nation, Revel. 5.9. It follows; To be testified in due time; compare this with
1 Pet. 1.20, 21. -- but was manifest in these last times for you, who by him
do believe, etc. Consider also how the words there aforegoing do declare,
that they which are ransomed or redeemed with the blood of Christ, are redeemed
from their vain convensation, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Yea Christ gave himself for
them, that he might redeem them from all iniquity, and purfie them unto
himself a peculiar people, Tit. 2.14. And this is the sum of the gospels
testimony concerning Christ, that being made perfect be became the another of
eternal salvation (not to all persons in the world, but) unto all them that
obey him, Heb. 5.9. having given himself for them, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Thus this
Scripture is so far from being full and strong against us, that it does not
oppose us in any thing. Now becanse the objection from this Scripture seems to
our adversaries to be backed and strengthened by the saying of Peter in 2 Pet.
2.1. therefore that place shall next be looked into.

2 Pet. 2.1. -- There shall be false teachers among you, 5. Object. From 2 Pet.
2. 1. answered.
who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. We grant the persons
here spoken of to be Reprobates; but mind that though the Lord be here said to
have bought them, yet it is not said that he gave himself a ransom for them.
Between these two there is a great difference. The Lord Christ has authority
and power given unto him of the Father over all men; see Psalm. 2.8, 9. Yea over
all creatures, Heb. 2.7, 8. over the Angels in heaven, 1 Pet. 3.22. And the
Devils that hate him, are yet under his power. In the exercise of this power
and authority, he shall at the last day judge all both men and Angels, Joh.
5.27. Acts 17.31. Then every knee shall bow to him, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth; and every tongue shall confess
that Jesus Christ is Lord, Isai. 45.23 Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. This Lordship the man
Christ has obtalned by his death, Phil. 2.8, 9. In that by his death he has
obtained his kingly power and authority over his Church, and consequently this
power and authority over all, that as King of his Church he may use it to his
Churches good, ( Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22, 23.) and the Church may enjoy the
glorious benefit of it; see Revel. 2.26, 27. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. Psalm. 1 49.6, 7, 8,
9. Dan. 7.27. The Father also being pleased thus to show his gracious approving
and accepting of Christ's dying for his Church, even by giving him this power
and authority over all for his Churches good. In this sense, and in this sort
Christ has bought all creatures: yet it does not follow, nor is it true, that
Christ has given himself a ransom for all creatures, or presented to his
Fathers justice a satisfaction for the sins of all creatures. We are put in
mind that the Lord having bought these sinners, this was a great aggravation of
their sin in denying him. We acknowledge this to be true. But let it be
considered. 1. In what fort they did deny Christ. 2. How their being bought by
Christ, was an aggravation of this their sin. 1. They did not deny Christ
openly, saying expressly that Jesus was not the Christ: for they brought in
their damnable heresies privily, and made merchandise of Christians with fained
words, 2 Pet. 2.1.3. and were admitted to their love feasts, Jude 12. But their
denying of him was like unto that which Paul spoke of in It Is. 1.16. being
rebellion against his commands. 2. It was a great aggravation of their sin of
rebellion, that they denied the Lord that bought them. 1. Because Christ having
bought them, had power and authority to command them: therefore they ought to
have obeyed him, and not to have rebelled against him. 2. It was (for the
present) very beneficial unto them that Christ had so bought them. For Christ
in the exercise of that power and dominion over the world, which by his death
he has obtained, conferres upon men all the benefits that they receive. It was
therefore an aggravation of their sin, that they did rebel against such a
benefactour. 3. Christ having obtained by his death this dominion over all, for
the good of those that believe in him, the consideration of his being the Lord
that has so bought all, should persuade sinners to believe in him. This
therefore was an aggravation of their sin of unbelief and disobedience. 4.
Thus the Apostle did also reprove their madness in rebelling against the Lord
that bought them, who therefore could not want power to punish them. Now
although the Lord (in that sense and in that sort that we have taken notice of)
has bought these; yet will he truly say unto them in the day of judgment, I
never knew you, Mat. 7.23.

A sixth objection is presented to us from Heb. 2.9. -- That be by the gract of
God should taste death for every man. 6. Object. From Heb. 2. 9. answered.
Whereto I thus return answer. 1. I deny not, but have already declared, that
every man (without exception of any) does in this life receive benefit by the
death of Christ. And what Christ effects by his death, the same was intended
both by the Father, and by Christ. 2. I am informed that the word man, is not
here expressed in the Greek Text, but supp^yed by the translators: Whereupon I
would have it to be considered, whether they might not as well have supplied
the word Son, because of that which follows in verse. 10. For it became him, for
whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto
glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings. 3.
Though we here read for every man; yet considering what here follows in verse.
10. and what went before in Chap. 1.13. Are they not all ministering spirits,
sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of salvation? I conceive
by every man we may here understand only every son; or (which is all one)
every man that shall be an heir of salvation. This I am the more confirmed in
by that which follows in verse. 11. -- 17. where they for whose sake Christ
took part of flesh and blood, (and consequently, for whose salvation he tasted
death) are declared to be brethren of Christ, and children given to Christ of
the Father. I am also the more confident of this, because of these words by the
grace of God in the place objected to us; it being certain that the Elect, and
only they, are the object of that grace of God whereby we are saved. Thus I
can discern no strength at all in any objection to be made against us from
this place.

Some endeavor to make a seventh objection from 1 Timothy 4.10. 7. Object. From 1 Timothy 4. 19. answered.
-- we trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all man, specially of
them that believe. But the showing of the true meaning of the place, may save
them the labor of making their objection. The Scripture speaks of a twofold
salvation. 1. A salvation temporal, of which you may read in these places:
Psalm. 106.8.10. Nebem. 9.17. Mat. 8.25. Touching this salvation, God is the
Savior of all men. Yea he preserves man and beast, Psalm. 36.6. 2. Eternal
salvation. And this God has prepared for his own people, and for none other;
saving them by his Son Jesus Christ from sin and eternal destruction. To these
he gives to believe in Jesus Christ, that they may be saved by him, according
to the promise of the Gospel. Thus he is the Savior of all men, specially of
them that believe. And thus there remains no objection to be made against us
from this place.

Another place from which an objection is made against us, 8. Object. From Heb.
10. 29. answered.
is Heb. 10.29. Of bow much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under-foot the Son of God, and bath counted the blood
of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, etc. This is
clear that by the blood of the Covenant is here meant the blood of Jesus
Christ, which he himself calls the blood of the new Testament or Covenant,
Mark. 14.24. But who is the person that is here said to be sanctified with this
blood? Our adversaries say, The sinner here spoken of. But his sinner is not in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. He is not made partaker of Christ, Heb. 3.14. He is not
sprinkled with his blood, 1 Pet. 1.2. How then is he sanctified with his blood?
Those that are sanctified with this blood of Christ, by one offering Christ
has perfected them for ever, Heb. 10.14. Therefore they are saved eternally.
It is not therefore the sinner that perishes, but Jesus Christ himself
(spoken of by the name of the Son of God in the words immediately afore-going)
who is here declared to have been sanctified with this blood. There is a
sanctifying of Christ spoken of in Joh. 10.36. That was the Fathers setting him
apart to the office of Mediator. That is not the sanctifying here spoken of.
But that you may rightly understand the sanctifying here spoken of, you must
remember that Christ did bear our sins, 1 Pet. 2.24. Yea the Father did lay
on him our iniquity, Isai. 53.6. And so he was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21.
Now that our sin might neither return upon us, nor still lie upon him, it was
necessary that he should purge it away from himself. This he did by himself,
Heb. 1.3. by his blood, Revel. 1.5. Doing this he sanctified himself with his
own blood: and had he not done this, he had not sanctified us with his blood as
the Scriptures declare him to have done, Heb. 13.12. Therefore when he was
near to his Passion, (in which he was to do this work) he said to his Father
concerning his Disciples, For their sakes (or, for them, as some understanding
the Greek tongue, do say the words may be rendered; that is, for their good) I
sanctify my self, Joh. 17.19. As this interpretation seems to be genuine and
proper, and no way forced, so it fully agrees with the Apostles scope, which
was to hold forth the excellency of the blood of Christ, that so he might also
show their odious sin that count it an unholy thing. And the excellency of the
blood of Christ could not be more clearly declared, then by showing that Jesus
Christ when he was made sin for us (all our sin then lying upon him) was
sanctified by his own blood. Thus this Scripture being truly understood, and so
made to agree with other Scriptures, makes nothing at all against us.

The next place of Scripture objected to us by our adversaries, 9. Object. From
Heb. ^.15. answer.
that we will now consider, is Heb. 9.15. from which they endeavor to infer
that Christ has freed all men from their sins against the first Testament,
and consequently from their sins against the Law, considered as sins against
the Law. And if Christ have freed all men from their sins against the Law,
considered as sins against the Law, then he has presented to his Fathers
justice a satisfaction for the sins of all men. The words in that place of
Scripture, are these; And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new
Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions
that were under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the
promise of eternal inheritance. Here these things are to be considered. 1. By
the first Testament is not here meant any covenant made with Adam, or any
Testament given to Adam before his fall; but the legal and typical Covenant
and Testament made with Israel, and given to Israel, in the days of Moses: as
appears in the words following, viz. in verse. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. compared
with Exodus 24.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. see also Heb. 8.6, 7, 8, 9. 2. The Apostles
scope here is to show that the believing Jews were freed from their sins
against the first Testament, not by the blood of bulls and of goats, or any
such like thing offered according to the Law of Moses: but by the death of
Christ. This appears in this Chap. in verse. 9.12.13. and in Chap. 10. verse.
1.4, 5.8, 9, 10, 11. And here note by the way, that these words once for all in
Heb. 10.10. do not signify once for all men, as some have ignorantly
conceived: but once and no more. 3. The restriction of this to believers
appears plainly in the words of the Scripture objected, if men had eyes to see
it. It appears likewise clearly in the verse afore-going. Also in verse. 24.
compared with Chap. 7.25. Also in Chap. 7.25. Also in chap. 10.10.14, 15, 16,
17. And that unbelievers under the Law were not redeemed from their sins
against the Law, is manifest in Romans 2.12. where it is said, that they shall be
judged by the Law. 4. As it has been already proved In page 40.
that all wicked persons shall be condemned and punished for all their
wickedness whatsoever, so I desire our adversaries to behold this truth again
in that glass which is held forth unto them in Revel. 21.8. For that place
does not only show who shall be punished with eternal torment, but also notes
the evils for which they shall be so punished. Thus we have found this place
also (though objected against us by some of our adversaries with much
confidence, yet) indeed to prove nothing at all of that which our adversaries
have endeavored to prove against us by it.

Another objection is made against us from 1 Cor. 15.1.3. by which place our
adversaries would prove that Christ dyed for the sins of all men, 10. Object.
From 1 Cor. 15 1.3. answered.
and consequently that he presented to his Fathers justice a satisfaction for
the sins of all men. True it is that Christ dyed to this end, that whosoever
believes in him, the same should receive remission of sins, Joh. 3.6. Acts
10.43. And Christ intended that his death should be of perfect sufficiency (as
indeed it is) for the effecting of this. Yet still it is true that he neither
did in his death, nor does in his intercession, present unto his Fathers
justice a satisfaction for the sins of any, save only of those that do, or
shall believe in him; which are his Elect only. But let us consider the place
objected. The words from which the objection is made, are these. -- I declare
unto you the Gospel which I preached unto you. -- For I delivered unto you
first of all, that which I also received, how that Christ dyed for our sins
according to the Scriptures. The Apostles scope here is to show the certainty
of Christ's resurrection, not only in it self, but also to the faith of the
believing Corinthians; and consequently how foolish they should be, if they
should deny the resurrection of the bodies of the Saints, wherein by necessary
and immediate consequence, they would be found to deny Christ's resurrection. To
this end he represents unto them how the Gospel which he at the first preached
unto them, and they through grace received, did contain in it) as a maine and
fundamental part thereof) the doctrine of Christ's resurrection. This, I say,
is the Apostles scope in this place. And thus representing to them (to the end
aforementioned) the Gospel which he first preached to them, he brancheth the
doctrine thereof into three Articles. 1. The doctrine concerning Christ's death.
2. Concerning his burial. 3. Concerning his resurrection. And here he ties not
himself to the same form of words which he at first used, but only
represents unto them the substance and heads of that doctrine which he first
preached unto them. The doctrine of Christ's death he thus sets forth; That
Christ dyed for our sins according to the Scriptures. By the Scriptures he
means the Scriptures of the old Testament: which Scriptures do not hold forth
Christ presenting to his Fathers justice a satisfaction for the sins of all
men, but the contrary altogether. The types of Christ in and under the Law held
him forth as a Priest and a Redeemer for his Israel, and of his Israel only:
and the rest of the Nations were looked upon as aliens from the Commonwealth
of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants, etc. Ephesians. 2.12. Insomuch that
the Apostles themselves for a while (not yet knowing the largeness of the
extent of Gods Israel knew not that Christ should be found to be a redeemer of
any of those Gentiles which were not joined unto Israel as Proselytes. This
appears in Acts 10. and 11. see also Ephesians. 3.3.5.6. And the testimony of the
Prophets concerning Christ, you may see summed up in Acts 10.43. This then was
the Gospel which the Apostles (and consequently Paul, who preached the same
Gospel that the rest of the Apostles did) did every where preach; viz. That
Christ according to the Scriptures did dye for the taking and putting away of
all the sins of all those that did or should believe in him; compare Acts
10.43. with Acts 15.7. This doctrine Paul in this his brief repetition
directly applies, not only to himself, but also to the Corinthians to whom he
wrote, because he looked upon them as believers, 1 Cor. 1.2. and 6.11. And thus
it appears that this Scripture also makes nothing for our adversaries in this
controversy or question.

Whereas some of our adversaries do endeavor to trouble both themselves and
us with an objection from 1 Cor. 15.22. we will next. consider that place. 11.
Object. From 1 Cor. 15. 22. answered.
The words of the Apostle there are these: As in Adam all dye, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive: or as some translate; As by Adam all dye, even
so by Christ shall all be made alive. Touching which place, mind these things.
1. The Apostle does not there speak of something already past, but only of
something to come. If he had there spoken of Christ's presenting in his death a
satisfaction to his Fathers justice for the sins of all men, he would have
said; As in Adam all have dyed, even so in Christ all have been made alive. 2.
The Apostle there speaks of the resurrection of the body unto life, even to
the life of glory; of that which Christ calls The resurrection in Luke 20.35,
36. Of the same which he speaks of afterward in this Chapter, verse. 42, 43,
44. Neither does he in this Chapter speak immediately and directly of any
other resurrection. 3. By all therefore we must here understand only all those
that are Christ's; verse. 23. of whom Christ is the first fruits; verse. 20. Upon
all these, as well as upon the rest of mankind, death entered by Adam and in
Adam: and to all these, though not to the rest of mankind, there shall be a
glorious resurrection of the body by Christ and in Christ. If this were not
true, then Christ were not risen, and so our faith were vain, and we yet in
our sins. These things being thus clear, I do not fear any objection from
this place.

There seems unto some to be somewhat against us in 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. 12.
Object. From 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. answered.
Therefore that place also shall now be diligently weighed. The words are
these; The love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one
dyed for all, then were all dead: And that be dyed for all, that they which
live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which dyed for
them, and rose again. Let the coherence and scope of this text be minded. The
Apostle had before expressed his laboring to keep a good conscience, verse. 9.
and 11. And in that expression concerning himself, he seemed to join himself
with others that faithfully assisted him in the preaching of the Gospel. Here
he declares the strong motive that still put him on upon that holy laboring;
viz. The love of Christ apprehended by faith. This love of Christ to him he
declares and commends by Christ's dying for him, when he himself was dead. He
shows also the end for which Christ so showed this love unto him; viz. That
henceforth he might not live unto himself, but unto Christ who dyed for him.
And in holding forth all this, he extends the same (as there was good cause for
it) to all believers: but with any other he medleth not in this place. The word
All is here used, as in Heb. 12.8. for all the sons, not all persons; for all
the Saints, ( Chap. 1.1.) not all men; for all that are in Christ, ( verse. 17.)
not for all in the world. And Christ's dying for them all, shows that they were
all dead in themselves, else Christ needed not to have dyed for them. It is
objected, that all men in the world were thus dead in themselves. Ans. The
thing indeed is true; but the Apostle had no occasion to take any notice of it,
or to make any use of it here; but only of this, that we who now live through
grace, were once miserably dead, as sufficiently appears by Christ's dying for
us to save us from this misery. The Apostle has the like expression in Romans
3.23. For all have sinned, and come Short of the glory of God. Though this in
it self be true of all men without exception, yet it is manifest by that which
there goes before in verse. 22. and that also which follows in verse. 24, 25, and
26. that the Apostle there speaks only of all those that do believe. Whereas
our adversaries would observe in this saying in 2 Cor. 5.15. that they which
live are but a part of those all for whom Christ is there said to have dyed;
they therein endeavor to observe that which the Apostle neither spoke, nor
meant. For by they which live, is there meant only they living.

Whereas our adversaries would either confirm their objection from the place
last answered unto, 13. Object. From 2 Cor. 5. 19. answered.
or else trouble us with another, from that which follows in verse. 19. -- God
was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them. I thereto thus answer. The word world, must there be
understood as in Romans 11.12.15. and so not be extended beyond those to whom
grace is (or shall be) given to believe in Jesus Christ. For these only are
the blessed ones, to whom God imputes not sin; as we have already seen in
Romans 4.6, 7, 8. These only are they that are afterward spoken of in 2 Cor.
5.21. for whom the Father made Christ to be sin, that they might be made the
righteousness of God in Christ. For God is not frustrated of his end there
propounded.

But the objection which seems strongest against us, 14. Object. From Romans 5.
8. answered.
is that which is drawn from Romans 5. and specially from verse. 18. of that
Chapter, where the Apostle has these words; Therefore as by the offense of
one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation: even so by the righteousness
of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. Therefore I
shall now address my self by the help of God, to give a plain answer to
this also in words of truth and soberness. 1. The scope of the Apostle here is
to commend the infinite love of God unto his children, shown and extended unto
them in Jesus Christ, and shed abroad in their hearts by the holy Spirit which
is given unto them. This will easily appear to any godly person that shall
diligently read from verse. 5. of this Chapter to the end; and shall consider
how every verse depends on that which went immediately before. 2. In the latter
part of this Chapter, Jesus Christ as the second or last Adam (as he is called
in 1 Cor. 15.45.47.) is compared with the first Adam, which first Adam is said
to be the figure of him that was to come, verse. 14. For as all that fell, did
fall in and by the first Adam: so all that are raised again to eternal life,
are raised again in and by Jesus Christ. Other things wherein the similitude
does either hold, or not hold, between Adam and Christ. I leave the Reader to
consider in the Chapter. 3. Whereas in verse. 17. the Apostle speaks of an
abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, which believers receive;
this is not meant of a greater measure of grace received by some believers then
by others: but it commends the abundant excellency of that grace, and gift of
righteousness which all believers do receive, whereby they are assured, that
they shall reign in life by Jesus Christ. Here also consider verse. 15. of this
chap. and compare this 17th verse. therewith. 4. All they upon whom the free
gift came unto justification of life, by the righteousness of Christ, and all
they which shall be made righteous by his obedience (as it is in verse. 19.)
shall be saved eternally: as also further appears in verse. 9, 10. and in verse.
21. of this Chapter. 5. Those all men on whom judgment came unto condemnation
by the offense of Adam, and those many that were made sinners by his
disobedience; (as it is in verse. 19.) are all those, and only those, that are
(or shall be) from Adam and by Adam in respect of natural life and being; and
were accordingly represented by Adam when he fell. Thus the man Jesus the Son
of the virgin Marie, was exempted. As he was not by Adam, so neither was he
represented by him when he fell. He was not for his own part, and as touching
his own person, made a sinner by Adams disobedience, as we were: neither did
the judgment so come upon him to condemnation by Adams offense, as it came
upon us. For then he had been under condemnation for his own original sin.
So that even here the words all men are not to be taken in the largest extent,
without any limitation. 6. Accordingly those all men on whom the free gift came
unto justification of life by the righteousness of Christ, and those many
which shall be made righteous by the obedience of Christ, (as it is in verse.
19.) are all those, and only those, that are (or shall be) from Christ and by
Christ in respect of new life, and their being new creatures, being borne (or
begotten) of him, 1 John 2.29. who were accordingly represented by Christ when
he dyed and rose again, as I have Page 40.
already showed. Thus the seed of the Serpent is excluded. And thus even here
also (through the goodness of God) the light of truth shines forth, and the
mist of error vanishes before it.

Some conceive that they shall find something against us in the saying of
Caiaphas recorded in Joh. 1^.49, 50. and in John's note or observation upon the
same in verse. 51, 52. 15. Object. From Joh. 11. 49. etc. answered.
Indeed if Caiaphas had spoken of himself, we might possibly have expected
some opposition, considering how a carnal heart, and the large and
flesh-pleasing doctrine (falsely called Gospel) which we now oppose, do easily
agree and close together; as experience also makes manifest. But in as much as
Caiaphas now spoke not of himself, but being high Priest that year, did
prophecy; we shall certainly find nothing against us in his speech. The saying
of Caiaphas was this; Tee know nothing at all, nor consider that it is
expedient for us, (that is, for us Jews; for the Nation of the Jews) that one
man should dye for the people, and that the whole Nation perish not. Hereupon
John gives this note; -- He prophesied that Jesus should dye for that Nation,
etc. The dying of Jesus for that nation, was his dying for the redemption of
all the children of God of that Nation; yea of all the children of God
wheresoever scattered abroad, of what Nation soever they were: of all which
children of God that Nation (in the separation thereof from the rest of the
world to be a peculiar people unto God) had hitherto been an appointed type.
For so John further explaines it in verse. 52. And not for that Nation only,
but that be should gather together in one the children of God that were
scattered abroad. This only holds forth that Jesus was to present unto the
justice of God his Father, a satisfaction for the sins of all the children of
God of what nation soever, and that hereby their salvation should be effected.
So it confirms the same truth that we maintain.

But yet our adversaries seem confident that by the words of our Savior in
Matthew. 12.31, 32. 16 Object. From Mat. 12.31, 32. answered.
they shall prove that all sins against the Law (considered as sins against
the Law) are forgiven to all men; and consequently, that Christ has presented
a satisfaction to his Fathers justice for the sins of all men. Let us therefore
with all seriousness, and in the fear of the Lord, consider that place also;
and diligently mind both what is said, and also what is truly to be said
concerning it. The words of our Savior there are thus rendered; -- All manner
of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the
Spirit shall not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaks a word against
the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaks against the
holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in
the world to come. Here let these things be considered.

1. Whereas our adversaries find fault with the last translation in the former
part of verse. 31. contending that the words ought there to be thus rendered;
Every sin and blasphemy; I have already Page 43.
proved that the word All, or Every, does sometimes signify only some of all
sorts, or of every sort.

2. Whereas they bring this place to prove the forgiving of all sins against
the Law to all men, but not of any sins against the Gospel; (which they
acknowledge not to be forgiven to all men) let it be minded that Christ here
speaks of sins against the Gospel, as well as of sins against the Law; unless
it be no sin against the Gospel to speak against Christ.

3. Observe that Christ does not here say, every sin and blasphemy is forgiven
unto men; and whosoever speaks against the Son of man, it is forgiven him.
But he speaks with manifest and express reference unto time to come; It shall
be forgiven. Even as he says of the blasphemy against the holy Spirit, with
reference to the same time to come; It shall not be forgiven, neither in this
world, neither in the world to come. But by the doctrine of our adversaries,
every sin and blasphemy, that they understand to be here so spoken of, is
already forgiven to all men; yea and they would have this place to seem to
prove it. I suppose they will say, that Christ did here thus speak of the time
to come, because he had not yet suffered for men's sins. But this reason is
insufficient. For though Christ had not yet actually suffered, yet his
sufferings were already accepted of the Father, and so effectual for the
putting away of the sins of all those that were partakers of him; see Dan.
9.19. 1 Samuel 12.13. Matthew. 9.2. And this saying of Christ in Matthew. 12.31, 32.
does as well belong to the time after his passion, as to that particular time
in which Christ so spoke it: as also appears in 1 Timothy 1.13. compared with
Heb. 10.26, 27. and 1 John 5.16.

4. Whereas our adversaries conceive, or take it for granted, that the sin
against the holy Spirit here spoken of, which shall never be forgiven, is
nothing else but final unbelief; in this also they do greatly err. For they
which do fall into this sin, do fall into it in their lifetime; yea
sometimes long before their death. Thus it was with those Pharisees that had
now committed this sin: see Matthew. 12.24, 25. with verse. 31, 32. and Mark.
3.22.28, 29, 30. This also appears in Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. and Heb. 10.26, 27, 28,
29. Moreover, there are multitudes, yea millions of unbelievers, that go to
eternal destruction without committing this sin. And here, I conceive, it will
neither be impertinent, nor unprofitable, to show what this sin is. This sin
against the holy spirit, is the sin of those that wittingly and wilfully oppose
with odious blasphemies the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ himself
as he is the author and subject of his Gospel. 1. This sin is an opposing and
rejecting of the whole Gospel of Jesus Christ, and of Jesus Christ himself as
he is the author and subject of his Gospel. Therefore the committers of this
sin are not only said to fall away, but also to crucify to themselves the Son
of God afresh, and to put him to an open shame, Heb. 6.6. Yea they are said to
tread underfoot the Son of God, and to count his blood an unholy thing, and to
do despite unto the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10.29. 2. This sin is not committed
ignorantly, but against a great and clear light of knowledge, 1 Timothy 1.13.
Heb. 6.4. Heb. 10.26. Mat. 21.38. 3. This sin is not committed through
infirmity, but wilfully, in the exercise of a full and settled malice, even
against Christ, not only known but also minded to be Christ, and against his
Gospel, both known and minded to be his Gospel, and against the commands and
invitations of the Spirit of grace, though known and minded to be his commands
and invitations: and accordingly this Devilish malice caries on the sinner to
abominable blasphemies, and makes him always to hate all thoughts of
repentance, though he expect nothing but fiery indignation. All this is to be
seen by the light of these places of Scripture, viz. Heb. 6.6. and Heb. 10.26,
27.29. And this sin is called, The sin (or blasphemy) against the holy Spirit,
because it is so committed against the work of the holy Spirit, giving such a
light of the knowledge of the Gospel, and calling upon the sinner to obey the
Gospel so revealed. (...) is sin a man falls into when he is only enlightened
(by the work of the holy Spirit) with the knowledge of the Gospel, and called
upon (by the same Spirit) to yield obedience thereunto: and God does not add a
further powerful work, giving unto him a new heart, and putting a new spirit
within him. And thus is discovered the desperate wickedness of man's heart, and
his hatred of the Gospel, which would in like manner appear in all, if all
were dealt with in like fort. By this it may be discerned how gross the error
of our adversaries is, who account this sin and blasphemy against the Spirit
to be nothing else but final unbelief.

5. The scope of our Savior here was to show that this sin against the holy
Spirit, shall never be forgiven to any person that once falls into it; and
that herein this sin differs from all other sins that men commit. For there
is no sin but it may be forgiven, and is (or shall be) forgiven to some that
have committed it, this sin only excepted: there being no sin, save only
this, which may not be repented of, and is not repented of (through Gods
mighty grace) by some that have committed it. Our adversaries do
notwithstanding straightly press us with these words; Whosoever speaks a word
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him. Whereto I answer, That this
clause, It shall be forgiven him, does here signify no more then, it may be
forgiven him. As in 1 Cor. 3.15. this clause, He himself shall be saved, does
signify no more then, he himself may be saved. For it is not of necessity
that every one must be saved, that builds hay and stubble on Christ the
foundation; that is, brings false professors of faith into an outward union in
Church Fellowship with others that are built on Christ the Rock. Thus it still
remains firm, that no sin is indeed remitted to unbelievers. And thus this
place makes not against us.

Some of our adversaries do also object against us, 17. Object. From Jer.
31.33, 34. answered.
Jere. 31.33, 34. affirming that God has now made the Covenant there spoken
of, with all men; and consequently that all men's sins are forgiven. This
therefore shall next be inquired into. The words of that Scripture are these;
This shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; Aster
those days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And
they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto
the greatest of them, says the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I
will remember their sin no more. Touching which Scripture I affirm, and
undertake to prove, that God has not made the Covenant here spoken of, with
all men, but with his Elect only. 1. The Scripture does not teach us, by the
house of Israel to understand all men. 2. This Covenant God keeps and
performs, with all those, and unto all those that he has made it with:
otherwise God were not faithful, but rather false and deceiving; which to
imagine were odious blasphemy. But God performs this Covenant only to his
Elect. 3. It is manifest from the latter part of verse. 34. that God performs
this Covenant both to all those, and only to those, whose iniquity he will
forgive, and whose sin he will remember no more. This place therefore is so
far from speaking for our adversaries, as that it overthrows them altogether.
But they object that all of the house of Israel are not Gods Elect. I answer,
that Israel notwithstanding did typifie the whole company of Gods Elect, as
also is intimated in Psalm. 135.4. and accordingly they who are declared to be
Gods Elect, are called Israel, and Israelites indeed, Romans 9.6. Psalm. 73.1.
Joh. 1.47. Gal. 6.16. They further object, that God puts his Law in the inward
parts, and writes it in the hearts of some (at the least) that are not his
Elect. I answer, that the Law here spoken of, is the very doctrine of the
Gospel; and that Gods putting this Law into men's inward parts, and writing it
in their hearts, is his making them to understand, and to love; to believe, and
to obey this Gospel. And this God works only in his Elect, whom he makes his
own people, and he is found to be their God. For this see Jere. 24.7. Jere.
32.38, 39, 40. Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27, 28. It being a clear and most
manifest truth, (though some of our adversaries are so blind, that they cannot
see it) that that precious promise in Isai. 54.13. is made only to the Elect.

Some endeavor to frame an objection against us from Dan. 9.24. 18. Object.
From Dan. 9. 24. answered.
where we thus read; Seaventie weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon
thy holy City, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to
make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness,
etc. But all this is spoken with a manifest reference and restriction to Gods
Elect. -- Thy people; that is, The people of Israel, (who are thy people after
the flesh, thou being one of that separated Nation;) viz. as they are a type of
the Israel of God, and no otherwise. Or rather, Thy people; that is, The
Israel of God to which thou appertainest. So also, Thy holy City; that is, The
City Jerusalem as it typifies the heavenly Jerusalem. Or rather, Thy holy
City; that is, Jerusalem which is above, which is thy mother. Here also
observe, that everlasting righteousness is the portion of all those whose
transgression is finished, to whose sins an end is put, and for whose
iniquity reconciliatio^ is made. This then is peculiar to Gods Elect, who only
are heirs of everlasting righteousness; who only are that remnant of Gods
heritage, whose iniquity he pardons, and whose transgression he passes by;
whose iniquities he will subdue, and all whose sins he will cast into the
depths of the Sea, Micah 7.18, 19. These only are that Jacob the Lords
servant, and that Israel whom he has chosen, ( Isai. 44.1.) whose
transgressions he blotteth out for his own sake, and will not remember their
sins, Isai. 43.25. These only are that Jacob which the Lord bath redeemed,
and that Israel in which he has glorified himself; whose transgressions he
has blotted out as a thick cloud; and as a cloud, their sins, Isai. 44.22,
23. These are they to whom the Lord proclaimed himself, not only merciful
and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth; but also
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin,
Exodus 34.6, 7. See also Psalm. 103.10, 11, 12, 13. As touching the rest, he
proclaims himself to be that Lord that will by no means clear the guilty,
Exodus 34.7. who will take vengeance on his adversaries, and reserveth wrath for
his enemies, Nahum 1.2. who repayeth them that hate him, to their face, to
destroy them, Deuteronomy. 7.10. Their own iniquities shall take them, and they shall
be holden with the cords of their sins, Prove. 5.22. The reward of their hands
shall be given them, Isai. 3.11. Their iniquity shall be remembered with the
Lord, and their sin shall not be blotted out, but the same shall be before the
Lord continually, Psalm. 109.14, 15.

Some endeavor to confirm the objection that I have now answered, by another
objection from Isai. 40.1, 2. 19. Object. From Isai. 40.1, 2. answered.
where it is thus written; Comfort ye, my people, says your God. Speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished,
that her iniquity is pardoned, etc. But they should here take notice that by
my people, the Lord clearly means his chosen people, and none other. This
therefore is to be applied to the Elect only. They object, that this was
spoken of Jerusalem which then was. That believers in that Jerusalem were even
then to make use of it, is acknowledged. But it is manifest that as this was
only meant of believers, so it was specially meant of believers which should
be in the time of the Gospel more fully declared, and of Jerusalem which is
above, which should then be more clearly discovered and gloriously enlarged.
This is made evident partly by this clause in verse. 2. -- that her warfare is
accomplished: partly by that which follows in verse. 3, 4, 5. The voice of him
that cries in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, etc. And here
mind the saying of Peter in 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. Of which salvation the
Prophets have enquired, and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace
that should come unto you, searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of
Christ which was in them, did signify, when it testified beforehand the
sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow. Unto whom it was
revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the things
which are now reported unto you.

Our opposers now seem to fly to that which is written in Isai. 53.5, 6. 20.
Object. From Isai. 53.5, 6 answered.
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All
we like sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to his own way, and
the Lord has laydon him the iniquity of us all. But here they will find as
little defense or help, as they have found in those places to which we have
already followed them. They conceive that all men are brought in here speaking,
or (atleast) some speaking as in the name of all: whereas indeed only
believers do here speak. Only that people of God for whose transgression
Christ was smitten, verse. 8. Only that seed of Christ which is spoken of in
ver. 10. Only those many whom by his knowledge Christ does justify, having
borne their iniquities, verse. 11. Only those transgressors for whom Christ
made intercession, verse. 12. which are only those that come unto God by him,
Heb. 7.25. Joh. 17.9.20. Who are healed by the stripes of Christ, but only
believers? To these only (according to the promise in Malach. 4.2.) the Sun of
righteousness did arise with healing in his wings. Consider also How this is
applied unto believers, and unto believers only, in 1 Pet. 2.24, 25. Who his
own self have our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to
sins, should live unto righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed. For
ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd and
Bishop of your souls. Here take notice both of the end that Christ propounded
unto himself when he so bare our sins, and also how he was not frustrated,
neither did fail of the same. Moreover, I demand this of our opposers, whether
this confession (being sincerely made) do not show a man to be a believer;
viz. Christ was wounded for my transgressions, he was bruised for my
iniquioies, etc. They dare not answer negatively. How then dare they affirm
that any other beside believers, do here make this confession? Though many
unbelievers did esteem the Lord Jesus in his passion to be stricken, smitten
of God, and afflicted, according to that saying in Isaiah 53.4. yet only those
that were afterward converted to the faith, did come to such a fight and humble
acknowledgement of that their sinful error, as is there held forth. But
possibly it will be objected unto us, that it is written in Matthew. 8.16, 17.
They brought unto Jesus many that were possessed with devils, and be cast out
the spirits with his word, and healed all that were sick: That it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet, saying, Himself took our
infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. Which has clear relation unto that in
Isai. 53.4. Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows. Which
makes it seem probable (at least) unto some, that this is to be extended
farther then to believers only. Hereto therefore I thus answer. 1. The Prophet
Isaiah there manifestly speaks of Christ's bearing our sins, which are there
called our griefs, and our sorrows, because they are causes of grief and
sorrow. Here in Matthew. 8.17. they are in like manner called our infirmities,
and our sicknesses, because they are causes of infirmity and sickness: for it
is sin that has brought in all grief and sorrow, infirmity and sickness. 2.
The love and compassion that Christ effectually showed in casting out the
Devils out of those that were possessed with them, and healing the sick, did
prove him to be that promised Savior, which should so bear and carry the
griefs and sorrows of his people. And all the good which he did to men by
such his works, was the fruit (and so also the evidence) of that his bearing
the sins of his people. And therefore, I conceive, the Evangelist said that
he did this, That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaiah the Prophet,
etc. that is, That the fulfilling thereof might be manifest. 3. The persons to
whom Christ so showed compassion, were either indeed Gods chosen ones, or at
least of the nation of the Israelites; (which were the appointed type of all
Gods Elect.) See Matthew. 9.2.22. Joh. 4.53. Luke 7.9. Mat. 10.5. Mat. 15.24 etc.
And thus it was intimated who they were whose griefs and sorrows Christ came
to bear and to carry; viz. Gods peculiar and chosen people.

There is also an objection made from Genes. 12.3. 21. Object. From Genesis 12.3.
answered.
(and other like places) where God said unto Abraham, In thee shall all
families of the earth be blessed. But this is fully taken off in Galat. 3.8, 9.
where the Apostle says; The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the
heathen through faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee
shall all Nations be blessed. So then, they which be of faith, are blessed with
faithful Abraham. If then we will believe the Spirit of God in the Apostle, we
must acknowledge that the meaning of that promise was only this; That
believers of all Nations should be blessed in Christ the promised seed of
Abraham.

The words spoken by Peter to the men of Israel in the Temple at Jerusalem, 22.
Object. From Acts 3.26 answered
recorded in Acts 3.26. are by some supposed to be very strong against us.
Those words therefore shall now be taken diligently into consideration. The
words are these; Unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him
to bless you, is turning away every one of you from his iniquities. Here let
these things be considered. 1. In as much as God does never fall short of the
end that he propounds to himself, he must be understood to have blessed these
Israelites by his Son Jesus, in that many of them which then heard the Word,
believed, Act. 4.4. He blessed them then, that is, many of them; viz. those
that were ordained to eternal life. 2. Whereas it follows; In turning away
every one of you from his iniquities. This implies that they only should show
themselves partakers of this blessing, who should show their believing in Jesus
Christ through the grace of God, by being turned away (through the same grace
of God) from their iniquities. In turning away every one of you; viz. whom he
blesses, or shall bless, by his Son. And we have proved in our answer to the
objection aforegoing, that they only are blessed in Christ, that believe in
him. 3. This their being turned away from their iniquities, was a being truly
converted from the love and service of sin, to the loathing and forsaking of
it. And thus this place also does indeed make nothing against us.

Some have endeavored to frame an objection against us from the words of our
Savior to the Pharisees in Joh. 9.41. 23. Object. From Joh 9. 41. answered.
If ye were blind, ye should have no sin. From these words they would
infer, that these Pharisees had not been chargeable of any sin, if the Gospel
had not been preached to them; and consequently, that Christ had taken away
from them their sins against the Law; and if he took those sins away from
them, then also from all men. Our answer is as follows. 1. Christ does not say
to these Pharisees, If the Gospel had not been preached unto you; But; If ye
were blind. 2. He does not say, Ye should not have been chargeable of any sin:
But only with reference to the time present and to come, ye should have no
sin. 3. He does not there say; But now the Gospel has been preached unto you.
But he says, But now ye say, we see. 4. Christ plainly tells them, Your sin
remains. If their sin remained, then Christ did not take it from them. Their
sin which remained, was not only sin against the Gospel, but also sin against
the Law. Their devouring widows houses, Matthew. 23.14. Their omitting the
weightier matters of the Law, judgment, mercy, and faithfulness, Mat. 23.23.
Their extortion and excess, Matthew. 23.25. yea it seems our opposers
themselves understand Christ to speak in this verse of sin against the Law:
for otherwise they would not have brought this place (as they have done) to
prove Christ's taking away sins against the Law from those that continue
finally in unbelief. Thus this Scripture is so far from opposing our
doctrine, that it confirms it altogether. 5. The true meaning of this
Scripture, is this; If ye were blind; that is, If ye did say, we are blind.
This interpretation is confirmed by the antithesis or opposition following; But
now ye say, we see. If ye did say, we are blind; viz. being sensible of your
blindness, and sincerely and freely acknowledging it, and so exercising and
manifesting true repentance and faith. Compare this with 1 John 1.9. If ye
confess, etc. Ye should have no sin; that is, Your sin should not remain.
This also is confirmed by the antithesis in the last words of the verse;
Therefore your sin remains. Your sin should not remain; for if we confess
our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse
from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. If any shall yet reject this true
exposition of this Scripture, he must be enforced to say, that man's blindness
whereby he does not behold the light of the Gospel of Christ, does make a man
to have no sin. Then which nothing can be spoken more absurdly, nor more
falsely.

The same opposers have endeavored to strengthen their former objection by
another (like unto it) from the words of Christ in Joh. 15.22.24. 24. Object.
From Joh 15.22.24. answered.
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin. -- If I had not
done among them the works which none other man did, they had not bad sin. From
hence also they would in like manner infer, that the men of whom Christ here
speaks, had not been chargeable of any sin, if the Gospel had not been
preached to them. Our answer is this. Christ did not here say, If the Gospel
had not been preached to them. But, If I had not come and spoken unto them.
That is, If I had not come and preached to them in mine own person. And, If I
had not done among them the works which none other man did: That is, If I had
not wrought my mighty works and miracles among them. Therefore when Christ
here says, They had not had sin; he does not mean, They had been in no wise
chargeable of any sin: But, They should not have been so manifestly inexcusable
in gross and open sin. For so the word sinners does sometimes signify persons
manifestly inexcusable in gross and open sins: as you may see in Matthew. 9.10.
The Jews were chargeable of sin before Christ wrought his miracles among
them; before he preached unto them in his own person; and before his
incarnation; see Amos 2.4, 5. Yea the men of Tire and Zidon were chargeable of
sin; and the men of Sodom and Gomorrah were chargeable of sin; see Ezekiel. 16.49,
50. and Jude 7. Our interpretation of Christ's words does agree plainly with the
clear meaning of that in James 4.17. To him that knows to do good, and does
it not, to him it is sin. That is, To him it is manifestly gross and
inexcusable sin. And this interpretation is fully confirmed by the antithesis
presently following in verse. 22. But now they have no cloak (or, no excuse)
for their sin. Thus this place also is far from proving that which it has
been brought to prove against us.

The saying of the Apostle in Colos. 1.20. is also by some objected against us,
25. Object. From Colos. 1.20. answered.
as if it contradicted our doctrine. The saying of the Apostle there is this;
And (having made peace through the blood of his cross) by him to reconcile all
things unto himself; by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things
in heaven. Our answer hereto shall consist of these branches. 1. Whereas some
of our opposers take all things here in the largest sense, comprehending all
creatures, and so Angels as well as men; this is a manifest error. The holy
Angels needed no reconciler. The Angels that fell are not reconciled; neither
did Christ take on him the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.16. And I believe, our
opposers will not say, that Christ presented to his Fathers justice a
satisfaction for the sins of Angels. 2. It has been already proved In Page
43.
that the word All must sometimes be understood with limitation to the present
subject spoken of. See another example of it in 1 Cor. 6.12. All things are
lawful, etc. Where under all things, you may not comprehend theft, adultery,
lying, etc. but only all meats which had been forbidden to the Jews in the
Law given by Moses: as there appears in the verse following. 3. Though the
Apostle here seem to speak of things, yet he means men, and no other things.
So when he says in 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. God has chosen the foolish things of the
world, etc. he means only persons. 4. Neither can All things here signify
all men universally, and every particular person whatsoever. For if every
person were reconciled to God by the blood of Christ, then every person must be
saved eternally, as appears in Romans 5.8, 9, 10. By All things therefore we are
here to understand All the members of that body of which Christ is the head,
verse. 18. All those that either already were, or afterward should be, such as
these Colossians now were, to whom this is applied in the ensuing verses. 5. By
things in heaven are here meant the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb.
12.23. who being absent from the body, are present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8.

There remains yet an objection from Christ's words in Joh. 15.2. which seems
to some to raze a great part of the foundation on which we have built. 26.
Object. From Joh. 15.2. answered.
It is therefore expedient that the same should be clearly and fully answered.
The inference that is made, is this. Unfruitful persons that perish eternally,
are, or sometime were, in Christ. Therefore they were in Christ when he
suffered. Therefore Christ, when he suffered, made satisfaction to his Fathers
justice for their sins. But let us first consider the words of Christ, from
which some endeavor thus to reason, Joh. 15.1, 2. I am the true vine, and my
Father is the husbandman; every branch in me that bears not fruit, be takes
away, etc. And that our opposers may not be too confident, let them in the
mean time mind the clear saying of Paul in Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation
to them which are in Christ Jesus; and remember that that which there follows
in the latter part of that verse (viz. who walk not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit) is not an exception from any thing that went before, or a
restraining of a general term to one particular comprehended under it, but an
explication of that which immediately went before; and so a description of
those that are manifested to be in Christ Jesus; see 2 Cor. 5.17. Here then is
held forth the full justification, and consequently, the eternal salvation of
all those whom the Apostle speaks of as persons truly in Christ Jesus.

As touching that saying of Christ in Joh. 15. let it be considered whether it
be not a figurative speech; an allegorical or metaphorical speech. If we
speak without any metaphore, and understand our words according to their
proper and literal sense or signification, without any figure, then we cannot
truly say, that Christ is a vine; that the Father is an husbandman; that
disciples are branches. The meaning then is only this; That Christ is like a
vine, or as it were a vine, yea the true vine: The Father is like an
husbandman, or as it were an husbandman: the disciples are like branches, or as
it were branches. They therefore which utterly reject the use of this word as
it were, in the opening of this and such like Scriptures, do not rightly
divide the Word. Disciples are as it were branches of the true vine, in a
twofold respect. 1. In respect of communion with the Church of Christ in the
outward worship of God and the use of Christ's Ordinances. Thus though not all
men, yet all Church Members are as it were branches of the true vine, and so to
be looked upon by us, till they are (or at least ought to be) cast out of the
Church for their manifest unfruitfulnesse. 2. In respect of true communion and
union with Christ. Thus only true believers are as it were branches of the
true vine, and so looked upon by God.

As touching that in verse. 2. If I be not misinformed, it is word for word,
Every branch in me not bearing fruit. Then the meaning may be this; Every
branch that bears not fruit in me. This implies only thus much; That there
are Church Members, who though they be as it were branches of the true vine in
that respect that I first mentioned, and so to us in Christ in respect of
outward profession and communion; yet do not bear fruit in Christ: and so do
not show themselves to be really in Christ, but the contrary. These the Father
takes away: viz casting them out of his Church, and punishing them with
eternal destruction. That they which abide not in Christ, were never in him
really, appears not only by that in Romans 8.1. already alleged, but also by
these Scriptures among many others, Matthew. 7.23. Heb. 3.14. 1 John 2.27. Ephesians.
1.3, 4. etc.

Now as touching this conceit, that all men either are, or were in Christ; I
would demand of those that so conceive, whether all men do for ever continue
in Christ. I am confident they will not answer affirmatively, as seeing clearly
that no such thing can be maintained; and that they cannot make such an opinion
to agree with this Scripture, no not by their own interpretation of the same.
I would therefore demand of them in the second place, when they which perish,
do cease to be in Christ; whether in this life, or after this life. If they
will say, Not in this life, but after this life; then must they relinquish this
Scripture, which speaks of men's abiding, or not abiding, in Christ in this
life; see verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. Yea they will be found to hold, (most manifestly
contrary to all truth) that men may be in Christ all the time of their life
here, and yet perish eternally. If they will say that in this life they cease
to be in Christ; I would then know when, and how. If they say that they cease
to be in Christ through their unbelief, or their unfruitfulnesse; I demand:
when were they other then unfruitful and unbelieving persons? And if men who
neither had, nor ever would or should have, either faith, or fruits, could
notwithstanding be in Christ; how comes it to pass that unfruitfulnesse, or
unbelief makes them cease to be in Christ? Thus I suppose, I have sufficiently
manifested the weakness and vanity of this objection.

The next objection that I will answer, shall be that from 2 Pet. 2.20. 27.
Object. From 2 Pet 2. 20. answered.
If after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge
of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and
overcome, the latter end is worse with them, then the beginning. Hence our
opposers would infer, not only that sinners perishing have escaped the
pollutions of the world; which touching some of those sinners we grant, in the
Apostles sense, not in theirs: but also that all their sins against the Law,
considered as sins against the Law, are forgiven unto them: which we neither
grant, neither did the Apostle mean any such thing. 1. The Apostle does not
here speak of all perishing sinners, but only of some, upon whom the doctrine
of the Gospel had had such a work, as that they were thereby outwardly
reformed, and purged from outward pollutions, in which the rest of the
unbelieving world did generally lie. Even as John's doctrine did so far work
upon Herod, that when he heard him, he did many things, Mark. 6.20. 2. The
Apostle does not say, nor mean, that these sinners were justified in Gods
sight from any of their sins; but only that they were out wardly reformed in
their lives. So they were washed, verse. 22. But how? As the sow that has
wallowed, and is still ready to wallow, in the mire. They were externally
washed in the outward reformation of their lives, but still retained their
swinish nature. They were not so much as sprinkled with the blood of Christ,
and therefore not washed in it from the guilt of their finnes. They were just
like a dog that has cast up out of his stomach some filthy thing that he had
swallowed down, but still retains the nature and appetite of a filthy greedy
logge. Thus these remained filthy dogs and swine, being never any of those
sheep of Christ, for whom he laid down his life, and whom he sanctifies by
his death, purging them by his blood from all sin, Joh. 10.15. Ephesians. 5.25,
26. Revel. 1.5, 6.

There is another objection made from the words of Peter in 2 Pet. 1.9. which
are thus rendered; 28. Object. From 2 Pet 1.9. answered.
But be that locketh these things is blind and cannot see afar off, and has
forgetten that be was purged from his old sins. From which words our opposers
infer that unbelievers (and consequently all men) were purged from their sins
by the blood of Christ. But 1. This cannot be understood of one that never was
a believer, by their own doctrine: for though they say that all men are purged
from their sins by the blood of Christ, yet they say also that none do know
and mind this but believers: and they make faith to be nothing else but the
knowing of this. Now he that has forgotten this, did sometime know and mind
it. And though some of our opposers have drunk in this error also, that a
true believer may fall away to total unbelief, and so perish; yet the
Scripture teaches us a more comfortable doctrine, Joh. 6.35. 1 Pet. 1.5. 2.
There is nothing in this Scripture that requires it to be understood of an
unbeliever. For though he that totally lacks these things, ( viz. faith,
virtue, knowledge, temperance, etc. verse. 5, 6, 7.) must needs be an
unbeliever: yet a true believer may sometimes lack these things in a great
measure; see James 1.5, 6. They object, that in the Greek it is; He to whom
these things are not present. We answer, that this phrase here only imports
these things not to be unto him in a continual present readiness, as it were
at his hand continually, for the manifestation of them in exercise and
practice. And this is confirmed by the antithesis in the verse aforegoing; If
these things be in you, and abound, they will make you that ye shall neither
be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. This also
receives further confirmation from that which follows in verse. 11. For so an
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom,
etc. So; that is, these things being in you, and abounding; these things being
continually in a present readiness unto you for the manifestation and exercise
of them in your practice; you being continually doing these things, and so
never falling, verse. 10. (which is meant not only of total, but also of
grievous falls:) An entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly; that is,
you shall have abundant assurance of your entrance, etc. which abundant
assurance, even those believers to whom these things are not so present, may
remain short of for a season. 3. Whereas that which follows, is in the
translation thus rendered; He is blind, and cannot see afar off. The copulative
And is not in the Greek text, but only these words; He is blind, not seeing
afar off; or, not being able to see afar off. And the second word shows the
meaning of the first. Though he be not so blind as to see nothing at all, (for
so no believer can be) yet he is so far blind as not to see afar off. 4. The
forgetfulness also, or forgetting here spoken of, is not total, (for such
indeed is not found in a believer) but only a forgetting in a great measure,
like that spoken of in Heb. 12.5.

This then is all that here appears; viz. that a man purged from his sins,
may yet with the Angel of the Church at Ephesus, leave his first love, and so
far fall, as not to do his first works, Revel. 2.4, 5. Faith, virtue,
knowledge, etc. may be far from abounding in him, and so he may be in a great
measure barren or unfruitful. Yea the eyes of his mind may be in a great
measure dimmed, and his mindfulnesse of the purging away of his sins, may be
much abated. All this proves not the conclusion of our opposers, neither
opposes our doctrine.

There is yet another place in this Epistle objected unto us; 29. Object. From
2 Pet. 3.9. answered.
viz. 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, (as some men
count slacknesse) but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repent ance. Hence some would infer, that
God would have no person to perish; and consequently, that he gave his Son to
present a satisfaction to his justice for the sins of every person. But if the
Lord open our eyes, we shall see this mist dispelled by the light that shines
from this place. 1. The will of God here spoken of, is an effectual will. For
the Greek word here used, holds forth not only the will of God, but also his
counsel; even that counsel of his will, according to which he effectually
works. Therefore the Apostle here speaks only of those whom God effectually
saves. 2. The Apostles scope here is to show the cause why it was and should be
so long before Christ did and should come to judgment; viz that none might
perish, but that all might come to repentance. Even this shows that the
Apostle has here respect to none but the Elect, of whom none shall perish, but
all of them shall come to repentance before Christ's coming to judgment. 3.
When he here says, The Lord is long suffering to usward; by us he means the
Elect, and more particularly, the elect of the Jewish Nation, of whom he and
they to whom he now wrote, were a part. And when he adds; not willing that any
should perish; he in like manner means, not willing that any of us his chosen
people should perish. And in that which follows; But that all should come to
repentance; by all he likewise means All of us his Elect; and specially, All
of us his Elect of the Nation of the Israelites.

But the objection seems stronger that is made from Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11.
30. Object. From Ezekiel 18.12. and 33.11. answered.
I therefore now hasten to those places, Ezekiel. 18.32. I have no pleasure in the
death of him that dies, says the Lord God. Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says the
Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked
turn from his way and live. For answer whereto these things are to be minded.
1. God sometimes speaks of himself after the manner of men; and yet those
speeches of his are to be understood after the manner of God. Thus it is when
God ascribes unto himself anger, sorrow, and the like. As in Genesis 6.6. It
repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his
heart. And in 1 Samuel 15.11. It repents me that I have set up Saul to be King.
Yet Samuel there says in verse. 29. The strength of Israel will not lie, nor
repent: for he is not a man that be should repent. And thus it is when the
Scripture ascribes to God a taking pleasure in any thing done by man, or any
fruit thereof: as namely when it holds forth God as having pleasure in this,
that the wicked turn from his way, and live. 2. When the Lord says, I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies: I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked: he declares indeed that he has no pleasure in the misery of his
creature in it self considered. Yet it is not contrary to the pleasure of God
to set forth the glory of his righteousness, and power, and just wrath against
sinners, in the destruction of the vessels of wrath; see Romans 9.22. Prove. 1.26.
Prove. 16.4. 3. The Scripture holds forth Gods greatest delight to be, not in a
sinners destruction, but in the conversion and salvation of sinners. This is
plainly held forth in these places. And elsewhere the Scripture manifests that
the destruction of sinners that perish, is purposely ordered of God to the
commendation of his infinite and glorious mercy toward those whom he saves,
Romans 9.22, 23. 4. The scope of these places is to declare Gods readiness to
accept and save those that sincerely turn to him: and so to move and encourage
sinners to such conversion unto God. In all this there is no opposition against
our doctrine.

In the next place through the help of God, 31. Object. From Luke 24.47. and
Act. 13.38. answered.
I shall return answer to an objection drawn partly from Luke 24.47. And that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his Name among all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And partly from Acts 13.38. Be it known unto
you therefore, men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins. From hence some do thus argue. Remission of sins was
to be preached to all men, even to unbelievers, Therefore sins are remitted
to all men. I answer. 1. In Luke 24.47. observe this expression, Among all
Nations. We readily grant that the true doctrine of the Gospel concerning
remission of sins, was to be preached among all Nations, and is to be
preached among all men. Some object that the Greek words here signify, Unto
all Nations. We deny not that the Greek Praeposition here used, does
sometimes signify unto; properly it signifies into; and sometimes, among. And
this last signification does best agree in this place. 2. If we here translate,
Unto all Nations: yet so this Scripture will make nothing against us. This
doctrine; Through Christ's Name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of sins; ( Acts 10.43.) was to be preached to all Nations, and is
still to be preached to all. And here (in Luke 24.47.) note how the preaching
of repentance, and of remission of sins, is joined together: importing that the
Gospel that was to be preached, testifies remission of sins only to those
that repent, or are changed in their mind, believing in Jesus Christ, Acts
3.19. 3. Those that are spoken to in Acts 13.38. were professors of faith in
the Messiah, as he was hold forth by the light of the old Testament, and were
now so looked upon, Acts 13.16.26. 4. Yet the preaching of remission of sins
unto them, that was here spoken of, was only the preaching of that doctrine
expressed in the next verse; By Jesus the Savior, all that believe, are
justified from all things. The particle And in the beginning of that verse,
does there import (as oftentimes it does) a declaration of that which was
before spoken of.

But it is objected, that every one is bound to believe that Christ presented a
satisfaction to divine justice for his sins, 32. Object. From 1 John 5.10, 11.
and that his sins are remitted: Therefore this is true. And some conceive
that this objection is strengthened by that in 1 John 5.10, 11. -- He that
believes not God, bath made him a liar, because be believes not the record
that God gave of his Son, etc. My answer is this. Answ.


What every man is commanded of God to believe, that I grant to be true. For
the God of truth commands no man to believe a lie. But God commands every
man to believe what he affirms, and declares, and no more. This then he
declares to be truth, and so commands every man to believe it, That through
Christ's Name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins,
Act. 10.43. This I say, God commands every man to believe, and to receive it as
the true and good word of God, and so to rest upon it, and obediently to depend
upon Jesus Christ held forth in this word, as the Prince and Savior exalted of
God. Mark. 1.15. Joh. 12.36. etc. When a man thus believes, then both the
Spirit and the Word of God does testify and declare that Jesus Christ has
presented unto divine justice a satisfaction for his sins in particular, and
that accordingly his sins are forgiven unto him. This then he is now (and not
till now) bound to believe as a certain truth; as indeed it is and now
appears to be. And touching the unbelieving and disobedient person, who obeys
not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, this is one part of the truth that God
reveals, and commands all to believe; viz. that persons still continuing such,
remain under the curse and wrath of God, and must be judged, condemned, and
punished for all their sins, Joh. 3.18. Jude 15.2 These. 1.8, 9. As also has
been already fully proved. Now God does not command any man to believe
contradictions.

Touching that in 1 John 5.10. it is to be minded that a child of God has
unbelief remaining and rebelling in him; and sometimes it rebels very
strongly and grievously. As far as this unbelief works in him, so far he
believes not God, but makes him a liar; that is, casts upon him the imputation
of lying: because he believes not on the testimony that God bath testified
concerning his Son. That this is John's meaning, appears by that which
follows in verse. 11. And this is the record (or testimony) that God bath given
to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. God has not given this
eternal life to us men, whether we be believers, or unbelievers: but to us to
whom he gives grace to believe in his Son; See Joh. 3.36. and 17.2. This is
farther confirmed by that which follows in 1. Joh. 5.13. These things have I
written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that ye may know
that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the Name of the Son of
God.

It is also objected that in Mark. 16.15. 33. Object. From Mar. 16.15. answered.
Christ commands that the Gospel should be preached to every creature: but by
our doctrine there remains no Gospel to be preached to the world for the
conversion of sinners. I demand. Is this indeed no Gospel? viz. That the Father
has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life. That through Christ's Name, whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. (Surely this is called The
word of the Gospel, Acts 15.7. with Acts 10.43.) Also that Christ came into the
world to save finners; even the vilest of sinners, that do or shall believe in
him, 1 Timothy 1.15, 16. Is all this, I say, no Gospel? If this be Gospel, as
indeed it is, then there remains a Gospel, which through the grace of God we
faithfully preach unto sinners; and God makes the preaching of this Gospel
effectual to the conversion of his.

It is further objected, 34. Object. From Coloss. 1.23. answered.
that true believers are grounded in the faith, Coloss. 1.23. But we have no
ground of our faith.

Answ. The ground of our faith is the divine truth of that Gospel which we are
commanded to believe; and the fullness of power, and authority, and
righteousness, and faithfulness, and love, and mercy, which is in him that
commands us to believe in him; which the Scripture declares, and the holy
Spirit discovers unto us. This is a sufficient ground of our faith: and they
which build not upon this ground, will be found to build upon the sand. Paul
built upon this ground, 2 Timothy 1.12. And the Elect that lived in his time did
build upon no other ground; see Acts 17.11, 12. 1 These. 2.13. 2 Pet. 1.16.

Lastly, it is objected, that the Devil is a liar, 35. Object. From Joh. 8.44.
answered.
and there is no truth in him, Joh. 8.44. But our doctrine makes him to speak
truth when he says to a vessel of wrath that dies in despair; Christ has
not presented to his Fathers justice a satisfaction for thy sins. I answer. 1.
Though the Devil be a liar, yet sometimes he speaks some truth, Mark. 1.24.
Acts 16.17. 1 Samuel 28.17, 18, 19. 2. We do no more justify the Devil as
speaking truth herein, then the Scripture does justify him when he says to a
vessel of wrath, Thou wast before of old ordained to this condemnation, Jude 4.
Yea bertunto thou wast appointed, 1 Pet. 2.8. Thou art none of Christ's sheep,
John. 10.26. Thy judgment lingreth not, and thy damnation slumbreth not, 2
Pet. 2.3. 3. He that affirms a truth to be a cretaine truth, not knowing it to
he so, is therein a liar. And God does not acquaint the Devil with his
counsel, further then he manifests the same to all by his Word and by his
accomplishing thereof. 4. When one speaks truth maliciously, that by false
inferences he may make a person rebel against truth, he is now an odious liar.
And this is the Devils case when he speaks any truth.

Now in conclusion let it be minded, that the opposing of the truth which I
have now asserted, brings forth (among other) these evil fruits. 1. It makes
men deny the truth of the Scriptures doctrine concerning divine predestination.
2. It robs God of the glory of his special and singular love and mercy to his
chosen ones. 3. It tends to puff up believers with pride, persuading them that
they have distinguished themselves from the rest of the world, and so saved
themselves: for Christ for his part did no more for them, then for those that
perish. 4. It robs the Saints of assurance of perseverance, and so of assurance
of salvation. For if men come to be believers by a common grace afforded to
all, then they may also cease to be believers through that weakness and
corruption that is in all. Now take away from Saints their assurance of
salvation, and ye take away from them their joy, their thankfulness, their
love, their life. 5. It holds forth God as making a show of being equally
loving to all, when indeed and in his purpose he is not so: and seeming most
graciously to forgive the sins of all men, when yet he determines to punish
the vessels of wrath eternally in hell for all their sins.

I could say much more, and yet may not now with convenience enlarge this Book
any further. I therefore conclude, sustaining my self against the error that
I have thus opposed, and the progress of the same, with that in 2 Time. 2.19.
Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord
knows them that are his.

FINIS.

