A LETTER FROM THE ARMY, Concerning the peaceable temper of the same.

Written by M. J. Saltmarsh attending his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, and sent
to a friend in London.

June 10th London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the black Spread-Eagle, at the
West end of Paul's Church. 1647.

Sir,
SInce I came to the Army, I bless God, I have seen no temper there, but
intendency to peace, and the preservation of the Kingdom; and they profess
unanimously, That when their just grievances are satisfied, and they estated in
a free and clear capacity as Subjects, as well as Soldiers, because they say,
that will flow down upon all their fellow subjects in the Kingdom, who may be
secured by the Parliament as to their civil rites, and just liberties, they
shall freely disband, or be commanded as the Parliament shall think fit in
their wisdoms.

There is a general cry in the Countries as we march, that the Army would
help them, and be their Mediators to the Parliament for Justice and
Righteousness: They are generally much troubled about the burning of some
Petitions. The Army are very sensible of the Countries grievances, being under
a grievance themselves.

The Country cry, Peace, Peace, let us have no more Forces raised to make new
Wars. I hope the LORD will give a right understanding amongst people, that
the Army are wholly for Peace too.

There is a Solemn Engagement the whole Army has entered into in order to their
just grievances, at the last Rendezvou. There is a mighty spirit raised up in
the Army for Justice and Righteousness; we admire at it.

They have solemnly engaged against meddling with Church Government, or doing
any thing destructive to the fundamental Constitution of the Civil Government
of this Kingdom, to declare to all the world, they are not against Magistracy,
and intend not to set up Independency upon the Kingdom; for truly that were
wholly to oppose their own Principles, if they should have thoughts to force
up any such thing, who desire that they should not be compelled themselves.

I bless God, I know no Design here appearing, but Peace to the Kingdom. And
this is the Principle of those who have the conduct of this Army, to indulge
and cherish the Presbyterians who have any appearance of God, equally with any
other.

For the King's being here, I hope since it was contrary to all our knowledge,
but to those Troopers, and Cornet Joyce, who acted the business, to prevent
(as they assure us) a practice against the PARLIAMENT, the KINGDOM, and his
PERSON, by raising up a new War. This is all I know of it; but I am confident
that nothing will be done as to this by this Army, but that which may become
honest men.

I am informed Sir GILBERT GERRATT of the House should say with much
confidence, That I hindered the Army from Disbanding the Generals Regiment: I
wonder he will upon so slight grounds asperse me. I challenge all the World
to be able to lay the least of that to my charge. It is a sign they know not
the Army; for the Soldiery are acted by their own Principles; They are an
Army understand themselves, GOD is amongst them; and this whole year I have
been with them, they can all witness, I never made State-businesse any
Pulpit-work, I never yet preached any thing but Christ. Indeed, formerly I was
a stickler in Yorkshire for the Parliament; but I have been since taught (I
bless God) only to pray for them and obey them.

JOHN SALTMARSH.

FINIS.

