THE FOUNTAIN OF FREE GRACE OPENED BY QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS: Proving the
Foundation of Faith to consist only in Gods Free Love in giving Christ to dye
for the sins of all, and Objections to the contrary Answered by the
Cnogregation of Christ in London, constituted by Baptism upon the profession
of Faith, falsely called Anabaptists.

WHEREIN THEY VINDICATE THEM-Selves from the scandalous aspersions of holding
Free Will, and denying a free Election by Grace.

LONDON. Printed in the Year. 1645.

To the impartial Reader that desires truth only for the love of it, Grace
and Peace be multiplied in this life with happiness and salvation in the life
to come through Jesus Christ.
IT is not a thing altogether unknown to those that are any whit read in
Controversies, that many striving against the errors of others, have sometimes
denied some truths, and given their Opposers thereby much advantage to have a
concei^e of the goodness of their cause, whilst they saw the manifest truth
denied by those that contended against them; the which thing has fallen out
without all doubt with the Arminians of late, who notwithstanding they have
been found, to hold forth many notorious errors, rasing the very Foundation of
Christian Faith: to wit, denying Original Sin, holding Free will and Falling
aw^: Yet in as much as in confuting them the manifest Truth has been denied
for the most part: viz. Christ's suffering for the sins of all: These
Adversaries have rather been emboldned then informed, or convicted, because
they conceived, that their Adversaries were driven to deny the manifest truth,
therefore they themselves were in the Truth. And on the other side, these
erroneous persons have glossed their errors under the pretense of being direct
consequences of Christ's suffering for the sins of all (whereas indeed and in
truth it is no such matter) the which thing not being so warily weighed, nor so
diligently searched, as it ought, has caused many to think evil of this
doctrine, and of us professing the same conceiving that we can not be the
Church of Jesus Christ, whilst we (in their conceivings) maintain such
errors: Whereas we having more narrowly searched the same, and by searching
have found not only that it is a truth, but such a truth as is the very
foundation of saving faith. Do therefore conceive, that we, ought to be so
far from shunning the Doctrine in respect of the ill esteem it has from
others; as that we ought rather to own it more dear to us then our lives, and
also to seek by all means possible that may be, to make the same known to
others, and for this end serves this following Discourse, partly to clear this
Doctrine from those evil consequences that are supposed undenyably to follow
upon it; and partly to manifest the excellent worth of this Truth to our selves
and others, it being so far from making us not to be the Church of Christ,
as it is indeed the very doctrine upon which the Church of Christ is founded.
Cu^teous Reader, therefore lend thy diligent search of this enfuing Discourse
with the quotations thereunto annexed, and if thou find the profit by it, that
is intended, give God the glory, and let us have thy prayers, and we shall ever
rest

Thine in any service of love to our power, The Church of Christ in London
falsely called Anabastsapt

THE FOUNTAIN Of Free Grace opened.
Q. What means has God provided for man's salvation.

A. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
beleiveth in him, should not perish, but have eternalll life, John 3. 16.

Q. Is it the duty of all mankind to believe in him for Salvation?

A. Yea.

Q. And why?

A. Because eternal life is promised to whosoever do beleeive in him, and
eternal death is threatened to them that do not believe

Q. Are not all under the penalty of everlasting damnation though there were
never a Christ to to be believed on?

A. Yes surely, for so it does appear, Romans 3. 9. 23. ch 5. 12. 16 17. 18. 19.

Q. Why then is eternal death threatened to mankind for not beleiving in him?

A. For two causes: First, for that Christ having suffered the punishment of
our sins, we should not suffer if we believe in him; the want of which
therefore causes our sins to rest upon us still: and Secondly, because the not
beleiving in him is the neglect or contempt of mercy offered, and so a grevious
sin, and does deserve condemnation more then any other sin of any other kind,
John 3. 18. Heb. 2. 3. 4.

Q. Has Christ then suffered the punishment due for the sins of all mankind?

A. Yes surely, for so it is written, 2 Cor. 5. 15. Heb. 1. 9. 1 Timothy 2. 6.
Isa. 53. 6. John 1. 29. and 3. 16. 17. 2 John 2. 2. John. 6. 51. and 4. 42. and
12. 57.

Ob. Then all mankind must needs be saved, or else God be unjust in punishing
our sins in Christ, and in (...) also.

A. It does not follow, for though our sins are punished in Christ, yet they
are not pardoned in us unless we believe: hence it is that we are justified by
faith in Christ, nor without: for he that believes not shall be damned Mar.
16. and the reason is because else Christ has not the Honor of Mediatourship
as means of pardon of sins, and secondly, he that trusts not in Christ trusts
in himself, and must be tried according to his t^n^ whereon he leans.

Obj. But yet it seems God is unjust in punishing Christ, and us also.

A. Not so: for Chirst did not suffer for any such end, as to free us from
punishment without faith in him: but that those that believe might be saved
Joh. 3. 16. and the rest left without excuse Joh. 12 47. 48. which could not be
if he had not suffered the punishment due for the sins of all.

Ob. But yet then it seems that Christ suffered in vain.

A. Not so: for in that those that believe in him are saved, and those that
believe not have no excuse to make for themselves why they believe not in him,
therefore he died not in vain.

Q. Could not Christ have effected, that all should have believed.

A. He could if he would, but his suffering for all does not necessarily
enforce that he must work faith in all, he was free in the giving of himself
to suffer. Joh. 10. 18* and he is free also in quickening the souls of whom he
will. Joh. 5. 21.

Ob. Why does Christ say, Mat. 23. 37. How often would I gathered thy children
together, and ye would not.

A. It was not to show that auy thing was impossible or too hard for Christ to
do, but only to show the aversnes of those people to the means of grace
afforded.

Q. Shall every one that beleiveth in Christ be (...)?

A. Yea sur^^y, for so it is written, John 3. 16. Acts 16. 31.

Q. What is that thing that is to be believed by all?

A. That which Christ has commanded to be preached to all, Romans 16. 26.

Q. What is that?

A. The Gospel which is glad tidings of good things, Mar. 16, 15. Romans 10. 15.
16.

Q. What are those glad tidings?

A. Peace and remission of sins by Christ, Rom: 10. 15. Ephesians. 2. 17. Luke 2.
10. 14. and 10. 5. and 24. 47. A^s 13. 38.

Q. Ought all men to believe remission of sins in Christ?

A. Yea surely, in as much as Christ has required remission of sins to be
preached to all in his name, and nothing is required of any to be made
partakers of that remission but only faith to believe it, Romans 3. 28. Gal. 2.
16.

Q. Are all men's sins then remitted in Christ, as a truth to be preached to,
and to be observed by all, though men do not believe?

A. not so, but the matter and means of remission of sins is true in Christ
for all, 1 John 2. 2. but then only formally remitted when the former truth is
preached in the name of Christ and believed, John 1. 12. 13. Gal. 3. 26.

Q. Ought men to believe, that their fins are pardoned yea or no?

A. Yea but it is true by consequent of our believing that Christ dyed for our
sins: therefore we we shall not dye for them, John 11. 26.

Ob. But then it seems, that we ought not to believe that our sins are
pardoned by a direct Act of Faith (...) Christ: but we ought to reflect upon
our faith for the ground of our belief in that particular.

A. That is not so, because by the same Faith by which Christ is understood to
be the means of the remission of sins, by the same he is understood to be such
an effectual means as nothing is needful to be added thereto; seeing his
death is our life, for by his stripes we are healed Isa. 39. 5. and he that
does truly believe, that Christ God man has suffered for his sins, cannot but
believe, that his sins are pardoned, and that he shall not suffer for them: as
on the other side it is impossible, that any should groundedly believe the
latter, that does not upon true grounds believe the former.

Q. Ought all to believe, that all sins are pardoned past, present, and to come?

A. Yea, Col. 1. 21. 22. and 2. 13. 14. Ephesians. 2. 13. 14. 15. Romans 3. 22. 23.

Q. Why then does Christ teach us to pray, forgive us our sins?

A. Because forgivenes of sins is by faith in Christ, and though all ought, yet
all do not believe in Christ: and those that do not fully deleive as they
ought, and therefore ought to pray, that God would give and increase in us the
beleiving in Christ the forgiveness of sins, and remove from us evil that
attends our unbeleefe.

Q. Are there any evils then that attend the unbeleefe of Godsowne people?

A. Yea surely, for God does rebuke chastise and judge the em for it, with
temporal judgments, helping them thereby as his children to mortify the sin
that remains in them, keeping them by this means from eternal damnation. 1
Cor. 11. 32. Heb. 12 5. 10. 11. Rev. 3. 19.

Q. Are not all the sins of all believers washed away in the blood of Christ.

A. Yes and of all unbeleevers too: as a truth to be believed by all. Romans 3.
22. 23. 24. 25. Joh. 1. 29. and 12. 47. Chap. 3. 16. 17.

Q. Is not the sin of unbeleefe washed away in the Blood of Christ?

A Yes, as a truth to be believed, or else beleivers themselves could have no
certainty of Salvation.

Q. Why then are not all saved?

A. Because they that believe not have no part in Christ nor his sufferings.

Q. But are not the sins of beleivers washed away other^ais then in
unbeleivers?

A. Yes surely, and so they are otherwais washed away in a glorified believer
then in one yet remaining in the state of Grace not glorified. 1 Cor. 13 9: 10:
11. 12. Col. 3. 3. 4. 1 John 3. 2. Rom: 8. 23.

Q. Are not all the sins of all beleivers so wash away, as that the guilt
does not remain aagainst (...) them?

A. Yes, so as they shall never come into condemnation. Joh. 5: 24: but not so
but that as yet the^ need mortification: and in that respect are subje^ to
Rebuke, Chastisement, and temporal Judge^^ments as means to help them
therein. 1 Cor: 11-. 32: Heb: 12: 5: 10: 11: Rev: 3: 19:

Q. But wheter does God in these rebukes, chastiseiments and temporal
judgments exercised upon his saiuts intend therein the satisfaction of justice
by that means?

A. Not so, for that is sanctified in Chr. sufferings which they parrake of by
faith effectually to the justify of their persons from condem. but not for the
justification of their evil actions which God does as much dislike and is
displeased with iu his own people as in others, and does in love to their
persons show and manifest his displeasure against those evil actions by
chastisements and temp. judgments in his own children more then in others.

Q. Has Christ then suffered for all the sins of all though they be
unbeleevers?

A: Yes surely, and that does appear: First because that is the plain
Doctrine of the Scripture: 2 Cor: 5: 14: 15: 19: 21: Joh. 1: 29: and 3: 16: 17:
and 4: 42: and 6: 51: and 12: 47: 1 Timothy 2. 6: Heb. 2: 9: and 9: 26. 1 John 2:
2.

2. because Christ has appointed remission of sins in his name and by his death
to be preached to all unbeleevers Lnk: 10: 5: and 24: 47: Mar: 16: 15: Ephe. 2:
17: Act: 13: 38.

3. Because else there is no means that an unbeleever should become a believer
by: For how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard To 10 14. 4.
Because it is the greatest sin in an unbelever not to believe that Christ has
suffered for all his sins. Joh: 3. 19: and 12: 47: 48: and 16: 9. 2 These: 1: 8:
and 2: 10: Heb. 2: 3: and 10: 29. 1 John: 5: 10.

Obj. True it is and may be granted, that Christ suffered for all to procure an
outward and temporal benefit, but not for justification and salvation

A: Some there be, that do enjoy no more then an outward and temporal benefit
it is true, and it had been good for such they never had enjoyed it; Mat. 36.
24. they received not the love of the truth by believing the forgiveness of
their sins in the sufferings of Christ, that they might be saved, as the
Scriptures next before mentioned do show with Luke 10. 11. Acts 13. 46. Romans 2.
4. 5. 2 Pet. 3. 15. And secondly, this overthrowes the office of the Gospel
and Faith, because whatsoever Christ suffered for must be preached and
believed; and no more, 1 Cor. 15. 2. 3. Now then if he suffered to procure an
outward and temporal benefit, and not for justification and salvation, then
that must be preached and believed and no more, and what need that he preached
or believed either if that were all, se^ing all do enjoy that though it be
neither preached nor believed.

Obj. But Christ says, John. 17. 9. I pray not for the World: Therefore surely
he did not dye for the sins of all the World.

A. Christ's prayer is to be distinguished in respect of the thing prayed for
(to wit) some things were special only belonging to the Saints, ver. 9.
compared with ver. 11. 15. and 17. and some things are common to all, and so
for such things Christ did pray for the world as ver. 21. 23. though not in
respect of the the things in special belonging only in peculiar to the saints.

Obj. But Christ says, I know that thou hear me always.

A. True, and therefore Christ was heard in praying for the world; for he only
prayed for the unity of the faithful, as a means tending to cause the world
to believe as his suffering for all is of the same nature wheother men believe
it or not: And thus the sufferings of Christ and his prayer for all is of
equal extention as a means tending to cause them to believe, and if they do
not, they are left without excuse.

Obj. But Christ says, John 10. 15. I lay down my life for my sheep.

A. True, and so does not the hireling, and this is his meaning in so saying,
and not to exclude any person as he has not laid down his life for.

Obj. It is said, Luke 1. 68 Mat. 1. he has redeemed, and shall save his
people.

A. In the Old Testament Israel were in special called his people, and so
these places mean, the one being spoken by Zachary, the other to Joseph, both
Israelites, for the comfort of that people in speaciall in the time while that
desolation l^sted, yet not so then as to exclude others: as appears, Luke 2.
30. 31. 32, John 11. 50. 51. 52. Act. 13. 46. 47. Isa. 49. 6. therefore this
hinders not, but that Christ suffered for the sins of all.

Obj. It is said, Isa. 53. 12. he bare the sins of many: Therefore not of all.

A. It does not follow seeing many is opposed to a few, not to all as appears
in Rev. 5. 19. by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, that is all:
and also in Dan. 12. 2.

Obj. It is said, Isa. 5. 25. Christ loved the church and gave himself for it:
therefore not for all.

A. It does not follow, seeing Paul says, 1 Timothy 2. 6. he gave himself a
ransom for all: Therefore by saying he he gave himself for it, is not to
exelude any, for that were to make the Scripture to contradict it self, but
only to show that the church did partake of such love from Christ as a pattern
to husbands toward their wives. And it may as well be concluded, because Paul
said, Christ loved me, and gave himself for me, that he gave himself for no
other, as because he he loved the Church, and gave himself for it: Therefore
not for all.

Obj. But Christ says, John. 15: 13. greater love then this has no man, when
any man bestows his life for his friends: Therefore Christ suffered not for
the sins of all.

A. It does not follow, for such love is fonnd in Christ to his enemies, Romans
5. 10. Col. 1. 21. 22. Therefore there is in Christ found greater love, then any
that is among men.

Obj. But it is said in Rev. 5. 9. and 14. 3. 4. some were redeemed from the
Earth from among men: Therefore, he suffered not for the sins of all.

A. We must distinguish Redemtion in respect of price and in respect of the end
and application: Now the price is paid for all, Heb. 2. 9. 1 Timothy 2. 6. And the
end is, that persons should no longer live to themselves (as formerly they with
others the men of this world have done) but unto him that has paid the price
for them, 2 Cor. 5. 15. and this only they perform that have faith given unto
them, whereby they do apply the benifit of this price; in which latter
respeect they only are said to be redeemed: yet in respect of price Christ
suffered for the sins of all.

Obj. But Christ does not call all, for he says, Mat. 9. 13. I am not come to
call the righteous, but sinners to Repentance: Therefore he suffered not for
the sins of all.

A. God admonishes all men every where to repent, Acts 17. 30. and therefore
Christ in saying, I am not come to call the righteous, does not intend that any
were righteous, and thereby such as were excluded from his call, but only this,
that so far as any thought themselves more righteous then others, so far
forth they do necessarily exclude themselves from the call of Christ more then
others.

Obj. But it seems by Rom: 5: 9 10: that all that Christ dyed for shall be saved.

A. Not so, neither does Paul so intend, but only that we have more manifest
grounded reason to believe salvation by him now he has suffered for us, then
we had before.

Obj. But Paul says, Rom: 8: 32: he that spared not his own Son, but gave him
up for is all, how shall be not with him freely give all things elso: But God
does not give all things freely unto all, universally: therefore be suffered
not for all.

A: All things are so inseperably united unto Christ that unto whomsoever
Christ is offered, all things are offered with him, and whosoever receives
Christ receives all things with him, John. 13. 20. Mat. 10. 40. Luke 10. 16. 1 Timothy 4. 8. Mat. 6. 3. and whosoever denies or refuses Christ, refuses all
things with him, Luke. 12. 8. 9. and 9. 26. 2 Timothy 2. 12. Mat. 10: 33: Mar. 8
38: 2 These. 2. 10. 12. and to whomsoever God gives faith, and so Christ, by
which only Christ properly becomes ours, Ephesians. 3. 17. which God only gives to
his Elect, Tit: 1. Rom: 8* 28: 28: 30: to them he gives with that faith and
that Christ freely all things, 1 Cor. 3. 21. but this hinders not but that he
suffered for all, though says and Christ be not given to all: and this
appear^^, in that some for whom he is given do deny him, 2 Pet, 2: 1: Mat: 21:
42: John 1. 11.

Obj. But in Heb: 9: 13: 14. it is faid that the blood of Christ does more
abunduntly purge the conscience, then the blood of Bulls and Goats did purify
the flesh: but the blood of Bulls and Goats and the ashes of an He^fee
sprinkling the unclean sanctified to the purifiing of the flesh: and all have
not their consciences purged by the blood of Christ: Therefore he suffered not
for all.

A. True it is, that the blood of Ghrist is of a purging nature for all, but
some tread it under their feet, and count it common or unholy, Heb. 10: 29:
and do not by faith (as with a bunch of hysop) sprinkle it upon the
conscience, and no marvill though they remain unclean still: And so if the
Beasts were slain, yet unless the blood were sprinkled on the unclean, they
would remain so in their flesh still: Yet this hinders not, but that Christ
suffesor the sins of all, that whosoever beleiveth in him may be purged.

Q. Is there any power in man by nature to believe this Doctrine?

A. No surely, he cannot know it, for it is a foolish Doctrine, and emnity to
the wisdom of every nanaturall man, 1 Cor: 1: 23: and 2: 14: Rom: 8: 7: 8:
and the light and understanding thereof is only had by the power of the spirit
of God, 1. John 4: 13: 14. and all men naturally are more averse unto this then
unto any other thing, John 5: 4: 44: Mat: 23. 37.

Q. Why does God promise eternal life only to those that believe, and eternal
death, to those that do not, seeing it is not in their own power?

A. First that he might by means of those promises and threats work us to
that which by nature we are averse unto, 2 Cor: 5: 1^: 20.

Secondly, that we might appear more inexcusable when neither promises nor
threats will move us to embrace free mercy, Acts 13: 16. 51: and 18: 6: 7:

Thirdly, that the grace of God might as well appear in giving power to
believe, as in giving Christ, and in him forgivenes of sins to be believed Rom:
9: 16: and 11: 5: 6: 7: Psalm: 2: 13.

Fourthly, that we might apply our selves unto God in the use of those means,
that he has appointed, for the working of Faith in us, John 6: 27: Isa: 55: 3.

Fifthly, that we might wholly deny our selves, and search, and by searching find
in the Covenant of Grace matter of free conveyance of power to believe
whatsoever is required to be believed, Rom: 10: 17: John 5: 39: Psalm: 119: 9:
98. 99: 104: 105: Rom: 3. 24: and 4: 16: Gal: 3: 2:

Q. Can it stand with the justice of God to require persons to believe with
penalties annexed thereunto, seeing it is not in their power.

A. Yea, seeing the matter of free conveyance of power is offered in the
Covenant of Grace, which would be conveyed thereby were it not opposed, Acts
13: 46: or despised, Acts 7: 51: Rom: 2: 4: Heb: 10: 29: or neglected, as, Heb:
2: 3: and in many other places of Scripture it appears.

Q. But whether does it not follow from hence that Gods Grace is subjected unto
man, whether he will oppose, despise, or neclect the same yea or no.

A. True, so far as to leave man inexcusable for so doing, seeing the opposing,
despising, or neglecting is wholly man's evil work, but not so, but that the
receiving, esteeming, or improoving the same power must be considered to
proceed from the covenant it self, and not from man, it must needs therefore
be attributed to God only, who proporioneth the dispensation effectually
according to his own Decree of Election.

Q. Ought every one to believe then that Christ did for all the sins of all.

A. Yea surely, or else how shall each person believe he suffered for their
sins?

Obj. But it seems incongreous, that one should be required to believe what
Christ did for others

A. Not so, for if the benefit of Christ's sufferings be to be preached unto
others, it is then necessary to believe what we preach for truth, to be truth,
and that to them to whom we preach the same.

And secondly, if there be nothing to distinguish me from others, as the truth
is, before faith there is not, then the question is, if he have not suffered
for all, how I shall find that he suffered for me? But if he has suffered for
all, as the truth is he has, Heb. 2. 9, then I believing tha do necessarily
believe that he suffered for me.

Obj. But if this be saving faith to believe that Christ suffe^ed for all, then
who is it but will be saved? for all men will say, that Christ suffered for all.

A. Not so, for all that object to the contrary do^ not say it.

Secondly, all that do say it, do not truly believe it; and whosoever do
believe it, do (...) believe that there is the matter of eter^all death in all,
2 Cor. 5: 14: and do necessarily believe an infinite love extended to all,
John 3: 16: and all persons thus believing will necessarily be constrained to
love God, and all things according to God, 2: Cor: 5: 14: 15: 1 John 4: 10: 14:
19.

Thirdly, Christ's yoke is easy in the nature of it, Mat: 11: 30: and that is
it that makes it most hard and difficult to our nature, Mat. 7. 14. foolishnes
to the learned Gretians and a^stomling bock to the Jews who cannot endure,
that the unlearned vicious Publicans and harlots should be free by the grace
offered in the Gospel, Luke 7. 39. and 15. 2. by their beleiving that Christ
suffered for all, should thereby only be saved.

Obj. But it suffices to saving faith, that Christ be believed to be the Son
of God, and was sent and came into the world to save sinners indifinitely
though not all.

A. Not so, if any be excluded: because that takes away certainty of faith from
any in respect of Christ, for if any be excluded, I may be the person as soon
as any other, and I have no ground to the contrary

Obj. But I may be certain if I believe.

A. This is to make the foundation of faith to stand in my believing, and not
in Christ, and also to make my first believing without any certain truth to
ground it self upon, and is a supposition of an impossibility, (to wit) of a
firm believing that which cannot be known whether it be true or not: whereas
on the contrary it being a revealed truth, Christ did ^ast death for everyman,
Heb. 2. 9. each person has a ground in that word of truth to believe, that he
dyed for him, and none has any excuse that does not believe it.

Q. Is this then the subject matter of the Gospel, that Christ has required to
be preached to the world: to wit, that Christ suffered for all the sins of all.

A. Yes surely, for without this no man has any thing to preach to the world,
no Gospel of glad tidings, no remission of sins, no doctrine of
reconciliation, no grace or peace at all.

Obj. But it may be preached that Christ dyed for beleivers.

A. That is no glad tidings to the world, which do not yet believe: neither
will such a doctrine work faith, whereas Christ has appointed a Gospel of
remission of sins by his death to be preached to the world, to the begetting of
persons to the faith of that truth, Romans 10. 14. 17. and 1. 16. and 16. 26.

Secondly, such a doctrine does suppose persons to be believers before Christ
dyed for them, or at least before it may be preached unto them, that Christ
dyed for them, and so by consequence before there be any thing to be believed:
and so by the same consequence impossible there should be any believer, for how
shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard, Romans 10. 14.

Obj. But men must first fear God, or have some work of God wrought in them,
Acts 13. 26. before it may be lawful to preach the Gospel to them.

A. Not fo, for then it cannot be said, that any are begotten by preaching: if
perfons must have a life and being in godliness before: which is contrary to
these Scriptures, Jam. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 4. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 23.

Secondly, then it is unlawful to preach the Gosto all Nations, even to them
that do not fear God, which is contrary to these Scriptures, Mat: 28: 18:
Mar: 16: 15: Acts 8: 5: and 9: 29: and 13. 45: 46: 50: and 17: 32: and many
other.

Thirdly the meaning of Acts 13: 26: is but to distinguish the Proselites from
the natural Jews by the application of fearing God: and when he says, to
you, that is you Jews, both by nature and religion; to you in the first place
according to the Commission of Christ, Luke 24: 47: as therein offering mercy
to them, and they refusiug the same, were left inexcusable: as, ver. 40: 41:
45: 46.

Q. But how is it proved that the subject matter, of the Gospel required to be
preached to the world, is that Christ suffered for the sins of all.

A. First, because Christ and the Prophets and Apostles did so teach, Isa: 53:
6: John 1: 29: and 3: 16 17: and 6: 51: and 12: 47: 48: 1 Cor: 15: 3: 2 Cor: 5
14: 15: etc.

Secondly, Christ required them so to preach, Mat. 28: 18: 19: Mar: 16: 15:
Luke 10: 5: and 24: 47: Rom: 16: 26:

Thirdly, the Saints are commended for believing so, John 4: 44: 1 John 4: 14.

Fourthly, because it is a condemning sin in any hearing the Gospel not to
believe so (to wit, that Christ dyed for their sins, Joh: 3: 18: 19: and 12:
47: 48: and 16: 9: 1 John 5: 10.

Q: But why is such a doctrine required to be preached to the world; to wit,
that Christ suffered for all the sins of all?

A. For the working of the belief thereof in all, in whom the doctrine
prevaleth, and for the inexcusablenes of the rest, 2 Cor: 2: 14: 15: 16: and 4:
3: 4: and 6: 1: 2: and 10: 4: 5: 6: 2 These: 1: 8: and 2: 10: Heb: 2: 3.

Q: But will it not from hence follow, that man has free will?

A. No surely, for if the Gospel must work faith, then it flows not from the
inclination of the will, but from the Gospels inlightning the understanding,
Ephesians. 4. 20. 23. Gal. 3. 2. Romans 1. 16. 17. and 10. 17. and as for the
inexcusablenes of the rest which do not believe, it does not betoaken a
freedom of will to believe, but does bewray a blind mind, and an bard heart,
and a rebellious disposition, that will not believe the truth, though it be
declared unto them, Acts 13. 4^. John 5. 40. 44 Ephesians. 4. 18. Romans 2. 7. 8. 9.

Q. Have not all persons a rebellians disp^sition to the beleiving of the
Gospel?

Ans. Yes surely, until the preaching of the Gospel prevail, and then, and
by that means the rebellious disposition is cast down and subjected, and the
persons brought unto the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor 10. 5: and when it
prevails not, it heaps up vengance against the disobedient, ver. 6,

Q. But has God elected some persons before the world began, which only shall be
saved?

A. Yea certainly, Romans 8. 30. or else the events of things in time should come
to pass without or by some ordering cause then the counsel and decree o^ God,
which were impiety once to imagine.

Q. But does not the doctrine of Christ's dying for all con^radict this doctrine?

A. No surely, because it is the means to work faith effectually in the Elect
according to the eternal decree, 1 Thef. 1. 4: 5. Romans 8. 30. and to leave the
other absolutely inexcusable in the effecting their own destruction by their
refnsall to believe in the s^^erings of Christ preached and that acording to
the same eternal decree, 1 Pet. 2. 8. Jude 4. Romans 8. 33.

Q. Why then it seems, that Christ's suffering for all the sins of all ought
freely to be preached to all, and not to be limited by any consideration of the
doctriue of Election?

A. Surely that must needs be so, First because it is the Commission of Christ,
Mar. 16. 15.

Secondly, Because we do not know who is Elected no otherwise then by the
event.

Thirdly, because it is as true doctrine to them that are not Elect; as to the
Elect, whether they believe it or not.

Fourthly, because God has his end in Christ's suffering for the sins of all,
and in the doctrine thereof to all as well when it is not believed, as when it
is believed, Luke 2. 34. 1. Cor. 23. 24. 2 Cor. 14. 15. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 6. 7. 8.
9.

Fifthly, Because else it is not a direct means to work says in any at all.

Sixthly, Because else unbeleevers are not by that m^anes left inexcusable.

Obj. But if this be the doctrine and faith to be preached, and believed, may it
be concluded frim hence, that that none have saving faith but those that
believe this doctrine?

A. It is certain, there is no saving faith without beleiving in the
sufferings of Christ; neithnr have any true ground to believe that he suffered
for them any otherwise then is declared in Scripture to have suffered for all;
yet here we must distinguish, some do not so distinctly understand it to build
their faith upon it as others do, who therefore have a weaker faith then
others have: yet this is out of all doubt, that no saving faith stands in
opposition to it, though some persons weak in the faith possibly may.

Obj. But some persons who do appear very godly do oppose it.

A. True, but many persons who do appear very godly are not so indeed.

Secondly, many godly persons are enemies to the truth, and to themselves too,
Mat. 16. 22. 33. Mar. 8. 33.

Thirdly, such opposition proceeds not from their faith, but from their
ignorance and sinful corruption.

Question. But may we safely believe that Christ snffered for the sin of all,
and so for us all, and therein our own Salvation, before we know whether we be
elected or not?

A. Yea surely: for so we are directed Rom: 10: 6: 7: 8. 9. and yet
nevertheless by this Call of God to this knowledge and belief, we may be sure
that he has chosen us unto Salvation. Rom: 8: 30.

Q: But why is this belief required?

A. That we may thereby partake of union with. Christ, and thereby
Reconciliation, Adoption, Justification, Sanctification, and Glorification.
Joh: 1: 19 Gal: 2: 16: 2 Cor: 5: 20: Gal: 3: 26: Rom: 8: 28: 29: 30: Ast: 26:
18: and 10: 43: and 15: 9: Ephesians: 3. 17: 18

Q. Are not the Elect Justified before they do believe?

A. Noe surely for they are without Christ, straugers from the Covenant,
without Hope or God in the world: dead in sins: children of wrath as well as
others: in a state of condemnation. Joh: 3: 18: Ephesians: 2: 1: 3: 12.

Ob: But the Scripture in many places does manifest Justification to be by the
blood of Christ, and does not mention faith: as Rom: 3: 24: and 5: 9: 18 19:
Rev: 1. 3: Heb: 9: 14: 26: 1 Job: 1: 7: Ephesians ^: 7. and besides, faith is a
believing of Remission of sins and consequently Justification, which
therefore mu^^ be before the believing of the same.

A. True it is that the matter of our Instification is the blood of Christ shed
for all, to be believed by ^ll: and faith has no other Object: but yet be that
believes not his own Justice and Life in the death of Christ shall never see
Light but the wrath of God abides on him. Joh: 3: 36. and we are justified by
faith: not without: Rom: 3: 28: and 5: 1: Gal: 2: 16: Nor yet before we
believe; for it is counted for Righteoufnesse, not an other thing: Rom: 4: 3:
5: 9: 11: 12: 16. 13: 22: 24: Gal. 3: 6: 7: 8: 9: 11: 14: 33: 34: 26: and the
reason is because by it only we partake of Christ's death and sufferings: Joh:
1: 12: and 3: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: 19. 33: 36: and 8: 34: and 11: 25: 26. and
12. 46. 47. 48 Jo. 16. 9.

Q. But are not the elect justified in the purpose of God from all eteinity?

A. No more then they are called and glorified from all eternity, and that is
only predestined and arpoynted from all eternity to be called and justified
in such a time and by such a means as faith in Christ. Rom: 8: 38: 39: 30.
Ephe. 1: 4. 5: and 2: 8. 2 These. 2: 13: 14. and thereby preserved to glory in
the end. Here we must distinguish betwixt the decree of God and the execution
of the same decree^ the appointment to do a thing, and the doing of the same
according to appointment: God did appoint for to justify his Elect in time,
and when the time is come, God does accordingly effect the sam^ by giving them
Faith thereby making them partaken of union with Christ, and thereby of
Reconciliation Adoption and Justification.

Q. But when persons do (according to the Gospel) believe that Christ
suffered for all the sins of all, an^ so for them: by which Faith they
partake of, or are (...) with Christ, and thereby of Reconciliation, Adoption,
and Justification: does God require any further means ^o be by them used
tending to Salvation yea or no?

A. Yes surely, because it is necessary that this belief be preserved and
increased, and the fruits thereof: and the power of sin mortified, which is
done by degrees. 2 Pet. 3: 18: 1 These. 4: 1: ^0. and God has appointed means
to be used for that purpose by the Saints.

Q. What means is that?

A. Surely the preaching and hearing of Gods word, which is as necessary for
Edification as for Conversion: and the administration of the Sacraments, and
prayer, and the Discipline of the true Church: ^ll which ought conscionably to
be used according to Gods word by all true beleivers as the means of
perseverance and increase of Faith, until we come to the end of our Faith the
Salvation of our Souls. 1 Pet. 1: 9: Ephesians. 4: 12: 13. Math: 26: 28: Act. 2:
39. 1 Cor. 5: 5.

FINIS.
Errata. p. 8. l. 22. for desolation ^. dispensation l. 29 for Re^ read Romans p.
9 l. ^ for Isa. read Ephesians.


