VOTIVAE ANGLIAE, ENGLANDS COMPLAINT TO THEIR KING: OR The humble desires of
all the zealous and true-hearted Protestants in this Kingdom, for a speedy and
happy Reformation of abuses in Church government, being the only means to
remove these distractions, and to avert the judgment of God from us.

As they were expressed in sundry Petitions, Remonstrances and Letters, lately
presented from them to the KING, upon sundry occasions.

Collected by a wel-wisher to Reformation.

LONDON Printed by H. Dudley. 1643.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH CHARLES by Divine providence King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, etc.
YOur Highness may justly condemn this as a high presumption, to present the
most eminent King in the Christian World with a discourse of Petitions and
Coppies of Letters: but I have found favor in your sight when I presented them
unto your highness upon more dangerous terms, and therefore I trust that
blessed Lord will move your heart still to accept of the hearty desires of your
poor subject, though they be not clothed with the glorious ornaments of
Wisdom and Eloquence, as was fit to dedicate to the view of so learned and
judicious a Prince, but my comfort is, I speak to a merciful King, that
knows how to pass by infirmities, and to pardon great offenses: and so
beseeching the Lord God of heaven and earth to bless your Highness with many
happy days, long to reign over us to hear the Petitions of your faithful
Subjects, and to redress their wrongs, craving pardon for my boldness, I
humbly take my leave.

Devoted to your Highness Service, JOHN SPENCER.

A DISCORSE OE DIVERSE PETITIONS OF HIGH CONCERNment, and great consequence.
This Petition was written upon the Book for the recreation upon the Lords
day, and I delivered it to King James at Greenwitch: he took it with him in
his Coach, and committed me to Mr. Hutchinson, of the guard, for a certain
time, and was graciously pleased to have great care of me for my diet and
lodging, and after diverse disputations with Bishop Neal, and Bishop Buckridge,
set me at liberty.
REad O King, read O King, and then consider well,
If ever any such decree was made in Israel.
Help O King, help O King, and let not the Sabbath.
Of our glorious God be thus prophained,
With grievous sins in open streets proclaimed:
Nor in Dooms dreadful day this heavy handwriting,
Be justly brought against great Britains Royal King.
The humble Petition of your sinful Subject, JOHN SPENCER.

A Petition delivered to King James at Bletfoe.
Good King James reform thy Court of cursed swearing,
Which otherwise will undoubtedly Gods heavy judgments bring:
And to his faithful Ministers gracious be,
Whose ruin else we foone shall see;
This happy Boon an earnest suit to thee I make,
Oh Consider well, and grant it for Christ's sake.
The humble Petition of your sinful Subject John Spencer.

A Petition delivered to our gracious King Charles at Finchingbrook, at his
going to his Army Royal, Anno, 1639, March 28.
THe glorious Lord of Heaven and Earth the God of battle, and Lord of Hosts,
for our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, bless our gracious King Charles, and his
brave Army, and cover his Royal head in the day of battle, and return him
with honor and victory to his Royal Queen: but I beseech your Highness,
give your poor Subject leave to entreat you that you would not adventure your
self in the day of battle; but remember what the Soldiers said unto the
valiant King, David, 2 Samuel, 21. 17. Thou shall go no more out with us to the
battle, lest thou quench the light of Israel, and consider what counsel that
kingly Prophet gives, Psalm 34. 17. Eschew evil and do good, seek peace and
ensue it. And therefore that fair Englands happy peace may not be now
endangered; let the new Scottish Service Book, and the book for the recreation
upon the Lords Day, be both thrown over the Scottish Bank, and so I humbly
take my leave, and although by reason of my old age, and some wounds that I
received at the famous siege of Ostend, I am disabled to do your Highness
service in the war, yet as my bound duty is, I will daily pray unto the God of
Peace, to set your feet in the way of peace.

The humble petition of your loyal Subject John Spencer

A Petition delivered unto our gracious King Charles, upon this occasion; The
King was to go toward New Market upon Monday, but the wagon and the hounds
went through Cheapside upon the Lords day, which was not lawful, O King: I
never heard that they removed since upon the Lords day, so gracious was the
Kings care herein.
Good King Charles, Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day,
And let not Charles wain be seen to move on London way;
But in the high Sphere of heavenly Contemplation:
Let that day be spent in holy meditation:
Both King, servants, subjects, all zealous for Gods glory,
To hate profaneness, and to abolish all idolatry;
That so when thy blessed soul shall leave thy Royal breast,
Thou may in heaven for ever have a glorious rest.
The humble petition of your sinful subject John Spencer

A Petition unto our gracious King Charles, upon the late setting forth of the
Book for Recreations upon the Lords day.
Good King Charles to hear be graciously pleased
That this Book in the days of your Father, King of great renown,
Grew very ill, and grievously diseased,
And to prevent the mischief that thereby might redowne,
Was with wisdoms holy care happily suppressed:
And so good King Charles for evermore let it rest.
The humble petition of your poor sinful fervant John Spencer.
I sent my son with this Petition, who made great haste, and delivered it to
the King; it pleased his highness to commit him prisoner to the guard of his
Royal person, and set him at liberty the next day, and commanded the Lords of
Scotland to attend his highness in Parliament upon Monday, and there concluded
a happy peace.



A strange and strong transportation upon the Lords day, April 27. 1639.
THis day going to the Church of great Staughton, and hearing the bells chime I
fell into a strong apprehension that I saw King Charles in the field with his
brave Army, under his Standard Royal upon a hill, with his own Squadrons, and
the Scottish Army in the field also, and the King gave directions unto his
Colonels and Captains to charge the Scottish Battalions here and there, till
the battle grew very bloody and mortal on both sides, and almost all the
Peers of England, and all the Nobility of Scotland lay slain in the field:
and then the valiant King Charles seeing it grew to such extremity, descended
the hill, and with great fury and resolution, charged the scattered body of the
Scottish Army and made a great slaughter of them, and so obtained the victory,
and forced them to leave the field, and then returned to mourn over his noble
Peers that there lay slain upon the ground, which put me into such a passion of
weeping, that meeting with Mr. Saul our Preacher, and Mr. Bauldin and they
seeing of me in such a passion of mourning, and desirous to know the cause
thereof, I could not declare to them the cause of my great sorrow, but went
into the Church, and prayed with a troubled spirit, The Lord grant if it be thy
blessed will, that it may prove but a melancholy Conceit. but oh that your
Highness would be be graciously pleased to call a Parliament, turn the faces
of these brave Armies toward the Palatinate to settle your Royal Sister in
her inheritance, and set at liberty your capitive Nephew Prince Robert and so
you shall make all the Princes of Christendom stand amazed at your high
prudence, and great magnanimity: Consider what I say and do it, and the Lord
will bring it to pass, and then make you the most renouned King of the
Christian world, amen, amen, good King Charles send for Colonel Fleetwood, he
is a valiant man, and of great abilities, and will do you faithful service in
your war, I hear he is lately married to a great man's daughter in those parts,
but if it please your Highness, to command him, he will leave his young Lady
to do you service. And now seeing things through Gods gracious providence do
thus happily concur, I beseech your highness give me leave to renew my former
suit unto you, and your houourable Court of Parliament for the happy and
honorable uniting of these brave Armies, make your Nephew the Prince Elector
(who was now so happily in your Court) make him General to lead these brave
Armies into the Palatinate, to settle your Royal Sister in her inheritance,
and to set at liberty his brother Prince Robert, for that is a shame to all the
Princes of Christendom to see a distressed lady so long insulted over by such
a bloody Tyrant; and for the support and transporting of these Armies, I would
willingly give ten Subsedies, besides those are already given; and I hope every
able and faithful Subject in the Land will do the same, that so this Royal
Prince may beat out the proud Enemy out of the Palatinate, and then settle the
Imperial Crown of Germany upon his Royal head, and lead his victoriors Army
unto Romes gates, sack the City, and burn the Whore of Babylon with fire* and
so fulfill the Prophecy Revel. 17. 16. 17. verses, And the ten horns which
thou saw upon the Beast, are they that shall hate the Whore, and shall make
her desolate and naked, and burn her with fire; for God has put in their
hearts to fulfill his will. Amen, Lord Jesus, amen.

The humble Petition of your loyal sinful Subject John Spencer.

A Coppie of a Letter to a great Peer of this Land, upon a strange
coffeehouse betwixt him and his beautiful Lady, about the passing of two
Manners unto his only Son as brave and as noble a gentleman as this Kingdom
afforded; the Letter I delivered unto his own hand: he read it, and retired
himself into an inward Chamber, wept much, and came out again unto me, gave
me thanks, and said never man desired more to gain awoman than he did to gain
her: to this effect, never did I in all my time know such great dislike about
such a slight occasion, betwixt two so virtuous, so noble, so beautiful and
amiable, and so long rejoicing in happy enjoying one another, as will appear
in this dolorous discovrse.
IT may seem strange unto your Lordship that a stranger should write unto you
in this strange fashion, but then I beseech you in the fear of God, consider
the strange course that you have taken, that forces me thereunto: for is it
not strange yet most strange, that so noble, grave and religious a man, should
forsake his wise being a virtuous, beautiful and religious Lady, make it not
your own case, and would you think it possible a wise man should be so
transported, but believe it my Lord, such a thing may be, and such a thing is
and as the Ptophet Nathan said unto King David, Thou art the man, that have
behaved your self so undiscreetly, and frowardly: for have not you forsaken
the wife of your youth, that virtuous and beautiful Lady, with whom you have
lived with great happiness these twenty years: who has approved her
faithful love and constancy unto you in so many strange and foreign
Countries, and adventured her self in so many dangerous passages both by sea
and land, to yield you comfort and contentment; now to forsake her when you are
gray headed and stand more in need of your mutual society and comfort: but
now to forsake her to grieve your friends, and make your enemies rejoice; to
forsake her to vex your selves, and to ruinate your estate, and to endanger the
loss of your souls and everlasting happiness, what greater want of wisdom
can be showed? you carry your self exceeding forwardly herein, that neither
the persuasions of friends, nor the entreating of those that love you, nor so
many pitiful tears from the fair eyes of your Lady can move a
reconciliation, but you fly from a distressed Lady as if you were pursued by
an armed enemy; was your noble blood ever stained with such cowardlinesse? how
may those renouned Princes of the united Provinces, who held and approved you
so noble and valarous in Heroic Atchivements, both in Germany and when you
were Lord Deputy of Ireland, be grieved to hear of this strange alteration in
you? but this is not the worst disgrace, for herein you have dealt very
unwisely, for you have rejected the counsel of the Prophets, of the Apostles,
and of our Savior Christ himself: and have followed the course of your violent
passions, or else the shallow device of some giddie heads, as Rehoboam did to
his own confusion: for Solomon the Mirror of wisdom advises you thus,
Reioyee with the wife of thy youth, let her be as the loving Hind and the
pleasant Roe, let her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and delight in her
love continually, Prove. 5. 18, 19. but you are so far from reioicing with her,
and yielding those comforts unto her, that you seek to rejoice your self in
hauking and hunting, and in the mean time to vex her with your tedious absence
and froward messages, call you this wisdom? nay, my Lord, account it no better
than Machavilian policy. Again, St. Peter advises you thus, Husbands dwell
with your Wives, as men of knowledge, Pet. 3 7. but you fly from Chiswick to
London, from London to Hitchin, from Hitchin to Bletfoe, as though some
fearful Dragon did haunt your own habitation, or the air was infected where
your fair Lady breathed. Lastly, our Savior Christ being demanded by the
proud Pharisees whether it was lawful for a man to put away his, wife upon
every occasion, makes this most holy answer, Matt. 19. 4. And he answered and
said unto them, have you not read that he that made them at the beginning, made
them male and female, and said, for this cause shall a man leave Father and
Mother, and cleave to his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, wherefore
they are no more twain but one flesh. Let therefore no man part asunder whom
God has coupled together. Now that you have been thus joined, you dare not
deny, or if you should, the solemn vow you made in the presence of Almighty
God, and before those honorable Personages in Cashawberry parlour shall
witness against you: therefore how dare you make this fearful separation,
except you will proclaim your self a truce-breaker to man, and a traitor to
God; the first too scandalous, and the other too dangerous for a man of wisdom
to undergo; I beseech you in the tender mercies of Jesus Christ, enter into a
serious consideration with your self, in what a desperate estate you are in,
and heartily repent of the evil you have committed, and earnestly crave pardon
of God, and then with all speed make a holy reconciliation betwixt you and your
fair Lady, that so the scandal of your holy profession may be removed, and the
mouths of insulting Papists may be stopped, and your distressed Lady comforted,
and your consciences quieted: but if you will be still wilful and obstinate, then
assure yourself these lines shall rise up in condemnation against you, at the
dreadful day of Judgment, before that glorious God of heaven and earth who
shall judge all men according to their works they have done in the flesh,
whether they have been good or evil, and that without respect of persons,
where your greatness shall no wise privilege you, nor my meandness not
prejudice, the cause of that mighty God who has chosen the foolish things of
the world, to confound the mighty things: unto that all-powrefull God do I
humbly pray, that for his dear Son Jesus Christ his sake, he will vouchsafe
his great power may be seen in my weakness, and his infinite wisdom in my
foolishness, so that this weak means may be made powerful to make you wise to
salvation and produce that holy reformation as may be to the glory of God,
and the everlasting happiness of your own soul, Amen Lord Jesus Amen.

From him that will honor you according to your noble quality, if you do not
dishonor that God that advanced you to this high dignity, JOHN SPENCER.
A Postscript.
You are now conversant with a noble and religious Friend whose zealouse heart
I do assure my self will easily be persuaded to take any pains in this
charitable business, consult with him, and then appoint the time and place where
you and your Lady may happily meet together to epaire the ruins that sad
absence has made, and beautify your faces with those amiable looks, and your
lips with those sweet discourses, wherewith you in happier times did solace
your selves with unspeakable contentment. That so you may make the Proverb
true: Amantium ira amoris redintigratio est. After this some great Lords
undertook to bring them together but it was too late, but better late than
never, for the Lady was very weak in her bed, so they lamented their fatal
error, and took their last farewell, for she dyed within few days, and he
lived not long time after.



A Copy of a Letter sent to the Earl of Cleveland and Tho. Lo. Oliver St.
John, for ending of a ^^^g suit betwixt Justice Fish, and Mr. Mordant,
concerning a seat in the Church at Northill.
Right Honorable,
When Ioab the General of King David's Army besieged Rabba, and fought against
it, and took the cities of waters, and thereby weakened them so, that they could
hold out no longer: then he sent unto hi^ Lord the King to come up with his
Army to take the City, lest if he took it he should have the honor, and the
City should be called after his name. So I having fought with these two
Gentlemen with many arguments, persuasions and earnest entreaties, and so
through the blessing of the God of peace, have qualified the bitter waters of
strife, and weakened the strong hold of their violent passion and contentious
humor, that now they can hold out no longer with any Christian resolution, do
now send and sue unto your Honors to come up with your commanding power, to
take the honor of the day, and the renown to be the noble Peacemakers, I have
viewed the seat in the Church which is large and spacious for both Parties to
sit in, like good Christians and loving Friends; and therefore, if it will
please your Lordships now to lay your Command upon them to confirm that which
I have so earnestly entreated, that thus, and thus, it shall be for their
sitting in the seat; and thus and thus it shall be for the endiug of all suits
and controversies betwixt them: then they have both of them faithfully promised
before sufficient witness, that they will submit themselves thereunto: and so
humbly beseeching that blessed Lord the great Peacemaker, who has pronounced:
Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God. To
bless your Honors with the continuance of many happy days, to make you
zealous for his glory, and to see like good Maiestrates under so gracious a
King, the peace and welfare of your Country, I humbly take my leave.

August 12, 1631. If it please your Lordships to appoint these Gentlemen a day
and place, where they may attend to receive your Commands under your hands.
Desirous that there was in me any ability to do you service, John Spencer.

Right Honorable,
IT is the Rule of the Apostle and of our Savior Christ, Rebuke not an Elder,
but exhort him as a Father: Oh therefore that it would please that blessed
Lord, even the God of wisdom, that I might perform this duty to your
Lordship with such regard of your noble qualities and tender care of your
precious soul as I ought: but however I may fail in point of discretion, ye
I hope your Lordship will bear with me, since it does proceed from a heart
that does unfainedly desire your everlasting happiness, I know it is a hard
task and many times a thanklesse office, to admonish men of mean quality of
their faults, and to bring them to acknowledge their errors; much more then
those that are so far our Superiors: yet where grace and true nobility is,
it will teachmen with meekness to suffer the words of exhortation, and with
the kingly Prophet to say, Let the righteous smite me, for that shall be us
precious Balm unto me, for the wisest and greatest in this world, have their
frailties and infirmities. David a man after Gods own heart, yet erred in
numbering the people, and confessed he had done very foolishly. And Solomon his
son the wisest and the greatest statesman that ever was upon the earth, yet
erred greatly, and although he provided men-singers, and women-singers; and the
delights of the sons of men; yet he does acknowledge all was but vanity, and
vexation of spirit: And so I trust your noble and religious heart, will tell
you though you did provide you such excellent singers such rare conceits and
curious Actors and numbered the people to behold it, yet all is but vanity, and
vexation of Spirit: and the more vanity, and vexation of spirit, because it
was on the Lords day, which should have been taken up with better meditations,
and the contemplation of Heaven and heavenly things, and therefore that God
might not be heareafter so, dishonored, nor your everlasting happiness thereby
endangered I beseech you, in the tender mercy of our Savior Christ, give ear
to the Counsel of your servant, and be you pleased to submit your self to the
censure of your own Court, that so it may appear to the world, that you will
not stand out in any thing that is ill, but will give glory to God, and yield
obedience to all good Laws, and so ye may stop the mouths and stay the fury
of many profane people, which proclaim such liberty (from this example, to
follow their vain delights upon the Sabbath day, But I hope when they shall
hear that such is the justice of the Court, and faithfulness of your
Officers, they will execute justice without respect of persons, and therefore
in this case will spare neither Lord, Bishop nor Knights nor Ladies: I trust I
say when they shall hear of this, it will be a great danting and
discouragement to them, and also, through the Lords mercy, a means to repair
again the breach whereat otherwise whole troops of profane wretches will enter
to lay violent hands upon the Lords Day: and so beseeching the Lord God of
Sabbath that my counsel might be as wholesome and as acceptable unto you, as
the Counsel of Abigal was to David, that you might with that holy man say,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel that has sent thee to meet me, and blessed
be thou that have kept me from giving any countenance or encouragement to any
man that dares presume to profane the Sabbath of the great God of heaven, Amen
Lord Jesus Amen.

Haughton More, November, 4. 1631. From him that has so great cause and is so
much bound to your Lordship. John Spencer.

YOu may be pleased, that my Lord Bishop had lately made me Comissarie
General upon this occasion, the Earl of Cleaveland had built a sumptuous
Chapel and entreated the Bishop to consecrate the same and it pleased their
Lordships to give me notice of the day, so I did attend the Bishop, and the
next day he did it with great state and solemnity accompanied with the Earl,
and Knights, and Ladies, and a multitude of his Clergy; there was a learned
Sermon and the holy Sacrament administered, and other rites and Ceremonies
performed, so that it was three a clock before they came out of the Chapel,
and then my Lord Bishop was pleased to question me before the Earl of
Cleveland, in this manner: Master Spencer, what will they say to you now, that
have been at the consecration of a Chapel, received the Sacrament at the
hands of a Bishop in his Babylonish garment? I answered; If they have nothing
else to say to me, this may very well be answered: But he said unto me, Master
Spencer, what shall I do for you now, I know if I should make you my
Vicar-Generall, you will dislike of that, because it is a Popish title: but I Will
tell you what I will do for you* I will make you my Commissarie-Generall; and
that he thought would please me better, for I had prosecuted his Comissarie
Smith, and charged him with suspicion of Treason against the Kings royal
person: well I thanked his LO^P. and shortly after made more use of my Office
then he would have had me: for one Mr. wilson a cunning Musition having
contrived a curious Comodie, and plotted it so, that he must needs have it
acted upon the Sunday night, for he was to go the next day toward the Court;
the Bishop put it off till nine of the clock at night: a while after, the
Commissarie, Doctor Morrison, kept a Court at Huntington, and I came thither
and went into the seat with the Commissarie, and put on my hat: the Doctors and
Divines stood with hats off, and gave their attendance; then some offered their
presentment, but I told Master Commissarie, that I had a presentment, and that
must be the first, and so he took it, and read it, the tennour was thus:

We do here present John Lord Bishop of Lincoln, for having a Comedy acted in
his house upon the Sunday, it began about nine of the clock at night, and
continued till two or three of the clock the next morning. We do present also
Sir Sidney Mountacute, and his Lady, for leaving their Parish Church to come to
hear this Comedy. We here present Sir Thomas Headly, and his Lady for the
like. We do present Master Wilson, and other Acters of the same.

So when Master Commissarie had read it, he was somewhat amazed at it, and
asked of me who wasthe Commissarie General, I bad him ask my Lord of Lincoln
who was Commissary General.

And this presentment we do make, Ex officio, Commissarie General, John
Spencer.
So when this was registered, I took my leave of Master Commissarie and came
away, for fear I should hear something else: And afterward, because the
Bishop did not appear, I censured him for his fault to build a Schole-house at
Eaton, and to endue it with twenty pounds a year for the maintenance of the
Schole-Master. Sir Sidney Mountacute to give five pounds and five coats to five
poor women, and his Lady five gowns and five pounds for five poor widows: and
this censure stands still unrepealed.



A Letter to Sir William Litton Knight, concerning Master Spencer, that famous
learned man, committed to prison for the refusing to stand to the hard award of
Mr. Noades, but was upon this letter speedly released, and Sir William Litton
took him again into his favor, and was a noble friend unto him during his
life.
GOod Sir William Litten,
I have visited Mr. Spencer, your famous prisoner whom it pleases you to call
my Rabbi, I find him so willing to refer himself unto you and Sir Oliver
Luke to mitigate his hard award, that Mr. Noades has made, that I need not any
further persuasions to effect the same, only give me leave to make this
request unto you, that as humility is an excellent virtue in any man, much more
in a man of eminent parts, that you would vouchsafe to be such a Patron thereof
in this case, that you will not suffer it to be abused and disgraced by the
reproachful taunts of any insulting Skinner man, that knows better how to
scrape ten groats out of a translated sheep-skin, than how to repair the loss
of unvaluable Learning, so long captivated in a loath some prison: I dare not
say as St Paul said to Philemon in the behalf of his prisoner si^^^: if he
has hurt thee, or owes thee ought, put it on my account: but I will rather
put you in remembrance what our Savior Christ says unto Simon Peter, There
was a certain Lender which had two Creditors, the one ought him an hundred
pence, the other fifty, when they had nothing to pay he forgave them both:
which of them therefore tell me will love him most? Simon answ^red and said, I
suppose him that he forgave most: and he said unto him, thou have t^uly judged:
And so I say unto Sir William Litton the more you shall forgive your
impoverished prisoner, the more you shall increase his love unto you; and
thereby you likewise you shall m^ke the splendour of your charity and true
nobility, more clearly appear unto others: consider what I say, and the Lord
give you an understanding heart to do that which may be most for his glory,
and your everlasting comfort: and so I take my leave,

and pray for your happiness on earth, and everlasting happiness in Heaven:
JOHN SPENCER.

A Copy of a Letter to Mr. John Harvy, My Lord St John's Steward.
GOod Mr. Harvy,
considering how dangerous the opposition of great men may be both to Church
and Commonwealth; and scandalous amongst those that profess the Gospel of
peace, I have therefore made bold to use some endeavors to qualify and allay
the heat of some unkindnesse which lately grew betwixt my Lord St. John and my
Lord Wentworth, and to that end used many persuasions, and hard entreaties to
them both, and found my Lord St. John so nobly disposed in it that he told me,
for the thing it self he thought it not worth a matter of unkindnesse; but
that which troubled him, was that he should be so much mistaken in his
judgment, esteeming my Lord Wentworth so loving and faithful a friend unto
him. To this effect I did much endeavor to remove that conceit of mistaking,
and reduce his Lordship to his former good opinion of my Lord Wentworth, and
disired that he should pass by that as an error of a young man, and so ground
his opinion upon the former and future carriage of my Lord Wentworth toward
him, then upon the failing in one particular, which hope gave some satisfaction
unto his Lordship, therefore I pray do you second that with your best
pe^swasions, as occasion shall give you opportunity; and let us not be
discouraged to deal therein, because they are great men, for God has ordained
weak things of the world often times to confound the mighty: And we may observe
in the overthrow of Benhadads mighty army at the siege of Samaria, whereof he
made such proud boasts, the overthrow was given by a small number of 232 of the
servants of the Princes of the Provinces, 1 King. 20. 10. 7. So likewise when
Naaman that great Commander was so discontented with the message that the
Prophet Elisha sent him to wash him seven times in the rivers of Jordan, the
good council of his servants prevailed with him, and stood him more in stead
then if he had had the whole army of the King of Aram, 2 King. 5. 11. and
therefore let us use our weak means, and leave the success unto the
powerful God of heaven and earth, who is able to make the lion and the lamb,
and the faulcon and the dove, to live peace able together, unto whose gracious
protection I do commend you, and so rest,

Your loving Friend, John Spencer.

IN the reign of King James of famous memory, passing through the Palace
yard, I saw two men very much urging one another to go over into Saint Georges
field to fight, one wa^ M. Phillips the Queens so or man, the other was M
Newman my Lord Chamberlaines footman the English man a Protestant; the Irish a
Papist. I used many persuasions to pacify the business betwixt them, but M.
Phillips said it was impossible to satisfy him till they had fought, but I
would by no means suffer them to fight, but I would be M Phillips his second,
and my Lord of Hollands footman should have been M. Newmans second, they should
have fought with single swords, and I had a single sword also. When they saw
that I would not leave them, the Irish man asked what religion I was of, I said
I did believe to have salvation only by the infinite merits of the death and
passion of my Savior Jesus Christ, and so I hoped he did likewise: then I
demanded what religion he was of, that could warrant him to fight in such a
quarrel; he answered, happy man be his dole: In the end they were contented
that I should have the hearing of the business betwixt them: so we went to a
Tavern in Kings street, where they fell out at Tables, and drew their swords,
but the servants parted them, and upon the examination of the servants that did
appear, that the Irish man did the wrong to the English man, and called him
boy? and that was the word of disgrace that M. Phillips would never be
satisfied till he fought with him; therefore I did order, that M. Newman should
acknowledge that he had done M. Phillips wrong, and that he was sorry for it;
and then M. Newman cried mercy, and then they embraced one another, and with
such expressions of love, that they would live, and die together in defending
one another quarrels, to this effect, and as it pleased God I parted this
dangerous quarrel without drawing my sword, the Irish man was a proper
tallman, but M. Phillips was young, but a brave spirit.

ANd now that I am upon the point of peacemaking, give me leave to give some
few directions for the better effecting of this charitable work.

1. Humbly pray unto the God of peace, and lover of concord, to give you
wisdom and direction, and frame the hearts of the contending parties to unity
and concord, then get them into bond to stand to the arbiterment.

2. Confer with the parties alone by themselves, and then use all the
strongest arguments you can to weaken the party you speak unto, by telling him
what advantage his adversary has of him, his great friends, his able parts,
and resolute mind, and use the like arguments to the other.

3. Try if a wife, a child, or friend, may not be a fit agent to persuade in
these differences.

4. Consider what a happy and pleasing thing it is in the sight of God and good
men to see neighbors to live together in love and unity.

But in my long trading in these charitable businesses, I will declare unto you
two very rare and unusual means which I have made use of:

A gentleman of great worth, and Knight of the Parliament house, and his
Minister of great worth and of great parts also, having spent much money in
suites of Law in the high Commission Court.

I humbly entreated my Lord Mandevill, that noble peacemaker to take into his
consideration they, being his near neighbors, who took great pains to order
the business, and end the suites, and gat them into bands, but they were both
so resolute, they brake their bands, and refused the order, and procured
Commiss^ions out of the high Commission Court to examine witnesses, I think
almost a fortnight together, to their great charge, and to make such
misdemeanors appear to that Court, that some of their good friends thought
would make them be fined a thousand pound at the least. The Commission was
sealed up, and sent to Huntington to be returned into the high Commission
Court. I was sorry to see all our labor lost, and hopes frustrate, yet it
pleased God to put a conceit into my head, and therefore. I consulted with two
that were nearly allied to the Knight of the Parliament house, and told them we
must make an end, either with the consent of the parties, or without their
consent; for the first, that the suit was impossible; the second, how could it
be, that I will tell you? so we fell to writing, first, that all suite in law
should cease: secondly, that thus much the Knight of the Parliament should give
the P^eacher for rearages for his tithes, and then to prevent suites here
after, the Knight of the Parliament should give thus much a year for
composition for his tithes. When we had done, I told them I will engage my
self to be bound in this sum, that the Minister shall stand to this, and you
shall do the like to me; That the Knight of the Parliament should do the
like, we entered into bands, and then sent for them, and when they saw that we
stood engaged for them, and it was not their Act they consented to that end,
and entered into five hundred pound bonds apeece to stand to that end, thus it
pleased God to take off this tedious and dangerous business.

The other concerned my self: in my old age a gentleman had made a scandalous
report of me, that I should send a Cart upon the Sabbath Day to remove certain
goods; which was very false, yet he made report of (...) ^oble friend of mine
which answered very much for the, and would not believe it, used many means to
vindicate my reputation; but he would not be satisfied, but gave credit to the
report of some lewd malicious companions; so in the end I grew so foolish, that
I sent him a challenge, and sent my man with it to meet me the next day by
eight of the clock in the morning, upon such a Common, betwixt two Woods, to
meet single and with single swords. I came to the place at the time appointed,
and beat the air, but he came not; I rode to his gates to call him, but he
returned his answer in a kind letter to me, did acknowledge that he had done
me wrong, to give credit to the report of such lying and malicious knaves, and
that he would satisfy my noble friend how much I was wronged, to this effect,
and afterward we continued very loving friends during his life: this I do
relate, but would have no man follow this example, except they will do (and so
I hope we should have done) As two knights in King Henry the eighths time, as I
take it, that the one was Sir John St. John, and the other Sir Henry Cromwell,
two valiant Knights, and brave soldiers, and contended for a piece of ground,
and spent more money in Law then they were willing; and seeing it was unfit for
soldiers to follow suites in Law, they resolved to determine it with their
swords, and appointed a day to meet upon that ground, and there met, but
considering better of it, that their valor was well known and what a vain
thing it was for them to adventure their lives upon such a quarrel, whereupon
they grew to (...) offers each to other of the ground, and contented who should
give or take it: a vain example of two so noble and valiant Knights; but I
would now advise all men to ^ake heed they be not put to that adventure, for
men to meet in the field, the devil will put these conceits into their mind
that it is not for your honor, to appoint the field and not to fight, and if
they fight, then it will be their dishonor to give over with this
disadva^tage, thy enemy has given thee more wounds then thou have done him,
and so will urge them to fight still until either one or both are slain: as
was seen in the ever to be lamented example of Sir George Wharton, and Sir
James Steward that stood upon terms of honor, and were both slain in the
field.

A Copy of a Letter to my Cousin M. Bullie, a grave Preacher in new England.
MY very loving Cousin, seeing we can no longer enjoy your company in old
England, we would be glad to hear of your safe arrival in new England, and I
fear in this little time you find by experience that all things are not
answerable to your expectation, and likewise that your friends that did so
earnestly desire your stay were not altogether mistaken, when they told you
that you should find many inconveniences in that place. Well, howsoever God,
the God of infinite wisdom, that has in his eternal Council appointed us
our going out and our coming in; that has in his providence thus directed and
inclined your heart unto this course, I trust also he will sanctify both your
prosperity and adversity in the same, that all shall work together for the
best, to further you to that everlasting rest which he has prepared for his
children in the kingdom of heaven; and therefore now let us be partakers of
the truth in both, and especially in the comfort of your freedom in the
ordinances of God, and in your public exercises in the holy worshipping of
him, for that is the main thing that I desire to be satisfied in: and whether
you have yet settled any uniforme course to be generally practiced for the
sanctifying of the Sabbath, and when you begin and end the same, as also for
prayer and reading the holy Scriptures, preaching of the Word, and singing of
Psalms, with the manner of the administrations of the holy Sacraments, and how
far you do still hold the order of the Church of England, and wherein you
differ from the same, or if you have not yet established such a course, but
leave every Minister to order his peculiar Congregation to his own Rule,
whether you do not find great variety and differences in men's opinions in
that way, and what inconvenience and danger may grow thereby, through sects and
schisms, that of necessity is like to fall thereon. And thus good Cousin you
see how bold I am to trouble you with so many quaeries in a foreign land, when
it is more need to make enquiry into my own sinful and deceitful heart, to
see what is done there in matter of reformation, repentance, and amendment of
life.

And therefore now though we are far remoted in the body, yet let us be present
in spirit and prayer, and although you are retvred to a place of more privacy,
and where your eyes (I hope) do not see such abominations to vex your heart
with as ours do, yet pity us and pray for us; and on the other side, be not,
oh be not so secure, nor put your confidence in your select company, nor in
those remoted woods and solitary mountains; but remember what befell unto Lot,
that was righteous Lot whilst he lived in Sodom; but when he would fly out of
Zoar to a solitary cave in the mountains, with his two daughters, he committed
those abominable sins there, that his soul would have abhorred once to have
thought on in Sodom, and therefore let him that thinks he stands take heed
lest he fall, our help is in the name of the Lord, that has made heaven and
earth, who is able to help us in all places, and at all times, and so
beseeching the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus
Christ the shepherd of his sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant make us perfect in all good works, and to do his will, working in us
that which is pleasant in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for
ever and ever. Amen Even so I take my leave, and rest,

Your loving and sinful Cousin, John Spencer.
I pray remember my respective love to my gracious Cousin, your loving wife,
who has given such a testimony of her love unto you, and the reverend opinion
she has of your honorable Calling, and commend me to the rest of my Cousins,
and to so many of our Christian friends as you think fit,

England, July 9. 1635.


A charitable Consideration, of new Englands plantation.
We read in holy Writ and Law Leviticall.
That if a man dies, having no child at all;
His nearest kinsman by the right of Aliance,
Shall take both the Widow and the Inheritance;
To raise up seed to the dead, and by doing well,
Continue still his Brothers name in Israel.
Fair England of the Northern World the great renown,
Having late made Union with the Scottish Crown:
Thereby involving her title with great Britain,
And so lies obscured in that golden chain
We to continue the name of our Brother,
In great America has raised up another:
The Almighty God grant that ever may remain
An ornament to England, a terror to Spain.
FINIS.
JOHN SPENCER.

Mtr. Brightman a little before he died, translated the Canticles into verse,
whereupon I wrote these verses.
THE heavenly song of that bright man,
Whereto he tuned his latest breath:
Much like asilver shining-Swan,
Presaged thereby his present death:
A goodlier song was never seen,
And few such singers left there been.
But you fair Signets which still remains
By pure streams of sacred Truth,
Washing your wings from sinful stains,
With mournful tears and doleful ruth;
Lest you should him too much deplore,
For you this song he left in store.
Never therefore let the profane,
With sinful lips and hearts impure;
This sacred Song once dare to name,
Lest they damnation do procure:
Let them with Toads their croaking make,
Till they do their sins forsake.
But you dear Children of the light,
Whose lips are tuned to sing this praise,
Oh labor still to shine more bright,
And therein spend your happiest days;
That when your dear Lord shall appear,
He may you find a Spouse most clear.
FINIS.
John Spencer,

A charitable Supposition of Mtr. Brightmans sudden Dissolution.
No marvel though so bright a man,
His glorious life in Heaven so soon began:
For long his soul had languish'd in great grief,
To see Gods chosen Flock to want their best relief:
And cruel Wolves, dumb dogs, and lordly Masters;
Set in the room of Christ's faithful Pastors.
Therefore his dear Lord seeing his servant thus distressed,
Took him away unto his everlasting rest.
FINIS.
John Spencer.

Here lies interred Sarah Spencer the virtuous,
Wife of John Spencer, and Sarah his Virgin-Daughter:
Both so goodly, fair and courteous,
As few such Sarahs will be found hereafter:
Blessed be the Lord God of Heaven and Earth
That made them so renouned both in life and death.
A Coppie of a Letter sent to a great Lady.
MAdam, my great care of your everlasting happiness, and my respective love to
my reverend Cousin Mr. Lee, who now is dead in the Lord, and therefore must
cease from his labor: and from those holy endeavors whereby he did labor to
plant grace in your heart in your tender years, and whereof you then gave such
excellent hopes that in the Autumn of your age, he should have seen a
plentiful increase of that blessed fruit, and many goodly sheaves of piety
and happiness, to his great comfort in the Harvest: but it pleased God, the
great Lord of the Harvest to take him away as from other evils to come, so
likewise from those griefs that would have wounded his heart to see those
flourishing hopes so nipt and withered in your springtime: it pleased God to
make me partaker of his last prayer, and to close his eyes: Oh that it might be
his blessed pleasure to make his Spirit to be redoubled on me, that I might be
the better able to admonish and exhort you to reform that which is amiss in
you, and disgraceful to your holy profession, I mean in respect of your
outward carriage and appearance, with so many fond fashions and garish attires,
as to deal plainly with you, were more meet for one of painted Iezabels
profession, than for a Lady of your worth: and more fit to furnish a pedlers
pack, than to make open show of them in the Church of God, and in the Assembly
of the Saints: whereas things should be done with comeliness and decency; and
therefore he commands that no woman should be covered because of the Angels,
1 Corinthians. 11. 10. and that women should pray with their heads covered. But if
this be a comely covering to have a woman's head covered with dogs hair, or
goats hair, and cats dung, and painted feathers, judge you: for my own part,
the Word of God wherewith you shall be judged, condemns it as odious and
abominable: but it may be you will say it is the Gallants fashion, and what if
the Venetian Curtizans have brought up that fashion? must the religious Ladies
of England follow that fashion? God forbid, the Children of God must not
fashion themselves after the world, Romans 11. 2. But they must fashion themselves
according to the rule of Gods Word, and then Madame mark what fashion you must
be in, 1 Timoth. 2. 9, 10. Likewise also the women, that they array themselves
with shamefastness and modesty, not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls,
or costly apparel, but as becomes the fear of God with good works. I
beseech you in the fear of God deck your self with these rich jewels, of
faith and repentance, humility, patience, fasting and prayer, and good works,
that so you may be like the Kings Daughter glorious within, and this will make
you amiable in the sight of God, and glorious in the eyes of his Saints, and
remember you are the Daughter of a religious Lady, and the Wife of an ancient
Knight, and the Mother of two Sons: and therefore you must give them good
example of wisdom and sobriety, for godliness is great gain, if we can be
contented with that we have: and God has blessed you with a rich portion of
outward beauty and comeliness, and therefore do not deface that incomparable
work of God, with such base trash and trumperie, for you shall never enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, into the company of glorious Saints, with that
trumperie on your back, and gaudes on your head: Consider what I say, and the
Lord give you grace to repent of your sins before you go hence, and be no more
seen, Amen, Amen.

From him that does desire your endless happiness. John Spencer

Good Brother,
I Am desirous to hear if my Father Win have paid the fifty pounds unto Sir
Milss Fleetwood, and also to admonish you (as I take it) of your unseasonable
payment of one hundred pounds upon the Sabbath day morning before Harborough
Fair, alas, was that a fit time to tell money, and to make your Accounts with
men, when you should account with God? was that a fit time to rumble in your
Chest for your money-bags, when you should have ransackt your heart for your
sius? must not the Lord of Sabboths needs be highly offended, to see the
service of men preferred before his divine Service? and more care had for the
buying of Oxen, than for the keeping of his holy Sabbath, must not the Lord
needs visit for such sins? nay, has he not already visited, although in great
mercy, for was not your dear and only son, within a few days after closed up
in a Chest? and there found by his mother speechless, and near his last
breathing, had not the Lord in judgment remembered mercy, and restored life
when we deserved death; and if you did not already make use of it, I beseech
you in the fear of God assure your self, that in that judgment the Lord
would have you take notice of that particular sin; for if you remember when I
was with you at Arlsen (I told you before I heard of this, that you must think
that there was something amiss that the Lord would have reformed, when he
threatened such fearful judgment to this effect: And therefore I beseech you
bewail that grievous sin; and as Job made a Covenant with his eyes, so do
you make a Covenant with your hands never to abuse them so again, with telling
money upon the Sabbath day. And remember it was Balaams ever to be lamented
error, still to pursue the wages of iniquity, although the Angel threatened
him with a drawing sword; but let his fearful end teach us with wisdom to
return in time, and repent of our sins, and make our peace with our God,
before we go hence and be no more seen; and to say truth, these days and
dangerous times requires a continual preparation for our last departure, when
so many wise and strong are taken away, and their honor laid in the dust; and
we must look also for our changing we know not how soon, and therefore good
brother let us walk circumspectly, as the children of the light, and such as
are risen with Christ, setting our affections on things that are above, and not
on things that are on the earth, for our life is hid with Christ in God: When
Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall we appear with him in
glory. In the mean time let us be diligent to exhort and admonish one another,
and to edefie one another in our holy faith, that so we may grow from grace to
grace, and strength to strength till we become perfect men in Christ. Amen,
Lord Jesus, Amen.

Your loving Brother, and the Lords unworthy Creature, John Spencer.
Staughton More, November. 7. 1616.
A Copy of a Letter to the prisoners at Bedford, with a Book of common Prayer,
and M. Dods exposition upon the Commandments bound up together with bosses and
claspes.
BRethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for you poor prisoners, is that
your souls might be saved: For I bear you record, that in these places you
endure many times hunger, cold, and much misery together, with the fearful
expectation of the Judges coming, and the sentence of death, yet if God does
not work in your hearts true repentance, and sanctify these afflictions unto
you, it will be but as a forerunner of the appearing before that dreadful
Judge that will pronounce that fearful sentence of damnation against the
wicked, of, Go ye cursed into hell fire, and these iron chains, a shadow of
those everlasting chains of darkness, wherein the wicked shall be for ever
tormented; and therefore that I might be a means (through Gods mercy) to
further you in that holy work of true repentance, I have procured these two
books to be bound up together for your better use in this place of restraint,
the one commended and commanded by the public authority for the public
service of God, the other the work of a reverend Preacher, an excellent
exposition of the Commandments, both being undertaken in the fear of God, and
diligently used, may be a blessed means to further you in the way of
repentance, and to set your feet into the way of peace. First therefore pray
earnestly to God to give you understanding hearts, and then read, and then pray
and read again: and the Lord of heaven so bless you in reading and praying,
that you may truly repent you of all your sins, before you go hence, and be
no more seen. Amen.

Stoughton Moore. 1624. From him that wishes your everlasting happiness.
LEt me entreat you in the fear of God, that one of you that is best affected
and best enabled, to read Prayers and the Psalms, for Morning and Evening
Prayer, according to the order that is appointed in the book of common Prayer,
and then in stead of the Chapters which you should read in the Bible if you had
it, read every morning and evening a portion of the Commandments as is
appointed for the day of the month that so the book of the Psalms and the
exposition of the Commandments may be read over once every month, and upon
every Sabbath day. I would have you (besides the ordinary portion appointed for
that day of the month) read the exposition of the fourth Commandment, half at
morning prayer, and half at evening prayer; Let one read distinctly and
reverently, and let the rest hear diligently and devoutly.

I do humbly desire the honorable Court of Parliament to take that to their
consideration, that every prison may be furnished with such a book, and every
high Sheriff of every country provide a Preacher to visit the prisoners once
every week, for it is pitiful to see how they are neglected.

A Copy of a Letter to M. Hutchinson, to whose hands King James committed me,
after I delivered unto him the petition for the Sabbath.
MY very loving and kind Keeper, although you have been long out of sight, yet
you have been oftentime in mind, and often in my thoughts and prayers unto God
for you, as I had good cause when I remember the great care and love that you
and M. Hutchinson did show unto me when I was prisoner in your house. Oh that
it would please the Lord to make me as happy a prisoner unto you, as Saint Paul
was unto his Keeper at Philippi, whereof you may read in the sixteenth chapter
of the Acts of the Apostles, who at Saint Paul's first coming into the prison,
was in such a woeful estate of a persecuting Infidel, yet that night being
terrified with the earthquake and fear of the loss of his prisoners, would
desperately have murdered himself, but Saint Paul having pity and compassion
upon him, cried out with a loud voice, Do thy self no harm, for we are all
here: and then with fear and trembling he fell down before them, and brought
them out of prison, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? and Saint Paul
preached unto them, to believe in the Lord Jesus, and he and his household
should be saved: and so through the Lords great mercy they were converted and
baptized, and greatly rejoiced that he and all his house believed in God. Now
though I have not seen you so desperately minded to kill your self with your
sword for fear of my escape, yet I must needs say, I have seen you ready to
wound your soul with fearful swearing, and excessive drinking, and how
greatly this may endanger your soul and body also you may consider of it: You
remember well that the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name
in vain; and Saint Paul does testify, that drunkards shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, Galat. 5. 22. but of these sins I have admonished you of
when I was with you, and through the Lords great mercy found some reformation
thereof, in that I did see you refrain from such excessive drinking, and
sometimes abstain an oath, and reprove others for swearing. I know that is a
hard matter suddenly to cast off such grown sins, and those whereunto you
have been so long accustomed; but on the other side also, I know it is an easy
thing unto our omnipotent God to set your feet into the way of peace. Oh
therefore unto that merciful God to convert your soul, and to set your feet
into the way of peace. Oh therefore pray unto that blessed Lord, and importune
him with earnest and zealous prayer day and night, until he has wrought in
you that blessed work, to give you grace not only to see your sins, but
give you also true repentance and godly sorrow for them, that you may now loath
them more then ever you loved them, and utterly detest and abhor them, though
they be as dear unto you as your right eye, and as profitable unto you as your
right hand, yet cast them off, and cast them from you; for it is better for us
to enter into the kingdom of heaven so maimed and spoiled of our sins, then
to enjoy them here for a short time, and then both soul and body to be cast
into hell fire, where there is weeping and wailing in everlasting darkness.
And now that you may escape those everlasting torments, and attain to the
kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof, you must settle your self
to the constant performing of those holy duties of prayer and hearing the word
of God; and you must take unto you that Christian resolution, that no fear of
man's displeasure, nor the mockes and scoffs of wicked men should make you
never to neglect the same; I mean, you must not be ashamed to go to Sermons,
nor to keep holy the Sabbath Day, nor to pray with your wife and servants,
though all the drunken companions in Kent should rail or ieere at you for the
same; but remember that those that are ashamed of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of
his holy service on earth, he will be ashamed to own them in the day of
judgment, and leave them to their devilish masters, and to those hellish
torments which he has prepared for such base slaves that do prefer the
service of the devil before the service of God: And then will they cry unto
the mountains to cover them, and to hills to fall upon them, rather then they
would hear the dreadful sentence of, Go ye cursed into hell fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels; and the woeful execution that follows
thereupon, to be closed up for ever in utter darkness, and there to be
tormented with those damned spirits, where in stead of their carousing and
filthy speaking, they shall have weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth
for evermore, and never shall behold the face of any man, nor hear the voice
of any creature to yield them comfort; but as they delighted themselves in
swearing and staring, in cursing and raging, so they shall have their fill
thereof among those raging and furious damned spirits, and yet shall not
procure one drop of water to cool their tongues, although they be tormented in
those hellish flames, as you may read in the example of Dives, Saint Luke 16.
29. and then my loving Keeper, is it not much better with Moses, to choose
rather to suffer afflictions with the children of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, and then to go to everlasting torments. And
what if you be mocked and pointed at for a Puritan, and be counted a mad man
because you separate your self from the company of blasphemous wretches and
abominable drunkards, and do now resolve to serve the living God with an
honest heart; nay, what if you should be persecuted and imprisoned for his
namesake? Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven; for so
persecuted they the Prophets and holy men of God in former times; and so
likewise did the Jews persecute our Lord Jesus Christ, and said, he was mad,
and had a devil: And if they dealt thus with him our Lord and Master, shall we
look for a greater privilege? nay, let us with a holy resolution arm our
selves to encounter with all their temptations; and with the blessed Apostle
rejoice that we are accounted worthy in such an honorable cause, and to be
made like unto our Savior Christ in any sort; for he entered into his kingdom
of glory through many tribulations. I am a little the more earnest upon this
point, because even while I was with you, I fear there were some that did with
scoffing and geering seek to discourage you in those good courses whereunto
you were so tractable: But I beseech the Lord of mercy strengthen your faith,
that you may not only come secretly unto Christ, as Nicodemus did, but boldly
speak to his glory, as Nicodemus did afterward: And then I trust you shall
find great comfort unto your own soul, and cause the Angels in heaven to
rejoice; for as our Savior Christ says, Luke 15. I say unto you likewise, joy
shall be in heaven for one sinner that converteth, more then for ninety and
nine just men which need no amendment of life: and so humbly praying to that
blessed Lord, that you and yours, and I and mine, may be found in the number of
those true repentant sinnners: I rest,

Your loving friend, John Spencer.
Braughton Moore, October 2. 1618. I pray remember my respective love and
thankfulness unto your wife, and desire her, that whatsoever I have written
unto you, she will account that as writ to her self, for you two must be but
as one. Commend me to M. John Davies, and to M. Knevett, and to M. Preston, and
M. Parsons the great Porter.



M. Commissary
I hear that you are greatly offended, because many well disposed people came
to Cople-Church upon Friday the nine and twentieth of August to pray and to
hear the word of God preached; for which heinous fact as you would make it,
you and your Officials have so terrified both Preachers and people, as though
it were in your power to bring them under the Spanish Inquisition. For my own
part therefore to save you some labor in your inquiry after me, I do
acknowledge my self to be one of them that was there, and one also that did
much desire to further that meeting; and that it was my meaning (and I hope the
meaning of many others) to humble our souls that day in fasting and prayer,
and to pray to the God of heaven for our gracious King, for we heard the week
before that he was sick; and likewise that the Lord would bless his great
designs then in hand, and protect his army and navy that was then to set forth
to sea: And now Master Commissary, if your heart be so malicious that you
cannot endure to have us perform this service to God, and duty to our King,
but you and your Officials will persecute and restrain us. Assure your self,
if there be any Law in the land will hang you up for it, at Bedford gallows, I
will as eagerly pursue you to that place of execution, as if you had cut the
throat of my father, and hewed my eldest sou in pieces: And if you and your
Officials will maintain your Decrees to be the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, that may not be broken, though the King and his subjects suffer never
so much prejudice by the same; and therefore if upon these extraordinary
occasions we make our prayers and supplications unto our God in this manner: We
shall be cast into the Commissaries den. I trust that mighty God that did
deliver his servant Daniell from the rage of such cruel beasts, will likewise
deliver us from the fury of your roaring Cannon; and being thus overcharged,
make it recoyle-upon your selves, and tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver you, read Psalm. 50. ver. 20. Are you so squint-eyed that you can see to
trouble an honest man in Bedford for going to hear a Sermon upon the
Sabbath Day in the afternoon in the same Town, and when there was none at his
own Church, and for more expedition, and for double Fees to cite him, and
suspend him altogether; but you cannot or will not see to punish some notorious
drunkards and swearers, and Tobackonists, and Tossepots, and whoremongers, and
blasphemers, etc. Pocklington or Pockie-tongue, who in a public Sermon used
this blasphemous speech, enveighing against those that stood for preaching,
that he sung a Hopkins jig, and so whipped up into the Pulpit: But I trust when
our gracious King is humbly petitioned unto, and his Highness, and his
Parliament truly informed how his poor subjects are dealt with, I hope his
Highness will see it redressed, and will not suffer us to be thus vexed and
terrified for performing the duty of faithful subjects in this holy course of
fasting and prayer, which his Highness has to his everlasting fame so often
publicly commanded, and in his Royal person so reverently performed; and
therefore having such a royal president, we will follow it, and do you and
your Officials the worst you can, and know this is the resolution of

John Spencer.

THis letter I sent to Master Commissary by an understanding man, and wished
him if the Commissary gave him a shilling for his pains he should not refuse
it, and appointed him to run to Bedford, that I might know the Commissaries
answer. The Commissary was a very stout and choleric man, and when he had
read the letter he stamped and fumed as if he had been wild, and returned me
this answer: That he would justify that he did, and if I had any thing to say
to him, I must meet him to morrow at his Court at Ampthill, and so I did; and
when he was going to his Court in his pomp, I met him in the street, and asked
him if he was the Commissary, and he said, yes: then I told him, I do charge
you with suspicion of treason against the Kings Royal person, and so then
commanded the Constables to do their office, and then there was a great hurrye
to fro, as if we had been driving an Ox to the butchers stall. He made great
offers to put in bail, and that he might go to the Church to take order for
the dismissing the Court; but I would give no consent, but told him, I knew not
whether he might sit there, being thus attached upon treason; yet he prevailed
with the Constables, and they went with him to the Church, and I rode to the
Church gate, and sent in the Constable to bring him away, he entreated to have
a little longer time to dissolve the Court, and there was such a Jubilee and
going away without paying Fees, as I think was never seen in all his time
before. I hastened him away to go to Sir Edmund Conquests to take order for
the sending of him up to the Council; and told him that I had charged him with
suspicion of treason against the Kings Royal person; and desired his care to
send him up safely by the Sheriff, or else to send him to Bedford Goal that
he might be forth-comming. So Sir Edmund said, he must do one of them, and
would have known of me what were the words which he should say; but I
answered him, that was not so fit for me to tell, that I must make that known
to the Council, and so made have toward London; and then I saw Master
Commissary and the Constable, and three or four more with him a foot, as
though they had been going to hunt the Fox: they called unto me, and would
have me stayed to see if they could have taken up the business betwixt Master
Commissary and I, but I would not come at them, but hastened to my Lord
President, and related unto him the business betwixt Master Commissary and I:
So his Lordship said, that was somewhat irregular, yet he should not disturb
me in my devotion. Master Commissary came up, and some friends labored to take
up the matter betwixt us. Sir Beaucham St. John, and other gentlemen we met in
Westminster hall; and after some conference about the business, M. Commissary
did solemnly protest that he did not prosecute us because we kept afast, and
prayed for the King; but heard that it was so well performed, that if it had
been with authority, he would have been at it himself, and then I did
acknowledge that I was sorry that I did not apprehend it so: To this effect
then we did consult what might be done for the repayring of Master Commissaries
reputation: so we resolved that Master Commissary should put in a bill against
me, and I should not plead against it, and so a writ of enquiry should go out
to enquire what damage this was to Master Commissary; and he promised me, if
they gave him two hundred pound, he would not take a penny of it: so he put in
two bills of complaint what great damage he was put unto; and whereas before he
was well esteemed of noblemen and gentlemen now they eschew his company,
whereunto I made this short answer:

When M. Co^missary shall clear himself of the suspicion of treason against the
Kings Royal person, and clear his bill of untruths: I hoped I should be at
more leisure to make a longer answer, in the mean time desired to be dismissed
of the honorable court; so they gave him a hundred pound damage, which I
tendered unto him, and he told it, and put it up again every penny; I gave him
a piece of plate with two hearts joined together, and this inscription,
Amantium ira amoris, redintigratio est: and so we continued very loving friends
to his death; and he told a gentlewoman of great worth, his loving neighbor,
that never any affliction did him so much good to commiserate this trouble and
vexation that he had done to others, and so grew one of the best Commissaries,
and died lamented.

A Copy of a Letter to Sir Oliver Luke Knight, when he was high Sheriff.
SIr,
the blessed Apostle having used that vehement entreaty unto the Romans, to
dedicate themselves to the service of God, chapter the 12. In the next verse he
does second that entreaty, with this excellent exhortation: And fashion not
your selves like unto this world, but be ye changed by the renewing of your
minds, that you may prove what that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of
God is.

Whereupon I beseech you give me leave to make this profitable application to
you in particular, whom it has pleased God to call now unto an office of great
dignity in the common wealth. And humbly I beseech him likewise to give you a
wise heart to manage it to his glory, and the good of his Church, and the
comfort of your own soul: and that you may so do, take heed you do not
fashion your self like unto this world, not like to a worldly Sheriff,
especially in these two things, neither in your Officers nor in your
Attendancy, for it is often the custom of carnal minded Sheriffs to receave
there under officers by tradition whatsoever their condition be; but I pray be
not you in that fashion, but follow that grave and holy direction that Iethro
gave to Moses, Exodus the 18. the 21. Moreover, provide thou amongst all thy
people men of courage, fearing God, men dealing truly, hating covetousness,
and therefore I pray make a diligent inquisition amongst your officers, and if
you find one lewd Bayliffe in all your pack let him be discarded, and an
honest man put in his place; again, it is the fashion of many vain glorious
Sheriffs to exceed so in the number of their attendants, and in their excessive
entertainments, that they are forced either to end their house keeping with
their office, or else to lay such heavy burdens and wracking rents upon their
tennant, as gives them just cause to lament the prodigallity of their landlords
Sherivalty seven years after; but I beseech you take heed you be not in any
sort drawn to like of this fashion, neither by the instigation of others, nor
by the volentary offers of your honorable friends which at this time it may be
will be too forward to add fuel to the flame of your one ambition; but I
pray consider your own revenue is very co^petent both for your own rank, and
for the support of that office which is imposed upon you, and thanks be unto
God for it, Master Oliver Luke is well known and well esteemed of in the
country without the liveries of great men's favoures, and therefore I pray stand
firm upon your own bottom, and let your own virtues make you still to be
honored, and not your excess lamented, and in my poor conceit it is more for
your reputation to show your self in the habit of true judgment and
moderation, and attended with your own servants, then to increase your number
with borrowed companies and deck your troops with the gay feathers of other
birds. Again consider you are to entertain Judges of the land, men of wisdom
and gravity, and such as should punish excess and prodigallity as well as
theft and usury; besides these times are so peaceable that they need not such
troops of horse or Squandrons of foot to guard their persons nor such pomp
nor bravery to divert their mind from the better consideration of these great
and serious employments that they are to go about.

Lastly in the fear of God lay this consideration well to your heart, how
unseasonable and unseemly a thing it is to make that a time of feasting, and
outward jollity, which should be a time rather of fasting and mourning, wherein
both Magistrate, and people should bewail their own sins and the sins of the
land, which at such times are so apparent, and for the which many of their
Christian brethren do suffer such heavy Judgments; and therefore if we were in
the right fashion, we should weep with those that weep, and remember those that
are in bonds as though we were bound with them, and those that are in
affliction as if you were also afflicted, with them, Heb. 13. 3. Thus did that
noble Magistrate Ezra fast and mourn for the sins of the people and thus did
David Samuel the 1. the 3. the 35. and therefore what great cause is there for
our Magistrates to fast and mourn when they hear of so many thefts and murders
and abominable sins committed in our streets, and for the which the Lord might
justly bring his fearful Judgments upon the whole land. And thus good Sir
Oliver through the Lords mercy, you may see that they are very proposterous in
their house, and show great want of true judgment and Christianlike affection
that think these fit times for feastings, pomp and outward bravery. And
therefore I beseech you take heed unto your own heart, and let neither the
vain examples nor the violent persuasions of vain glorious men, draw you into
their vain errors, but evermore remember that most holy saying, and righteous
censure of our Savior Christ, Saint Luke 16. 15. That which is highly esteemed
amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God, and therefore hold fast that
word of truth and follow the holy directions thereof which is able to make you
wise unto salvation, and both in these and all other your affairs first prove
what that good acceptable and perfect will of God is, and do that with all
diligence, and then assure your self if you should fail of this fading honor
that they so eagerly hunt after, yet you shall have everlasting honor in the
sight of God, and of his glorious angels in the Kingdom of heaven. Amen Lord
Jesus. Amen.

Staughton More, Anno. 1617. From him that would be glad if either his pen or
his person might do you that good service he desires. John Spencer.

A Copy of a letter to his brother Nicholas Spencer, to dissuade him from his
inordinate delight he took in Cock-fighting, which soon after he happily and
absolutely gave over.
IT is said of the churlish Inne-keeper of Bethlehem Luke 2. 7. who entertained
so many guests in the Inn, that the virgin Mary and our blessed Savior, were
thrust out into the stable, because there was no room for them in the Inn:
but let us in in the fear of God take heed of such Jewish tricks, lest in the
end we force our Savior Christ to leave us in the fight of our sins, and
ingratitute, and then it will cost us many a grievous sigh, many mournful
tears before we find him again, read Cant. 5. 6. Nay, so woeful shall our
estate be that it shall be never out of our mind: and now out of my brotherly
love unto you I must admonish you of that bewitching and vain pleasure of
Cockfighting, wherein you are so strangely transported that both my self and
many of your faithful friends with grief of heart discern a great alteration
in your affections to those courses of religion wherein heretofore you have
showed your self more forward and zealous. I beseech ye in the fear of God
consider to be a stunling in religion is a fearful thing, but to go ten
degrees backward with Ezekiahs dial is most intolerable; alas shall we begin
in the Spirit and end in the flesh, shall we be snch greedy Elues in our
pleasure, sell those heavenly joys and blessed hope of our heavenly
inheritance for a mess of vain delights: Oh consider how far we are from
the holy zeal of those blessed Saints in Queen Mary's days, that forsook both
their goods, wives, and children for the glory of God and the safety of their
souls: What vain wretches shall we approve our selves to be, if we will not
forsake our vain pleasures? It is not your fair house, nor your children, nor
loving wife I persuade you to forsake, it is the vain and unprofitable sport
of Cock-fighting, which brings ruin to your state, and the endangering of your
everlasting happiness: and therefore if either a desire to preserve your
estate, or to preserve your everlasting inheritance might prevail, my suit
were soon granted. But it may be you will say, if I can prove this you will
give over Cock-fighting; Well, upon that condition I will take some pains to
make it manifest: First, to the matter of the ruin of your state, I refer
you to the examination of your particular exspences of those occasions, and I
pray let Sir William Dyers ruinate estate be a means to make you take heed by
other men's harms; for the matter of coffeehouse I appeal to no other judge
then your loving wife, which can tell you what discomforts she often times
finds in your long absence, and the dangers that does fright her when she
considers that you are in the company of such swaggering companions, for the
latter which is the maine point I purpose to insist upon being a matter of such
high concernment, first because you make that a cause of your jollity and
merriment, which should be a cause of your grief and godly sorrow, for you
take delight in the enmity and cruelty of the creatures, which was laid upon
them for the sin of man, for the earth was accursed with thorns and briers
for our sins, and therefore the bloodshedding of the creatures should rather
teach us to shed tears for our sins: thus did Saint Peter when he heard the
Cock crow he went out and wept bitterly: I would to God you Cock-masters would
make that use of these Cocks. Secondly it is dangerous unto your soul in regard
of the time that you mispend, for if ye must give an account of every idle word
that we speak Matthew. 12. 36. How much more of idle hours and days, and if you
did keep as strickt an account as you do of your household expenses you should
at the weeks end see what a heavy reckoning you should make when you shall see
before your eyes thus many hours of such a day and so many days of such a
week, I have spent in my vain delights, and thus few hours in the service of
my God; well, howsoever we are loath to come to this account now, yet we shall
be one day, brought to it whether we will or no. Thirdly it is dangerous to
your soul in regard of the company with whom you do converse who for the most
part are either swearers drunkards, or licencious people, now if it be most
true that the prophet says Psalm. 18. 25. With the holy, thou shall be holy,
and with a perfect man thou shall be perfect. Then on the contrary it must
needs be, that with the wicked we shall learn wickedness, and with the
profane we shall learn prophanes, for it is a hard matter to handle pitch and
not to be defield with it, or to lie among thorns and not be pricked with
them, as the Prophet says 2. Sam. 23. 6, 7. But the wicked shall be every one
as thorns thrust away because they cannot be taken with hands, but the man
that shall touch them must be defenced with iron, or with the shaft of a
spear, and they shall be burnt with fire in the same place. Therefore dear
brother, if you did rightly consider of the hateful and infectious quality of
the wicked, it will make you stand upon thorns while you are in their company
and to bewail the hardness of your heart which has not felt them such
pricking thorns all this while.

Lastly it is dangerous to your soul in making your soul guilty of many other
men's sins, by drawing away many a poor man from his honest labor whereby he
should maintain his wife and children, to spend his time and money in such an
idle manner, but also you are guilty of many great men's sins whilst you see
and hear the glorious Name of God dishonored, and dare not, or will not
reprove for the same, consider what the Psalmist says. 50. 16. But unto the
wicked said God, what have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, that thou
should take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and
have cast my words behind thee? For when thou see a thief, thou runnest
with him, and thou art partakers with the adulterers. verse. 22. O consider ye
that forget God, least I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.
Now therefore I beseech you observe that those that run with the wicked and are
partakers with the ungodly in their wicked delights are those whom the Lord
shall tear in pieces: thus you see that not only the wicked themselves, but
also their associates and partakers shall be torn in pieces in the day of Gods
fearful wrath: O consider this, sweet meat must have sower sauce, and then I
trust through the Lords great mercy you will utterly refuse it upon those
terms: for what were it to gain the whole world and to loose our souls.

But to conclude if neither persuasions nor exhortations may prevail with you
to break the neck of your Cock-fighting pleasures, consider well with your self
that the Lord has put you as it were into the Cockpit of the round world to
fight his battle against the flesh, the world and the devil, the strongest
striking, the sorest hitting, and the cunningest fighting Cock in the world,
who is only to be wounded with the spurs of faith and piety, and that all
those that will overcome in this battle must be thoroughly fed with the word of
God, and daily breath with prayer and, meditation, whereby they strengthen
their faith, and sharpen the spurs of their holy zeal: and those that
neglect this means let them brag never so much upon their own dunghill, yet
when it comes to a sound trial they will prove themselves to be brand fallen
Cravens, and likewise consider that every hour idely spent, and every vain
word that proceeds out of your mouth is as it were vain to your soul: and all
unlawful pleasures like hovells upon the spurs of your devotion: and then
with wisdom consider what an unlikely, or rather impossible a thing it is for a
poor famisht Cock pitifully vained and thus hung and hovelled to overcome a
Cock of that wonderful strength and devilish spirit that you are matched
withal. Again suppose that those that sit in the lower ring of the Cockpit
are the Devils and wicked Spirits, and those that sit in the upper ring of the
Cockpit are the glorious Angels and blessed Saints, both behoulding this
doubtful battle, though with contrary affections, the angels rejoicing when
they see you fight this spiritual battle like a good soldier of Jesus
Christ, the wicked Spirits wohping and hallowing when they see you strike
faint, fight like a Craven, and fall beastly, and hear dear brother that we
make our selves a laughing stock to this wicked spirits: let us pray unto our
Lord Jesus Christ to strengthen our faith and to assist us with his grace that
we may resist the devil and make him fly from us and in the end tread Satan
underfoot and give us a crown of immortal glory. Amen Lord Jesus.

From your truly loving brother though he deals thus plainly with you. John
Spencer.

GOod Sir Robert Carr,
I have received your letter and do acknowledge my thankfullnes unto you, that
you are pleased to have so good opinion of me and my endeavoures, to commit
your brother unto my care and ordering and that all things accomodate unto my
desire at Steeford, but I must entreat you that I may be spared for my coming
to undertake care of him, so far remoted from my family, I have my hands full
of such dangerous employments; again I hear there are suits in law betwixt you
and his mother my Lady Carr who should I think have the custody of him, and
therefore matters standing upon those litigious terms I should be loath to
meddle with him, but if you would bring him into this country I should be glad
to do you the best service I can, and the rather because his mother is very
willing to commit him to my care: but if my directions may do you or him any
pleasure, I have sent them unto you, and desire you to employ Master Dixie that
has lived with me and is acquainted with his courses: and so I beseech the
Lord to bless these or any other good means to yield him comfort. I take my
leave and rest,

Desirous to do you service. JOHN SPENCER.

The direction for Master Rochester Carr.
Our help is in the Name of the Lord that made heaven and earth.

First therefore let that blessed Lord be humbly fought unto by fasting and
prayer.

Secondly let the distressed gentleman be removed from his own house unto some
other convenient place well situate for air, and spacious fields: to walk in
and to do other exercises.

Thirdly, settle with him a religious discreet Divine that may constantly pray
with him and read unto him evening and morning, and upon all good occasions to
keep him company.

Fourthly, place about him six honest servants men of good discretion and
resolution that may be ready upon all occasions to aid and assist in the well
ordering of him according to the dirrections of him that shall undertake the
government of him, to watch with him, to ride with him, and to exercise with
him in shooting or bowling or any other exercise that shall be thought fit for
him.

Fifthly, let them be very careful and take heed that there be no knives, nor
swords, nor any wounding instruments left in the rooms wherein he comes, nor
worn by others, that he may suddenly snatch at them for their temptations are
many times very violent and their resolution sudden and disperate.

Sixthly let his apparel be decent and comely of cloth or plain stuff without
lace or any such curious trimming, and let his attendants give him no titles of
honor but in civillity call him Master Rotchester or Master Carr, and when he
does any thing well, then to show the more respect unto him: but other wise to
slight him, as those that are set over him to command him, and not to be
commanded by him.

Seventhly, let his diet be sparing and moderate, rather to support nature then
to pomper the flesh: veale, lamb, pheasant, larkes: smelts, troutes, pike,
perch, also let him fast often and pray much, let him refrain from all kind
of wines and strong drink, if you can by any means, let him sleep six or seven
hours in the four and twenty and not above.

Eighthly, let him be held constantly to prayer, and reading an hour in the
morning and an hour in the evening, and if the weather be fitting and his
strength answerable let him walk a mile out right in the morning and evening
and if you find him inclining to a sottish humer put an armor upon him and
beat a drum before him and let one attire himself like a Captain and put on
his gorget and a plume of feathers in his hat and a trunchion in his hand and
make to march and exercise his arms, or else set him upon a bounding horse and
trot the ring and run a career: and in these martial exercises let the
Captain command him as his soldier, and if he finds him peevish and froward
give him a good knock upon his helmet, and if he find him willing and
tractable then to commend and praise him.

Ninthly, for matter of Physic, you must advise with some learned Physician
that does well understand the nature of the disease, and the constitution of
his body; for otherwise he may be prodigal of blood-letting, and the want of
blood may increase his melancholy: he must likewise take heed of strong vomits,
that strain the head, and distemper the brain; in my opinion bathing, and
sweating, and bleeding with horseleeches the safer way.

Lastly, because these maladies and distempers are accompanied with a great
deal of peevish crossenesse, and wilful obstinacy, and a great part of the
cure stands in the right crossing of them from those froward and furious
humors, which will require great patience, and good observation; for the
general, use all fair means you can devise to gain them to the good, and
divert them from the ill: but if that will not prevail, you must have patience
and pass it over as though you took no notice of it; but if it comes once to
this, that they do perceive that you go about to cross them, and that you are
in opposition and contesting with them, then you must follow it with all
importunity, and resolvtion to subdue them, and compel them to do it; but be
sure you take them with such advantages that you prevail, otherwise the
attempting of it will prove dangerous to your self, and make them more
outrageous and insolent.

Postscript.
Master Dixie I pray be careful to see these directions well performed, and
then I hope you will well deserve to have twenty pound a year for your pains,
otherwise I would be loath to persuade you to undertake such a dangerous
employment.



A Copy of a Letter to a virtuous Gentlewoman greatly afflicted in mind,
which it pleased God to give unto her great comfort.
BLessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort, which comfort us in all our
tribulations, that we might be able to comfort them that are in any affliction
by the comfort where with we our selves are are comforted of God: and humbly I
beseech that gracious Lord that he will vouchsafe for his dear son Jesus
Christ his sake to open your eyes that you may behold those unspeakeable
mercies and comforts that he will in his appointed time give unto all those
that do fear his holy name and call upon him faithfully. Cosen I have lately
received, your letter wherein you do acknowledge that when I was with you it
pleased God you found some comfort, praised be his holy name for it, but since
you have been very ill and so remain, some causes you show for the same,
because you cannot be assured of the favor of God toward you, the reasons
that you allege, because you find so small comfort in prayer and in hearing
of the word. Secondly because of your fearful temptations both past and still
continuing: these as I take it are your chief reasons, and being rightly
understood they will prove so many sound arguments, to prove that you never had
so good cause to rest assured of Gods favor toward you, nor ever had so many
testimonies of his everlasting mercyes toward you as you have now, that
afflictions, chastisements and temptations are the signs of Gods favor, and
the marks of his children, I pray consider what the holy Apostle says Hebrews
the 12. the 5. the 6. my son despise not the chastening of the Lord neither
faint when thou art rebuked of him, for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and
he scourges every son that he receives: and mark how he concludes in the
eight verse, if therefore ye be without correction, whereof all are partakers,
then are ye bastards and not sons, is it not strange that you should vex and
torment your self, because the devil cannot prove you a bastard, but it may be
you may say it is not thus in your judgment, but then know that it is not fit
for you to be a Judge in you own cause, but submit your self unto the
Judgment of Gods word, which is the word of truth. And believe his holy
Apostles that knew how to judge in those cases better then you, and they will
testify that we have cause rather to rejoice then any wise to be discouraged
with afflictions and temptations: Saint Peter 1. 2 My brethren count it
exceeding joy when ye fall into temptations, and the blessed Apostle Saint Paul
when he was tempted and grievously buffeted by Satan, for the which thing he
besought the Lord thrice that it might depart from him, but what was he
presently released? no but received this answer from the Lord, and he said
unto me my grace is sufficient for thee, for my power is made perfect through
weakness, and what was the blessed man dismayed with this answer or concluded
as you would do that he was out of the favor of God because his prayer was not
granted? no such matter but rather does conclude greater comfort and assurance,
very gladly therefore says he, will I rejoice in my infirmities that the power
of Christ may dwell in me therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in anguish for Christ sake, for
when I am weak then am I strong, thus you may see how the Apostle out of
Daniel gathers matter of comfort, and out of his own weakness increases great
strength of faith, and thus must you do in these fearful temptations not so
much as cast your eyes upon your own weakness, nor upon the strength and power
of your malicious enemy, but you must look up with the eye of faith unto our
blessed Savior Jesus Christ who is in the highest heavens, and whose grace is
sufficient for us, and he it is who has triumphed over sin, death and
damnation, and has tramped underfoot all the enemies of our salvation: and
therefore with the holy Prophet say, The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom
then shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be
afraid?

Now concerning your discomfort in hearing the word, because you take so small
comfort in the promises, and are so much terrified with the judgments, This I
take it proceeds partly from the error of your judgment in misse-aplying the
same, and partly from the malice of Satan who evermore labors to drive us
into extremities either with Eve not to fear the judgments of God at all, or
else with Cain to think our punishment greater then we can bear, but even
from your weakness, and from Satan's malice does the Lord draw out that which
may tend to his glory, and to your great comfort, and hereby I trust he has
broken up the fallow grounds of your heart and brought you to godly sorrow for
your sins so that I do assure my self, within this short time of your
afflictions; more repentant tears have been put up into the Lords bottle then
in many years before, and account not this as a small blessing nor pass it
over with a slight thankfulness, but take special notice of it, assure your
self, this fair will not last all the year, and the time will come when you
will desire to see these tears of contrition and shall not see them, no though
you seek them with fasting and prayer, and that you may the better conceave how
blessed their estate is that have a contrite heart and sorrowful spirit, I
pray consider of that wonderful comfortable promise of the Lord, Isaiah. 57.
15. For thus says he that is high and excellent, that inhabiteth eternity,
whose name is the holy one, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
that is of a contrite and humble spirit to revive the spirit of the humble and
to give life unto them that are of a contrite heart, who would think themselves
most happy that had a heart fit to entertain that glorious guest, thus
likewise does the holy prophet testify Psalm. 34. 13. The Lord is near unto
them that are of a contrite heart and will save such as are afflicted in spirit
and our blessed Savior in whose mouth was no guile, he says blessed are they
that mourn for they shall be comforted, and in the 16 of S. John verse the 20
Verily, verily I say unto you ye shall weep and lament, and the world shall
rejoice, and ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, a woman
when she travelleth has sorrow because her hour is come, but as soon as she
is delivered of the child she remembers no more the anguish for joy a man is
borne into the world, and you now therefore are in sorrow, but I will see you
again and your heart shall rejoice and your joy, shall no man take from you.
Thus you may see this godly sorrow, is but as the throes of our spiritual
birth in Christ, which although it may be somewhat grievous for a time yet when
we see our selves thereby borne again of water, and the spirit, and so made
able to enter into the Kingdom of heaven, oh how joyful and comfortable
should this make us to be, many would with Zebedees sons sit one at the right
hand, the other at the left hand of our Savior Christ in his kingdom, but
they are loath to taste of this cup, but let us know assuredly that as he is
entered into his Kingdom of glory, through many tribulations, so must we follow
him through many tribulations if ever we will come there; you are now in the way
be not weary of well doing, nor turn not back till you come to that holy
resting place, and that you may finish your course with joy and comfort, be
diligent in prayer, and observe a constant course therein evening and morning
and at noone days, and as often as you find your affliction to press and
oppress your soul, then make your moan unto your merciful God and power out
your souls before him, and especially bewail wicked thoughts and vain lusts
where withal you heretofore so mnch delighted your self, and labor to mourn
in secret for them, and likewise all other secret sins, and that your prayers
may be more fervent, add thereunto the holy use of moderate fasting, and this
I trust through the Lords mercy, you shall find an excellent means to recover
your self unto your spiritual cheerfulness again, and be not discouraged
from these holy exercises though Satan strive neversomuch to vex and terrify
you: nay though you fear the Lord is angry with you, nay though you knew that
assuredly, yet pray with the Psasmist. Psalm. 80. 5. O Lord God of hosts how
long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people.

Secondly having in this holy manner recomended your soul and body unto God in
prayer wait upon him with a quiet mind, assuring your self that now the Lord
is to take care of you and therefore cast your care upon him, and so with a
settled resolution dispose of your self unto some profitable employments
fitting for your calling, and this course the Prophet David took Psalm. the 5.
3. Hear my voice in the morning, O Lord, for in the morning will I direct me
unto thee, and I will wait: and what good success those have that do thus
attend, we may read in the Psalm. 147. 11. But the Lord delights in them that
fear him and attend upon his mercy.

Thirdly labor for meekness of heart and an humble spirit, for where this
grace is in some reasonable manner attained there the heart of affliction does
break away apace, and the danger thereof of is little to be feared, for our
blessed Savior has pronounced a double blessedness unto such Matthew the 5.
Blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven, blessed
are the meek for they shall inherit the earth. And the want thereof has
driven many in their desperate fury, to loose their inheritance both in heaven
and earth.

Fourthly take heed of moderate grief, and violent passions, which at this
time is very unseasonable, though easily fallen into; and therefore watch over
your own heart diligently and do not entertain so much as a sorrowful sigh
into your heart except it be for your sin, nor an impatient word into your
lips except it be when you see God dishonored, and then speak zealously and
spare not: and furthermore you must be contented to be admonished of these
infirmities by your Christian friends with whom you do converse, for it may be
they may discern these things amiss in you when you do not discern it in
your self being overwhelmed with the pleasing humor of Sottish melancholy.

Lastly, that you may well remember it, you must by all means possible strive
to serve the Lord with a cheerful heart and a willing mind, for the Lord
loves a cheerful giver, and especially in matters of his holy worship:
therefore when you come to hear his holy word, to fast, to pray, to religious
conference or any other holy duty, strive to do it chearefully, and to rejoice
even in your very tears, for I can tell you that is a good cause to make both
you and others rejoice it; may be you think it strange, but read what Saint
Paul says to his entirely beloved Timothcus and then I hope you will say I am
in the right, desiring to see thee mindful of thy tears that I might be
filled with joy. 2. of Timothy the 1. 6. And for neglect of this duty the Lord
does threaten many heavy Judgments against the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 28.
47. Because thou servest not thy Lord thy God with ioyfulnesse and a good heart
for the abundance of all things therefore thou shall serve thine enemies which
the Lord shall send upon thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and
in need of all things. And thus according to my simple understanding I have
satisfied your request in setting down some directions humbly beseeching that
mighty and glorious God who gives wisdom to the simple, and works great
effects by weak means to give such a blessing unto my poor endeavors that his
great power may be seen in my weakness, that you may find such comfort to
your soul, and such peace to your conscience, that hereafter you may tell unto
others the great mercies that the Lord has showed unto you in the days of
your afliction; and therefore say with the Prophet, lo this is our God we have
waited for him and he will save us, this is the Lord we have waited for him we
will rejoice and be joyful in his salvation. Amen Lord Jesus. Amen.

From him that would willingly exchange some of his comforts for some of your
sorrows, and some of his best delights for some your repentant tears. John
Spencer.

MAster Frankling, a man of great worth, almost a thousand pound a year, fell
into a wonderful melancholy and distraction for seven years, his eyes closed
up, his mouth closed up, his hands closed up, so that he was like a dead corpse,
and almost famished, he was with Master Nappier that famous Physician about a
year and a half, but could not prevail with him: some two years after he
returned unto his own house, he fell into a strange humor of eating, and
drinking wine and strong ale, and it is almost uncredible to report how much he
did devour in a day and night: but this putting strength into him, he grew very
outrageous, and fell a burning, and fighting, and greatly endangered the
killing of his servants, and the burning of his house; and then my brother
Master Gery that married Master Frankl^ngs sister, entreated me to go unto him:
I told him my opinion was as it was before, that he must be removed from that
house, and have some others placed about him that would follow other
directions; my brother was desirous still to have me go to see him, so with his
importunity I went* and took with me Master Jones, a grave Preacher, and one
that had taken great pains with him: we found him in a great chamber the glass
windows broken down, and one chair, another afterward was brought, we sat
down, my intention being at this time only to observe his carriage, he was in
a slight suit, hardly worth five shillings, like Irish trouses, without a band,
the hair of his head on both sides being rubbed off, and standing with his
back to a great fire, and looking so terribly, that he would have terrified a
man that was not acquainted with furious objects: so having spent some half an
hour in observing of him, Master Jones very respectively rose up and put off
his hat, and made his Apology to Master Franklin because he did not come to
see him, for he went to Thurly: but he slighted him, and would make him no
answer. Then I spoke to him, and said, Master Francklin you are much beholding
to Master Jones for his great care of you, but he sweld up, and said unto me,
Sirrah how dare you speak thus unto me? And I saw it was now time for me to get
me out of my chair, and because he should see that I was not daunted at his
speeches, I drew nearer, and said, Who are you that I must not speak unto you?
And thereupon he suddenly darted off the hearth, and with his filthy nails
raked over my face, and tore my ruff; so I was so engaged that I must win the
horse, or lose the saddle; but it pleased God to give me such strength, that
(closing with him) I threw him down, and gat his hand and swaked it to the
boards, and called for a knife to pare his nails, but he would then have set
upon my face with his teeth; I was fain then to loose one of my hands, and take
him by the throat, and with all my strength thrattle him, but he made a hideous
noise, and cried to his brothers to help him, so one of them came and took me
off, and then I washed my face; for I had not lost so much blood in any fray
since I was at the siege of Ostend: Afterward he would be friends with me, for
he knew that I did it as a Soldier of Ostend: A while after there was a
meeting of diverse Justices of Peace and other gentlemen and there he was
delivered unto me as by virtue of a commission out of the Court of wards, and
so we removed him to another place and set other attendants about him and gave
other directions: and so after a short time he rode abroad a hunting and
coursing, and grew into great jollity, and married my Lady Charnockes
daughter, a brave and virtuous young gentlewoman, by whom he had one daughter
and is lately dead.

And another beautiful young woman one Wapooles daughter of Southoe near
Huntington and one Master Beadles Son falling in love with her and intending to
marry her, but after his father perceived it he would not give his consent,
because her father was not able to give a portion according to his estate,
whereupon she fell into great coffeehouse and fell distracted, and wandering
from her fathers house in the depth of winter, and in great floudes, toward
evening she came to my house, and being in the porch, made a strange kind of
noise: I went to see her, and she was wet and moiled as though she had been
dragged through a river, I feared at first she had coundterfeited and thought of
sending her to the constable, but afterward I had more pity on her and caused
her to be brought to the fire, and got some warm drinks and a warm lodging,
and so with in some few days, it pleased God she was so well amended, that she
was able to declare unto me where her father dwelt, and related unto me this
pittyfull story of her love: after she was able to do some business I sent to
her father to fetch her home, he was glad when he heard she was living, for
they did think she had been drowned in the great floods; when her father came
we had been at prayers, and I was reading a chapter: when her father came in
the young woman looked upon him very earnestly, but would neither speak nor do
any reverence unto him, I used many persuasions to her, but could not prevail,
I sent out her father into another room, but it would not be: then I called
for pinsers and opened her mouth, and dealt very roughly with her, as though I
would have plucked out her teeth, but it would not be: then I took a Bible and
bad her read the first commandment, and then she fell a reading and into a
passion of weeping, and afterward spoke to her father, her father entreated me
that she might stay with me a while longer, and so she did, and returned to her
father, and so went up to London where she had two Uncles rich men.

A Joiner and his wife being much perplexed in mind: came over to me, it
pleased God in short time to send them comfort: some year after their maid
fell into great terror of mind, she sat up late to attend her dames child and
there would appear unto her a Spirit (as she term) it like a cat, and would
dance about her: I told her it might be it was a cat, she said it spoke to
her, I asked her what it said to her, she said, come follow me, then she would
cry out, and her master rose and went to prayer with her, but the maid was so
troubled that she was almost at her wits end, and her hands and her face so
swelled that they glisterd, it pleased God within few days to send her comfort
and she returned to her master, and I never heard that she was terrified with
the cat since.

One Charity of the same Town fell into great terror of mind, her husband
brought her over to my house and made great moan for her, I enquired if she was
not fierce and dangerous, he told me no; but only trouble of mind: I lodged
her that night with one of me servauts, in the night she fell into a fit, and
set upon the maid, and almost bit of one of her fingers; the next day I sent
her to Saint Needs with a servant of mine called godly John, a strong man, who
went with her to Saint Needs to have her let blood; but as they returned she
leapt into a pond, and godly John had much a a do to get her out; but it
pleased God she grew well and came to Lady Luke to give her thanks: my Lady
Luke had entreated my care of mad Bell that came from London, but I told my
Lady, that we had been with Charity.

A great Lady falling into great melancholy, and distracted, and having
attempted diverse ways to make her self away, the devil did put one strange
temptation upon her, as they related to me: she had caused her maid that did
attend upon her to bring up good store of wood, and laid it under her bed, and
watched a time when her maid was gone down, and locked the door, and made a
great fire, and then unclothed her to her naked body, and kneeled down near
the flame, and was very earnest in her devotions; the fire being great, made a
great smoke, which some perceiving, came to the door, and brake it open, and
demanded what she meant to do with her self; she answered she made trial of
her self how she could endure the flames of fire if persecution should come
for the profession of the Gospel: her husband left her with me some month, and
then it pleased God she went away much amended, and comforted. A temptation
accompanied with a zeal for the Gospel is hardly to be resisted. The Virgins
in the Primitive Church, rather then they would be dishonored and deflowred by
the heathen, would murder themselves; it was their sin, though a zeal, but not
according to knowledge.

Mistress Clements, that married the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, fell into
a dangerous melancholy, and burning fever, and terror of conscience, and grew
very weak, and past all hope of life; the Bishop and her husband sent for me to
come over to her, if ever I would see her alive, for they were persuaded if any
man could do her good, I was the man: it was a long journey, and I was loath to
go upon such hopeless terms; well, I went and found her very weak, and almost
famished, for her throat was so furred with heat, that we could hardly get a
spoonful of broth down; I saw that it was grown to that desperate state, her
Physicians having left her, I caused a bath to be made of milk and cool
herbs, and being in a goodly large room, in the Castle caused them to make a
good fire, and take her out of her bed, and put her into the bath, and bathe
her head and her stomach well, and after some few days, using this means; it
pleased God to bless it so, that she could take down her broth, and in a short
time came into the Chapel to make her prayers unto God, and to give him
thanks; but I told them though she had recovered her health, yet this did not
cure her mind: and therefore within some few months after, the Bishop and his
Lady sent her husband with her to my house in her Ladies charet, and left her
with me; and so within half a year it pleased God to send her much comfort,
and now she is very cheerful and comfortable.

John Crawly of Luton a Yeomans only son of good worth, and Judge Crawly's
kinsman, upon some unkind speeches which his father gave him, fell into great
melancholy, and attempted to dround himself, but help came in before he was
drouned, and then he strove to famish himself, he was sent unto Chesford in a
Cart, and then to my house to keep him from famishing; I took a strange course
in feeding him, and do the more willingly declare the manner thereof, that
other Physicians may do the like in case of such extremity. I prepared a
wheele-barrow, a homely engine, yet very useful for this purpose, for the
shafts gave good advantage of the binding of his legs and his arms and
putting some hay in the bottom of it, and so his head might lean backward, and
we stand about him, then gagged his mouth to keep it open, and four or five
with napkins and towells as though we were going to dress a Hog, made them ply
his mouth with pouring in milk or posset drink which he would as freely cast
up again into our faces and moile us pitifully; but which did the deed, I
poured milk into his nostrils and that falling, more backward upon the gollet
of his throat, and that passed down, and so fed him diverse days and kept him
from famishing, and then to make him speak I caused a great fire to be made and
bound his arms, behind him, and a spit through his arms and held him down to
the fire a basting stick and butter to bast him and made him believe we would
roste him but he endured a great deal of heat, but it came not to blistering,
and my son said unto me, father let us but roste his head to night for the
disease lies in his head, so at the last he spoke, and then we took him from
the fire, and that night he took his rest well, and in the morning spoke to my
wife and asked for his breakfast, and kneeled down to his prayers and read his
chapter, and went to the church and behaved himself so orderly that I never
saw any in such a desperate estate to mend so much in a short time, and so
returned unto his father, and is a more active man and of better discourse then
ever he was.

Margaret Russell a Yeomans daughter of good worth a young woman and very
beautiful, fell into a great mellancholy, and attempting to make her self
away she was in love with a Baker and the Brownistes had tamperd, with her fell
likewise into a humonr to famish her self, with whom I took the like course to
feed her; she was a woman of that strength and nimblenesse of her joints as I
seldom are met with the like, she was very resolute to famish her self so I
was careful to break the points of the knives: but, Except the Lord keeps
the city the watchman watches but in vain. For our harvest cart coming home
and many of our neighbors with the same we went to prayer and song a Psalm as
our usall custom was, they fell unto such cheer as it pleased God to bless us
withal, and the table being being furnished, Margaret Russell sat down at the
table end upon a threshold near the store house, and he that attended her being
set at the table, and making merry with our neighbors, my wife and I being in
another room with some other young women: Alice Pentlow, my wives servant,
having been at the market, and put on her holy day girdle and knife that had a
sharp point, she went into the store house to cut some victuals, and brought a
piece of pastie in her hand Margaret Russell made an haighing, and held out her
hand as though she would have the pasty but when she was within her reach she
snatch at her knife, and Alice made a pitiful scritch and cried out Marget,
Marget, and held the knife in her hand as fast as she could but the other being
to strong for her stabd her self twice into the throat so I run into the hall
and wrencht the knife out of her hand, and one of them was directly upon the
throat, as if one had stickt a pig, and bled grievously and we expected her
death presently: and therefore kneeld down and prayed unto God for her, and did
earnestly entreat her to cry unto God for mercy; but she seemed not to regard
it, but rather forced her self to make it bleed more I wished them to bring
her to the hall door and give her air, and there we kneeld about her at last I
bid on bring me a mallow stalk and search the wound, and found it slip along by
her wind pipe and so used some means to staunch the bleeding and heald the
wound: within few days she went home with her father, and after grew into
great bravery: and I hear is lately richly married, and that her father gave
her two hundred pound, the Lord give her grace to repent of her sins, and
praise him for this merciful preservation.

A Discource of mad Dogs, and the danger of their biting, with some directions
to cure the same.
I Came to Cambridge to my brothers Master Edward Spencers, as I take it, upon
a Friday toward the evening, that night I went not into bed, but toward
morning fell asleep, and was much troubled with a dream, that I was at the
receiving of the Sacrament, and when the Minister delivered the bread he was
taken suddenly in such a manner, that he could not come at us, I was much
troubled to think what we should do in such a case; but it pleased God I waked,
and then was free of that fear. My brother came presently after, and desired
me to go with him to see a friend, that could not live but till eight of the
clock, it was Master Twells his son, that was then Major, my brother told me a
strange discourse of the manner of his sickness, about a month before had a
little dog that bit him by the finger and repelled the skin and bled a little
and healed up again the little dog grew mad, upon wednesday the young man
found him very ill, and went to two or three of the cheifest Doctors of
physic, and they used their best endeavors but could not prevayle, but the
young man grew worse; when I came into his chamber I found his mother weeping,
and lamenting, and two or three attending on him: he was a proper tall young
man, spoke strongly, and very religiously, with great apprehension of the joys
of heaven: oh, that some good man would further me, with their prayers, I saw
him so well disposed desired his father to send for some Divines to pray with
him: but he desired me to satisfy his desire since he made the motion to me,
and so rather then it should not be done I prayed with him, the young man
seemed to be greatly affected therewith and made great expressions of his joy
and comfort: he was very hot and dry but durst not drink for then he thought
he should presently die: and now let me tell you something that has relation
to my troublesome dream, the morning before I came young Master Twels was very
desirous to receave the Sacrament of the Lords supper and resolved to drink the
wine though he died for it, and so the Sacrament was administered unto him, and
they thought some of the wine went down, but they had much a do to keep life
in him: I told his father that I feared he would fall into more extremities,
but advised them not to bind him for that would make him worse: but I told my
brother that if his sickness grew upon this occasion he would be mad, I would
have made him a bath of milk and plunged him in it over head and ears and let
it run in at his mouth at his nose and his ears, and in this desperate case
put it to that adventure, for otherwise there was no hope: but they had sent
that morning to a skillful man, to advise with, and was loath to make trial of
it till they heard from him, and I was loath to press it in such a desperate
case; so in the afternoon I returned home: but my brother told me that night
he fell into a great rage and madness, and in his fits barked like a mad dog:
but some hour or two before he dyed, it pleased God to restore him to his
senses again, and he spoke very religiously, and prayed earnestly unto God to
pardon his sins, so departed. Now to give some directionsin such dangerous
cases: first, pray unto the God of heaven to bless the means, and if the
party so bitten with a mad dog be near the Sea let them with all speed throw
him into the Sea water and plung him over head and ears and wash the wounds
thoroughly with the Sea water, if that cannot be had, then take the liver of the
mad dog and make poridg of it and let them eat the liver and the broth as long
as it lasts, and take the hair of the mad dog and make tents of it and put it
into the holes that the mad dogs teeth made, and this I saw in experience by
one Richard Haines, a tall young man, pursued a mad dog a mastie near the place
where I dwell, and standing at the gap the mad dog would come through, clasped
him in his arms, intending to hold him tell his fellows came, but the dog bit
him very grievously in his side and about his belly: they gat the mad dogs
liver, and made poridge and stuffed the wounds with the hair and so through
Gods blessing the mad man did very well: Crabs claws, and lobsters claws
beaten to powder and put into butter-milk or drink is very good.

It is for the zeal of Gods glory, the desire to yield comfort unto poor
afflicted souls, and love of my country, which moves me to write upon this
subject.

Samuel. 16. 23. And so when the evil spirit sent of God, came upon Saul,
David took an harp and played with his hand, and Saul was refreshed, and was
eased, for the evil spirit departed from him.

NOw the question is whether this distemper and distraction grew out of some
inordinate affection, which proud, ambitious, covetous and amorous men are
subject to fall into: the only help in this case is to pray unto God, to give
them humility and patience, to submit themselves unto Gods will, and
faithfully believe that God will turn all crosses and losses to the best, Romans
8. 28. Again consider what thy sins have deserved, and thine own
unworthiness of the least of Gods mercies despise the world, and prise heaven,
this is the only music to cheat the heart.

Secondly if it were some natural in disposition, or distemper Pheniticall,
timpheticall, then material drugges might rectify the humor, so a sensible
music might recreate the spirits; so a man prefer the spiritual and inward
remedies but the corporal and outward also are not to be neglected, as mirth
good company or any comendable recreation is not to be refused, but undoubtedly
it was an absolute madness or melancholy fury with some intermission, in which
time he could hear advice, and do mischief, those mischeivous acts of mad men,
are both guilty before God, and punishable also before men, when the force of
reason is not totally transported and extinquisht. Again if it were a mere
obsession that daibolicall spirit troubled and vexed him, and because the
devil is Gods creature and at Gods command he may be said to be an evil spirit
sent from God, now in case of demonaicall obsession and affliction I cannot
conceave what natural power music or melody sick can have for the
profligation or repulsion of devils, and seeing a created Art has properly,
not far upon any proternaturall habit unless music does delight the seuce,
and so draw attention, and so alter the passion: but I resolve it thus this
music cured Saul not as music, but as David's music, no music but David's
music could do it, otherwise seeing Saul so much hated him he would not have
been so much behoulding unto David having many other cunning Musicians in the
temple, but their music made him more mad: God was pleased to work such an
effect to bring him into favor with the king.

A TRACTATE OF MELANCHOLY.
IT is my love to my Country which incites me to write upon this subject: And
since Almighty God has been pleased to make my studies and labors fortunate
in this kind, I have here presented them to the public view; hoping that some
mayreceive good by my directions, as many have done by practice. I do not
promise an addition to learning, in this respect, nor do I doubt but my long
experience may add somewhat to others readings: however, this good the
understanding reader shall receive, when as he shall (by my faithful relation)
know the effects of those means which I have used he shall either be emboldned
to use the like, or enabled by judgeing them to find out a more exellent way;
although I go not accuratly to work, because I intend to be short, and only
positive avoiding the more questions: yet to avoid confusion, I will observe
this order. First, I will speak somewhat of the humors in general. secondly
somewhat of the four chief in particular. Thirdly will set down a method, 1.
For knowledge of those things that any wise concern the melancholy humor.

1. Of the humors in general.
Man's body may be divided into such parts as are contained, or such as do
contain them: those which be contained are of a fluid and liquid substance,
the other may be called the subject or vessels wherein these are kept and do
cohere, which otherwise would beas water spilt upon the ground. To omit the
parts containing, those which be contained are, humors, and spirits.
Concerning spirits let it suffice to know, that they are a thin, aieriall
vapors substance, the chief instruments which our soul works withal, those
which be inplanted and fixed in our solid parts from our first generation, be
the seat of our native heat and the bond of soul and body: those which be after
added to the former, are first natural in the liver conveied in the vains to
the habit of the body, secondly vital made in the lest cavity of the heart,
partly of the natural spirit and partly of the air which we suck in, and
runs by the Arteryes through the whole body. Thirdly. Animal, made of the
vitals in the brain thence diffused by the sinews into the body stirring up
sense and motion therein.

A humor is either Radical or adventitious, that is necessary to the
constitution of a thing, this to the preservation thereof. Here is a fat
aieriall oily substance inplanted, inbred an inherent in the body from the
conformation thereof, this we call Radical call moisture, or natural Balsome,
and compare it to a candle: there is likewise an inbred and innate heat (which
word does not signify a naked quality but a substance endued with this quality
which our most wise Creator has made sensible to our touch so long as the
life lasts) this heat is the instrument of the soul and is likened to the
flame wasting the candle, the coexistence of these two in the heart chiefly is
the beginning and continuation of life, this is that perpetual fire that
continual light (although it never flame) which hitherto the Chymicks have in
vain labored to imitate and blow up or kindle, when nature saw this heat ever
feeding upon, and consuming that moisture, she thought good to add oil to the
lamp, and provided ways to repair what was spent, this she appointed should
be done by the use of meat, drink, etc. The humor thus generated is called
Adventitious, because it is added to the former, now whether the faculties flow
with this humor or no, I will not here determine. All those humors which are
continually made to renew so much of the Radical moisture as is daily spent,
are first primairly, such as proceed from the second public concoction the
liver of these, to be accounted alimentary or fit to nourish viz. blood and
phlegm, the cast excrementitious viz. Choler, melancholy and why, the matter
of urine; as also those which be expelled from the third and private concoction
viz. Tears and swet, secondarily such as proceed from the manifold concoction
of the blood till it come to the most perfect degree of assimlation, viz. Ros,
Gluten, Humor, Innoninatus, Caubis. The two last are added without necessity,
and therefore by some excluded without injury.

The four humors, blood, phlegm, choler, an melaneholy be made in the liver
all at one and the same time, all by one and the same heat. The difference of
them is not to be imputed to this heat but to the condition and qualification
of the subject matter, if they be mad, when which is the Chylus, that is the
meat and drink concocted in the stomach, resembling perhaps no color and
consistence Almond-butter, now this though it seem to be one simple humor yet
it never is, no not in the greatest disease. Fornelius, if this Chylus be
temporate in a temporate body, then all these humors in that body are
temporate in their kind, if all, then choler does not always proceed from an
immoderate, but sometimes from a temporate, nay a weak heat. For what man's
liver how cold soever it be is altogether without it. This Chylus is carried by
the meseraick vains to the liver which encompasseth it with the same heat from
all parts, and penetrates it equally, making of the temporate part thereof
blood, of the hot part choler, of the crude phlegm, of the terrene melancholy,
and all this at the same time. Object. But phlegm is cold and crude, the
rudiment and shadow of the blood and and may by further, concoction be turned
into blood. Ans. It Is true yet not therefore necessary that we should name all
halfe-concocted-blood phlegm, or think it proceeds therefrom. For then we
might call the Chylus our meat or whatsoever we are nourished withal, phlegm:
which how dissonant from reason let the obiector judge: moreover if the whole
mass of blood were made of phlegm, and choler of that, and melancholy of this,
and each thus of other successively; there should be but one humor in us,
taking diverse names according to the degrees or continuence of heat working
upon it: as a river is called now thus now otherwise, by the inhabitants of
this or that town as it passes by it. It may here seem to be required what
phlegm is, but of that hereafter, Thus much of the Galenists opinions, of the
humors: the Chynicks laugh at these and their defenders, calling them
Humorists, etc. And count it folly to fetch the common internal causes of
diseases from these supposed humors, but derive all from Suphur Salt, and
Mercury, which three principles to speak properly, are not bodies, but plainly
spiritual (as they say) by reason of the influence from heaven with which they
are filled, nor are they spirits because corporal; therefore of a mixed nature
participating of both: and do bear anallagey and allusion as follows, viz.

Salt Common Salt A cerbe and bitter The Body Matter Art Sulphur Salt peter
Sweet The soul Form Nature Mercury Salt Armoniack Acid The Spirit Idea
Understanding, etc.
And as they extract these third principles out of natural bodies so they
resolve them into the same, hence they argue that bodies are made of the same,
and therefore must be well or ill as these shall stand affected, to say the
truth, doubtless that which being present in us makes us sick* and being
expelled from us we are well, was the cause of our sickness, but common
experience says a body full of corrupted humors, is sick, and freed from them
is well, therefore here is no reason why we should not think those ill humors
the causes of our malady: on the otherside I think Bertinus was deceived, when
he said that not a crum of salt lay hid in the body, which if any deny: I
think he deserves to be served as Lots wife.

Concerning the temper of the body and every part: how the elements concur to
their constitution, over ruling qualities result, how there is one equal
temper where the qualities of the elements do not exceed each other in quality,
nor their substance in quantity, how this is the rule of all the other eight:
to speak of these things is too large a discourse, let it therefore suffice to
know, that when a man abounds with blood, he is not therefore to be called of
a sanguine complexion, if with melancholy humors, of a melancholy te^per, etc.
For the abundance of this or that excrement does not instantly alter a man's
particular temper, and doubtless choler phlegm and melancholy, may abound in any
nature: if in the liver be cold and dry blood a long time together; it may
incline the body to coldness and drines which is a melancholy temper.
Astrologers refer the vari^ty of the constitutions to the several natures of
the seven Planets; and hereupon call some Ioviall, some Martial, some
venereall, etc. And from each Planet draw two constitutions, as it shall be
found well or ill disposed: as from Mars, well disposed, they conclude a man
valiant courragious fit to be an Emperor. If ill, they argue a man rash, and
foolhardy, no better then a Tyrant. He that desires to know more of this, may
have recourse to the learned treatise of M. Perkins, styled a resolution to a
country man: in the third volume of his works.

Of the Blood.
Blood is a humor hot, yet temperate, sweet and red, prepared in the meseraick
veins, made in the liver of the temperate fat, and aieriall parts of the
Chylus and flows from hence to all parts of the body. Philosophers affirm
that we are nourished with his humor only, Phisicians say with all four. The
seeming contrariety may be composed by the distinguishing: thus blood is often
taken for the whole mass contained in the veins appointed to nourish the body
now this mass is not homogenerall, but of a diverse nature. For the best and
most temperate part of the blood is properly and in specie called blood, the
hot and dry part of it is called colerick blood, the cold and moist part
phlegmatic blood, the cold and dry, melancholic blood, and this diversity is
answerable to the qualities of the Chylus whereof it is made, therefore when
Philosophers say we are nourished with blood alone they understand the whole
mass contained in the veins, which neither Aristotle nor any other
Philosopher will deny to have parts of the foresaid qualities: these parts of
the blood thus qualified, must not be taken for excrementitious, but for
alimentary humors, since they all nourish the body: here two things are
questioned, first whether there be any pure blood in the veins without the 3.
humors 2. Whether the blood be only a mixrure of the third sincere humors, so
that choler or rather colerick blood in the veins should be the same with that
which is in the Gall. I conclude negatively to both, and think that the blood is
always accompanied with the rest of the humors, which only resemble those
which be separated and received into their proper vessels, this of humors is
the best, the treasure of life, many excellent things are spoken hereof,
insomuch that Empedocles and Critius say it is the soul, Chrysippus and Zeno
say it nourishes the soul. It is needles here to thrust in a reason among
others; why Almighty God sometimes forbad the eating hereof; as also to speak
of the circular motion, how it resembles the fountains running to the sea and
the sea supplying the fountains.

Of Phlegm.
Phlegm (so called by contrariety because of its crudity and that not in
respect of the first concoction but of the second) is an humor cold and moist
white and without taste, or somewhat sweet. It may be called imperfect blood:
for by further concoction it becomes real blood therefore nature has
appointed no vessel to receive it: intending it for alteration not evacuation,
this is the Alimentary phlegm, that is the Phlegmatic blood That which is
preternatnrall (as are all the following kinds) is avacuated with other
excrements having no peculiar receptacle, here note, that the filth of the nose
is not phlegm properly, but the private excrement of the brain, yet I deny not
but that if the body be full of phlegmatic humors part of them may pass this
way, of this preternaturall phlegm be four kinds: the first is called Nisipid,
not absolutely as the Alimentary, but in respect of the other three kinds
which follow. This only is properly termed a crude humor: it is true, every
concoction may have its crudity, but this concoction which attaines not its
full perfection in the stomach, by way of eminence is called crude, and that
body which abounds herewith is of the color of lead, such an humor also
appears 1 in the sediment of some urines, 2. Acid, (tasting like vinegar) which
remain thus for want of natural heat and is caused by cold and moist diet
especially if liberal, large and out of due time: as also by the constitutions
which is colder in old men and women then others, by a cold liver, cold air,
to much sleep and the want of the ordinary evacuation thereof, thirdly Salt,
Avian thinks phegm becomes salt by adustion of bitter humors, as we find
after combustion the fixed salt of any plant as wormwood etc. Galen says it is
either from putrefaction or from the mixture of a salt whaylike humor, neither
do oppose other if rightly understood, for doubtless the true cause is a salt
whaylike moisture which is nothing but the superfluous salt of those things
which we eat and drink; do we not find tartar in wine casks? and is not such a
substance found in the earth wherewith plants are nourished? do we not use salt
with many meats? that then hereof, which nature cannot convert to nourishment
is the matter of this preternaturall humor, which is therefore hot because
salt. Fourthly glass this bifference is not taken from the taste as the other,
but from the color and consistence, it represents melted or liquid glass:
this is the coldest of these kinds yet not exactly cold, for then it should be
like ice, nor exactly moist but thick and viscous pertaking of the two other
qualities.

Of Choler.
Choler, Alimentary is the hot and dry part of the blood and fit to nourish,
called colerik blood, because blood thus qualified will easily degenerate unto
choler. Secondly, Natural this an excrement of the second concoction, hot dry
bitter and yellow, separated from the blood in the liver, conveyed to the
gall, hence it distills upon the first gut adhearing to the stomach, and by its
acrimony excits the slow expulsive faculty of the guts to excretion, this is
that which we mean when we say choler, viz. Yellow not black choler, this in
cold bodies is somewhat pale: in hot bodies somewhat red. Thirdly
preternaturall which is not made after the law of nature: of this be four
kinds, first is in consistence and color like the yolk of a raw egg, this is
hotter and thicker made of choler adust, so Galen. Second resembles the juce of
leeks, such are infants stools: for milk in them is soon corrupted, garlic and
onions cause it in others, third is of color like verdigrease; here the heat
is more vehement, fourth resembles the color which the herb Woad makes, and
is made by a further adustion. The material cause is hot and dry diet, sweet,
and fat meats. The efficient cause hot and dry constitution of the body, air,
and age which is youth watching, hunger, anger, vehement exercise, and lastly
the suppressiou of natural evacuation.

Of Melancholy.
Melancholy, 1. Alimentary is the fourth part of the blood cold and dry. 2.
Natural: this is a humor cold and dry, thick, black, bitter, and sour, made
of the thick and druggy part of nourishment; and according to the vulgar
opinion drawn from the liver to the spleen, and transmitted from thence to the
stomach, to further the actions thereof. Thirdly preternaturall which differs
much from the former kind, for that is a cold and dry iuce made naturally in a
healthful man, this hot and dry, tasting like the sharpest vinegar, this of
the four humors is the worst: this kind of the foregoing kinds is the worst,
it wastes the body, melts the flesh, it works upon the earth like Ceaver upon
meat, and no beast will taste thereof. But I cease to write more hereof under
this head: because it shall be the subject of the ensuing discourse, unto
which, this which I have already penned is but an apparatus.

But having so much tired out my self with this sad Subject; I will here give
some ease to my pen, and leave this to be supplied by some learned Physician,
beseeching the great God of heaven and earth, the great Physician of soul and
body, to give this good blessing upon this weak means, and if any poor
afflicted souls receive any comfort by it: to give the glory and praise unto
God, unto whom it does of all right belong: Amen Lord Jesus. Amen.

At my lodging in Black Friars. April. 19. 1641.
MAny times it falls out that a loving husband parting with his dear wife,
behaves himself like the child of some great man; Whose Father has given him
a fine Top to play withal: but afterward perceiving his son to much
carried away with that pleasure or too lusty in justling the Topp, or else to
try the boys disposition, takes up the topp, and puts it up into his own
pocket; whereat the boy puts finger in the eye, pouts, and cries,
notwithstanding his father persuades him to be content, tells him what fine
Coats he has given him, what dainty things he has for him, and what goodly
land and houses he will bestow on him; but for all that the sulling boy sits
pouting, and lowering, and will not so much as thank his Father for all these,
because he has taken away his top, and yet when he had it, the best use he
made of it, was to play with it: In like manner the Lord of heaven and earth
gives a man a dear wife, adelightfull companion wherein a man takes great
pleasure, sometimes to make her go, sometimes to see her sleep, and some
unkind wretches delight to scourg them with bitter words, and to justle them by
cursed usage; the Lord of wisdom seeing either our too much doting affection
on the on side, or our to much contempt on the other side, or else to try our
disposition how willingly we would part with that he has so freely bestowed
upon us, takes away this delightful play-fellow from us; And we then for the
most part behave our selves like sullen boys, and murmr, and repine against
the proceedings of that gracious Lord that does all things in infinite wisdom
and judgment, and therefore is evermore holy in all his ways, and righteous in
all his works, who gives and takes in his appointed time, and therefore unto
him be all praise glory and thanksgiving for ever and ever. Amen. Amen.

In this heavy affliction in parting with so dear Beautiful and Virtuous a
wife.
I Have found by lamentable experience that as we draw near the Irish climate,
so we have to much Irish nature in us. For they are (commonly) very fond and
loving to their foster children, and too rebellious to their governors. God
the great commander of Heaven and Earth gives unto a man a wife to foster, and
to make fit for the court of Heaven, as the King of England should commit his
son to a noble man in Ireland, to be bronght up till he be fit for his own
Court, but this foster Father having got the possession of this princely child,
and finding it some comfort, and great honor unto him, and yet withal a great
care, and a continual watchfulness required for fear the child should
miscary in his hands. The King seeing his fit time sends for his son home to
his own Court, and sets him in his own presence, and gives the foster Father
an honorable reward for his loving care and pains taken, notwithstanding the
fosterer of this noble child is mal-content and fales a mourning, and
murmuring, because he is freed of his great care: even so the King of Kings,
gave unto me a beautiful and blessed child to foster, and has now freed me of
that honorable charge, with full assurance that he has taken her into the
Court of Heaven, where she injoyes the highest happiness, in the presence of
his glorious Majesty: he has likewise given mean honorable reward for my
slight care and attendance' of Gold, silver, friends and Aliances; and many
divine things of her gathering for the comfort of my soul. Notwithstanding, all this yet I have behaved my self like a murmuring and unthankful Rebel toward
my dread Sovereign, because he has taken away his own dear child, and my
dear charge. O Lord! what will become of so vile a Rebel; and such a
murmuring wretch? But Lord, good Lord, for thy dear sons sake, Pardon my
sins, and consider my frailty, and heal mine infirmities, that the bones
which thou have broken may rejoice, Amen Lord Jesus. Amen.

A Speech, Master Spencer made upon this occasion, their was agreat
coffeehouse, and quarrel betwixt Sir Iarrad Harvie, and his neighbors of
Carington, about a Levy had not the God of peace, framed their hearts to
peace, by the powerful sermon that Master Saul that famous Preacher, and the
great importunity of Master Spencer, which took such happy success, that they
lived together like loving Friends until the death of that valiant Knight,
who is death was much lamented, and he lies their interred in a Magnificent
Tomb: in Mr. Saul's Text was, Beho'd how good, and how pleasant, It is for
Brethren to dwell together in unite

Psalm. 133. 1.
MY Christian friends and loving neighbors you may well think that there is
some extraordinary occasion that makes me thus far from my own Parish
Church, and assure your selves, so there is; For I have heard of some
differences, and discontentments that have been betwixt this noble Knight, Sir
Iarret Harvie, and you his neighbors of this Parish, I must needs confess I
was much grieved to think that there should be such discord and opposition,
among those whom I did so tenderly affect on both sides; you as my loving
neighbors, that dwell so near the place where I was borne, and received my
first breathing; and this noble Knight not only our Countryman but also a man
of great and valor, who for the good service that he has done to his Prince
and country with the loss of his blood and the danger of his life, in so many
brave adventures in the wars, both in Spain and in the Low-countrys, and
against the Rebels in Ireland, may justly challenge a great deal of love and
respect, not only from us his native countrymen, but also from this Nation,
and the whole Kingdom; and therefore to receive unkindnesse, and disregard
from you in this place, whither he is retired in his old age, to do good and
to end his days in peace like a good Soldier of Jesus Christ; I say to
receive unkindnesse and disregard from you, must needs be a great discomfort
and no small provocation to a well restrained mind, and therefore to qualify
discontentments of this quality, it is no easy matter; For the word of God
does teach us, that the discord of brethren are like the bars of the gate of a
City, strong and hard, for flesh and blood to beat through, and so I find in
searching into these businesses, that there are to many bars that will keep
out these happy guests of unity, and amity, which I so much desire to bring in
amongst you; and therefore do beseech the great God of Heaven, that is the God
of peace and lover of comfort, that he would vouchsafe to break in sunder
these Iron bars of revenge, and hard conceit, and frame your hearts to
meekness, and to suffer the word of exhortation with patience, for Sir Iarret
Harvie as a Soldier, and standing upon the point of honor, cannot pass by
such wrongs and oppositions as it may be (as he conceives) has been offered
unto him. For in that little experience that I have had, I know in the point of
honor, and being opposed by an enemy, a soldier must make way to revenge,
though he runs upon the point of the sword, and marches against the mouth
of the Cannon and so likewise the Country People, to be contradicted in their
ancient customs and to be drawn out of their road way, though an other way may
be better and more commodious, it is so hard a matter to prevail with us, as
is seen by daily experience.

But if it please Sir Iarret Harvie to lay aside the resolution of a man of
war, and to take unto him the disposition of a Christian Soldier, and to
follow the direction of that blessed Lord, and great commander under whose
banner we have vowed manfully to fight, that is to learn of our Savior
Christ, to be meek and lowly, love our Enemies, and to pray for them that
persecute us.

And you on the other side, to lay aside the peevish, and froward disposition
of corrupt Nature, which makes us so prone to rebel against God, and and to
reject his commandments, and so likewise makes us so wilfully to oppose our
Superiors, and to disdain their good council and wilfully run in those
courses, that tend to everlasting destruction, as like the men of Sodom, who
said unto that holy man Lot, that had deserved so much of them, yet when he
persuaded them from that furious and beastly rage, in pressing upon his house
to offer violence upon his angelical guests, they cried out against that good
man, away with him, and they said he is come alone as a stranger, and shall he
rule, and judge, we will now deal worse with him, then with them; But you know
what became of them, the Lord preserved his servant Lot, and safely conveyed
him out of the City, and smote the outrageous men with blindness, and the next
morning caused fire, and brimstone to rain down upon them, and utterly
consume them, and their city: this instance I bring to show what we are, when
we are led by the unruly Passions of our sinful nature, but now I speak to
men, I hope of wisdom, and such as God has endewed with grace; and that will
teach us to deny ungodly lusts, and to behave our selves charitably, that if
any man be fallen by occasion into any sin, ye which are Spiritual, restore
such a one with the Spirit of meekness considering thy self, least thou also
be tempted. Gal. 6. 1. And therefore I beseech you, if any here have fallen by
any such sudden passion, or caused others by their provocations, O let them
now acknowledge their error, and unfeinedly desire to entertain one another,
with all love and cheerfulness; and assure your selves as it is the honor of
a Soldier to be the first that enters the breach, and for the countryman
that has the first blow at the Ball, so it will be the honor of a Christian
man that shall now show himself most forward to acknowledge his error, and to
seek a holy reconciliation.

A PRAYER which Master Spencer does use ordinarily in his familly, Morning and
Evening, which he does earnestly desire might be zealously and devoutly
performed in every family in this Kingdom, that are not provided of a better.
O Lord open our lips, and teach us to pray, that we may humble our souls
and truly repent of all onr sins, for our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, in whose
holy name only we presume to come unto thee to bege, and crave mercy in thy
sight.
O Most Heavenly Father and gracious Lord God, the Father of our Lord Jesus,
the God of mercy and salvation, we poor creatures do humbly prostrate our
selves before the throne of mercy, confessing and acknowledging that we are
miserable sinners conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity; nay we
must acknowledge we stand guilty of that original sin of our first parents,
for the transgressing thy holy holy Commandments, and eating of the forbidding
fruit: plunged themselves, and their posterity unto shame and confusion, their
Souls and bodies to be tormented in hell fire, with the Devil and his Angels
in utter darkness, and in that miserable estate thou might have left us all to
perish in our sins, but this is not that we have to answer for, But we have
made our selves seventy times the Children of the Devil more by our actual
transgressions in violating all thy holy laws and Commandments, both with
vile thoughts, wicked speeches, and abominable actions, which we have done in
the sight of men, to the great dishonor of thy holy name, and the utter
damnation of our own souls, and the greatly endangering of others, by our
evil example; and that not only in the time of Ignorance, and practice, we
have desperately, and Presumptiously, gone on in those wicked courses, which our
Conscience have accused us, and thy sacred word condemned us, and therefore
thou might have cast us off in thy heavy displeasure, never more showed
pity upon us but exposed us to the heaviest judgment this world could afford
of plung, pestilence, utter madness and despair, and when we have passed all
the miseries of this life, then to cast us down in utter darkness, with the
Devil and his Angels, to be tormented in everlasting darkness: but good
Lord, good Lord pity us, and show mercy upon us, and teach us to bewail our
sins, and truly to repent us of them before we go hence, and be no more
seen: and that we may find mercy, and favor in thy sight, remember us, oh
remember us with that everlasting love of thine toward us, in sending thy
eternal son Christ Jesus our blessed Savior, and our everlasting Redeemer;
to take upon him our humane nature in all things, sin only excepted, to
become the son of the blessed Virgin Mary, and so both God and man in one
person, to accomplish the glorious work of our redemption, by leading a most
pure and holy life, by fulfilling all thy holy Commandments, in one absolute
and perfect manner, that he might free us from that death and damnation, that
our sins have justly deserved, and by his death and passion, and those bitter
torments, and again which he suffered upon the cross: which neither the tongue
of man, and Angels is able to express, and shed his precious blood, even
unto death, which is of that iufinite value, to make satisfaction for the
sins of the whole world, and of that infinite virtue, to purify our souls
and consciences, and make them as pure, and undefiled, as if we never committed
any sin, and rose again the third day according to the Scriptures, and is
ascended into the highest heaven, and there sits in all glory at the right hand
of God, and triumphs, over all the enemies of our salvation, Hell, Death, and
damnation, and shall come from thence to judge both the quick, and the dead,
and has oppened the Kingdom of heaven to all beleivers: we do believe, Lord
help our unbeleife, and give us grace to use all holy means, that we grow more
in faith, then ever we have done: make us more zealous for thy glory, more
devout in prayer, and zealous in good works, more careful to keep holy the
Sabbath, and come more reverently unto thy holy ordinances, and walk
dilligently, and faithfully, in our calling, and work in our hearts an
everlasting hatred against all sins and the sins especially, that we are
most prone unto by nature, and those whereunto the Devil does so eagerly tempt
us, and allure us; and those sins which wicked and ungodly men, that run the
headlong course to hell, and damnation do enforce, persuade us, but Lord let
them never prevail with us and ours, to give any liking and allowance
thereunto, but ever let us hate and abhorce them as cursed works of
darkness: and have nothing to do with them, and grant us grace to serve thee
in holiness, and righteousness all the days of our life, and labor to keep
our souls and bodies pure and undefiled, as the temples of the holy Ghost, and
walk honestly and religiously in our calling, and deal justly, and charitably
all the days of our life, that so it may be well wirh us at our last
breathing, and in the dreadful day of judgment, and in this confidence we do
not only pray for our selves, but also for all our christian brethren upon the
face of the Earth, those especially that are wounded in their souls, and
consciences, and those, that sufferd for the truth, sake, and those that are
visited with mortal disstresse and tormenting crosses, and wear new the point
of death, and prepare them for thy glorious Kingdom; good Lord bless our
gracious King Charles and his great Court of Parliament work graciously in the
heart of the King, and all his Subjects, and in the heart of the Prince and all
his people, godly sorrow for all our sins, and give us grace to weep and
mourn, night and day for the sins, and abominations of these sinful times,
and cry mightily unto the Lord to turn away those heavy judgments we have
justly deserved, and continue his great mercy toward us, and inflame their
hearts with all holy zeal, and devotion to advance the glory of God, and do
good unto thy faithful ones, and on the other side, to raise up their hearts
with an everlasting hatred of all sins, and utterly to abolish that, and to
root that out, and make them zealous to execute justice upon the malefactors,
that have so dishonored God, and labor to bring in Idolatry, Popery, and shed
innocent blood, and persecute thy faithful ones, that there may be that due
execution of justice upon them, as may most tend to thy glory, the peace of the
Church, and comfort of thy faithful ones; and to the terror of all wicked and
profane men, bless our Royal Queen, and convert her heart more and more
glorious to the love of the Gospel, and that she may renounce all popery, and
Idolatry, and wholly rest upon our Lord Jesus Christ, to be her only Savior,
and her everlasting Redeemer, that so the Angels in Heaven might rejoice to see
her true conversion unto. Thee, and bless all good means, that may effect the
same in thy due and appointed time, and make all faithful Bishops and
ministers of thy sacred word, take all opportunities to effect the same as they
will answer that in the dreadful day of judgment, good Lord bless the
Prince and the Princess, and all those of the Royal posterity, and the Prince
of Orringe, and his Royal Consort, sanctify their hearts now in their tender
years, with the truth of thy holy religion, and work in their hearts an
everlasting hatred against all Popery, Idolatry and profaneness.

Good Lord bless the Prince Elector, work graciously in his Royal heart,
godly sorrow for all his sins, and let, oh let (we humbly beseech thee) the
precious blood of our Savior Christ, cleanse him from all his sins, and make
him as pure, both in soul, and body; as if he never had sinned, but continued
in the first state of innocence, and cloth him with the holiness, and
righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ; that he may stand ever acceptable in
thy fight, and enabled to perform that great service unto thee, to burn the
Whore of Babylon with fire, and revenge the blood of thy Saints, to that end
put it into the hearts of all the Kings, and Princes of the Earth, to fulfill
thy will, to hate the Whore, make her desolate, and naked and burn her with
fire.

Good Lord for the Lord Jesus sake, bless the Queen of Bohemiah, and the
Queen of Swedon, and those of that Royal issue, that has pleased the a long
time, to humble them with a dejected state and to suffer the enemies of thy
truth, greatly to insult over them, to spoil their goodly Cities, to burn
down their houses with fire, and carry so many of our Christian brethren, and
sisters, into a miserable captivity, and to shed so much innocent blood, but
thou do all things with infinite wisdom, thou know the fittest means
to humble thy children, and thou know the fittest time to make them glorious
in their deliverance, good Lord in thy blessed time revenge their cause, and
setle them again in the inheritance of their Fathers, and set them up to sit
with the Princes of thy people, in the mean time, give unto thy servants
faith, and patience, a godly sorrow for all their sins, and holy zeal and
wisdom, to make their inheritance sure in heaven, and lay up their treasure
where that is not subject to these alterations, and changes, and confound the
power of Ante-Christ, that man of sin, and his adherentes, that they may not
to much insult ovet thy Children, nor to much disturb the peace of thy
faithful ones, but in thy blessed time make it appear how precious the blood
of thy Saints, is in thy sight, and what a fearful account they shall make
for the same, at the day of judgment, before the great God of Heaven and
Earth, that art no respector of persons.

Bless the good Bishops, and faithful Ministers of thy sacred word especially
those that thou have placed over us, give them wisdom and grace to preach thy
heavenly word powerfully and profitablely to our soul and consciences, and
bless them in their lives and conversations, that ye may be pure and
peaceable, that so they may be a a blessed means to convert many souls unto
thee.

Root out those that are so scandolous and ignious, and labor to bring in
Idolatry and prophanes, and make them evermore to find by experience, that
thou, that fittest in the heavens will laugh them to scorn, and have them in
dirision. Be merciful unto our Christian brethren in the Palatinate in Germany
and other places of Christendom, which suffer for the truth and the profession
of the glorious Gospel, and deliver them from blood thirsty men, and
graciously supply all their wants both soul and body in thy appointed time.

Bless our Christian brethren in Virgenia and new England and those remoted
places of the world, keep them from secret schisms, herisies and set their
feet into the way of peace, and deliver them from theit enemies

Bless our Nobles, Pears, Judges of the land, and Councellers of state:
blefle them and their council, that tend to thy glory, the peace of the
Church, and the good of the commonwealth, that their councels may evermore be
happily established, to the confusion of the wicked devises of ungodly men and
women, that labor to bring in Idollatry, popery, and prophannesse: oh bless
we beseech thee our afflicted brethren, and sisters, that are humbled with the
sight of their sins, and the terror of thy judgments due unto them for the
same and make clearly appear unto them thy everlasting mercy toward them in
our Lord Jesus Christ, their blessed Savior, and Redeemer, and that his
precious blood does cleanse them from all their sins, and make them as pure in
thy sight, as if they continued in their happy estate of innocence, and let
thy grace be sufficient for them to support them in all their aflictions: And
confound the power and malice of the Devil, and all his devilish devises,
whereby he labors to drive them to despair, and to lay violent hands upon
themselves, and make him fear and tremble with the consideration, that all
these evil thoughts and wicked suggestions, which he puts into our hearts
shall be set upon his own score, and add to his greater damnation in utter
darkness and hell fire.

Bless all our Christian brethren, that are visited with the Plague and other
mortal diseases, comfort their souls and work in their hearts godly sorrow
for all their sins, and that they may cry mightily unto the Lord for mercy,
before they go hence and be no more seen, and give them faith to believe in our
Lord Jesus to be their Savior and everlasting Redeemer, and that his precious
blood, that cleanses from all their sins, and that he will vouchsofe to be
unto them advantage both in life and death. O bless we beseech Thee, our
distressed brethren that are in distraction, raging madness and fury, those
that we have taken the special care and custody of, whether present or
absent, oh stay them from laying violent hands on themselves or others, and
thou that art the God of infinite wisdom and power, that stillest the raging
of the Seas, and the madness of the people, stay those raging fits, and set
their feet into the way of peace,

Bless all our Christian friends, Father, Mother, sisters and brothers, those
we have taken the special care and custody of wife, children and servants, and
other our neighbors and friends, amongst whom we live, grant that we and they
may labor to keep our souls and bodies pure and undefiled, and make our
houses the houses of prayer, and not a den of thieves, and keep us from all
infection of Idolatry, popery and profaneness, and if it shall please thee to
bring us to such an honorable trial, grant that we may witness thy truth
with our best blood.

And now good Lord in the name of our Savior Jesus Christ, we praise and
magnify thy holy name, for that everlasting love of thine toward us, in
sending our Lord Jesus to be our Savior, for all those blessed comforts
revealed unto us in thy sacred word, for comforting our souls when we have
been so near the point of despair, and raising our weak bodies, when we have
been so near the point of death, and set our feet in the way of peace when we
have been running the headlong course to damnation, and blessed our labors and
made us a means to yield comfort to any of our destressed brethren and
sisters, and blessed be thy holy name that has enabled us to write this book
unto our gracious King, good Lord bless it that it may tend to thy glory, to
the confounding of Antichrist and his friends, and the comfort of our afflicted
brethren in their afflicted state. And blessed be thy holy name for blessing us
with the good things of the land, thou have given us the first and second
rain, and caused the earth to bring forth herbs for the use of man, and
fodder for cattle, and caused our valleys to stand so thick with Corn and
Wheat; that we have cause to tell of thy goodness all the day long, and sent
us peaceable days, that we might receive the fruit of the Earth in due season,
notwithstanding the fear and terror of the Schottish Armies, have given such
holy wisdom to our gracious King to compose those dangerous wars with
honor and safety to both Nations, and blessed be thy holy name for continuing
thy holy word unto us, thy holy sacrament, and thy holy ordinances unto us, and
blessed be thy holy name, that continues our gracious King unto us, and our
great Counsel of Parliament, and us with comfort and confidence, that thou will be graciously pleased to make a holy reformation on both in Church and
Common wealth, and rise up with all holy indignation, to root out all Idolatry,
popery and all prophannesse, and Papeists, Atheists, and Anabaptists, that do
so oppose thy truth, and authority, and government of our gracious King, oh
convert their hearts, or else confound their devices, and bring them to their
well deserved ends.

And blessed be thy holy name, that have done such great things for us, in
discovering those horrible treasons, and rebellious Idolatry, popery and
profaneness, and so confounded them and brought many of them to their shameful
and well deserved ends.

And blessed be thy holy name, for thy gracious providence over us this night,
that we have not perished in works of darkness, that we have not fallen into
despair, raging madness, that thou have not suffered our houses to be burnt
down with flames of fire, or our enemies to possess our gates: and now good
Lord, what shall we render unto thee for all thy mercies showed toward us,
still take up the cup of salvation, and still entreat thy mercies to be
continued toward us this day, and for evermore, and that we may be the better
for thy service, and the works of our calling, sanctify all the faculties of
our souls, and all the parts and members of our bodies, make our will ever
liable to thy will, onr understanding apt to conceive of those mysteries of our
salvation, and our memories apt to retain all holy lessons, and good
directions, that we may make use of them in our lives and conversations:
sanctify all the affections of our hearts, our love, that it may be settled
upon thee, and thy sacred word, our fear, that it may make us fear, and
tremble to commit the least sin, or do any thing, that might tend to thy
dishonor, or the hurt of our neighbor, and sanctify our anger that it make
us zealous for thy glory, and boldly to reproove sin, both in our selves and
in others, and sanctify our sorrow, that it may be termed into a godly sorrow
for our sins, and the abominations of this land.

And sanctify all the parts and members of our bodies, that our ears may be
dilligent to hear the word of God and all good council, that our eyes may be
dilligent to see and observe thy glorious works in the creatures, and to
admire thy infinite wisdom, and power in the creating of them, and thy mercy
and goodness in preserving them for our use and comfort: our speeches, that
they may be gracious and tend to thy glory, and the edifying of one another in
our holy faith, and keep us from lying and swearing, that whereunto by nature
we are so prone: and sanctify our taste and smelling, that we may not abuse
them to drunkenness, and gluttony, and sanctify our hands, that we may
employ them dilligently in our calling, and that they may be ready to defend
the poor Fatherless, and Widows: sanctify our feet, that they may be swift
to hear thy word, to visit the poor in their afflicted state, and sanctify
our bodies, that we may keep them pure and undefiled all the days of our
life, for these and other graces, which we stand in need of, Lord mercifully
supply them for our Lord Jesus sake, in whose most holy name, in whose most
holy words we pray unto Thee as our blessed Savior has taught us, saying;
Our Father which art in Heaven etc.

FINIS.

