ENGLANDS Warning-Peece: OR The HISTORY of THE Gunpowder Treason:

Enlarged with some Notable Passages not heretofore Published.

Whereunto is Annexed

The ACT of PARLIAMENT for Public Thanksgiving upon the Fifth day of November
yearly.

By T. S.

They conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity,

Job 15.35. Who so is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord,

Psalm. 107 43. London, Printed by T. N. for Tho. Pierrepont at the Sun in Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.

TO The Courteous Reader.
AS time does wear out the remembrance of actions most famous and worthy of
mark: so History the message of antiquity does bring back time with the
wonderful works thereof, to the knowledge of Posterity, both for delight and
benefit. The memorial of this most prodigious Conspiracy, which never had any
fellow, being almost obliterated and forgotten in many places of the land, may
be renewed, revived, and presented to succeeding generations, by the use of
this little Story. Little Books are fittest for little purses; Such a one as
this, whose price (I hope) will never give just cause of repentance to the
discreet buyer. All that I desire by it, is, that the great preserver of man
may have everlasting glory, and our Nation his everlasting Protection. Farewell

Your Friend, Tho. Spencer.

Englands Warning-peece, OR The History of the Gunpowder Treason, enlarged
with some notable passages, not heretofore published.
MAny and sundry were the Plots and Attempts of Treason, against our most
gracious Sovereign, Queen Elizabeth of famous and ever blessed memory. Pope
Pius the sifth cursed her, and therefore Parrie and Savage would have stabbed
her, Somervil and Arderne would have killed her, Squire and Lopez the Jew would
have poisoned her, but they did all fail of their purposes; for God Almighty
blessed her, and made her reign long and prosperous; maugre the malice of all
her Enemies, both at home and abroad.

When the Pope and his welbeloved Sons (falsely called Catholics, but truly
Papists) saw that no sorcerie could prevail against her, they did then cast
about how they might serve their own turn, and promote their own cause by her
Majesty's immediate Successor. To this end Pope Clement the eight (a little
before her death) sent two Bulls or Letters into England, one after another,
wherein he did forbid any man to claim the Crown, and take upon him the Rule
and Government of the English Nation, that would not conform himself to the
Church of Rome, acknowledge the Supremacy of her head the Pope, and stoop to
his lure; yea death was to be endured by his beloved Sons, rather then such a
one should be admitted, that would tolerate any of the Protestant Religion.

And to debarr the King of Scotland of his right of succession, he did
liberally bestow upon him the disgraceful names of a Heretic, a Schismatic,
an Apostate, another Julian. Such were the terrible words of his thunder. Much
about this time Robert Parsons the Jesuit wrote a Book of honorable descents,
and put it forth under the name of Dolmax, wherein he did entitle the King of
Spain to the Crown of England, as being descended from Katharine the Daughter
of John of Caunt Duke of Lancaster, the fourth Son of our King Edward the
third, who was married to Henry the third King of Castile and Leon.

And in another book he says, His Philopater. Sect. 2
That it is the opinion both of Divines and Lawyers, That if any Christian
Prince shall fall from the Catholic Religion, and seek to draw others from the
same, he does presently fall from all princely power and dignity. Visib. Monar.
lib. 2. cap. 4,
And Sanders another bird of the same wing, says, That the King that will not
submit himself to the authority of the Pope, ought not to be tolerated, but his
Subjects ought to choose another in his place, as soon as may be. These
diplomatical and Jesuitical writings, gave life and beginning to the greatest,
the rarest, the vilest Treason, that ever was invented, plotted, attempted,
against Prince and People, famous throughout the world for the horrible infamy
thereof (the eternal shame of Popery) as shall be showed in the course of our
History.

Upon the sour and twentieth day of March, in the year of our Lord, One
Thousand six hundred and two, Queen Elizabeth (a Princess full of happy days,
but fuller of immortal Trophies of honor) did change her corruptible Crown in
this World, for an incorruptible in Heaven, and within four hours after her
decease, by the grave and wise Council that she left behind her, James the sixth
of Scotland was Proclaimed King of England and Ireland at the Court-gate at
Richmond, which did much rejoice the hearts of the godly people in England when
they heard of it. And in the sweet and pleasant month of May, his Majesty made
a safe arrival at London, where he was received with great joy and acclamation.
The Princes of Europe did stand amazed and wondered, when they heard that his
Majesty had gotten the possession of two Kingdoms without the shedding of a
drop of blood. Many of them sent their Ambassadors, and the King of Denmark
(who was brother to his Wife the Queen) came in his own person, to congratulate
the greatness of his fortunes. It was now a rare sight in London to see two
Kings walk peaceably together in the streets.

His Majesty for some reasons did deferr his Coronation, until the twenty
fifth of July, In the mean while some turbulent and discontented spirits
plotted a conspiracy, and purposed to surprise the King and Prince Henry his
eldest Son, being instigated and persuaded thereunto, by Watson and Clarke two
Popish Priests, who told them that the Act was lawful, for that the King was
no King before he was Crowned. The other persons of note involved in this
Treason, were, Thomas Lord Gray of Wilton, Henry Brook, Lord Cobham, Sir
Griffin Markham, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir Edward Parham, George Bro^ke Brother
to the Lord Cobham, Bartholomew Brookesly, and Anthony Copley; All which were
indicted; Sir Edward Parham was acquitted by the Jury, the rest were found
guilty and condemned. George Brook, and Watson and Clarke the two Priests were
executed. All the rest were graciously pardoned by his Majesty; at which
example of mercy, the condemned wished, that they might sacrifice their lives,
to gain the love and favor of so merciful a Prince. But clemency to offenders
makes men bold to offend. One Treason is past, and a greater follows at the
heels thereof. For in the same year the old Serpent the Devil does put it into
the heart of Robert Catesby of Ashby in the County of Leicester Esquire, to
destroy the King with Gunpowder, by blowing up the Parliament house, when his
Majesty, the Queen, the Prince, the Duke, the choycest of the Nobility and
Gentry, were there assembled, for doing the turn; most proper to their places
and degrees. And this damnable device, he did maintain to be holy and lawful,
upon this ground of reason; That if by the two Bulls or Letters of Pope Clement
the eight, See the Hist. of France, P. 1196.
they ought not to have received the King into the Kingdom; then by a greater
reason, being received, the Pope would have him made away; as if Kings, Free
Princes, and States were to live but at the pleasure of the Pope. The
proditorious doctrine of the Josuits, did likewise add much fuel to this fiery
enterprise, which was first made known and revealed by Cateshy to Thomas Winter
of Huddington in the County of Worcester, when they met together at London, who
gave his consent and approbation thereunto, And shortly after went into
Flanders to negotiate with Baldwine the Jesuit, with the Constable, with Owen,
with Faewkes, and also with Sir William Stanley, who for many years together
did lurk in those parts of the Netherlands, that were under the obedience of
Albertus Archduke of Austria, and Clara Isabella his Wife, the Daughter of the
King of Spain, and durst not come into England. For this was that Sir William
Stanley who (contrary to his Oath) did treacherously deliver up D^venter a rich
Town in Oven Yssell, to the King of Spain, which had bin gotten a little
before by Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester, sent into the low Countries with
some considerable Forces by Queen Elizabeth, to aid the Dutch against the
Spaniard; but the Town was regained shortly after by the States of Holland. He
that is false to God will be false to Man, and when opportunity serves, will
keep no faith with them that are no better then Heretics in his account.

When Winter had conferred with the parties aforesaid, and had imparted to them
so much of his mind, as he thought convenient at this time, he returned back
into England, and brought with him Guide Fawks, a very desperate Soldier, and
a monstrous instrument of mercilese cruelty. And when they came to London, they
met with Robert Catesby, Thomas Percy, and John Wright, at a house behind St.
Clements Church without Temple Bar, where they spoke of doing some thing, but
first they thought it fit, to take an Cath of secrecy, which they gave to each
other upon a Primer, the contents whereof here follows.

YOu shall swear by the blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose
to receive, never to disclose, directly nor indirectly, by word or
circumstance, the matter that shall be proposed to you to keep secret, nor
desist from the Execution thereof, until the rest shall give you leave.

And for their further confirmation, they went into a more private chamber, and
there heard Mass, and received the blessed Sacrament, at the hands of William
Gerrard a Priest, who told them that it was better that some Innocents did
perish with the nocent, for the advantage of the Catholics, rather then the
service should quail, the necessity of time and occasion so requiring it. And
now did Catesby and Winter disclose the business to the rest; wherefore they
took the Oath, which they all approved. And Percy by the Authority of the rest
was sent to take some house or lower room either under or near the Parliament
house, to lay in the Powder which was to be bought by Winter and Fawkes. Now
while this Cockatrices Egg (horrible Treason) was hatching, to the end that it
might succeed well, and break forth into a Basiliske a flying and
fire-breathing Serpent, whose deadly eye might destroy both Prince and People
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, the Papists gave themselves to their
devotions and Prayers both at home and abroad. For although the vulgar sort
knew not of the particulars of the damnable design, yet they had a general
notion, and confused knowledge of some thing to be done in the Parliament, for
the good of their Church.

And the Priests and Jesuits themselves, did usually conclude their Masses, and
oblatory Sacrifices with these verses made by Henry Garnet Provincial over the
Jesuits here in England.

Gentem auferte perfidam credentium de finibus,
Vt Christo lauds debitas persolvamus alacriter.
Which I English thus.

Even from the Coasts of faithful men A faithless Nation take,
That cheerfully to Christ our Lord We may due praises make.
And others prayed, See Speed his Chron.
(as they were taught thus;

Prosper Lord their pains, that labor in thy cause day and night, let Heresy
vanish away like smoke, let the memory of it perish with a crack, like the
ruin and fall of a broken house:

Hereby alluding to their working in the Mine, the mounting smoke of the
Powder, and the violent fall of the Parliament house.

In Flanders Baldwine was not slack, to improve his Interest in Heaven, for the
speeding of their great errand.

At Rome Parsons the Jesuit, being Governor of that College which was founded
by Pope Gregory the thirteenth, for English Fugitives and discontented
malignants, did give order to the Students of the house, after their ordinary
devotions were ended, to pray for some extraordinary thing. -- Orate
proconversione Turcae.
One while they must pray for the conversion of the Turk, some two or three
days together. Another while they must pray as long for the Captives in
England, meaning the Papists that were in Prison. But for two months together
before the day appointed for the execution of their bloody design, Orate pro
Captivis in Anglia.
Parsons commanded them to pray, for the intention of their Father Rector;
which made the Students of the house wonder what their Father Rectors intention
should be. Orate pro intention Patris Rectoris. They had set forms of Prayer
for these things made by Parsons.
But when they heard of a Barbarous Treason discovered in England, sixteen of
them forsook the College, and came over the Alps down into France, waiting
for a better season to return home; with some of which who forsook the Church
of Rome, and embraced the reformed Religion, I had some conference. The King
began his Reign (as we have showed) upon the four and twentieth day of March,
the last day of the year, according to the date of the Lawyers, in the year of
our Lord God, one thousand six hundred and two. And in the Summer Quarter
following, and in part of the Autumnal, the Plague in London made a lamentable
ravage upon mankind; the weekly Bills of mortality (I very well remember) were
exceeding great. But when it pleased God to lighten his hand, and relent the
violence of his devouring Angel against the people of that City, giving good
hope that the infection was come to a period, then did his Majesty call his
Parliament upon the nineteenth day of the next March, and upon the seventh of
July, concluded the first Sessions thereof, and adjourned it to the seventh of
February in the second year of his reign And before that time came, he did
adjourne it again to the sift of November, in the third year of his reign, and
in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and five, which proves a most
remarkable date by reason of this monstrous and never enough abhorred Treason.
This long time between the first and the second Session of the Parliament, gave
good leisure and liberty to those of the Conspiracy, not only to make a large
provision of Powder, Fagots, Billets, Bars, and whatsoever else they thought
necessary for the execution of their devilish device; but also to travel into
foreign Countries, to visit their Friends and welwishers, and to solicit
them for their aid and best assistance when need should require it. Winter
makes a journey to Valladolit in Castile, and Fawkes returns into Flanders to
consult with Sir William Stanley and the rest, and then goes over the Alps to
Rome, to obtain the blessing of Pope Paul the sift, and to take the Counsel of
Father Parsons, a bitter enemy to his own Country. In the latter end of the
Summer preceding their intended fatal sift of November, they return back into
England, and do find their Diabolical machination in a safe and secure
condition. The time for the sitting of the Parliament does now begin to draw
nigh, and the Nobility and Gentry that had places in that high Court, did make
preparation to come up to London. The conspirators likewise did make all the
preparation they could to give them the blow, even that blow that should have
been the common ruin of us all. Cursed may it be called or blessed; or both?
cursed in respect of the intent, but blessed for ever in respect of the event.
For when we were white for their harvest, and ready to be cut down by them,
then, even then did the Almighty, by his gracious Providence, bring to light
and discovery, this infernal and prodigious Plot, as shall be showed in the
next part of the History wherein I will follow the Original, Carleton and Speed.
as others have done before me

The Saturday of the week, immediately preceding the Kings return from his
hunting exercise at Royston, (which was upon a Thursday ten days before the
Parliament) the Lord Montegle, Son and Heir to the Lord Morley, being in his
own lodging ready to go to supper, at seven of the Clock at night, one of his
footmen (whom he had sent of an errand over the street) was met by an unknown
Man of a reasonable tall personage, who delivered him a Letter, charging him to
put it in my Lord his Masters hands; which my Lord no sooner received but
having broken it up, and perceiving the same to be of an unknown and somewhat
unlegible hand, and without either date or subscription; did call one of his
men unto him, for helping him to read it. But no sooner did he conceive the
strange contents thereof, although he was somewhat perplexed what construction
to make of it (as whether of a matter of consequence, as indeed it was, or
whether some foolish devised pasquil, by some of his Enemies, to scare him from
his attendance at the Parliament) yet did he as a most dutiful and loyal
Subject, conclude not to conceal it, what ever might come of it. Whereupon,
notwithstanding the lateness and darkeness of the night in that season of the
year, he presently repaired to his Majesty's Palace at Whitehall, and there
delivered the same to the Earl of Salisbury his Majesty's principal Secretary.
Whereupon the said Earl of Salisbury having read the Letter and heard the
manner of the coming of it to his hands, did greatly encourage and commend my
Lord for his discretion, telling him plainly that whatsoever the purpose of the
Letter might prove hereafter, yet did this accident put him in mind of diverse
advertisements he had received from beyond the Seas, wherewith he had
acquainted as well the King himself, as diverse of his Privy Counselors,
concerning some business the Papists were in, both at home and abroad, making
preparations for some combination amongst them against this Parliament time.
for enabling them to deliver to the King some Petition for toleration of
Religion, which should be delivered in some such order, and so well backed, as
the King should be loath to refuse their requests, like the sturdy Beggars,
craving alms with one open hand, but carrying a stone in the other in case of
refusal. And therefore did the Earl of Salisbury conclude with the Lord
Montegle that he would in regard of the Kings absence, impart the same Letter
to some more of his Majesty's Council; whereof my Lord Mountegle liked well:
only added this by way of protestation, that whatsoever the event hereof might
prove, it should not be imputed to him, as proceeding from too light and too
sudden an apprehension, that he delivered this Letter, being only moved
thereunto for demonstration of his ready devotion, and care for preservation of
his Majesty and the State. And thus did the Earl of Salisbury presently
acquaint the Lord Chamberlain with the said Letter. Whereupon they two in the
presence of the Lord Mountegle, calling to mind the former intelligence
already mentioned, which seemed to have some relation with this Letter; The
tender care which they ever carried to the preservation of his Majesty's person
made them apprehend, that some perilous attempt, did thereby appear to be
intended against the same, which did the more nearly concern, the said Lord
Chamberlain to have a care of, in regard that it does belong to the charge of
his Office, to oversee as well all places of Assembly where his Majesty is to
repair, as his Highness own private houses. And therefore did the said two
Counselors conclude, that they should join unto themselves three more of the
Council, to wit, the Lord Admiral, the Earls of Worcester and Northampton,, to
be also particularly acquainted with this accident, who having all of them
concurred together, to the reexamination of the contents of the said Letter,
they did cenclude, that how slight a matter it might at the first appear to be,
yet was it not absolutely to be contemned, in respect of the care which it
behooved them to have of the preservation of his Majesty's person. But yet
resolved, for two reasons, first to acquaint the King himself with the same,
before they proceeded to any further Inquisition in the matter, as well for the
expectation and experience they had of his Majesty's fortunate Judgment, in
clearing and solving of obscure riddles and doubtful mysteries; as also because
the more time would in the mean while be given for the practice to ripen, if
any was, whereby the discovery might be the more clear and evident, and the
ground of proceeding there upon, more safe, just, and easy. And so according
to their determination, The Letter showed to the King.
did the said Earl of Salisbury repair to the King in his Gallery upon Friday,
being Alhollow day in the afternoon, which was the day after his Majesty's
arrival, and none but himself being present with his Highness at that time,
where, without any other speech or judgment given of the Letter, but only
relating simply the form of the delivery thereof, he presented it to his
Majesty. The contents whereof follow.

MY Lord, out of theleve I bear to some of your friends. I have a care of your
preservation. Theresore I would advise you, as you fender your life, to devise
so me excuse to shift off your affendance at this Parliament. For God and Man
have toncurred to punish the wickedness of this time. And think not nightly of
this Aovertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where you may
expect the event in safety. For though there be no appeatance of any stir, yet
I say, they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet they shall
net see who burts them. This Counsel is not to be contemned, because it may
do you good, and can do you no barme; for the danger is past so soon as you
have burnt the Letter. And I hope God will give you the grace, to make good use
of it. To whose holy profection I commend you

The King no sooner read the Letter, but after a little pause, and then reading
it over again, he delivered his judgment of it in such sort, as he thought it
was not to be contemned, for that the style of it seemed to be more quick and
pithie, then is usual to be in any Pasquil or Libel (the superfluities of idle
brains:) But the Earl of Salisbury perceiving the King to apprehend it
deeplier then he looked for, knowing his nature, told him that he thought by
one sentence in it that it was like to be written by some Fool or Madman,
reading to him this sentence in it, For the danger is past as soon as you have
burnt the Letter, which he said was likely to be the saysing of a Fool: if the
danger was past o soon as the Letter was burnt, the warning behoved to be of
little avail, when the burning might make the danger to be eschewed. But the
King by the contrary considering the former sentence in the Letter, That they
should receive a terrible blow at this Parliament, and yet should not see who
hurt them, joining it to the sentence immediately following, already alleged,
did thereupon conjecture, That the danger mentioned, should be some sudden
danger, by blowing up of Powder. For no other Insurrection, Rebellion, or
whatsoever other private and desperate Attempt could be committed or attemoted,
in time of Parliament, and the Authors thereof unseen, except it were only by a
blowing up of Powder, which might he performed by one base knave in a dark
corner; whereupon he was move to interpret and construe the latter sentence in
the Letter (alleged by the Earl of Salisbury) against all ordinary sense and
construction in Grammar, as if by these words, For the danger is past as soon
as you have burned the Letter, should be closely understood the suddainty and
quickness of the danger, which should be as quickly performed and at an end, as
that paper should be of blazing up in the fire; tnrning that word of as soon to
the sense of as quickly; And therefore wished that before his going to the
Parliament, the under rooms of the Parliament house might be well and narrowly
searched. But the Earl of Salisbury wondering at his Majesty's Commentary,
which he knew to be so far contrary to his ordinary and natural disposition,
who did ever sin upon the other side, in not apprehending nor trusting due
Advertisements of practices and perils, when he was truly informed of them;
whereby he had many times drawn himself into many desperate dangers; and
interpreting rightly this extraordinary caution at this time to proceed from
the vigilant care he had of the whole State, more then of his own person, which
could not but have all perished together, if this designement had succeeded; He
thought good to dissemble still unto the King, that there had been any just
cause of such apprehension. And ending the purpose with some merry jest upon
this Subject, as his custom is, took his leave for that time. But though he
seemed so to neglect it to his Majesty; yet his customable and watchful care
of the King and the State still boiling within him; And having with the blessed
Virgin Mary laid up in his heart the Kings so strange judgment and
construction of it; He could not be at rest, till he had acquainted the
foresaid Lords, what had passed between the King and him in private; Whereupon
they were all earnest to renew again, the memory of the same purpose to his
Majesty, as it was agreed that he should the next day, being Saturday, repair
to his Highness; which he did in the same privy Gallery, and renewed the memory
thereof, the Lord Chamberlain then being present with the King. At what time it
was determined, that the said Lord Chamberlain should according to his Custom
and Office, view all the Parliament houses; both above and below, and consider
what likelihood or appearance of any such danger might possibly be gathered by
the sight of them. But yet as well for staying of idle rumors, as for being the
more able to discern any mystery, the nearer that things were in readiness,
his journey thither was ordained to be deferred till the afternoon before the
sitting down of the Parliament, which was upon the Monday following. At what
time he (according to this conclusion) went to the Parliament house accompanied
with my Lord Mountegle, being in reale to the Kings service earnest and
curious, to see the event of that accident, whereof he had the fortune to be
the first discovered: Where, having viewed all the lower rooms, he found in the
vault under the upper house, great store and provision of Billets, Fagots, and
Coals. And enquiring of Whyneard keeper of the Wardrobe. to what use he had
put those lower rooms and cellars; he told him, that Thomas Percy had hired
both the house and part of the Cellar or vault under the same, and that the
Wood and Coal therein was the said Gentleman's own provision. Whereupon the
Lord Chamberlain, casting his eye aside, perceived a fellow standing in a
corner there, calling himself the said Percies man and keeper of that house for
him, but was indeed Cuido Fawkes the owner of that hand which should have acted
that monstrous Tragedy.

The Lord Chamberlain looking upon all things with a heedfull indeed, yet in
outward appearance, but with a careless and rackless eye (as became so wise and
diligent a Minister) he presently addressed himself to the King, in the said
Privy Gallery, where in the presence of the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Admiral,
the Earls of Worcester, Northampton, and Salisbury, he made his report what he
had seen and observed there, noting that Mountegle had told him, That he no
sooner heard Thomas Percy named to be the possessor of that house, but
considering both his backwardness in Religion, and the old dearness in
friendship between himself and the said Percy, he did greatly suspect the
matter, and that the Letter should come from him. The said Lord Chamberlain
also told, That he did not wonder a little at the extraordinary great provision
of Wood and Coal in that house, where Thomas Percy had so seldom occasion to
remain. As likewise it gave him in his mind that his man looked like a very
tall and desperate fellow.

This could not but increase the Kings former apprehension and jealousy:
whereupon he insisted (as before) that the House was narrowly to be searched
and that those Billets and Coals would be searched to the bottom, it being
most suspicious, that they were laid there, only for covering of the powder. Of
this same mind also were all the Counselors then present. But upon the fashion
of making the search was it long debated. For upon the one side they were all
so jealous of the Kings safety, that they all agreed, that there could not be
too much caution used for preventing his danger. And yet upon the other part,
they were all extreme loath and dainty, that in case this Letter should prove
to be nothing but the evaporation of an idle brain, then a curious search being
made, and nothing found, should not only turn to the general scandal of the
King and the State as being so suspicious of every light and frivolous toy, but
likewise lay an illfavored imputation upon the Earl of Northumberland, one of
his Majesty's greatest Subjects and Counfellors, this Thomas Percy being his
kinsman and most confident familiar: And the rather were they curious in this
point, knowing how far the King detested, to be thought suspicious or jealous,
of any of his good Subjects, though of the meanest degree. And therefore though
they all agreed upon the maine ground, which was to provide for the security of
the Kings person, yet did they much differ in the circumstances, by which this
action might be best carried with least din and occasion of slander. But the
King himself still persisting that there were diverse shrewd appearances, and
that a narrow search of those places could prejudice no man that was innocent,
he at last plainly resolved them, That either must all the parts of those
rooms be narrowly searched, and no possibility of danger left unexamined, or
else he and they all must resolve not to meddle in it at all, but plainly to
go the next day to the Parliament, and leave the success to fortune, which he
believed, they would be loath to take upon their consciences; for in such a case
as this, an half doing was worse then no doing at all. Wherefore it was at
last concluded. That nothing should be left unsearched in those houses, And yet
for the better color and stay of rumor, in case nothing were found, it was
thought meet that upon a pretense of Whyneards missing some of the Kings stuff
or Hangings, which he had in keeping, all those rooms should be narrowly
ripped for them. And to this purpose was Sir Thomas Knever (a Gentleman of his
Majesty's privy Chamber) employed, being a Justice of Peace in Westminster,
and one of whose ancient fidelity both the late Queen and our now Sovereign
has had large proof: who according to the trust committed unto him, went about
the midnight next after, to the Parliament house, accompanied with such a small
number as was fit for that errand. But before his entry into the house, finding
Thomas Percies alleged man standing without the doors his clothes and boots on
at so dead a time of the night he resolved to apprehend him, as he did, and
thereafter went forward to the searching of the house, whereafter he had caused
to be overturned some of the Billets and Coals, he first found one of the
small Barrels of Powder, and after all the rest, to the number of thirty six
Barrels great and small. And there after fearching the fellow, whom he had
taken, found three matches, and all other instruments fit for blowing up the
powder, ready upon him, which made him instantly confess his own guiltiness,
declaring also unto him, That if he had happened to be within the house when he
tookhim, as he was immediately before (at the ending of his work) he would not
have failed to have blown him up house and all.

Thus after Sir Thomas had caused the wretch to be surely bound, and well
guarded by the company he had brought with him, he himself returned back to the
Kings Palace, and gave warning of his success to the Lord Chamberlain, and
Earl of Salisbury, who immed atly warning all the rest of the Counsel that
lay in the house, as soon as they could get themselves ready, came with their
fellow Counfellers to the Kings Bedchamber, being at that time near four of
the Clock in the morning. And at the first entry of the Kings Chamber door the
Lord Chamberlain, being not any longer able to conceal his joy for the
preventing of so great a danger, told the King in a confused haste, that all
was found and discovered, and the Traitor in hands, and fast bound.

Then order being first taken for sending for the rest of the Council that lay
in the Town, The Prisoner himself was brought into the house, where in respect
of the strangeness of the accident, no man was staid from the sight or speaking
with him. And within a while after, the Council did examine him, who seemed to
put on a Roman resolution; did both to the Council, and to every other person
that spoke with him that day, appear so constant and settled upon his grounds,
as we all thought we had found some new Mutius Scaevola borne in England. For
notwithstanding the horror of the Fact, the guilt of his Conscience, his
sudden surprising, the terror which should have been stricken in him, by
coming into the presence of so grave a Council, and the restless and consused
questions that every man all that day did vex him with; yet was his countenance
so far from being dejected, as he often smiled in scornful manner, not only
avowing the Fact, but repenting only with the said Scaevola, his fa^ling in the
execution thereof, whereof (he said) the Devil and not God was the discoverer;
answering quickly to every man's objection, scossing at any idle questions which
were propounded unto him, and jesting with such as he thought had no authority
to examine him. All that day could the Council get nothing out of him touching
his accomplices, refusing to answer to any such questions which he thought might
discover the plot, and laying all the blame upon himself; whereupon he said he
was moved only for Religion and conscience sake denying the King to be his
lawful Sovereign, or the anointed of God in respect he was an Heretic, and
giving himself no other name then John Johnson, servant to Thomas Percy. But
the next morning being carried to the Tower, he did not there remain above two
or three days, being twice or thrice in that space re-examined, and, and the
rack only offered and showed unto him, when the mask of his Roman fortitude did
visibly begin to wear and slide of his face; And then did he begin to confess
part of the truth, and thereafter to open the whole matter, as does appear by
his depositions immediately following.

The true Copy of the Depositions of Guido Fawkes, taken in the presence of the
Counselors, whose names are under written.
I confess that a practice in general was first broken unto me, against his
Majesty for releif of the Catholic canse, and not invented or propounded by my
self. And this was first propounded unto me about Easter last was twelve month
beyond the Seas, in the Low Countries of the Archdukes obeisance, by Thomas
Winter, who came thereupon with me into England, and there we imparted our
purpose to three other Gentlemen more, namely Robert Catesby, Thomas Peter, and
John Wright; who all five consulting together of the means how to excute the
same, and taking a vow among our selves for secre^^e, Catesby pro pounded to
have it performed by Gunpowder, and by making a Mine under the upper-house of
Parliament; which place we made choice of the rather, because Religion having
been unjustly suppressed there, it was fittest that Justioce and Punishment
should be executed there.

This being resolved amongst us, Thomas Percy hired and house at Westminster
for that purpose, near adjoining to the Parliament house, and there we begun to
make our Mine about the eleventh of December. 1604.

The five that first entered into the work, were, Thomas Percy, Robert Catesby,
Thomas Winter, John Wright, and my self; and soon after me took another unto
us, Christopher Wright, having sworn him also, and taken the Sacrament for
secrecy. When we came to the every foundation of the wall of the house, which
was about three yards thick, and found it a matter of great difficulty, we took
unto us another Gentleman, Robert Winter, in like manner with Oath and
Sacrament as aforesaid.

It was about Christmas when we brought our Mine unto the Wall, and about
Candlemas we had wrought the Wall half through. And whilst they were in
working, I stood as Sentinel to discry any man that came near, whereof I gave
them warning, and so they ceased until I gave notice again to proceed.

All we seven lay in the house, and had shot and Powder, being resolved to die
in that place before we should yield or be taken.

As they were working upon the Wall they heard a rushing in a Cellar of
removing of Coals, whereupon we feared we had been discovered; and they sent
to go to the Cellar, who finding that the Coals were a selling, and that the
Cellar was to be let, viewing the commodity thereof for our purpose, Percy went
and hired the same for yearly rent.

We had before this provided and brought into the house twenty Barrels of
Powder, which we removed into the Cellar, and covered the same with Billet: and
Fagots, which were provided for that purpose.

About Easter the Parliament being prorogued till October next, we dispersed
our selves, and I returned into the Low Countries by advice and direction of
the rest, as well to acquaint Owen with the Particulars of the plot, as also
least by my longer stay, I might have grown suspicious, and so have come in
question.

In the mean time Percy having the Key of the Cellar, laid in more Powder and
Wood into it. I returned about the beginning of September next, and then
receiving the Key again of Percy we brought in more Powder and Billers (...)
cover the same again, and so I went fer a time into the Country till the 30 of
October. It was further resolved amongst us, that the fame day that this Act
should have been performed, some other of our confederates should have
surprised the person of the Lady Elizabeth the Kings eldest Daughter, who was
kept in Warwickshire at the Lord Haringtons house, and presently have
proclaimed her Queen, having a project of a Proclamation ready for that
purpose; wherein we made no mention of alteration of Religion, nor would have
we avowed the deed to beours, until we should have had power enough to make
our party good, and then we would have avowed both. Concerning Duke Charles the
Kings second Son, we had sundry consultations how to seize on his person. But
because we found no means how to compass it (the Duke being kept near London,
where we had not forces enough) we resolved to serve our turn with the Lady
Elizabeth.

Commiss.

Edward Somer set Earl of Worcester, Charles Howard Earl of Notingham, Thomas
Howard Earl of Suffolk, Charles Blont Earl of Devonshire, Henry Howard Earl
of Northampton, Robert Cicil Earl of Salisbury Lord Treasurer, John Erskeine
Earl of Mar, William Constable Viscount Dunbar, Sir Fohn Popham, Sir Edward
Cook, Sir William Waad.

But here let us leave Fawkes in a lodging fit for such a guest, and taking
time to advise upon his conscience; and turn our selves to that part of the
History, which concerns the fortune of the rest of his partakers in this
abominable Treason. The news was no soouer spread abroad that morning, which
was upon a Tuesday the fifth of November, and the first day designed for that
Session of Parliament but some of those conspirators, namely Winter, and the
two Wrights brothers, thought it high time to hasten out of the Town (for
Catesby was gone the night before, and Percy at four of the Clock in the
morning, the same day of the discovery) and all of them held their course, with
more haste then good speed, to Dunchurch upon Dun more in the County of Warwick
where Sir Everard Digby and his accomplices had appointed a match of Hunting,
that under pretense of that sport they might come together without any
suspicion, though his mind was Nimrod-like more bent upon the blood of
reasonable men then brute beasts. For when the terrible blow had been given at
the Parliament house, whereby the King and all the issue Male of the Seed Royal
had been destroyed, their purpose was to surprise the person of the Lady
Elizabeth the Kings eldest Daughter, who kept her residence at Comb the Lord
Harringtons house by Coventry, to proclaim her Queen, to provide an Husband for
her, some Prince of the Popish prosession; the Castilian was most likely to
have the refusal, for to him at this time they were much devoted, and so
England might have been made a province to Spain. Notwith standing all their
care, to take a solemn Oath, and receive the blessed Sacrament for the
observation of secrecy; yet asthe day appointed for the execution of their
barbarous cruelty did draw nigh, so did the knowlede thereofencrease, among the
common fort of their own faction, who did measure their joy by their hopes of
good success. For upon this Tuesday morning early, the Papists of Rowington
came to Warwick to Ring the Bells, and when Master Themas Hall the reverend
Pastor of the Church heard who they were that were ringing, he gave command
that the Bells should cease, saying, that their meaning was Popish and
superstitious; but within two days, he sound it to be proditorious and
merciless. Let not any man sing a triumph before the victory, least he be
brought to his P^linody or recantation. Also this morning and much about the
same time, John Grant of Norbrook, Lodowicke Grant his Brother, and Henry
Morgan with their associates and servants, rode thorough the Town of Warwick to
Dunchurch to join with Sir Everad Digby and his Accomplices and those Powder-Men
that came down from London, who brought them full assurance that their main
Plot was failed and bewrayed, whereupon they had builded the golden mountains
of their glorious hopes. Then, and there did they all hold a consultation what
way was best for them to take, whether they should scatter, and every man shift
for himself, or cluster together, and stand upon their own defense. They did
conclude for the last, and so turned the secret Treason into open Rebellion.

And for their first exploit, by the Advice and Counsel of the Grants and
Morgan, they did resolve to strengthen themselves with certain great horses,
that were in the Castle stable at Warwick, which did belong to diverse Nobleman
and Gentlemen of the Country, who had put them into the hands of one Henry
Bennock a skilful Rider, to make them fit for their service. William Lord
Compton had a brace, Grant had one there himself, and Morgan had another, and
some other Gentlemen had the like, to the number of twelve, or there about.

And this act of violence and Robbery, Gram made no doubt to perform easily
and speedily (as he did) by the acquaintance he had with ^icholas Smith,
servant to Bennuck, who lay in the Stable over the horses. For the Stable at
this time did lie opon to the Street, and was not walled about as now it is.
That work of defense, and much more about the Castle, both for use and
ornament, has been erected since by Sir Fulke Grevill, Lord Brook, after that
by the favor and bounty of King James he came to be the owner and possessor of
it. Upon the Tuesday night, or rather the Wednesday morning some hours before
day. they all came from Dunchurch to Warwick, and Grant and some others with
him, rode up to the Stable door, and called to Smith the Groom, and said, Nick,
what, art a bed? a good husband would be up, and preparing his Horses to ride;
the Groom knowing Grants voice, by his often coming to see the riding of his
own Horse, and expecting nothing but fair dealing (having always a Candle
burning by him in the night in case the horses prove unruly or break loose)
rose up, and being but half dressed opened the Stable door. Then the Rebels
rushed in, sadled all the horses, and rode away with them to Norbrook, Grants
house, two miles from Warwick, Westward. Where Rookwoods Wife, Morgans Wife,
and some others of the same stamp were come together, to sing and rejoice for
the downfall and destruction of the Heretics. But when they saw their Husbands
much dejected in spirit, their countenances fallen, and understood the cause
thereof, their mirth was turned into mourning, and their singing into sighing.
Yet did they not spare to upbraide them with dullness and cowardliness saying;
Are you the men that would Conquer Kingdoms, and do you stay here? go out for
shame, increase your forces, and try the uttermost of your fortunes.

This night Master John Norton the undersheriff, (who at this time dwelt at
Alcester) lay at the Swan in Warwick, and being quickly informed of the riot
and robbery committed at the Castle Stable, (for all the Town was up in a
tumult, partly by the woeful complaint of Smith for the loss of the horses, and
partly by the neighing and pransing of the horses, when they came among the
mares) he sent a Messenger to Sir Richard Verney Sheriff of the County, who
came to Norbrooke, and seized upon all the Cattle on the ground, and goods in
the house; but the Rebels were gone before he came thither, and their Wives
became Prisoners to the undersheriff, from whom I had the information of these
things.

He also sent Reynold Parker his own Man to Sir Eulke Grevile (the Father of
Fulk Lord Brook) one of the Deputy Lieutenants of the County, who lived at
Beauchamps Court a quarter of a mile from Alcester, a Market Town Ten miles
from Warwick, bordering upon the County of Worcester.

This Messenger being afraid to go by Grants house, went over Barford bridge to
Stratford, and so to Alcester, where he set up his horse in his Masters Stable,
and spoke not a word to any of the Town, of what was done at Warwick, but went
hastily to Beauchamps Court to deliver his message. The old Knight and noble
Patriot no sooner heard of the manner of their taking away of the great horses,
the Winters and the Grants named, whom he knew very well, and also called to
mind the late boldness and insolency of the Papists before him, in his course
of justice, menacing the Adversaries of the contrary Religion, with the day of
revenge for all their sufferings, by the penal Laws and Statutes: but he did
presently conclude from these premises that they were entered into a practice of
Rebellion, and therefore without any delay he sent Edward Worthington the
Steward of his house, to Alcester to buy some Powder, his store at this time
being not answerable to his desire, to make his defense against such enemies,
as he supposed were now coming toward him. The Messenger that came to him from
Warwick, returned back with his Steward; and when they came into the midst of
the Town, they there saw John Winter the youngest of the three brothers, who
was come thither to call a Trumpeter, which he had there placed about a month
before to learn to sound the points of War. They cried, stop the Thief stop
the Thief, Winter flourishing his naked sword over his head, rode back with
speed to meet his company. The Towns men assayed to apprehend him, Henry Eaton
a Blacksmith smote at him, but Edward Walden one of the Constables, saluted him
with his black staff, the Ensign of his Office, and made his horse reel out of
his way. At this very instant came the Head of the Rebels, along the high way
that did cross that end of the Town, and looked aside; they saw Winter like to
be taken; Then they cried; Arm, arm, arm, and so turned into the Town and
rescued him.

The Townsmen all amazed at their sudain surprizal by so gallant a Troop, so
bravely mounted, knew not what to do, but to save themselves by slipping into
their houses. This hurly burly being near the house of Master Fulke Madley.
Bailiff of the Town, he came forth and charged them in the Kings name to keep
the peace; whereupon one of them smote him with the lock end of a Petronel or
Horsemans piece, which blow he felt to his dying day. Some of them in their
desperate fury and madness would have set the Town on fire, but others gave
Counsel to depart, saying that if Sir Fulke Grevill should hear of them, and
come sorth with his men (whom they knew to be always well attended with a
brave compapany of stout fellows) the Town and Country would side with him,
and so they might have the worst.

Upon their departure the Townsmen being informed of their riot and misbehavior
at Warwick did set a strong watch upon the highways, and presently took one
York, and Ward, and Johnson, and Tom Suo^ servant to Robert Winter the eldest
of the three brothers, and some of them that came in the Rear, seeing their
fellows apprehended made a retreat, and fled over Bidford bridge toward
Campden and Evesham; But the maine Troop (supposed to be about fourscore) went
eight miles further, to Huddington the house of Robert Winter, within four
miles of Worcester.

Here a neighbor of Crowle the next Parish seeing such an unusual company, of
strangers, and perceiving their muttering and whispering together, and also
noting the great waste they made in the Barn, by putting their horses to a
heap of wheat in the chaff, did resolve with himself (though the way were
foul, and the night dark) to go to Worcester to acquaint the Bailiff of the
Town (for then the head-Officer was so called) with their number and behavior,
for he did imagine that they had some bad business in hand. As Soon as this man
came to the Gate of the City, he was apprehended by a watch; for they had
received Letters of Hue and Cry after the horses, by a special messenger who
went from Warwick to Which, and so to Worcester about an hour before he came
thither. The Watchmen threatened to carry him before the Magistrate for a spy;
he showed some unwillingness, which made them to drag him with more eagerness
to that place whether he did desire to go. And when they came to the
Convocation house, where the Bailiff and his Brethren were in consultation,
about the strange news they had received from Warwick, he was admitted into
their presence, to whom he made report of what he had heard and seen at
Huddington, which gave them full assurance that Rebellion was come into their
Country. Wherefore a Messenger with all intelligence was posted to Sir Richard
Walsh Sheriff of the County, who lived on the West side of the River Severne,
about four miles from Worcester. And a speedy preparation was made, both for
their own defense, and also for the subduement of the approaching enemy.

Upon the Thursday morning by the dawning of the day, four hundred of them
kept their Rendezvous upon Oddingley Heath, near to VVinters house: but before
they came thither, the Rebels were fled Northward, through the Forest of
Feckenham to Hewell, the house of the Lord VVinsor, and there they took all the
Armor they could find, and carried it away in a Cart, which they brought with
them from Huddington, and went that night to Holbeach the house of Stephen
Littleton, within the edge and confines of Staffordshire, about Twenty miles
from Worcester.

Sir Richard VValsh and the VVigornians pursued them with as much speed as the
season of the year would give them leave. And when they heard that the Rebels
had taken harbor at Holbeach, they made their advance to the house, and
besieged it, sheltring themselves under the brick-wall which surrounded the
house. And then did they summon them by a Trumpeter, to render themselves to
the Sheriff his Majesty's Officer; but they returned this scornful answer, and
said, That he had need of better assistance, then of those few numbers that
were with him, before he could be able to command or compel them. The Sheriff
and his company being justly incensed, by their arrogant answer, did make
preparation to give them a furious assault; and upon the Friday morning early,
many of the Country did come in to their aid. And the other party within the
house did likewise make themselves ready to give them the repulse. But as they
were drying about two pound weight of Powder a little from the Chimney in their
Chamber, by the mending of the fire, a small coal of fire spurted out upon it,
which being thereby blown up, scorched and burned the faces, the hands, the
sides of Catesby, Rookwood, Grant, and diverse others of greatest account among
them, who were thereby not only made unable for defense, but also wonderfully
discouraged and cast down. For now they did begin to see, the pride of their
own heart that had deceived them. Now they did begin to see the wrath of the
Almighty waxing hot against them, who had thus perfumed them with their own
smoke, and paid them with their own Coin. And therefore they resolved no longer
to make resistance, but to endeavor to save themselves by flight. Stephen
Littleton and Robert VVinter made an escape, and fled to Hagley in the County
of Worcester, (where contrary to the Kings Proclamation) they were first hid
and releived in the Barn of one Perks: but doubting of their safety thete, (by
reason of a poor fellow, who had been stealing of Conies in the night, and
being beaten from his work by foul weather, came to the Barn, and climbing
up into it, to lodge there all night, fell into the hole between two mowes,
where they lay hid) they removed themselves, and were received, harbored, and
relieved by Humphry Littleton (for distinction commonly called Yellow Humphrey)
who was the Governor of the house in the absence of Mistress Littleton the
owner thereof.

Here they were not many days, but the Cook of the house did vvonder what
use this Humphrey Littleton should make of so many dishes of meat in his
Chamber at every meals time: and to satisfy his own curiosity, went secretly
to his Chamber door, and peeping through they Keyhole, saw Stephen Littleton and
another man with him, at which sight he was so terrified and affrighted, as he
knew not what to do. For to reveal them might endanger their lives; and to
conceal them might cost him his own. After some debate with his own soul, he
did resolve to save himself harmless what ever came of it, and therefore went
and disclosed them to one Jobber of the Town, to whom he had some relation,
whereupon followed their apprehension, and afterward their conviction,
condemnation, and execution. Let us now return back to Holbeach, and see how it
fared with the rest of this hellish society; there shall we find first the
Elder Wright slain, secondly the younger Wright his brother, thirdly Rookwood,
and last of all Percy and Catesby were slain by John Street of Worcester, who
had charged his Musket (as he himself told me) with a brace of Bullets, and
resting it upon the Wall by the Gate, shot at them as they were coming in rank,
and not in file from the door toward the Gate; each Bullet (as he thought)
killed a man: for which Fact the King gave him two shillings a day, during his
natural life, to be paid him out of the Exchequer.

All the rest of these merciless Monsters were taken Prisoners by Sir Richard
Walsh and his company, who did enrich themselves with the spoil of the Enemy.
Their Horses, their Arms, their Silver, their Gold becomes a fair booty for
the Conquerors, who do carry them away in triumph to the ordinary Goal of the
County: where they stayed some few days, and then were sent to London, to be
judged by the Worthies of the Parliament, whom they would have destroyed. Most
of their Servants, led by their Masters, had a gracions pardon; But the Arch.
Traitors had famous and honorable justice executed upon them in and about
London, and some of the meaner sort were sent back into the several Counties
where they lived to have their trial and execution there for the spreading of
the more terror. And Thomas Winter a principal Agent in promoting this terrible
Treason, being now a Prisoner in the Tower, there made this confession as
follows.

The Confession of Thomas Winter taken the XXIII. of November, 1605. in the
presence of the Counselors whose names are underwritten.
My most honorable Lords,
NOt out of hope to obtain pardon; for speaking of my temporal part, I may say,
The fault is greater then can be forgiven; nor affecting hereby the Title of a
good Subject; for I must redeem my Country from as great a danger as I have
hazarded the bringing of her into, before I can purchase any such opinion: Only
at your Honors command I will briefly set down mine own accusation, and how far
I have proceeded in this business; which I shall the faithfuller do, since I
see such courses are not pleasing to Almighty God, and that all, or the most
material parts have been already confessed. I remained with my brother in the
Country from Alhallontide until the beginning of Lent, in the year of our Lord
1603. the first year of the Kings Reign, about which time Master Caresby sent
thither, entreating me to come to London, where he and other my friends world
be glad to see me. I desired him to excuse me, for I found my self not very
well disposed; and (which had happned never to me before) returned the
Messenger without my company. Shortly I received another Letter in any wise to
come. At the second summons I presently came up, and found him with Master John
Wright at Lambeth, where he brake with me, how necessary it was not to forsake
our Country (for he knew I had then a resolution to go over) but to deliver
her from the servitude in which she remained, or at least to assist her with
our uttermost endeavors. I answered, that I had often hazarded my life upon far
lighter terms; and now would not refuse any good occasion, wherein I might do
service to the Catholic cause; but for my self I knew no means probable to
succeed. He said that had bethought him of a way at one Instant to deliver us
from all our Bonds, and without any foreign help to replant again the
Catholic Religion; and withal told me in a word, It was to Blow up the
Parliament house with Gunpowder; for, said he, in that place have they done us
all the mischief, and perchance God has designed that place for their
punishment. I wondered at the strangeness of the conceit, and told him that
true it was, this struck at the root, and would breed a confusion fit to beget
new alterations; But if it should not take effect (as most of this nature
miscarried) the scandal would be so great which Catholic Religion might hereby
sustain, as not only our enemies, but our friends also would with good reason
condemn us. He told me, the nature of the disease required so sharp a remedy;
and asked me if I would give my consent; I told him yes, in this or what else
soever, if he resolved upon it, I would veuture my life. But I proposed many
difficulties; as want of an house, and of one to carry the Mine, noise in the
working, and such like. His answer was; Let us give an attempt; and where it
fails, pass no further. But first, quoth he, Because we will leave no
peaceable and quiet way untried, you shall go over, and inform the Constable
of the State of the Catholics here in England, entreating him to solicit his
Majesty at his coming hither, that the Penal Laws may be recalled, and we
admitted into the rank of his other Subjects; withal you may bring over some
confident Gentleman, such as you shall understand best able for this business,
and named unto me, M. Fawkes. Shortly after, I passed the Sea, and found the
Constable at Bergen near Dunkirk, where by help of Master Owen I delivered my
message, whose answer was that he had a strict command from his Master, to do
all good offices for the Catholics and for his own part, he thought himself
bound in conscience so to do, and that no good occasion should be omitted; but
spoke to him nothing of this matter.

Returning to Dunkirk with Mr. Owen, we had speech whether he thought the
Constable would faithfully help us or no. He said he believed nothing less,
and that they sought only their own ends, holding small account of Catholics I
told him that there were many Gentlemen in England, who would not forsake their
Country, until they hadtryed the uttermost, and would rather venture their
lives, then forsake her in this misery; And to add one more to our number, as a
fit man both for Counsel and execution of whatsoever we should, do wished for
M. Fawkes, whom I had heard good commendations of; he told me the Gentleman
deserved no less, but was at Brussels, and that if he came not, as happily he
might, before my departure, he would send him shortly after into England. I
went soon after to Ostend, where Sir William Stanley as then was not, but
came two days after. I remained with him three or four days, in which
time I asked him if the Catholics in England should do any thing to help
themselves, whether he thought the Archduke would second them. He ansvvered,
no, for all those parts were so desirous of peace with England, as they would
endure no speech of other enterprise, neither were it fit, said he, to set any
project afoot now the peace is upon concluding. I told him there was no such
resolution; and so fell to discourse of other matters, until I came to speak
of Mr. Fawkes, whose company I wished over into England, I asked of his
sufficiency in the wars and told him we should need such as he if occasion
required, he gave very good commendations of him. And as we were thus
discoursing, and I ready to depart for Newport, and taking my leave of Sir
William, Mr. Fawkes came into our company, newly returned, and saluted us.
This is the Gentleman said Sir William, that you wished for, and so we embraced
again. I told him some good friends of his wished for his company in England,
and that if he pleased to come to Dunkirke, we would have further conference,
whether I was then going so taking my leave of them both; I departed: and about
two days after came Mr. Fawkes to Dunkirke, where I told him that we were upon
a resolution to do somewhat in England, if the Peace with Spain helped us
not, but had as yet resolved upon nothing; such or the like talk we passed at
Graveling, where I lay for a wind, and when it served came both in one passage
to Greenwich, near which place we took a pair of Oars, and so came up to
London, and came to Master Catesby, whom we found in his lodging; he welcomed
us into England, and asked me what news from the Constable. I told him, good
words, but I feared the deeds would not answer. This was the beginning of
Easter Term, and about the midst of the same Term (whether sent for by Master
Catesby, or upon some business of his own) up came Mr. Thomas Percy. The first
words he spoke (after he came into our company) was, Shall we always
(Gentlemen) talk, and never do any thing? Master Catesby took him aside, and
had speech about somewhat to be done, so as first we might all take an Oath of
secrecy, which we resolved within two or three days to do, so as there we
met behind Saint Clements, Master Catesby, Master Percy, Master Wright. Master
Guy Fawkes, and my self; and having upon a Primer given each other the Oath of
secrecy, in a Chamber where no other body was, we went after into the next room
and heard Mass, and received the blessed Sacrament upon the same. Then did
Master Catesby disclose to Master Percy and I together with Jack Wright, tell
to Master Fawkes the business for which we took this Oath, which they both
approved. And then was Master Percy sent to take the house which Master Catesby
in mine absence had learned did belong to one Ferris, which with some
difficulty in the end he obtained, and became as Ferris before was, Tenant to
Whinniard. Master Fawkes underwent the name of Master Percies man, calling
himself Johnson, because his face was the most unknown, and received the Keys
of the house, until we heard that the Parliament was adjourned to the seventh
of February: At which time we all departed several ways into the Country, to
meet again at the beginning of Michaelmas Term, Before this time also it was
thought convenient to have a house that might answer to Master Percies, where
we might make provision of Powder and Wood for the Mine, which being there made
ready, should in a night be conveyed by boat to the house by the Parliament,
because we were loath to foul that with often going in and out. There was none
that we could devise so fit as Lambeth, where Master Catesby often lay, and to
be keeper thereof (by Master Catesbies choice) we received into the number,
Keys, as a trusty honest man: this was about a month before Michaelmas.

Some fortnight after toward the beginningof the Term, Master Fawkes and I
came to Master Catesby at Marecrofts, where we agreed that now was time to
begin, and sit things in order for the Mine: so as Master Fawkes went to
London, and the next day sent for me to come over to him: when I came, the
cause was, for that the Scottish Lords were appointed to sit in conference of
the Union in Master Percies house. This hindered our beginning until a
fortnight before Christmas, by which time both Master Percy and Master Wright
were come to London, and we against their coming had provided a good part of
the Powder: so as we all five entered with tools fit to begin our work, having
provided our selves of Baked meats, the less to need sending abroad. We entered
late in the night; and were never seen, save only Master Percies man, until
Christmas Eve: In which time we wrought under a little entry to the Wall of the
Parliament house, and underpropped it, as we went with Wood. Whilst we were
together, we began to fashion our business, and discoursed what we should do
after this deed was done. The first question was how we might surprise the next
heir, the Prince happily would be at the Parliament with the King his Father,
how should we then be able to seize on the Duke? This burden Master Percy
undertook, that by his acquaintance, he with another Gentleman would enter the
Chamber without suspicion, and having some dozen others at several doors to
expect his coming, and two or three on horseback at the Court gate to receive
him, he would undertake (the blow being given, until which he would attend in
the Dukes Chamber) to carry him safe away: for he supposed most of the Court
would be absent, and such as were there not suspecting or unprovided for any
such matter.

For the Lady Elizabeth, it were easy to surprise her in the Country, by
drawing friends together at an Hunting near the Lord Haringtons; and Ashby,
Master Catesbies house, being not far off was a fit place for preparation.

The next was for money and horses, which if we could provide in any reasonable
measure (having the Heir apparent) and the first knowledge by four or five
days, was odds sufficient.

Then what Lords we should save from the Parliament, which was first agreed in
general, as many as we could, that were Catholics, or so disposed; But after
we descended to speak of particulars.

Next what foreign Princes we should acquaint with this before, or join with
after. For this point we agreed, that first we could not enjoin Princes to that
secrecy, nor oblige them by Oath, so to be secure of their promise; besides we
knew not whether they will approve the project or dislike it. And if they do
allow thereof, to prepare before might beget suspicion; and not to provide till
the business were acted, the same letter that carried news of the thing done,
might as well entreat their help and furtherance Spain is too slow in his
preparations to hope any good from, in the first extremities, and France too
near and too dangerous, who with the shipping of Holland, we feared of all the
world might make away with us. But while we were in the middle of these
discourses, we heard that the Parliament should be a new adjourned until after
Michaelmas, upon which tidings we broke off both discourse, and working until
after Christmas. About Candlemas we brought over in a Boat the Powder, which we
had provided at Lambeth, and laid it in Master Percies house, because we were
willing to have all our danger in one place.

We wrought also another fortnight in the Mine against the stone wall, which
was very hard to beat through; at which time we called in Kit Wright, and near
to Easter as we wrought the third time, opportunity was given to hire the
Cellar, in which we resolved to lay the Powder, and leave the Mine.

Now by reason that the charge of maintaining us so long together, besides the
number of several houses, which for several uses had been hired, and buying of
Powder, etc. had lain heavy on Master Catesby alone to support; it was
necessary for him to call in some others to ease his charge, and to that end
desired leave, that he with Master Percy and a third, whom they should call,
might acquaint whom they thought fit and willing to the business; for many,
said he, may be content that I should know, who would not therefore that all
the Company should be acquainted with their names; to this we all agreed. After
this Master Fawkes laid into the Cellar (which he had newly taken) a thousand
of Billets, and five hundred of Fagots, and with that covered the Powder,
because we might have the house free, to suffer any one to enter that would.
Master Catesby wished us to consider, whether it were not now necessary to send
Master Fawkes over, both to absent himself for a time, as also to acquaint Sir
William Stanley and Master Owen with this matter. We all agreed that he should
(provided that he gave it them with the same Oath that we had taken it before)
viz. to keep it secret from all the world. The reason why we desired Sir
William Stanley should be acquaimed herewith, was, to have him with us so soon
as he could, And for Master Owen, he might hold good correspondency after with
foreign Princes. So Master. Fawkes departed about Easter for Flanders, and
returned the latter end of Angust. He told me that when he arived at Brussels,
Sir William Stanley, was not returned from Spain, so as he uttered the matter
only to Owen, who seemed well pleased with the business, but told him that
surely Sir William would not be acquainted with any Plot, as having business
now afoot in the Court of England, but he himself would be always ready to
tell it him, and send him away so soon as it were done,

About this time did Master Percy and Master Catesby meet at the Bathe, where
they agreed that the company being yet but few, Master Catesby should have the
others there is authority to call in whom he thought best. By which Authority he
called in after Sir Everad Digby, though at what time I know not, and last of
all Master Francis Thresham. The first promised as I heard Master Catesby say,
fifteen hundred pounds. The second two thousand pounds; Master Percy himself
promised all that he could get of the Earl of Northumberlands rents, which was
about four thousand pounds, and to provide many galloping horses to the number
of ten.

Mean while Master Fawkes and my self alone bought some new Powder, as
suspecting the first to be dampe, and conveyed it into the Cellar, and set it
in order, as we resolved it should stand. Then was the Parliament a new
prorogued until the sift of November, so as we all went down until some ten
days before when Master Catesby came up with Master Fawkes to an house by
Enfield-Chace called White-webbes, whether I came to them; and Master Catesby
willed me to enquire whether the young Prince came to the Parliament. I told
him that I heard that his Grace thought not to be there. Then must we haveour
horses, said Master Catesby, beyond the water, and provision of more company to
surprise the Prince, and leave the Duke alone.

Two days after being Sunday at night, in came one to my Chamber, and told me
that a letter had been given to my Lord Mounteagle to this effect, That he
wished his Lordships absence from the Parliament, because a blow would there be
given; which Letter he presently carried to my Lord of Salisbury. On the morrow
I went to VVhite-VVebbes, and told it Master Catesby, assuring him withal that
the matter was disclosed, and wished him in any case to forsake his Country. He
told me he would see further as yet, and resolved to send Master Fawkes to try
the uttermost, protesting if the part belonged to himself, he would try the
same adventure.

On Wednesday Master Fawkes went and returned at night of which we were very
glad. Thursday I came to London, and Friday Master Catesby, Master Thresham and
I met at Barnet, where we questioned how this letter should be sent to my Lord
Mounteagle, but could not conceive; for Master Thresham forsware it, whom we
only suspected.

On Saturday night I met Master Thresham again in Lincolns-Inne walks.
Wherein he told me such speeches that my Lord of Salisbury should use to the
King, as I gave it lost the second time, and repeated the same to Master
Catesby, who hereupon was resolved to be gone, but staid to have Master Percy
come up, whose consent herein we wanted. On Sunday Master Percy being dealt
with to that end, would needs abide the uttermost trial.

This suspicion of all hands put us into such confusion, as Master Catesby
resolved to go down into the Country the Monday that Master Percy went to
Syon, and Master Percy resolved to follow the same night or early the next
morning. About five of the Clock being Tuesday came the younger Wright to my
Chamber, and told me that a Nobleman, called the Lord Mounteagle, saying,
Arise, and come along to Essex-house, for I am going to call up my Lord of
Northumberland, saying withal, The matter is discovered. Go back Master
Wright (quoth I) and learn what you can about Essex gate. Shortly he returned
and said; Surely all is lost; for Lepton is got on horseback at Essex door, and
as he parted he asked if their Lordships would have any more with him: and
being answered no, is rode fast up Fleetstreet as he can ride. Go you then
(quoth I) to Master Percy, for sure it is for him they seek, and bid him be
gone, I will stay and see the uttermost. Then I went to the Court gates and
found them straightly guarded, so as no body could enter. From thence I went
down toward the Parliament House, and in the middle of Kingsstreet, found the
Guard standing that would not let me pass. And as I returned I heard one say,
there is a Treason discovered, in which the King and the Lords should have been
blows up. So then I was fully satisfied that all was known, and went to the
Stable where my Gelding stood, and rode into the Country, Master Catesby had
appointed our meeting at Dunchurch, but I could not overtake them until I came
to my Brothers, which was Wednesday night. On Thursday we took the Armor at my
Lord Winsors, and went that night to one Stephen Littletous house, where the
next day (being Friday) as I was early abroad to discover, my man came to me
and said, that a heavy mischance had severed all the company, for that Master
Catesby, Master Rookwood, and Master Grant were burned with Gunpowder, upon
which sight the rest dispersed. Master Littleton wished me to fly, and so
would he. I told him, I would first see the body of my Friend and bury him,
whatsoever befell me. When I came, I found Master Catesby reasonable well,
Master Percy, both the Wrights, Master Rookwood, and Master Grant. I asked them
what they resolved to do; they answered, we mean here to dye; I said again, I
would take such part as they did.

About eleven of the clock came the company to beset the house, and as I walked
into the Court, I was shot into the shoulder, which lost me the use of mine
Arm: the next shot was the elder Wright stricken dead, after him the younger
Master Wright, and fourthly Ambrose Rookwood. Then said Master Catesby to me
(standing before the door they were to enter) stand by me Tom, and we will die
together. Sir (quoth I) I have lost the use of my right Arm, and I fear that
will cause me to be taken. So as we stood close together. Master Catesby,
Master Percy, and my self, they two were shot (as far as I could guess, with
one Bullet) and then the company entered upon me, hurt me in the Belly with a
Pike, and gave me other wounds until one came behind, and caught hold of both
mine arms.

And so Iremaine yours, etc.

Commiss.
Edward Somerset Earl of Worcester. Charles Earl of Notingham, Lord Admiral.
Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain. Charles Earl of Devonshire, Lord
Deputy of Ireland. Henry Earl of Northampton, Lord Privy Seal. Robert Earl
of Salisbury, Principal Secretary. John Erskeine Earl of Mar and Garioth.
William Constable Viscount Dunbar. Sir John Popham Lord Chief Justice. Sir
Edward Cook, Attorney General. Sir William Waad, Lieutenant of the Tower.
The names of those that were first in the Treason, and labored in the Mine.

Robert Catesby Esquires. Robert Winter Esquires. Thomas Percy Gentlemen Thomas
Winter Gentlemen John Wright Gentlemen Christopher Wright Gentlemen Guido
Fawkes And Bates Catesbies man.
The names of those that were made acquainted with it, though not personally
laboring in the Mine nor in the Cellar.

Everard Digby Knight. Ambrose Rookwood Esquires. Francis Tresham Esquires.
Stephen Littleton Esquires. John Grant Gent. Robert Keys Gent.
Sir Everad Digby and some others of the chiefest were executed in
Pauls-Church-yard,

The Names of those that did rise in Rebellion with them, and also of those
that did harbor and releeve some of them contrary to the Kings Proclamations
posted down into the Country.

Lodow. Grant, Gent. Executed at Warwi. H. Morgan. Gent. Executed at Warwi.
John Winter, Gent. Executed at Worcester. Hum. Littleton, Gent. Executed at
Worcester. Perks of Hagley, and Burford his man. Executed at Worcester. Smart
and lihead. Executed at Stafford,
For harboring and releeving Robert Winter, and Stephen Littleton at
West-Bramwich before they fled to Hagley.

When these monstrous offenders were made examples of famous and honorable
justice; the King and the Parliament took special care to find out such Popish
Divines as gave Counsel and countenance to this unheard of villainy. For it is
proper to all the Treasons attempted in England, to have some Romish Priest or
Jesuit in the practice. The Devil who was a Murderer from the beginning,
will evermore make choice of the fittest instruments that may be, for the
bringing of his cursed and cruel designs into action. Not the dull Ass, not
the heavy Ox, not the silly sheep, but the subtle serpent must help to set
forward his work of temptation.

Many of these Incendiaries inspired by the powers of darkness with a
transcendent rage against the State, being chased with the guiltiness of their
own consciencies, fled from their trial into foreign Countries for their
better safety. Father Creswell putting himself into the habit of a Merchant took
shipping at Bristol, and wafted into Spain, where he had been leiger Jesuit a
little before, and came into England at this time to bear his part with the
rest of his society in a victoral song, or song of thanksgiving, for the
extirpation and rooting out of those, who do worship God after that way which
they call Heresy.

But Garnet and Oldcerne two of the principal were apprehended at Henlip in the
County of Worcester, in Mr Abingtons house, where they were immured and closed
up in a stack of Chymnies, the way or passage into the Cave or Vault where they
lay, was in an upper room or chamber, by taking up the half pace before the
hearth, whose wooden border was made like to a trap-door, to pluck up, and let
down, and then the bricks were laid in their courses and order again. Such
holes have these Foxes made for their hiding places.

Upon their examination and confession of their own guiltiness of their
foreknowledge and concealment of this so detestable a Treason, they did both
suffer condign punishment; and Garnet (whose Authority was great and Reverend
with Catesby, and the rest of the Arch. Traitors was executed in
Pauls-Church-yard upon the third of May next ensuing the discovery of the Plot.
He was a man (says the Un-Jesuited Cardinal) incomparable for learning of all
kinds; but surely had he had less learning and more grace, he would never have
had a hand in so foul a business.

As for the gentle hearted Jesuit Parsons, who had dipped his pen in gall
against our most renowned Queen Elizabeth, he always kept himself without the
reach and jerke of the rod of Justice, and dyed shortly after at Rome, in that
old House which was converted to a New-Colledge by Pope Gregory the thirteenth
(as we have said before) whereof he was Rector, much grieved, (no doubt) for
that their holy Enterprise did so miscarrie. And Owen brother to Owen of
Godstow by Oxford succeeded him in that place, and to him succeeded
Fitz-Herbert.

But Baldwine who was of the Council of this horrible Treason whiles he lurked
in the Low Countries, was many years after apprehended at Basil in Switzerland,
as he was going up into Italy; and being brought into England, and falling into
the hands of a merciful Prince, found more favor then he deserved. For by the
means and mediation of Don Gondomar the Spanish Ambassador, an honorable Spy,
the King granted him his pardon. And the Ambassador with all his train went to
the prison, and with great veneration brought him forth and set him at liberty,
which made the account of his Embassage, the more acceptable to the Duke of
Lerma, President of the grand Counsel of Spain, when he returned home.

We have now seen how much was wrought to have turned the Parliament House into
a Slaughterhouse, to have brought our Nation under the calamity of
Antichristian servitude, and once more to have clapped the Popes Saddle upon
Englands back, which if God Almighty had suffered for our sins to have been
brought to pass; then might our neighbors of the Reformed Churches beyond the
Seas, have said (and that truly) that the Devil did ride us.

Notwithstanding the greatness of this Treason, so great as no history can
equal, yet some of the Traitors, viler then the earth, See King James his
premonition, page 6. and his Apology. page 78.
at the time of their death, would not ask God or King forgiveness, nor
acknowledge that they had done any fault unless the Church of Rome, should first
condemn it, as if Treason were no Treason, and Murder were no Murder, unless
the Church of Rome judge it to be so.

Never was there any Sect or sort of people in the World, neither Turk, nor
Jew, nor Infidel, no not those of Calicute which worship the Devil, that did
hold it lawful, or rather meritorious to kill Prince or people, for quarrel of
Religion, the Papists only excepted, who do palliate and cover all their
perfidious practices, with the fair pretext of conscience and the good of the
Catholic cause. When did the Bishop of Rome, who is commonly called the Pope,
ever call any of these Priests and Jesuits in question, that fled hence into
Italy, who were Fomenters of this damnable Conspiracy, much less punished them
for it? Whatsoever is done in favor of the Church of Rome, must be accounted
well done, though never so ill done.

His Holiness (so called by an antiphrase) and his Parasites will command
bloody Massacres, will commend Treason and Rebellion; Pope Innocent the third,
who lived in the time of our King John, and was his great and troublesome
Enemy, decreed an immortal war against the poor Christians that went under the
names of Valdenses or Albigeans. charging them with all kinds of Heresies,
because they blamed and detested the Vices and Errors of the Pope and his
Clergy. Many Princes are commanded by the Pontifical Authority to arm against
them, and the Croisado is preached against them, as against Infidels. See the
History of France. page 125. and. 131.
This was in the year of our Lord a thousand two hundred and ten. Simon Earl of
Montfort is chosen General of the Army, who enters into Languedoc, and there
besieges Bezeirs with such cruel success, as having taken it, the blood flowed
by the loss of threescore thousand persons. And when preparation was made for a
new search, to root out the remainder of them, Lewis the ninth of France
(commonly called St Lewis) would not give allowance to any further proceeding
against them within his Dominions, saying, that they must be persuaded by
reason, and not constrained by violence. For piety is a duty of man unto God,
over which worldly force has no power.

Pope Sixtus the fifth mnde a Panegyric Oration in his consistory, wherein he
did praise and commend the Divelish Friar, an excrement of Hell, See King James
his Apol. page 67 and pa. 75.
that murdered King Henry the third of France by sheathing a knife in the
bottom of his belly.

Cardinal Richard Allen, an English Fugitive, being honored by the Pope with
the degree of a red hat, was not ashamed to publish in print, an Apology for
Sir William Starlies treason, maintaining that by reason of Queen Elizabeth's
excommunication and Heresy, it was not only lawful for any of her Subjects,
but they were even bound in conscience to deprive her of any strength which lay
in their power to do. And whether it were armies, towns, or fortresses of hers,
which they had in their hands they were obliged to put them in the King of
Spain her Enemies hand, she no more being the right owner of any thing. But
whatsoever the Cardinal says; the best policy is to be an honest man.

And Oldcorn that refined and sublimated Friar, preached Treason upon Treason,
and Rebellion upon Rebellion. For after the discovery of this horrid intended
Massacre, and a little before notice was given to the Sheriff of the County, of
his hiding, and for his apprehension, at Henlip aforesaid, he did there preach
consolitary Doctrine, to his popish Anditory, exhorting them not to faint for
the misgiving of this Enterprise nor think the worse thereof, See King James
his Premonition. page, 127 and 128.
that it succeeded not alleging diverse Presidents of such godly enterprises
that misgave in like manner; especially, that of St Lewis King of France, who
in his journey to the holy Land, was taken prisoner by the Sultan of Egypt, and
the greatest part of his Army was destroyed by the Plague, and thereupon
exhorted and persuaded them, not to give over, but still to hope that God would
bless their enterprise at some other time, though this did fail.

By these demonstrations we may know the mind of all of that profession, and
what they would do, if they had the power in their hands, and were Lords over
us. When they want force of argument, and sound reason to persuade us, they
will then use force of arms, fire and sword, treason and rebellion to destroy
us, which should rouse up our spirits, and engender in our hearts; First a
detestation of the bloody, but cherlie, and most ignoble practices of the Pope
and his Adherents. Secondly, gratulation and thanksgiving to the most high God,
who has hitherto compassed us about with songs of deliverance. And lastly,
circumspection, caution, valor and vigilance for the time to come that we be
not suddenly surprised, and swallowed up quick of our implacable Enemies, while
we dally and play with Popery. The Scorpion is not without a sting, though he
does not always strike. A Cain, a Cataline, a Catesby, full of Malignity,
hating with cruel hatred, will always be working some great mischief. And
therefore to our own safety and security, our own diligence and sedulitie is
evermore required.

Their thoughts are vain who think that their watching can preserve the City,
which God himself is not willing to keep. And are not theirs as vain, who think
that God will keep that City, for which they themselves are not careful to
watch? The providence of the Almighty must be served with the use of lawful
means.

In the Third YEAR of KING JAMES.
An ACT for a public Thanksgiving to Almighty God, on the fifth day of
November every Year.
FOrasmuch as Almighty God has in all Ages showed his Power and Mercy, in the
miraculous and gracious deliverance of his Church, and in the protection of
Religious Kings and States. And that no Nation of the earth has been blessed
with greater benefits then this Kingdom now enjoys, having the true and free
profession of the Gospel under our most Sovereign Lord, King James, the most
Great, Learned, and Religious King that ever reigned therein, enriched with a
most hopeful and plentiful Progeny, proceeding out of his Royal loins,
promising continuance of this happiness and profession to all posterity: the
which many Malignant and Divellish Papists, Jesuits nnd Seminary Priests much
envying and fearing, conspired most horribly, when the Kings most excellent
Majesty, the Queen, the Prince, and all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons should have been assembled in the Vpper-House of Parliament upon the
fifth of November, in the Year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and five,
suddenly to have blown up the said whole house with Gunpowder; an invention
so inhumane, barbarous, and cruel, as the like was never before heard of, and
was (as some of the principal Conspitors thereof confess) purposely devised
and concluded to be done in the said House, that where sundry, necessary, and
Religious Laws for preservation of the Church and State were made, which they
falsely and standerously term cruel Laws, enacted against them and their
Religion, both place and persons should be all destroyed and blown up at once,
which would have turned to the utter rume of this whole Kingdom, had it not
pleased Almighty God, by inspiring the Kings most excellent Majesty with a
Divine spirit, to interpret some dark phrases of a Letter showed to his
Majesty, above and beyond all ordinary construction, thereby miraculously
discovering this hidden treason not many hours before the appointed time for
the Execution thereof: Therefore the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Lords
Spiritual and temporal, and all his Majesty's faithful and loving Subjects, do
most justly acknowledge this great and infinite Blessing to have proceeded
merely from God his great mercy, and to his most holy name do ascribe all
Honor, Glory and Praise: and to the end, this unfeigned thankfulness may never
be forgotten, but be had in a perpetual remembrance, that all ages to come may
yield praises to his Divine Majesty for the same, and have in perpetual
memory, This joyful day of deliverance.

Be it therefore enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by the Authority of the same, that all and singular Ministers in every
Cathedral and Parish Church, or other usual place for common Prayer, within
this Realm of England, and the Dominions of the same, shall always upon the
fifth day of November, say morning Prayer, and give unto Almighty God, thanks
for this most happy Deliverance.

And that all and every Person and Persons inhabiting within this Realm of
England, and the Dominions of the same, shall always upon that day, diligently
and faithfully resort to the Parish Church or Chapel accustomed, or to some
usual Church or Chapel where the said Morning Prayer, preaching or other
service of God shall be used, then and there to abide orderly and soberly,
during the time of the said Prayers, preaching, or other service of God there
to be used and ministered.

And because all and every person may be put in mind of this Duty, and be the
better prepared to the said Holy Service, Be it enacted by authority aforesaid,
that every Minister shall give warning to his Parishoners publicly in the
Church at Morning Prayer, the Sunday before every such fifth day of November,
for the due observation of the said Day. And that after Morning Prayer, or
preaching upon the said fifth day of November, they read distinctly and plainly
this present ACT.

FINIS.

