A SPEECH OR DECLARATON OF THE Declared King of Scots UPON THE DEATH OF
MONTROSSE THE SETTING Forth of a Fleet by the Hollander, And two Ships taken by
the FRENCH, with the last Intelligence out of SCOTLAND.

ALSO Some excellent Passages concerning the Lord General Cromwell, his
Entertainment at Windsor Castle, and the manner of his coming from thence to
London, the first of June, 1650.

LONDON, Printed for J. C. And are to be sold at the Royall-Exchange, and in
the Old-Bayley, 1650.

The substance of the DECLARATION OF THE Declared King of Scots. Upon the Death
of the MARQUIS of MONTROSSE, THE Number of his Guard, and the setting out of a
Fleet from HOLLAND, and another from SPAIN.
SIR,
HEre arived a Ship on Thursday last, which came from St. Mallows, by which we
received Intelligence as follows. The French Pirates do daily much mischief,
not only to the English, but also to the Hollander and Spaniard, and others
which they light upon, they have lately taken two Merchants Ships belonging to
Genua, and are become worse Enemies to Trade then ever the Dunkerks were:
wherefore the Merchants in the low Countries, are furnishing out a Fleet of
twenty Sale to help to scour the narrow Seas: the like we hear is intended by
the Spanish and others, and it has been long expected that our own Countrymen
the Merchants of London, would [if possible] have had the honor of giving the
first example in this kind.

From Scotland we are advertized, that the Cavalier party are extremely
dejected, and even stand amazed at the manner of putting Montrosse to death,
which they chiefly attribute to the leading censure of the Kirk; they say that
a man deserves some favor for humanity sake, but that such a man that for
goodliness of person, and neat deportment, is not to be paralleld in Scotland,
should be given up to Satan, and sent suddenly to Hell, without longer time of
repentance, has scarce been heard of, yet least his temporal punishment should
not be so great in another world, as he was adjudged to deserve in this: the
tortures inflicted on him at his death, were more then ordinary, neither after
death could the Kirk with safety bless that part of his Karkess which was to be
buried, and indeed what reason had they for it; for how knew they what he had
eaten, or lay undigested in his stinking guts and garbage, unfit to be put in
their holy consecrated ground; yet for all this, the Clergy will be reconciled
with their King, and say they will receive him into the bosom of the kirk; but
why may not he fear the same sentence with Montrosse, if Montrosse acted by his
Commission, and had not received any countermand. Notwithstanding their
declared King having received Letters, certifying that Montrosse was dead,
declared that he approved thereof, and being told by some that were about him,
that he had lost one of his best Servants; he replied that he could not fetch
him again, and if he should show any distaste at what had past, it was in the
power of the Parliament of Scotland, to make the Treaty null and void; by which
it appears, that the life of him whose dependence was the strength of his
Princes assurance, is as soon lost in his affection, as his miscarriage
happened in the action, his thoughts being mo^e enlarged, and thereby can the
easier overlook the first election, knowing that no further service can be
expected from that instrument, some think his coming into Scotland will be
retarded, and its very improbable he should be crowned in Scotland the 29. of
May, for some letters of the 26. of that month say, that he was then at Breda,
and had a Guard of about 200. men attending his person; in the mean while, the
Parliaments Army march this way with an intent [as we heare] to go farther
North, they behave themselves very civilly: insomuch, that the Country people
love them as Brethren, and honor their Commanders, as men most exquisite in
observation of good discipline, they take nothing but what is only necessary
for their present sustenance, and are willing to give money for it, and are
careful not to give any just cause of offense, and are frugall in their
expenses, carrying themselves as if they coveted no other recompense for their
pains then for the glory of doing well. Great cause therefore have the Country
to respect such men, which after the mustering of thousands of enemies are so
well able to govern themselves; whereas if the poor Countr^ should be never so
much injured, they can revenge themselves no ways but with tears, [and those
sometimes prove bitter] but others can do it by Arms.

Newcastle the 28. of May, 1650.
A Letter from Windsor.
SIR,
THis day his Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL came to WINSOR, where he was
entertained with many vollies of shot, his Lady also met him here, and many
persons of eminency, Members of Parliament, and of the Council of State, and
chief Officers of the Army; after much time spent in expressing civil respects
one to another, and in congratulating his welcome thither, they had some
discourse on the affairs of Ireland, and of the prosperous success wherewith
it has pleased God to crown his undertakings. For the carrying on of which
work in Ireland, there is Sir Hardres Waller, Colonel Venable, Sir Charles
Coot, col. Hewson, col. Hugh Peter's, and many other faithful and deserving
Commanders, who both in Valor and Discipline, will truly imitate the virtues
of their General, till he return thither again. And this is it which all men
ought to follow that they hear or see in others; for as a Learned Man says,
The race of Men are Men; but the race of Souls are Virtues, and Sanctity.

The General had an indifferent good passage from Ireland to Bristol, and was
not so Sea-sick, as when he first went over thither from Bristol to Windsor, he
came with a small retinue of his own Servants, and some few Gentlemen and
Officers of the Army, he shows himself very affable, and courteous unto all,
and as time will afford, admits any man that has business, to speak with
him.

This Evening came some part of Colonel Riches Regiment of Horse, and most of
the Innes in Town are full of guests, which come from London on purpose to
attend him in his way to morrow. They tell us that a great number will also meet
him by the way, in his passage to London; but his Lordship expresses much
humility, and when any Victory obtained is spoken of, he acknowledges God to
be all in all, and says, that that which ^s of God shall stand, but if it be
not of God, (...) will come to naught.

He also declares, That it is not suitable to his desire, to come up to London
in great Pomp and Glory, yet because men would not be thought guilty of that
abominable vice of ingratitude, and for that Worthy, deeds are not to be
requited with neglect, it may be decent and seemly, for such as are
well-wishers to the common good, to testify their affections this way, which
may be done without ostentation in the one, or ascribing more then is due by
the other.

June the 1. 1650. This Afternoon his Excellency the Lord Cromwell, came from
Windsor to Westminster, accompanied with many Lords, and most of the Members of
Parliament, and Council of State, the Officers of the Army, and many hundred
well-affected Gentlemen and Citizens.



FINIS.

