GENERAL ACCOMMODATIONS By Address.
WHosoever shall have moneys to let forth upon Interest, may have sufficient
security to his desire, and such present and positive directions for the more
secure disposing of his moneys, so far transcending all manner of Adventure,
that the result thereof, may (by many degrees) be more satisfactory and may
more advantagiously extend and conduce to his content: see the Discoveries.

Whosoever shall be provided for a purchase of what proportion soever, either
of lands in the Country or houses here in the City, may have several
particulars presented to his consideration, and full satisfaction to his desire.

Whosoever has occasion to sell lands, houses upon Lease, etc. or to borrow
moneys upon lands, houses, leases, rents, etc. may be timously supplied to his
desire from 50 l. to 50000 l.

Whosoever shall desire to increase the talent, Divine Justice has put into
his hands, and will deposite moneys upon present Annuities or for estates in
reversion, that shall appear to the eye of judgment exceeding advantageous,
may have satisfactory compliancy to the full accomplishment of his expectation;
or whosoever will give reasonable satisfaction for moneys during life, may have
considerable sums seasonably parted with, upon honest and conscionable terms.

Whosoever has occasion for a necessary house, or shall desire to be provided
with convenient lodgings, furnished or otherwise, or shall be minded to be
dieted, either wholly or at meals, as an Ordinary, of what condition or degree
soever, they may have full information and satisfaction, with as much content
as may be expected or desired; Or whosoever shall desire to take a convenient
Mansion near London, or within twenty miles thereof, or part of an house or
lodgings, with their diet or otherwise: they may have such Information and
Intelligence, as cannot but abundantly correspond with their expectations; Or
whosoever shall have an inclination to take a convenient House or Farm in the
Country, by lease for years or lives, whereby they might continue to
themselves a convenient competency for their support and livelihood; they may
(in pursuance of their desires) have plenary Intelligence from most part of
England or Ireland, and may further (according to their capacities) be directed
and furthered to more fructiferous employments under some eminent neighboring
Gentleman, that may (by virtue of their relation and recourse) happily become
their Landlord, etc. or whosoever shall be willing to part with such habitation
or place of residence, of what proportion soever, or in what part of England or
Ireland soever by hinting their pleasures, all industry will not be wanting, at
least so much as may occasion them inheritors of their desires.

Whosoever shall be minded to buy any goods that London does afford, either for
apparel or otherwise, may be furnished at the first and best hand, at
equitable rates, with all clarity and serenity, and with forbearance of their
moneys for the present or otherwise, or shall desire to have their wants
supplied with any kind of household stuff, at the first or second hand, as
linen, pewter, brass, all sorts of hangings, or other requisites,
appertaining to household affairs, they may have their choice either by parcels
as they have need, or the full furniture of an house from executors, or from
such as have occasion to give up housekeeping, etc. and constant information
where, with whom, and upon what conditions they may be had. Or whosoever shall
have commodities to sell, or what vendible commodities soever shall come from
beyond the Seas, or out of the Country, either in great parcels or otherwise,
upon information thereof at my Lodgings, they may have diverse make address
unto them, and may instantly vend whatsoever they shall have remaining by them.

Whosoever shall lose any Papers, Books of Account, or any other considerable
thing, whereas the finder may desire restitution to the owner, by leaving
notice thereof at my Lodgings, there may happen a reciprocal accommodation
between them. Or whosoever shall have goods stolen, as horses, or any other
cattle, may by describing the marks, etc. with other necessary explanatory
observations, have such an expeditious course taken, by posting of bills
throughout the City, the Market Towns and Faires, within a considerable
distance, and by all other Scrutinies for suspicious persons about the City,
together with such other probable and imaginable expedients, effectually
prosecuted and pursued, as may consequently render responsible inferences of
discovery, how to recover their goods again.

Whosoever shall desire to be entertained as a Gentleman's Chaplain, Tutor,
Secretary, Steward, etc. or shall be capable of preferment, especially youth of
what degree soever, may have such directions and furtherance as may very much
tend to their advancement; Or whosoever shall need any such servant, either for
Clerks or Apprentices with sufficient sums of moneys, or any other servant of
what quality or condition soever, or any that would be set a work in their
faculties, etc. they may be sufficiently accommodated to their desires; Or if
they need any that are expert and excellent in teaching Music, Short-writing,
etc. or any Artist whatsoever, or Masters of bodily exercise, as Dancing,
Fencing, etc. they may have such that will (according to the dispensations God
has conferred upon them) endeavor to ingratiate themselves to their esteems,
and some of the same qualifications that will occasionally evidence their
willingness by their industrious observancy to conform themselves as domestic,
that are men of known Trust, Government and Integrity.

Whosoever shall have suits in Law to commence, or shall happen into any kind
of litigious controversies, discordancies and competitions of what nature
soever, or shall be prisoners, etc. they may have their doubts explained,
matter of fact stated, substantially proposed, and methodically disgested with
seasonable directions upon easy terms, without Retardings or Remoraes, and
with the contribution of the concurrent opinions and free advice of the most
candid and ingenious judgments that will stand by them in their just rights,
and may happily address them unto some that shall (without partiality) resume
the pursuit of the business for them by right, or else make an amiable and an
amicable composition and transaction of the matter for their best advantage
with their Adversary in their behalf. And may have some always in a readiness
to serve as Amanences or Transcribers, and to draw and engrosse all sorts of
Conveyances, Bills of Chancery, and such like, with all manner of Bonds,
Petitions, and whatsoever else may relate to such that are Masters of their Pen.

Whosoever shall have debtors that skulk and are latent in any part of England,
Ireland, etc. they may have such real and pertinent courses observed and
peracted for their discovery, and for recovery of their debts, whereby they may
be made willing (if able) for all conscionable performances, etc.

Whosoever shall need an Agent or Solicitor, and shall desire the common
Intelligence of Public State-affaires, and other communicable occurrences,
may have all honest and faithful services performed, with what respective
credentials and considerable obligements, shall be necessarily required in
reference and order to such employments.

Whosoever shall be minded to undertake an office, or place of present benefit,
and shall desire to be negotiated in any such condition, may be severally
advertised very much tending to their future content and satisfaction. And such
that will part with an office or place of benefit for present profit, they may
find (by address) how to compass their desires; and those that shall be
able to give. Intelligence of any such office, etc. which may happen by the
sickness or death of any officer, or by misdemeanors, being themselves not
capable to execute the same, upon their discovery they may be sufficiently
considered and rewarded therefore. Or if any man living remote shall be able to
discover any material thing obvious to his observation, which may be
advantageous to the Public, or to himself, not being able to repair to
London, to advance his design, upon intimation thereof by Letters or
otherwise, he may have all prevalent advantages effectually pursued to promote
the execution thereof, without putting himself to the charge of a great journey
at adventure, and a condign recompense procured out of the benefit which
thence may accrue to the public or otherwise, with as much reality and
sincerity, as if he himself were present and able to prosecute the same.

Whosoever shall be so isntrumental to their own happiness and future
content, to avoid the pernicious effects of ignorance in their children, and to
endeavor the right framing of their studies to the ready attainment of virtue
and knowledge during their flexibility (according to the order of duty, and the
talent committed to them, whereof they must be accountable) may (in case of
such concernment) have such excellent designs illustrated unto them, that
those parents that are truly generous and careful of their childrens good,
cannot but exceedingly approve thereof, and very much incline thereunto: see
page 11, 12.

Whosoever shall be inclinable to travel into any part beyond the Seas, may
happily (by address) enjoy the blessings of such unanimous consotiation, as
may most nearly be consistent with his disposition, so that by a candid and a
symphaticall participation and complacency in all occurrences, and by the
intercourse of mutual friendship and correspondency, there affections may be
so firmly tied together in the bonds of unity, and so entirely woven within
one another, that they may rationate, consult and cooperate jointly in their
travels, and the one may by their amicable coherency and combination meliorate
improve and be helpful unto the other in their abilities; and may further by
men of worth, knowledge and experience, be respectively intelligenced,
instructed and advertised of the manner and condition of traveling into what
part soever, how to steer his course with cautelousnesse and circumspection,
and to order and deport himself in his Peregrinations for matter of expenses
and compliancy, and to discover and decline all false representat himself with
such sort of people as he shall obviate and be converfant with, and may be
furnished with Gold for Silver upon all occasions, and be recruted and supplied
with all conveniences wheresoever he shall come.

Whosoever shall have relation to Virginia, the Barbados, New England, or any
other Country inhabited with English, or shall have cause to send into any of
those places, or would inhabited, or transplant himself in those parts, they
may have all intelligence and expedients with as much convenience as maybe; And
such here in England that shall have means fall unto them in any of these
Countries, or any there shall have the like in any part of England, and would
have commodities transported from the one unto the other or any other
reciprocal negotiation, or intercourse of friendship of what importance
soever, and so likewise into any other Country, as France, Spain, Holland,
etc. by their address and application according to their particular ends and
concernments, they may have all accommodation that may possibly be afforded,
and matters of conscientious concernments completely expedited, and what
equitable offices Christianity and humanity may afford, they may assuredly
enjoy withal faithfulness and serenity.

Discoveries.
IMprimis, to discover a certainty to raise 2000. li. per Ann. de Claro, with
less then 200. li. Stock unhazarded, and beyond contradiction, without the
least aspersion of Usury, Extortion, Oppression, engrossing, or any
unconscionable, monopolizing or dishonorable way whatsoever. This design may
be advanced to a far greater proportion, and exceedingly to the good of the
public.

Item, a certainty with 500. li. stock unhazarded to raise de Claro 1000. per
Ann. and upwards, without aspersion, as above, and without the least imaginary,
inconvenience or prejudice to any whatsoever, but to a general good,
especially to the poor with the free allowance of all the Country.

Together with a certainty with less then 500. l. stock unhazarded, to raise
de Claro 1000. lib. and upwards, and so with less or greater sums
proportionably by honest, fair, and generous courses as above.

Item to discover a credible way without charge more then ordinary expenses,
whereby an industrious man but of a reasonable capacity and fortune, may
contrive to himself 500. li. per An. and upwards, without prejudice to any, or
dishonor in the least kind whatsoever unto himself.

The like but with small charges more then convenience of livelihood, whereby a
man of an ingenious and a generous condition, may be compendious, facill, and
conscionable ways, gain 10000. li. per An. and upwards, with as much
freedom, sincerity and regularity as with the particulars above written.

Item with less then 50. li. stock constantly visible and no way endangered to
advance de Claro 10000. li. per An. several ways, with all claritude and
uprightness.

Item to make in all probability with 200. li. in three years 400. li. and in
three years more to make the 400. li. 800. li. and in three years more to
make the 800. 1600. li. without adventure by sea, and so with less or greater
sums proportionably, by even honest and charitable ways.

Item to discover 500. li. per An. during life, which may easily be obtained,
being no way disadvantagious to the public, or to any in particular.

Item several other feisible designs easy to be enjoyed by those that will
use the means.

Item in all reality, to discover a way to advantage the public many 1000. li.
per an. easily to be put in practice, which will be generally allowable without
prejudice to any whatsoever.

Item with 30. li. to raise within the compass of 18. years 10000. li.

Item a late experiment to make Tin here in London or in the Country at 20. for
5. benefit; and to make Steel brass, and Copper with very great profit: and
to make Iron out of Pit-coale, and Sea-coale.

Item to make Saltpeter to serve all the three Nations cheaper then any
without digging of houses.

Item a design with 200. li. charge and two men's labors to raise de Claro
5000. li. per. An. and upwards.

Item whereas Middletons Mines (as it is reported) was never worth 16. li. per
An. to discover Mines of 20. li. and 30. li. a Tun, holding Silver out of
Lead Oar, which by art may be advanced a 4th. part by a new invention.

Item there are Copper Mines within the three Nations, holding as much or
rather more then the Queen of Sweathlands does, and being managed it might save
this Commonwealth 100000. li. per An. and set many poor at work.

Item an undeniable manifestation, whereby every housekeeper within England,
Scotland, and Ireland, may for a penny disbursed advantage themselves 8. d. per
week or thereabouts throughout the year, and so continually by a way easily
communicable, and constantly comfortable, as well to the poor as the rich, and
to the last at the least a quadrible Emolument.

Item a way(under God) whereby all food of flesh may be constantly under the
rate of 2. d. the pound throughout the Commonwealth without imposition of of
rates, restraint of the ordinary free use thereof, by a percimonious
abstinency, and without injunction of the too much neglected, and the most
ingratefully disregarded blessing of fish offered to our endeavor.

Item that Bread-corne (according to the store God has blessed this Nation
with) may be cheaper, and far more plentiful without restraint of quantity,
imposition of rates by course of justice, and without relation to importation,
and the too too much suffered abuse of exportation.

Item that Horses may be kept fat and in heart, and enabled to work and travel
as formerly, without Hay, and a good part of the ordinary proportion of Oats
usually allotted unto them saved, and so in like manner Swine, and all sorts of
Poultry, may be fed fat and kept constantly in good liking, saving one part in
three of the usual proportion of Oats ordinarily given unto them throughout
the Commonwealth, and so especially for Hunting-dogs; That Grain having been
the chiefest and most comfortable preservation of the poor from perishing,
being still for the most part their constant food.

Item diverse undeniable ways to return constantly 20. for one with less then
an Acre of Ground, and so accordingly with many Acres, without the labor,
toil, and charges, as usually with Corn, and to make 30.40. and, 50. li. an
Acre per Annum in several parts of England, etc.

Item to make 10. li. an Acre per An. of the worst Pasture Ground without
plowing or sowing, and so with many Acres in several parts of England.

Item after seven years, and so constantly to make of the worst sort of meadow
10. li. an Acre per Annum, and so with many Acres in several parts of England
without plowing, etc.

Item an Engine to contrive water from 20. yards depth, to drive a Mill
constantly, so far as a Level shall convey the water.

Item to cleanse any Country River of the mudde, though very deep with mudde
and water, without diverting the course of the River, or use of Boats, or
standing in the water, by which means the River may be let down from
overflowing, the banks much raised, and the grounds improved thereby. And so to
empty Moats and Ponds of the mudde, without casting or letting the water forth,
or going into the water, or use of Boats: and so to empty any Pond or Mote of
the water if there be no passage by Sluices, os Ditches, without casting the
same, or going into the water.

Item an Engine lately devised, whereby water may be contrived to dry Hilly
and stirrill grounds, by which means they may be made more fertile, and afford
far more profit then formerly.

Item a late rare discovery to prevent the smuttinesse of Corn, there being
several large fields not far from London, and in many other places where the
Corn was constantly spoiled therewith, and after this experiment there was
hardly a Corn amiss, being very sound, and far more fruitful, and the
grounds exceedingly improved thereby.

Item a discovery of conceiled Lands which King James and King Charles were
couzoned of, worth thousands per Annum.

Item a way to take red or fallow Dear with a bait, as easily as you do Fish,
etc.

Item to put in a stock with a sufficient Brewer, the moneys secured, and to
have half the benefit assured, with constant and very great profit.

Item a way lately devised, whereby an active man being accommodated with
conveniences of livelihood, may put himself into credible employment, and
gain thereby a 100. li. per Annum.

Item to discover a Mine of Coals, vety considerably convenient for sale, not
known to any but my self, the Ingeneere whom I employed therein being lately
dead, whereby might be raised (all charges borne) at least a thousand pound per
annum.

Item Iron, Stone, Mills, Woods, and all other Requisites whereby may be raised
(beyond exceptions) at least 1000. li. per annum de Claro, which may be made
apparent beyond contradiction.

Item a Mine of Lead easy to become by, lying upon the side of an Hill,
whereby may be raised 500. li. per annum de Claro, and without hazard.

Item to make Houses of Office being but half full, never to be fuller, and
being emptied, never to be full.

Item to discover a way whereby one Horse may draw in a Cart as much as five
Horses, and so throughout England; This I have seen performed with an ordinary
Horse in the fowlest ways.

Item an Instrument whereby the half part of all seed-corne may be saved
throughout the Commonwealth.

Item a way whereby Brewing-vessels may be contrived of wood, to serve in stead
of Lead or Copper Vessels, and half the Fuel (usually spent) saved thereby.

Together with a Manuscript, whereby any man that can but read may discover his
infirmity of ^icknesse by the causes, symptoms and other apparances and
discourses at large, etc. with the observation of diet before and after, etc.
Then a manifestation of the remedies covenient and necessary for all diseases
whatsoever, if curable, etc. with the courses of practice, and the experiments
of most of the famous Doctors of these later times; Together with the
collection (by traveling) of all the rare and excellent receipts of Physic
and Chyrurgery: amongst which, four eccellent and exceeding successful ways
for the perfect curing of the Kings evil, and neither of them with the seventh
child, and diverse others maintainable re-experimented experiments, of Physic
and Chyrurgery for all infirmities whatsoever, -- -- part whereof cost near
1000. li. attested by speculative and practical confirmations of piously
learned and judicious men, with diverse other most curious and lucriferous
rarities, which could not be attained unto, without extraordinary great care,
pains, and expenses. Together with several easy and most excellent ways to
make the Hands, and Face fair, and to take out wrincles, fleckles, marks,
spots, sunne-burnings, or any such deformity of the face, and to make them very
clear, etc. with the newest experiments of all necessary distillations that
shall be fitting and useful, and perfect directions for the timely gathering
of all sorts of Herbs, Roots, Fruits, etc. therefore, or for any other
purpose, with the true manner of using them, and the plenary discovery of all
the effects of simples, etc. all rare and new devices and experiments of
Cookery, not any thing omitted, relating to the illustration thereof, with all
physical observations, natural effects, operations, and co-operations of
meats, etc. The excellency or true knowledge whereof, will render an
unexpressible delight to the becoming reflections of the most eminent, and
make them beautiful in the eyes of all that are blessed with virtuous
inclinations. Item all kind of Juses, Gellies, Sirrups, Restoratives,
Preservatievs, cordials, cawdles, etc. all sorts of gallimauferies, kickshawes,
biskets, Wafers, etc. several excellent ways, Comfits, Preserves, Conserves,
Quiddinies, all manner of Candid, and dried fruits, Marchpaines, etc. and
either of these several exceellent ways and new inventions and devises.
Together with the neatest, compleatest, and most experimental ways of the due
ordering, rectifying, restoring, and refining of all sorts of Wines, and to
make very pleasant wines of Grapes here in England. Item Raspassfe wines, etc.
diverse sorts of Hypocrasse, and excellent good with water, and several other
rare and singular devises belonging unto wines. Item to make Mathegline,
Perrie, Sider diverse ways, and several other excellent and most pleasant
drinks; and how to order Ale, and Beer several ways with Herbs and Spices,
etc. Together with all sort of rich sanative perfumes, pomanders, with several
printings and impressions thereon, sweet-waters, sweet washing-balls,
sweet-bags, sweet-powders, etc. all colors of sealing-wax, perfumed and
otherwise, all sorts of Wax-candles, and all the varieties, and rare inventions
and secrets that have been devised in these kinds or otherwise whatsoever, with
the newest and most excellent experiments thereof discovered, for the most
part, and collected by Gentlemen of singular eminent and excellent parts, out
of the rarest Repositories, and from the abstracts of the most experienced
Ladies, and Gentlewomen throughout the three Nations, and likewise from
Gentlemen of great skill, judgment and practice.

These or any of them (although they cannot but relish well to those that have
pallets to taste them) being for the most part of that inestimable value and
dignity, that by ordinary judgments they cannot be computed or comprehended,
and notwithstanding the observations and attestations of men of honor and
worth, and of the most juditious and candid of each respective profession, yet
in order to farther satisfaction, so far as they shall relate to health (the
most desirable of all earthly blessings) they may be confirmed and illustrated
in a full and overflowing measure, by Gentlemen of known integrity and
cleerenesse, and by the most eminent and most deserving Practitioners of these
times, with their free advice, judgment, and direction.

Item several other great discoveries, exceeding beneficial and of very great
consequence and importance which will be opportunely and cordially demonstrated
with all candor, etc. whereby whosoever shall vouchsafe the perusing of them,
notwithstanding the Compilors great losses and extreme sufferings during these
sad distempers, the wind, stream and Tide being always against him) may
apprehend him capable of doing good to any whatsoever, he having (for want of
other employments) devoted his whole life to these and other public
concernments, not daring to despair of all favorable providence therein, etc.

For young Gentlemen.
A Very choice place for conveniencie of Air, House-roome, Gardens, and walks
most complete, pleasant and healthful, several Masters in the house, being
absolute, complete Gentlemen and excellent Scholars; These to teach them
Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and French, by incomparably more methodicall,
compendious and facill ways then formerly by any: by lessening there former
tedium by more then half. But above all they are to be taught the explanation
of the Scriptures, and the principles of Religion by a devout, a most Religious
and a piously learned Minister in the House with them; And shall be taught to
write by sufficient Penmen, and the best and most perfect way of short
writing, to take out Sermons, and to be able to convert them into Hebrew,
Greek, Latin and French, as some of very tender years have lately done; They
shall like wise be fully instructed in Heraldry by a deserving Antiquary of
very great knowledge therein; And shall have a skillful and a well experienced
Picture drawn to perfect them in that Art, if they shall delight therein:
Masters of Music, and Dancing-Masters constantly to attend them, skillful
Fencers in a gentle and a moderate way to instruct and exercise them (for their
Recreation) in that Science, Horsmasters with special care and diligence to
teach them all manner of Horsemanship, and several easy and well guided
Horses kept for them to those purposes, with all necessary Rings, and
Riding-places provided for them: A Gentleman skillful in all Military affairs
to train them up (for their delight) in the exercise of Arms.

They shall further (if their Parents be so pleased) be taught the true
experimental natural Philosophy and what is most necessary of the
Mathematics, to wit, Arithmatick, Geometry, Geography, Cosmography,
perspective and Architecture, and also whatsoever is most excellent of the
practical Mathematics, whatsoever belongs to Fortification, besieging,
defending of places, fireworks, ordering of Battalies and marches of Arms,
etc. A discreet care to be taken for such wholesome diet, as shall be most
convenient for them at all seasons, with a direction of a Doctor of Physic
very famous and of exceeding great judgment, constantly in the House to
overlook them, and to advise with their Parents and friends for the timely
prevention of any infirmity they shall be inclinable unto, or shall happen unto
them.

For young Gentlewomen.
A Very choice place for convenience of air, with a fair House, Gardens and
spacious. Walks, very private, pleasant and complete, a religious Matron, with
the help of other most discreet and skillful servants to teach them all manner
of Needle-works, Imbroidering, etc. together with drawing on cloth for their
works, the pourtraitures and fimilitudes of Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Flowers etc.
and the full art and skill belonging thereunto; a learned and a most devour
Minister in the house with them, to frame them rightly to the ready attainment
of virtue and knowledge, by Preaching, Explicating and expounding the
Scriptures unto them, and to instruct them sufficiently in prayer, and in the
Principles of Religion, etc. industrious and most judicious Penmen, to teach
them to write, cipher, and cast accounts, especially the best and most exact
way of Short-writing, French women very vitreous, and well approved of, to
teach them French, and constantly to be conversant with them: several Masters
of Music, singing and dancing Masters, all choice men, grave, religious, and
of excellent skill and government. They shall likewise have given them to
write out at convenient times, and be sufficiently and most effectually
instructed therein; all rare and excellent Receipts of Physic and Chyrurgery,
so far as shall concern their own healths, or be convenient for them, and all
re-experimented experiments then unto belonging, not to be paralleled for all
infirmities whatsoever, etc. -- And so following according to the other
particulars set down, page 9. at this mark -- -- unto the end of that clause.

There shall likewise be a discreet care taken for the provision of such
wholesome diet as shall be most convenient for them at all seasons, with
Doctors of Physic very famous and of great experience, repute and estimation,
to have an influence upon them, and such daily care of their healths that no
considerable Punctilio in any circumstance whatsoever, shall (under God) escape
their observation.

There shall likewise be a trusty and an able Solicitor in the house, who with
the free advice of the most experienced Judgments that are Counselors,
together with the concurrence of the other Superintendents, viz. the Governor,
Minister, Physician, Steward, etc. shall take care of all businesses belonging
to the Law, concerning the children that are or shall happen to be Orphants,
and to assist and direct them as occasion shall fall our, and to consider with
their nearest and dearest friends how to dispose of their estates and means, by
more fruitful and secure ways then by Interest.

For ancient Widows and Maids.
Whereas there are diverse real and single-hearted Ladies and Gentlewomen, of
virtuous and Christianly disposed minds, captivated to the obedience of
Christ, and hoping to have his Spirit to inhabit and possess them, whose
affections are raised from the things of this earth, and are set on those
things that are above, they being blessed with freedom, and with the happiness
of their own dispose, having unanimously declared their resolutions, with
constancy and serenity, so to continue firmly to the end, and to make
themselves (by the directing Spirit of Grace) amiable Lovers, amicable
Partners, and examplary Patterns of godly works, by abandoning and deserting
(as true Penitentiaries) the base earthlinesse of their affections, the
swelling pride of their hearts, the perverse frowardness of their wills, and
avoiding all alurements that might withdraw them, and all oppositions that
might provoke them from the duty of their vocation, by becoming indeed and in
truth impartial lovers of righteousness, they not taking pleasure in the
ordinary way of living, as those whose unbridled appetites are their whole
Religion, or seeking themselves, but the glory of the great Disposer of all
humane actions, in all their ways, still re-minding the great account they have
to pass at the last Audit, when the dearest beloved, the chief Favorites,
the fancy-feeding and flattering pleasures of this world, shall shrink from us,
and nothing but our own deeds and deserts shall accompany us before the
Judgment Seat of God, making Christ's Precepts the rule of their practice, and
knowing that life is but a vapor, that appears but a little time and so
vanishes away. Do therefore during their sojourning here fully determine, to
keep themselves in the knowledge and love of God, with an eager pursuit and
delight thereof, looking for mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto everlasting
glory and eternal life, and holding fast their integrity, without wavering or
falling from their steadfastnesse, do cast themselves upon the divine
Providence, that is able to keep them from falling, and to preserve them
faultlesse before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, being such as
the world (being shut up with gloomy darkness) cannot comprehend, nor give
unto them or take away from them, making themselves ready to sail toward the
Haven of perfection, upon all opportunities of stronger Gailes, with full
assurance, that when God is minded to bring his purpose to pass, he does
according to his good pleasure, as seems good in the eyes of his heavenly
wisdom, put a rectified frame upon our wills, to perform those things that are
pleasing in his sight, and ordaines means, whereby he does offer himself unto
us, and whereby we are fitted to come unto him, in all holy conversation and
godliness. And for the present establishing, perseveration and advancement of
these their serious, truly virtuous and gracious determinations (whereunto all
true hearted Christians are one way or another, if not engaged, yet concerned)
there is a most complete house and harbor of repose intended for them, and
such that are impartial lovers of virtue, truth and righteousness, with all
accommodation their hearts can wish or desire, near adjoining to the place
where the young children (before mentioned) are to reside; from whom (besides
the mutual tranquillity, and almost unspeakable harmonious consolation, they
may most assuredly receive (under God) from each other) they may likewise enjoy
all the content, and comfort that may possible be afforded, by their virtuous
breeding, and all the regards, observancy and attendance that may be conceived
or imagined conducible to such a select and blessed community, viz. a Minister,
a Doctor of Physic, a Steward, etc. men of worth, credit and esteem, and of
singular, eminent, gracious and natural parts, together with all other
necessary officers, which for goodness of life, religion, conversation, and
all other abilities, are hardly to be paralleled, with all respective and
considerable attendance of women servants allowed likewise by the house, that
shall be beyond exceptions, besides such servants as they (if they please) may
keep of their own, they allowing but a reasonable proportion for their diets;
And it is further so contrived, that all requisites and needful concernments
shall be provided for them at the best hand, and at the cheapest rates, both
of Merchants and others; here in the City, and from all parts of England. And
whatsoever is desired extraordinary, exceeding their constant competency of
diet, shall be ordered at all times in the discreetest manner, and shall be
always in a readiness provided for them at their chambers, or otherwise, by
the cooks, and other officers at command, with all diligence and respect, and
with all content that may possible be expected, without the least exaction of
fees, etc. but the full allowance of every particular, at the rates they were
provided, whereunto there shall be always a diligent care and circumspection
evidenced by the Steward and such as are subordinate unto him, no servant being
to be admitted into the house without letters of credency and sufficient
obligements for their behavior, and to be dismissed upon the least mis-behaviour
whatsoever. There shall likewise be a learned and an eminent Counselor and
Solicitour always at hand, able men of unquestionable trust and uprightness,
constantly to take special care of their estates, and with the furtherance,
assistance, and concurrence of the superior officers, to secure the
Gentlewomen from all worldly troubles, and to endeavor to dispose of what
shall belong unto them with such security and advantage, that may assuredly
acquit them from all disturbance and unquietness whatsoever. Which happy
conjuncture, sweet concordancy and conformity, may (with the blessing of the
most High) who works all things after the counsel of his own will, make
them beautiful in the eyes of the faithful; and by their gracious motives and
incitations of encouragement, to render a great improvement and advancement for
the Plantation of piety, and to a further propagation of Christ's Kingdom, and
will be no small comfort (in these evil times) unto faithful souls, whose
hearts arc filled with the joys of the Spirit, and are kept by the power of
God, through faith unto salvation, they looking for the blessed hope of the
glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, who receiving the end of
their faith, even the salvation of their souls, shall always rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory.

FINIS.

