A SPIRIT MOVING IN The VVomen-Preachers: OR, CERTAJNE QVAERES, Vented and put
forth unto this affronted, brazen-faced, strange, new Feminine Brood.

Wherein they are proved to be rash, ignorant, ambitious, weak,
vainglorious, profane and proud, moved only by the spirit of error.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Shepherd, at the Bible in Tower-street, and William
Ley, at PAUL'S Ch^ine near Doctors Commons. 1646.

Certain Quaeres vented and put forth to the Women-Preachers.
THough perhaps it had been much better and safer for me to have scorned to
meddle with these silly frantic creatures, hereafter named, saying unto them
with abominated indignation, as the Prophet Isay 30.22. speaks of the covering
of superstitious Images, as unto a m^nstruous cloth, g^^ thee hence. Yet lest
these insulting, in show false Prophetesses (running unsent) should too much
insult in their arrogant pride, that no man would, or could rationally
encounter their foolish, proud, vainglorious insolences in presuming to
advance themselves before, and over men, transgressing the rules of Nature,
M^destie, Divinity, Discretion. Civilitie, etc. in triumphing against
Authority, contemning Laws, and all things opposite unto their weak
proceedings; I have chosen to encounter with these Syr^ns* the s^aine of women
and of Religion, by some Quaeres put forth unto them and the world, to discover
their foolishne^^* weakness, pride, indiscretion, insolency, and
vainglorious frenzy* How in stead of acting as the Spirit moves them (as all
Sectaries pretend) are rather led by the spirit of darkness, ignorance, and
gross error.

When the Devil first adventured to sting the woman, and tempt her as (...)
weaker vessel, so by her to sting and undo all mankind by all likelihood, he
k^^^ well what a rare piece he had to deal with, naturally apt unto all
mischief (...) effect all his plots and purposes, to disturb the whole Fabric
of the Creation, and as near as might be, to bring the whole world unto woeful
desolation. Witne^^^ his after-work since the fall, having for the most part in
all ages used especi^lly this silly and weaker Sex, to atchieve and compass
all his greatest plots and designs; who in all Kings, Princes, and Noblemens
Courts, have been, and yet are his only Engines to effect all his exorbitant
desires. For when women bear (...) over men, having catched and bewitched them
in their subtle snares, what (...) that they will not do for them? what
requests or gifts will they refuse them? what secrets will not these Dalilabs
enforce, even from Samsons themselves? So that for the most part, in all Kings,
Princes and great men's Courts and houses, they bear rule, and all things must
be as they will, or else there is no peace (...) Court nor Country, and many
times the less peace, the more they bear sway and rule. And how extremely do
the most common lascivious sort of them undo men of all sorts and degrees,
whilst be witch^d with (...)

But of all other, the Jesuits, Priests, and Separatists of our times and
Church, have made, and ever do make singular use of these female Creatures: The
former, to learn from them all their husbands secrets, to make use of them,
both for prevention of all designs against them, and advancement of their
Kingdom: thereby to insinuate into their husbands favors and estates, to lead
them which way they list, to their unlawful pleasures, having them once caught
in the snares of Confession, to overawe them one way, and please them the
other way with slight and light penances. And our Separatists in this Kingdom
are not in this kind to learn to shufflle their Cards, and how to lead captive
(as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7.) silly women laden with diverse lusts,
ever learning, and never leanred, nor able to come unto the knowledge of the
Truth: under color of long prayers, devouring widows houses; that so by them
they may attain unto all their unlawful secret desires; most of them (for the
most part) wearing the breeches, and so draw and lead their husbands by the
nose, which way they please, by degrees wasting their estates, and furnishing
their pretended holy brother of the Separation, or Schism, with whatsoever he
pleases, not displeasing this man of God, as they call him, (though perhaps a
wolf in sheeps clothing) whose insinuation with this Female Sex, has so
prevailed with this poor ignorant sort of Creatures, that puffed up with
pride, diverse of them have lately advanced themselves with vainglorious
arrogance, to preach in mixed Congregations of men and women, in an insolent
way, so usurping authority over men, and assuming a calling unwarranted by the
word of God for women to use: yet all under color, that they act as the Spirit
moves them; wherein they highly wrong and abuse the motions of that blessed
Spirit, to make him to be the Author of so much Schism, disorder, and
confusion; they being rather led by the strong delusions of the Prince of
darkness, to contenance their ignorance, pride, and vain-glorie, as Hacket and
John a Leyden were, who pretended spiritual revelations for all the villainies
they committed, even when they were to give up the ghost, dying in the midst of
such blasphemies.

Wherefore that the vanity, weakness, ignorance, pride, ambition, and
vain-glorie of these poor Creatures may be discovered, and that they may see
upon what sandy foundations they build their Babels of confusion in their
pretended Congregations, and may repent, and reform themselves for the time to
come, I have hereafter provided from the Word some few Quaeres for them, to
show both to the world and themselves, how far they are from any lawful
authority of preaching unto others, who themselves are so short of knowledge
being grossly ignorant, disabled either by precept, rule, or example of holy
Scripture, so proudly, grossly, and ignorantly to behave themselves: after
which (God willing) I will encounter, if the paper fail me not, with their
Fort-Royall, to overthrow it, showing that their actions are not regulated and
ruled by a right, but by a deluding spirit.

But ere we come to our Quaeres, let us first state the condition and nature of
that Sex we are to entreat of; what they are by Creation, and what they are by
Degeneration. 1 By Creation, we find her equal unto the man, a helper meet for
him, Genesis 2.18. 2 By Degeneration, we find her his inferior, the weaker
vessel, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 3.7. made subject unto man's government,
her will for over subjected unto his will, he to bear rule over her, Genesis
3.16. she becoming therewith ignorant, shallow, proud, ambitious, fantastike,
inconstant, passionate, and vainglorious, indiscreet, easily led into
extremes, either in good, or evil: which drew Solomon's choice to be so as to
choose any malice, save the malice of a woman. In which subjected estate, she
was no more to wear her hair down along, as in the Creation, but to wear it
tied up for a covering, 1 Cor. 11.15. only in one case of jealousy, accused by
her husband, when she was to drink the bitter water of her Trial, the Priest
then for that time of her accusation was to uncover her head, and stand during
that storm, with her hair down as his equal, whereby it appears, that all
her life time, she is ever to be in subj^ction unto the man, and not to advance
her self, by dis-honouring mankind, in the presence of men to put her self
before men, as these women Preachers, we are now in pursuit of have done, unto
whom we present these ensuing Quaeres.

Quaere 1.

Why these silly weak women, without calling, example, or precept dare
undertake to usurp the Office of Preaching in a mixed Congregation of men and
women, seeing the Scriptures never speak of any women's teaching of men, but of
being taught by men, or else to be silent; as it is Tit. 2.3. The aged women
likewise, that they be in behavior as becomes holiness, not false accusers,
not given to much wine, teachers of good things, that they may teach the
younger women to be sober, to love their husbands, to love their children, to
be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own husbands, that
the Word of God be not blasphemed. Where we see that those who in those days
were permitted to teach, were of the ancienter, graver, and approved sort, not
every upstart youngster as now ^ This permission was only to teach women, not
men.

Quaere 2.

Seeing as it is said, 1 Cor. 14.22. The spirits of the Prophets are subject to
the Prophets: (not Prophetesses) they having no warrant or right Spirit to be
ruled by in this grand action, save by a seeming spirit of error, why yet they
will intrude themselves in this grand office of Preaching, the weight whereof
made the Apostle Paul the best Preacher, (next, our blessed Savior) cry out, O
who is sufficient for these things? sure not weak, ignorant silly women. But,
who is so bold as blind bayard? says the Proverb, It must needs be a silly
flock where the Ewe bears the Bell.

Quaere 3.

Seeing women are commanded to keep silence in the Churches not being permitted
to speak there, but to be under obedience, and if they would learn any thing,
to ask at their husbands at home, as it is, 1 Cor. 14 34, 35. Let your women
keep silence in your Churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak, but
they are commanded to be under obedience, as also says the Law: and if they
will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home, for it is a shame
for women to speak in the Church. By what discretion, modesty therefore, or
shameless impudence, dare they be thus contumaciously insolent thus to abuse
Religion, raise and foment Schisms and Errors in the Church, to undertake to
teach and preach in a mixed Congregation of men and women. For to preach unto a
mixed Congregation in a House and in the Church is all one in effect, Churches
being then by the Apostle thought to be the fittest and most decent places for
preaching of the Word in those days, though all sorts of Sectaries do now
strive to discredit the same, by House-Preaching by all appearance, having such
lights (as Christ told the Scribes and Pharisees) because their deeds were evil

Quaere 4.

Seeing is it written, That to one is given the Word of wisdom, to another the
word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the
same Spirit, to another the working of miracles, to another prophecy, to
another the discerning of spirits, to another diverse kinds of tongues, etc. 1
Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. Now seeing the same Spirit is said to work the same in every
man, without mentioning any women for such endowments; By what authority and
power then can these female Preachers usurp this office of preaching? contrary
to the Spirits intention, to fall a preaching as is said unsent or uncalled.

Quaere 5.

Seeing the Apostle in re^koing up the endowments of women in the choice of
such appointed for some inferior services in those days, makes no mention of
preaching amongst the rest, (which surely he would not have forgotten if any
such had then been in the Church) saying only, If she have been well reported
of, if she have brought up children, if she have lodged strangers, if she have
washed the Saints feet, if she have releeved the afflicted, if she have
diligently followed every good work; Yet in all these speaks not of preaching
or teaching, 1 Timothy 3.16. by what Authority dare those untoward vaineglorious
rash indiscreet creatures, presume to preach or teach in mixed Congregations of
men, and women: which place they use in Houses in place of the Church.

Quaere 6.

Seeing the Apostle writing to Timothy concerning the imposition of hands, and
ordination of preaching Ministers, is wondrous choice and wary in warning of
him, To lay hands suddenly upon no man, neither be pertaker of other men's sins;
keep thy self pure, 1 Timothy 5.22. therein makes no mention of ordination, or
appointing of women, or imposition of hands upon any of them, by what authority
dare they be so bold as to be intruders in this sacred work of preaching the
Word proper ever only unto those Ministers, who have a lawful Calling and
Ordination?

Quaere 7.

Seeing Christ at his ascension up on high, when he had led Captivity captive,
furnished his Church with all several offices and endowments for the
perfecting of his Church with several Ministerial functions; Ephesians. 4.11, 12,
13. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Trachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, and for the edifying of the body of the Church, till we all come
unto the unity of the of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man, into the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ,
etc. Woman Preachers being here left out and exempted from having any share in
this great Ministerial work, not no expositor ever having dreamt or thought
of this their late bold intruding impudence, the Churches fulness and
perfecting having no need of their public gifts. By what warrant or authority
dare they be such bold intruders, to take upon them to teach or preach unto
men, who are commanded by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.11. To learn in silence what
all subjection?

Quaere 8.

Seeing that it is written, 1 Timothy 2.12. But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor
usury authority over the man; but to be in silence. Seeing then the Apostle
unto all the foresaid does directly forbid their preaching and teaching,
commanding their silence: By what authority dare they, or can they be so bold,
impudent, affronted, and shameless, as to take upon them to teach, or preach
before men in a Congregation, therein seeming to assume authority and
superiority over men, contrary to the express rule of the Apostle.

Quaere 9.

Whether or not these usurping vainglorious women (all the forenamed reasons
against them being considered) teaching otherwise, and not consenting to
wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, which are according to
godliness, be not as is there showed of that profane rude number, reckoned
up, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. Proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and
strifes of Words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings,
perverse disputings of men corrupt and destitute of the truth, supposing that
gain is godliness, from such withdraw your selves: being silly women, ever
learning, and yet never learned, nor able to come unto the knowledge of the
Truth, 1 Timothy 3.6, 7.

Objection.

But all the Rabble of Separatists, those and all others, have this shield and
buckler, wherewith they shroud themselves in all their undertakings, That they
only act as the Spirit moves them.

Answer.

A false and grossly ignorant Objection, a grand untruth, and imputation put
upon the blessed Spirit of Truth, who lead men into all Truth, and
countenances no gross errors of Schisms, or errors in any. But to answer
them; 1 Ingenerall, and then in particular: Certain it is, that as truly might
that grand Impostour Mahomet, that counterfeit Christ Hacket, executed in
Queen Elizabeth's time; that blasphemous Butcher John of Leyden, who proclaimed
himself King of Righteousness, pleading Revelations, Raptures, and
Enthusiasmes of the Spirits motions for all they did, or said; plead the
Spirits Authority and Revelations, as these our shallow, weak, ignorant,
preaching Sisters may, and all alike. For if this grand Imposture might pass
current, that men might impute all their gross dreams and fooleries on the
Spirits Revelations, what gross impieties and enormities might they not father
on the Spirits Revelations, In infinitum? And so abuse the Spirit, the world,
and themselves, under a pretended show of holiness, and voluntary counterfeit
humility, without any warrant from the Word, the rules whereof must be our
warrant in all our actions, without which the Spirit moves not at all, but as
he witnesses unto the Truth of the Word revealed. Thus much in general.

But more particularly a little to assault and batter this their Fort-Royall,
let us survey three things touching the Spirit, which will clear the point, I
suppose: 1 Let us survey briefly, The Spirits motions under the Law before
Christ's Incarnation. 2 The Spirits mission and offices assigned him by Christ,
at his mission from the Father and the Son. 3 The Spirits limitations by
Christ, at his mission and sending.
And so we will conclude this short discourse.

First, for the Spirits motions under the Law before Christ's Incarnation, we
read of diverse motions of the Spirit: First, that in the Creation, The Spirit
of God moved upon the waters, Genes. 1.2. Then we read of diverse other motions
of the Spirit. In Joshuah, full thereof, Deuteronomy. 34.9. In Iephthah, Judge. 11.29.
His moving in David, 1 Samuel 16.13. In Saul, 1 Samuel 10.10. On Eliah, running
before Ahab unto the entrance of Iezreel, 1 King. 18.16. The spirit of the Lord
falling on Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 11.5. And (in an extraordinary case) we read of two
women Prophetesses; Deborah, who judged Israel, Judge. 4 4. and of Huldah the
Prophetess, 2 King. 22.14. From which two particular dispensations, for that
time to two women, can be no general deducted for these women-Preachers,
against the warrant and rules of the word of God, as has been showed. And we
read also of another motion of the Spirit, Isa. 30.21. In a voice behind us,
saying. This is the way, walk in it, etc. which can be no warrant for these
foresaid women to preach: for there the Spirits directions for our walking is,
in the Way of Holiness, and Divine Rules: not into Schisms, Rents,
Deviations, Divisions, and Errors contrary unto the express Rules of the
Word, and so I have done with the first thing, The Spirits motions before
Christ's Incarnation. From whence they can deduct no warrant, or example for
their preaching.

The second thing is, The Spirits mission by Christ, with the Offices assigned
unto him by Christ: For his Mission, He is sent by the Father in Christ's Name,
a Spirit of Truth, whom all in the world cannot receive, Joh. 14.17. whose
Offices are to comfort us, to dwell and be in us, to teach us all things, to
bring unto our remembrance all things taught us by Christ, Joh. 14.26. to
testify of Christ, Joh. 15.26. to guide and lead us in all truth, Joh. 16.13.
to show us things to come, Joh. 16.14. and to convince the World of Sin, of
Righteousness, and of Judgment. From all which there can be no warrant
drawn, for his moving of women to preach; for, his motions are according unto
the doctrine of Christ, and the Apostles from the Spirit of Christ, who teach
us no such Doctrine, but quite contrary, as has been showed. For this Blessed
Spirit of Christ is still the same, which is said to be, A Spirit of Wisdoms
and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge,
and of the fear of the Lord; Isa. 11.2. A Spirit (as is showed) leading us
into the practice of all known and revealed Truths from Christ, not the
dreams, errors, fables, and pretended raptures of these silly abused
Sectaries.

The last thing is, The Spirits limitations by Christ: 1 Negative; 2
Affirmative. 1 Negative, For he shall not speak of himself. 2 Affirmative,
but Whatsoever he shall hear, that he shall speak, and he will show you
things to come; he shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall
show it unto you. Intimating, that if the Spirit should guide and lead us other
ways, than in the truths and rules received by Christ in the Word, the
testimony of such a spirit were not to be believed, neither led us in the right
way, which should not this way glorify Christ.

By all which we may gather, that these poor silly women, transgressing (as is
showed) against the rules of the word, delivered by the Spirit of Christ in the
Apostle, which he affirms to be the Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14.37.
are ignorant, and like to remain in ignorance, 1 Cor. 14.38. led by the spirit
of error in all their vainglorious, rash impudencies, whose Siren enchanting
songs are carefully to be avoided of all, following the Apostles rule, Romans
15.17, 18. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them that cause divisions and
offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them: For
they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and
by good Words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. For when
such like false Intruders, took upon them to be Exorists, and to conjure evil
spirits, in the name of the Lord Jesus; the Devil himself refused to own, or
know such.

ACTS XIX. XV. Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye?
FINIS.

