SPECIAL AND LATE PASSAGES FROM THE MOST EMINENT PLACES IN CHRISTENDOM:

Containing amongst others these particulars.

The winning of the City of Perpinian from the Spaniard. The late proceedings
of the Spanish Army about Calis. Diverse late Victories of the Sweedes. The
taking of John de Werth. The preparations in Holland for the Queens return. The
taking of many Spanish ships by the Dutch Admiral. The distress of Cullen.
The tottering condition of the Kingdom of Spain. The late Conspiracy in
France, with many other matters of great consequence.
Sent from a Gentleman to his friend in London.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Underhill. October. 6. 1642.

THE LATEST REMARKABLE FOREIGN NEWS.
From Rome the 4. of September, 1642.
THere is a great Tumult between the Spanish Ambassadout and the Portingall
Ambassador, so that the French that live in Rome took the Portingalls part,
and came so far that if the Spanish Ambassador had not saved himself in the
Popes house, he had been slain. Thereupon the Pope has caused to be
proclaimed, that all vagabonds and idle persons shall depart Rome; which if
this Proclamation be well executed, they will half unpeople Rome.

From Uttecht the 7. of September.
Here is no Trading that flourishes better then those that make inventions to
kill folks, they work night and day and cannot make enough, for they buy all
sorts of Arms, and are sent not only for England, but for Germany, and other
parts. Here is for certain, that the Prince has given leave to draw out of
every English Company, two Soldiers, experienced in Arms, and three out of
every Colonels Company, to go they know not where, but sure it is that they
go for England, but for whom I know not.

From Calis the 15. of September.
There is a great dissension between the two Generals, to wit, of Horse and
Foot, the one puts the fault in the other, because their exploit did fail in
France: The Spanish General Don Francisco, and the Italian Don Cantelmo, so
that they have small hopes this Summer: For we have certain News, that the
Prince of Orange breaks up and draws his Army, both foot and horse, into
Garrison, and leaves the Hessens and Wymers in Field, how they will do this
Winter we shall hear.

From Paris the 19. of September.
There is sent to Perpinian 500000 Gilders in Victuals and other provision, to
furnish the Town, for it is the greatest Victory that ever the King of France
has had of the Spaniard, for this Town makes all Spain to quake; and now the
King of Spain must keep an Army always on foot to secure his Country. The
great Master of France, and the Duke of Bullion, with the Secretary of France,
are brought prisoners, and there are 24 deputed to hear their Examination, and
it is thought that they will hardly escape with life; yet the Duke of Bullion
has great friends, the Prince of Orange, the Queen of Bohemia, with diverse
Princes of Germany, seeks to mittigate the business, being that they had
attempted something against his Majesty of France, which was not, and is not to
be written. The Swedes continue Victorious in Moravi and Silesia, takes in
Towns and Castles, they have gotten great supply of men and money, so that the
Emperor is not able to resist them, specially now that the King of Spain can
send no succors, and the Pope has enough to do with the Prince of Parma.

Cargo or loading of 8. Ships.
From Brasil the 9. September arrived:
For the West Indie Company
- 1446 Chests of Sugar. Item 692 Marck 17 ounces Gold. Item - 33005. pound of
Brasill wood. Item - 600. pound Violet wood. Item - 17080 pound of Copper. Item
- 50155. pound of Ivory.
For the particular Merchants.
23. Chests of Tobacco. Item - 2349. Chests of Sugar, and daily to expect more,
for there are mote Ships to load, being a number of Sugars and other wares to
be expected.
From Perpinian the 20. of September.
We have certain News, that Perpinian is delivered up unto the King of France,
after 14. months besieging, and the greatest misery as has been heard since
the destruction of Jerusalem; for Mothers has eaten their own Children. Their
Conditions to march out in a warlike manner, with six pieces, flying Colors,
full Arms, light match, Bullet in mouth, pack and pack, bag and baggage, and
to be conducted with a safe Convoy.

From out of the Kingdom of Sweden.
The Elector of Brandenburgh seeks to marry the Queen of Sweeden that now
reigns; and it is likely that it will be a match, because that they are of
one Religion, and both enemies to the Emperor.

From out of the Hage 23. of September.
This day a mischance is fallen in the Portingalls Ambassadors house, that his
whole house is burnt, and great loss of plate and jewels; this fire came
through default of his own servants.

From Dunkerk the 22. of September.
Those of Dunkerk seeing that the States Ships lie so near them, and passes
so upon them, that they cannot come out, they are wholly discomforted, and run
away by multitudes, begging through the Country. And we hear daily that the
States catch sometimes 1. or 2. of their Fregats, which are their best
plundering vessels, for they have nothing laden but men, ammunition, and
victuals, and the last week the States men of war took two of them, so
that of four that came out three are taken.

From Bohemia the 14. August. 1642.
IN Vienna there is a Spaniard taken prisoner for having correspondence with
the Sweedes, he will suffer a fearful death: the Castle Troupan where Colonel
Slang lay is given up in hope of mercy. His Excellence General Torstenson lies
with his Army of 24000 foot, and 13000 horse, between Hernstat and Crahenborg.

From Prage, 6 August.
ARchduke Leopoldus is marched toward Torstenson, and has ruined Colonel
Slangs whole Army, and himself prisoner.

From Cullen 19.
THe Country here about is all spoiled with sundry Armies which lies here,
so that every thing is very dear, for all the country people are fled into
this Fown, and lest goods and houses to the disposition of the enemies, being
glad only to save their lives; for we can get no provision from Holland, as we
were wont to do, because the King of France his Army lies between us and them
30000 strong: likewise the Prince of Orange lies with his whole Army but two
hours going from them. So that if this continue, we shall be constrained to
fall into our enemies hands

From Breslo in Hungaria 10 August.
Upon St. James day the Sweedes have taken the Town of Briegh, plundered the
Town of Neus, and taken the principallest of the Land with them; and sets upon
them an extraordinary ransom: took a number of cattle with them. The Friday
after came 2 Regiments of the Emperors Army, and afterward the whole Army to
fight with the Sweedish, but durst not fall on, although they were almost two
for one.

From Basel 15 August.
ABout this Town is fallen such hail stones that no man alive ever saw the
like, they have beaten down the corn, and spoiled the vineyards so, and withal
the enemies parties comes and drives away all our catrell: so that in out town
and round about the town thousands dies for hunger.

In a Town of Germany 2 Tailors wife is brought to bed with a child having two
heads, four arms, four legs, fastened together, two bodies, at the navell and
lives yet: so it is credibly reported.

From Arien out of the King of Spaines Army the 15 ditto.
Don Francisco Melo the Spanish General having mustered his Army, and finds
them 25000 strong, with 80 pieces of Ordnance, besides the horse which is the
flower of his Army, paid the whole Army every one a months pay, then they
marched toward Valliciens, and causes much ammunition bread to be baked, and
commands every Soldier to provide his knapsack for 8 days; and came hard by
Callis, and took the strong Castle of Oye, Don Cantelmo General of the horse,
dividing his Army into three wings, marched by night between Ardes and Bullin,
and took in two Forts by Callis, cutting off the passage of the Town of Ardes
that Callis could have no succor. Cantelmo has also taken the Fort St. Lewis,
so that it will be hard for the French to get out the Spaniard: The French
General Count Harcourt lets them alone and is marched into the Count of
Haynow, whas he will do we shall hear. From Ostend, Newport and Graveling, we
hear they make great preparation to send out great store of armed shipping, but
the Hollanders ships keeps them in And this last week our Statesmen of war
has taken a well mounted ship with 16 pieces of Ordnance, and 100 men, being
the first voyage that it made.

We have certain news that the French men has taken all the Castles and Forts
that they had lost, and were taken by the Spaniard, but they are beaten out
with great loss of blood.

The Duke of Bullin is brought prisoner to Lions, the Cardinal is likewise
gone thither: it is greatly to be feared but he will suffer, being that the
Cardinal is his great enemy.

The Princess of Orange is brought to bed of a young daughter, which is the
cause of much joy.

There are letters come to the States of certain news that Perpinian is taken
by the King of France, after four months beleaguering, and enduring such
hunger that the soldiers have stolen little children and eaten them, after
they had eaten all the leather and goat skins that were to be found. The
conditions whereupon they rendered, at the next return you shall hear.

A fearful accident is befallen in one of the States towns, called Wesell,
some 7 or 8 Wagons going to the Leaguer laden with powder, it seems that there
was a barrel that scattered powder as it went, which was the last saving 2.
and being behind, the bore whipped his horse to be by the others. The horse
strikes fire with his iron shoes, so that wagons, horse, men, all flies in
the air: 60 persons, 25 houses, besides other harms.

Here is a ship come from Portugal, brings news that there is a fleet of ships
from Brasillia with 12000 chests of Sugars, with other Merchandise: and that
there was a fleet of ships sailed out, but not knowing where.

A Post came from Cullen saying, that the Sweedish troops set upon the
Emperors arreareguard, taking from them 1500 wagons, with baggage and rich
pillage, 2 halt Cannons, 6 small field Pieces, 1 Mortar, and a great many of
prisoners taken, and many killed, the number is not justly known.

Moreover it is said that a whole Dutch mile the ground was covered with dead
bodies.

Within these four days there happened a battle between the Wymars Army and
the Emperors, here in our low Countries, since that the States Army departed
and came lower into the Land: the Wymars are paid by the King of France, and
the other belonging to the Emperor, and lies there to defend the City of
Cullen, these two Armies it seemed fell foul the one of the other: so that
there are 3000 horsemen taken prisoners, and 500 slain. The General John de
Werth is likewise taken, which causes great joy. For this unhappy General, if
so he may be called, has been taken once before by the King of France, and
kept prisoner 4 years in the Castle of Paris, and now is likely to return
again, but hardly never to be relieved.

Here is great talk of the Queens returning into England, for the States of
Holland makes readiness to give her ships for her safe convoy: if she were
going, there are none would hold. Her Servants finds great difference between
England and these Countries; wishing they might change air, the sooner the
better.

In Rotterdam.
A few days past, Captain Colster took a Fregat that came out of Dunkirk
mounted with 30 Pieces of Ordnance, 300 men: this was one of the three which
desperately ventured out of Dunkirk some ten days ago in spite of our Holland
fleet: the second is taken by the Zelanders, and brought to Flushing, the third
is sunk. The 300 men are brought prisoners to Rotterdam.

From Bergamopzom.
One night a party of the enemy came from Liar about 200 strong, with boats
upon wagons, and came into the Land of the Cluniard, where they plundered
only 3 houses, and took 5 prisoners, and was forced to run away: for had they
tarried a little longer, Colonel Morgan had been at their heels.

Last Wednesday 9 ships went out of Dunkirk full of men and ammunition, and
bound for Spain, but were followed by our Admiral Martin Tromp, and after 3
hours fight, one was taken mounted with 20 Petces, 100 Sayllers, and 250
soldiers, being most of them Bourgunnians, and Wallouns: making their account
to go fetch some Spanish Gold, but it is mist, upon this ship that was taken in
the fight, there was slain 18 men, and 34 hurt: The ship that took her lost 3
men.

From Clogau in Silesia the 19 of September.
The Swedish has had a great Victory against the Emperialists in Germany, so
that the Emperors Army is wholly deleated, and the Swedes make themselves
Master of Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia; and now that the Swedes have got ten
thousand French men to supply their Army, and that the King of Spain cannot
help the Emperor, so that it will be a cause that the Swedes will have a
great Victory.

From Gorlits in Saxony the 23. September.
Eighteen Sutlaers with horse and carts being set upon by 50 Saxish horsemen,
pillaged them, and found 8000. Ducats in courant, the Saxsiser Army does much
harm about this Town, they have burnt 24. Brew-houses, and 100. other houses,
and the Church of S. Niclaes.

The loss of the Town of Perpinian, and likewise the whole Spanish Fleet,
coming from Terra Firma, with all his treasure, puts him into a great
perplexity, that he knows not which way to turn him; for this Fleet before it
was cast away, was 17. Ships, and esteemed to be worth 30. Millions of gold.

From Cullen the 21. of September.
Here is no great News, only the four Ledgers which lay here, two of the
which lies still; the King of Spaines Ledger and the Prince of Orange, they be
retired, but we believe they will do nothing this year, for the time will come
shortly, that they will be forced to retire into Garrison. What the Wymers and
the Emperors Army will do which lies here, we shall shortly see. His
Highness the Prince of Orange is come with his Army to the Maze, and in his way
has taken in a strong House called Bosbergen, which the Spaniard thought to
fortify, where he has found great store of Ammunition and provision, and so
soon as he has well fortified the same place, he will retire home to
Garrison: it is a place of great importance for these Countries.

The General of the Wymers is marched over the River of Rhyne with part of his
Army, to fetch in provision out of the neighboring Countries, and in his
going over the Bridge, he gave the keepers of the Bridge 400. Ducats to drink
to his health. There were two Soldiers of the best experimented out of every
English Company, to go, as it is thought, for the King of England; but they
are stayed, and Captain Flood, who should have conducted them, is imprisoned in
Dort, a Town in Holland, and is like to suffer for it, being that the States
are very discontented that such things should be done without their knowledge.

From Paris the 26. of September.
It is for certain, that the King of France since that he has taken
Perpinian, and has strengthened his Army so strong, that he may go into
Spain where he pleases, into the Kingdom of Arragon, Vallencie, or Navarre,
so that the Kings of Spain never saw themselves so near home this many years,
and is like to see more troubles, for we hear that the Kingdom of Vallencie
does follow the steps of Portingall, that if they had a sure Head, they would
soon rise.

It is likewise assured that Monsieut le Grand, and Monsieur le Thon, are both
beheaded; and for any thing we can hear, that the Duke of Bullion is in great
danger, his Mother being dead, and all his friends fly from him, excepting the
Prince of Orange his Uncle; He has offered the King of France the Town of
Sedan, whereof he is a Prince Sovereign, to save his life; But the Cardinal
which governs the King and Kingdom, says, that there is no trust in him,
and that if he were let go, he might do worse then before: It seems that his
fact is heinous, he is here much bemoned, for since his marriage, and his
revolting from his Religion, the leaving of his Government of Mastrich, and now
this bad Enterprise, so that we fear the worst.

FINIS.

