Questions propounded for Resolution of unlearned PROTESTANTS, In matter of
Religion, to the Doctors of the Prelaticall pretended Reformed Church of
England.

Printed at Paris, 1657.

Questions propounded for Resolution of unlearned PROTESTANTS, In matter of
Religion, to the Doctors of the Prelaticall pretended, reformed Church of
England.
1. Quest. WHither every Christian is not obliged, to choose the safest way, all
things considered, to Salvation?

2. Quest. Whither that way, wherein both parties acknowledge, that unlearned
men may have possibility of Salvation, Bishop of Canterbury, in his Relation of
the conference, etc.. 35. page 280.
though one of them say it be with difficulty and danger, if they look not well
to the foundation, be not prudently to be judged more safe for the unlearned,
then that which is esteemed safe by one only party, and that incomparably less
in number, but by the other incomparably greater party, which equalizes the
less in all respects requisite to gain credit and authority, is constantly held
to be utterly void of all possibility of Salvation, even for unlearned persons?

3. Quest. Whither this be not the present case betwixt Protestants and those
of the Roman Church, according to the acknowledgement of the latest and
learned of Protestant Authors; they acknowledging the B. of Cant. in fore
cited place.
said possibility of Salvation for unlearned persons in the Roman, and the
Roman Doctors denying all possibility to unlearned Protestants, so long as
they remain wilfully in the Protestant Religion?

4. Quest. Whither all unlearned Protestants, who are sufficiently informed of
what is here said, are not quilty of a damnable neglect of their Salvation, so
long as they remain Protestants, and refuse to be of the Roman Church?

5. Quest. Whither a person, who is in quiet possession of any Goods, Titles,
Rights, or Dignities, etc. retain not the right to all such Goods, and is
wrongfully deprived of them, so long as he neither confesses that he has no
right to them, nor is condemned by the clear sentence of any lawful and
competent judge, of sufficient authority to define against him, but still
maintaine^ his cause against his Adversary, and gives at least probable answers
to all that he alleges against him, and pleads to be restored to his ancient
possession taken from him by force and violence? And whither he, who thus
violently took the possession from him, be not obliged in conscience to restore
it to him again? and whither he proceeds not unjustly, so long as he retains it
from him?

6. Quest. Whither this has not been, within the last hundred and fifty years,
and still is, the proceeding of Protestants against the Roman Church,
violently excluding her Bishops, Pastors, and people, from the quiet
possession, of many hundred years continuance, of their Doctrine, Dignities,
Titles, Governments, Benefices, Churches, Possessions, and still retayning
them, and refusing to restore them; those of the Roman Church still claiming
their right, and never having been condemned by any competent and lawful
judge, nor acknowledging themselves convinced to have obtained that possession
wrongfully.

7. Quest. Whither the quiet possession of many ages, both of the Eastern and
Western Churches, in their unanimous consent of Doctrine and practice, in most
points of controversy betwixt them and Protestants, be not a sufficient proof
to justify the said doctrine and practice; till it be convinced clearly,
evidently and undeniably, (by reason or authority) or lawfully condemned of
error? So that it belongs to Protestants, who are the Aggressours, to convince
their adversaries of error, and not to those of the Roman, or Grecian
Churches, to prove their Tenants by any other argument, then that of their
quiet, ancient, and universal possession, though Catholics be upon the
affirmative, and Protestants upon the negative; as he who quietly possesses the
name, title, arms and lands of such, or such a family, has sufficiently
proved, that he has right to them, and that they are truly his, till he either
confess, that the contrary is sufficiently proved, or that it be lawfully
determined against him.

8. Quest. Whither it is not a most insolent madness (as St. Augustine. terms
it) or an insufferable height of pride, for any Christian whatsoever to call in
question, much more to censure and condemn as erroneous, that which all the
visible Churches in the world taught and practiced; and a manifest foolery, to
follow any teachers, and give ear and belief to them, who contradict the
universal practice and doctrine of the whole Christian world?

9. Quest. Whither the first was not done by the first Authors of Protestant
Religion; and the second done, and still continued by their followers? or if
the first Authors of Protestant Religion received those points of their
doctrine from any visible Church in the whole world which existed immediately
before their relinquishing the Roman doctrine, let that Church be produced, and
named.

10. Quest. Seeing Protestants affirm, that the Roman Church is infected with
errors in Faith, which they pretend to have purged in their Reformation, I
demand that it be evidenced, when any of these pretended errors begun to be
publicly taught and practiced out of some approved Authors of any age, who
affirm, that the public profession of the said errors begun in or about their
time. For seeing they were publicly practiced through all Christendom, if that
public practice had ever begun in any age since the Apostles, it must have
been taken notice of: whereby their instances of consumption in the Lungs, of a
beard growing white, etc. are showed to be nothing to the purpose; because they
are either wholly secret, or insensible, and no way public and notorious, as
these were. And seeing Faith by S. Paul. Ephesians. 4. v. 1. 2. is said to be one,
and reckoned up with the unity of God and Christ, and so must be perfectly,
one, how Protestants, and those of the Roman Church can properly be said to
have one Faith, when the the one believes, what the other disbelieves? And as
opinions contradicting one another cannot be said to be one opinion, how can
Faiths contradicting one another be said to be one Faith? neither is it enough
to say, that they are one in that wherein they agree, for so they will be one
only in part, or partially, and not absolutely and entirely: and as the least
difference destroys the perfect unity of God and Christ, so will it do that
of faith; and though my opinion agree with that of another in many things, but
disagrees in many others from his, we can never be said absolutely (as it must
be in faith) to be of the same, or one opinion.

Quest. 11. Whither it be not a great argument, to induce any rational
indifferent man, to judge that the Protestant Authors are put to great
Straits, and to desperate acknowledgements, when being ashamed of the first
refuge of their beginners, in flying for the defense of their Succession to an
invisible Church; and no less of the second, in alleging for their
predecessors and continuance of the visibilitie of their Church, Berengarius,
the Waldenses, Albigenses, Wicleffests, Hussites, and other publicly condemned
heretics, they confess, that they have now no other means to save their
visible succession, but by acknowledging, that they succeed to the Church of
Rome, and other Churches joining with her against them in all the points of
difference betwixt them, and her; and so are enforced to acknowledge her, and
all those who are united to her, to be true Churches of Christ, and
consequently to hold no fundamental error at all; and consequent to this, to
acknowledge, that their first Authors and Churches, both in England and other
countries, wronged the Church of Rome and those others insufferably, first, in
condemning them of Superstition, Idolatry, Antichristianisme, etc. which are
fundamental errors in Religion, and destructive of Salvation. Secondly upon
this pretext in destroying, burning, and alienating to secular uses so many
thousands of their Churches, Monasteries, Towns, Cities, Castles, Villages.
Thirdly in massacring and putting to cruel torments and death, so many Priests
and Professors of the Roman religion. Fourthly in depriving their Bishops and
Clergymen of their respective Church-governments, dignities, Seas, Benefices
and Churches, and setting up others, they yet living, in their places. Fifthly
in making it no less then high Treason, (which is yet in force) either to be
Priests, or to communicate with them in many spiritual Church offices and
Sacraments. Sixthly in continuing to this day, in a violent detaining of their
Churches, benefices, dignities, and spiritual functions, from all those of the
Roman Profession, and holding them in their own hands; and all this, because
they maintain certain pretended errors, which they now confess not to be
fundamental, nor destructive of Salvation; and consequently that those of the
Roman Church have suffered, and still suffer all these intolerable injuries,
for that which even these modern Authors acknowledge to be no more then a
venial or small sin: for if it were mortal, it would destroy Salvation, so
long as one wilfully continues in it; which they affirm, it does not.

Further by this acknowledgement, these modern Protestant Authors must
confess, that their former writers, who were of a contrary mind, in charging
the Church of Rome and the rest with her, of superstition, and Idolatry, etc.
and all those, who then joined with them, and all their modern Churches and
Protesters, both without and within England, who at this day hold it as a point
of their faith, to accuse the Church of Rome in the same manner, err damnably
against Christian Truth, and consequently are no true Churches of Christ. For
it cannot be less then a damnable error to make it a point of their faith,
and religion, to condemn any one, much more all the visible Churches of the
West, nay and of the East too, and so of whole Christendom, for nine hundred
years together, of grievous superstition, when upon better examination, the
Doctors of the same Protestant Church are compelled by force of Truth to
confess, that those Churches neither are, nor ever were guilty of any of those
horrid errors, and at the most err only venially and lightly; which hinder
them not, either to be Bish. Cant. p. 129. number. 3.
a true Church of Christ, or to obtain Salvation, even while they most
constantly and immoveably maintain them; and accurse all who wilfully
contradict them, or condemn them as erroneous.

And hence also it follows, that ceing those modern Protestant Authors and
their party, communicate in prayer and Sacraments, with the Presbyterians and
Calvinists, who accuse the Church of Rome of Idolatry, etc. (and so put it in
fundamental error,) and acknowledge themselves to make one Church with them,
must be guilty of deadly schism by that communion and acknowledgement; and
consequently so long as they continue in that communion, are incapable of
Salvation.

Quest. 12. Whether it be not a great argument of security to those who either
are of the Roman Church, or convert themselves to it, that her very adversaries
after so many condemnations of her to hold most grievous, and damnable errors,
dare not now accuse her to hold any error destructive of salvation; so that
the belief of her doctrine in every point, their obedience to all her commands,
the exercise of all her practices, their praying to Saints, reverencing of holy
Images, adoring of Christ as really and naturally present in the Sacrament,
etc. consist with salvation. And though some say, though they destroy not
salvation, B. of Cant. above cited 181.
yet they are dangerous points, and practices, weakening the foundation, and
endangering the destruction of it in continuance of time; yet who sees not,
that it is more secure to hold a religion, which makes the foundation only
weak, by their adversaries confession, then to hold theirs, which the contrary
party most constantly affirms to destroy quite, and raise the foundation of
religion, and to make salvation, not only hard and in danger, but utterly
impossible, till it be deserted.

Quest. 13. Whither it be a likely thing, that the chiefest of the pretended
errors in the Roman religion, contain any danger of loosing salvation, in
maintaining them, seeing for this thousand years, by the common confession of
Protestants themselves, they have been universally believed and practiced, as
matters belonging to Christian faith and duty, both by the Latin and Greek
Church; and so the belief and practice of them was the common way, wherein
Christians were saved; which if it were dangerous, what other safe way was
there, wherein Christians might be saved; and yet certainly there was always
a safe way to Heaven: And what likelihood is there, that the safe way should be
wholly unknown and unpractised for so many hundred years together, and the
common known way, according to the full belief and settled persuasion of all the
visible Churches of Christendom, should be dangerous and unsafe? or what reason
can be given, that the Professors of the doctrine of the Roman Church, should
be in an unsafe, or dangerous way, before Protestants begun seeing they had
none in those times, to show them, that they were in danger.

Quest. 14 Whither it have any show of probability, that the said pretended
errors, though they raise not the foundation of Christian faith (as the late
Protestants confess) yet they may in time endanger the raising and destruction
of it, as they argue, seeing that after the universal belief of them, for a
thousand years together, the foundation remains yet undestroyed and entire? B.
of Cant. p. 283.
For if a thousand years continuance of them has stood with the integrity of
the foundation, what appearance is there, that they will ever cause, or induce
the destruction of it?

Quest. 15. Further concerning this Protestant distinction of errors in faith,
fundamental and not fundamental, I demand first, what they understand by
fundamental errors? for if they mean any nicetie in speculation, or
Theological discourse, it belongs not to the knowledge of the unlearned:
either the refore they must understand by a fundamental error, such an error
in faith, as destroys salvation howsoever that comes to pass, or they say
nothing to the present purpose. This therefore supposed to be their meaning, I
demand secondly a Catalogue, and precise number of the fundamental errors in
faith, that is, how many, and which are those errors in faith, which destroy
salvation? for what helps it a Christian to know, that there are such
destructive and damnable errors, unless he know whether he hold any such
error himself, or no? And how can he ever be certain of that, so long as he is
ignorant, which are fundamental errors, which not? If this Catalogue be
refused, I demand at least some evident means, or marks, to distinguish errors
in faith, destructive of salvation or damnable, from others consistent with
salvation, or venial: which is neither to deny any of the Articles contained
in the three Creeds (as some Protestants have thought;) for one of them puts
the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, the denial of
which they neither do, nor can hold to be a fundamental error, unless they
affirm the Grecian Church to err fundamentally, and so deny it to be a true
Church of Christ; which were quite against the said Protestants, seeing they
maintain the contrary. Nor is the Creed of the Apostles alone a sufficient
rule to determine fully, which are fundamental points, which not; both because
there are some things in it, which (by reason of the lightness of the matter
they contain,) come not by far so near the radical and primarie mysteries of
Christian faith, as do many points controverted betwixt Protestants and those
of the Roman Church, and therefore cannot with any show of truth be termed
fundamental by Protestants, such as are the circumstances of time and persons,
as that our Savior suffered under Pontius Pilate, and no other judge, that he
rose the Third, and no other day, etc. And because some points, necessary to
the subsistence of Christian faith according to Protestants, are not expressly
defined in that Creed; as that the Holy Scriptures are the divine word of God,
which is the precise number of the Books of Canonical Scripture; whither,
there is any written word of God, or no; or any Sacraments, etc. so that a
Christian finds not all fundamental points of faith set down expressly in the
Apostles Creed. Neither is the Scripture a sufficient rule to know which are,
which are not fundamental points. For there are a thousand, nay a million of
Truths expressed in Scriptures, which touch not immediately the foundation of
faith, as Protestants term it; and no small number of points, according to
them, fundamental, which are not expressed in Scripture, as the number of
Canonical Books, the entire incorrupt purity of the original, in any copy,
or copies, which is come to the hands of Protestants, etc. which in their
principles are such points of faith, that true faith, and consequently
salvation, cannot be obtained without them. For if sole Scripture, (as they
affirm) be the rule of faith, and all that is in Scripture is to be believed,
and nothing to be believed, but what is in Scripture, or evidently deduced from
it, seeing faith is necessary to salvation, the determinate belief of all that
is true Scripture, from which only (they say) the true points of faith are
drawn, must be necessary to salvation, and so a fundamental point of faith.

Thirdly, I demand, how any Christian can affirm, that the denial of any point
of faith whatsoever, being sufficiently propounded as such, is consistent with
salvation, seeing all such denyalls, or disbeliefs, include this damnable
malice, of attributing falsity to that which is revealed by God himself, as all
points of faith are, how small so ever the matter be, which is revealed in
them; which appears evidently in this example.

I suppose that this sentence of Scripture, Tertia die resurget, he shall rise
again the third day, is sufficiently propounded to any one, as a point and
article of Christian faith, as well according to the substance resurget, that
our Savior should rise again, (which Protestants grant to be a fundamental
point) as the circumstance of time, Tertia die, the third day. Now suppose that
some Christian, to whom this whole sentence of Scripture is sufficiently
propounded, should firmly believe the substance, or mystery of the
resurrection, because he esteems it to be a fundamental point, but should
disbelieve the precise circumstance of time, that it was only upon the third,
and no other day, I demand seeing both the one and the other is propounded
equally, as expressly contained in that sentence of Holy Scripture, whither he
that disbelieves that the resurrection happened upon the third day, and dies in
that belief, can be saved?

Quest. 16. I demand farther, that seeing S. Paul, Hebr. 11. v. 1. says, that
faith is (...), the substance, or ground (as the Protestant English Bible of
Anno 1648. has it) of things hoped for, and is reckoned up by the same Apostle
Hebr. 6. v. 1. 2. amongst those things, which are called by him basis, the
foundation, one of them being Faith to God. And the Apostle Ephesians. 2. v. 20.
says we are built (...), upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
which now, according to Protestants, can be nothing else save the writings of
the Prophets and Apostles in Holy Scripture, I demand, whither to say that some
points of Faith are not fundamental, or belonging to the foundation, be not as
contrary to common sense, as to say, that some stone in the foundation of a
building belongs not to the foundation, or is not fundamental?

Quest. 33. Further I demand, that seeing S. Paul affirms in the fore cited
place, Hebrews the 6. verse. 2. that laying on of hands amongst many other
points, is the foundation; how Protestants can deny, that (seeing the laying on
of hands is disbelieved and rejected by them in the Sacrament of confirmation,
and by some in the Administration of Holy Orders, as a Popish superstition)
that such Protestants differ fundamentally, or in the foundation from those
of the Roman Church? or, if the laying on of hands belong to the foundation, as
S. Paul here affirmed, why anointing with oil, mentioned by S. James, should
not also be a fundamental point? or why, laying on of hands (being only, as
Protestants esteem it, a ceremony not Sacramental) should be here termed the
foundation and the substance of the Eucharist, which all hold to be
Sacramental, and more then a mere ceremony, should not be fundamental? or
lastly, what reason there is to say, that laying on of hands has a nearer
connection to the radical and prime mysteries of our faith, then many other
points controverted betwixt Protestants and those of the Roman Church?

It is yet further demanded, seeing Protestants affirm, that the whole visible
Catholic Church may err in the definition of points of faith not
fundamental; and seeing they affirm, that the points in difference betwixt us,
are not fundamental, and so not necessary to salvation; and lastly. Seeing
they affirm also, that the Scriptures may be obscure in points not necessary
to salvation, by what means can they ever think to convince the Roman Church of
error in these points of difference betwixt them and her?

Quest. 19. Seeing also, that every point of faith is a divine truth proceeding
from the Revelation of God, and to be believed (as I suppose for the present
with the common consent of Protestants) with an infallible assent of faith, if
the universal visible Church may err, and the Scriptures may be obscure as is
generally affirmed by our adversaries in points of faith not fundamental, how
shall such points as are in controversy betwixt us, and are accounted by
Protestants not fundamental, or not necessary to salvation, be discerned to
be points of faith? or how agreed this modern Protestant doctrine of no
difference betwixt us in points necessary to salvation, with that of their
beginners, and more ancient Predecessors, who taught that the Scriptures were
clear only in all points necessary to salvation, and upon that pretext, both
affirmed that our doctrin's against them, were clearly convinced of falsehood by
the authority of sole Scripture, and allowed all lay people promiscuously to
read them, as being clear to them in all the points controversed betwixt us?
for this manifestly supses, that they were held by those beginners to be points
of faith necessary to salvation, or fundamentalls: or what means is there to
believe them as points of faith; seeing they can never be believed infallibly
upon the Churches authority by reason of her pretended fallibilitie in them;
nor expressly for the authority of Scripture by reason of its obscurity in the
delivery of them, according to the principles of Protestants?

Quest. 20. I demand further, if the whole visible Church may err, in the
definition of any point of faith whatsoever, that error must either proceed
from ignorance and want of light, or from malice and want of virtue or
goodness: not the second, for then the whole visible Church of Christ should
not be Sancta, Holy, as it is believed to be in our Creed, and described in the
Scriptures, but should become a Harlot and abominable wilful deceiver of the
world, and a seducer of Nations in teaching, contrary to the known truth: not
the first, for if she could err out of ignorance, to what purpose do
Protestants appeal to her determination in a lawful general Council, in any
of the points in difference betwixt them and those of the Roman Church, seeing
she may through ignorance err in the determination of them, as being not
fundamental, according to them.

Neither can it be said, that, notwithstanding the whole visible Churches
fallibility in points not fundamental, nay though it should actually err, and
that error should be evidently discovered, yet even those who had thus
evidently discovered the said errors, were to conform themselves to those
erroneous definitions of a general Council. For if this conformity be
understood of an internal conformity in judgment, it is wholly impossible,
seeing that were to judge the same thing to be true, and not true, at the same
time, and to judge against an evident knowledge: and if it be understood of an
external conformity and profession only, it were manifestly impious and high
hypocrisy, in resisting the known truth, and professing to believe that as a
divine Truth revealed by Almighty God, which they evidently know to be a most
false error in faith. Secondly, if one were to subscribe and externally to
conform himself to the definitions of lawful general Counsels, which one
persuades himself, he evidently knows to be erroneous, till another Council be
assembled to correct them, why did not Protestants afford this external
conformity to the definitions of the General Council of Florence, of Lateran,
and to the second Council of Nice, (to omit others) till some other lawful
general Council came to correct their pretended errors, they having no other
reason to reject the authority of the said Counsels, then that they define
many things against the Protestant doctrine. Thirdly, seeing it was never yet
seen, nor can be ever made manifest, that any lawful general Council revoked
any definition in matter of faith, of any former lawful general Council,
what hope is there, that they shall now begin to do, what was never done before
them? Fourthly, if it were supposed, that any such revocatorie definition
should issue from them, that party, whose doctrine should be condemned by such
revocations, would accuse that Council of error, as much as the contrary
party accused the former Council of error in defining against them; and so
the controversy would remain as indetermined as it was before: neither would
it be possible ever to determine it fully by a general Council: for the party
condemned would still expect another Council to revoke that definition; which
seems to him evidently erroneous; and so there would be no end of new
determinations and revocations in infinitum.

Yet further, seeing lawful general Counsels do not only oblige, even under
pain of Anathema, or being accursed and excommunicated, all Christians to
believe and profess the doctrine which they teach them, not only to be true and
free from error, but to be divine Truth, revealed by God himself; if they
should err in any such definition, they must make God the Author of error
and untruth, which quite destroys the veracity of God, and consequently
overthrows the main and primary foundation of Christian faith, and therefore
must necessarily be held to include a fundamental error: so impossible and
implicatorie a thing it is, for them to err in matter of faith, and not to
err fundamentally. For either that erring Council must define some positive
error, or that which God never revealed, to be revealed from God, or that some
true revelation of God is an error; both which contain no less malice then
this, to make God a liar.

Quest. 21. Seeing S. Paul, Ephesians. 4. v. 14. affirms, that our Savior had
appointed Pastors and Teachers, till the day of judgment, as a means to
preserve Christian people from being carried about with every wind of doctrine,
these words every wind of doctrine cannot be understood disjunctively; for then
if those Pastors preserved them from being seduced in one only point of
Christian doctrine, it would not be true, that they preserved them from being
carried about with every wind of doctrine; but they must be understood
conjunctively, that is, that they preserve them from being carried away with
any wind of doctrine whatsoever, which should chance to be buzzed into their
ears by false Teachers. Now seeing such winds of erroneous doctrine are raised
as well in points, which Protestants account not fundamental as in
fundamentalls, the meaning of the Apostle must be, that by means of those
Pastors Christians be preserved from following any error in faith, whither it
be fundamental or not fundamental; and consequently that they can ass^redly
direct them, to eschew all errors in faith, which they could not do, if they
themselves were subject to teach them any error, or seduce them by any w^nd of
doctrine whatsoever.

Seeing also that S. Paul, in the same place, Ephesians the 4. v. 10. tells us,
that the said Pastors are to consummate the Saints, and to build up the
mystical Body of Christ, I demand, whither the Apostle by these words make not
those Pastors, able to secure Christian people from error, not only in the
foundation (as Protestants term it) but in superstructures also; for otherwise
they would have been instituted by our Savior only to found his mystical Body
the Church, but not to build it up, and to ground, or initiate the Saints, but
not to consummate them.

Quest. 22. If it should be answered, that these and such like promises, or
institutions of Christ, are only conditional, that is truly intended on his
part, but yet may be frustrated by the malice of such as corrrespond not to his
intention; and therefore, though he intended, that these Pastors should
perform the said offices in the Church, yet that it involved this condition,
if they were not wanting on their parts, but by their failing the institution
of Christ is made frustrate and of no effect.

I answer to this profane and unchristian objection, first, that if Christ's
promises and institutions be thus inefficacious and conditional, that
notwithstanding all the promises, that Christ has made for the preservation of
his Church, yet by the malice of Christians, or others, the whole Christian
Church may utterly fail and come to nothing; Secondly that it may err even in
fundamental points (contrary to the doctrine of Protestants) and so become a
Synagogue of Satan. Thirdly, that the ancient promises, of the coming of the
Messiah, of the redemption of mankind, of the saving of some at the last
judgment, etc. have no absolute certainty in them, and so by the malice of men
might have been, or may be frustrated. Fourthly, that by this there is no
certain credit to be given to any promise, or institution of God or Christ, in
the whole old or new Testament. For a thousand different conditions may be
invented, which not being performed, or put, the prediction fails: thus one may
say, (upon the like grounds) that as the promises of benefits, or blessings,
might be hindered by the malice and demerits of wicked persons, so the Threats
and Thundrings of punishments upon sinners, may be hindered by the virtues and
good works of Saints: and because we have no rule to know, what proportion of
goodness or malice is sufficient to frustrate such predictions, we remain
wholly uncertain, whither they shall be absolutely verified, or no, unless
therefore this principle be settled, that all divine institutions and
predictions, are to be held absolute, and never to be frustrated, whenever it
is not evidently apparent, that they are conditional, and may be hindered,
there can be no certainty, that any institution, or prediction in the whole
Scripture shall be absolutely fullfilled. Seeing therefore it is not evident,
that this institution Ephesians the 4. etc. and others of the same nature
concerning the Church, are conditional, they are to be supposed to be
absolute, and not to be frustrated by any malice of men whatsoever. Fifthly, no
Protestant, who holds the whole visible Church cannot perish, nor all her
Pastors prove wilful Seducers, can apply this answer to the Text now cited,
viz. Ephesians 4. etc. for if it be hindered by the malice of the said Pastors,
they must with joint consent maliciously and wittingly teach false doctrine to
be the doctrine of Christ, which were to teach fundamental errors, and to
fall of from Christ. If this solution may pass for current, who can be
certainly assured, that there is any true Church of Christ, visible or
invisible, existent now in the world: for all the promises, concerning the
continuance of it to the worlds end, may be as well said to be as well
conditional and frustrable by the malice of men, as this Ephesians the 4. etc.
and who knows, that the said malice is not already grown to that height, that
it has deserved, that God should take his true Church quite out of the world;
and so that there is now no true Church at all existent in the whole world.

Quest. 23. Whither it be not evident, that unlearned Protestants, who cannot
determine differences in religion, either by force of argument, or places of
Scripture, but must wholly depend, in the choice of their faith, upon the
authority and credit of Christian Teachers, are not obliged in conscience to
prefer that authority and credibility of Doctors, before all others, which
all circumstances confidered, is absolutely and unquestionably the greater
authority.

Quest. 24. Whither that authority of Doctors, where those of one side are
equal at least, if not exceeding them of the contrary party, in learning,
wisdom, zeal, sincerity, virtue, sanctity, and all other qualities and
perfections, which confer to the accomplishment of complete authority in a
Christian Teacher, and with this equality incomparably exceed the Doctors of
the other party in number, is not in all prudence to be judged absolutely and
unquestionably the greater authority?

Quest. 25. Whither this equality at least, in all the said perfections, is not
to be found in the Roman Doctors, compared with those of Protestants?

Quest 26. Whither with this forementioned equalizing the Protestant Doctors,
those of the Roman Church, the many years of their continuance, and universal
extent of their religion considered, exceed not incomparably in number those of
the Protestant profession?

Quest. 27. Whither, this equality in perfections and incomparable excess in
number considered, all unlearned Protestants are not obliged, both in prudence
and conscience, to prefer the authority of the Roman Doctors before that of
Protestants, and consequently to follow the Roman, and desert the Protestant
doctrine?

Quest. 28. Whither upon the foresaid considerations, the authority of the
Protestant Doctors, in all things wherein they contradict the Roman, is not
contemptibile, and unable to sway the judgment of any prudent Christian, to
frame any moral esteem of it: for though in matters, wherein they are either
seconded, or not contradicted, by an authority incomparably greater then their
own, they may deservedly be esteemed, for their natural abilities and moral
qualities worthy of credit, yet in all things where in they stand in
opposition, and contradiction against an authority incomparably exceeding
theirs, they deserve nothing but to be slighted and contemned by all those, who
are to be led by the sole force of authority. Thus when Protestant Doctors
affirm, that either Scriptures or Fathers are for them, and against the Roman
Church, what they say in this is not to be regarded, seeing the authority of
the Roman Doctors, absolutely greater then theirs, unanimously affirms the
quite contrary. Thus when they affirm that the Roman Church is full of errors,
and superstitions crept in they know neither when nor how, their accusation is
to be slighted, being clearly and constantly contradicted by a far greater
authority. Thus they say, that Protestants may be saved, living and dying
wilfully in their religion, they deserve no credit at all, for the quite
contrary is most constantly defended by the incomparably stronger authority of
the Roman Doctors: and the like is to be affirmed in all the points of
difference betwixt the two Religions. So that a Protestant is not to consider
the abilities and authority of his Doctors absolutely, or in matters out of
controversy, but as contradicting an authority ^comparably exceeding theirs;
in which contradiction they deserve neither credit nor esteem.

Quest. 29. I demand further, that if the authority of all the Doctors of the
whole body of Protestants, be so inconsiderable, in comparison with that of the
Roman Doctors, how much less will be the authority of any one sect, or party
of them; and then how minute and scarce perceptible will be the authority of a
Lawd, an Hammond, a Chillingworth, a Fern, a Bramhall, a Tailor, etc. which now
obtain so powerful an Ascendant, upon the hearts of our modern lay
Protestants; seeing they are in a manner nothing in respect of the authority
of the Roman Doctors.

Quest. 30. All this is demanded, supposing that the Roman Doctors were only
equal to those of Protestants in all the forenamed qualities, conducing to the
perfect authority of a Master in Christianity: But now I demand, whether
those, who have authority of Teaching in the Roman Church, generally speaking,
in so much as can be prudently deduced by experience from them, are not much
excelling the Protestant ministry in all the said qualities?

What Counsels have they worth the mentioning in comparison with the general
Counsels consenting with the present Roman Church, (even according to their
own confession) as the second of Nice, the great Council of Lateran, the
Council of Constance, Florence and Trent, wherein such multitudes of learned
men, and Holy Patriarchs, Metropolitanes, Archbishops, Bishops, Doctors,
Prelates, both of the Eastern and Western Churches, unanimously confirmed the
Roman, and condemned the Protestant doctrine?

What proofs of learning have the Protestant ministry, comparable to those of
the Roman Doctors, whereof many have written one, no small number two, others
three and four, others six, eight, ten, twelve, and some twenty and four and
twenty great Tomes in Folio, and those replenished in the general repute of
Christendom, even amongst Protestants also, with profound and high learning?

Who amongst their ministry have they, who have obtained the universal esteem
of sanctity, as has our Gregory, Beda, Thomas, Bonaventure, Antonine,
Dominicke, and diverse others.

Where find they amongst theirs that zeal, to pass into the heart of so many
barbarous and heathen Nations to plant the Gospel, even with the undergoing of
unheard of torments, and suffering most cruel Martyrdoms, as many of the Roman
Clergy have done within these late years? let them name but one sole Minister,
who has suffered Martyrdom for preaching Christian faith to the Pagans.

What means have the Protestant Ministry, with their wives, goods and families,
to apply themselves to study and devotion, comparable to our single Clergy,
and retired religious.

Where is that unanimous consent in all points of faith (seeing they are
perpetually jarring, not only one with another, but the same Ministers
dissenting notoriously now, from what they taught twenty years ago) amongst
them, compared to the constancy and agreement of our Doctors?

What Miracles have any of their Ministry ever done, in confirmation, either of
their doctrine against the Roman Church, or of the Christian faith against
heathens, as (unless all humane faith be infringed) many of ours have done,
both against them and heathens?

I could instance in many more particulars, but these may suffice for these
short demands. Whence appears evidently, that whosoever professes to be led by
the sole authority of Christian Doctors, and Pastors, must either deserve the
esteem, I say not only of an unchristian, but even of an imprudent man, if he
adhere to so undeserving and contemptible an authority, as is that of the
Protestant Ministry in comparison of the Roman Doctors, who so incomparably
outstrip them, not only in multitude, but in all the motives and perfections,
which give credit to the authority of a Christian Teacher.

Quest. 31. Whether hence be not evidently discovered, not only the
insufferable pride of Luther, and the other original beginners of any Sect in
Protestancy, in preferring their sole authority before that of the Prelates and
Doctors of all the visible Churches in Christendom, existent when they begun
first to preach their doctrine, but the extreme madness of all the ignorant
laity, who followed them, upon their sole authority, and preferred one single
person upon his bare word, (without any extraordinary signs or manifest proofs
from heaven attesting his authority) before all the Doctors, Prelates,
Counsels, Churches within the precincts of Christendom, both of that present
time and for nine hundred years before? and if those were infested with so deep
a frenzy, how can any man be judged deservedly discreet and prudent, who
approves of their proceedings in this particular, and sides with them, (at
least in some article or other) in the opposition of the whole Christian world,
as all Protestants do, even to this day.

Quest. 32. Hence I farther demand, that seeing on one side the true Christian
religion, having the divine wisdom for its author, cannot admit of any thing
imprudent, as properly belonging to it, in the choice of it: and on the other,
that the Protestant religion, or any sect whatsoever sprung from it, or
existent in it, cannot be prudently chosen, by any unlearned person, who is
sufficiently informed of the nullity of that authority which propounds it,
compared with the authority propounding the Roman religion; whether I say,
those particulars considered, the Protestant religion, in any sect of it
whatsoever, can be esteemed the true Christian religion?

Quest. 33. Hence, I press farther, whether the proving that Protestant
religion cannot be prudently chosen, or retained, by any unlearned persons, who
are sufficiently informed, of the eminent authority propounding the Roman
religion, is not a sufficient argument to them, that no sect amongst them in
any point wherein it differs from the Roman, has either any solid ground in
the holy Scriptures, or true relation to Gods holy Spirit, or coherence with
true reason; seeing a religion, which cannot by them be chosen prudently,
cannot possibly proceed from any of these three; whatsoever fair show
Protestants, each respectively to his several sect, make vainly of them.

Quest. 34. And upon this, I demand yet farther, whether the Roman Doctors
have any obligation to urge any other argument then this, either from
Scripture, Fathers, or reason against Protestants, till they have cleared their
religion from the impeachment of imprudence, committed by their followers in
the election of it, or persisting in it, as is a fore declared.

Quest. 35. On the contrary side; I demand whether the Roman Doctors have any
obligation in rigor of dispute, to use any other argument, for persuading
unlearned persons, to desert the Protestant, and embrace the Roman religion,
then this of imprudence in adhering to the Protestant, and of prudence in
uniting themselves to the Roman Church, so long as the said unlearned
Protestants, persuade themselves, that they proceed prudently in preferring
their own before the Roman. Seeing this erroneous persuasion is the first step
which must be redressed relinquishing the one; and the contrary persuasion, the
first step which must be fixed, in approaching to the other. Now when unlearned
Protestants once confess that they are convinced in this, and thereupon recede
from Protestancy, but object that the prudentiall motives to prefer the Roman
religion before the Protestant, as they convince that the Protestant is wholly
improbable, and so to be deserted, so they convince no more then that the Roman
is probable, and so is in great likelihood to be the true religion, but
convince not, that it is so much as morally certain? to Protestants brought
thus far, there is an obligation put upon Roman Doctors, to prove at least the
moral certainty of it; to such as acknowledge that it is morally certain that
the Roman religion, is the sole true saving religion, but deny,
notwithstanding, that it thereby follows that it is fallibly certain; rises an
obligation to prove, that it is also infallibly certain, and when one is once
convinced of this also, but yet doubts whether this infallibility be divine,
and so the highest of all infallibilities, there will be also an obligation to
show to such as are brought on so far, the most high divine infallibility of
the Roman religion. Hence therefore I demand, whether our late Protestants, and
Socinians, proceed not preposterously, and unreasonably, in pressing Roman
Doctors, to demonstrate the divine infallibility of the truth of the Roman
religion, before they themselves grant, that it is either infallible in any
degree, or morally certain, or probable, or prudentiall. For though it be
necessary, to prove all these particulars in their due circumstances, yet there
is no necessity, to prove them all at once to every adversary, but by degrees
the one in order after the other, with correspondence, to what of them is
denied, or called in question, by those with whom we treat, for thus we proceed
orderly, and logically a notioribus, ad ignotiora, and hold a correspondence
with nature, by proceeding, ab imperfectionibus, ad perfectiora, still
observing the stop, or progress of our adversary, and still stopping, and
going forward along with him. And if this method had been strictly held by our
late controvertists, the adversaries mouths had been stopped long before this.

Quest. 36. Seeing these demands are proposed to such as believe that without
true Christian faith no man can be saved, and that this saving faith is one
only; and that this only faith is infallible, and divine: and moreover seeing
it is already showed that every difference, in any point of faith whatsoever,
makes a different faith and religion; and that amongst all the different
religions, and beliefs, now on foot in these parts of Christendom, there is
none that can be prudently embraced, (by such as are in the number of the
unlearned, and yet are sufficiently informed about the force of the authority
of those who teach them) save the Roman, and that no religion can be true,
which cannot be prudently embraced by such unlearned persons, seeing in a
manner the whole multitude of Christians consists of those who are unlearned,
and must according to prudence, follow the authority or their Teachers. Those
things, I say considered, it is finally demanded, whether by proving, that the
Roman faith only can be prudently embraced (which is already done) it is not
made inevitably clear, that the Roman only, is that Divine, Infallible, One,
true Faith, wherein Christians may be saved.

FINIS.

