'APHONO'LOGOS. A DVMB SPEECH. OR, A SERMON made, but no Sermon preached, at
the Funeral of the Right Virtuous, Mrs MARY OVERMAN, Wife to Mr THOMAS
OVERMAN, the younger. Of the Parish, formerly called, Saint Saviors, or
vulgarly Mary Overis, in Southwarke.

By B. Spencer, Minister of Bromley.

The reason you may find, if you read the Epistle.

If these should hold their peace, the stones would cry. S. Gregor. Moral.
Humilitas aperit, Superbia scientiam operit.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his shop under Saint
Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1646.

To the worthily respected, and his much honored friend, Mr THOMAS OVERMAN: B.
S. wishes all happiness.
Worthy Sir,
WHen God made Man, he left nothing to make more but himself Man, that Man
might eternally enjoy himself. For he foreseeing that Man would lose
himself, though he had made him perfect, so far as was consistent with such
a creature, determined to find him again, by searching him out through
briars, and brakes, and bushes, worse then those Thickets in Paradise, in which
Man hid himself after he had sinned. In these thorns Christ was caught, like
Abraham's Ram, by the head, whose seed whilst he took hold of, he was taken
hold of, and by wicked hands crucified and slain, for bearing witness to the
truth. If the Son of God, the Lord of glory has thus suffered for the
Servants, shall not the servants for their Lord and Master? All this he did to
set us an example, to take up the cross, whose heavy burden the world will
impose upon his disciples sufficiently, though the world like the Pharisee,
will not touch it, nor endure the touch of it with one finger.

Let the world strain at Gnats, and swallow Camels; I am persuaded better
things of you, and your worthy family, though I thus speak. For as you have
been ever industrious to find the truth, so never wanting to support it, in
what shape soever it has appeared to you, being not ashamed of the Cross of
Christ. Now as you have not been ashamed of it, so you must not be dejected
under it. Though, I confess, the loss of so virtuous a wife, is a great
trial; But to be prevented of her due obsequies, adds to the affliction;
being a custom allowed by all Nations to the dead, except by the Massagetae of
Scythia, who eat up their ancestors to prevent the worms; and the Hircanians
and Caspians, who buried the dead in the mawes of wild beasts, and the gorges
of vultures, to prevent Funeral charges (peradventure.) As the Bactrians
devoured their dead by dogs, kept for that purpose, to avoid all Funeral
ceremonies. Which buryalls were good enough for them, who neither feared God,
nor reverenced Man, who made no difference of a dead man, and a mere Carrion,
as some do not of a dead Christian, who dies in hope, and an Heathen that dies
without. Whose stupidnesse neither the examples of Scripture, nor Antiquity,
nor laudable Customs, nor the allowance of the State, nor the permission of
the Reverend Synod, can remove. Poor souls! What Lethargy now troubles them,
being the Liturgy (by them so called) is taken away?

But this prevention of your Funeral Rites, happened through your love to me,
and your earnest desire, that I should do that last duty for your dear
Spousesse. Which prevention I feared, and premonished, though you had the leave
of all those that were interessed in the Church. For those few that in your
parts disaffect me, are of Ammons disposition, (it seems) who when he had
ravished Thamar, could not abide the sight of her, though he himself had done
the wrong. Like an Ape, he would break that glass, which showed him his
visage. God forgive the, they have ravished me of my living by misconstructions
where I lived many years in good repute (I thank God) taking great pains as
is well known, and giving no just offense; what ever some might take through
ignorance or ill will, (which never speaks well) though now some cannot abide
to see me, because they see their own ill deeds in me. Which it seems facient
iterum, si se fecisse crediderint, as says Seneca; hoping to overawe justice
by their violence, and to make Authority, like themselves, take pleasure in
oppression.

But their troubling of me turned to my good, for the Honorable Committee found
themselves abused, by their false reports, as well as my self. Now therefore,
being I was prevented of preaching this Sermon, by their false suggestions,
procuring a Warrant, which took me off as I went before the Corpse, I cannot
deny your just request for a Copy of that, which I meant to have said at that
time. Wherein you may and shall perceive, how fearful these men were, where no
fear was.

For the false accusation of our endeavor to preach, without the Ministers
consent, and the rumor of Soldiers raised to support me, and Malignants
gathered together to hear me, was but a ridiculous pretense to get a Warrant
to hinder the Sermon, The thing therefore which they feared, was no carnal
weapons, but the Spiritual weapons of the true Christian warfare, viz: the
sword of the Spirit the word of God, with two edges, and the mutiny which that
might make in their own guilty consciences, of which you will find me very
tender in this Sermon: (not that I would excuse sin, but) because I would
take occasion, from them that seek occasion, to blame my Ministry of spleen
or partiality.

As therefore you have the greatest part in the Cross, and the greatest right
to the Sermon, so I pray accept it as a crouch to rest the Cross upon.
Remember, that the devil bid Christ cast himself down; worldly sorrow
seconds him; I hope you are too wise with Christ, to obey either; much less to
vex your self at those, who do after evil counsel. Psalm. 37.1.
The fools sport is to do mischief, for he flings firebrarnds, and says it is
in jest. Let them therefore walk in the light of their own fire, Isa. 50.11.
and in the sparks that they have kindled, they shall at last sit down in
sorrow. For the deceitful man seldom rosteth what he took in hunting. Non
gaudet tertius haeres. But as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is a
fools joy, soon in, and as soon out. God knows the way of the righteous,
but the way of the ungodly shall perish.

I mean not hereby that you should so carry this wrong, as to be infensible of
it. For Ferendo injuriam, fortasse invitas novam: A wrong not rightly carried,
may invite another: But so to bear your self, that Dum non vis calcari, neque
videaris posse calcari, as you would not be trodon, so to show your self above
their wretched spleen, by whose teeth a poor wretched corpse cannot pass
without being snapt at. But as it was said of Socrates, so let it be of you,
who retreating in the rear of his retyring Troops, looked with such a
countenance, as put courage in his pursued friends, and daunted his following
enemies. Even as a friend of yours, a Commander, did look that day upon the
guilty faces of your Funerall-disturbers, whom they answered with making faces,
altero ad frontem sublato, altero ad mentum depresso supercilio, by pulling one
eye-brow up, and the other down, or else turning their backs. God keep every
good man from envy, hatred, malice, and uncharitable men.

So entreating I may be excused for so long detaining your right from you,
which you had received long since in a better character, but that mine
adversaries stony hearts, have bred upon me Calculum in renibus, the Stone in
the Kidneys; a disease I never knew till I fell into the gravell-pits of their
digging, where I have suffered by pain and grief a petty martyrdom.

But God, I hope, who has, will still deliver me from unreasonable men, and
from every evil way. To whom I commit you, and all your worthy family, resting

Your devoted servant in Christ Jesus, Benjamin Spencer.

TO THE READER.
WHosoever reads this Copy, I suppose will find nothing in it worth so much
ado, as Envy made to prevent the preaching of it. But as Envy is a Monoculus,
so also, she is suspicious. She had but one eye, and that is a bad one, but
many jealousies of those she looks asquint upon. Do not thou look throw her
spectacles, and thou will find in the Author, rather work for pity, then
Envy, and his Sermon rather craving mercy, then deserving malice. Read then
whithout prejudice, this dumb Sermon of his, whom his adversaries account no
better of, then a dead dog. Thou needst not think the worse of him, 1 Cor. 4.13.
nor it. The Apostles were reckoned as the filth and offscouring of all
things. And Turks call Christians dogs. And I wonder not when brethren of the
same Family are fallen out, to hear them miscall one another. For from among our
selves must men arise, speaking perverse things, says S. Paul. Well, Acts
20.30.
let them speak, do thou read. It may be Mutimagistri, dumb teachers, such as
Books are, may give thee more light then some great talkers. God direct thee,
Farewell.

Errata.
Page 6. lin. 27. r. Cerinthus. p. 15. l. 17. r. Sesostris. p. 22. l. 18. r.
(...). p. 31. l. 26. r. vagula, blandula. ibid. l. 27. r. wandering sporting
soul. p. 42. l. 23. r. disposal. p. 45. l. 22. r. the Living.

An Introduction to the Sermon.
THe Directory, His speech intended before naming the Text.
set forth by the Reverent Synod, gives Ministers leave at Funerals, to put
the living in remembrance of their duty. And I will do no more. And I hope
that will give no offense to any good Christian; since that, is not, to strew
complementall flowers upon the hearse of the dead, but will rather prove
supplementall ornaments to the living. I therefore being partly acquainted with
our deceased Sisters life, and death, and requested therefore to this office by
her friends, who seeing her lamp, went not out in darkness, was loath that her
earthen vessel should be interred without some light, which might direct
others, how to walk from the womb, to the tomb. Leave therefore being first
obtained of your Minister, and Officers of this Church, I have thought good to
present you, as a subject of your contemplation with such a piece of scripture,
as may both answer to our dead Sister, the pattern, and to us, the living
portraictures. Which you shall find delineated by Saint Paul himself, Philip.
1.21.

PHILIP. 1.21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.


WISE SOLOMON said in the old Testement, that this is the sum of all, Eccles.
12.19.
Fear God and keep his Commandments, this is the whole duty of man. So I say,
to live rightly by faith, and to dye in hope, are the two chief lessons of
Christianity. But because they under the Law saw Christ like Moses, in a veil,
therefore was their lesson legal, Fac hoc, et vive, do this and live. But since
Christ was revealed, who is our life, we must find our life in him, that in our
death we may find him with comfort. To this tends the whole Law and Gospel.
For this life was veiled in the old Testament, and revealed in the new. To this
life tend all the examples of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, which
were written for our learning, Romans 15.4. of which St. Paul was not the least,
who could aver thus confidently of himself, that to him to live was Christ,
and to dye was gain.

This blessed Apostle having saluted this Church of Philippi, with grace and
peace, ver. 2. and having showed them his thankfulness to God, and his love
to them, for the fruits of their faith, and fellowship of his sufferings,
(which he prays God to continue ver. 4.5. to the 9.) he makes in the next
place an account to them of his labors at Rome, and shows them that the
talent wherewith Christ had entrusted him, had increased by his sufferings
there, ver. 12. So that many waxed confident, to preach, as well as to believe,
ver. 14. though it may be some of envy, some of good will. All which he says
he knows shall turn to his salvation, according to his expectation, to
magnify Christ in his body, whether by life or death, ver. 19.20. the reason of
which confidence, this verse shows in these words, For to me to live is
Christ, and to dye is gain.

As if he should have said, If it please God, that I shall magnify Christ in my
body, living Christ is to me my way of living: or my life shall be spent to set
forth, or set up the Kingdom of Christ. It is life to me to do his work, as
you may perceive it to be expounded in the next verse, If I live in the flesh,
that is, the fruit of my labor, viz. To advance the Kingdom of Christ, And to
dye is gain, because I shall enjoy him for whom I labored. But this is not so
to all, yet to me it is, who desire to magnify Christ, both in my Life and
Death, whom I finding to be my life, I know death must needs be my gain;
because thereby I receive the end of my hopes, the salvation of my soul.

There needs no accurate division of these words, only consider these three
things.

First, what is common to Christians, and other creatures, To Live and Dye.

Secondly, What is proper in life and death to a true Christian, besides to
others, (viz.) First to find Christ to be their Life. Secondly, Death to be
their gain.

Thirdly, to find the fruit of this assurance, which is included in the word
[FOR] having relation to the former verse, which is a resolution to glorify God
in his body, whether by Life or Death. Which fruit will also prove this
assurance to be good, as all Gods graces are proved, or improved one by
another. For upon such a resolution a man may well say, that Christ is his life
and death his gain. For what life can stir up this resolution in a man, but
the life of Christ only? And what advantage are we like to make by gloryfying
Christ in our bodies in life and death, if death yield not an advantage, when
all is lost in this world? But therefore he finding this fruit of resolution,
shows the reason of it thus, For to me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain.
That makes me so bold to do as I say, and because God has given me grace to
magnify Christ, I am no less comforted, for Christ is life to me, and death
advantage.

1. What is common to man, with other creatures. To Live.
First, let us see what is common to man, with other creatures, (to wit) to live
and dye. This is also common to all men, to Heathens as Christians. To live is
no privilege, from the Ant, to the Elophant, every creature can boast as much,
a Dog has his day, a Flower has its flourish and fading, every leaf has its
spring and fall, and wherein does a man exceed these, if he do but live? Nay,
wherein do not these exceed him in natural life? For they have a certain time
of life, man has not. Eccles. 3.1.
He that said there was a time for all things, said not there was a time to
live. So they renew their age every year, but man is in a continual decay, or
decrease from his very birth. Genesis 1.25, 26.
The Beasts and he were made all upon one day, to forewarn him that he became
not like one of them. But man remained not in honor, Psalm. 49.12
but became like the Beasts that perish. Nay worse, He comes up, and is cut
down like a flower. We scarce can peep out our heads, but Times Scyth is ready
to mow us down, For all flesh is grass, says Isaiah. It is not so good, our
bodies are like baskets of dust, which a little wind can scatter, and all our
glory like a bladder of wind which the least incision will soon empty.

What is there in life to boast of? but either A Being, A Lasting, or A Seeming
happy Accident.


1. Being.
First, for a Being, It is not worth boasting of, every Emmet has an Esse, this
makes a small difference, let Solomon teach them better, who boast of this,
Eccles. 3.18. where he wishes that God would so manifest himself to the sons
of men, that they who trust to an Esse, or mere being, might see themselves to
be but Beasts.

Yet some men are infinitely in love with life, why I know not. I think if
they found as many checks in it as some do, they would rather cry with Moses
and Eliah, 1 Kings 19.4.
Lord take me out of the world, that I may not see my wretchedness. But it may
be they know no other happiness, which makes them dote on this life, like
Birds and Brutes, and only dream of worldly felicity, as the Jews looked for
Christ in a temporal Kingdom, and as the Turks did, and do look for their
great Prophet Mahomet, who has promised at his return to his Disciples the
world to enjoy at pleasure, and all other men to be their slaves. A doctrine
taken up by some Christians long since, Eusebius. 7. lib. cap. 24.
as Ebion and Corinthus, damnable Heretics both; and by others of late, only
to keep up the lean hopes of their hungry followers, who gape but only after
carnal felicity (what ever they pretend to piety) if they can be bewitched by
such stuff as this. Poor souls! All this is but an external being, Micah
2.10.
which is not the place of your rest, no more then your Lords Kingdom is of
this world. But these kind of teachers have cozened you of your meat, and now
for fear like children you should cry, and scratch, they fain would please you
with a Puppet.

Beloved, Believe not every Spirit. 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. Phil. 3.20
St. Jude tells you of dreamers. Be not led by a dreamer of dreams, nor be thou
carried away by high swelling words of vanity, by which the hearts of the
simple are deceived. Look for Christ your life to appear, but not according to
the fashion of this life. Prepare to meet the Lord in the air, Coloss. 3.2.
not upon the earth, set not your mind on things that are beneath, but on the
things that are above. Let no man spoil you of your reward, by thrusting
himself into things he has not seen, vainly puffed up in his fleshly mind.
Let them enjoy their thousand years upon earth, without envy, look thou to
enjoy Heaven forever.

For that thousand years the Millenaries talk of so much, Brightman on the
Revelation.
taken from Rev. 20.4. is not any earthly Kingdom of Christ with his Saints.
Because it is called the first resurrection, and seems to entail eternity
only upon those who did enjoy it. Which if so, I pray what shall become of the
rest of the Saints, who shall arise after the thousand years be past, who
maintain the war against Gog, and Magog? Are not they blessed, though they did
not partake of that thousand years? Or are these the same Saints, which did
enjoy the thousand years? If so, then they must live upon earth more then a
thousand years, and so the truth of the 4th. verse will be doubted. Or what
shall become of the Saints, who never were beheaded for the testimony of
Christ, and yet good Christians? shall not they be delivered from death at the
second resurrection, because of the first they could not partake, being no
martyrs? Apage. I willtrouble you, nor my self no further, with raking in this
mud.

Yet some love life more then these it seems, who say that an evil Being is
better then none at all. First, because (say they) a Being is good, but no
being is no good. Secondly, because a being has a capability of exaltation, but
no being has none. Nay, some have been bold to say, that it is better to be in
hell, then not to be at all; But there I leave them.

For Solomon says that a nonens, Eccles. 4.3.
a not being, is better then them both, (viz.) who were oppressors, or were
oppressed, though the one had power to do mischief; which is a kind of
unhappynes, and the other had no power to resist it, which is a great misery;
so ver. 1. Yea, Eccles. 4.1.
he preferres it before them that were dead, whom yet he thinks in better
state then the living, because, the dead have had life, and lost it: and the
living are subject to vanity and mutability while they have it. And Christ
himself says Math. 26.24. It had been better for Judas if he had never been
born. For certainly, though that Being simply considered in it self, is better
then not to be, yet it is not better to be in an evil condition, then not at
all; because that which was never had, was never lost, and therefore no grief
vexes one for that; But to be, and to be deprived of a good, is worse then
never to have it; Life simply considered, is but a way to death, therefore not
to be doted upon.

The second thing in living to be boasted of, 2. Length of days.
is length of days, for if there be any good in life, the longer life we have,
the better it is still for us: But if nothing but vanity, then length of life
is not worth boasting of. Solomon therefore calls life, All the time of thy
vanity, Eccles. 9.9. For indeed a man comes in with vanity, and departs
with darkness; his life begins with sports, and ends with griefs; like Venus
Image, that seemed to smile upon all that came into her Temple, but frowned on
all that went out; to show that solace ends in sorrow. Therefore says that
Wiseman, Eccles. 6.3. If a man live an hundred years, and beget many children,
and his soul be not satisfied with good, an untimely birth is better then he,
because it has less experience of evil, and more rest. Yet of this length of
time many creatures can boast more then we, as the Oak, Stag, Blackbird, and
the Raven, Every one of which if Naturians say true, can number hundreds of
years, only you will say, they are obvious to chances more then you; yet
therein we are deceived, for as a Bird is taken in the snare, and the Fish with
a hook, so is a man in the evil day, when it comes suddenly upon him.
Eccles. 9.12. Besides, every creature has a power to hurt, as well as to help
me, and any man that cares not for his own life, has a kind of power over
another man's. Surely then, long life being hazardous, is to live in doubt, and
suspend in fear, and therefore not to be boasted of.

3 Seeming happynes.
The third thing to be boasted of in life, is the Accidents thereof, which
conduce to some good in possibility at least, such as is Nobility, Power,
Riches, and Friends, all which are subject to a change, or check.

1. Nobility
Nobility is the finer meal, yet is the Common man and the Noble man ground
all in one Mill of Nature. The rich and the poor meet together; the Lord is
the maker of them both, Pro. 22.2. And it is a great check to Nobility, that it
can neither it self hinder a Beggar from rising from the dunghill to be set
with Princes, nor prevent it self though clothed in scarlet, from embracing
the dunghill; It is but the moth of industry, and a bank upon which the Beggar
rests, or on which the eyes of envy, like the Sunbeams, beat extremely, even
to the mouldring of it away to nothing.

2. Power. 2. Pet. 2.19.
The other accident is Power, which while some men seek, they lose liberty; and
while they desire to get power over others, they lose it over themselves; and
become servants either to Fame, or Business. In which when they have toyled
themselves, it comes to pass that they fall into disgraces, as they first rose
by indignities; and though at their first rising they seemed Lords of their
Ascendent, yet they prove darkened in their declining. Their standing is
slippery, and their failing melancholy; and though their felicity stands much
in other men's thoughts, yet they shall not have my opinion to make them happy,
because I perceive they are dying every day, but have no leisure to think of
it, yet they first find their griefs, but last (if not too late) see their
errors.

3. Riches.
Another Accident of life is wealth, or Riches, which are a strong hold in a
man's imagination, yet will prove hardly a ransom for a man's life, Pro. 18.11.
sometimes either to the Physician or the Soldier; What happiness is there in
that, whose real use is but rightly to leave it? Which whosoever does not, is
but bought and sold with his own money. I am sure the ancient Wise men called
them irritamenta malorum, the incentives to evil, and they prove impedimenta
virtutum, the impediments of virtue. I confess them to be adminicula vitae,
props to this frail life of ours, lest we should loath it, but not such
additaments as may make us love it.

4. Friends.
Fourthly, Friends, are the last good accident of life, without whom we live
like beasts in a wood; they multiply all our joys, and divide our griefs when
we impart them; But when I consider amongst so many friends there be so few
true, life seems tedious as to Jeremy, Jerem. 9.2.
Oh, that I had a Cottage in the Wilderness, that I might flee away from the
assembly of treacherous men! For men without true friendship, are but like
pictures in a room, fair and useless.

Yet there be other concomitants of life, which seem to give some content; for
though all other degenerate, as Nobility into servility, Riches to Beggary,
Power into Tyranny, Friendship to Flattery, by which life is embittered; yet
there be virtues which better, and graces which sublime life, to a
supernatural condition, even while we live here in this tabernacle of flesh.
Yet when I see even these have their mixtures of imperfection, and that the
Epiphonema of them, Coloss. 1.19.
is above summed up in our mystical head Christ Jesus, under whom, we and they
must be reduced; and when I see that many who think they stand, are apt to
fall, and with Demas, to embrace the present world, though it may be with David
they thought they should never be moved, then do I wish for the wings of a
Dove, to flee away and be at rest, for who can set his mind on that which is
unsettled? For as life is but mansio animae in corpore, the sojourning of the
soul in the body, which is apt to remove: so to live long, is but Remansura, a
little longer stay then ordinary, and that in bonds. For (...) is but (...),
the body is but a shackle to the soul. His flesh is called by the Hebrews
(...), lecham, bread, because bread for worms, as Abenezra, and other observe
from Job 20.23. in the word (...). So Senex is but Seminex, an old man is like
one half dead, Jam. 3.6.
and (...), generation, is so called, because it is (...), an intrusion into
the earth, which must have an extrusion. One Generation goes and another
comes. St. James calls it a wheel, (...), a course of nature, which goes
always round; a thing well observed by a King, that drew amongst others the
chariot of Selestris, whom the Tyrant asking what he ayl'd to look back so
often upon the chariot wheel, answered, to observe how that Spoke which is now
uppermost, is anon deprest in the dirt; which answer made the Tyrant more mild
afterward.

It is indeed but a vapor, of which there is no hold, therefore says Solomon,
Ne glorieris in crastinum, Pro. 27.1.
boast not of to morrow, thou know not what a day may bring forth. Being,
without well-being, is not worth our desires, we must look to another life,
if we desire to see good days, and that is the life Christian, which does
difference our lives from all others, For our life is hid with Christ in God.
Coloss. 3.3. and from this life we are denominated, as righteousness does a
righteous man, for as Non vivere sed valere est vita, not to live but to be in
health is life, the rest is sickness, and deaths equipage: so not to live is a
Christian life, but to live godly. God looks Non tam multum, sed quam been,
not how long, but how well we live, there is therefore not only a life
natural, but a life spiritual, which prepares us for a life eternal, as the
wilderness of Sin, and the Kingdom of Bashan, did lead to Canaan. This is when
we lead a natural life after a spiritual manner, as to be a Mary in
contemplation, and so anticipate the joys of heaven; or a Martha, by good
actions, and so become our own rewarders, by laying up for our selves a good
foundation, against the time to come, that we may lay hold of eternal life,
or like Lazarus, to come out of the grave at the call of Christ, or to make
Christ our pattern, who has left us an example, that we should follow his
steps, or like St. Paul, to make Christ our life, that death may be our gain.

So I come to that life, which puts a difference between other men, The life
different of a Christian.
and a Christian, (viz.) to be their life. Of this St. Paul speaks, who made
not the world his life, nor his pleasure his life, but as the work of Christ
was his meat and drink, so Christ was his life also.

Operative, Or Objective.

First, Operatively, that is, if I live, Christ is my life, by the operation of
faith, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life that
I now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
himself for me. For Christ lives in a man by his Spirit, by faith and by love.

First, by his Spirit, justifying me, that his righteousness is mine in the
merit of it; that he has deserved for me to be held guiltless of all sin in
the sight of God; so by his spirit also sanctifying me, to a new and true
spiritual obedience: and lastly, Romans 8.16
exciting me by the same spirit, to every good work. To this purpose St. Paul
says, The spirit witnesses to our spirits, that we are the sons of God. This
is Pignus salutis, the pledge of our salvation, Greg.
which never goes alone without the other, for that spirit that gives the
pledge of salvation, gives also the Robur vitae, the strength of life, by
which those things are easy which before seemed hard: and lastly, Lumen
scientiae, the life of knowledge, which like light does illuminate what was
dark, and produces what lay hid in our earthy natures.

Secondly, Christ lives in me by faith, urging me to believe, that by his grace
I am that I am.

Thirdly, He lives in me by love, by which faith works me, first, to
acknowledge my self to be his in all true obliegement, and then to do him all
manner of service. Therefore St. Austin prays to God, that his spirit may
thus live in him, Sanctum semper opus in me spira ut cogitem, suade ut diligam,
urge ut faciam, inspire me with thy holy work, persuade me to love, urge me to
do.

And so comes in the second sense of this text, viz. Objective, which I take to
be here especially meant, namely, To me to live is Christ, that is, I account
my life Christ's, to be spent and disposed of in him, and for him, to be spent
in his service, as David says, Psalm. 116.16. I am thy servant. So all the
Apostles write themselves, CHRIST'S and the CHURCHES servants, the Pope writes
himself so, but it is merely titular, he Lords it too much over Gods
inheritance, to be a servant. This is a good Christian complement, when it is
essential, that whether we live, we live to to the Lord, or whether we dye,
Romans 14.8
we dye to the Lord.

Secondly, To live to me is Christ, if my life be willingly at his disposal,
as St. Paul said Acts 21.13. I am not ready only to be bound, but to dye for
the Lord Jesus; so that here we see, if Christ be our life, then our life must
be Christ's, the one of these depends upon the other, Christ has bought us, we
are not our own, Glorify therefore (says the Apostle) God in your bodies,
and in your spirits, for they are Gods. We must not live to our selves, 1 Cor.
6.20 2 Cor. 5.15
let us first find that Christ is our life, and then the other will be found
also, that our life shall be Christ's, for such an unionthere is between Christ
and us, as there is between the Head and the Members, the Vine and the
branches; If the Body have a living Head, the sense of the Body is derived from
the Head, and disposed of to the good of the Head; and therefore here is set
down, that Christ is to me life, because Christ is all in all to them that are
his, in the flux, and reflux of grace, in the preventing and operating; in the
donation, and retribution.

That Christ is life to me?

By the Spirit that he has given us. 1. Joh. 3.24. which Spirit is known by
diverse motions.

First, by a purpose to obey God, and an inclination to that purpose; Therefore
Christ minded Gods work with David, Joh. 4.34.
more then his daily food, and he was straightened till that was accomplished,
that he was sent to suffer; but you must observe, this purpose and inclination
is in us, not only in extremities, as in Pharaoh, Exo. 9.28.
while the rod was upon him, he promised fair; but even while we are in health,
and have the world at will; God loves to be chosen as freely, as he was
forsaken; and it is a great comfort to a man, and a good token of Gods spirit,
when a man can say, This good I did embrace, and this evil I did forsake,
merely for Gods cause, without any other respect or constraint, as Joseph did,
Genesis 39 9.
How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? The Devil (as the
Proverb is) when he was sick would be a Monk, (which savours of more religion,
then those Monks, who while they be well, will be devils) but being well he
was the devil still; so many of us, cry in affliction, and pretend repentance,
but the storm being over, we do as he did, that vowed to a Saint, if he came
safe to shore, a wax Candle of twelve pound weight, but when he came there, he
gave one of twelve in the pound.

Secondly, The other sign of the Spirit, is to have the mind of Christ, which
St. Paul so much urges, Phil. 2.5. Let the same mind be in you, which was also
in Christ: the spirit of God appeared like a Dove, like a Fire, and like a
tongne; Mar. 3.16. Act. 2.3.
a Dove, to show simplicity, a Fire, to show ardency, and a Tongue, to show it
loved to inform ignorance. So did Christ, he did no harm, but much good, and
the zeal of Gods house did even consume him, and his tongue never ceased to
preach the glad tidings of salvation; see then, if you have pure simplicity,
without hypocrisy, zeal without ignorance, or partiality, and a tongue ready
to glorify God, then sure Christ is your life.

Thirdly, the third sign is to love Christ for himself, and all those that
love Christ, though I know not their persons, or if I do, yet to love them for
this reason only, because they love Christ, Thus we pass from death to life,
if we love the brethren. 1 John 3.14. And that it be (...), without
dissimulation, Romans 12.9.

But before we pass to that life, there is a vale of death to be passed,
which though it be common to all, yet it is not advantageous to all, but only
to such, to whom Christ is life; therefore we will first look upon it as it
is common to all, then, how it is a peculiar benefit to some.

First, Death is common to all, Statutum est omnibus semel mori, It is
appointed unto all men once to dye, Romans 6.23
the reason is, Man sinned, and the wages of sin is death.



And threatened only for sin; and therefore surely had not Adam sinned, Genesis
2.17.
he had not been mortal. Besides, a change might have been without death, as
we see in diverse creatures, the Eagle by casting or breaking off her Bill, the
Snake, by shiftting off his old rugged skin, becomes more lively and active.
Lastly, the Tree of Life, for ought we know, might be as well restaurative, as
sacramental, an help to Nature, as well as a type of Christ.



They were made for man, and therefore for man subjected, Romans 8.20
that man by them might be served, and not starved for want of them, therefore
there is no injury done to the creature by God, but by man, when he does abuse
them by cruelty or surquedry.

Therefore being that to dye is common to man, it behooves man to expect it,
Mat. 24.43
and to suspect it, as a thief that would steal upon him, this contemplation,
when it proceeds not from Panick fear, is holy and pious, I mean when I do not
fear death so much, as a debt of nature, but as the wages of sin; for so to
fear it is childish, for many go out of the world easier then they came in, and
the vital parts are not so quick of sense, as other parts are; therefore a
religious fear of death is profitable, because it prepares us to dye, by making
us to cast up our account, and make all even beforehand, 1 Cor. 11.31.
And to judge our selves, that we may not be judged; that so as by sin, we
have made life away unto death, so by a true preparation we may make death a
passage to everlasting life; for, as says S. Bernard, Cecidimus omnes super
lapidem in luto, unde inquinati, et vulnerati sumus, We are fallen upon a
stone in the dirt, by which we are both defiled and wounded; we must
therefore before we dye, be washed in the laver of regeneration, and cured by
the blood of the Covenant.

There be three sorts of People, can never prepare well for death. The first is
the Epicure and Socinian, who deny the souls immortality: such were in St.
Paul's time, who said, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye; 1
Cor. 15.32.
and though that these thought of no resurrection at all, yet it will not
excuse them, who imagine the soul to have no subsisting after this life, as to
be capable either of joy or sorrow, and therefore they count the Parable of
Dives and Lazarus, Jos Stegman. Disp.
not to be a thing propounded in a figure, which may have a corresponding
reddition, but a mere fiction, as of the Poets Tartarus and Elysium, whom the
Popes policy in setting up Purgatory will condemn to have lessereligion then
himself: these men can never prepare for death, but rather for the continuance
of life, because with death their happiness ends, like a birds, or a beasts.

But this error is confuted diverse ways. First, from the very instinct of
nature, which desires perpetuity of name, fame, 2 Samuel 18.18.
and family, which is but the shadow of eternity in the soul; so also because
the soul is no bodyly thing, and therefore not corruptible, it finds no
satisfaction in finite things, and therefore, except it be made in vain, cannot
cease to be, till it has enjoyed the object adequated to it, Greg. Nyss.
and then it can neither, because that object does quicken it the more, for the
vision of God is the life of the soul, which vision it apprehends, when it
is separated from the body, therefore God is said to be the God of Abraham,
Mar. 12.27
of Isaac, and Jacob, though they were dead, because they lived to him; Heb.
12.23
so in the Epistle to the Hebrews, the 12. and 23. there is mention made of the
spirits of just men made perfect, which must needs be in heaven, by the sight
of God, though their bodies be not yet raised. If we think not thus, how
shall we prepare to leave the certainty we have here, to enjoy we know not
what, nor when?

Nor do they rightly prepare for death, who slight it; for it is the King of
terrors. It is not putting on the ignorant bravery of a Roman spirit, who
knows not what comes after, that gives Death right entertainment. Desperate
resolutions, are not heroical Christian virtues. For see revenge of wrongs
dares death; a man in grief wooes death; and the fear of dying, has
prevented the cruelty of it. Some have dyed in pitying of others, as some of
Otho's friends did. And Christ's Disciples had a touch of this, when they said,
(hearing Lazarus was dead) Let us go, that we may die with him. Joh. 11.16
Love sleights death. A certain Neapolitane leapt into the Sea, when his wife
was taken by Pirates. Tiberius Graocus having two snakes in his house, male and
female, was told by the Southsayer, that if he killed the female, his wife
should die; if the male, himself should: He killed the male, and dyed first
himself. Beauxamonts wife the Moore, would be buried with her husband. Porcia,
the wife of Brutus, dyed by eating hot burning coals, for grief her husband
was dead. But all these sorrowed as men without hope, and did not prepare for
death, but provoked him against themselves. Others of the Heathen dyed with
less passion, though for ought I know, with as little hope. As great Augustus,
in a fair complement with Livia: Conjugii nostrimemor esto, vive, and vale:
saying, Be mindful, Livia, of our wedlock bands, live still, and prosper. But
there is more to be done in this business.

First therefore, be acquainted with death, by dying to one sin or other that
lives in thee, or by killing that love to the world, ease, riches, friends,
which makes death so bitter, as says Syracides, Ecclus. 41.1
O Death, how bitter is thy remembrance to a man that lives at ease in his
possessions!

Secondly, be temperate in all things against this fight. So the Apostle
counsels the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 9.25
(They that strive for masteries, are temperate in all things) lest when he
comes to fight, you are loath to lose your delicates: as many are loath to die,
so long as they can but receive meat. These are such who make their (...) their
(...), Phil. 3.19.
and (...) their (...). For banqueting is vinculum animae, the bond of the
soul, and the fetters of the affections. As we read of Philoxenus, who would
not leave the Polypus his head behind him, though his Physician told him, that
what he had eat already, would kill him in seven hours. Many there are, Qui
Curios simulant, who seem abstemious a while, (yet scarce a Fasting day) but
like the fish Musipula, they suck up their fry again, which they had formerly
vomited.

Thirdly, Challenge death in thy shirt, strip thee naked of all worldly
habiliments. He fights but as some Soldiers do, for booty. If he find
nothing to spoil thee of, he has no spirit to fight with thee. Job wooed him
to wound him, but he would not. Job 4.13
It is our hugging of the world, which makes death violent; and our security,
that makes him so eager to obtain a Habeas Corpus. But if he find a man, that,
Nil nisi cutem morti concesserit atrae, Horat.
who has nothing for death but his skin, he is willing to let him alone, till
some better advantage happen to his liking.

Fourthly, yet do not take deaths part against thy self, by lying at too open
a ward of despair. For that is it he would have, and therefore makes thee
believe, that he will end all thy pain and grief, shame and sorrows, if thou will betray thy life unto him, by some violent death. Whereas indeed, then
begins thy misery; for while there is life there is hope. I waited long, and at
the last God heard me, Psalm. 40.1. Know ye not, that Blessed is the man that
endures temptation? Jam. 1.12.
for he shall receive at last a crown that fades not away. You must like a
faithful Sentinel, wait till your change come. No Soldier is praised for
marching without the word of command; nor no Christian, for spending his life,
till God take it. I read of a Roman Conful, that whipped a builder for using
other timber then he had appointed, though (it may be) more fit for the
purpose. If a practical Carpenter, was so served, wanting only the complement
of obedience; what have your pragmaticall builders deserved, who out of the
spirit of disobedience, will have no cake but of Thamars making, though it
prove their own ruin? Well, let us not call death upon our selves by the
error of our lives, but prepare only for it. Dediscas vivere oportet, si
discas mori: You must forget to live, if you would learn to die, as Saint Paul
did, who said, By the rejoicing I have in Christ Jesus, I thank God I die
daily, 1 Cor. 15.31.

Nor count death evil, as those that dye without hope, as one Mecaenas, of
whom Seneca says, He was of so weak a heart, that he would refuse no torment,
Nec acutam crucem, dummodo inter haec mala, spiritus and vita prorogentur. He
was content to endure any torment, so his life might be prolonged. Which, says
Seneca, was pessimum votum, the worst desire and wish, and argued him
effeminate and base. Quia distulit id quod est in malis optimum, supplicii
fine^: because Death is the end of all misery and punishment. Yet the man could
not be much blamed, not knowing with Adrian, what life was to come after,
whether any, or none: Which made him so discourse with his soul, Animula,
vagra, blanda, quae nunc abibis in loca! Little vagrant tender soul, into what
regions art thou posting hence? And indeed if we know not that, I wonder not to
see folk loath to die; for a living dog is better then a dead lion. But death
is not evil in it self, (...), Not to die is evil, but to die ill is evil.
Which that we may not do, we must so prepare our selves, that we may look
back upon our lives with comfort, and forward upon the object of our hope with
joy, that so it may prove an advantage to us.

So I come to the other thing in death, which is proper to a true Christian.
(viz.) a Gain. Death is to me a gain.



gain.

Therefore those that live to Christ, lose nothing by death, but gain by it.
All things else lose by it, as either life, or pleasure, or wealth. But all
these are gained by a good man in death: first, life, Christ came, that we
might have it more abundantly. 1. Joh. 10.10. And for pleasure and joy, In his
presence is the fullness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for
evermore. Psalm. 16.11. And for wealth, there is no want: Luke 12.32
We change a Cottage for a Court, and a Farm for a Kingdom. This is not hard
to prove, if we could believe Scripture, which tells us, that no eye has seen,
nor care heard, nor tongue is able to express, what God has laid up for them
that love him. 2 Cor. 4.17
Saint Paul tells us of a crown of Righteousness, of a weight; yea, an
everlasting weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4.17. Now it is not so in this life; For
all that we have here, is either toilsome to get, careful to keep, or fulsome
to continue with, as Seneca says of satiety. Cogita quamdiu eadem feceris
Mori, velle non tantum fortis and miser, sed etiam fastidiosus potest. A man
would die with weariness of reiterating the same thing, though he were neither
valiant nor miserable. The best thing here, is of a perishing nature, but our
inheritance there, is incorruptible, undefiled, and fades not away, and
reserved in heaven where there is no fear of robbing, 1 Pet. 1.4.
or spoiling us of it, either by the violence of the Soldier, or the crast of
the deceiver, or the deceitfulness of the Lawyer. But all things here are
fading, saving Grace, and yet that has much ado to stick by us, as says
Saint Paul, I find a Law in my members, fighting against the law of my mind.
Romans 7.23.

Who feels or sees not this decay, except those whose eyes are too much fixed
upon the worlds toys, whom the god of this world has blinded? Excellens
sensibile destruit sensum. They look too much much on the world, and so are
blinded by it. They hold it not at a just distance from God and Godliness, or
look not upon it with a right spectacle of Gods Word, which discovers to us all
her adulterate ware. That is the Reason, why we see not the envy of honor,
the allurements of pleasure, the inconstancy of riches, the impediments of
Poverty, the temptings of the flesh, the baits of beauty, the infirmities of
the body, the certainty of evil, and the danger of losing good.

What then is all this to what we lose by being absent from the Lord, whilst
we are in the body? 2 Cor. 5.6.
We lose the blessed vision, the sight of God, the presence of Christ, the
full enjoyment of the holy Ghost, the company of Angels, and the Society of
Saints; all which we know but in part here, but then we shall know, even as we
are known.

The fruit of this confidence
and death is your gain, included in the word (For,) which has relation to
that Resolution, which this confidence bred, namely, to glorify God in his
body, whether by life or death, because Christ was his life, and death was to
him advantage. And surely, he that desires so to do, cannot choose but find
the other; For Christ being his life, makes him apt to glorify God in life,
and in death; And this he resolving to do, must needs produce this effect,
that death must be his gain. For he that will lose his life for my sake, shall
find it, Mat. 10.39. And not such a life simply; but better an hundred fold in
the happiness of it, and for the continuance everlasting.

The sum then of all is this: Consider we are Christians, which does give us
a right to a better life then nature can, viz. a spiritual life in Christ, and
an eternal life with Christ.

To obtain either of these, we must avoid the voluptuousnes of life natural,
and let Christ be our contemplation, and his example our pattern. This is in
mundo vivere, and vana mundi contemnere; to live in the world, Gal. 6.14.
and yet despise it; to use the world, as not using it. The world must be
crucified to me, as looking on it as a cursed thing. Totus mundus positus in
maligno; and I must be crucified to the world by its hatred of me. So that we
must live as Saint Paul directs, our loins girded with truth, lamps burning in
our hand, viz. shining in good works; and lastly, watching in devotion, lest
we be found sleeping.

This being done, we may bid death welcome, for he brings advantage with him.
And if yet our infirmities present death formidable, Consider, what is death;
but a fall to rise like the setting of the Sun, A medicine to those miseries
which sin brought upon us. For we, having fallen by sin into all manner of
woe, it was mercy as well as Justice in God, to make us mortal, lest we should
live for ever miserable, Pluto guessed well, when he said, Death was the Law of
Nature. Adrian said better, and more full, that Death was Paver divitum, pauper
is defiderium; the fear of the rich, and the desire of the poor. Seneca said
more divinely, that it was Finis, or Transitus, an end to the wicked man's
happiness, a passage to the good man's blessedness. Death cannot bite
Innocence, but smiles upon it. Which made Saint Augustine to say, He desired to
see death as Christ had made it.

Secondly, consider not so much the seares it has, as the joys it brings. It
is strange to see, how light they made of it, who had no such hopes as we have,
I mean the Heathen. And we that count our selves the true Israelites, need not
be ashamed to borrow a jewel of these Egyptians. Cato sent Caesar word, that he
feared more his pardon then his pain. The joys of death are such to those that
live well, as that they rejoice, when it draws nigh: For it is but a sleep,
and the grave a dormitorie, where men rest from their labors. In vita vigilant
justi, ideo in morte dicuntur dormire, says Saint Augustine. Righteous men
watch while they live, and therefore are said to sleep when they be dead. A
certain wise Roman said, Non puerascam, si Deus mihi largiatur: He would not
be a child again, though God would permit it; His reason was, because now
(says he) Ex hospitio ad domum discedam, I shall go from my Inn to my home.
For indeed, the soul, Non est, ubi nunc est, is not where it would be: It
looks ad futura, to that which is to come. And he that does not, believes not
certainly the souls immortality, nor the pain of death; which being once
apprehended, makes us impatient to live in Mesech, Ps. 120.5.
and desirous of dissolution with S. Paul.

Which gain if thou would make of death, die to the world betimes. He that
begins a journey early makes a pleasure of it, rather then a pain. Such men
are neither ashamed to live, because they have lived well; nor afraid to die,
because they are are but going whither they have been always traveling.
Remember therefore thy Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccl. 12.1.
before the evil day come. Like the Be and the Ant, let not your provision be
to make in the winter. Christ taught us to prevent impediments of safety, when
he said to the people concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, pray, Mat. 25.20
that your flight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabbath day, because he
knew their opinion of the Sabbath, would hinder their flight one way, as the
winter another. So provide against this blustering day of death, lest it hinder
you in your passage to heaven. In a word, let sin die before thee, and then it
cannot follow thee to judgment. Fear not death, but look to the error of
your life, break off sin by repentance, and entertain Christ, and death will
be found without sting; yea, no cross but a crown, no dart, but a scepter,
shall thou find in Christ's hand, or an olive in token of our victory. As
confidently thou may pass deaths teeth, as once Ignat. did the teeth of wild
beasts, who said before hand, when he was condemned; I care not what death I
suffer, for seeing I am Gods corn, I care not with what flaile of death he
please to beat me out, for I am willing to beground, even by the teeth of these
beasts; that I may make clean bread for Christ, who became the bread of life
for me. How cheerfully may we then say, Egredere anima mea, egredere: Go forth
my Soul, Ps. 142.9.
to meet thy Savior, and with David, pray, Lord bring my soul out of this
prison, that I may praise thy Name. And with Saint Aug. Creasti nos ob te, and
Lord thou have created us for thy self, and I cannot be quiet til I come to
thee. And then shall begin that heavenly Epithalamium, or wedding song of four
parts, sung in Antiphona's and Responsories, The Lamb says Come, and the
Spirit says, Come, and the Bride says, Come, and thy soul shall say, Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly.

So did this our deceased Sister, Mrs MARY OVERMAN, descended of an ancient and
worthy Family of the Breretons, married into an accomplished Family of the
Overmans, with whom though she found sufficiency and satisfaction to her own
hearts desire, yet she breathed after another life: Not because she was
sullenly fallen out of love with the world, but in love with Christ, as appeared
by her dying words, which must eternize her memory, when as a little before her
dissolution, this earnest and pious prayer departed from her first, Lord when
shall I come and appear before the presence of Christ, my JESUS? Dying MARY it
seems by this was ready for living CHRIST, and living CHRIST as willing to
receive dying MARY; for soon after, he took her to himself: Who though she
was weak in body, yet was she strong in faith and hope; which viaticum she had
with her to strengthen her in her journey, and to convey her soul into the
hands of her Redeemer. Herein as well approving as professing her self a true
MARY, in choosing that better part, which now shall never be taken from her.

Next to Christ her Head in heaven, she loved her Head on earth, whom God had
given her; and like the Turtle, loved her Mate: yet was not like Rachel,
importunate for children, nor yet dejected for want of them.

She spent her time not idly, (as many of her degree too usually do even in
these times, whose miseries call to baldness and sackcloth) but like another
Dorcas she seemed to those that have seen her constant employment, so far
from being idle, that she was most an end well busied, and full of good works.
So that as it was written of the Lady Paula, so it may be of Her too, that she
spent most of her time, either in good works, or Gods worship. Her chamber was
not only a shop of Confection (as the fashion is) but an Oratorie for Devotion.

Thirdly, In a long and tedious consumption, she behaved her self very
patiently; and knowing under whose hand she suffered, opened not her mouth in
any discontent, and well perceiving it was the Lords doing thus to permit her
to suffer, she laid her down and possessed her soul in patience; only with the
meek spirit of Job, intending Saintlike to imitate him in this her sanctified
affliction, in the depth of her consumption, yet in the height of her devotion,
applied ever and anon Jobs deploring words to her languishing self, and like
him, wholly submitting her self to Gods dispoall, said, My months are months
of vanity, and sad nights are appointed for me. And at other times in David's
words, (for she conversed much with dead Saints, whiles she was living, and had
therefore learnt to use their language now she was dying) when in his prayer,
he deciphered his miseries, that he might the easier implore mercy, Psalm.
31.10. My life is consumed with grief, and my years with sighing. So that as
Saint Ambrose said, of one dying of such a disease, so may we of hers, that it
seemd a martyrdom.

Yet was she not childishly afraid of death, nor struggled she much to retain
life, as some do, from whom God is feign, as it were, to tear away their
souls; but she offered up hers as a free-will-offering, with a contempt of the
world, saying, Away with all these things, and with an earnest desire besides
to be with Christ, who having been her life, made death her gain. Which Text
it seems was some time since her own meditation, as appears by her notes
under her own hand, with this her devout paraphrase found upon them, Heaven is
my home, I am a stranger here: Which undoubtedly was the language of her heart,
as well as of her hand. And if so, what can we less persuade our selves she
is, then what she made her self by her pious endeavors, a true, a very MARY,
that is, by interpretation, Excellent. Excellent in Contemplation, thereby
anticipating the joys of heaven whilst she walked upon the earth, and excellent
in action too, her actions speaking her a perfect servant of the Almighty: And
therefore now no doubt after death, a partaker of his glory with her fellow
Saints, for right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of such Saints, so
dear that he takes them into his bosom.

And for our parts, we may say of her, as Saint Hierome said of Fabiola, Ex
annulo Ecclesiae monile perdidimus, We, even we have lost a precious jewel
out of the Ring of the Church. But lost she is not (I do her wrong to say so
of her) whom God has found. She is not dead, but sleeps. And her flesh does
rest in hope, that what is sown in weakness shall rise in power, according to
his mighty working, who is able to subdue all things unto himself, who
brings down to the grave, and raises up, by whom death is already swallowed
up in victory, and so made an advantage to us.

Thus passed this precious Saint from sickness to perfect health, from
weakness to perfect strength, from bondage to perfect freedom, from trouble
to perfect peace, from loss to perfect gain, from heaviness to perfect
joys. In a word, she is passed from death to life, and from earth to heaven,
to be for ever in perfect happiness, where we leave her safe, and come to
cloze with you.

Now therefore as the death of Christ does for us make a gain of death; so may
the death of good men and women, work some advantage also for us in that
point, and so their death may be a gain to us. Therefore Solomon says,
Eccles. 7.2
It is better to go into the house of mourning, then of feasting, because that
is the end of all men, and the wicked will lay it to his heart.

For when I see a man die, I get this by it, to remember my end also, that my
day of account will come too. When I see one die willingly, it comforts me
against death, that it is to be embraced rather then seared. If I see one die
resolutely, it gives me advantage to be valiant also, and so make the blood of
the Martyrs to be the seed of the Church. When I see one patient in sickness,
and hopeful in death, I gain some confirmation of my assurance, that surely
there is a reward for the righteous, and the patient abiding of the meek shall
not perish for ever. For I see there is hope laid up in their bosoms, from
which Death cannot make them start.

And thus the dust of the dead is like fresh mold cast into a garden, which
makes all things spring the better. Quot justi, tot miserationes, So many
good-men, so many mercies; if they live, to keep off judgments; if they die,
to guide us by examples, that they and we may at last meet together in one
CHRIST JESUS, who has left us an example, that we should follow his steps,
that he may both in life and death be of so great power with us, that death may
prove a gain to us, and we a glory to him.

To whom, together with the Father, and the holy Spirit, three Persons, and one
only true and ever-living Lord God, be rendered, as is most due, all honor,
and glory, and praise, now and for ever.

AMEN.
Memoriale Sacrum. AN APPENDIX TO THE Pious and Learned Sermon OF Mr BENJAMIN
SPENCER. To the perpetual Memory of the most Virtuous Gentlewoman, Mrs MARY
OVERMAN, Who departed this life, to live with the Saints, on a double Saints
day, being that of S. Philip and Jacob. BEING A Speech written, not spoken, by
her sorrowful Husband, THOMAS OVERMAN.

PROVE. 10.7. The memory of the just is blessed: but the name of the wicked
shall rot.

PSALM. 112.6. The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

164^.

Memoriale Sacrum.
To my friends at the Funeral, not at the Sermon.
YOu all had, I Confess, (dear friends) upon the sad occasion of this
Invitation, an undeniable Civil Right to this Funeral, not Factious Sermon,
falsely so christened by some ill-meaning men, who would give it no other name,
before it went to Church, or the Pulpit, but what a factious Conventicle begat,
Which it seems has this privilege (unknown till now) to miscall any thing.
And since Innocence never is in greater danger, then when Detraction acts its
part against it, be pleased now to see, what would not then be suffered in your
hearing, this dumb Sermon speak, both for it self, and your deceased Sister,
a choice young Christian, silenced by death. Whose blessed innocence, has made
her incapable of speaking here, but by a proxy; who being dead, yet speaks,
by her surviving husband, her proximated friend, by Gods appointment. Who, as
he must not be injurious in the least respect, to a deceased loving Wife,
(that being wholly inconsistent, with his last duty to her, to whom he must
ever owe a precious memory) so must he now publish, to the impartial world,
that she had an unquestionable right, as dying a Christian, to a peaceful
burial. For, as she lived in faith fixed, so she died in the full hope, of a
very good Christian. What Antichristians then were they that hindered it, I
leave for you to judge.

I will therefore crave leave to be at this present what indeed I am, your
sorrowful Historian, yet my history must be (...), a sad glad relation of
this our sister, who is now gathered to her heavenly Father. I have therefore
first presented you with the Sermon it self, which was then suppressed, but not
obliterated as you may perceive, you need not fear what Faction says against
it, here is no such infection. The Sermon you shall find attend the Text, and
the occasion only, and after take its leave of you. So that all the way, till
it bring you home, it will entertain you with no other discourse but the
livelie Character of a true Christian, dead to the world betimes. And the
example of our deceased friend will do no less. A good, and full account she
made of that precious time God left her here, which you will plainly perceive,
both by the rejoycings she had in her well-spent life, and with firm hopes in
earnest of a full assurance of a comfortable death. And withal, have her dying
example for your living pattern, which will guide you like wise, how to make
up your accounts well, that you may be happy too, when ere you go hence, and
be no more seen; which we all sooner or later inevtablie must. So that it
highly concerns us whilst we are here, to make good our accounts first, if at
last we would not miss of that happiness of good Christians. And blessed be
God, that of his fulness, this our deceased sister did receive grace for
grace; Who driving on toward the mark of her high calling, and aiming at
perfection, went on from one degree of grace unto another, till glory came upon
her. So that we doubt not in the least measure of her fulness of glory,
whither she is gone.

A Progress you shall see she had, and that in goodness, being well acquainted
with that truly divine maxim, That not to go forward is to go backward, and
not to thrive in goodness, not to be good at all. But she stood not at such an
unhappy stay, for I may safely affirm, that piety throve with her even from
her infancy, humility with either, both strove to outstrip each other,
neither came to full stature, yet perseverance crowned all. She well knew she
must carry her goodness to the grave, if she meant to go to heaven. For
without holiness, no hopes of that happiness, to see the face of God.

Minority and Sanctity do not usually meet, yet here both; we see a young
Woman dead to sin, and ready for death, which is no less admirable then rare.

A reason then you see I am ready to give you of our good hope we have of this
dead Sister, it was such indeed, of which we need not be ashamed, no more then
she was. So truly lively, that I may confidently say, The just man's, and the
just woman's hope were here all one. Her end then, must needs be like his. I
will therefore first show you how she led the life of the righteous, and next,
how she dyed the death of the righteous too. And this task I shall truly
perform, if you please to consider with me, First, What she did.

And in this I must bear her witness, that in all her actions God had her early
day, for in them she constanstly looked heavenward first, and let religion in.
Full often have I been an eye-witnes with joy, of her constancy in reading, nay
and in writing too, some divine tract or other throughout the day, to exercise
her hand, as well as heart, and both to Godward, thereby on earth, to train
her self for heaven. And to my knowledge, who have perused her pious papers
since her death, both these were daily busied, and piously lifted up, her heart
in ejaculalory devotions, and her hand in devout transcriptions. So that nor
here, nor else where neither, is any handwriting against, but for her. Who was
so sincerely constant in all her devotions, that she seldom, I may say, never,
willingly missed her duty to God in prayer either in closet, Church, or
family. This was her piety to God. And for the prosecution of the duty or
obedience to her Mother, I have veiwed the deep impressions of it long since,
and to express it, will give it you, in her Mothers own phrase, as near as I
can, as she was heard to utter this spontancous good testimony of her: This
dutiful daughter was always won by love, not fear, and that by a motherly
admonition only, but never did I force her to her duty by a severe correction.
So that conclude of her we may justly from these good premises, That the
innocence of her nature, made this meek reverence, coupled with love, not
fear, in her behavior to her mother.

Give me leave yet farther, to go within the sphere of mine own knowledge in
her due commendations in some other relations. Her love and loyalty to her
husband, with whom she ran a five years race, so even, that I may justly say,
we were true yoke fellows, and good fellows well met. Our loves were
reciprocal, and equally swayd us both, till Death dissolved this Gordian knot,
and left me alone to mourn for this lost Turtle. For though this match on
earth, was made in heaven for her, she rested unsatisfied, till she reached
heaven to obtain a better, which will admit of no divorce by death: where
married now she is, to that eternal Bridegroom of her soul, Christ Jesus.
Stay here with her feign I would, but I must leave her to go on.

This Jewel had more Diamonds which did adorn her, other spiritual graces
which were resplendent endowments in her: I will make them transparent.

God had given her that discreet piety in her deportment, as that she
constantly held a respective carriage toward her superiors, a friendly
correspondencie toward her equals, being ever ready to pleasure all, and loath
to offend any. A love she bore to her kindred, both natural, and adopted, and
an innate courtesy to all she knew. Besides, she had Sobriety and Moderation in
her self, and lastly, Modesty and Humility in the possession of all these. All
which deserve our Commemoration, Imitation, and Admiration also: Hereby
adorning not her self alone, but spreading the pious care of her parents in
her religious education. And thus you see how in all relations, she ran the
course of her health constantly well. So that by this time I hope you are
resolved to say what you see, That she led the life of the righteous, and all
good men will be glad thereof.

I shall now draw on my Speech toward her better end, that you may not doubt
but that she dyed the death of the righteous too: And indeed her last end was
like his, in perfect peace. For having thus wholly dedicated her first fruits
of sanctity to God by a pious life, her next study is to triumph in the
assurance of a comfortable death, endeavoring thereby to adjoyne her self to
him, who is become the first fruits of them that sleep: Nothing doubting, but
as she was Gods servant on earth, so to be his Saint in heaven. It should
seem, sickness was to this good woman no other then as indeed it is, Deaths
elder brother. For, Omnis passio being Janua lethi, every pain giving to the
soul of every Christian, an Item of his mortality, she began to think with
her self, what she afterward felt by experience, that her Consumption might
crack her earthen vessel, and reduce her to her first principles. Whereupon
she gave that attention to sickness, which sick Hezekiah gave to Esaiah, she
put her house in order that she might die, and so composed her self wholly in
heavenly meditations, the better to prepare her soul for heaven, as well as
her body for death: Seeming thereby to say, Quo propinquior morti, eo latior:
that the nearer she was to her dissolution, the firmer she was in her
resolution. Et vicinior coelo, longior a terra: the nearer she was to heaven,
the farther her thoughts were from the earth.

In her sickness, being often asked, How she did? she still answered, Not
sick, as if then she would thank God for being heart-whole. And having laid one
hand on her heart, and lifting up the other heavenward, said sighing, I am
oppressed; yet thy grace (Lord from above) gives no room to sickness. Each day
was to her a new life; and that daily life but one continued sickness, ever in
a Consumption, and decaying daily. Yet had God so sanctified this her tedious
visitation, that she did every day promote her own good by it; in so much that
it did rather improve, then impair her: for it did not only draw her nigher
to her end, but to God also. So that it seems this furnace did but refine her
from her dross, and purify her for God himself. Death came not to her more
sudden then expected; not feared, but embraced, yea earnestly desired. For
being conscious every day, what might befall her ere the next, betaking her
self at last wholly to her bed, she does likewise to her continual prayers.
Which she ceased not, till her self ceased to be. And having now armed her
self for death, feared no more to go to her grave, then to her bed, since she
was certainly assured, both tended to her rest. When she lay down to sleep,
she thought it her last, knowing then only she should truly be at rest, when
she should be no more here. And having obtained the end of her dying prayers,
and of her never dying hopes, having thus set her house in order for a more
durable repair, sweetly composeth her self for death, and falls asleep in
peace. When she awakes again, she will account her life not continued, but
restored, which she was ascertained should be made good to her at the
Resurrection of the just. And thus our friend sleeps.

Now blessed be the God of peace, who gave her his peace so abundantly both in
life and death. For she being one of Christ's disciples whilst she lived, took
her Masters legacy he left his Saints on earth to heaven with her. Where she
enjoyes, God the Father of peace, her Redeemer the Prince of peace, his Angels,
her fellows, the messengers of peace, and heaven her inheritance, the place to
perfect peace, as well as her. For in the presence of all these must needs be
the fulness of peace; else in a word we know not what it is, nor what she
has. Yet this we know of this dear Saint our Sister, A peace she had internal
and external too, even whilst she lived here, and they are good forerunners of
that eternal in the heavens. Where to be sure it concerns them she be at
peace, who were the uncivil disturbers of her Funeral Rites, or they might
fear thence a sudden requital for those disturbances.

However: such is the Saints insuperable happiness, not to be touched with
things below. And such is hers. Who though she might not be permitted to go
down to the earth her Mother in peace, no more then so me of them, yet can she
not be hindered from sitting down in peace with those holy ones in the bosom
of her Father which is in heaven. It is enough then that God has placed her in
so serene a Region, as that she is beyond the sphere of malice, (though not to
envy, yet) to reach her bliss, or to molest the quiet of her better part. No
wonder then this young sweet Saint hasted thither, whither her early
perfections did convey her timely holiness, being to God most acceptable. Yet
did she stay Gods leisure here, and went not hence without his great
Commission, till patience had her full effect in her, and sealed her up for
heaven: Where now her innocence and patience, have captivated death in perfect
triumph. And this may comfort us who here remain behind her, that God in his
due time, will silence such who ere they be, who thus like foul-mouthed
earth-wormes, not Christians, fasten their teeth, Caniball-like, upon a dead
corpse.

However yet, such times we live to see,
Depart in peace we may, not buried be.
But God forgive them, (I do) this unseasonable malice to my dearest
spousesse, whose death gave life to this Funeral Sermon. Yet you will find, as
it is in the natural, so in this spiritual body; this pious Sermon, it could
not quicken, except it self dyed first. It did so: for it lay speechless, and
so dead all this while, and now it lies in thine own power, by Gods grace
assisting, to let it quicken both it self and us. Nay, let the power of God
accompany this power of godliness, we need not doubt its fruitfulness: but
expect rather a very plentiful harvest, even from those envious men, who
plucked these ears too soon. So far were they in practice from his precept,
who bad them let even the tares grow until the harvest. So hope we will, and
pray we must, that those rude hands who would not let alone a peaceful Sermon,
may yet at least reap something better by it, then the shameful fruits of
their inhumanities from it. However, here it is, a Treatise I may say able to
rectify those spirits of contention and blind zeal which led them thus to
violate the dead, even before they could come into their dormitories. And now
they have the Sermon in their eyes, and at their hand when ere they please to
take it. They cannot say, but that they have it ready, to convey it to their
hearts, one way or other, if God have not denied, or they refused humility, to
entertain it. Else I am sure, it cannot prove to the living a dead letter, but
serve to quicken them, as well as bury her, which was intended. The press must
be the Preacher, and as it falls out anticipate the Pulpit. This now, supplies
that then. A (...), I confess no good decorum here. Yet let it not trouble
thee (good reader) in order unto truth, to see it come to light in such
disorder. Let this content thee, Truth has so prevaild, as that it comes at
length in greater power. Ready for birth this Sermon was before, yet it has
gaind perfection by staying in the womb, and here that presses forth in
greater strength which was suppressed by some mistaking men, even at the Pulpit.
Yet this must I say, had we had the happiness to have heard it from the
Authors lips, we had met with Chrysostomes lively voice, and golden mouth, in
the delivery, which would have moved us more, yet writing teaches more. This
gives thee leisure for thy contemplation, and leave thou have to bore thine
ear and tansack thine own heart when ere thou will. Words spoken, have their
wings, (...), though never so eloquently or aptly spoken. And though like
apples of gold in pictures of Silver, they do too nearly resemble those apples
of Sodom which turn to nothing with a touch, and do too often teach but for
one hour: But he that writes seems to teach for ever. By voice we profit
those in compass only; by pen, those at the greatest distance, yea the yet
unborne. Which consideration moved me with so much zeal, though little skill,
to pen this Funeral Oration, in honor of my most beloved Spouse, who though
dead, justly bespake this blessed memory of her self in the sad heart of her
surviving Husband, who has no better Trophee to erect, worthy so much virtue.

And if in this last duty to my dearest, I seem a passionate admirer of her, I
have reason to appear so; And you must pardon me to take my leave with some
solemnity of that same house wherein did lately dwell that soul, which was
indeed the soul of my contentment. And you may well conceive none else knew
how to value this jewel so well as did the owner: who must acknowledge it no
lowpriz'd happiness to have enjoyed the society of so sweet a companion. Yet
if you think I glory too much in this particular, I must tell you, as
concerning my self, I do not glory, but in the Cross of Christ, who was
pleased to take from me this crown of my rejoicing upon earth. But I must
remember my self, and not dwell too long in this kind of speech. Only thus I
leave her, the joy of my life is gone before, and I must be patient till I can
follow after.

You all see by this time, That as Sampson did with honey, so have I all this
while done with my speech of this blessed woman, imparted some of her
spiritual endowments, that you also might have a taste of her heavenly
consolations.

And now to you, my loving friends, will I address my speech: Yet first,
present you with the Sermon: Ye had had it sooner, had the learned Author
enjoyed his wonted health, to have transcribed a Copy. It is now at last in
your possession, you have had it long enough in expectation, and you deserve it
now. You traveled for it first, since thirsted for it, and now at last it is
come home to you, to make amends for your lost journey then. I cannot be so
inhumane to the dead, nor yet so injurious to the living, as to defraud either
of their due. Nor shall it ere be said, I engrossed that to my self, which did
so truly belong unto you all. You all did honor me (I thank you) to follow the
body of my dear Bedfellow with solemnity to her bed of rest; But see what
happened, (to my greater grief I speak it, for it added much to my affliction
then) you were dismissed without your spiritual banquet. Uncivil men dispoyled
you of your Feast, and having fasted from it ever since, you needs must have it
now: And here it is. Fall to it when you please. I do persuade my self, you
came so well resolved, as that you meant to profit by the dead, why should I
frustrate this chief end of yours? I need not, others did, who promised well,
but ill performd it. They spoke of peace, yet would not let it follow her to
the grave.

If to excuse themselves, they ask, What profit is a Sermon to the dead?

I must answer, it is the business of the living, who were by them defrauded
of this excellent Sermon: wherein the Prophet Ezechiels dead and dry bones are
gathered together to a happy Resurrection, Death it self enlivened by the
pious Authors eloquence, into a profitable life: By whose skillful guidance
thou may be instructed so to live, that thou shall never dye; and so to dye,
that thou shall live for ever. What kind of Adders then were those, who did not
only stop their own, but others ears, against the voice of this wise
Charmer here? Who, how injuriously he was accused, upon suspicion for this
Sermon, has by the publication of it, made you judges, and the world besides.

And now high time it is to cloze with you, (dear Mother) and to remove my
foot a little from this house of sorrow, at least from the depth of it, to
comfort you. And you will give me leave to say after the story of so much
goodness eminent in our departed friend, we have something to rejoice in, in
the midst of all our tears, that she both lived and dyed so exemplarily well.

It has pleased God indeed, to call you and me in a more especial manner to
the house of mourning. A sad truth, if we consult with flesh and blood only.
God has of late deprived us of a very near relation to each of us; You, of an
obedient daughter in her youth; Me, of a bosom friend too soon. Both these
were dear relations in our affections, which having had a Benjamins portion in
our love, must needs have the same proportion in our sorrow for her loss. I
can no more forget my wife, then you your daughter. I must acknowledge, the
separation of an obedient daughter from an indulgent mother, to be cause
sufficient of lamentation: yet you will pardon me if I say that I have more. If
you consider us in those sacred bonds wherein heaven had joined us, where I met
with so much mutual conversation and affection, with such an union, that as
living I could not over-love, so neither now over-grieve the separation. The
tribute of my tears must needs be larger then, who bear a larger share in the
same loss.

But we will not vie tears in this sad contention, but rather strive to bear
our selves as Christian Mourners, Not so full of tears, as hope. She dyed in
hope, let us mourn too, as for our Friend who is but gone before to that place
of joy, whither we hope, to follow her in Gods due time. He only make us
ready as she was, and then we shall not need to fear our Masters call, how
soon or late, soever. So shall not death over-master us, but we shall conquer
it, through him that took away its hurtful sting. And let us now remember,
all tears are wiped from her eyes, why should ours then, stand full of tears
for her? If all her sorrows be fallen asleep and buried in the grave, Why
should ours live too passionatly to bemoane her? Let us not then drop a tear
more here, but rather lend each other both our hands to help us bear this
weighty cross between us. I must confess, no crosses do so much affect us
as those which tear away the things we dearliest love, and when the chief
object of our affections is taken from us, a general lamentation follows it
through all the powers both of soul and body. We cannot suffer it to be
divided from us without abundance of tears. I need not apply it.

Yet must I give my Soul this consolation for the loss, (If I do not so
miscall the blessed death) of my dear Spouse, she is not dead, but sleeps,
And if no more. I may think further, Worldly occasions have many nights
separated our bodies, when the next morning has rejoyned us; and it is but one
night, one short night of this dull life she shall be from me, when the morning
of glory shall appear, we shall appear together. And since this comfort of my
life could not here stay with me, this comfort is my stay of life, that a
little time of patience will bring me to her.

And for you (dear Mother) the Argument is as good: you may mourn excessively,
as David did for Absalom; Yet you must expect a loab to chide you for it. So
much the more, in that David had more cause to bewail his Absalom, then you,
your Mary, he knew not how God would deal with that rebellious Son, but you
cannot doubt but he has dealt well with your obedient daughter.

My advice therefore to you, shall be no other then this in brief, neither too
much to remember, nor altogether to forget so good a daughter. Could she not
have dyed, it had been worthy of wonder, not at all that she is dead.

I might save you, and my self this quere, Whether we loved her, whom we
lately have forgone? and could we love her, and not wish her happy? Could she
be happy, and not die? God gave you this daughter as a gift, and me this wife,
and he has again taken her as his due, may he not do with his Theodosia,
his own gift, as he pleases? It was Jobs saying in the midst of all his
losses, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the Name of the
Lord.

In all afflictions, we must consider, both what we have lost, and what we have
left, and bless God in every loss that we have lost no more, having so many
things to be deprived of.

It Is some comfort in calamity not to be altogether miserable. And it is as much
as we can expect whilst we are here, to part with our earthly happiness by
degrees, it is but a kindly passage to those eternal ones above: which will
sufficiently recompense all our losses here below.

This must be the consideration which in this, and the like occasions must
satisfy both you and me.

For any other satisfaction, we must not expect. Nor must the denial of that
Christian solemnity, which was designed for her more honorable interment
afflict or trouble us, we know the times, and men. And if we look abroad, we
shall behold great, noble, farnous persons, thrust into their graves with
lesser ceremony. And we must not think much to sympathize a little with the
disquiet of the times.

And if yet any be so censorious, to look upon this speech, or that Sermon with
an ill aspect, in respect that it is now made public; It suffices me that I
have hereby given my chief friends their own content, which is my duty. For
sure I am, they were sufficiently discontented with what befell at the
Funeral. And I have hereby decently interred my dear Wife, (having no either
way left me to perform it) as became the last duty of an affectionate Husband.
For till now, she was buried in silence, whom no man can blame me if I
perpetually speak of, as well as continually remember. And I must further
profess, that both the Preacher, and my self, have modestly and truly
deciphered her proper Character, as became her by the law of Christianity to be
reported of.

If now all this virtue and goodness make thee (whoever thou art that read)
press forward to the same practice, Thou will sufficiently justify the
justness of this true, though ceremonious commendation.

And you my friends, as you will acknowledge, that I have thus but paid the
honor I owed to her beloved ashes: So you will confess your selves honored,
by the interests and relations you once had, to so deserving a Saint; And for
her sake, retain with love, the ancient respects and freindship, to her,
lately beloved Husband, and still, your friend, and Servant,

THO: OVERMAN.

FINIS.

