A SPEECH MADE To the Declared King of SCOTS, BY ONE OF HIS CHAPLAINS AT HIS
Departure from Breda, to take Shipping, with several Rules and Directions how
to behave himself toward the People.

ALSO, The last news from Sea, touching a great Flemish Fleet with the King of
Scots, and the Duke of Buckingham, their putting in at the Isle of Jersey;
together with Intelligence from Scotland, and the Isle of Silly.

LONDON, Printed for J. C. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange, and
without Cripplegate, 1650.

A Letter from the Hague, touching the King of Scots, his taking leave of the
Prince of Orange, and his Sister the Dutchies Dowager of Orange, and his
Captains and Servants:
SIR,
ON Wednesday last the tituler King of Scots took solemn leave of the Prince of
Orange, (his Brother in Law) and his Sister, there were many expressions, and
real tokens of love and affection between the King and the young Prince; but
(as some observed that stood by) what past between the Prince of Orange and
him, favored much of complement and outward show. At Breda he took his farewell
of many of his old Servants, (having entertained new according to the late
agreement in the Treaty, his Chaplains being also to stay behind; one of them
made a Speech, the Copy whereof is here enclosed. These solemnities over his
Highness and the Duke of Buckingham departed together, and its thought they
went to Schevering to take shipping, either for Scotland or some other place,
his intentions for the first had been without question, had there not come
newse before his departure, of the proceedings of Montross in Scotland, which
put him into a great Delema, which way to steer his course, some persuading
him to go to Denmark, and others to one of the Islands next unto England; which
way he goes, a short time will give you knowledge.

Hague 6. Jan. 1650.
A Speech delivered to the King of Scots, by one of his Captains, when he took
his leave at Breda, ult May 1650.
May it please your Majesty,
IF persons descended of a Kingly race, desire to enjoy the Patrimony which was
their Ancestors, they ought to seek it not by tyrannical ways, but by means
proportionable to the intentions of them who laid those rich foundations; for
he that is of a royal race, to enter into his inheritance, the ways of wisdom
and virtue, are ever the most assured, and most honorable, and none are fitter
to be of that List, then men of science, conscience, courage, and fidelity,
parts belonging to the ornament, support, and maintenance thereof; and these
seconded by the prerogative of antiquity, (which age and time bestows upon
them) are the main pillars whereby royalty subsisteth. To descend of royal
blood provokes to virtue, and therefore Christ chose not to descend of the
Tribe of Benjamin, which was the least, but of the Tribe of Judah which was the
greater, and according to his example no man ought to boast himself descended
of noble ancestors, without imitation of their virtues, and to presume no more
then to descend of noble and royal Parents, is a thing most vain; for Marius
the Consul says, that he does inherit very little which does not inherit the
virtues of his predicessors. And as your Majesty ought to follow by example the
virtues of your Ancesters; so on the contrary to avoid and shun their vices,
you ought not only to forbear to do injuries, but to revenge them, for that
which in the vulger sort of people is called wrath, in your Majesty will be
named pride: As ought therefore as you shall confer with your own Conscience,
and remember from whence you came, you will never be troubled for the offenses
you have smoothered, but for the injuries you shall revenge, for the pardoning
of injuries, does give great content to a noble spirit; but the desire of
revenge is a continual torment, and many times it happens, that seeking to
revenge a small injury, the party returns much more injured, and before
satisfaction can be obtained, there may arise other new injuries. My self and
many others must now take leave of your Majesty, and have not wherewith to
serve you further then by our prayers, which shall ever be for your height of
happiness, not only in this World, but that Kingdom which is eternal, and
fades not away.

A LETTER FROM PLYMOVTH.
SIR,
AMongst the variety of Intelligence which flows at this time in these parts,
it is lawful to be ignorant of somewhat. That which I chiefly desire to inform
you of is, that which we have lately received by some Ships that came into this
Harbor. As for the fight at Sea, about which I wrote unto you in my last: here
is not any full account given thereof as yet. It is believed, that if any Ship
were then taken, it was not English; for the fight being within sight of the
Isle of Wight, if it had been a Friend of ours, she might have run ashore
before the Enemy could have boarded her; but that which is spoken of amongst
us, is the sight of a Fleet of ten Sail of lusty Flemish Ships, which were
lately discerned to sail toward the Isle of Jersey, two days since, which
are supposed to be a Guard for the Prince, but whether Vantrump were there in
person, is not certainly known, though the Ships are conceived to be of his
Fleet, and if the Prince were there, the Scots may yet look for their King, and
when they see him, bid him gued morning for all day; but its likely he is come
to consult with Hopton, and others of the first Edition, whose advice has had
but slender success, when they had better Cards, and if by the vent (as most
commonly it is) the thing propounded be adjudged good or evil (though much more
might be said thereof) what rational man can think that any great matters will
be enterprized by those at this time, which (as Plutarch says) want plenty of
young men's lances, and old men's councels, and money which gives motion to the
rest. If the declared King of Scotland be landed in Jersey, surely he will send
word to his Subjects there, that the Parliaments ships ride so thick on the
Northern Seas, that he could not find any passage through them, which
peradventure will very well satisfy their greedy desires, as to that point, but
whether he comes to them or not, their design must go forward. Greenvil lives
in the Isle of Cilly, upon fish, and what else the Irish Pirates bring him, the
Island not affording sufficiency of it self, to sustain the Inhabitants without
supplies by Sea: neither do we hear of any increase of forces come lately to
him thither.

Plymouth 10. June, 1650.
FINIS.

