RVLES TO GET CHILDREN BY WITH HANDSOME FACES: OR, Precepts for the Extemporary
Sectaries which Preach, and Pray, and get Children without Book to consider and
look on, before they leap.

THAT SO, Their Children may not have such strange, prodigious, ill-bodeing
Faces as their Fathers, who (unhappily) became so ill-phisnomied themselves,
not only by being born before their conversion, by Original Sin, and by being
Crossed over the Face in Babtisme; but by the lineall ignorance of their Parents
too in these Precepts, fot begetting Children of Ingenuous Fea tures and
Symmetrious Limbs.

Composed by George Spinola.



LONDON, Printed for R H, 1642.

Rules to get CHILDREN by, with handsome Faces.
NAture the Vicegerent of God, seems now to be grown old, and in such a
decrepit dotage, that she is disinabled to bring forth things so accurate and
perfect as she was wont, when she was young and lusty, and her veins filled
with prolifique Spirit, not yet dispensed to the generition of so many Millions
of several things. The Sun it self is observed by modern Men, to have
sunk two degrees nearer to the Earth, then it was in Ptolomies time* and if
that glorious body of the Sun be not exempted from diminutions by time, we
may well suspect that the whole Frame and Systeme of Nature, is hamstringd and
lame, and that she her self goes now upon her crutches. The fire, which once
(as the Ancient Egyptians and Greeks tell us) brought forth many Creatures, as
the Salamander, the Pyrausta, and others, is now grown quite fruitless and
barren. The Air does not now bestow a cherishing and vital incubation upon
the Earth and Water, as sometimes it did; and to say all in a Word, in
comparison of former influence and foecundity, the Heaven is become Brass, and
the Earth Iron. Neither is this decay and dampe of Nature obserueable in the
Systeme of the greater World alone, but more eminently in the Microcosme or
lesser World of Man, which is a little transcript of the great Universe. Do but
sum up the age of Man now adays, then observe his petit diminutive Stature,
and you will presently say, That Man is but the Creature of a Day, that he is
become a Pigmey now, and that Nature has spent all her sovereign Balm which
sometimes maintained him in a kind of perfect, lasting, and settled beauty.
Since, such an insufficiency of Nature in the ^eeming of all her Births, and
especially of Man, is manifest* I thought it not unworthy of a Philosopher to
inquire the Reasons, why Nature in this age of the World fails so much in the
Generation of Man, and ^o to discover some Artificial Rules to help and
relieve her failings in the bodies of Men, and to make Posterity beholding to
m^ for their better Faces. But I confess in all my observations of the
Phisnomies of Men, I have not found such strange, exotic, foreign, ridiculous
deformities, and non-conformities of parts in the Faces and Limbs of any kind
of Men, as in those which at this day are familiarly called the Sectaries and
Seperatists, and therefore I direct this discourse of Face-mending to those
invisible Christians of Knock-verjuce-lane, and other obscure places. They
above all others seemed to me to have the fairest plea, title, and claim to
such a discourse. First, because the mistakes of Nature are not so
praeposterous, ridiculous, and enormous in the Faces of any kind or order of
Men as in theirs and their Childrens. Secondly, because some of the best Rules
of Facemending here proposed, do work primarily by the strength and force of
Imagination, in which kind of Imagination, they are known to have a greater
share, then of Reason, and a clear intellectual mind. Now least any Man
should think I offer at a thing impossible, when I promise Rules to get
Children with handsome Faces; First I will show you that some Christian
Philosophers upon their honor have affirmed, that it is possible by Rules of
Art reduced to practice, not only to mend, but to raise even out of Dust the
bodies of many vegetables, and sensitive Creatures, which bids higher for the
improvement of Nature, then my discourse of Rules. Secondly, I will lay the
Basis and foundation of my Rules in the Scripture it self, that the Brownist
(if he be true to his own positions) may not suspect me for a humane
Traditioner; but apply himself forthwith to beget good Faces by the Text.

It is reported of Rhasis the Arabian, and Albertus Magnus (and themselves in
their writings intimate the same) that they did generate and produce by Art,
Homunculos quosdam, certain little men in stature puppetlike, but with all the
Organs of a perfect man, born by the ordinary course of Nature. Paracelsus, of
whom the judicious Erasmus of Roterdam, says, ^ulta invenit divinitus, he
found out many things by Divine inspiration, con^esseth boldly, that he
received that secret of producing little men by Art from God himself, and sets
down the way of proceeding artificially to that purpose, in his first Book of
the Nature of things.

The bold experiments of these Philosophers excuse me for daring only but so
high as to prescribe Rules to beget good and Orthodox Faces, especially since
my way of proceeding, takes it rise from Scripture, and common experience of
observing men. And now I fall upon that part of natural and most lawful
Magic, by which the Generation of Man may be perfected and enobled.

1 Rule. It is known to all sober and discreet men; That all sensitive
Creatures (and such are Men especially when they close with Women) do Impresse
into the thing begot that very affection which prevails and presides in them
in or about the time of Generation. And this is confirmed by the practice of
the Patriarch Ja^ob, Genesis 30. 37. And Jacob took him Rods of green Poplar, and
of the ^asell and Ches^ut-trce, and pilled white strakes in them, and made the
White appear which was in the Rods. And he set the Rods which he had pil'd
before the Flo^ks in the Gutters in the watring-troughes when the Flocks came
to drink, that they should conceive when they ^ame to drink; And the Flo^ks
conceived before the Rods, and brought forth Cattle ri^gstraked, speckled and
spotted, etc. The whole Story proves not only the lawfulness of this kind of
Natural Magic to better the Generation of Beasts, much more of Men, but the
use and certain effect of Impressions taken from external objects. In
Mesopotamia and Syria, where this Patriarch was Shepherd, the heat of the
weather is excessive, the Waters but ^ew, and those for the most part in little
purles; therefore when the Flocks came to the water wherein the Rod^ were laid
and looked upon them in the Water, to which they had an e^ger appetite, they
did, as it were, with their eyes, draw in and drink the sh^pes of those Rods
loved and desired by them, even in that love and desire of the Water, and so
generated, conceived, and teemed t^ose speckled births. And no doubt, but an
Artifici^ll and lawful Magic not unlike this of the Patriarch may be used
with good success to perfect the generation of Man. Be this then the first
Rule, Take heed what affection prevails in thee, and what Impression thou have
derived and naturalized to thy self from outward objects about that time when
thou go about the Blandum Mysterium, as Trismegist speaks, the toying
mystery, which makes thee Father of an handsome or ill-favored Babe. The Tribe
of the Brownists though illuminated has bin extremely ignorant in this
principle. And it is no wond^r that they and their barnes are of such
ridiculous Phisnomies, since by their profession they abhor all decency and
harmoniousnesse, and lie with their Wives in that opinion. Impressions of
slovennesse, disorder and disproportion must needs affect the Spirits of such
as are habitually averse from decency, order and proportion. If no other ill
Impression but this which is almost their very essence; namely, the abjuring of
all Order, affected their spirits, it were enough to make all their brood of
shapes as strange and monstrous as those irregular figures and appe^rance^
which sometimes we see in the Clouds, which several eyes judge to be of
several form* yonder Cloud says one looks like a Peddler with a pack upon his
back, no says another, it is a Cat-a-Mountai^e with the heels upward. But
this is not all; besides, their resolute abjuring of Order, from variety of
other Objects of their like or dislike, varieties of strange Impressions arise
in their Spirits. One fastens upon a Presbytery which neither he nor the
Christian World, for this almost fifteen ^undred years, well understood, and
in the ignorant heat of that desire, begets a thing of such a doubtful shape,
that when it is presented to a Minister that can see, he may justly doubt
whether it be a thing that ought to be Chris^^ed at all, or not. From his
dislike of Episcopacy results his love of Presbitery, and from those two
together, such a miscellaneous Impression is made in the blood, that any thing
begot of that is very likely to look monstrous scurvily. In the mind of
another of them, Canterbury continually runs, and though his fancy be not
strong enough to hit the lineaments of the Man exactly, yet his hate is active
enough to draw him more monster then he is in shape or m^nners* He has an ugly
shape of the man in his mind, though not a true one, and that ugly Idea,
Prints it self in his blood, as we often see misshapen Clouds in the Water;
when his Religion, his appetite, and Mistress incites him to give due
benevolence, he cannot well expect, if ^e understand himself, that the issue of
that Close, should have but one Face, and that handsome* but one Name, and that
Christian. Certainly, it must needs prove a thing of doubtful Interpretation,
of a Priest-and-Minister Face, of a Secular and Ecclesiastic Head and
S^oulders, or else an uncooth-shap't Lay-Elder bepist in the Swadling-clouts;
for part of its Original it will owe to that Impression which the Father has
derived from strange apprehensions of Canterbury, and part to the Dad and Mam,
as mere Seperatists. Neither is it unlike, that the shape of a Bishop should
contract Lay-Eldership and Original Sin from the blood of a Brownist, where
ignorance and hate has mistaken, and writ it foul.

But see! here comes a Company of Assasinates to make a religious ^iot upon
Cheapefide-Crosse: they look something like Men, and might possibly beget
Children with humane Faces; but for those very Images which they will carry
home to their Wives, Imprinted in their Animal-Spirits, (Spiritus animalis
quoniam natura mobilis, tenuis passivusque est, aptus est omnibus a rebus pati,
Campanella. lib. 4. cap. 6.) by looking eagerly upon what they desire to ruin.

The Objects of Love and Hate cut deep Impressions in our Souls. One falls
foul upon the Picture of Judas and his Lantern, and when he comes home
reports to his Wife his zeal and valor, and ^hen whilst his spirit is big and
full of the action, begets a Brat with a Judas-lanthorn-belly, which in time
will be fi^^d with Illumination and Gutt, like the Fathers. Another ^al upon
the Statur^ of S^int Peter; a third upon Paul's; a fourth upon those which are
remembrancers of more glorious Names, and from all these first looked upon with
hate, while they stand entire, and then with pleasure when they are dismembered,
strange unshapen figures are impressed in the blood, able to make all their
posterity Apes, Elves, and Hobgoblins.

Thus they prevaricate from my first Rule which teaches Men to take heed what
affection presides in them, and what Impression they derive from outward
Objects. And since misshapen objects possess the eager beholders with misshapen
figures; I advise the Sectaries hereafter to find themselves objects wherein
there is a beauteous conformity of all parts, out of a Christian pity to them
and their posterity, I wish them all which have Wives to buy the Canon of the
Mass, ana the Golden Legend, for there they shall find most beauteous
pictures of the Roman Saints of Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Archbishops,
Archdeacous, Canons, Demicanons, Prebends, Deans, Nuns, and Virgin-Ladies,
which will beget ^ine ^ormes in their fancies, especially if with a devout
intention they peruse the story of their lives subjoynd, which will certainly
send them back to gaze upon the pictures with a great deal of love. One
serious look of a Brownist upon the red Capital Letters in the Canon of the
Mass, would enable him to beget a Boy or G^rle with Cherrycheeks and L^ps. But
I must praemonish thee (good Brownist) that thou look not upon all the pictures
in the Masse-book and Legend with equal ardency; take ^eed of staring too wide
upon S. Dunstan holding the Devil by the Nose with a pair of tongs, lest
immediately upon it thou chance to get a Babe which may have more of the
Devil, the Nose, and the Tongues in it, then of S. Dunstan. There is a Picture
of a certain Saint, preaching in the Water with a little Millstone about his
neck, by miracle to convert the Ethnicks which flung him so desperately into
the Water* pass by this picture I pray thee, lest while the Imagination of
this is fresh in thee, thou should aff^ict the World with a prodigious
opinionist which would induce a form, and urge the necessity of Preaching in
the Water, with Milstones about men's necks, to put Universitie Hoods quite out
of fashion. And thus I pass from the first Rule, and your trespasses against
it, with the redresses of ills ensuing to you from those trespasses, to the
second Rule as follows.

2 Rule. Let no Sectary dare to enter the arms of his mistress, before he has
praemeditated, and is certainly informed whether benign stars be in the
H^roscope, whether happy Planets smile upon one another with a gracious aspect,
that a Child may not be got (as Spencer speaks) -- Under ill-disposed Skies,
When sullen Sa^u^ne sits 'ith'house of obloquies.


But this Rule the Brownist is partly resolved, partly necessitated to
transgress though he get a Child with more horrid and ridiculou^ Phisnomies
then are necessary for a whole masque of anticks. First because he neither has
nor will have any skill in this kind of humane learning. Secondly, his
extemporary Cock-sparrow devotion toward his doxie will not let him take time
to Catechize a Planet, and say, is it peace Jehu (for by his learning he may
easily take that for the name of a Planet) or in what point of Heaven is
Leviathan now. Thirdly, because he cannot be convinct that the Stars have an
Influentiall authority here upon Earth, since he believes that the Bishops
which liein a nearer prospect to him have none at all; And yet the Stars
(beloved sought in their courses against Jabin and Sisera, and why may not the
Stars take up the Cudgels to break thy babies Head, or Brain, or face, and make
it break forth a ^ery Moone-calfe; rather then you should be quite ignorant in
this Rule and fright us still with your Childrens ill-portending faces, I pray
that you may convert Bouker, Alestre, Winter, and all the rest of the
Almanack-mongers to be the advisers and grooms of your wantou Stools.

3 Rule. My third Rule or caution is founded upon a relation of Aelian a Greek
Historian and Philosopher. In Africa (says he) where it is very hot, and
Waters are scarce, wild Beasts of all kinds and shapes meet iogether at the
Water in very great Companies, and there, when their spirits are cheered by the
Water, they engender with one another at random, and so by a continual
coalition of promiscuous blood, Africa is continually full of strange and
monstrous shapes.

It is not hard to draw a fair parallelisme betwixt these African Beasts, and
the practice of the invisible brethren; your hearts* (brethren) are known to be
as great and malignant as those which the surly Dogstar breathes; your
companies are full, and of shapes, strange and exotic, whether compared with
us, or one another, your watering places are but few and private; your waters
are cheering, sublimated Cock-broth, ambergreece caudle, candied-eryngomotives,
frontinack and muscatellie-means, with the high and mighty spirit of
Diasatyrion to raise your weaklings, fallen into interims of spiritual
desertions; now, if you chance to mingle your loves promiscuously (which I will
not say) as you i^^e^^eave opinions, and beget monsters, in reason, your Church
may well Vie with Africa for monstrous shapes, and give it three in seven. Take
heed therefore (good private Christion) of these hot, private, lusty, and
promiscuous meetings, if thou mean that thy Child, or him that thou may
own for thine, should have a handsome ingenious look.

My fourth Rule informs the Sectary not to be rash in the choice of a place
for familiar congresse and collation of notes with his Mistress, place may
conduce much to the temper, both of the body and mind of a Child. A Child got
upon a pair of stairs, is very likely to be crump-shouldred; and besides that,
may confess the place of its Original by staring. An Orchard may conduce to
the Green-sicknesse; a Dayrie to a Wheybeard; a Chee^e-loft to all kind of
Obstructions; a Gallery, to a Long^ose* a dull kitchen to the love-hickup, for
the want of Wit; and repletion by meat and drink engender love and the hickup.
If thy Mistress will stand a veney rather then fail against a Bean-stalk, can
thou think to beget any thing there but an Arminian, for the Mothers fear and
suspicion of breaking her Bean-rest, may infuse in a Babe so begot a strong
suspicion of falling away finally, against the Brownists Position of Assurance:
If she be so coming that she will allow thy Courtship, even there where there
is nothing but Venice-glasses and Urinals behind her, the Birth may prove an
open trasparant Fool, and have the Pissing evil for ever.

My fifth Rule advises thee to leave thy Preaching, and fall to thy Trade, if
thou mean to get Children with handsome Faces, and Symmetrious Limbs. Those
high speculations of thine, concerning Gods eternal efficacious decree,
concerning the certainty of Divine prescience opposing contingency of actions,
concerning the immobility of Divine praedestination, end reprobation; those (I
say) make thy weak Spirit, like a Skain of raveld Silk, which is hardly evolved
without snapping, ^aring, and a thousand knots; whilst thy Spirits are so
entangled, perplexed, and at^enuated into single threads, thy Child must
probably have such a long, thin, and narrow Face, that a man even with that
Face, instead of a stick might stop paper into the hole of an Eldern-gnn. The
Roman Priests even for this Reason, Because their Spirits are engad'g in Divine
and Humane Contemplations, are prohibited the Marriage Bed; and if at any time
a contemplative Priest chance to g^t a Baby, it proves such a witless and
shapelesse Fool, that he never owns it as his Son, but his Nephew. Much more I
could have said in this Argument of Sectary-facemending, but that a serious
study which I have in hand, calls me to play upon a deeper Reed, then ^^nes the
Face of a (...). If these Precepts already given do not mend their Faces and
behaviors, I beeleeve our Honorable Patriots of the high Council will become
such natural magnians as Jacob was, and lay Rods for'em in their most private
Watring-troughs.

FINIS.

