Christophilos. The true CHRISTIAN SVBIECT Decyphered in a Sermon preached at
Saint Paul's London, on the seventh of August, Anno 1642.

By Benjamin Spencer, Minister of St. Thomas Parish in Southwarke.

Iudicium regis est ultimum judicium, ultra quod causa pertransire non porest.

Aug. Cont. Parm. Lib. 1. Potestas principis juris est, non injuriae, and cum
ipse sit Author juris non debet inde injuriarum naset occasio, unde jura
nascuntur.

Bract. MAT. 24.15. Let him that reads understand.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Paybody, dwelling in Paternoster Row, in Queen^s
Head Court. 1642.

To the Right Honorable EARL OF MANCHESTER, Lord Privy Seal, B. S. wishes
all present and future happiness of Grace and Glory.
Right Honorable,
I Think my self happy as Saint Paul said to King Agrippa, that I have
occasion given me to plead before one, who is red in all Customs and
questions, that so those which speak evil of the Sermon may be ashamed by
your justification of it, to whom I make bold to dedicate it. Not that by your
greatness it should be defended, if it give just offense, but by your
worthiness protected from unjust calumnies of suspicion, of which the world is
now so full that Jealousy has given faith her pasport and she is gone. Being
therefore fallen into these dregs of time wherein we can hardly draw off
clear Wine without racking some new opinions, which are so toothsome. I
thought good to try if I could but help to settle those muddie Lees by
expounding some Texts of love, peace and obedience. But my good meaning has
been so much mistaken, and my words wrested, yea threatened, yet not by either
wisdom or greatness that I am forced to present this Sermon to your L
rdships censure First, and next to the view of the world. To the world for my
vindication to your Honor for expression of my duty in which I shall ever rest

Your Lordships truly devoted Servant, Benjamin Spencer.

To the Considerable READER.
Gentle Reader;
IF thou knew how much this Sermon has been abused by evil Tongues, and
how I have been urged to print it before it was scandalized, but especially
since, that it might vindicate it self, thou will clear me from any
audacious daring of the times or vain glory to be seen in print. Pardon me
only in taking the Text, and I fear no censure for the Sermon, because it is
not Conscious of time serving by taking part with any save plain Truth, which
all good men aff ct though she have an austere countenance, to whose commands
for my part I have ever devoted my self, and shall be glad to die in thy
service, if thou will in hers, To which good purpose that God would assist us
with his grace, I pray, and rest thine in Jesus Christ,

Ben. Spencer.

A Sermon Preached at St. Paul's on the seventh of Aug. 1642.
PROVE. 24.21, 22, 23. 21. My Son fear God and the King, and meddle not with
those that are given to change. 22. For their destruction comes suddenly and
who knows the ruin of them both? 23. These things belong to the wise.

THis Book and Ecclesiastes are Salomons retractations, or his second
thoughts, and therefore the more worthy, to be thought of We may say of him as
it was of Origin, ubi male nemo pejor, ubi been nemo melior, In his error no
man was worse) but where he did well no man could mend it. I may call it one
of Salomons Gardens richly enameled with flowers of all sorts, some to make a
posie for the moralist, as rules of Ethics, or moral Philosophy, others for
the house-holder, as rules of Oeconomie; some for Governors, and people, which
we call politics, of which, this is one: My sin stare God and the King, etc.

In this Garden you seldom find many flowers upon on stalk; many verses upon
one subject.

Here is two, and a bud; two verses and an half all yielding a rare seed,
goodly leaves, and a fragrant sent unto all whose Noses are not stopped, or their
mamillary process corrupted. I mean whose understandings are clear, and
their affections clean.

In this verse behold a praecept and an inducement to perform it. Division.


The praecept is like the Commandments of God both Affirmative, Praecept.
and Negative.

The affirmative part is fear God and the King, Affirmat.
wherein we may see whom we are to fear, God and the King, severally,

Secondly, God and the King conjunctly.

Thirdly, God frist, then the King orderly.

The Negative part is, Negative.
and meddle not with those that are given to change. Wherein we see, First the
duty imolicite not to be given to changing, Secondly, not to meddle with those
that are given to it. If meddling be forbidden then changing much more. If the
less then the greater.

The inducement to performed is is, Inducement Loving counsel. Wholesome.
first because it is loving counsel, it comes from a Father Secondly, it is
wholesome Counsel it prevents destruction and ruin both which else will come,
and that first, suddenly, and secondly, inscrutably, ere we knower her from
whence it comes, or how long it shall continue, for who knows the (...) of
either, viz. of them who norther fear God, nor the King

Thirdly, Wise.
Because it is wise counsel such as wise men both give and take though fools
will not receive instruction. These things belong to the wise: which words
though some translations set by themselves in relation to what comes after,
writing it thus like a title. (These are also the sayings of the wise,) yet
because it may justly draw all that follows into a just suspicion of being
the sentences of some old Rabbis and doubtful Authors, I take it rather to
have relation to the Counsel, Fear God and the King these things, or duties
belongs to the wise.

The pracept is fear God and the King, Praecept.
which being severed we are taught to fear God, and fear the King.

First, For the fear of God, Fear God.
It is a duty which leads us to wisdom, The fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom, and in vain do men seek wisdom, who do not first learn to
fear God, even as they do labor in vain in the quest of virtues, si aliunde
eas sperandas putent quam a domino virtutum, if they seek it any where but of
God.

We need not make an observation here which is made to our hand that God must
be feared. But I would it were done as sure as we believe it should be done,
and then men would not have so many vain hopes; for all true hope is grounded
upon the true fear of God.

But the fault is some fear not God at all, Some fear not God at all.
as those that ask with Pharaoh, who is the Lord, till they come to some great
exigent as the Persian Cavaleers, who were wont to say in their Cups, there
was no God. But when the Grecians had them in chase, and they came to the river
Strymon, they then prayed to God the ye might hold till they got over.

Secondly, Others fear God ignorantly as Children are afraid to go in the
dark, 2. Ignorant fear.
they know not aright the God of their fathers and therefore as some worship
him wrong by doing aliquid magis, though not majus somewhat more, though nothing
greater than God requires: so others are afraid to worship him right by that
inanis timer deorum also of which Cicero speaks a vain fear of God, like the
idle servant who said he knew his master was an hard man and would exact
account of every dort, and therefore he for fear of loosing any, hid it in a
Napkin and so lost all the gain he might have made; so this ignorant fear
makes some too superstitious in maintaining Ceremonies that are nocent and
others too scrupulous in gain saying Ceremonies that are innocent. Of both
which Saint Paul warns us, Colos. 2.8.20, 21.

Some have the fear of diffidence, 3. Fear of diffidence.
that God cannot or will not save as Israel said, can God give meat to his
people? this fear makes them to value Christ at too low a rate by selling the
price of the Redemption under the price of the Redeemer, as Judas did, who
thought the price of Redemption could nor buy out the sin by which he set so
small a price on the Redeemer.

Some have only the fear which is begotten by the spirit of bondage, 4. Fear
of the Spirit of bondage Psalm.
by which they fear only God for his judgments, but they never think, there
is mercy with thee, therefore thou shall be feared; but they look only upon one
attribute of God (viz.) his Justice which preventing them of the faith of
affiance they reject also the faith of adherence, which is as good though not
so strong, Psalm 42.11.

Some again fear God only with neglect of those whom he bids them to fear
also, 5. Fear of God single.
and so separates that which God has coupled. But as to fear God is wisdom,
so to depart from such evil is understanding, says Job 28.28.

Therefore the precept says also, Fear the King.
fear the King, To show us there is duty belongs to men as well as to God.
Give to Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to God that which is Gods, fear God,
for his own sake, fear the King for Gods sake. I might say for your own
sakes, for he that resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God and
receives to himself damnation. So that as God must have his fear, so the King
must have his. And as Gods fear must be partly for his judgment, though it
be better for his goodness, Romans 15.5.
so we must fear the King, not only for wrath, but also for conscience. Yet
his wrath is not to be slighted, for Solomon says, It is like the roaring of a
Lion, Amos 3.8.
Prove. 20.2. And shall the Lion rear, and shall not the beasts of the forest
tremble? but as David said of God so may it be said of Kings, when terras
Astraea reliquit, Justice has left the world and those dog days are come of
whom Saint Paul speaks, Psalm 90.11. Romans 13.
2 Timothy 3.1. who then regards the power of his wrath? Yet he is (...), the
revenger of wrath though,) not of his own,) nor in his own wrath must he take
revenge, yet he bears not the sword in vain. And therefore it is an happy
thing when people so bear themselves toward Kings as ever to keep in them a
(...), a parentall affection and not rowse up the (...) wrath, which is seldom
raised that ever it will be laid again without satisfaction, except in those
mild Princes, who like heavenly natures had rather conquer their subjects,
ferendo by bearing, than feriendo by smiting.

Object. What if men live not under a King?

Answ. Then they must fear him or them that are Vice Regum in place of Kings.

The true fear of a King due from his subjects, Wherein consists the fear
of a King. Eccles. 10.20.
consists, First, in having a reverene conceit of him, as Eccl. 10.20. Curse
not, or disrespect not the King in thy privy Chamber, not in the privatest
chamber which is thy heart, though he be evil, or has done thee some evil
as Saul did to David. For as God smote the Bethshemites to the number of 50000.
for looking into the Arc with too narrow and curious eyes: so will he those
that prye into Princes with the eye of envy or curiosity. The Bethshemites
thought because it had been among the Philistines in captivity, Euscherius
they might play with it as many suppose they may with authority in the evening
or declining of it: when the Lion grew weak says the fable, every beast did
beard him, yea the very Ass kicked him. When David was in distress. Nabal the
fool, cries who is David? and Shemei opens too wide upon him, and Sheba
blows the Trumpet crying, we have no part in the son of Iesse. fear of the
King consists in reverend speeches of him, as Saint Cyprian notes well upon
Christ's speech to him that smote him before the High Priest. He did not rail
at the High Priest for keeping such bad officers, but docens sacerdotalem
honorem servari oportere, contra pontificem nihil dixit sed innocentiam suam
tantummode purgavit, he did only defend his own innocence showing that
authority ought not to be rayled at but indeed ought rather to be preserved
like Sanctuaries, which as they are not to be violated, Psalm 89.51.
so neither is the footsteps of Gods Anointed to be slandered. Jude 13.
Christians must not be like the Sea which by every little wind swells into
raging Waves which foame out their own shame by casting up mire and dirt,
Isaiah 57.20. fear of a King consists in Obedience when he commands us that
which is good. Do well and thou shall have praise of the same, Romans 13 3.
says Saint Paul. It consists in patience if he commands thee evil, to suffer
rather: but beware of resisting the power, for fiat voluntas tua: (thy will be
done) extends to suffering as well as doing, for, hereunto you are called
(says Saint Peter,) to be subject to the froward as to the gentle. 1 Peter
3.21.
Let no man mistake, there is great difference in patience, there is a patience
without sense, such as is in things insensible, as Fields which suffer
themselves to be overflowed by waters, because they want sense and power to
stop the inundation. So there is a patience with sense, as the patience of the
Ass who feels his wrongs but wants reason to redress them. Then there is
the patience grounded upon reason of men knit together in a body politic, who
are taught by reason patience in some wrongs, least the body be disjoynted
upon any petty occasions and government utterly dissolved upon small
greevances. Lastly, There is the Christian patience begot by the precept and
pattern of Christ Jesus who left us an example, 1 Peter 3.
that we should follow his steps.

This patience is to be used especially when Christian Religion is assaulted
of which patience is both the badge and proof.

Patience therefore must be used to show our reverence unto Kings. Not but that
the powers may be reverenced and yet the goods of the Subject may be by them
defended by Law from rapine and their persons by Legal powers from illegal
violence. For herein the power is not resisted but the exuberancy and
overflowing of the power is stopped and turned into his true Current: For
example we resist not the current of a River when we stop the aestuation of
it from drowning our Lands and Houses, but we labor to keep it in his
Channel, Romans 13.
for as the River is ordained for our benefit, so is the power for our good.

But indeed the power by our impatience is resisted when just obedience is
refused, the just authority infringed, or the person endued with authority is
assailed or violated.

We see then there is a fear severally and properly belongs to God and the
King. God and the King conjunctly.
Now conjunctly, for God has joined the King in Commission with himself and
that so close as nothing comes between but a conjunction copulative, no power
of the Pope nor any other for Non habet parem super terram, (...). Optat. Com.
Tari. lib. 3. 1 Pet. 2.13.
for he is next and immediately under God, Super imperatorem non est nisi, qui
fecit imperatorem, and therefore says Saint Peter, submit your self, to the
King as to the supreme, Namely when there is a King: but if there be none then
unto those that rule Vice Regis in the place of Kings, and so unto Governors
as to those that are sent of him or them. And these are well joined together;
for we are apt to do our duty by halfes as either to fear God and contemn
the Magistrate and so become religious Rebels, or else to fear the King and
neglect God, and so make the Prince an Idol, but joined together they must
be, and that without any interposition. Colimus imperatorem ut hominem a deo
secundum and solo deo minorem. Tert. ad Scap.
Yet distinguish them we may, separate them we may not. Iulians Soldiers would
not sacrifice with the Emperor, and yet would fight for him, disjoined they
may not be, God has given them to us both together, to observe as the two
tables of the Law, thereby teaching us to avoid Heresy and faction either of
which will observe one table with a damage to the other: Heresy with fair
shows of good works to men, cover the injuries it does to GODS Truth. So
Faction and Hypocrisy by a show of Holiness to GOD cloakes the wrong it does
unto men. Therefore separate neither least you spoil both.

We see therefore that the fear of God and the King must go together, not
that hereby we make Kings equal with God, nor attribute to them indefinite
power much less infinite power as some flatterers have to the Pope who make
him believe he is infallible in knowledge and Almighty in his power. Nor do we
marry Minerva to our Kings, as the Athenians offered to Anthony, as if there
were no wisdom but in his breast. Nor do we make them Gods as the Grecians
did Alexander, but we teach people to obey them by the word, though they rule
not always by the word; for the neglect of their duty will not excuse the
neglect of ours. For though they indeed, that rule well are worthy of double
honor, 1 Timothy 5 17.
yet we cannot deny to any our single duty of fear and reverence.

This therefore may serve to consute the Anabaptists who will know no
Magistrate, Anabaptists condemned.
but separate the reverence of Magistrates from the fear of God, and so
Ecclipses the glory of Kings, and the duty of Subjects, by interposing
pretenses of Christian Liberty against their authority, and so turn it into
libertinisme even to the subjugating of Princes if they can find power enough
to do it, Anno 1533.
as you may read in the History of Thomas Munt. zerus, John Laydon, and
Cniperdoling, all which made insurrections against Governors, though
themselves liked well to rule as powerfully, and as proudly, and tyrannically
as the Turk himself. But this Text will not allow to fear God, and contemn
the King, nor fear God, and affright the King, but commands us to fear GOD
and fear the King. Least as says Optatus, Optatus.
Dum Donatus super imperatorem se extollit non veretur cum qui post Deum.

So the Papist his Doctrine is here condemned which boasts of his Catholic
faith, Papists condemned.
but teaches not true Christian fear. The Pope it seems has absolved them
from it, and the Papists ghostly Father comforted them against it, as Mortimer
did King Edward the seconds keepers, with this sentence, Nolite occidere reges
timere bonum est. It is good to do say they, what I fear to name.

There be others who say they abhor the Papists, Seditious Sectaries condemned.
and can as ill endure the Anabaptists, and yet have involved themselves in
their opinions of not fearing Kings as well as they, witness those dangerous
positions written in the time of Queen Elizabeth, Mart. in Libel. 3. page 28.
which for my part I adhorre to mention, though some do not to preach and
practice them, Dr. B. Dangerous positions.
by which opinions as they are tied together like Sampsons Foxes by the Tails,
so there is a firebrand between them which is able to set an whole kingdom in
a combustion. Of such as these one may say as Saint Paul said to Titus, there
be many unruly men, vain talkers and deceivers, who do subvert whole houses,
speaking things they ought not, Tit. 1.10.11.
whose mouths must be stopped, least they subvert whole kingdoms.

But now as we must fear God and the King, 3. Orderly: Fear God first and
then the King.
so we must fear God first, and then the King: the fear of God will teach us
so to do, and not fear the King the less for that, but the more and the
better. The first must be the grand work of the last, piety the foundation of
fidelity. Obedience to God, produces allegiance to Kings. God must be first
and chiefly served, Kings in him and for him. In him because my obedience
active must be governed by his precepts. For him, because my obedience passive
must be regulated by his example, and sulcepted for his sake, who suffered
himself not only to be baptized with death, by wicked Pilate. He that
observes not this order will confound his service by disorderly fear, and give
the fear which he owes God, to the King, and so be^^m a Sycophant, or give
the fear which he owes his King, to God only, and so become seditious under a
color of being religious, for we must fear God first, and principally, and
then the King.

For the King must be served in relation to God for he has set them as Gods,
and by him Kings Reign: Psalm. 82.7. Prove 8.15.
yet they be but earthen gods, and yet gods they are, and every earthen picture
must not expect to be such a vessel of honor, least the bramble exalting
himself to be a King, a fire come out of the Cedar and consume the bramble
and a fire come out of the bramble, and consume the Cedar, Judge 9.15, 20.
which commonly comes to pass when, solvuntur cingula Regum and legum,
Reverence to Kings and Obedience to Laws are loosened from the loins of
Royalty and Loyalty also. The sum of all is this. Ephesians. 6.2.
Fear God, and keep his Commandments, that is the whole duty of man: and one
of his Commandments is to obey the King, and Honor Him: As appears in
Commandment the fifth, which is the first Commandment with promise. Therefore
fear God and the King, and bless God we live under such a Prince as will
give us leave first to fear God, and then him. Again, so fear as that you
love, for fear has painfulness, timor edium spirat, Tert.
the spirit of fear profits not where the spirit of love is not. Fear God so
as it may direct us to the right fear of the King. And fear the King in some
measure as ye fear God; He that fears God is loath to forsake him, so we must
fear our Kings, as be loath to desert them. Let not this sentence be writ
upon our sign posts for a memorandum, and we forget it.

Fear God and honor the King.
LEast a voice cries out of the timber, and another answers it out of the
wall, Hab. ^.11.
and proclaim our sin. But consider every King is either Gods golden
Scepter, or his Iron rod, by which he breaks in pieces many a vessel of
clay. Let us as far as Gods Word enjoy noth, submit our selves to both, and
not strive to wring Gods rod out of his hand, least we acquire to our selves
the more stripes. Therefore meddle not with those that are given to change.

This is the Negative part of the praecept, meddle not, which, Negative part.


back of the breath, Psalm. 119.131
as if afraid to put the hand or the tongue to evil. Say not as Saint Aug.
warns, quid miht and regi, what have I to do with the King, Aug. Super. Jo.
unless you will say also, Quid miht and possessioni, What have I to do to
possess the goods I have.



fear of God will make us cautious how we change our God, or our Religion, so
a true fear of the King, will make us take heed how we change or desire to
change our Governors. So that as this part has relation to the fear of God,
it warnes us we should not meddle with those that are irreligions; As it has
relation to the King, so it warns not to meddle with those that are
seditious. And therefore as it is most laudable for a State to root out
superstition; So is it not less commendable to oppose Rebellion.

We are warned therefore here, not to meddle with change nor changers. Not to
be given to it our selves, nor meddle with those that are given to it.

First, Not to meddle with it. Meddling is to make a meddle or mingling. So
that in meddling with change is understood a mingling of things to make them
alter from their proper state and being, as in making of colors diverse
colors are mixed or meddled together, and from thence comes a change, so man
being a creature by nature affecting Novelty is apt to meddle with change
though it be from better to worse, and this is rooted in him ever since the
first change he made in Paradise. From hence it is that every n^w form
appearing to us, We first meddle with it in our fantasy, and before judgment
can determine we suffer it to mingle with our affections: From whence follows
a desire or a being given to change. But considering what ill success Adam had
in changing, it is good to be advised. Seldom any change is made but it costs
much trouble, though it be for the better as sick bodies to be made well. Yet
to recover health is worth trouble, and against such change the wise man
speaks not, but against the affectation of it as against people who are given
to take physic more for fashion than necessity or for wantonness than want,
and so sometime stir humors, to the bodies ruin.

To avoid this humor of change we must look back again, fear God and the
King, that will keep down the the humor.

Then look on the danger of changing.

First, Of changing God. Go to the Isles of Chittim. has any Nation changed
his God, or his Religion, and shall we ours for popery or any other which may
corrupt the Protestant? Ier. 2.10, 11.
God forbid.

Again, for changing Kings consider if men affect to change for none, see the
misery of such a state, Judges 17.6. There was no King in Israel, Judge. 17.6.
where Micah brings in Idols. So Judges 18.1. There was no King, and then Dan
went a robbing. Judge. 18.1.
So Judges 19.1. There was no King, and then the Levites wife was ravished,
Judge. 19.1.
and afterward they took the daughters of Shiloh by force.

Again if men affect changing for others, as Samuel for Saul, it brought great
trouble, God gave that King in his wrath, and yet as bad as he was David durst
not meddle to make a change though for his own advantage, for says he to
Abishai who can stretch forth his hand against Gods anointed and be guiltless?
1 Samuel 26.9.
For had he suffered it, he had but taught away to destroy himself another
time. 2 Samuel 3.1.
Nay if Saul's House be changed for David (the far better choice) yet much
blood it cost, Luke 19.14.
and therefore meddle not with it without mere necessity enforce, but remember
those that said in the Gospel, Nolumus hunc regnare; and therefore as we
would not meddle with changing, so not with changers, or with those that are
given to it.

Those that meddle some calls homines duplicantes, doubling men, Medlers. Kab.
Sa^om.
who fold one thing within another, speak one thing and mean another; men of
a dark light says others, who are twilight men, they do things by half
lights, that is, their actions are of a mixed color, not perfect white, not
perfect black; their actions are like Linsey Woolsey, zeal and malice,
knowledge and ignorance carnal policy and piety, so they make a medley or a
confusion.

Therefore Ne commiscearis, ne confundaris, Numb. 16.26.
be not mixed least you be confounded, as Moses said, Numbers 16.26. Separate
your selves from these men, least you be consumed in their sins. For as the
simple people that followed Absalom fell in the wood of Ephraim, 2 Samuel 18.8.
so male-contented persons by being given to change, bring themselves into an
intricate wood, out of which they cannot extricate themselves. The people with
whom we are not to meddle are men who are apt to change, Changers.
like the Moon, and in their minds, and like the tide they love to carry all
things in their own current. The word in the Hebrew is Shonim, which some
translate travelers, (...)
or plodders, that plod o^ and journey in sin: that travail or take much
pains, as men in a journey, and walk on in the counsel of the ungodly,
though mercy has often passed by them, yet they iterate, and itinerate in
mischief. Psalm 1.


Others read it for detractors. Meddle not with men that have slanderous
tongues, such as Shemei and Nabal, who laid too hard charges upon David, so
Corah upon Moses and Aaron, that they took too much upon them, Numb. 16.3.
but that fault was their own, for Moses and Aaron had their just calling to
it, but so had not they. Envy had laced them so straight, that they could
admit of no government but their own.

Others read it seditious. Meddle not with the seditious such as was Absalom,
2 Samuel 15.3, 4.
who bewitched the people with a fair tongue, saying there is none deputed to
do you justice, but if I were in place, all should be well or the like and
thus with words of vanity, he beguiles the hearts of the simple, 2 Pet. 2.18,
19.

Others read it changeable men, or men of various dispositions. It may be men
that like a balance are apt to turn with a grain or like a Weather Cock with
the Wind, who love to Ring the Changes, because they are more delightful for
variety, but not so easy nor so orderly.

All these senses may be understood here for the word is of a large
signification especially considering that all men's travayling in detraction and
sedition, is but for a change, and shows men of changeable dispositions. For
first men revolve in their minds some discontent, and then resolve every one
in the secret of his own private heart.

(Shen) a tooth, and David said that his Enemies teeth were spears and
arrows, Psalm. 57.4.
and their tongues a sharp sword. Unto such belongs this caution. Galat 5.15.
If you bite one another take heed least you be consumed one of another.

Shemei comes Sheba always. Sedition follows detraction at the heels, which
is nothing else but a departing from the tracts of true reason, Law, Custom or
Religion, with a violent motion toward some change affected, as we see
oftentimes in Israel, who poor souls complained often of their Governors,
when they were not straightened in them, 2 Cor. 6.10.
but (aswere the Corinthians) in their own bowels like children who sometimes
complain their Clothes are too strait when their bellies are too full, to
them belongs that lesson. Ephesians. 4 14.
Be no longer children tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine.

Thus we see what changing is. I think we have no reason to meddle with it. And
if we have any mind to avoid it.

diabolum in o^e, the other in aure. One has an evil spirit in his tongue,
and the other in his ears, if he hear it with delight. The one was Shemei
his sin, the other was Saul's.

Sheba did who blew the Trumper saying, We have no part in David.

Achitophel with his counsel.

Ioab was to Adoniah, and Abiathar the Priest by his prayers, when David was
weak.

Abell.

Sichem did Abimelech against the house of Gideon.

Therefore as Daniel said to Nebuchidnezzar, Daniel. 4.27. Loving Counsel.
so say I to all of what condition soever. Let this counsel be to thee
acceptable, that if it be possible, it may be a lengthening of thy
tranquillity. And well may this counsel be taken.

First, because it is loving counsel, it comes from a Father, and therefore we
may conceive it good, for seldom or ever you found any father to give evil
counsel to his Child, though he be bad himself. For nature rejoices in the
prosperity of posterity. Dives in Hell would have his brethren forewarned of
that place of torment, to which himself was damned: Though some Fathers have
less charity than Dives or less wit at least, who care not to educate their
children in true wisdom, not knowing that their Children being damned with
them will be a means to increase their own infernal sorrows, King Lewis
the Eleventh of France is much to be wondered at therefore who brought up his
son Charles at Ambois without litterature as Guicciardine reports, he hardly
knew the forms of Letters, but only le^ him learn this sentence in Latin,
Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare.

This was Council more like machtavill, then a King, to teach his son to be
a dissembler. A good Fathers council speaks better things to children. They
are called in Latin Patres a pate faciendo, from opening their hearts to
Children, or a patrando for doing much for them, or a patiendo, from bearing
much with them, such a Father is God above all. Such an one for counsel is
Solomon, and every good Minister by the word of exhortation.

If coming then from a Father, receive it as children, for if from God a
Father so good, and Solomon a King so wise, Arist.
Consentaneum est ex melioribus ortos esse meliores, we should be the better
being advised by the best Parents: and as we please our selves in supposing
God to be our Father in giving us this Counsel, so let him be pleased in us
by showing our selves his sons, and ready to take this counsel.

But if this prevail not, yet consider it is wholesome counsel like
preventing physic which may be as an Antidote against destruction, Inducement.
for he says as an inducement not to meddle with change, their destruction
shall come suddenly.

Wherein we will consider,

shall come.

destruction and ruin.

suddenly, it comes sudden.

who knows it.

First, Certainty.
Of the certainty, it shall come.

Judgment has feet of Wool but hands of iron. Psalm 50.
God says Psalm 50. I winked and thou thoughtest I was like thy self, but I
will set before thee in order the things that thou have done, for sure our God
will come and not keep silence. He bends his bow and makes it ready. Psalm
7.12.
He loves to wait that he may be gracious to us, and forbear that he may
have mercy upon us, although man's sins are such as that the very Poet could
say, -- Non sinunt Iovem ponere fulmina. Hor.
So then if the sinner turn not, he will whet his sword. He is yet but
whetting, I would we would take counsel and meet him by repentance, while he
is a far off, Luke 14.32. Greg. in Evang.
and crave conditions of peace, Ne justitiam destrictiorem in judicio exigit,
quanto longiorem ante judicium patientiam provocavit, least judgment be the
larger by how much it stays the longer. Oh save God a labor, Aug.
peccatum puniatur a te ne tu pro illo puniaris. Punish thy sin least thou
be punished for it, Et peccatum tuum judicem te habeat, non patronum, be not a
Patron to thy sin, but a judge, and then I hope, Nay I am sure this
destruction will not come, or if it do, we shall laugh at destruction when it
comes. Job. 5.22.
For when the Net shall be spread upon all, yet some fish shall be but
transported out of these muddy waters, into the sweet streams of Paradise, and
some birds to sing among the quire of Angels. For though it is certain, come
it will, yet as God is loath it should come, Hosea 11.8. Hosea 11.8.
How shall I give thee up Oh Ephraim, how shall I deliver thee up Oh Israel,
how shall I make thee like Admah, how shall I set thee like Zeboijm? my heart
is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together: Yet his resolves are
certain, being pressed under as a Cart is pressed with sheaves, so that we
must put him to the Quaere what could, Jsaiah 5.4.
I have done more than I have done to my Vineyard? and Oh my people what have I
done to thee, Micah 5.
or wherein have I wearied thee; testify against me? So I know in that day he
will distinguish between the precious and the vile though it be to others a
destruction and a ruin.

The manner of this judgment is such. M^nner.
Destruction implies some violence: as if such as fear not God and the King
should not die a natural death, which indeed is never called destruction but a
dissolution rather; for violence does destroy before the time, and destruction
is a kind of pulling down, not repair again or to build, but to lie waste like
old Troy, which became, Corpus sine nomine, a body without a name, Nay not so
much: for destruction extends to all manner of being, so that a man shall not
say this was Iezabel, 2 Kings 9.37.
except to their infamy; for destruction pulls down house, body, name and fame.

And therefore most justly is this judgment called a ruin, Ruin.
because such men, pereunt funditus, they perish as it were by the mothers
curse, which roots out the foundation. So that such men like old ruinated
houses shall drop in pieces, Jsaiah 24.1.
as fair houses wanting inhabitants do, which for sin they must want, says
the Prophet, though it may be some think as Cicero says, Piscinas suas fore
salvas amissa Republica, Cicero ad Attic.
that though the Commonwealth be ruined, their houses shall stand. But let
them not deceive themselves for the sword of destruction knows no difference,
as that Commander said in 88. between an English Papist, and an English
Protestant when things are once in confusion.

But the worst of all is, this shall come suddenly. It shall rise suddenly,
Suddenly.
as the Hebrew word shows ((...)) which signifies a vapor as well as
destruction showing,







David, Psalm 37.36.
but his place could no where be found.

Well then being it comes upon a sudden like a Theife in the night, and so man
knows not his time, Eccles. 9.12.
but like a bird taken in the snare, and or a fish in the not so is man in the
evil day when it falls suddenly upon them. For as men riding in a mist, when
it is gone find themselves sometimes where they would not: so those that walk
in the Clouds of obscurity, 2 King. 6.26.
as they think no man descries them, so neither do they descry their own
danger till it discover it self suddenly.

Therefore what manner of men ought we to be in all godly conversation and
honesty, since it comes suddenly, and therefore they cannot escape, for God
will shoot at them, who obey not his precepts, Psalm 64.7.
with a swift arrow suddenly, that they shall be wounded.

who knows the ruin of them both. Where we see, First, that neither can
exempt himself from destruction. Neither he that fears not God, nor he that
fears not the King, nor he that fears neither God nor the King, they that
are medlers against lawful authority or he that medleth or mixeth with them,
both are threatened here. Prove. 11.21.
Though hand join in hand, yet not one shall go unpunished. So secondly, we
see the punishment is inscrutable, and as far as I know eternal.

Acts 20 30.
so even from among those that fear neither God nor King, may arise some,
whose hearts God may so turn, as they may be a means to bring ruin upon the
rest.

Bajazet little thought of the Iron Cage in which Tamberlaine carried him, who
intended so to carry Tamberlin. Nor Perillus thought not that he should have
roared first in his brazen Bull.

1 Samuel 10 26. Isaiah. 30 33.
We know that Tophet is ordained of old, yea for evil Kings it is prepared,
and I believe not leffe for evil subjects if they be such Tophets, such fools
to be led aside, Deuteronomy. 1.1.
or such Achitophels such kinsmen to fools, as that they neither fear God,
Romans 13.
nor the King, for Saint Paul tells us that such receive to themselves
damnation.

If we would avoid the penalty, then avoid the finne, otherwise it will fall
upon us. Upon them that fears neither God nor King, which is mere Atheism,
and Libertisme mixed together, or God without the King which is to make a show
of godliness, and deny the power of it, 2 Timothy 3.5.
to keep a form of piety in the first Table, and deface it in the second. Or
that fear the King without God, which is to love the praise of man, more than
the praise of God. Or that fear God before the King, which is mere flattery,
if not Idolatry, Prove. 28.21.
and such men will transgress for a piece of bread. Therefore let us avoid all
these, and fear GOD, not without the King. For if GOD said Amen to David's
Curse on the Mountains of Gilboa as Saint Ambrose observes, Amb. in Lib. off.
Aruerunt montes maledicto prophetico, after Saul's death upon them, they dried
away, and the grass did not thrive there, how much more will the imprecations
of good men take effect upon those who regard not these precept. It cost
Absalom the hanging, and Achitophell an halter of his own purchasing Ioab his
life, after he had taken sanctuary. Abiathar his Priesthood. The City of
Abell a seige, and it might have proved a sacking, if there had not been one
woman in it wiser than all the men. Sheba his head, and Sichem an utter ruin
even to the sowing of salt upon it to season all posterity. Coreh and his
company such a ruin, as who knows, how far it went, even to the lowest pit
so far as we know.

Besides all this it is wise counsel. Wise Counsel
For it is spoken to the wise, It is such as wise men uses to give and take.
Of which we may say as the Angel said in the Revelation. Here is wisdom.
Let him that reads it consider. Rivel. 13.18.
It is not spoken to fools, whom if we bray in a Mortar, yet will not be the
wiser.

But to those that either are wise and judicative, and this may make wiser, or
those that are wise optative, in wish seekers for wisdom. Or those that
think themselves wise, and are only wise supposative, and are the great
active brains, and stirring spirits, and by that means would be thought wise.

Let none of these refuse this honest counsel, this holy advice. Nor those
that are the stickling malignant spirits, who think themselves wiser than
King, Parliament, or the whole State b^side, let not them refuse it, but let
them remember to be subject not only to the King, but to those that are sent of
him: For in them, they are subject to him. If they be or would be wise. let
them not strive to divide the body from he head, and make the State like the
Serpent called Amph soena, who had an head at either end, Romans 14.19.
which by diversity of attraction bred distraction, and so broke the body a
sunder in the midst. And let us all study in the fear of God, the thing
which belongs to peace, that there be no breaking in nor leading out, nor no
complaining in our streets. Psalm 144.14.
I speak as to wise men, judge you what I sa^ says Paul. And here the only
wise God, and the wisest King speaks though the weakest preacher. Cape tu quod
suum for wisdom, quod tuum for duty, remitte quod meum, for infirmity sake,
or in charity at least.

And let us all pray for the King, to God, and for all that are in authority,
That God would give the King his judgments and his Righteousn sse to the Kings
Son, that whenever we look how he reigns we may remember also by whom he
reigns. In whose strength, Let the King rejoice O Lord, Psalm 21.2. Pro.
20.28.
and make him exceeding glad of thy salvation. Mercy and truth, preserve the
King, and let his Throne, be established by mercy, that by his m^ckenesse and
virtue, and the wisd^me of his great Council, the Parliament meeting together
thy people may be comforted and thy inheritance blessed in this world, with
the Truth of the Gospel in peace, and obtain at l^st those heavenly places
appointed for them i^ Jesus Christ, to whom together with the father and the
Holy Spirit three persons and one only true God be given all honor and glory
for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Epistle Dediatory, Red for read.

PAge 5. line 25. leave out him or, p. 10. l. 31. after baptized, read (with
water by Saint John Baptist but also) page 11. l. 10. read pitcher for picture.
p. 15. l. 10. leave out and, p. 19. leave out must, p. 22. line 31. read (that
fear the King before God) page 23. line 24. read Indicative.


