A VIEW OF A PRINTED BOOK ENTITLED OBSERVATIONS UPON HIS MAJESTY'S LATE
Answers and Expresses.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Liechfield, Printer to the University. 1642.

The Printer to the Reader.
YOu will wonder, it may be, that this comes forth no sooner, and yet comes
forth now, so long after the publishing of those Observations. That it comes
forth no sooner, is not that it was no sooner ready, but having passed the
Authors hand long since, it waited till now the convenience of a Press. That
it comes forth now (wanting not a President) is to free and undeceive Decl: of
the Lo: and Com: of the 2 of November.
such who are either entangled, or misled by his dangerous Doctrines; and to
vindicate the Kings just Rights and Privileges: All which you will find so
clearly done in the ensuing Treatise, that I doubt not but it will satisfy
every impartial Reader.

A VIEW OF A PRINTED BOOK Entitled OBSERVATIONS UPON HIS MAJESTY'S LATE
Answers and Expresses.
I Have read of the Citizens of Abdera, That one hearing a strange Tragedy
Luci^^.
full of seditious designs, they were all stricken into such a fit of
Frenzy, That for many days after, they did nothing but act the same Tragedy,
with furious gestures in their streets; I would it were not too late to wish
that licencious Pulpits and seditious Pamphlets might not work a like effect
upon our London Citizens.

Among the many other Libells I have not observed any that has so much
intoxicated the vulgar, or entangled the more understanding, as thse
Observations, wherein Treachery is more cunningly mixed with some show of
reason: Those other Spiders spun their Web for insnaring only weak and silly
Flies; But Prentices and Porters are below our Observator: A King and His
Answers shall be His Subject, and His Discourse shall soar alost unto the head
and origin both of regal and Parliamentory Power, wherein as in a Laborinth of
implicatory and inextricable Errors, some Reader may unhappily loose himself.
I shall not follow him in his maze of incertainties; I hope some able pen will
undertake to give him a sharp and just Answer; mean while to those Animad
versions formerly made, I shall add some few Observations.

And first, I would have you observe the boldness of his undertaking; A
Privad^, interposing himself betwixt a King and His Parliament, being in
earnest debate of the highest Rights that ever have come in question twixt King
and Parliament: It has been the modesty and wisdom of former times, with a
Veyl of Reverence, to reserve from vulgar insolence the Rights of Supreme
Majesty. And although at this time, by unhappy occasions, they are fallen into
question betwixt a King and His Parliament, yet should not any private man
presume to meddle. What? Are not the Parties a King and His Parliament, exempt
from our Observators Jurisdiction? No? nor is the Matter above his Cognizance?
No surely, both are subject to his Tribunal; and therefore he observes, and
boldly censures His Majesty's late Answers and Expresses.

His Pamphlet treating matter of so high concernment. I was somewhat scrupled
whether I might lawfully deal with it: But I considered, and be pleased
likewise to consider, That I make not the Messages and Answers, either of the
King, or Houses, subject to my Consure or Observation, I only encounter with
the Observator: Nor do I deal with the Matter it self otherwise then I find it
in his Observations, examining his Principles, and proposing some Arguments, as
against him only; upon all which, I presume not to make any determinate
Conclusion.

But now although his undertaking were bold, yet perhaps his expressions are so
full of humility, and dutiful regard toward his King and Sovereign, as will
make amends; for which purpose, be pleased to observe these Particulars [Pag.
37.] As for those absurd, unreasonable, incredible supposicions, etc, He speaks
of the Kings suppositions. [Pag. 39.] He first sets down the Kings Reasons
against Parliamentary Election of the great Officers: 1. That it would be
prejudicial to the people; 2. Dishonorable to Himself: upon which the
Observator thus replies; Man is by nature of restless ambition; Antoninus Pius
was greatly renowned for communicating weighty Affairs, and following public
advice: What will Nero more d^spise, then to condescend as Antoninus did; yet
it were more necessary that Nero were limited, then Antoninus. Page 7. He tells
us the King may not think to justify His Acts by a President of Queen Eliz.
For the gracious Acts of soft Princes may more easily invade the Subjects
Liberty, then the furious proceedings of such as Caligula was. Page 10. It Is a
wonderful thing that the Kings Papers (so he is pleased every where to term
His Majesty's Answers) being fraughted scarce with any thing else but such
Doctrines of Division, tending all to the subversion of our ancient
Fundamental Constitutions, should find such applause in the world. See Page
3. how he checks at the King for using the word ( Grace.) Page 31. he charges
the King to have left the Parliament out of good opinion to Papists and
Incendiaries; and that His solemn Oaths of cordial love to them, has wanted
integrity and faith. See Page 38. how he scornfully taunts the King: If he
spare not the King, do you think he will spare the Court? Page 42. He regards
not those fond things (Courtiers) which cannot see in humane nature what is
depraved in it, and what not; But what if he be bold with the secondary derived
Majesty of the King, yet he will be more respectfull of that he calls the
underived Majesty of the people. Page 11. We have ever found enmity and
antipathy betwixt the Court and Country, but never any till now, betwixt the
Representatives, and the Body of the Kingdom represented; and were we not now
those dregs of humane Race, etc. What? the Kingdom represented to whom you say
so great a Majesty is due, in whom Majesty is underived, will you say they are
the dregs of humane Race? Will you charge them with deserting their
Representatives, then which, you say (Page 16.) there is nothing, next to
renouncing God, more persidious. I fear our Observator is some one of the
malignant party, in saying, There is now enmity and antipathy betwixt the
Representatives, and the Body of the Kingdom represented; he would then have us
believe they are only Apprentices, and some of the courser sort, who unjustly
assuming the name of whole Counties, being hired with public Moneys, brought
up those Petitions, extolling and approving their Proceedings, when as the Body
of the Kingdom represented, had (as he says) forsaken their Representatives.

Who sees not the Observator's modesty? I will give you but a taste of his
sincerity in citing the Kings words. (Page 7.) he cites these in a small
Character, as if they were the Kings formal words: When Parliaments are
assembled, they have no Commission to counsel, but in such points as the King
pleases to propose: And if they make any transition into other matters, they
are laable to imprisonment, at the Kings pleasure; witness Wentworth's Case.
The King only cites the Writ (the Form whereof is ancient) whereby they are
summoned to counsel the King de quibusdam arduis, not in all things, but in
some things, says the King; Is this to say, only in such points as the King
shall please to propose? Did not His Majesty in express words at the beginning
of this Parliament, leave them to their own method? Again, Does the King say,
If they make any transition, they are liable to imprisonment at His pleasure?
Not His pleasure, but the Law is the Rule he ties Himself unto; these then are
but false Calumnies. Page 8. 9. 46. he charges the King with this Position, The
Lords and Commons in Parliament, are merely to council the King, As if without
their consent the King might make a Law. That they are limited by the Writ, ad
consilium only, That if we make the Lords and Commons to be more then
Counselors, we make them commanders and controllers, and this is not suitable
to royalty. From hence the Observator takes occasion to argue very sadly, That
the Lords and Commons are summoned not only ad c^nsilium, but ad consensum
also, in the making and altering Laws; And in this (though in nothing else) he
brings authority to back his reasons withal, citing the close Roll, 7. Ed. 1.
Quodomnes tangit ab omnibus approb^ri d^bet* or trat^ari. He did well to
corrupt the Record, by putting approbari d^bet, for tractari: otherwise it
would not have served his turn.

But surely the Point needed not proof, for never did the King, nor any body
else deny it; the King no where says, They are called ad consilium only,
merely, or that to allow them mere then to counsel, were to make them
Commanders: He says they are called to counsel (that is true) not to command,
(that is true) but he does not deny them power of consenting, which the
Observator contradicting himself, does afterward acknowledge (Page 16.) It is
l^s^ unq^^s^imed (says he) That the legislative power is partly in the King,
partly in the Kingdom; and that the King in ordinary cases cannot make a Law
or Ordia^n^^, without the Parliament. Is it left unquestioned? why then would
you abuse the people as if the King had claimed a legislative power to himself,
whereto the consent of the Lords and Commons were not requisite, (Page 7.) The
King (says he) deni^s the Lords and Commons, if h^ withdraw himself* to have
any power of any Court. (Page 10.) He cites these, as the Kings precise words,
It Is improbable and impossible, that His Cabinet-Councellors, or His Bishops,
or Soldiers, who must have so great a share in the misery, should take such
pains in the procuring thereof. (Page 25.) He tells you, That the King (says
he) cannot without renouncing His own conscience and reason, preforce the
Parliaments counsel before the Courts; All which, and many more, are falsely
imposed upon the King, to alienate and corrupt the affections of His Majesty's
Subjects. (Page 25.) He says, The King charges the Parliament with these
Doctrines, as so offensive: 1. That the Parliament has an absolute
indisputabl^ power of d^^laring Law. 2. That Parliaments are bound to no
Presidents. And then the Observator justifies these Doctrines, as well as he
may, for they are most true; And had the King denied them, as the Observator
would have it thought, he had indeed destroyed the power of Parliaments. But
the Doctrines the King charge them with, are, That the then major part of the
two Houses, had indisputable power of declaring Iaw, and were not bound to
Presidents: Had the Observator taken the Charge aright, he would not have
answered, Statutes are not binding to them, why then should Presidents? For I
hope the now major part of the Houses are bound by Statutes and cannot repeal
them, though the Parliament may. What though his Pamphlet be stuffed with such
corruptions? yet let me speak one word for him, He is no more faulty in this
kind then others.

You see his i^genuity; I shall now consider the solidity of his Reasons, and
the goodly Consequences he draws from them. Omitting then those loose
extravagant Passages, which have no connection with the Body of his Discourse;
the sum of that part which seems rational, is as follows; Quicquid efficit
tale, est magis tale: The efficient cause is ever superior unto, and more
excellent then that which it causes: But the people in whom Power is
original, and Majesty underived, are the efficient cause conveying Regal
Power and Majesty unto Princes, not God, who is no more the author of Regal,
then Aristocraticall Power: The same people being the efficient cause, are also
the final cause, for whose good and preservation only that Power is conveyed;
and their conveyance is fiduciary, upon trust, and under such Conditions as
they please. The people being the efficient cause of Kingly Power, he hence
inf^rres, They are above the King, Rex etsi sing^lis major, universis minor
est. And from thence (to bring it on to his purpose) it must needs follow (as
he thinks) the people being above the King, The Houses (being by virtue of
representation the same people) must likewise be above the King; The Houses
then being by virtue of representation the efficient cause, conveying Regal
Power upon Trust, and to no other end, but to the good and preservation of the
people, may, when they please to say, That it is not disposed of by the King to
that end, and according to that Trust, reassume that Power, and make
themselves the disposers thereof; from all which Grounds he inferres their
power of making Ordinances, obliging the People in general, The Ordinance of
the Militia to be legal, and consequently the Commissions of Array illegal,
The taking and retaining Hull to be justifiable, The taking the Magazine, and
whatsoever else has been taken from the King. That the King has in nothing
appertaining to His Crown, an unconditionable Property, That whatsoever Acts he
has passed, whatsoever he has done, or can do for His subjects, is mere Duty,
That He ought to acknowledge, that he can in nothing merit of the whole State;
That he ought to assent to all Bills that they approve, and adjudge fit to
pass; That His great Officers be such as they shall allow of; That without
him, they may authoritive, declare the Law, and consequently, make and repeal
Laws and Statutes at their pleasure; That when they adjudge the Power entrusted
with Him for the Kingdoms safety to be turned against them, they and all are
ipso facto, absolved of all Obedience, of all Oaths and Ties of Allegiance
whatsoever to His Majesty, and bound to seek their preservation by resistance
and defense. Desperate Conclusions.

I shall examine his Grounds ordine retrograd^, beginning with that immediately
antecedent to all his Conclusions, Wheth^r the Parliament (so he would have you
call the major part of the Lords and Commons remaining) are above the King, by
reason of their representing the whole Kingdom. How true it is, That the
Houses, without the King, represent the Universal Realm, shall be considered
anon, passing that by.

I conceive that the Parliament (truly so called) is above the King, taken
solely, for that it does involve the King, without whom they are not truly a
Parliament. The Parliament then, thus considered, is a whole compared with some
part, and the King but a part (though the most excellent part) of the whole;
Now every whole is greater then any part; the Head (though more excellent then
all the other Members, yet) not more excellent then the whole Man: whereof the
Head is but a part.

But the King solely compared with the Parliament (or rather the Houses of
Parliament) excluding or not involving the King, is superior and above them,
whether you consider them scorsim, or conjunctim; for taken conjunctim, they
make but a Body, which though it be greater then, then the Head in Bulk, yet
does the Head excel in Virtue, Excellence, and Authority; And although, by
virtue of representation, they are the Body of the whole Kingdom, yet is the
King the Head of that Body, and the Representative of God himself, who, I am
sure, is above the Body they represent.

It is a Principal undeniable, Pax in parem non habet imperium, multo minus in
superior^^^. If then the Houses be above, nay, if but equal with the King, He
can have no Command over them; But it is evident He has Command over them; He
calls and commands them to assemble; being assembled, or united together, He
may command them to prorogue, or adjourn for time or place; upon which Command,
it is then their Duty to rise* and remove; and again at His pleasure He can
dissolve them: Although for this time His Majesty has been graciously pleased
to restrain Himself from the exercise of that Power, yet the Power it self is
still in Him, as an Inheritance inseparable from His Crown.

The Representatives of the Kingdom either are Subjects, or not; That they are
not Subjects, by reason that they are assembled, is absurd, and so would not
the Kings Protection due unto Subjects, belong unto them. If they are Subjects,
then does the King remain their Sovereign and Superior: And indeed, so far is
their uniting and assembling in Parliament from diminishing the Kingly
Sovereignty to which they were before all and every one Subject, as that the
Regal Majesty is thereby much more increased and augmented. ( Cromp. Juris^.
10.) We are informed by Our Judges (says King H. 8. to His Parliament) That We
at no time stand so highly in Our Estate Royal, as in the time of Parliament;
wherein We as Head, and you as Members, are con^oyned and knit together in one
Body Politic.

If the Houses, as representing the Universal Realm, are above the King, then
they may judge Him, punish, or depose Him; But they cannot judge Him, 22 Edw.
3. 3. Le Roy per cux ne doit estre ajuge. 3 Edw. 3. S^^m^. 158.
19. Scrope. Those which are Judges of Parliament, are Judges of their P^^rs;
but the King has no Peer within His Own Kingdom, and therefore ought not to be
judgedly them. And for deposing a King, or depriving Him of His Right and
Authority, or any necessary part thereof, no Act of Parliament can prevail,
much less the Lords and Commons. An Attainder by Parliament, could not bar
the title to the Crown from descending on King H. 7. nor was an act of
Parliament disabling King H. 6. to reassume the 1. H. 74. 6. Plow. Com. 238.
244.
Government of his people of any force, but without any repeal in it self
frustrate and void, 7. Rep. 14. Calvin's case, an act of Parliament cannot take
away the Kings protection, or the Subjects service which is due by the Law of
nature. 11. Rep. Sur de la wares Case William de la ware although disabled by
act of Parliament was nevertheless called by Q. Eliz. to sit as a Peer in
Parliament for that it seems the Queen could not be barred of the service and
Counsel of any of her Subjects 2. H. 7. 6. A statute that the King by no non
obstante shall dispense with it, is void, because it would take a necessary
part of Government out of the King: If then no act of Parliament be of force
to take away the government or any necessary part thereof from the King; then
surely is not any Ordinance of the Lord and Commons of force to do it; And
consequently the Lords and Commons as representing the universal Realm cannot
be above the King, but inferior to him.

Before the King commanded them to assemble, each particular and all of them
were his Subjects and inferior to him: If by assembling into one body, and the
virtue of representation they cease to be his Subjects and inferiors, why do
they then in all their petitions, and declarations or Answers (proceeding from
them not as particular men, but as houses of Parliament united) style him,
Their gracious Sovereign and themselves, His Majesty's most humble Subjects,
the Lords and Commons in Parliament. Let our Observator judge whether these
representatives have not ill discharged their duty to the Kingdom by debasing
thus the underived Majesty (so he calls it) of the people; by petitioning in
so low and humble a form, him that is but their creature, and in whom there is
no Majesty, but what is from them derived down unto him (for so the
Obseruator conceives it.)

But now to answer the Observators Argument, which is thus, There is nothing,
says he, more known or assented to then this, that although the King be
singulis major, yet universis minor, being below the people then in universali,
he must likewise be below the representatives of that universalitie. I will not
stand to question what necessary connection these propositions have, The people
are above the King: therefore their representatives are so: The King of England
is above the King of Spain, does the English Ambassador, therefore take place
of the King of Spain? But admitting a necessary Connection. The people are above
the King, ergo, the houses representing them. Why then e converso, The houses
representing are not above the King, ergo, the people represented are not, and
so having proved the houses below the King I have already proved the King above
the people: yet a word more.

It Is true (as the Observator says) nothing is more known, or assented to then
this, that the King solely is Minor universis, the universalitie including the
King; For no part, be it the head, can exceed or be greater then the whole; But
again if the King and universalitie be contradistinguished, nothing is more
known or assented to then this, That the King (I speak of the King of England,
a Sovereign King, not a Duke of Venice) is not only singulis major, but major
universis. Nay most properly is the King above the people, considered as an
entire Congregation; For chiefly as he is King, he is above all others; Now
King relates to kingdom, Rex to Regnum: and Kingdom or Regnum denotes an
universalitie or body collected. As he is head, so is he in place, power and
dignity above the body politic or universalitie, and not otherwise the head
of any particular, but as he is a part of that universalitie. As out of the
Embrion (says Fortescue) arises a body natural ruled by one head, even so of
a multitude of people arises a kingdom which is a body mystical governed by
one man, as by its head: As then in the natural body the head is improperly
said to be the head of the arm, or of the leg, but the head of the body, so in
truth must the King be made the head of the mystical body, not of the
particular members. The King is but one head, and therefore but of one body,
not then of the particulars which are many bodies but of the universal one
body.

There is a politic body which is the Vniversalitas Angli^: has this body
politic no head? or is the head inferior to its body, and yet no Monster?
The Observator will object that the political head must be s^bservient to its
body, for that it received its first being and subsistence from the body, we
shall hereafter prove that the Regal power has always its being from God
though it be sometimes with the peoples approbation: And as the political head
has its subsistence with the body, and must be destroyed by its dissolution,
so if you destroy the head or kingly power, you destroy the kingdom, and
dissolve it into a Chaos and confused multitude: Nec populus Acephatus (says
Fortescue) corpus vocari meretur, quiaut in naturalibus capite detru^cato
residuum non corpus sed truncum appellamus; Sic in politicis sine capite
communit as nullatenus corporatur. But admitting that in the body politic the
head has its power and authority derived merely and solely out of the
politic provision, that radically and habitually was in the people to provide
for its own safety and weal; yet I cannot see how it will follow that
therefore the Regal power must be subservient and subject unto the people: for
as in the natural body, the heart being primum vivens, distributeth blood and
spirit unto all the members, and gives life and virtue unto the head it self,
yet must that and the whole body be subject unto the head, which as Supreme,
governs and directs the whole man.

A second kingly Attribute is this that he is Spons^s regni and at his
Coronation wedded with a Ring unto the kingdom: The Observator says this must
be applied to subjects taken devisim not conjunctim: Otherwise as the wife is
inferior to the husband, so would the people be in politiques to the King: But
in sadness is the King wedded to the particular men and women within this
kingdom with beards, and without, I pray how many wives will he so have?

The Observator foresaw the Arguments which might be drawn from these and
other attributes, whereby Princes are (...) Gods, Lords, Fathers, etc. and that
therefore subjects must stand by the same relation; as Creatures, Servants,
Children, etc. all Which he would shift off by his misapplyed distinction of
Kings are such singulis, but not universis. But indeed a King is said to be a
Father, or Pater patriae, that is of the universalitie, not of particular
persons; And elsewhere the King is termed an Oeconomus, or Pa^e^familuis, which
with no congruity can be said in respect of particulars; Nor can the Observator
satisfy any man considering that Domestical government is the very Image and
model of Sovereignty in a Commonweal; why children and servants might not as
well use this distinction against their Parents, and Masters, as subjects
against their Sovereign, for may it not be objected though the Father in
relation to his Children, or a Master of a Family in relation to his servants,
be singulis major, yet Vniversis minor, and therefore if all the sons or
servants hold together, they may command their Father or Master, or turn him
out of doors; which was wisely foreseen by Agesilaus, when he returned this
answer to a Citizen of Sparta that desired an alteration of the Government:
That kind of Rule which a man would disdain in his own house, were very unfit
to govern great Regions by. But the Observator will object that the relation
holds not alike betwixt King and Subjects, as between Master and servants; For
that the Master (says he) is more worthy then his servants, and above them
all: but this holds not in relation betwixt a King and his Subjects. Why that is
the question, For proof whereof although he neither does, or can allege any
one authority; yet to prove the contrary that the people neither conjunctim nor
divisim, and much less then representatives, are more worthy or above the
King? amongst many peruse these few.

Bracton l. 1. cap. 8. Omnis quidem sub eo (rege) and ipse sub nullo nisi
tantum sub Camb. Britan. 163. The King has Sovereign power, he acknowledges
no superior but God alone.
Deo, parem non habet in regno suo; quia sic amitteret praeceptum, nam par in
parem non habet imperium, item nec multo fortius superiorem nec potentiorem
habere debet, quia sic esset inferior sibi subditis. If he be tantum sub deo,
then not under the people or their representatives.

19. E. 4. 6. If all the people in England would make a war, yet if the King
will not assent, it cannot be said a war; but the King alone may make See Sir
Tho. Smith de Rep. Ang. li 2. cap. 4. 5. Rep. so. 86. de Iure regis Eccl.
siastico.
a war or league; Is not the King in this above all the people in England?

24. H. 8. cap. 12. Where by diverse sundry old authentic histories and
Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and expressed that this Realm of England
is an Empire, and so has been accepted in the world, governed by one Supreme
head and King, having the Dignity and royal estate of the Imperial Crown of
the same unto whom a body politic compact of all sorts and degrees of people
been bounden and owen to bear next to God a natural and humble obedience etc.
Note the King the supreme head (true says the Observator singulis, not
universis) unto whom a body politic compact of all sorts been bounden and
owen next to God. (Then no mediate underived Majesty 'twixt God and him) a
natural obedience, that is due by the law of nature, or the Divine Law, not
only by the pactions and agreement of politic Nations. 25. ^^, 8.

25. H. 8. This your Graces Realm recognizing no Superior under God, but only
your Grace. By Realm is meant either Subjects divisim or conjuncti^. If
divisim then no particular is subject to Judges and Justice, nor to the Lords
and Commons in Parliament, but only to the King, which is absurd: If
conjunctim then is the King in the act recognized Major universis.

Camb. Eliz. page 39. The Queen explaines the Oath of Supremacy, that she
claymes nothing thereby, Quam quod ad coronam Angliae jam olim jure spectavit,
scilicet se sub Deo summam and supremam gubernationem and potestatem in o^nes
regni ordines habere; Here is no distinction of being superior singulis, but
not universis.

16. R. 2. cap. 5. The Crown of England immediately subject to God, and to
none other. If immediately subject to God, then will not that distinction salve
that the people in universali are above it.

The judgment then of Bodin may be well applied unto this observator: Rodin de
Rep. cap 8.
They which have written of the duty of magistrates, and other such like
books have deceived themselves in mayntayning that the power of the people is
greater then the Prince; A thing which oft-times causes the true subjects to
revolt from the obedience which they owe unto their Sovereign Prince: And
ministers matter of great troubles in Common wealths; of which their opinion,
there is neither reason, nor ground* except the King be Captive, furious, or in
his infancy, and so needs to have a protector or Lieutenant appointed him by
the suffrages of the people: For otherwise if the King should be subject unto
the assemblyes and decrees of the people, he should neither be King nor
Sovereign and the Common wealth neither Realm nor monarchy, but a mere
Aristocracy of many Lords in power equal, where the greater commands the
less in general and every one in particular, and wherein the Edicts and Laws
are not to be published in the name of him that rules, but in the name and
authority of the States, as in an Aristocraticall Seigniory, where he that is
chief has no power* but owes obeisance unto the Commandments of the
Seigniory unto whom yet they all and every one of them feign themselves to owe
their faith and obedience; which are all things so absurd, as hard it is to
say, which is farthest from reason. Thus, he, which he does a little after
apply unto the state of England. Consider I pray whither it be not true, which
this author says, that the maintayners of this doctrine, do but feign
themselves to owe faith and obedience unto their Sovereign. They will take the
Oath of Allegiance to be every one true and faithful; But then they will tell
you that they were particulars only that took the Oath, and each in his
particular is thereby bound, but the people in general is a certain
universal body, in power and nature divided from every man in particular, and
as an universal body they neither did nor could swear, and consequently are
not bound. Each particular member to be admitted into the house of Parliament
may swear that the King is the only Supreme Governor in all things or
causes; but being admitted they may altogether deny the King to be supreme
Governor in any cause or thing. Is the King only supreme Governor in
disposing of the Militia? The making of Laws is a cause or thing, and by and
under them are all causes and things governed, yet so far is the King in this
thing from being supreme Governor, that he must be governed, and ought to
follow the major vote: And it were well if he might as a Burgess intervote, or
at least as an honest Tradesman, might be admitted to vote in election of some
Burgess, for so at least by his proxy he should have some share in the
supreme Government, though not the only supreme Governor: But how
inconvenient soever this position may be, that the people in universali, are
above the King yet the Observator will prove it true, for that the people are
the efficient cause, and author of Regal power: But we shall first deny that
ground, And secondly, we shall prove, that admitting they were the author of
the Regal power, yet it does not follow that therefore they are above it.

For the first* Let us examine, whether the people are the author, and
efficient cause of conveying Regal power. For better understanding whereof it
will be requisite, first to search out the original cause and ground of
Political Government, or power to govern in general, and surely we shall
find that to be no other, then the very Law of nature it self;

The natural condition of mankind is such as necessarily requires society:
Naked and impotent weaklings are we, when we enter the World, and unable
without mutual help and assistance to preserve our selves, whence society is
absolutely requisite for the preservation of mankind in his infant being, as
likewise for his future protection, from the violence of beasts and brutish
men; Again, would we preserve our 7 Rep. 12 13. C^lv. Case.
being without Civil society yet should we be more like beasts then men, dumb
and void of all discourse: Man therefore naturally needs Civil society, and
that society necessarily requires some form of Civil Government, without
which it were a confused assembly (not a society) and such as would ere long
become destructive to it self; Vbi non est Gubernator, corruet populus. So then
from the Law of nature and Prove. 11.
necessity is government in general derived, which Law of nature is no other
then the Divine Moral Law it self, whence I conclude that God is the
fountain, and efficient cause of all Government or power to govern in the
general, So S. Paul Romans 13. Non est potestas nisi a Deo, and again, Qui
potestati resistit* Dei ordinationi resistit; True it is, although God be the
Author of all political power, yet does he not always determine it to this or
that particular form, but with the peoples mediate election* So that it is
lawful (yet not altogether indifferent) for a multitude among whom no form of
Government is already established, to choose to themselves either a
Democraticall, Aristocraticall, Monarchical or mixed Government, and to design
the particular person or persons that shall be therewith invested, But the
power so determined by their vote, unto a particular form, and person, is from
God still, not only as he is the Author and universal cause of all things,
but as from the immediate efficient cause, As when anciently Bishops and
Presbyters were elected by the people, their order or power was not from the
people, but immediately from God, The people only nominated or designed the
person, but neither did, nor could confer the power or order of Priesthood*
Surely the Observator does not believe that a Horse was the author of Darius
his power, and yet was the neighing of his horse the means by which the
Kingdom was determined unto him; before all the other Persian Lords.
Nevertheless, he cannot imagine but that this peoples election is the very
efficient cause of that Regal power that is elected and settled in some
particular person, whereas in truth it is but a medium used in the conveyance
of it from God, the only author, which instrumentally operates in the
conveyance, but has no causall influx at all into the Regal power conveyed;
whence it is that God challenges to be acknowledged the author of Regal
power* Dan. 2. He (GOD) removes Kings, and sets up Kings, The God of
Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, power, etc. Dan. 4. Cuicunque voluerit det
illud. Prove. 8. By me Kings reign, by me Princes rule: By these places it is
manifest (I think) that although the peoples election may sometimes operate in
the specifying of power, and designing the person, yet never is it a cause of
that power; God only is the author and efficient cause thereof. See Kitchen
fol. 10. Le Roy est ordain de Dieu. And therefore was that ever renowned
Elizabeth acknowledged by her Parliament, to be the lawful Queen of England,
Iure Divino, so says Cambden, page 25. And the Parliament thought it just that
King H. 8. Having his Kingly and Regal power given by God (says the Act)
should in case of necessity, that would not abide the calling of a Parliament,
by his Proclamation, or Edicts, provide for the safety of the Realm.

Regal power in specie, if it were conveyed or given by the people, then must
it first have been in the people, for Nihil dat quod non habet, Now that Regal
power could be in the people is impossible, for it is against the nature of
Regality, to be in more then one. Rex unicus esto. If the people had Regal
power, I would know over whom. Multitudo Deorum, nullitas est Deorum. Were
supreme power radically and originally in the people, and by them delegated to
some particular person, that should govern as a King, the King as their
instrument would but propound Laws, but the people must enact them; As in Rome
while it was a popular State, and that Magistracy was but beneficium populi.
Livy.
Leges (says Livy) a Magistratu proponuntur tantum sed a populo jubentur. But
now in the government of this Realm* it is clear contrary, Leges tantum
proponuntur a populo, jubentur a Rege, By which it is manifest, that Regal
power with us cannot be beneficium populi. But again, the Observator must not
take it for granted, that the determination of power to Regal rather then
Aristocraticall, etc. or the placing of it in such particular person, was
always with the peoples election, for surely Regal power and the persons that
should govern, without any choice of the people, has been determined by God
himself. I shall not insist on the particular institution of Monarchical
Government amongst the Angels, good and bad; nor on that which Bees and other
sensitive Creatures do observe by that instinct of nature that the Divine
Goodness has implanted. Nor on that Monarchical Government amongst the Jews,
which was often particularly determined by special ordinance sent from Heaven,
by the Ministry of Angels, or Prophets, though this were sufficient to
disprove what the Observator affirms, That God is no more the Author of
Regal then Aristocraticall power.

I shall only observe that even in Adam, and after among the Patriarchs, Noah,
Abraham, Jacob, and others, the common Fathers of Mankind. Regal Government
was instituted by GOD himself, without any Election of the people; GOD created
Mankind ex uno, ut esset inter homines non Democratia, sed Regnum: after which
the Elders, or Fathers of Families successively, had by their Eldership, Genesis
14. ^^od. 32.
not only paternall, but Regal power, as appears by their making war, and
execoting sentence of death upon offenders: And from these original
Stock-fathers, Kingdoms and Monarchies, I suppose for the most part, have had
their beginning, without popular Election, in their first commencement, and
therefore I would have our Kings style continued, Carolus Dei gratia, rather
then, Carolus electione populi. This is excellently declared by Sir Thomas
Smith, in his Commonwealth, lib. 1. cap. 12 to have bin the natural source, or
beginning of that Government, which is termed legitimum regnum, to difference
it from Tyranny and absolute Dominion, Such as Nimrod and others first gained
by usurpation, and after held by violence, over the people, And which is not
otherwise from God* then as the Divine providence pleases to direct it, to the
punishment of a sinful people, or to such other purpose as to his divine
wisdom seems best: But with such absolute Dominion England has naught to d^e,
it is legitimum regnum that takes place with us; where the royal power (says
Fortescue) is restrained by power politic, that the King can neither change
the law, without the consent of the subjects, nor charg them with any strange
impositions against their will; And he there cites Aquinas to prove, that by
this Rule, and kind of Regiment should all Mankind have been governed, if in
Paradise they had not transgressed: By which i^ appears, that God in the Law of
nature, instituted this form of Government: And whether we call it Paternall,
or Regal, it refers to that institution, and is from thence derived; True it
is that violence of war, and vulgar Commotions may in most places have
interrupted, and altered the course of succession according to this Divine
institution; upon which occasion popular Elections may have interposed, But the
King once Elected and seated in his Throne, is thenceforth d^^m^d to reign by
that Paramount right* unto which the peoples election is but a restitution, or
as that learned Historian, Kings are made by God, and Laws divine; and by
humane Laws only declared to be Kings; and thereupon he observes, that Sir W.
Rawley. l. 2. Hist. Mund.
David thought himself accountable only to God: Tibi soli peccavi, Psalm. 51.

But again, if it were admitted, that the people originally were the Authors
of that Regal power by which they are governed: I cannot see how it does
necessarily follow, that therefore there remayns in them a power above the
King: I acknowledge, that Maxim with its just limitations, holds truly in
natural causes, Quicquid efficit tale, est magis tale: but surely it is
mightily misapplyed by the Observator, who would have us imagine, if the people
made a King, they are themselves more King then he; I should rather think if
Regal power were originally conveyed from the people, they by conveying it
over, have divested themselves of it; If it were conveyed with conditions, then
under those conditions may it be held against them: if absolutely, then may it
be held absolutely over them; It was necessary by the Law of nature, that they
should convey over a power unto some, for will they, nill they, a people cannot
be without a Government: Or were their conveyance voluntary, have they
therefore a power over it, at pleasure to revoke it, although it were often
ratified by Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy? Does not this doctrine destroy
not one y Monarchy, but all Government whatsoever? The people you say are the
Authors, and efficient cause of that power, that the Parliament Members have by
Conveyance from them; may the people therefore conclude themselves to be above
the Parliament, and at pleasure revoke and control their power? May Newcastle,
or any other particular Borough, or County disauthorize those they have
empowered? Or if a particular Borough or County cannot remove their proxies, yet
the major part of the Electors throughout the whole Kingdom may according to
this doctrine revoke the trust and authority, that all the Members have; If so,
how can my obedience be required to their Votes when as it is doubtful whether
the major part of the Freeholders do not disavow their proceedings.

Most certain it is (whether the people were the authors of Regal power, or
not) there neither is, nor can be any power remaining in the people, above that
which is in a Monarch or King: for if the supreme power remayn in the people,
it must be a popular State, such as Rome sometimes was; The Lacedaemonians had a
King in name but their Estate was truly a popular Estate the supreme power
being in those 5 worthy Members called the Ephori, who figuring and patronizing
the people had power to control the doings of their King; and their custom
was (as Plutarch relates) every ninth year upon some clear night to gaze upon
the Firmament, and if they observed the Moon to twincle, or any Star to sparkle
or shoot, they thereupon would commit their King to prison, who might not
thence be delivered, until the Oracle of Apollo, had so declared. A happy
Government (I assure you) both for King, and people. But if you will allow of a
true King in power, as well as in name, the sovereigne power next under God,
must be in him, not controllable with the breath of the fickle multitude.

Princeps -- Nec ponit aut sumit secures
Arbitrio popularis aurae.
The Roman Emperor was anciently chosen by the Soldiers, but did there
remain in them a power over the Emperor so elected? It Is recorded Sozomen. li.
6.
that the Soldiers having chosen Valentinian the elder, would have added ao
lleague unto him in the Imperial government: but the Emperor answered them,
me ad imperium eligere penes vos erat, sed cum jam a vobis electus sim,
consortem imperii quem postulastis non amplius in vectra, sed in mea potestate
eligere situm est: and with this answer were the Soldiers well contented,
whereby it appears, there remained no superour power in them.

Did there remain a superintendent power in the people over the King, it would
then be lawful to appeal from the King to the people as to the more supreme
power: but such appeals were never heard of, at least not till of late, nor
are they consistant with Monarchy, or any government, but necessarily tend to
Anarchy, and destruction; Omnis honestae rei malus judex est vulgus: there is
no Commonwealth wherein there are not more evil then good, more simple then
wise; if then the majority of the people shall determine upon the last Appeal,
what judgment shall we be ruled by.

You see whereunto the Observators principles do lead, and if you desire to
know the fountain from whence he drew these goodly doctrines, that little
Treatise entitled, Puritano-Iesuitismus will point it out unto you.

I shall forbear to consider any further, by what authority Kings do reign*
And I heartily wish, that this Anti-monarchist had spent his time in praising
God, for giving us that form of government, which experience teaches, and all
the learned in the world do acknowledge to be the best, and most convenient,
rather than by presumptuous enquiry after the cause and origin thereof, to have
endeavored to shake and unsettle the same.

As concerning the final cause of Regal Authority, it must be acknowledged,
the general end thereof is no other, then the conservation and good of the
people; and true it is, that the King is bound not only by his Oath, but also
by the very end of his Regal Office, to protect us, and to endeavor our
promotion to all kind of political happiness, even as much as he intends his
own honor and right: But I cannot swallow that ungrateful inference the
Observator makes from thence, daring to tell his King, That he cannot merit of
the State, that whatsoever he does for them, is me^re duty: May not the same
act be of duty, and yet meritorious, or deserving? Is it not the duty of a
Father to take care for his children? and yet your self acknowledge the Father
does all his offices meritoriously.

You suppose (though falsely) Kingly authority commenceth by pact and agreement
with the people, is not honor and obedience, even by that very pact, to be
paid him as a due reward? and does not reward presuppose desert? although after
such pact made, his care and protection be of duty, yet being free, to oblige
himself by that pact to preserve, nourish, and defend his people, was an act
meritorious. Omnium domos illius vigilia defendit, omnium Seneca.
otium illius labor, omnium delitias illius industria, omnium vacationem illius
Stamford Preface.
occupatio. For which the Law does attribute unto him, all Honor Dignity, and
P cheminence: and yet you say he deserves, nay he can deserve, nothing. The
word ( Grace) you tell him sounds not well in his mouth; yet surely former
Kings have used the word without being checked for it. 28. ^. 1. cap. 1. The
King ^f his special grace for redress of the grievances of his people,
sustained by his wars, and for the amendment of their estate, and to the
intent that they may be the more ready to do him service, the more willing to
assist and ^yde him in time of need, grants, etc. You see that King terms it
of special Grace, though for amendment of their estate; and for those Articles
he granted them, he expected in retribution, that his subjects should be the
more willing to assist and aid him in time of need: And so I hope will all
good subjects be at this time the more willing to aid his Majesty for those
many Acts of greater grace he has pleased to pass unto us. You may see sundry
other Acts, wherein the King himself speaking* pronounces them to be of his
special grace: W. 2. cap. 10 cap. 29. 18. E. 1. Stat. de quo warranto etc:
Statutum de gratia regia di^itur Cokes Insti^. 2 part page 379.
quando Rex dignatur cedere de jure suo regio pro quiet and comodo populi sui.

Pr^m Regal, the Observator passes on to consider Parliamentary power, (page
5.) Parliaments have the same efficient cause as Monarchies, if not higher, for
in truth the whole Kingdom is not so properly the author as the essence it
self of Parliaments, and Parliaments have also the same shall cause as
Monarchies. Well, it is agreed, that the good of the Kingdom is the end whereto
Parliamentary power should direct it self; but then as concerning the power of
Parliaments, and the efficient cause of that power, it will be requisite to
consider the parts distinctly, and then the power of all together.

The Parliament is a Body consisting of three distinct Estates, the King, the
Lords, and the Commons: Unto the Commons considered alone, it most properly
appertains to present the grievances of the people, and in humble manner to
pray such redress, as the King with their consent, and advice of the Lords,
shall deem to be just and fit. And this power (or rather trust) they derive
from the people their Electors, yet not without dependence on the King: The
Knights are sent by the County, but the County had power and command by the
Kings Writ to send them: And as for the Burgesses, their trust or power (call
it what you will) does more especially refer unto the King, as the author
thereof; for whence had the elected Burgesses their power, but from the Borough
that sent them; whence had the Borough power to send, but from the King, who by
his Letters Patents incorporated them into a Borough, and gave them power to
send Burgesses to the Parliament; which otherwise they had no more right to
do, then any other vile whatsoever. And this is the ground of that power which
the house of Commons have, as concerning the generalty of the Kingdom: And
besides this the house of Commons, although a great and honorable Assembly,
yet of themselves (as I think) they are no Court either of Record, or of
ordi^ary Justice, unless it be with respect to their own Members, which is
rather a necessary privilege then any power: They can neither administer an
Oath, nor give any judgment twixt party and party; nor have they power to
control or reverse a judgment given in the meanest pipowder Court. I speak
not this with a mind to derogate from the due honor of that Assembly, but to
occasion some friendly brother (if I am in error) to instr^ct me how the
imposing of the Protestation by order of the Commons only, upon all the
subjects in general, under a penalty of being branded with malignancy, and
adjudged unfit to bear any public office, may be defended: How that order for
levelling Chancels, and making other alterations in the Church, which issued
from the Commons without the King, and in opposition to the Lords, may be
justified either by reason or president: How that Remonstrance (a chief means
of all our succeding dissentions) that was voted, with so much opposition, in
their own house, and was after published (I will not say to disaffect the
people from his Majesty's government) may be defended and justified. In brief,
may I be instructed with some grounds, by which these and many other their
actions and Votes may be warranted; I shall thenceforth acknowledge them (whom
now perhaps by mistake I think to be no Court at all) to be the most supreme
Iudicatory both for Law and State: In the mean while I am ignorant of any
trust they have, other then a trust from the people, to consult and assent to
the King and Lords in the making of Laws, which without the consent of the
Lords, and his Majesty's concurrence, is altogether useless, and of no virtue;
And in them apart I know no Jurisdiction, but with respect to their own
Members: and surely that (such as it is) they have from the Crown the
fountain of all Justice, and the spring head of all Jurisdiction.

The house of Peers considered simply have power by assent, or disassent, to
enable or disable the making or repealing of any Laws and general Ordinances;
but without the concurrence of King and Commons, this of it self is of no use:
They are likewise an high Court of Iudicatory in respect of particular causes
orderly brought before them, having Jurisdiction in many, though not in all,
Cases. In criminal causes concerning life, and member, I think they have not
Jurisdiction without the Kings special Commission; and therefore they cannot
attaint any man for treason, murder, or felony: They are not only a Court of
Justice, but of Record, they may take a recognizance, ^ H. 7. 20.
and by the Kings Writ or Commission may reverse for error the Judgments
given in any of the ordinary Courts: But all these powers, as likewise their
Baronies, by reason of which they have place and vote in Parliament, are
immediately and merely derived from the Crown, the fountain of all honor
and jurisdiction; and they do so necessarily depend upon the King, in matters
of Iudicatory, as that in judgment of law they speak Stamf. 72.
ove bouch le Roy mesme.

Thus much concerning the Lords and Commons apart from the King: The King alone
he is Capitalis Angliae Iusticiarius, the fountain of all Jurisdiction, and
above all other Jurisdictions. Britton speaking in the person 12 H. 7. 17.
Mirror of Justice.
of King E. 1. nous volousque nostre jurisdiction soit sur touts jurisdictions
in nostre royalme. By the law of Nations, and by the very end of Regal power,
the King is to judge the people, 1 Samuel cap. 8. Give us a King to judge us,
(verse. 20.) We will have a King over us, that we also may be as the Nations,
Bracton lib. 3. fol. 107.
and that our King may judge us. Bracton tells us, That the King alone, if he
could suffice, ought to judge the people, and that by his Oath he is bound
thereunto. And as the ordinary iuridicall power is supreme, and originally in
the King; so likewise is the legislative, it being a principal end of Regal
authority, dare jus populo; which power was in Kings by the law of nature,
while they governed the people by natural Equity, long before either
municipall laws, or Parliaments had a being. Before Moses there were no
Fortescue cap. ^^. 13. ^ Rep. Cal^ins ^ase 13.
standing municipall laws, or at least not before Pharoneus; long before which
there were Kings of S^it^^^, Assyria, Egypt etc. who according to natural
Equity gave law unto their people. Rhemo cum fratre Quirinu^ -- jura dabat.
Hoc Priami g^stamen erat ^um jura vocati^ Virg*

M^r^ d^ret popul^^ --
But their laws they so gave, ought to be agreeable to natural Equity,
aiming no less at the good of the people, then of themselves: Such conditions
and limitations as are agreeable to natural Equity, Kings by the divine
institution, were bound to observe; and some by their voluntary Oaths, for
themselves and their successors, many times bound themselves to more strict
limits, then were absolutely requisite; yet being agreeable to Equity, and
consistent with Royalty, ought to be observed. And then^e it is, according to
the several degrees that the latitude of natural Equity does admit, in giving
laws, that some Kings are more strictly limi^ed then others; and according to
the oaths and promises made by the King of this Realm, they can neither give,
nor repeal any law, but ^ith the assent of the Peers and people.

The Observa^or does not deny the Legislative power to be in the King, but
(says he) partly in the King, partly in the Kingdom; which I shall admit to be
true in this sense, viz. that the Legislative power is not so in the King
only, as that he being sole can either in ordinary or extraordinary cases,
make or alter any Law; for thereunto is necessarily required the assent both of
Lords and Commons: But yet to speak properly the Legislative power is solely in
the King, although not in the King being sole, Rex solus legislator, non si
solus; the assent of Peers and Commons gives weight and testimony unto the
Law, but the King only gives it force and authority: And it will be thus
proved, the Legislative is the most sovereign power, jus dare, is somewhat more
then jus dicere; If then this most supreme power were formaliter and
subjective, as well in the Lords and Commons, Davis rep. Rex Angliae est
monarcha and Imperator in regno suo. Cassaneus in catol. glor. mundi. Rex
Angliae est absolutus Monarcha in regno suo.
as in the King, the Government of this kingdom during Parliament; would be
Democraticall or Aristocraticall, not Monarchichall or Regal; Nor would it be
a kingdom or Realm, but a Republique; For what else is Aristocracy, but the
supreme power seated in diverse of the Nobility? or what Democracy, but a like
power in the people? The Legislative power is then solely in the King, ut in
subjecto, and the consent of Lords and Commons is no parting or sharing in that
power, but only a condition requisite to the use of that power in the King.
And this (I conceive) is evidently proved by the Oath of Supremacy, whereby the
King is acknowledged the only Supreme Governor, and likewise by the form of
all our ancient Statutos, in which the King only speaks as the Lawmakers; some
Statutes are in form of a Writ in the Kings name only, directed to the
several Sheriffs: some in form of a Charter made by the King, sometimes it
runs, the King wills, the King ordained, or the King in Parliament, or the King
with the assent of the Lords and Commons, etc. And never did any Act run
thus, The Lords and Commons with the assent of the King; or the Lords and
Commons in Parliament ordain or order, etc. And in the passing Bills to this
day, the imperative is only by the King, Soit fait come est desire, or Le Roy
voet, 22. E. 3. 3. Pl. 25. Le roy fist les leyes per ass^nt des Peers* and de
la comune, and non pas l^s Peers and le comune. In a learned argument made in
Parliament against impositions, and printed by command of a Committee this
Parliament, that Champion for liberty, examining where the sovereign power is
in this kingdom, The sovereign power (says he,) Is agreed to be in the King,
but in the King is a twofold power, the one in Parliament, the other cut of
Parliament, the correcting of the errors of the ordinary Courts is by him, Acts
of Parliament be they Laws grounds, or whatsoever, the Act and power is the
Kings, but with the assent of the Lords and Commons, which makes it the most
supreme power, not controlable by any, but controling the regal power out of
Parliament, so he. Now by all that has been said, it is apparent, That in the
Lords and Commons severed from the King, there is only power in particular
cases, as is before expressed; but that power that may oblige the subject in
general by Laws, Ordinances, or such like Acts, or Orders, is solely in the
King: In the name of goodness then, what is that which the people speak of,
when they talk of the power of the Parliament in such general cases, without
and in opposition to the King? How can they without the King (the power being
only in the King) make Laws, and Ordinances, and with binding authority
declare the Law? Is the Legislative power solely in the King, and yet has he
not a free assent, but must of necessity follow the major Vote? The Royal
assent was that which only did give power and force unto the Law, and it is
now turned to an empty piece of formality* a matter of course, that without any
Election must follow which way the Vote shall lead it? Or if the Royal assent
be not added, yet if the major part at any time shall deem it necessary that
their Votes stand for Laws, without it, they are as completely and firmly
binding as if they were added.

I wish some man would first sadly consider, and then give me satisfaction, if
by these very Votes, the Government be not already altered, and Monarchy
regulated by Law, turned into an arbitrary boundless Cligarchy; altered I say,
as far forth as mere Votes are ab^e to prevail, which yet I hope will never
be actually effected: This, and many other Observations that may be made out of
the premises, I shall remit unto the ingenious reader: I shall only make
application of what has been said against the Observator, page 9. It is
alleged (says he) in derogation of Parliament, that whatsoever the right of
Parliaments is to assemble, and treat in all cases of a public nature, yet
without the Kings concurrence or consent, they are livelesse conventions
without all virtue and power; the very name of Parliament, not due to them,
This Allegation (says he) at one blow confounds all Parliaments, and subjects
us to as unbounded a regiment of the Kings mere will, as any Nation under
heaven, ever suffered under. Patience good Observavator! The very name surely
is not due but to the very thing, In conjunction with the King, I can say the
King and Parliament, n^ming the King specially propter excellentiam, but I
cannot rightly say the King or Parliament, or the King against the Parliament;
can you show me where the Lords and Commons opposed to the King, are termed a
Parliament? Did ever any man describe a Parliament to be a body consisting of
Lords and Commons only? with some difficulty I could find where it is said to
be a body consisting of King, Lords, and Commons. I would not strive about
words, but that I see the very name of Parliament misapplyed to the two Houses
does somewhat abuse the people: As for Parliamentary power itself I have
proved it to be formally and immoveably in the King only, ut in subjecto, and
that the consent of Lords and Commons is but a requisite condition to complete
that power, as to the doing of some Acts to which it cannot other wise extend:
If then there be no concurrence of the King in whom only the power is, what
are they but a livelesse Convention without all value and power? What Is a
confirmation of the Deane and Chapter, without a grant of the Bishop to be
confirmed? An assent o^ Lords and Commons without an Act to be assented to, is
somewhat like two ciphers without any figure, which yet if added to a figure
make it centuple. If this Allegation against which the Observator does exclaim
with so much vehemence, be any new doctrine, I am content to be discarded; but
if it shall appear to be a most known truth, and such as does not more support
the Royal Prerogative, then the liberty of the subject, then I trust men will
be satisfied, upon what grounds that odious scandal is raised against his
Majesty, of intention to bring in an Arbitrary Government such as the French
are subject to: A calumny not a little practiced to beat off the subjects from
their due Allegiance. The truth then of this position, that the Houses without
the King (as to the making of any public Acts, Orders, or Ordinances) are
livelesse Conventions, will appear by these ensuing proofs, Com. 79. Although
the Lords and Commons agree to a thing, it is but as an Embrio, or issue in the
belly, and yet unborne: It were to be wished these Embrio's ^id not at present
too much trouble this part of the world. Lamberts Archeion, 271. The necessity
of the assent of all the three Estates in Parliament is such, as without any
one of them, the rest do but lose their labor. 11. H. 7. 27. per Davers. Le
Roy est assentus, ceo fait un Act de Parliament. Polidore 185. Nihil ratum
habetur nisi quod major pars utriusque concessus senserit, idque rex
comprobarit. Cowell ^nter* verbo prorog. The King may quash any Law. 8. Rep.
20. b. Cromptons Iurisd. 8. 6. Institut. 1* part. 90. b. Institut. 2. part.
158. accord'. Sir Tho. Smyth at Republica Anglicana lib. 2. cap. 3. No Bill is
an Act of Parliament, Ordi^ina^ce, or Edict of Law, until both the Houses
severally have agreed unto it, No nor then neither, but the last day of that
Parliament or Session, the Prince comes in person, and declares his pleasure
concerning their proceedings, whereby the same may have perfect life and
accomplishment by princely authority, and so have the whole consent of the
Realm: those that the Prince does ^^ow, be taken as perfect Laws and
Ordinances of the Realm of England, and none other: to those which the Prince
likes not, he answers, Le Roy advisera, and th^se be accounted utterly
dashed* and of none effect. Bodin de Republica. lib. 1. cap. 8. Albeit that in
the Parliaments of England, which have commonly been holden every third year,
there the Estates seem to have every great liberty (as the Northern people
almost all breath thereafter) yet so it is that in effect they proceed not but
by way of supplications, and requests unto the King: As in the Parliament of
England holden in October, 1566. When the Estates by a common consent had
resolved (as they gave the Queen, to understand) not to entreat of any thing
until they had first appointed who should succeed her in the Crow^: she gave
them no other answer, but that they were not to make her grave before she were
dead. All those resolutions were to no purpose without her good liking; neither
did she in that any thing that they required. Now also the Estaies of England
are never otherwise assembled (no more then they are in this Realm of France or
Spain) then by Parliament Writs, and express commandments proceeding from the
King, which shows very well that the Estates have no power of themselves to
determine, command, or decre^ any thing, seeing that they cannot so much as
assemble themselves, neither being assembled, depart without express
commandment from the King: Yet this may seem one special thing that the Laws
made by the King of England at the request of the States cannot be again
repealed, but by calling again of the States, which is much used and ordinarily
done, as I understood by Master Dale, the English Ambassador, an honorable
Gentleman, and a man of good understanding; who yet assured me that the King
received or rejected the Law as seemed best unto himself, and stuck not to
dispose thereof at his pleasure, and contrary to the will of the Estats. I
might add many more, but that by understanding men I should be laughed at, as
holding a Candle to the Sun. Let the Observator tell me, which of all these
does not say fully as much as that which he says, at one blow confounds all
Parliaments, and subjects us to as unbounded a regiment of the Kings mere
will, as ever any Nation under Heaven suffered under: Let him against all
these, and such others as I might add, allege but one single opinion from the
beginning of the world till 1640. that in public Cases the Lords and Commons
have any virtue and power, without, nay, maugre the King, to oblige the subject
in general by any Law or Ordinance they shall make, and I promise him upon
that to turn Reformado; Mean while (I must think) not the King, but the
Observator, with one blow confounds all Parliaments; for it does not only cut
off the head, with which the virtue, life, and soul of that body expires; but
by the same reason it cuts off likewise the Lords from being any necessary part
of the Parliament: For if the Commons shall adiudge that the Militia for
repelling danger, ought to be put into such a way as dislikes the King and
mayor part of the Lords (that is in truth now the Case) yet ought the House of
Commons being virtually the whole kingdom, to be obeyed by the people against
the will and command of King and Lords, and against the desire of the minor
part (perhaps by two Votes) in the House of Commons; If the mayor part of the
Lords shall be b^uited to be Popishly affected or Malignant, and thereupon
their names shall be required that so the Rabble-rout may take a course with
them, by means whereof they are necessitated to absent themselves; and by like
seditious courses, a considerable part (if not the mayor) of the Commons shall
be driven from Parliament: if after this by the cunning practice of some few,
the Major part of Lords and Commons, that shall be remaining shall adjudge such
Assemblies, not to have bin riotus and seditious and that therefore themselves
have power, as a free Parliament to provide for the safety of the Realm: and
shall thereupon by or dinante require a Levy of Subsidies, to be presently made
throughout the Kingdom: you will say the Subjects are bound in such case, to
lay along their necks* and pay; and is not this to subject us, to as unbounded
a regiment of mere will, as any Nation under heaven, ever suffered under.

This is more then ever the King pretended to he never claimed a power ^o make
Laws and lay taxes without the consent of Parliament; he only lays claim to
a negative voice, that they without him may not make any Laws, or charge his
Subjects, but that all be done by the joint consent of him and his people; and
otherwise their proceedings without him to be vertulesse and of no force.
Against which so well known right let us see what worthy argument the
Observator brings forth: By the same reason (says he) that Parliaments are
thus vertulesse, and void Courts, upon the Kings desertion of them, other
Courts must needs be the like; and then what remains, but that all our Laws,
rights and liberties be either no where at all determinable, or else only in
the Kings breast. He is very wary not to fall under the Kings determinations,
though (as appears before) the and why a King was set over Nations, was to
judge them: and Bracton tells us, That the King by his oath is obliged (if he
were able) in person to judge his people. And it is a known principle in the
Laws of England, Rex presumitur habere omnia jura in scrinio pectto^s sui: And
yet as the government of this Kingdom is now settled, the King cannot Vide
Crompt. Ju^i^d. 108.
make void or vertulesse the settled Courts of Justice, and thereby draw all
things to a determination within his own breast. And if any cause shall come
before him as a Judge, to determine, yet he has a rule to follow, and that is
the Law, not his will: which Law in respect of the King, has somewhat more
then a directive force, restrayning him and disabling him to go against it, so
that he can do no wrong. The Laws are made by the Kings power, with the
peoples or Parliaments assent, which is a superior power (or rather the same
power in a higher degree or extent) to the Regal power alone, and with^^^^
their assent: And therefore the Regal power out of Parliament cannot change
nor al^^^ the Laws and Ordinances made in Parliament, but is bound by them, as
being made by a superior power: whence it is that Bracton every where affirms
the Law to be above the King solely. And by this superior power (that is by
the King with the assent of his people or Parliament) were the ordinary Courts
of Justice founded and established and their jurisdiction assertained, and
therefere may not be altered by the Regal power alone; and by the same reason,
the King cannot alter the Constitution of the Court of Parliament, but is the
Constitution of all Courts alike? the ordinary Courts are so constituted as
that the Kings special Concurrence is not neeessary. Arts and Judgments by
the ordinary Judges alone, are complete, and binding: their assembling and
departing is settled and does not depend on the special pleasure of the Prince.
But the Court of Parliament has another kind of Constitution, the Kings
special concurrence is in that a necessary and essential part, Rex est cap^t
principium, et finis Parliamenti. Their assembling Modi^ tenendi Parliament.
expects his special call* their continuance depends on his will, the
Judgemements, Arts and Ordinances, made in Parliiament, and concerning the
Kingdom in general, are the Kings only, and without him frustrate and null.

Consider this good observator, and then tell me, if you did not endeavor grossly
to abuse your reader, by telling us, that by the same reason the Parliament, is
not a Court comple^ without the King, the Common Pleas, and all other Courts
are not: I confess I have wondered to see it of late so often a^^i^med, That as
the King cannot, nor ought to declare by pr^claimation, or otherwise his
disalowance of the acts and judgments of the ordinary Courts so not of the
Votes and Ordinances of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, being the highest
Court* Should the ordinary Courts take upon them to dispose of the Militia, by
virtue of an Ordinance by them made, might not the King by his Proclamation
declare the Militia of that Ordinance, and forewarne his Subjects, not to be
abused by it? if the Observator can prove that the Laws and Ordinances made by
the now major part of the Lords and Commons, are (without and against the Kings
pleasure) of any more validity: that they are in themselves Laws and
Ordinances, and not only so called: then I shall admit that the King either by
Prociamation, or otherwise, ought not to declare against them: mean while let
every man judge, how well the observatour has maintained the power of the
Lords and Commons (mauger their King) to make Laws and Ordinances that shall
bind the people in general: By which Ordinances the Militia, the taking of
Hull, the Navy, the Magazine,* the intercepting all money and other provision,
that is but suspected to be passing toward the King the imprisoning all such
as appear dutiful toward his Majesty's commands and such like Acts must be
justified or acknowledged unjust.

The Observator finding it more then difficult in a plain field to maintain
his cause, endeavors to shelter it under famed pretenses of extraordinary
danger and necessity* in this extremity the King neglecting the helm, nay
purposely stearing toward rocks and shelves; It is the duty of his Parliament
in this case, to oppose, and preserve him and his Kingdom from utter wrecke
and ruin. He will then acknowledge that in ordinary cases, without the King,
they cannot make a binding Law or Ordinance, but in danger (that is, when they
please:) In the miast of our calamities (we are sensible of none, thanks be to
God, but what their Ordinances have occasioned) the Parliament seeing they must
make use of their legislative power, and make Ordinances to secure some Forts,
and settle the Militia, or else two Kingdoms probably will be lost; they do
accordingly, the King proclaims to the contrary; in this contrariety consider
if the Parliament (...) vertually the whole Kingdom, if it be not the supreme
Judicatory, as well in ma^^^^^ of State as Law, if their grounds of jealousy
be vain. To what purpose shall we consider of their jealousies, if we think
them to be but pretended by the cunning and practice of some few for
accomplishing their designs and plots, invented by some of their own party*
to be again by them discovered; yet must King and people submit to their
judgment. Are not the now major part the supreme Judges of danger, to whom
King and people are bound to submit? If they are, is it less then a mockery to
bid us consider, when as after consideration, will we, nill we, we must
subjugate our understandings and opinions to whatsoever they already have or
hereafter shall declare? But yet at your bidding, I Will consider, in this
contrariety whether the Parliament (pray call them the Lords and Commons now
assembled) may not make use of their legislai^e power; yes, if they have any
such: but I would not have them make use of the King legislative power, without
him, and against him: had they been partners in that power, some color you
might have had to have called it theirs; but it seems the power is solely the
Kings, they are only to give an assent to the use of it. Then you will, I
consider whether they be not the supreme Judicatory. I think not: the
Parliamenti^ supreme and above them both in matters of State and Law: but
again I must consisider you say, if the Lords and Cammons be not vertually the
whole Kingdom, why do you put in the Lords, whom at other times you can be
content to spare? The Lords Vote in respect of their Barronies derived from the
Crown, the Commons Vote in right of their electors whom they represent, at
least nine parts of the Kingdom, neither do nor may Vote in their election,
the Clergy in respect of their spiritual livingt, may not, nor the most
substantial Coppy-holders, Farmours nor Lessees for years, not inheritrixes,
Jointresses, nor reversioners, Heirs apparrent, and men that live upon Interest
are excluded; and all that have not 40. s. per annum free*hold Land, which I
imagine, cannot be above a tenth part of the Kingdom. Tell me good Sir you
that list Page 1.
to unsettle principles, power being (you say) nothing else but that might and
vigor which a society of men contains in it self, why should the might and
vigor of these being far the major part, be over mastred, and concluded by
the Votes of those that are deputed by a miner number of the people? or why
should half the Kingdom in which there are but few Burroughes, be equalled
and overborne in Voting by two Counties, out of which many Burgesses are
chosen? Old Sarum shall have as many Votes in Parliament, as the City of
London, or County of Wiltes: By which it seems the Commons are not sent with
equallity from all parts, nor sent by all: how do they then represent all?
what reason is there that all the Kingdom should sit down with their Votes?
the truth is, the King, Lords and Commons in conjunction are vertually the
whole Kingdom, for that all the people did at first submit themselves to their
determination. 25 H. 8. 21. your royal Majesty and your Lords and Commons
representing the whole Realm, in this your most high Court of Parliament, have
power, etc. So that in the King principally, but yet in conjunction with the
Lords and Commons, is the virtue and power of the whole Kingdom contained: But
if we shall admit that the virtue and power of the whole Realm is by
representation in the Commons alone, or at least in the Lords and Commons, what
will thence follow? the Kingdom (you will say) are the efficient cause of
Kingly power, and consequently above it, they being above it have power over
it, may reassume it, or dispose of it to such persons as they can confide in,
and this power the Kingdom may confer upon such as they shall choose for that
purpose. The Observator has met with a free Gamster: though his principles
have been particularly disproved, and are distructive, not only to Monarchy,
but unto all government, yet at present let him take all for granted. First,
that the people have such power; and secondly, that they may transmit it unto
such as they shall choose for that purpose; But the question is, whether they
have done it? whether they have chosen the new members for that purpose, or for
some other? The King did not create the Lords (I believe) for that end, nor
create Borroughes with power to send Burgesses for that end, nor command the
Counties to elect Knights for that purpose: nor did the Borroughes and Counties
when they did elect, give any such power, upon the receipt of the Kings Writ by
the Sheriff, and warning or notice given to the Freeholders, they meet, and
cry up some man's name; this in it self imports nothing but with reference to
the Writ so that the people entrust them to do only what the Writ requires,
and thereupon the Sheriff returns Elegi feci duos milites, who have power
from the County, ad faciendum (what I pray) quod breve in se exegit: in that
they have no avthority without the King, to judge of dangers and oblige the
King and people to go their way for repelling the ^ame, and yet does the Writ
continue as large as ever it has been; seeing neither the Kings writ, nor the
peoples election made thereupon do give it; I demand whence have the Lords and
Commons, excluding the King, this sovereign power to judge of danger^^ and
thereupon if they so cause, to take from the King the power of the Kingdom,
and according to their pleasures, to dispose thereof unto certain confiding
persons, unto which disposition the King and people are all required to
conform, and give consent. We have been often told that it is by the
fundamental Law of the Land; a foundation so deep, that like the River Nilus,
it hides its head from all that seek it; never yet could any the most learned
instruct us where to find out this fundamental Law; which has layen buried
so long that no Law-booke, Record or Chronicle, makes any the least mention
thereof. But yet at length a certain Pamphleter, defending the Observatour,
has hapt upon it, but not amongst the Laws of this Land, (he was nessitated
to dig a little deep for it) but amongst natures principles; It is radically
couched in nature it self, and irrepealably enacted in her Magna Charta (to
which all positive Laws must in equity veil) that the State may lawfully of
its self provide for its preservation, espectally if the King either see not
the danger, or seeing it, will not provide for it in such m^nner as may give
best security to himself and the Commonwealth. Certain it is there is no
state but is endued with ability and means to preserve it self: instinct of
nature will force all men preserve themselves from present destructior, and
providence teaches all to provide against future emergent dangers; and this
surely the State of England has done in submitting it self to the care and
protection of a King, on whose good foresight and wisdom, next under God, the
welfare of the whole Realm depends: he sits as on a watch Tower, survaying
his own dominions, and by the vigilance of his Council at home, and
Ambassadors abroad, has timely intelligence of any approaching evil; against
which if he shall need any extraordinary advise or aid of his Subjects he has
power by his writ to assemble them in Parliament, and with their assent to
raise money and other necessary provision for their defense and safeguard: And
this I say, is that means of safety wherewith the State of England has
provided it self, by putting themselves for better for worse, under the
protection of a King against all dangers: And certainly he that onght to
protect them against dangers, to him it appertains to judge of danger, and so
much was admitted by those who argued for the Subject, in case of Ship-mony,
that the King was sole Judge of the dangers, but that he could not thereupon tax
the Subject, but by assent in Parliament. But what (you will object) if the
King will not see the danger, or seeing it will nevertheless suffer the
Kingdom to f^eat at all hazzards? or what if being carried away with Malignant
Counsel, he himself shall steer it toward rocks and shelves? May not the
Kingdom in such case save themselves from ruin, and oppose the King? There
can be no Generalissime so uncircumscribed, but that if he shall turn his
Cannons upon his own Sonldiers, they are ipso facto absolved of all Page 4.
obedience, of all Oaths, and ties of Allegiance whatsoever, for the time, and
bound by higher duty, to seek their own preservation, by resistance and
defense. For my part, I cannot but think that a state after much sufferance,
seeing utter destruction to be at hand ready to swallow them up, may use any
good and lawful means, as flight, and avoydance to preserve themselves from
ruin by the hand of a tyranizing Lord: yet I dare not approve of active
resistance, by taking up arms against a lawful Sovereign Prince* though
^yranizing over his Subjects. If the Prince (says Bodin) be an absolute
Sovereign, Bodin de Reput. l. 2. cap. 5.
as are the true Monarchs of Spain, England, etc. where the Kings themselves
have the Sovereignty without all doubt, or question, not divided with their
Subjects; in this case it is not lawful for any one of the Subjects in
particular, nor all of them in general, to attempt anything either by way of
fact, or of justice, against the honor, life, or dignity of the Sovereign:
albeit that he had committed all the wickedness, ^mpiety, and cruelty that
could be spoken: for as to proceed against him by way of justice, the Subjest
has uo such jurisdiction over his Sovereign Prince, of whom depends Vide
Cambd. Eliz. pa. 118. accord.
all power and authority to command. Now if it be not lawful for the Subject,
by way of justice to proceed against his Prince, how should it then be lawful
to proceed against him by way of fact or force? for question is not here, what
men are able to do by strength and force, but what they ought of right to do?
the subject is not only guilty of Treason in the highest degree, who has
slain his Sovereign Prince, but he also which has appempted the same, who
has given Counsel, or consent thereto. And then he goes on to prove the same
by sundry examples taken out of Scripture, and then says he, to answer vain
objecti^ns were but idely to abuse both time and learning: But as he which
doubts whether there be a God or not, is not with arguments to be refuted,
but with severe punishments, so are they which call into question a thing so
clear, and that by Book^s publicly imprinted, that the Subjects may take up
arms against their Prince being a Terant; Howbeit the most learned Divines are
clear of opinion, that it is not lawful, without especial command from God;
And as for that which Calvin faith, if there were at this time Magistrates
appointed for the defense of thee people, and to restrain the insolency of
Kings, as were the Ephori in Lacedemonia, the Tribunes in Rome, and the
Demarches in Athens; that they ought to resist and impeach their
licentiousness and cruelty: He shows sufficiently that it was never lawful
in a right Monarchy, for he speaks but of the popular and Ar^stocratique
States of Commonweals. We read also that the Protestant Princes of Germany,
before they entered into arms against Charles the Emperor, demanded of Martin
Luther, if it were lawful? who frankly told them that it was not lawful,
whatsoever Tyranny, or impiety were pretended, yet was he not therein of them
believed: So thereof ensued a most deadly and lamentable War, the ^^d whereof
was most miserable, drawing with it the rume and destruction of many great and
noble houses of Germany, with exceeding slaughter of the Subje^ts. The Prince
we may justly call the Father of the Country, and ought to be more dear unto
every one then any Father, Et nulla tanta impretas nullum tantum scelus est,
quod sit parricidio vindicandum. I say therefore that the Subject is never to
be suffered to attempt any thing against his sovereign Prince, how naughty and
cruel soever he be. Lawful it is not to obey him in all things contrary unto
the Laws of God and nature, to fly and hide our selves from him, but yet to
suffer stripes, yea and death also, rather then to attempt any thing against
his life or honor. This is the substance of that learned Protestants
discourse, which is worth your reading at large. But alas, all this discourse
is besides the present business, nothing is attempted against the life or
honor of the Prince; the taking up of Arms, and shooting bullets at him, is
in defense of his Majesty's person; there are no expressions in this
observatour, nor yet in him that has made observations upon a speech of King
James* with eight and twenty Queres, nor in any other Pamphlets that
licenciously slye about, that do at all touch the honor of the Kings Subjects
may not resist (says Bodin, and our best Divines) without special command;
but ou^ Brethren now have special instruction from the Spirit to do what they
do, or if they have not the Spirit assuring them that they may take arms
against their Prince, yet Master Call. has well distinguished, that it is one
thing to sight against a King, another thing to fight against the lusts of a
King: Against the lusts of a King, my beloved Brethren, we may fight, nay we
ought to fight against them.

And our Observatour stands in defense of that distinction, That levying Forces
against Page 45.
the personal commands of the King (though accompanied with his presence) is
not levying war against the King, but war against his authory, though not
person, is war against the King. But in truth, are not all these shifting
distinctions, like a Shipmans hose, that will fit an Jrish Rebel as well as an
English: I dare not speak my mind of that distinction the Observator
maintains, but you shall hear what an honorable Chancellor of England has
long since said of it; This is a dangerous Elsmere postnati 99.
distinction between the King and the Crown, and between the King and the
Kingdom; it reaches too far, I wish every good Subject to beware of it. It
was never taught but either by traitors, as in Spencers Bill, in Edward the
seconds time, or by treasonable Papists, as Harding in his confutation of the
Apology maintains, that Kings have their authority by the positive Law of
Nations, and have no more power then the people have, of whom they take their
temporal jurisdiction, and so Ficlerus, Simanca and others of that crew: by
seditious sectaries and puritans as Buchanan de Jure Regni apud Scotus, Penry,
Knox, and such like, in Calvin's case it is reported that in the reign of Ed.
2. the Spencers to cover the treason hatched in their hear^s, invented this
damnable and damned opinion, that homage and oath of ligeance was more by
reason of the Kings Crown, (that is of his politic capacity) then by reason
of the person of the King: upon which opinion they inferred execrable and
detestable consequence. 1. If the King do not demean himself by reason in the
right of his Crown, his leiges are bound by oath to remove the King. 2. Seeing
the King could not be removed by suit of Law, that ought to be done per
aspertee. 3. That his leiges be bound to govern in aid of him, and in default
of him: All which were condemned by two Parliaments.

I will not say that this concerns the Observator, or any body else, let
others judge; I only say, I am unsatisfied how we may lawfully use active
resistance with our swords in our hands, against a lawful sovereign Prince,
though tyrannizing: or if it might be done yet certainly not till after much
sufferance, and that destruction shall open its jaws ready to swallow us up;
and not upon imagenary fears and jealousies, such as we have had now at lest
twelve months past; from Papists training under ground, and conspiracies
against the State discovered by a traitor lying in a diteh, and which have bin
wrought in us by weekly relations of horrible, terrible strange news from
Denmark, France, Spain, and from all places in Christendom, excepting
Amsterdam, from thence no danger at all to be feared. But what if a kingdom
may not resist, shall they not therefore have means to save themselves, if a
seduced King shall endeavor to lead them back to popery, or to bring them
under an arbitrary rule; may they not in good time foreseeing the danger, arm
themselves for defense, and not suffer themselves to be led on to the ruin of
their lives, fortunes and religion? For Religion, surely no Subjects ought to
depart from it at the pleasure or command of any Prince or Potentate, how great
or absolute soever his power be; and for their lives and fortunes no
Commonwealth may want a means of preservation, Salus populi supremalex. But I
think the best way to preserve a Kingdom or people, is not to allow them a
power upon such suppositions, to rise against the pleasure and command of their
King or Governor; Caligula in a sudden fit of cruelty might wish that all
his Subjects heads grew upon one man's shoulders, that so at one blow he might
cut them off: But is it possible that after deliberation, such an unnatural
wish should settle in the mind of any Tirant? certainly it is near bordering on
impossibility, that a King should seriously desire to destroy the lives and
fortunes of all his Subjects, with which his own Sovereignty will necessarily
be destroyed: or if he should endeavor to make them slaves and vassals to his
arbitrary power, what does he else but change the good title of a King, to that
of a Tirant? which before a lawful Prince will ever do he must be extremely
blinded with ambition, and cruelty: And if a King of England should affect it,
yet has the Law disabled him to effect it; his commands must all run in the
right Channels of Justice, and equity, or by no particular officer ought to be
obayed, Nihil aliud potest Rex in terris, cum sit Minister Dei, et ejus
Vicarius, quam quod de jure potest, it is then a very remote danger, and almost
impossible, that can this way befall the Subject: and yet seeing it is not
altogether impossible, a mischief I must acknowledge it is, to be under such a
possibility. But on the other side, if you g^ve way to the inconstant
multitude, upon pretense of saving themselves and the kingdom* to rise against
authority, we shall every day have the government hazarded, if not destroyed;
and in such case, does not even natural prudence instruct us to live under a
possible mischief, then under a daily inconvenience? this Doctrine (of the
peoples power to judge of danger against the commands of their Sovereign, and
upon that to take up defensive arms) if it should be admitted, will be more
pernicious to Kingly government out of Parliament, then it will be to
Parliaments themselves; for as the people may preserve themselves against a
wilful seduced Prince that would destroy them, so may they against an
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, if they shall judge it to tend to the
destruction of the Kingdom, or subversion of Government, the Charter of nature
by its supreme Law, intitles all to seek their salety, and against this it
will be of little purpose for you to tell the people, that next to renouncing
God, nothing is more pernicious then to forsake their representatives: when
they shall judge their representatives, forsake their trust, and would lead
them on to Anabaptisme or any other way to destruction.

The King is Judge of danger, at least out of Parliament, but if he will not
see dangers, or if he himself shall become a danger to the Kingdom, the
Kingdom may save it self: In Parliament we will suppose the Lords and Commons
are Judges of danger, but if some driven away by force, and the rest seduced by
a Malignant party, will not see dangers from Anabaptists, Brownists, etc. or
shall themselves become a danger to the State and settled government, the people
may save themselves from ruin; it is so written in Natures Magna Charta, cap. 1.
Will not this cloak sit exceeding well upon the back of. Irish Rebels? they
judge their Religion restrained, and ready to be destroyed by a Prince seduced
by the advice of English Protestants, and defense and maintenance of their
Religion they take up arms; let us first lay this ground in England, and then
let a Doctor in Divinity or some seditious IMP, walk up and down under hand,
like the pestilence in the dark to infect the minds of silly men, and make up
a faction, whether against King or Parliament; thereupon what think you will
become of Regal and Parliamentary power, will not they both be made subject to
the designs of such seditious, Protestants as at any time shall be able with the
glorious names of Liberty, and self preservation to abuse and intoxicate the
minds of the wavering multitude? If the King being led away with an old error
of Protestancy, shall endeavor to extirpate the believing Brownist, or
orthodox Anabaptist; may not the Brownists, or Anabaptists (judging their
Religion to be true) save themselves, nay ought they not to catch at all
advantages, whereby they may deliver their blinded King, and Kingdom, from
following after their own destruction, in an Antichrist way of Protestancy? It
was long siince suspected by the King, and by many of his good Subjects, that
the ordinance of the Militia, would be used to the overthrow of Government and
destruction of the Realm, and since that has raised unto the Authors of it a
sufficient strength to over master all opposition we see they have already
adventured to root out Episcopacy, together with Deanes and Chapters,
Archdeacons, Chancelours, and the ancient and honorable profession of
Eclesiasticall and Imperial Law, besides a good part of the common Law
overturned, and in likelihood the rest will not stay long by us: And how far
this wilful rejection (I say wilful rejection, not barely the want) of
Episcopacy is destructive to the very essence of a Church, is much to be
doubted. After so good e^rnest given of their intentions, I suppose a major
part of the Realm, are well satisfied that their Militia, and the ordinances
send to the destruction of the Realm, if so, then by this ground they may
lawfully save themselves and oppose their destruction: Admit this, or forsake
your principle. And yet if it will do you any service I am content at present
you take advantage of it: I will admit the Kingdom, if they see the King would
destroy them, may preserve themselves; you will say ^f the people have power to
preserve themselves against the danger a seduced K. would bring upon them, then
must they have power to judge of that danger, when it is, and when not: and if
the people have power to Judge of danger, and defend themselves, without and
against their King; then may they entrust that power unto some others, for that
all should assemble ^^ next to impossible, and could not be without confusion;
a few therefore may be entrusted to judge for all, and to direct the manner of
their defense: well, It is admitted they may entrust this power with some few,
but that they have entrusted it with the Lords and Commons, I must deny. There
is no color to say it is entrusted with the Lords, they judge only for
themselves, and if the King intended to alter the Government, or Religion, it
is likely he would create such as should assist his intentions; and therefore
it will be of little purpose to give the kingdom a power to judge of dangers,
and save it self, unless they may do it by the major part of their proxies
alone, both against King and Lords. You put in the Lords only to gloss your
actions, for the present, but by your principles the power must be in the
Commons only, if any where; Now clearly there is no such trust imparted to
the Commons their trust is limited by the writ to advise with the King, not to
make Acts and Ordinances in any case, against him: Nor can I possibly see why
the Coroners elected by the body of each County according to the Kings writ,
might not as reasonably claim this trust, as the major part of the Commons
alone, unless we must therefore think it to be the Commons right, because
they now pretend unto it.

The Observator tells us, We may not imagine the Houses should be injurious, no
age will furnish us with one story of any Parliament, freely elected and held,
that ever did injure a whole kingdom, or exercise any Tyranny. I Will charge
tirannie on none; only I say if the now major part of Lords and Commons against
the Kings pleasure, and authenticke Proclamations, have power to command the
subjects in general, and to imprison, kill, and slay such as withstand their
commands, and obey his Majesty's Proclamations, I would gladly be instructed
how this power is derived unto them, either from King or people, or whether we
must think they above all other men, were naturally borne unto it? Mean while,
I like well the Observators note in honor of free Parliaments, that never any
such injured a kingdom. But yet such as have called themselves free
Parliaments have injured King and kingdom, this have the Lords and Commons
done when they have left the head free in His Royal assent, or disassent to
such Bills, as they had a mind to pass; of which take one Example, 15. E. 3.
The Lords and Commons pressed the King to pass a Law derogatorie to his just
prerogative, that Parliament being ended, and the kingdom representing it
self again the same year, it was enacted, Whereas in the last Parliament
certain Articles expressly contrary to the Laws of England and the
Prerogatives and Royal rights, were pretended to be granted by manner of a
Statute, the King considering how that by the bond of his Oath, he was bound to
the defense of such Laws and Prerogatives, because the King never freely
consented to the said pretended Statute; It seemed good to the Earls Barons,
and other wise men, that sithence the said statute did not of the Kings
free will proceed, the same should be void.

It seems at this time, the King was not bound to pass whatsoever the Lords
and Commons Voted to be for the good of the kingdom: And his oath did tie him
to seek a restitution of his prerogative against such forced laws, so far
was it from tying him to pass all such laws as the Houses should judge fit.

Questionless the King is bound by oath and office, to pass all good and just
laws (yet that part of the oath that has been urged does not prove so much)
But the question is whether he be not free to judge what is a good and just
Law, and what not? But must submit his understanding, judgment, and Conscience
to the votes of Lords and Commons, so that the six Articles for popery pass
them he is bound to pass it. Queen Elizabeth was boun^ to pass an Act
abolishing popery, because the Lords and Commons had Voted a Bill against
Protestancie, Queen Mary was bound to pass that likewise.

So again the King wishes all good subjects to put the case to themselves; If
the Papist^ in Ireland should make themselves the major part of both Houses,
and pretending their Religion to be in danger of extirpation by a Malignant
party of Protestants and puritans should pass a Bill for settling the Militia
in such as they should confide in, is not the King bound to assent unto it? Not
in that case, says the Observator, For England and Ireland are one and the
same Dominion, there is as true and intimate an union betwixt them and England,
as betwixt England and Wales, though they meet not in one Parliament; yet to
s^^^ purposes their Parliaments are not to be held several Parliaments, and
therefore if Papist^ were stronger, and more in Parliament there, yet would
they want authority to over rule any thing voted and established before in
England, and they being the minor part of Ireland (...) ENGLAND both ought to
sit down, for that the major part will probability prevail against them; and
in all suffrages, the minor part that blood may not be shed^, ought to (...)
down.

Alack, alack, how does the good man bestirre himself to bedge up a seeming
answer unto this objection? He supposes England and Ireland to be one and the
same dominion which is certainly false; Statutes that are limited to the
Realm and Dominion of England, do not extend to Ireland: That there is as true
and intimate an union betwixt England and Ireland, as betwixt England and
Wales, is con^radicted by himself, acknowledging England and Ireland to be
governed by several Parliaments, several to most (if not to all) purposes*
It Is true Ireland is united to the Imperial Crown of England, and so is
Scotland, yet all 33. H. 8. ca. 1. 28. H. 8. c. 19. Davis Rep. 25.
three are distinct kingdoms: He says they want authority there, to over
rule any thing established before in England: But Ireland will say the English
Parliament wants authority to establish a Religion in Ireland: Or admit the
Irish Parliament has not authority to over rule any thing established before
in England, yet the point that the King instanteth in, that is the Militia of
Ireland, is not established by Parliam^nt in England; why ought not the King
then to ass^nt to the disposal of it according as the Irish parliament shall
desire? or if he will not assent, why may not the Irish of themselves dispose
of it, as now the English do? If we shall admit them to be one Dominion, why
then if the papists in Ireland, the popish party in England, and their
adherents the Episcopal party, and the misnamed Malignant party shall join
in one desire against our superfine Reformers, the Reformers being far the
minor part, ought to sit down and acquiesse, otherwise blood will be shed, and
the major part in probability prevail; you to lay a Calumny on the King, will
say they speak all one language, and conspire in one end, which although no
sober man will credit, yet this is certain, that they all concur in some
things against new Confounders (I should say Reformers) In these things then by
your own rule, the minor part ought to yield and acquiesse.

If the major part present of Lords and Commons shall desire it, the King you
will say, is bound to pass an Act that no marriage for any of his Children
shall be concluded, not treated on without the Parliaments assent; By the same
reason that he is bound to pass this Law to the English, he will be bound to
pass the like to the Irish, and again the like to the kingdom of Scotland,
because the Lords and Commons in the several Parliaments desire it, and the
kingdoms have a like interest and right to warrant that desire; If these Laws
be passed what will become of the Royal line; Besides a match may be
mentioned or treated on, a Parliament for that (...) purpose must be called in
each kingdom, and being called, is it probable three Nations so different in
their constitutions should agree in one? The Scots ^^y approves marriage
desired with the French. The Irish will rather desire the alliancs of Spain,
The English of Denmark.

In this case to observe one Law, is to break two; yet such a Law being Voted,
or any thing else, the King you say is bound to pass it, and you seem to
prove it thus: It Is acknowledged the King is bound by Oath and Office to pass
all just Laws that are either for preservation or good of the Subjects: to
grant this say you, that he is bound to pass just ^awes, and yet to leave him
to his own free Judgment, what is a just and good Law, is to give us a dry
right without a remedy: So again you object, If the King will not call the
Parliament. For making Laws when it is expedient, that must not conclude the
people, for the^ they would have a dry right to Parliaments without a remedy:
And upon this ground, and for that the King has his power given him (as you
suppose) by the people, and that upon trust, you will have him accomptable to
the Lords and Commons the representatives of the people, how he has discharged
his trust: and if he shall be found neglectfull or faulty, there must be you
say, a means to enforce, otherwise we are subject to the boundless will of
the Prince, and a gappe is opened to, as past and arbitrary power, as ever the
Grand Seignior had: If the King may so assume a share in the Legislative power,
as that without his concurrence, the Lords and Commons may not Judge of
dangers, and by temporary Ordinances put the kingdom into a posture of
defense, God has not then left humane nature any means of sufficient
preservation. Thus the Observator.

Although he mention God, yet I doubt his Argument, is grounded in Atheism,
because forsooth, we have not the remedy in our own hands, therefore are we
without remedy expos^^ to the will of any tirannous Prince that may be: either
then he thinks there is no God, or with Epicurus, that he is ot^osum
inexer^itum et neminem i^t humanis rebus ad ^^li cardines o^^^b lat, and nulla
tangitur mortalium cura. For if there be a God with providence, why should we
be afraid to trust our remedy with him? There is a bridle to restrain the
licencious will of ambitious Princes, and that's the Law, but the reins must
not be laid in the hands of subjects, The Heart of the King, must be in the
hands of the Lord, he will direct it toward the subjects good; or if a Prince
shall incline to Tyranny, he will in good time remove him, unless it be his
pleasure by him to chastise the sins of that people, or to try and improve
their patience, in which case there is a blessing for them, that can content
themselves with a fiat voluntas Domini. God only (I have proved) is the Author,
and efficient cause of Kingly power, Kings are his anointed his vicegerents,
and therefore properly occomptable to him alone. Where the word of a King is,
there is power, and who may say Eccles. 8. v^ 8. Bracton l. 5 tract. 3. c. 3.
and li. 1. cap. 8. W^sd. 6.
unto him what do then? Non potest ei (Regi) necessitatem aliquis imponere
quod injurian^ s^^m corrigat et emendat nisi velit, cum superiorem non habeat
nisi Deum, et satis erit ^i ad pae^^^ quod dominum expectat ultorem. Punishment
enough indeed, if you consider how much more severe God is, in taking an
Account of Kings, then of other men subject to temporal punishments, which you
may see set down by a King himself. Hear therefore O ye Kings and
understand, learn ye that be Judges of the end of the Earth, Give ^are you
that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of Nations, for power is given
you of the Lord and sovereignty from the highest, who shall try your works,
and search out your Councels, because being Ministers of his kingdom, you have
not judged aright, nor kept the law, nor walked after the council of God;
horribly and speedily shall he come upon you, for a sharp Judgment, shall be
to them that be in high places, for mercy will soon pardon the meanest, but
mighty men shall be mightily tormented. Were there not a God to take this
severe account from Kings, and to strain their ambitious desire from
tyrannizing over their subjects, yet by what has been formerly said, it will
appear to be more safe for a people, to live subject to the inconvenience then
to give power to the people, upon pretense of saving themselves, to ri^e
against Sovereigne authority.

A supreme indisputable power must be somewhere, this the observator
acknowledges, and al must acknowledge that are not in love with Anarchy: the
question then is only this, when is its most safe resting? In the Parliament
says the observator* ^ agree with him in the King page 45. Arist. Eth. 18.
Cap. 10
in Parliament, is the most safe resting of the supreme indisputable power:
But the mischeife is, the observator by Parliament means only the Lords and
Commons distinguished from the King: Now whether it be more safe resting in
them, or in the King with them, th^^ is the question? which in effect is all
one with this whether Democracy be a better form of Government always
follows the disposition of the Sovereigne power; If therefore the Sov^reigne
power rest incontrollably in one alone, then is the Government simply
Monarchical, If it rest in the chief Peers, then it is an Optimacy: If in
the people Democracy: If it r^^t in one alone and yet to the use of it in the
most weighty matters, a consent of Peers, and people is to be had* then it is
not an absolute, but an admirably well tempered Monarchy. Now if you compare
the 3 simple forms of Government, A^istotle will thus determine Har^^^^ optima
est Regnum, deterima Democratia: In so clear a truth, the spirit of opposition
could not force him to dissent from his Master Plato, who having set down
those 3 simple forms of Government, with three mixed and compounded, thus
delivers his judgment. V^i^^ dominatio bonis instructa leg^bus sex illarum
omnium optima est, Gubernationem vero ^a^in qu^ Plato in Bolitico*
non multi imperant mediam cens^re d^b^mus, caeterum multorum administration^m
^^^ibus is rebus debilematque infirm^m. And surely if this judgment be not
right, near all the world are in error; But n^w though simple Monarchy, do
far excced their Cons^^ar or popular Government, yet is it not without its
inconveniences, and therefore it may be so tempered and mixed, as that it may
still remain Monarchy, and yet have its inconveniences restrained and avoided
as farforth as may be, then will it of all others, whether absolute, or mixed,
become the most useful and convenient form of Government. Now such, and no
other is the constitution of Government in England, so well poysed and molded
by the wisdom of our ancestors as that it gives to this Kingdom* the
conveniences of all, without the inconveniences of any one; as far forth as
by humane prudence they may be prevented. The supreme power therefore of
making Laws whereby to govern and judge the people in time of peace, as
likewise His Majesty's Answer to the 19. propositions
the power of armies for preventing of invasions and insurrections, rests in a
King only, and immovably, whereby he is sufficiently enabled to protect his
people: And again as the King himself acknowledges those laws by which he
is to govern may not be made but by the Consent of the house of Peers and by
the house of Commons chosen by the people, all h^ving free votes and particular
privileges* And that the Prince, may not make use of his high and perpetual
power, to the hurt ^f ^ho^e for whose good he h^th it, the house of Commons (as
an ^^cellent conserv^r of liberty) is solely entrusted with the first
propositions concerning the levies of m^^y (the sinews of pe^c^, a^ ^^^) and
for the impe^cki^g of those who for their own ends (though countenanced by any
surreptiti^usly gotten command of the King) have violated that law* which the
King is bound (when h^ knows it) to protect and to ^he protection of which,
they were bound to advise him, at the least not to serve him in the contrary,
And the Lords being trusted with a jud^^atory power are an exc^llent sk^^ene
and bank between the prince and people, to assist each against the incroachment
of the other. Now whether it be more safe for the supreme indisputable power
after this manner to rest in the King, or else to be in the Lords and Commons,
excluding the king, that's the question? The ^bser^ator urges these
inconveniences that s^eme to rem^i^ in this regulated Monarchy, so that it is
at the kings pleasure when h^ shall iudg^ fit to call parliament^ and being
called, by dissent he my frustrate their proceedings, and at his pleasure
dissolve their being: If this be so, how have they a power more than sufficient
to restrain Tyranny? ^^^^ly if these principles hold, Parliaments will be
made the very Engines and Scaffolds whereby to erect* a Government more
tyrannical then ever was known in any other kingdom: What ^^mes do we live
in, when the known principles of ancient Government shall be thus impudently
railed at? That it is left at the Kings just pleasure to call Parliaments,
(upon which o^^er rights depend) is a truth so manifest, that I am ashamed to
allege any proof of it; that the King has indisputable power of dissolving
of Parliaments, is equally manifest, and acknowledged by the Act for not
dissolving this present Parliament; and that the King in his ^udgment
dissenting may thereby quash their proceedings, for as much as it is at this
time denied, I have formerly proved it. But if this be so, what is left to
restrain Tyranny? Marry as much as conveniently may be: For though it be at
the Kings pleasure to call and dissolve Parliaments; he is disabled to make any
new Laws, or repeal the old, how great need so^ver there be for it: Nor may
he raise Subsidies for his Wars, or other occasions, without (...) in
Parliament: If impositions be otherwise indirectly laid upon the subject, the
ministers ought not to levy it, or if it be levied, experience teaches that
the King will be thereby the greater looser: These and many other motives there
are enforcing a King to call Parliaments, and to comply with the just desires
of his subjects: And yet of late I must confess, we have had occasion to
bewail the too long intermission of Parliaments of which a reverend Judge
complaining, gives us the probable reason: At the last meeting in Parliament
(says Huttons Argument against Ship money p. 33
he) either by ill choice of the members, of that House, or by the great
increase of the number, or by the ambitious humors of some Members of that
House, who aimed more at their own ^^ds, and designs, then the general good
of the Commonwealth; things were so carried, not ^^ was used in ancient time,
but so disastrously, that it has wrought such a disease of this course of
Parliaments, as we and all that love the Commonwealth, have just cause to be
sorry for it. But now the fruits that have sprung from this error in
Government, are discovered, the remembrance whereof will ever hereafter put
Princes in mind of calling Parliaments. And to secure this unto us, His
Majesty has now passed an Act for Trieninall Parliaments, not d^^^olvable
within the space of 50* days; then which can there be a better assurance
against Tirannie, not destroying Monarchy it self? Yet all this will not
satisfy the Observator; If the King shall have the disposing of the Militia,
or power of the kingdom, according to the established laws, and may so claim
a share in the Legislative power, as that the Lords and Commons may not without
him, make laws and ordinances whenever themselves shall think fit and
necessary so to do; or if at any time (without presupposing a necessity) he
shall not according to his oath and office, assent to what laws and ordinances
the Houses shall Vote, though they go against his own Judgment and Conscience;
there will be still a means left for the King to make himself a tyrant, or an
absolute Lord, not limited by Law, but disposing all things according to his
lawles^e will, and pleasure; A power you say, is left that he may these, but
the Law trusts him presuming he will not abuse it, and that objection that is
against the presumption of the Law, none should presume to make. Something must
be left if it cannot be restrained, but that Monarchy will be destroyed, or
disabled to perform its office* that restraint that you would put upon it by
placing a superior power in the Lords and Commons, into whose command the King
shall be but a mere Minister, changes the government to popular or consular,
having less appearance of Monarchy in it, then that of Venice, where the Duke
in the highest power of making laws, has a concluding voice freely allowed
him, and yet is that government acknowledged to be Aristocraticall, if not
Democraticall. If then the King should so abuse his power, as to make himsel^^
an absolute Monarch, yet we are better to live under that, then under an
optimacie mixed with democracie.

How are Consular estates almost continually tossed up and down, with the
bill^^^^ (...) surges of ambitious discontented factions? what Republique could
ever preserve it self from being torn in pieces with intestine disentions? or
over run with forragne invasion? di^ not Rome when it was a Republique any
other while degenate into seditions di^cord, and Civil wars? with in the
space of 500* years (to which period it could not reach how many things and
rechanges had they of their Government: under all which it (...) came to
flourish, so as under the sole Gournement. of Julius and Augustus* And yet
R^^^ of all states have best thriven under such popular Government the other
three empires Assirian, Grecian* and Persian grew to rheir greatness under
Monarchy, and were of lon^^^ continuance then ^he Republique of Rome: but I
will not enlarge my self upon so co^^^ a Theme, where in all learned men
agree and experience conformeth an Optima^^^^ Rep^^lique unlimited. to be far
worse then unlimited* Soureigntie. The Obs^ruator* neu^rthe^^^ stands vp^n
defense of the contrary, the King obiecting that the houses claim an arbir^^^^
illimited power to unsettle the security of all men's estates, and that they are
sed^^ible* (...) may nay have abused this power: To this the observator
answers. That there is an Arbit^^ry page. 34.
power in every state somewh^re, it is true it is necessary every man has absolute
power ov^r himself; but because no man can hate himself this power is not
d^ngerous: So every State ha^ a^ arbitrary power over it self, and there is no
danger in it for the same reason; if the state (...) his to one man, or fe^,
th^r^ may be danger in it, but the Parliament is neither on^, or fe^ it is noe
good consequence the Parliament does abuse power because it may; and again^*
The King challenges a greater power then Parliaments.

Is not this to prefer Democracy, if not Anarchy before Monarchy? Not only
suprem^ power regulated by Law, is safer in many then in one or few, but an
arbitrary power is likewise in them without danger, because as one man cannot
hate himself, so a state cannot h^^^ it self: But yet a state may hate one
another, some few may ambitiously seek to overto^^ the rest; the rest may
tumultuously rise against the few; divisions may b^eake th^^ into pe^ces and
make them a prey for foreign invasion: and there wants a Sovereigne King to
sett^^ differences, to suppress tumults, and invasions, and yet no danger,
because no man can ^ate himself: But what though arbitrary power in the
people, or their proxies the Parliment* may be thus abused? it is no good
consequence therefore they do or will abuse it; If it be not a good consequence
against Parliaments, then not against Kings, that because they may abuse their
power to make themselves absolute, therefore they do it, or will do it: Again
you tell us the King challenges a greater power then Parliaments, you mean the
Lords and C^^mons, and it is true he challenges a greater power then they have;
but not ^ greater then they challenge or you give them, for you say Every state
has an absolute arbitrary power* and ^^ Parliament is indeed the state it
self, and so have an absolute arbitrary power; a greater the^ which I am sure,
neither King, nor Tyrant can claim; and the King of England neither lawfully
can, nor does claim so much; He claims a supreme power not absolute bu^
political, regulated by law, not arbitrary, nor can he make Parliament
ordinances or laws binding to the kingdom in general without them, upon any
pretended necessities, but without him they make such.

The observator ha^h another Argument to prove Domocracy, or the Soverai^ne
power in a Committee to be better and more safe then in one. The King asks,
why not the King predominate rather then the Lords and Commons? The observator
answers, We ^^^ a maxim, and it was ground^d upon nature, and never till this
Parliament with-stood* That a Committe^ can have no private e^ds ^o misl^ad it*
no Parliament ever injured a whole king^^^^, o^ exercised any Tyranny, nor is
there ^^y possibility how it should. True it is a Committee or Corporation
Metaphisically abstracted from those of whom it is compounded, can have no
private end, as not being subject to any lust, appetite, or passion, (...) yet
to death; but the particulars compounding that body may have private or at
least evil (...).

What does the Observator think of the Council of TRENT? Could it aim (...)
nothing but good? cannot a Committee exercise Tyrann^e? D^d the vas^alls unto
^^^thage never suffer under that Committee? would they not have chosen to
groan under ^he oppressions of a Dionisius, rather than under the intolerable
exactions and Ordinances ^f that Tyran^zing Dame? Did not Athens suffer under
thirty Tyrants, who at first had the peoples consent to govern? Did never any
Parliament in Rich. 2d. time abuse the ^ingdome* Why then did one Parliament
condemn another? Was there not a Parliament sometimes branded with the name of
Parliamentum insanum? and has there not bin ^ Parliament termed Parliamentum
Doctorum in quo jugulum Ecclesiae atrocius petebatur? I speak not this to cast
any the least blemish upon that thrice Honorable, and never enough commended
Counsel; but only to show that by the fury and practice of some Members, the
whole body may possibly be lead into error, and injure the Commonwealth: Some
members may possibly combind themselves for alteration of Government in Church
and State, and if they can back their design which the force of an unruly
multitude, they may with that force and hypocrisy mixed together, prevail with
the major part of the Houses, and then having got an Act to be indissolvable,
they may go on with their design, making ^se of such schismatic and
seditious dispositions as the Commonwealth shall then abound with, and abusing
the rest of the people with imaginary fears and Iealousies from foreign
kingdoms, and pretending an alteration of Government to be endeavored a
prelaticall popish malignant party at home, who have so far seduced their
King, as that he will not ^earken to the advice of his great Council* they
may then upon pretense of prepelling such dangers, make themselves Monsters of
the Militia, and strength of the Realm; That ^one, it is possible they may
proceed to destroy the Hierarchy of Church, and Monarchy in the State, and
then what will let but that they may reign as arbitrary Lords? possible I say
it is, that some Members in a Committee may thus make themselves Lordly
Tyrants, and the^ too late will the people wish to have kept under a King,
though he should have proved ^ Tyrant; for so there might have been some end
of their miseries: Many Tyrants have again changed into worthy Kings, or if
that hope should delude their expectations, yet his death would ere long make
place for a successor, who probably may prove a milder Lord: but a tyrannizing
community will be an immortal slavery. I da^e not say this is now aimed at by
any, yet I could wish men would wa^ily consider circumstances, and well weigh
with themselves whether our Observators principles do not make way for some
such end; which the wisdom of Parliament cannot but deter; and I hope, will
ever present.

He gives an absolute arbitrary power to such as shall by what means soever
make themselves a major part in the Houses* neither Statutes nor presidents
shall be binding unto them: all oaths and ties of Allegiance unto their King
must cease, if they Vote their Sovereign be their danger; and yet for^ooth
they are obliged by Justice and honor not to do wrong to King nor kingdom,
that is all the security this observator will allow for our Religion lives ^^
^^erties: and yet what applause and approbation has his desp^rate principles
received amongst many of us, as if they all tended to a glorious freedom. O
that men would wisely consider what enemies they are unto themselves, who
blindly hinting after the name of liberty, overtorne and destroy their ancient
sec^^ities.

It Is not prerogative that is now contending with the Subjects liberty, but
liber^ie struggles with Othlocracie, the established protestant Religion with
scisme and heresy; whether learning, Law, the flower of Nobility, the best and
choice of the commonalty may live an^ not be destroyed, is the question? An Act
of oblivion wherein all unhappy difference^ and contentions may lie forever
buried, has once and again bin offered and refused* So^^ men's debts and
necessities must be satisfied out of the skinns of those they call malignant^

Are not all such as meddle with the Commission of Array, or assist and stand
by his Majesty in this opposition, declared by those whose well meaning
integrity, his Majesty supposes to be abused by some few malignant spirits,
to be wicked and traitorous enemies to the State? Is it not ag^ine required
that all who are or shall be voted Delinquents be delivered up to the Justice
(as they call it) of Parliament? will they be content to be tried o^ both
sides, by the kingdom representing it self in a second Parliament? No says
the Observator, that were to exceed in infinitum. Will they then allow the King
to be an essential part of this Parliament? or if not, will they remove this
Parliament to any other plac^ but London? that so all the members may freely
resort unto it, and deliver their conscience^ without being posted or
prescribed or torn in pieces by a rabble of people that shall requir^^ their
names:: They see no reason for that. What remains then but that themselves be
justified by themselves, and all that dissent from them be at their mercy or
destruction? And do not three parts of four of the Nobility dissent from them?
Are not near an equal part of the Commons house dis-inclined to these
proceedings? If you intermingle the Lords, and Commons elected, are they not
opposed with equal number? Besides the King and his Royal Line to turn the
State, survey the kingdom, are not the most and most learned of the Divines
against them? Are not the most and most learned in the professions of Cano^ and
Common law, disapproving their proceedings? will they in that property falls
within the cognizance of Judges, as the legalitie or illegalitie of the
Commission of Array, be directed by the Judges and Sergeants for such purposes
attending in the house of Lords? On which side stands the visible major part of
those Seminaries of learning the Universities, and Innes of Court? which way
are the most of the Gentry and such of the Commonaltie, whose education or
nature gives them abilities to discern further into things then other men?
Must these be all turned out of the Kings protection, to be at pleasure
destroyed? Must the Militia be delivered up, that so the King may be disabled
to give them, and such as shall hereafter, finding themselves abused, return
unto their Sovereign, a due and just protection? because those that demand the
disposal of it, have found a means to betray a multitude unto their cause,
amongst whom, and on whose side, all the Anabaptists, Brownists, Familists, and
Non-conformists, are to be found even to a man; and yet besides them, I verily
believe there are very many able, honest, and well minded men, as likewise many
right noble Lords and Members in the House of Commons, most heartily desiring
the good of their Country, whose innocence and noble disposition making them
unapt to suspect a foul face of treachery to be masked under the pretense of
liberty, subjects them to the deceipts and hypocrisy of some few furious
deformers, who as they want not art to abuse the integrity of many good
subjects, so have they many other means and inducements to make their cause
suitable with the common sort of men: They adorn it, with assuming (but
unjustly) the glorious name of Parliament, with the very ty^le of Reformation
they so tickle up the crasie minds of the multitude, (who ever are in dislike
with what is present, and believe much virtue to be in that which they never
tried) that to witness their affections and forwardness in such a cause, they
will be content to charge, and overcharge themselves, and some of them to
hazard their own lives, rather then (as they are persuaded) to live like
vassals under a tyrannizing Prince, or Popish superstition; and these slanders
of an intention to bring in Popery, and superstition, and arbitrary rule, with
such other falsities, are ever made the Triarian Legion, in which they put
their last and chiefest strength; were in soundness of reason that did support
their cause, it would not prevail chiefly where least ability of judgment,
is? But as which the simpler sort (ever jealous over the intents and purposes
of wiser men) imaginary fears and slanders are the aptest means to prevail;
So in others, ambition and self conceit meeting with an unquiet and factious
spirit, is that which (I am persuaded) has given the greatest furtherance unto
this unhappie cause.

Let every man enter into his own heart, and ask himself, what it is that he
particular wants? what point of liberty his Ancestors ever had, which he now
h^th not, or may not have granted by the King? Let him ask himself whether
more be not granted then ever our Forefathers had? and whether it be not as
well, Nay better secured unto us, then ever any liberty was unto them? Why then
are we not happy and contented as they were? Surely we shall find no other
cause of our present misery, but that unquiet spirit within our selves; were
we not possessed with this unquiet spirit, strong in its illusions, vain and
ridiculous fears could not have so far prevailed with us? Who to affright the
world has invented day by day those many plotts of Treason, which experience
has assured us to be all but vain, or wickedly invented? What is it that
carries on with fury and madness those disturbers of Church and State the
Brownist, the Anabaptist, and those of the Family? Is not this unquiet spirit
that rages within their own breasts? This is that spirit with which some
seditious preachers being themselves professed, labor to infuse the same into
their ignorant auditory? with this seditious spirit some members finding
themselves to have been hurried on to the hazard of their lives and fortunes,
endeavor as much as they can to draw others into the same danger, hoping
thereby to make the multitude of offenders, a refuge and safe guard for their
own offenses: It is the desperate fury of this bloud-thirstie spirit that
rejects all terms of Accommodation.

The way of peace it will not know. O most unhappie England! Thou that for
happiness stoodest so lately in the envy of all Europe, shall now through the
raging fury of this infernal spirit, lie weltring in thine own blood: Dead
Carcasses shall be strowen up and down thy streets, the Father divided against
his own bowels, brother against brother, like the Children of Sadmus, each
slaying and imbruing their hands in the others blood.

In this violent storm of intestine War, who can promise to himself
security of his fortunes, family, or life in it self; Shall not we be all
split upon the rocks of self division, or overwhelmed with the stormy wind of
foreign invasion, unless with timely resistance, we either cast out or
destroy this unquiet spirit? Let us not delud^ our selves with imaginations
that to give way to its fury, will be the shortest way to end our misery:
Consider those that are in opposition to it: Consider the justness of their
cause, and you will not exact, that they while there runs but one drop of
blood in their v^ines should yield themselves to be trampled on by the fury of
their insulting adversaries, betraying their Religion and Liberty to the
destroying Anabaptist; or when they shall be overborne and destroyed, do you
that shall survive them, expect to enjoy a calm after so bloody a Tempest?
will there not arise dissentions amongst your selves? You do not all surely
conspire the same end, who nevertheless infected by some few malignant
spirits, are united in opposition to your Sovereign: of many of you I cannot
but say, O quam honesta voluntate miseri^stis? Yet are there not Anabaptists
Brownists and other Sectaries abounding amongst you? and do not each aim at
the establishing of his own Sect? Against all which you that are truly
Protestants must oppose your selves, and so must engage your selves in a second
war, as bloody as the former, unless you will comply and suffer your selves to
be carried on beyond your proposed ends of reformation; which is an effect that
often befalls well-minding reformers, when they at empt it by tumultuous force,
by some fury* amongst them to be forced on beyond their aim and intended
scope. These and many other miseries will assuredly encount^r with you, unless
God shall please timely to unite the hearts of the King and His Parliament, to
the confusion of those s^ismaticall and seditious spirits, who hope by abusing
the good intentions of th^se ^onourable Houses, to establish their design^s in
the destr^ction of the Commonwealth. If any harsh expressions have fallen from
me in this discourse, I desire they may be applied against the destroying
pests, and only against them. If in the matter which the Observator has given
occasion to treat of, I have through error too strictly limited the Royal
power, or in ought derogated from the right and au^hority of the houses of
Parliament. I shall be most sorry for such my mistake, and be ready to retract
the same upon the first intimation. It was necessary if I would say any thing
against the Observator, that I should insist upon the actions of the major part
of the House; in which whatsoever has been said, is by way of proposal of my
doubts rather than dogmatizing any conclusions, and that the observator may not
from h^nce have any occasion further to debate and bandy the principles of
Government, which ought to remain sacred and untouched* I shall abstract from
thence in way of recapitulation such doubts, as (without examining the cause
and origin of Regal and Parliamentary power) being well satisfied, will much
settle my now scrupulous mind, and will I think, go far in satisfaction of
many others: They arise from consideration of the means used in composing the
House of Commons, of the proceedings and Acts of the Houses so composed, or
from the consequences a and effects that from those acts and proceedings are
likely to ensue.

His Majesty objects, that in the determination of elections, no other rule
was observed then affection to the persons, with reverence to their opinions
for the abolition and destruction of Ecclesiastical government, etc. witness
the excelling at one clap a great number of persons fairly elected, upon
pretense of having had their hand in some Monopoly: against whom to this day
they never have proceeded, whereby they might be restored if innocent, or if
faulty others might be elected in their rooms to serve for the Coun^ry: And
yet they continue among them, some that are notoriously known to be promoters
of Monopolies, because their opinions are such as do well please them. This
objection and many others in that Declaration concerning the determination of
elections, does and will somewhat stagger me until the observator shall
furnish me, with a sufficient answer. Again I desire to be instructed* whether
it be but a calumny raised against some worthy Members, that by their means
and countenance terror and force should be used to amate the courage of some
members, who would not otherwise comply with their opinions, whether nippie
reprehensions and sometimes imprisonment and other punishments were not
rigorously used toward such as did not run with the happy vote of the prime
and worthy members? whereas others combined for alteration, did and might take
a liberty to say and propose even what they pleased themselves? If there be a
truth in these objections, it will be to little purpose to dispute what is the
power of the Houses of Parliament fairly chosen and freely vo^ing.

Concerning their arts and proceedings, I am unsatisfied by the Observator,
whether the Commons alone may make binding Ordinances, even out of the case of
necessity? Jf not, how shall I defend their imposing the Protestation upon all
the kingdom, by a Declaration, that what person soever shall not take it, is
unfit to bear office in Church and Commonwealth, and yet before that the
Lords had rejected a bill for imposing the same Protestation? How shall I
defend their published orders, as that of the ninth of September in derogation
of the book of Common prayer, and for suspension of some laws in force
concerning Church Government: Or if not in ordinary ^ases, yet inform me,
whether in case of ne^essitie, the Commons may make O^dinances, mauger the King
and Lords, and dispose of the strengeh of the Realm? And if so, whether they
may not likewise levy Subsidies, and impose taxes in such manner as they shall
think fi^.

Whether is it pliamenta^y when a Bi^l has been once and again rejected to
obtrude it a third time in the same Session, taking advantage of the absence of
such, as are known to oppose it? Thus it is said was done to pass the
Ordinance for the Militia.

How shall I satisfy such as saw heard, and felt the frequent tumults
resorting to the Parliament house d^ores, o be no tumults but lawful
assemblies, although they threatened and assaulted some Members, and af^righted
very many? If I yield they were tumults, I contradict a Declaration in the name
of the Lords and Commons, defining them to be lawful assemblies: If I say they
were not tumults, I am threatened by a Decl^ration formerly made by a fuller
house of Peers, and s^nt down to the house of Commons to have had their
assistance for the suppressing of such tumul^s.

If it be objected to me, that the new major part of the Houses do assume and
challenge ordinary power to make new, and repeal old laws; shall I answer,
that they have not as yet so far incroached upon the liberty of the Subject,
my opponent will I doubt reply, that indirectly and implicite^y they have
alr^ady done it, though pol^^ie will that they forbear a while to claim it in
down right terms, for fear it should too much sta^tle the subject, whose
liberty must be invaded by degrees; at first therefore the v^te shall be only
thus, Whenever the Lords a^^ Commons shall d^cla^e what the law of the land
is, the same must be asse^ted to and obeyed: Let this be ^rst swall^wed, and it
w^ll ^hence be early proved in good time, that those De^lar. Maii 27 concerning
the Stat. of E. 1.
that may authorative declare the law, l^ying an obligation immediately upon
all to obey such Declaration, may likewise whenever they please, make new or
repeal the old law: this will will be proved by a Declaration of the Lords and
Commons. If it were admitted (say they) that the King by his Proclamation (^he
^ow major part of Lo^ds and Commons by their vote) may declare a law, thereby
his Proclamation (their vote) will in effect become laws: which would turn ^o
the subversion of the law of the land, and the rights and liberties of the
Subject. This again the Observator proves, There is (says he) in the
interpretation of law upon the last appeal the same supremacy of power
requisite, as is in making it, and therefore grant the King to be supreme
interpreter, and it is all one as if we grant him to be supr^m^ maker of law;
grant him this, and we grant ^im to be above all limits, all conditions, all
humane bounds whatsoever, we resign all into his hands, Lives, Laws,
Liberties, Parliaments, all to be held at me^re discre^ion. But the King (will
my opponent say) never c^aimed to himself alone any such power; but the now
major part of the two Houses do claim to themselves (and such as shall at any
time make themselves a major part) this supreme power of interpreting and
declaring law; and accordingly they declare that the King may not send for
Sergeant Skippon, nor require any subject to come to him, which by some
special service is not bound to come to him. That the King could not by the
law adjourne the Term to York and many such other Declarations, and
Interpretations of law they have made, to all which they require the kingdom
should obey without appealing. And so they (not the King) will have our Laws,
Lives, Liberties, Parliaments, all to be held at mere discretion: Now what
clear answer may be made to this reply, I desire to be instructed,

Another doubt that perplexeth me, arises from their declaring the privilege
of Parliament to extend to high treason; now I do not know that any privilege
can have its ground or commencement, unless it be by statute, grant, or
prescription; no statute, grant, or presciption can be alleged for this
privilege against treason; nor indeed can a grant in such case hold fo^ce, if
the King and Pope (when the Pope was conceived to have had plenitude of power)
should have both joined in granting a Sanctuary for treason, although it were
not to exempt traitors from all manner of trial or punishment, yet was such a
grant in it self merely void, 1 Hen. 7. Staff^rds case, etc. And by the
statute 26 Hen. 8. cap. 13. it is enacted, that no offender in any kind of
high treason shall have the privilege of any manner of Sanctuary: And as
there is neither statute nor grant, so no prescription neither to exempt the
members of Parliament wholly from punishment, nor yet to change the method and
manner of their trial: for no prescription can be, but it must be both
reasonable in it self, and also used and allowed; now there has not been nor
can be any one instance given to prove that this privilege was either allowed,
or so much as claimed: nay the contrary practice has been witnessed by
Wentworths case cited by his Majesty, whereunto many others might be added:
and as it wants allowance or claim, so is it in it self unreasonable; for if
after the rising of the House, I shall overheare or discover a Parliament man
plotting treason, and ye^ may not attach him till I have acquainted the House,
which cannot be till next day, or perhaps two days after that they again sit,
the treason in the mean while will be executed, or the traitor perceiving
himself discovered, will be fled. So if a Parliament man at York commit
treason, murder, or robbery, if you may not arrest him till you have been at
London, and got leave of the House, the offender without doubt will not stir
away, till you return to apprehend him. Can we imagine any should have greater
privilege, then the law of Nations gives to Ambassadors, and yet they have no
privilege i^ case of high treason; being an offense against the laws of
Nations and Nature, Cambd. Eliz. fol. 201. May not every Judge in Westminster
Hall claim this privilege with better color then a Member of Parliament,
though the Parliament be a higher Court then any of them? For as the King may
impeach one Judge, so more, and then it will be in his pleasure, or of any
other accuser, to make the ordinary Courts (though settled by prescription and
Acts of Parliament, and less depending upon the will of the King, then does
the being of the two Houses) what they will, when they will: and then if the
King has any suit depending in the Common Pleas, and finds some of the Judges
inclyning against him; they may be held under a fained accusation of Treason,
till the others have given judgment for the king: Surely though the Parliament
be a superior Court, yet have the ordinary Courts as firm a foundation as
that can have, and are more necessary for the people: and yet without question
upon such pretense no judge* may claim a privilege from arrest in Case of
Treason.

If we consult with our Law books, they tell us that the privilege of
Parliament does not extend to Treason, nor yet breach of the peace, nor yet (as
I think) against the kings debt; for the reason and ground of privilege is,
because the king has an Interest in the members, to have their advice,
therefore no subject may arrest them for his debt; But that cannot give them
privilege against the king himself. Vid^, Dyer, 59. 60. Every Burgasse has
privilege quant larrest nest forsque al suite dun Subject 2: 8. 4. 8. b. per
Danby Dyer. 275. Crompton. 8. b. 9. 10. 11 Elsm^re Postnati. 20. 21.

Now whereas the observator says, that this privilege is Claymed in case of
suspicion only, and when leave may be had, and when competent accusers appear
not; This overthrowes the reasons given by the Houses, and is not in it self
satisfactory: For th^e Attorney General in the most competent accuser, and the
accusation was of downright High Treason, not only of suspicion: and yet
upon probable suspicion the accused ought to be imprisoned.

I must therefore entreat the observator in this particular for that it has
been a cause of so great combustion, and taking up of arms within this
Kingdom, to give me a more full satisfaction.

There remains one other scruple wherewith I am perplexed: and it arises for
their voting the Commissions of Array to be illegal; whether they deny the
power it self, or only dislike* the ^orme of this present Commision, is
uncertain? Now as concerning the first, it seems to me that posse regni, or
the power over the Militia muster array etc. is by the fundamental Law
inmovably settled in the Crown, or rather the Crown, settled on it: ^ being
such an individual right of the Crown, as if a King without it, is in truth
nothing Op^rtet (says Glanvill) regiam potestatem armis esse decoratam. Jn
rege (says Bracto) qui recteregit, necessaria sunt hac duo, arma viz et leges:
and the Statute ma^e El^^ven Henry the Seventh. Cap 1. tells us that by duty
of All glance, the Subjects are bound to serve their Sovereigne Lord for the
time being, in his wars, f^r d^f^nce of him and the Land, against every
Robellion* power and miget reared against ^im, And with him to enter and abide
in service in battail^ if the case so require etc. And another Statute. 4. and
5. Phil. and Mary: Cap 3: Shows that the Ki^gs of his Realm have ever used to
muster their Subjects, and to Levy a number of them for serv^ce in wa^res: And
so those Reverend Judges Hutton and Crook, arguing for the S^^ject in Case of
Shipmoney, acknowledge the mustering and arraying of the Subjects by
Commissions to be undoubted right of the Crown. Hutton fol 39. That there have
been Commissions of Array, and provision for Arms, and for preparing Armor,
according to the variety of times, for training and disciplining of Soldiers
to be prepared for defense etc. That this has been in use, no man can or ever
could deny: But the arms wherewith they were charged were still their own
proper goods; And does not the whole frame of Government of the Realm depend
(and ever has done) upon Commissions granted by the King to Shereiffs and
Justices of peace? which are in substance the same with this: 12. Hen 7. 17.
tells us, that at first all administration of Justice, was in the Crown, till
people multiplying, Shereiffs were deputed, under whom are all to be ready for
defense of the Realm, when enemies come; And the Sherif^e is to attend the
King in time of war, and shall cause the people to go with the King for the
defense of the Realm against enemies and now by all this it appears, that it
is the kings right to discipline, and array the souldier^ and to dispose of the
strength of the Realm: And that this power is inseparable from him, even an
act of Parliament. if it would disable the king t^ defend the kingdom, is void,
deing against Law and reason. Cook^s Argument 56. But you sa^, that the
Parli^ment ^esires no ^em vall of that power which was in the King, but that
which was in such or such a substitu^e: But whether they desire it or no, they
have by th^i ordinance of Militia, taken away that power which was in the King;
unless we shall think those to be his substitutes that take it against his
will, and hold it, and employ it against him.

Again you tell us, it is but for a time disposed of by a t^mporary Ordinanc
and not absol^tely and for ever taken from the King, and seeing they de^^red it
not for the present occasion* why should the King d^ny it. Should a good fellow
desire the observators wi^e f^r the present occasion, I doubt he would not be
so kind hearted, as to grant it? And surely there be some kind of things that
are not to be departed with though for a day; Semiramis desired of her husband
king Ninus, that he would grant unto her the sovereigne power for five days
(as Diodorus Siculus or) as Plutarch reports, but for one day, which being
granted her, she in that place caused her husband to be slain and ever after
ruled as Queen; I hope no body is so wicked as to imagine any such vile
intention: and yet this story may well show how a king is no more himself, i^
he but for a day; depart from his individual right: And such it appears by
his right to the Militia of the Realm, and therefore the Commission of Array,
is in substance undeniably good.

But then whether the form of the Commission, be legal, I can see as little
reason to doubt, seeing it is for substance and form both by a very act of
Parliament now in force, and by his Majesty's Ceclararation, cleared from all
color of objection? So that in mine own understanding, it seems
unquestionable both for matter and form: You will say nevertheless, that I
ought to submit my understanding, and implicity believe it illegal, because so
voted: But this sound somewhat harsh, that we should be bound to submit to such
votes, against an Act of Parliament, upon record; unless you can assure me
that they are proper ^udges against the king, and all such as descent from
them, wheather it be an Act of Parliament or not?

And if they are, yet I pray satisfy me concerning the manner of their
proceedings* why was it so hastily determined being a question of that weight,
and which required a perusal of many ancient Statutes, and Records? Why were
none of the Judges nor Sarjeants advised within such a qu^stion of legalitie,
or illegalitie? The Commission is in Latin, and old legal Latin, are all the
members that voted against it, able to give the Grammar Construction of it? But
above all, why was it voted without so much as hearing the King or his Counsel
to speak in his cause, before it were condemned? You know what the Poet says,

Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera, aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus
futi. I spare to load the Observator with any more doubts concerning their past
votes, the good Consequences whereof and of other concomitant proceedings, I
do much fear. If the observator shall give me but probable hope of the good
event of things; and satisfy my doubt in these perticulars I shall with
cheerfulness, ever after pay an humble obedience unto all such votes and
proceedings, and shall from thenceforth acknowledge my self for his industry
in settling and satisfying my yet unsatisfied Conscience to be much indebted
unto him; Mean while I bid him heartily farewell.

FINIS

