A HAND-KERCHEFFE FOR A DISCONSOLATE SOUL, To wipe away his Sin, and to keep
him from Despair, as though they had never been committed.

By Samuel Spinckes, Minister of Gods Word.

So apply the Promises of God unto thy Soul, that thou never despair, but
make him thine own by Faith in Jesus Christ, and hope thou in the Lord
Jehovah, for by Hope we are saved,

Romans 8.24. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, 1651.

TO THE Much Honored and truly Virtuous, THE LADY ANNE SCOTT, Late the
Spousesse of Sir EDWARD-SCOTT, of Scotts Hall, Knight and Baronet, the Mirror
of Piety; S. S. wishes all the Prosperous Events of Health and Happynesses,
external, internal, and eternal.
Madam:
THE Truth is most Divine, though crossing humane sense, spoken by the Father
of truth; but I will not here stand blowing a Trumpet (as it were) either of
your Worthiness, or my own weakness: As for your Virtues and Almsdeeds,
they shall and will follow you, when you shall be gathered to your Fathers,
Revel. 14.13. And for my imbecility and weakness, let the World laugh at it,
I care not; only my desire is, that God may be glorified. I have made bold to
present a Hand-kercheffe for a Disconsolate Soul, under your name, assuring
myself (according to your wonted Piety) of your loving acceptance; my desire
to do good, and that to the poor and meanest soul, shall in part (as I hope)
excuse me in all: For we are all Debtors (with that blessed Saint Paul, Romans
1.14.) both to the wise and unwise. And as it must and ought be our wisdom
chiefly to win and gain souls Prove. 11.30. So it behooveth all Gods
children to receive from us with meekness his Statutes and Judgments, Deuteronomy.
4.6. I have heard you are as patient as Job, and like to Moses mild, and
altogether full of Virtue: In a word, although neither my person nor condition
can any ways merit at your Ladyships hands, yet the benign aspect you
always afford to those that labor in Gods Church has thus far emboldned me,
in all humility to crave that this my endeavor may pass in Public under
your Ladyships name; which favor being happily obtained, the Work and thing
it self may of all sorts expect to be the rather embraced: And so praying the
Father of mercy to grant you much joy, health, and happinesses terrestrial,
with a glorified life celestial, rests,

Yours in all duty most bound, Samuel Spinckes.

A Hand-kercheffe for a disconsolate Soul, etc.
OH! What shall I do? what shall I say? Herein observe the true Light of the
World, and he will direct thee, Joh. 1.34. Even that Son of God, whom as yet
the Disciples knew not, neither did they understand the mysteries of
Redemption, the which are wrought by Christ's humiliation and exaltation: by the
one (says Aquinas) taking from us all evil, and by the other giving us all
good: Oh why should any then despair of their salvation? seeing Christ came
not for the just, but to call sinners to repentance; for it is he that died for
our sins, and rose again for our justification, Romans 4.25. Is it thus? Why
then should any despair of everlasting life? I dare say, it is abusive much to
thy Creator, to say that the joys of the Kingdom of Heaven belong not unto
thee: Wherefore take heed of thus abusing or mis-using of Gods mercies, and
Christ's merits; for Christ was betrayed, mocked, spitted on, scourged, and put
to death, and all for our sins: I say, truth it self was betrayed, wisdom
it self mocked, glory it self spit upon, innocence it self scourged, life it
self killed, and all for us, and our sins, that we might not despair. What
should a man do to keep him from despair? Confess his sins unto God, and
that not once or only in general, but often also, and that in particular; and
be sure to make satisfaction and restitution to those thou have wronged: for
the Law of God under the penalty of his curse, requires to restore whatsoever
was wrongfully gained, Levit. 6.2.3. etc.

Do not thou then waver in thy faith, for a wavering minded man is unstable in
all his ways, Jam. 1.8. For as the Painter at the first, (says Ponton on Luke
chapter 19.) draws his picture with a Coal roughly, and afterward with an accurate
Pencil and Orient colors exactly, so the Holy Ghost in the Prophets and Old
Testament shadowed Christ's passion obscurely, but in the latter and New
Testament, points and sets it down (as it were) perspicuously. The two
Testaments are two pence, Luke 10.35. bearing the same Kings Image, (says
Theophylact on Luke 10.) though not in the same stamp; for all things being now
finished and fulfilled that are written by the Prophets, of the same man, yet
our Saviors picture engraven in the Gospel, is more full and clear, then that
which was imprinted in the Law: for now God has showed us the light of his
countenance, Psalm. 67.1. Let us not therefore despair for all the hub-bubs and
garboiles, and wars, or discontents that are in the world, nay in this our
Kingdom, but put sure trust and confidence in God, and we shall see that the
Lord in his good time will bring a period to those distractions: Oh, I say,
despair not! but search the Scriptures, for they are the way unto Christ, and
Christ is the way to Heaven. Altissiodorensis in his Golden Sum, says, that
Faith, Hope, and Charity, are a created Trinity, resembling the three Divine
persons uncreated. For the Son is begotten of the Father, and the Holy Ghost
proceeds from both; so steadfast hope is bred of faith, and love does issue from
them both. Whence observe, that Bellarmine cites often out of his Works against
S. Augustine, that the foundation of Gods house in our souls, is faith, the
walls hope, and the roof charity. And the Prophet in a vision saw the
transgressour against the transgressour, and the destroyer against the
destroyer. So the Schoolmen oppose the Schoolmen, and their Champion
Bellarmine fights against Bellarmine, in the points of faith and charity: for
if faith be the foundation of all other virtues in a Christian, as himself
writes, in his first Book of Romes Pontificals, and 10. chapter, then it is
not as he disputes in the first Book of his Justification, and 4. chapter;
that is wrought by charity: but contrariwise, charity does arise from faith. It
is then an idle dream to suppose that charity is enclosed in faith, as a
Diamond is in a Ring; for Christ is the precious Pearl, says Luther in Galla.
2.5. and Christ it is which gives life and luster to the Ring; for, the just
live not by love, but by faith in the Lord Jesus, Habak. 2.4. It is an improper
speech then (as some of our Divines observe, as Doctor Fulke, in Gal. 5.6.) to
say that faith works by love, as the body by the soul, the matter by the
form; for the soul rather works by the body, than the body by the soul.
The matter is passive, the form active: whence know ye, that tribulations and
afflictions are the patrimony of good men and good women: therefore never
despair of mercy, for any vexation or trouble, nor have such a thought in
thee, as to think that Gods mercies are not for thee: I wish that all our
Anabaptists and women-Preachers would have such thoughts in them, then I am
persuaded it would make them more conformable to our Parliament, and to the
truth of Gods holy word.

Let no afflictions or troubles of this world (I say) daunt thee; for unto good
men and women, afflictions and troubles in this life serve to admonish them of
their infirmities, and the virtues of good people are made manifest unto the
world by their troubles and crosses of this life; wherefore, if thou be
almost in despair, or be cast down upon thy bed of sickness, etc. why then
note, to thy comfort, as in a skirmish (as God grant it may be otherwise with
this Kingdom, wherein there are now too many) in the wars: that when the
conflict is once begun, then the courage of the Captain, I say then, and not
before, is his valor exercised and known; so when God does call his children
to any cross or calamity, then begins the battle, then their blessed patience
and meek contentment is made known and manifest; I say, then, or never, knowing
that all goes by the hand of Gods providence, and holy Ordinance, in whom we
live, move, and have our being, Acts 17.28. And know that no Physician (I write
this as a Hand-kercheffe to wipe away all tears from the eyes of such as are
mourners for sin) can be more careful for the health of the body, then God is,
and will be (if we be constant and confident in calling upon him by prayer, for
mercy and favor in his Son, and our blessed Savior Jesus Christ) for the
health of the soul, how bitter soever the potion and portion of our afflictions
may seem to us; yet receiving it from him who means us so well, we should not
but receive it and them with patient suffering, yea whatsoever his merciful
hands shall reach or lay upon us, saying with holy and just Job, though he
kill me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13.15. My son, says the Wise man, when
thou come to the service of God, then prepare thy soul for temptations, and
fears, and troubles, and shrink not away when thou art tried; for, whom the
Lord loves, him he chasteneth: as gold and silver are tried in the fire, so, I
say, are our faith and patience tried in the furnace and fire of afflictions:
Sicknesses, and afflictions are a means to purge out the dross of natural
corruption, which by reason of our sins, remains within us.

Afflictions being sanctified (says Gregory) will bring us to a true fight of
our sins, and so to a hearty sorrow for the same, and Affliction will teach
Humility, even in the best of Gods Children, as Job, David, Paul; and a man
that should but read Johes Book, David's Psalms, and Saint Paul's Epistles, he
could not but wonder to think that ever they should have any mirth at any
time, etc. If we put into the Balance the afflictions of this life, they will
be found of no weight, nor in any wise able to counterpoize the greatness of
the reward; for (as I said before) tribulation is but a passion, and therefore
small is the force thereof, but glory is an action, and therefore powerful,
and increases every moment. This life passes away swiftly, and soon
vanishes, therefore despair not, but strive to make they election sure, which
may be done if thou can but believe, and so labor and endeavor for the
glory to come, Esaias 64.4. which has no end, and is full of sweet comfort and
happiness, more then heart can think, 1 Cor. 2.9. and endures for ever and
ever. Oh therefore, good Christian soul, persevere constantly in a pure faith
in Christ, and therein labor to finish your course, for great is your reward,
which God has promised, and Christ has purchased, if thou can but believe
in him. And mark this also for thy future and eternal comfort, that the life
of a Christian cannot be without sin, nor temptations; for, I dare say, our
profit and increase in godliness, is through temptations, (as St. Augustine
says) and his reason there follows, for neither does a man well know
himself, except he be tempted, neither can he be crowned except he overcome,
neither can he overcome except he fight, neither can he fight except he have
enemies and temptations, to encounter with. Whence again, note and observe,
that God uses diverse instruments in tempting, troubling, and afflicting of his
children; for sometimes he uses the Devil, as he did with Job; sometimes
wicked men he uses as a means, as the talse witnesses against our Savior;
and sometimes he uses other creatures: but yet in all these there is a double
comfort to Gods child; first, that great and many are the troubles of the
righteous: and then secondly, for their full comfort, the Lord will deliver
them out of all, Psalm. 34.19. the Prophet does not say he has, nor in the
present, does, but in the future, shall. Again, if ye observe the ends of
afflictions, therein also know, that sometimes we are afflicted, that we may be
humbled, and the pride of our hearts abated; sometimes to the end that we may
not fix our love upon this world; sometimes they are sent to make us more
zealous in good works; and sometimes they are sent for this end, that
pertaking with Christ in his sufferings, we may also be glorified with him: and
herein remember how the Lord tried Abraham in offering up his Son, how he tried
Isaac, Jacob, and all the Patriarchs with many and hard peregrinations, and
think also how he tried all the holy and godly Martyrs with scourges and
torments, with fire and faggot, and thereby think, imagine and know, that the
scourge of tribulation, stirs up the drowsy, humbles the proud, purges
the penitent, and crowns the innocent. Again, know and understand, that the
Lord afflicts his children for these ends, that our faith thereby in the
first place may be more pure, holy, and perfect, even as gold out of the
furnace: Secondly, that we might the better know our selves, and our own
frailnesse and weakness: Thirdly, in respect of others, that so we might be
examples of patience and constancy unto them. Thus Christ proved the faith of
Peter on the Sea, and at his Passion, and again after his Resurrection. And
the Apostle Paul witnesses, that through his persecutions and bonds (I say
that thereby) many of the brethren were imboldned, and did more frankly speak
the truth, Philip. 1.14. even through my bonds, says he: and hence proceeded
those confident speeches of the Christians, and holy Martyrs, to their tyrants
and persecutors, saying, torment us, rack us, condemn us, break us in pieces;
yet for all this your malice, and iniquity, it is nothing to our hurt, but for
our joy and comfort, it is nothing but the trial of our innocence; wherefore
seeng it is thus, Oh! therefore never despair of Gods mercy, but with the
Apostle James, count it exceeding joy when ye fall into diverse temptations,
knowing that the trying of your faith brings forth patience, etc. Comfort (Oh
comfort!) your selves in, and with these words: And know, that through many
tribulations ye must enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts, 14.22.

Oh man! thou art created, thou art healed, if by faith thou can see it; yea,
thou art saved, if thou will perceive it: but which of all these are from thy
self? I dare say not any of them; for thou could not create thy self, when
thou wast not; thou could not justify thy self, when thou wast a sinner,
and worse then thou had not been; thou could not raise thy self, when
thou wast dead, because then thy strength was, as if thou had never been.
When then is a man's free will in the state of nature? seeing the Roman Church
boasts much of their free will, where is our merit at the hand of God? Those
that are wise do consider a threefold operation, not offree-will to merit, (as
the Roman Church teaches) but of divine grace, and all these in man, but from
God. The first is our Creation, the second a Reformation, the third our
Confirmation and perfection to glory; and God I say is the Author of all
these; for all our being, and well-being is from God the Father, in, and by
Christ, and by the Blessed Spirit; and therefore to us humility, but to God
only belongs the glory.

Object. But here some may reply, and say, surely I have heretofore felt (as I
thought) the beginnings of Grace, and a new reformed life and conversation, by
which I was persuaded, that I was formed wholly to Christ my Redeemer: thus I
was once persuaded, yet now I find that I am subject to manifold temptations,
and sometimes overcome to fall into grievous sins, which wound my conscience;
yea, I see a decay of grace in my self, I find a weakness of faith, and a
kind of deadness in my soul, so that I delight not in the Law of God, as I
should, nor do I feel that assurance of the favor of God, and of my
salvation, as I desire; and therefore I fear, that the faith that I had was
but feigned, and my holiness but in show, and therefore now I doubt that my
estate and condition is fearful, woeful, and miserable.

Respon. This is a very large Objection, and has many parts, but I will
answer them all with what brevity I may, and first, for the Conclusion; who
told thee that thou wast in Gods favor? It may be thou will reply, it was, and
is, thine own conscience, seeing thy decay in faith, in holiness, and the
burden of thy sins too heavy for thee to bear, and therefore this
pronounces the curse against thee, because thou have not continued in all
things that are written in Gods Law to do them, Levit. 27.26. and because thou
have not that measure of grace which should be in a Christian, in such an one
as is in Gods favor; but who is this that thus persuades thy conscience to
these doubtings? Shall I tell thee who it is? Why then know, it may be either
God, or Satan: First, I say, it may be it is God, which if it be so, then know
certainly, it is for thy good, and that God for a time leaves thee to thy
self, and so suffers those doubtings to be in thee; it may be it is for some
secret sin, for which, as yet thou art not fully and absolutely humbled, nor
have not truly as yet repented thee thereof, and in such a case then God does
it to work humiliation in thee, that so thou may be saved; or it may be it
is to keep thee from security, and to make thee so much the more to abhor
and fear sin, or to prevent spir^tuall pride in thee, to try thy faith,
patience, constancy, and true trust in his promises; or else it is to move thee
to esteem better of Gods service, and of all spiritual graces hereafter; or
it may be it is to teach thee to fly by earnest prayer unto Christ thy
Savior, and to mplore mercy at his hands, with the renewing of his spiritual
grace in thee, because in Christ God is well pleased, and in him thou may
have, and find mercy, yea even in the depth of all thy misery; but I say, If
it be God that brings all these doubtings into thy mind, then I dare say that
it is a sure argument to confirm thy faith, and ascertaine thee that thou art
Gods child, and that so his mercy shall embrace thee on every side; and thus it
is, I say that God tempts, and it is then for thy good, if God do thus tempt
thee.

But not so with Satan, for if Satan tempt and persuade thee to these
doubtings, then he does it to work despair in thy soul, and so to procure
thy utter ruin and destruction; and therefore believe him not, but resist his
temptations at the very first, as the Apostle advises 1 Pet. 5.9. and so
prevent all occasions; for, according to the Proverb, Give the Devil an Inch,
and he will take an Ell: and take heed of solitariness, and of being too much
alone, but use company; if thou be naturally given to mellancholly, then I
say, use merry company, for thy recreation, but take heed of being alone, lest
Satan may deal with thee as he did with Eve, when she was alone, for then it
was that he tempted her, Genesis 3.2, 3.

Therefore I say, be circumspect, and give no credit to Satan when he shall
persuade thee to any evil motion or action, for he is a Liar, John 8.48. and
he is thy enemy, yea, thy accusing enemy, and one that seeks to devour thee,
1 Pet. 5.8. and why should thou believe a liar, or any way credit thine
adversary, rather than the sweet promises of the Father of mercy? how full the
holy Scriptures are of the sweet promises of mercy! let a man search and he
shall find, as in Ezekiel. 18.27. he that does righteousness, not he that says,
but he that does, shall save his soul alive: and come unto me all ye that are
weary, etc. Mat. 11.28. and for this, read Job 13, 14, 15. with others: And
therefore hold this for a ground; although thou may be subject to doubtings,
yet by, and with Gods assistance, with holy Job, thou will never despair, but
pray earnestly and without ceasing for the gift of persevering: And thus shall
thou find comfort in the latter end: and thus thou may perceive then how thou
may obtain the joys of Heaven, and not to despair. Again, peradventure
thou will say, I know there is much joy and happiness in Heaven provided for
the elect, but what is that to me? For I shall have no share thereof, I know it,
by reason I am so subject to so many temptations, and entised often to grievous
sins, sometimes with the Atheist, to think that there is no God, as also to
deny the providence and power of God, harping that all things happen by fortune
and chance; sometimes again I am ready to deny Christ, the second Person in
the Holy and Sacred Trinity, and sometimes I am ready to lay violent hands upon
my self, and thus to sin sometimes against the first Table, and sometimes
against the second: Yea, and although I pray to be free there from, yet I
cannot; well, I shall tell thee the reason of this, Satan is thy utter enemy,
and for that cause, both he and the world, and the flesh, will not leave
assaulting thee, and therefore it is that thou doubtest, and think withal,
that thou ought not to apply the favor and mercy of God unto thy self.
Unto these I fully answer: That these temptations and corruptions may sometimes
be found even in the best of Gods children, (yea, in those upon whom God has
bestowed an excellent measure of grace) the which either arises from the
corruptions of their own natures, from which they are not fully purged, and in
which there are the seeds of all these sins of Atheism, Infidelity, and the
like, or else from the temptations of Satan, from which they neither are nor
can be free, so long as they live in this vale of misery. Paul the Apostle was
often buffetted with Satan's temptations. Peter had a shrewd fall, when he
denied his Master: Noah, Lot, and saythfull Abraham, they had their
resurrections from sins, as I may say, and David, (though a man according to
Gods own heart, Acts 13.22.) yet he was constrained to pray, as Psa. 51.10. for
to have a new heart created in him, etc. And how terrible were Jobs
temptations, as we may read, Job 6.4. if these men were not free, then how
can thou look to be privileged? But to satisfy thee further herein, know
that thou art yet a member of the Church militant, and so long as thou art so,
thou art, and shall be subject to these fightings and warrings against the
temptations of Satan continually, nor can thou be free from these, till thou
be a member of the Church triumphant, which shall be in the world to come; for,
first, our regeneration is not fully perfected in this life, and therefore the
seeds of sin and corruption remaining, there is a fear and doubting even in
Gods dearest children, yea, and sometimes a kind of despair too; Oh! but in
this know for thy comfort, that Christ (thine and our sweet Savior) has felt
the terrors of Gods wrath and absence, that so his faithful ones might be
delivered from it; yet know this also, that there will be a combat in thee,
(if thou be Gods) even between the flesh and the spirit. Again, Satan is
a perpetual enemy, and he will never leave off to seek thy destruction:
howsoever, thou may get the victory, and be at peace for a time, (when upon
true repentance thou art reconciled unto God) yet thy enemies will adventure
again, and thou shall be sure of many battles and skirmishes with them,
before thou can pass through the wilderness of this world, to the Canaan of
Heaven. But yet take this again for thy comfort, that temptations are sure
signs, that they that are troubled and possessed therewith are the dear
children of God.

And temptations are profitable for a Christian, and therefore Saint James
says, my dear brethren, count it exceeding joy when ye fall into diverse
temptations, knowing that, etc. Ja. 1.2.3. etc. nay, our Savior himself was
tempted, and that to grievous sins too, as ye may see, Mat. 4. as to Idolatry,
distrust of Gods providence, and to doubt whether he were the Son of God or
not; nay, he was also tempted to pride and vainglory, yea to lay violent
hands upon himself, and so to be the cause of his own death; and when the
Devil left him, says the text, Luke 4.13. it was but for a season. St. Paul
was an excellent Christian, and the dear child of God, and yet he could not be
free from assaults, Romans 7.23. for he had the seeds of sin in him, and he had a
Law in his members, rebelling against the Law of his mind, and often leading
him into the Law of sin; for he had inward enemies, and he was not free from
outward; for he had the messenger of Satan sent to buffet him 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.
that is, Satan still assaulted him with one temptation or other to move him
forward and to provoke him to sin. And St. Paul prayed thrice; that is, often
and earnestly, to be freed therefrom, and that he might have no more of these
assaults and troubles, and yet he could not be free; and why did not God give
and grant his desire and request? if he would have given this freedom to any,
then why not to Saint Paul? I answer, the state of the Apostle required it
(being a member of the Church militant) that he should not be free; least he
might grow secure, leave off fighting, and so cease to be a Soldier, which we
must not do in this life, for we then break our vows and oaths made by our
Sureties or Parents in our Baptisms: wherefore we must, I say, fight manfully
under Christ's Cross and Banner against the three deadly enemies of the soul,
the world, the Devil, and the flesh, and be faithful unto death, and then
thou shall have a crown of life, Revel. 2.10.

It is the property of the Devil (says Saint Bernard) to suggest evil
motions, but it is our parts and duties not to consent unto them; for, as often
as we resist, so often we overcome the Devil, and we thereby do honor our
God, who visits us, that we should fight, who helps us that we may
overcome, and who strengthens us that we faint not in our combat; to be
tempted by Satan, is Satan's sin, not thine, but to yield and consent to his
temptations, is sin in thee: And know this, that seeing our Savior (as I
showed you a little before) was so tempted to such grievous temptations,
therefore let none think to be free; but yet comfort thy self with this, that
God (who is thy loving Father in Christ) has the Devil in chains; and as he
stays the waves of the Sea at his pleasure, Job 38.8. So he holds Satan
(as it were) with bit and bridle, that he can tempt thee no otherwise, nor any
longer, then God sees for thy good, as is evident by the example of Job, Job
1.12. And if the children of God be tempted and overcome by any assault, yet
upon true repentance and coming unto Christ, we have an Advocate with the
Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our
sins, 1. John 2.1. and in the first Epistle John 1.8.9. If we say that we have
no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; but if we
acknowledge our sins, then he is fathfull (according to his promise) to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

We must not therefore conclude and say, that because we are subject to
temptations, and because the sword is so predominant in our Kingdom, or
because the seeds of sins are still in us, and the corruptions of our natures
are not fully purged, that therefore we are out of the favor of God; and first
for the sword so reigning in the Land, we must confess it is for the sins of
the Land, which if once that cause were but removeed, then the effect would
cease: What, will thou say that for these thou art out of Gods favor? Well
then note again, that these may be, and often are to be found even in Gods
dearest Saints; but herein we may pray unto God for help, because he is the
Lord of peace, who gives peace unto his children; cast thy care therefore upon
God, the author and finisher of thy faith, 1. Pet. 1.2. and use an endeavor
by striveing and laboring to resist these temptations, and endure the combat
with patience, having an eye to our Captain, Christ Jesus, who is the author
and finisher of our faith, etc. Heb. 12.1.2. and know that God freely accepts
us as righteous, not for any merrits of ours, but for the merrits of his dear
Son, in whom only he is well pleased, 2. Pet. 1.17. And also know, that
whenever thou art in any temptation or doubtings to trouble thy soul,
remember then, I say, that thy estate in this life, is like Peter on the water,
whose faith at first was so strong, that at the call of Christ, he came boldly
to him on the waters without doubtings, but when he saw the waves coming
against him, then he presently doubts, and fears drowning, and begins to
sink, and finding himself unable to save himself, he flies to Christ, and
prays earnestly unto him for help; saying, Master, save me, I perish: And
then Christ gives him his hand, and bringing him into the Ship, saves him
from drowning: And in like manner it is with a Christian; for, at first, when
Christ called him to faith and repentance, being persuaded by the Spirit to
believe, then he comes boldly unto Christ, being moved by the excellency of
Christ's merrits, and the free promises of grace and mercy in him; but when once
he comes to see his own unthankfulness, and the weakness of his faith and
obedience, and the unbelief and wants of sanctification in him; then (the
waves of Satan's temptations and corruptions of his own nature assaulting him)
fears and doubtings seize upon him; and he is ready to sink down into the
sea of despair for want of faith. I say, if this be thy estate and thy case,
as peradventure it may? What then must thou do herein? Only this, confess
and acknowledge thine own weakness and insufficiency, and with Peter (being
ready to sink) fly unto Christ, and pray unto him for comfort, who is the
author and fountain of life and peace; for if any be afflicted, let him pray,
says Saint James, 5.13. And my house shall be called the house of prayer,
says our blessed Savior, Mat. 21.13. But where is Gods house once called the
house of preaching? neither yet in all Gods word, I am sure, from the beginning
of Genesis to the end of the Revelations, we do not read of one quarter of the
Miracles and Wonders that have been done by preaching, as have been by prayer;
and the Apostle wills us to prove and to examine our own selves, not any man
another, but himself, 2. Cor. 13.5. And was or is that by preaching, and not
rather by prayer? and pray continually, 1. These. 5.17. And I dare say, that in
any doubtings, troubles, and afflictions whatsoever that thou may be in,
prayer may be the means to beget faith in thee to believe, and thou thereby
may be saved and recovered, etc. But again, if thou at any time doubtest,
because of thy imperfections in any of thy assaults, and because thou art not
fully (as thou may imagine) regenerated: Know then, as I said before, that
Christ is thy perfection, and that God so beholds thee in him, as that thou
can not totally fall: For if we look upon our selves, why then when we have
done all that we can, yet alas! we must needs be constrained to say, that
we are but unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. And for peace in our selves, we
cannot find any. So that as Noah's Dove was constrained to fly back again
into the Arc, before she could find whereon to rest the sole of her foot,
Genesis 8.9. So are we constrained to fly to Christ, before we can find rest to
our souls. As the Israelites being stung with the fiery Serpents, presently
looking upon the brazen Serpent, were healed and cured, Number. 21.9. So
whenever thou art wounded by sin, or moved to doubtings, by thine own
weakness, or Satan's temptations, then sly presently to Christ, and behold
him by the eye of faith, how he was crucified, how he shed his most precious
blood, how he died and rose again, how he sits at the right hand of his and
our Father, and makes intercession, and all for the purchase of thy peace, and
for the joy and comfort of as many as thus believe of him: Oh now! with this
persuasion, I say, possess thy soul in patience and hope, that thou shall one
day enjoy that inheritance of the Saints, where is freedom from all these
fears and doubtings, which Christ has bought and purchased for thee. O
despair not then! for Christ, I say, has purchased and bought eternal life,
and everlasting joys for thee; and not by or with thy merits, but by and with
the price of his own most precious blood, this hope will not make ashamed,
Romans 5.5. Yea, by and with this hope, thou art and shall be saved, Romans 8.24.
Do not therefore conclude and say, that the joys of heaven belong not to
thee; this is to abuse that sweet and loving mercy of God; for, as you have
heard but even a little before, from the holy Apostle St. Paul, we are saved
by hope, oh then think not thy self to be out of the favor of God, or that
the joys or happinesses of Gods holy Kingdom, belongs not or appertains not
to thee, because thou art not yet free from sin, and Satan's temptations, but
comfort thy self in hope, that as Christ's prayer for Peter was heard, that
(though he failed in faith, and that for a time, yet) he could not fail and
fall totally and finally, and so also, I dare say, it is hard for thee; for,
Christ has prayed for thee as earnestly and as effectually as he did for him,
yea, and for all that shall but believe in him, John 17.20. and therefore, Job
19.2. as Job in the midst of his misery, did comfort himself with this
meditation, that his Redeemer lived: So do thou comfort thy self in Christ,
that one drop of his blood is of efficacy, virtue, and power, to procure pardon
for all thy sins; yea, and though all the sins of all the whole world were
thine. And therefore wait with patience, and be content with Gods answer to
Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee, and my strength and
power shall be made manifest in thy weakness: and know, that it is not for
thy merits, but for the merits and worthiness of Christ, that God freely
accepts us.

And this is the very promise of God to those who are once his, on whom he has
once bestowed those graces of the knowledge of Christ, of faith, of repentance,
of regeneration, and newness of life, (which thou can not deny, I think,
but at sometime to have been in some measure in thee) though he suffers thee
to fall into diverse great and grievous temptations, (yea, temptations of a very
high nature) yet he will lay no more upon thee (or them) then he will make
thee and them able to bear, 1. Cor. 10.23. And though he suffer to be overcome
for a time, yet will he make a way to escape, and will give grace of faith and
repentance, by which they may be reconciled and re-assured of the love of our
heavenly Father. Doubt not then to apply the promises of God in particular unto
thy self, upon repentance and coming unto Christ, because there is no kind
of sin, which thou can commit, but the mercies of God in Christ are far
greater. For that sin against the holy Ghost, thou can not commit, which is
not any transgression of the Morrall Law, either in general or in particular,
either of ignorance, or of infirmity, or a sin committed wilfully, or
presumptuously, and against a man's own conscience, (though these be grievous
sins;) but it is an universal and final Apostacy or falling away from
Christ; I say, it is a voluntary renouncing of the knowledge or known truth of
the Gospel, and a rebellious proceeding from the hatred of it, being joined
with a tyrannical, sophistical, and hypocritical oppugnation of the same;
when a man that has been enlightened with a true knowledge of Christ, and is
convinced in his conscience of the truth of it, by the blessed Spirit, and has
tasted of the good word of God, Heb. 6.5. and of the powers of the world to
come, (but it is only a taste, for they that do feed of these graces
spiritually, and do digest them, and are nourished by them to newness of
life; I dare say; God will never suffer them to fall into this sin) when such
an one, I say, shall afterward universally, and with a full consent, fall from
the truth, deny Christ, persecute him (and though it be but in his members)
with reproaches, despisings, and taunts, and so disdain the sacrifice of his
death and passion, and continuing thus without repentance unto the end, this is
the sin against the Holy Ghost. Thus did Julian, and other Apostats sin,
and of these are that of the Apostle to be understood in Heb. 6.6.7.8. etc. But
to thy comfort whosoever thou art, that art troubled with doubtings, and so
fears that heaven and the joys thereof belong not unto thee: This sin, I
say, thou can not fall into (being first ingrafted into Christ by faith;) and
for all other sins be they never so grievous, yet remission is promised, upon
faith and repentance, and that freely, not for the merit of thy faith or
repentance, but for the love and merits of Christ.

Why then should thou not apply the general promises of grace unto thy self
in particular? Come unto me (says our blessed Savior, Matt. 11.28.) all that
are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you. This promise is general.
But this thy own conscience will tell thee, that thou art weary and laden
heavily with the burden of thy sins, and therefore thou may well
conclude, that coming unto Christ, the promise of mercy belongs to thee:
Whosoever shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved, Mar. 16.16. this is a
general promise also. But thy own conscience will tell thee, that thou art
Baptized, and that without our new fangled re-baptizings, and that thou
beleevest (though it may be that thy faith is but weak but like a grain of
mustard seed, that is very small, Matthew. 7.20.) yet if thou can but say with
the man in the Gospel, I believe, Lord help my unbeleefe, Mar. 9.24. If thou
can but touch the hemme of Christ's garment with the finger of faith, (if thy
hand of faith, by which thou may lay fast hold of him be wanting) yet by this
touch of Christ, even but with the finger of faith, the virtue of Christ may
flow forth sufficiently to stop the bloody issue of thy sins, and to cure
the maladies of thy soul, and with this thou may truly apply the promises
of grace unto thy soul. Well then! as you have seen, since thou art and must
be a Soldier whilst thou live in the Camp, or Field of the Church; faint not
at the sight of thine enemies, though they be many and terrible, but comfort
thy self with this, that (as Elisha said to his servant in the 2. Kin. 6.16.)
there are more with thee then with them, yea, and though thou be weak, yet
the stronger part is on thy side; for thou have God thy friend, to send thee
more aid of grace, (if at any time thou art decayed in thy strength) thou have
Christ a Conqueror, thy Captain, under whose Banner thou do fight, thy
friend; and thou have the blessed Spirit to encourage thee; and though he may
leave off to show his favorable presence for a time, yet will he not be long
absent from thee. Though for a moment he hide his face, yet with everlasting
kindness will he have compassion on thee, Esaias 54.7.8. In a word, thou have,
being in Christ, Myriads of Angels to accompany thee, and the prayers of the
Saints, of the whole Church; yea, I say, and of Christ himself, at the right
hand of his and our Father; like the shouting of the Israelites, to make the
walls of Jericho, the strength of their enemies to fail, Jos. 6.20. And
therefore fail nor, but there go on, I advise thee, with faith and constancy
to endure the combat; and faint nor, though thou have many losses of grace,
many wounds by sins, and by thy spiritual enemies, for Christ being thy
Captain, thou shall certainly prove a Conqueror in the end.

But notwithstanding all this, thou find that thou art unable to apply the
promises of mercy and free grace unto thy self, or to do it so weakly, that
fear is not altogether removed out of the heart: Then as in the sickness of
thy body, thou art ready to seek and to send to the Physician for health of
thy body, that so he may apply somewhat unto thee for thy health and cure, so
must thou do: I say, in the sickness of thy soul, then thou must fly and
seek to Gods Minister; for the Priests lips ought to preserve knowledge, and
thou must seek the Law at his mouth, says the Lord by his Prophet, Mal. 2.7.
To him then thou must open the wounds of thy soul, and all the causes and
occasions of thy fear; whether they be thy sins (if any trouble thy
conscience) or thy temptations to sins, thy weaknesses of faith and
holiness, or the like; so that he upon view and sight of thy estate, and
arguments of thy faith and repentance (though they be but weak) may apply the
promises of mercy, the comfortable refreshing Oil of the Gospel unto thy
soul: But yet herein also heed and wariness must be taken, to what
Minister, and to what spiritual Father we do repose and put our trust and
confidence in for this so great a business; for we must not send to the
Schismatic Anabaptist, Brownist, etc. who preaches and applies all
judgments, and little or no mercy; for, then he may make the wound worse then
it is; but in this case, send to the godly reformed Minister, not to some
up-start, Tradesman, or body Minister, of which at this day are too many; but
know this, that our life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. For, as Trees in
the cold and stormy Winter, so good men and women in tempests and anguishes of
soul, seem to be dead, not only to the world, but even to themselves. Whence
note, that Acts 20.9.10. Eutichus there is an Emblem of a Christian in
temptation; for, he fell from an high loft, and was taken up dead, and so was
reputed of all that ware present; but (says the Text) the Apostle Saint Paul
laid himself upon him, and embraced him, and so found life in him, and set him
on his legs; so though a man fall high, from heavenly grace, even to the very
pit of hell, if it were possible, yet he may be raised again by some skillful
and painful Paul, by applying the comforts of the Gospel, and so rightly
showing him that his life is not altogether extinguished and put out, but hid
only in Christ, and that the same is to be found again in God.

But for those that think (if there be any such) that any man may as well
absolve or baptize, or use any other Ministerial Function or Office in the
Church (but some, if not too many, could be contented that there were no
Churches) as well as the Ministers of God, who only are lawfully called
thereunto, I would have such to know, that he that sent forth to baptize, Mark.
16.16. he sent also to remit sins, saying, as my Father sent me, so send I
you, etc. John 20.12.13. As therefore none can or ought to baptize, though he
use the same water and words, 2. Cor. 5.7. and 10. verse. but only, the lawful
Minister, Heb. 5.4. I say, he only which Christ has called and authorized to
this Divine and Ministerial Function: So though others (I confess) may
comfort with good words; yet none can absolve from sin, but only Christ, and
those to whom Christ has committed the holy Ministry and words of
reconciliation, 2. Cor. 5.18.19. and of their absolving Christ speaks, in Luke
10.16. He that hears you hears me: In a doubtful title, thou will ask the
counsel and advice of some skillful Lawyer; in perrill of sickness, thou will
enquire of the learned Physician; and is there no danger in the dread, and
fear of damnation, for a sinner to be his own Judge? Judicious Calvin
teaches this point of Doctrine most plainly, Et si omnes mutuo nos debeamus
consolari, etc. Although (says he) we ought to comfort and confirm one
another in the confidence of Gods mercy; yet we see that the Ministers are
appointed, as Witnesses and Sureties to ascertaine our consciences of the
remission of sins: Insomuch, as they are said to remit sins, and to loose
souls, etc. Beza highly commends this practice; and Luther says, that he
had rather lose a thousand worlds, then suffer private confessions to be, etc.
And our Church has ever most soundly admitted and maintained the truth of this
Doctrine; and herein I might bring in the visitation of the sick in our
Liturgy, but that is now abolished, and for my own part, I never was against
the abolishing of it; only this I say, and say of it, if those in Authority had
punished some of those that rent it out of the Churches, before that Authority
had made the same of no validity and use, that then it would have made some
(and that a great many too) have leaned more freely to them and their
Authority, who now (I fear) stand but as neuters; and the not punishing of
such, has been a great cause of the augmentation and increasing of this civil
uncivil and unnatural War: There was once much wondering when the Pope fell
here in this Kingdom, as now they wonder to see the Prelates cast down, and
so the world did once wonder to see the Mass cast away and disliked, and now
many wonder to think that the Lithurgy should be so swept away. And for my
part, I pray God grant that the people do not at last take a surfeit of that
most Divine Ordinance of preaching, for no violent thing lasts long: Well, but
we all complain of our present misery, by the unhappy and bloody distractions
of the Kingdom, by this inbred and unnatural War: But yet few consider
seriously or the cause, whence they come; for information herein, take and
observe this, that sin is the only cause of every affliction, and of all
punishments, whether to private men, or whole Kingdoms, Esaias. 26.9. We by our
sins have provoked God to anger, and God shows his anger by these judgments
upon the whole Nation, Deuteronomy. 6.15. King and Subjects have sinned, and now King
and Subjects are punished, Deuteronomy. 28.63. Nay, God causes us to punish one
another; and he does it either to reform us, or else to destroy us. But (I
dare say) God is the efficient cause of all: Yea, the cause of all causes; all
other causes are but Gods instruments; now the isntrumental cause of these our
distractions, are wicked men, 2. Chron. 22.2.3. God uses one sinner to punish
another, as Isreal's sins were punished by wicked Shishake, and by idolatrous
Asher, Esaias. 1^.5. whom God calls the rod of his anger, and the staff of his
hand, 2. Sam. 12.11.12.13. So God punished David's sin by wicked Absolon, and
King Rehobcams sin by his rebellious people, 2. King. 14.16. and the sin of
the people by their King Jeroboam.

But yet though God do use wicked men for his instruments, yet wicked men do
but wickedly, even in the things wherein God uses them; for naturally still
they are but the Devils instruments to execute his will, and their own
Divelish malice: as ye may see Job 1.15. But to pass and go where we were,
for Absolution, we find that Doctor Holland absolved Doctor Reynolds at his
death, who not being able to speak, yet he kissed the hands wherewith he was
absolved. And so King James, of blessed memory, as I have credibly heard, when
he lay on his death bed, sent for a Reverend Bishop to come and give him his
Absolution. But yet I say further, and that most justly and truly to, that our
Church has abolished, as it was very fitting, the Tyrannous and Antichristian
abuse of Popish Auricular Confession, which they very fondly thrust upon the
souls of Christians, as an expiatory sacrifice, and a meritorious satisfaction
for sin, racking their consciences to confess when they feel or felt no
distress, and to enumerate all their sins, which is impossible; that so by
this means they might dive into the secrets of men and women, which many times
proved pernicious and hurtful, not only to private persons, but also to
public States.

But to leave the Church of Rome to their fopperies, let all good Christians be
admonished to beware of their own natural corruptions, which is a thing that
is by nature in the best; for all are, in this point, borne Papists, and there
is no man that has not, as Luther said, a Pope in his belly, a high conceit
and opinion of his own works, (whereby we think we tie God unto us) and yet
I dare say, there is in us no real virtue, no true substance. For we can of
right challenge nothing at Gods hands, be our works never so good or excellent:
for before thy conversion what can thou deserve, when every of thy works and
actions, are but as so many sins? for to the impure, all things are impure,
Tit. 1.15. And without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. And
also after conversion, all thy works are tainted with sin, whereas if they
could merit or deferve, then they must be absolutely good and righteous. Oh
then challenge nothing for thy works sake, for thou may know their
imperfections, and in begging any blessing from above, from whence comes
every good and perfect gift, Ja. 1.17. I say, therein use no other plea, but
the freedom of Gods grace: Let Papists lay claym unto them, as they are
servants, but let us claym them as we are sons. For know, it is not Esaus
riches, nor Jesables birth, nor Goliahs strength, nor Achitophels wit, nor
Absolons beauty, nor Saul's stature, nor Dives fine Purple, nor the Fools great
Barnes, that can assure or certify the soul of the favor of God: for, I dare
say, all these a man may have, and yet be of old ordained for condemnation.
But as we were, I say, thou must confess thy sins and weaknesses, (as the
Reverend Divine Mr. Perkins in his Case of Conscience, observes) That so the
Minister of God may pronounce the sentence of Absolution (of thy free remission
and reconciliation with God in Christ) unto thee: for, as is showed a little
before, the Minister has the Keys committed unto him for that end, Joh. 20,
22.23. and that hence thy hope and confidence in God may be confirmed, which
the Minister may truly do, if by thy confession, he finds in thee, the grounds
and signs of faith and repentance; and here, in this small Tract, I doubt
not, but fully hope, that I have not spent my time in vain, but that some, if
not all, that shall see and read it, shall find some comfort thereby unto
their souls, (if thou be called, and brought to repentance and faith in
Christ) despair not. I will here again put you in mind of one ground of
comfort more, for, or in stead of many, and it is this: That a desire to repent
and believe, in a touched heart and conscience, is faith and repentance it
self; for God accepts the will for the deed, as I said before, though it be
not so in nature, yet in Gods acceptance by and in Christ it is so. And this
is evident in the holy Scriptures; first, because if there be a willing mind,
it is accepted, not according to that a man has not, but according to that he
has, 2. Cor. 8.12. And does not God only call all, that thirst and desire the
waters of life, yea, and offers thereof freely, Esa. 55.1.2. I say, if they do
but desire and thirst for it, he then promises to give it them freely, Revel.
21.6. and 22.17. And he will be as good as his word to us, because his word and
promise is to us Yea, and Amen, 2. Cor. 1.20. Seeing it is thus with the Lord,
that thou shall be sure to receive and taste of these waters of comfort, if
thou will pray for it, and expect with patience, and tarry the Lords leisure
for it, then thou art and shall be blessed in the desire of it; for, Blessed
are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness; for, first or last, they
shall be satisfied, Mat. 5.6. And then blessed shall thou be in the happy
possession of it; hope well: for if it were not for hope, as it is in the
Proverb, Heart would break; and pray heartily for it: for, I dare say, Prayer
is an excellent Antidote against any despair, temptation, or assault
whatsoever; and no Prayer comparable to Christ's, which he has taught us, Mat.
6. But in a word for conclusion, know, Christian and loving Reader, and
despair not. For Christ is the door to Heaven, Faith is the lock of this
door, and Prayer is the key to open this lock; which may be a great motive
to keep a man from despair, and therefore not to be distracted for these
times, though troubled with an unnatural war: but in a word let me advise
thee, often, and with zeal and fervency of spirit, to turn this Key, Prayer;
for as the body cannot live without the soul, no more can the soul live
without Prayer. But for thy further satisfaction herein, I refer thee to a
Sermon of mine, entitled, The great Estimate that redounds by Crosses and
Afflictions. The Text being but one word, viz. Romans 8.18. the word Afflictions:
as also to my Exposition on the Lords Prayer. Thus (blessed soul) thou have
for thy comfort, A Hand-kercheffe, to wipe away all dolor and grief, or what
may trouble thy soul or conscience for the miseries or calamities of the
Times, and a Directory to all happiness. To which God in his good time bring
thee. Amen.

FINIS.

