THE SPEECHES AND PRAYERS OF Major General Harison, October. 13. Mr. John Carew,
October. 15. Mr. Justice Cook, Mr. Hugh Peter's, October. 16. Mr. Tho. Scott, Mr.
Gregory Clement October. 17. Col. Adrian Scroop, Col. John Jones, October. 17. Col.
Daniel Axtell, and Col. Fran. Hacker, Oct. 19 The times of their Death.

Together with Several occasional Speeches and Passages in their Imprisonment
till they came to the place of Execution.

Faithfully and impartially collected for further satisfaction

Heb. 11.4 And by it he being dead, yet speaks.

Printed Anno Dom. 1660.

To the Reader.
REader, the intent of this Epistle is not to set forth (in a commendatory way)
any thing concerning the persons, or their sufferings, though much might be
spoken deservedly in that matter, but only to present unto thee the words of
dying men, some part whereof was occasional Discourses (betwixt them and some
friends that visited them) in the Prison, yea in the Dungeon; unto every
particular there are sufficient Witnesses in this City, unto whom we can
appeal, that there is nothing patronized upon these sufferers but what was
spoken by them, though it is not all that was spoked by them, for that would
have swelled into too large a volume: What thou have here therefore are but
some small mites, carefully taken out of their great treasury. Here are also
extracts of several Letters coppied from their own hand writings; the rest is
their Speeches and Prayers (at the time and places of Execution) taken by exact
short-writers, and diverse of the best coppies have been compared, and the work
(with much care and industry) has been brought to this perfection. There has
some special reasons moved us to undertake this matter: as first, to prevent
that wrong which might be done to the deceased, and more especially to the name
of God, by false and imperfect coppies. Secondly, to satisfy those many in
City and Country who have much desired it. Thirdly, to let all see the riches
of grace magnified in those servants of Christ. Fourthly, that men may see what
it is to have an interest in Christ, in a dying hour, and to be faithful to
his cause. And lastly, that all men may consider and know, that every man's
judgment shall be from the Lord. Prove. 29.26.

Some occasional Speeches, and Memorable passages of Major General
Harrison's, after his coming to Newgate. With his Speech upon the Ladder.
THe day of his coming to Newgate from the Tower, at night he sent his Wife
word that that day was to him as his Wedding day.

When the sentence was pronounced, he said, whom men have Judged God does not
condemn, blessed be the name of the Lord.

And as he was carried away from the Court through the crowd, the people
shouted, And he cried good is the Lord for all this; I have no cause to be
ashamed of the cause that I have been engaged in. Some Friends asked him how he
did, he Answered, very well; and cannot be in a better condition if I had the
desires of my Heart; we must be willing to receive hard things from the hands
of our Father, as well as easy things: when he came to Newgate there was
Chains put upon his Feet; And he said Welcome, Welcome* Oh this is nothing
to what Christ has undergone for me; this is out of his great loving kindness
and faithfulness, and my God is All sufficient in all Conditions. And also
soon after his coming into the Dungion in order to his Execution, a Woman
belonging to the Goal, who was sent to make clean the Room, and to make a Fire
for him, was asked when she came out by diverse people (whereof some were
scoffers) how the Major General behaved himself and what he said. To which she
answered, she knew not what he had done to deserve to be there, but sure she
was that he was a good man, and that never such a man was there before, for he
was full of God, there was nothing but God in his mouth; so that it would have
done any one good to have been near him, or with him; And his discourse and
frame of heart would melt the hardest of their hearts.

Some time after he was put into the Hold, Three Ministers of the City were
sent by the Sheriff to discourse with him.

And their discourses was to endeavor to convince him.

First, Of being Guilty of the Kings Blood.

Secondly, Of Mr. Love's Death.

Thirdly, Of breaking the Old Parliament.

Fourthly, Of being loose in Family duties, and the Observation of the Lords
day.

Fifthly, Of the justness of this thing that was upon him by reason of his
iniquity.

To which he answered, As to the Blood of the King, I have not in the least any
Guilt lying upon me; for I have many a time sought the Lord with Tears to know
if I have done amiss in it, but was rather confirmed that the thing was more
of God then of men; And besides what I did, I did by Authority of Parliament,
which was then the only lawful Authority, for God owned it by pleading their
Cause, and Fighting their Battles for them; the Lords people owned it by
rejoicing in it, and praying for it; the Generality of people both in England,
Scotland and Ireland owned it by yiedling Obedience to it; Foreign Princes
owned it by sending their Ambassadors, therefore it was rather the act of the
Parliament, then ours that were there servants. He declared that he was very
tender of the King, insomuch that the King himself did confess that he found
him not such a person as he was represented to him (when he was brought out of
the Isle of Weight) and that he had some skill in Faces, so that if he had but
seen his Face before, he should not have harbored such hard thoughts of him.

Secondly, As to Mr. Love's Death, I was in Scotland when he was Condemned and
had no hand in it in the least. They desired to know if he did not say then,
That if a Godly man so transgress as to being himself under the Condemnation of
the law, it were not a just thing for him to suffer for his sin; he told them
he did not remember that he did say so, But then said, if a godly man did so
transgress a righteous law, he ought to suffer as another man.

Thirdly, The breaking of the Parliament was the Act and Design of General
Cromwell, for I did know nothing of it; that morning before it was done he
called me to go along with him to the house, and after he had brought all into
disorder, I went to the Speaker and told him; Sir seeing things are brought to
this pass it is not requisite for you to stay there he answered he would not
come down unless he was pulled out; Sir said I, I will lend you my hand, and
he putting his hand into mine came down without any pulling, so that I did not
pull him; Indeed afterward I was glad the thing was done, for I did see they
did intend to perpetuate themselves without doing those desirable things which
were expected and longed for by the Lords people; and apprehending that God had
done his work by them, and that he had some more worthy persons to come upon
the stage; the Lord is my witness, that I had no self-end in that Action, but
it was out of the Integrity of my heart as to the Lord. Afterward when
Cromwell and his party did set up themselves in their room, I abhorred them and
their ways, and suffered imprisonment by reason I would not join with them in
that iniquity and go against my conscience; there is nothing of this also that
lies as Guilt upon me.

Fourthly, Concerning Family Duties and the Observation of the Lord's Day,
there stands my Servant let him speak to it; for he has lived with me about
this Eight years.

The Servant answered, That those reports were very false; for his Master was a
man in a manner wholly devoted to religious Exercises, very frequent in prayer,
and diligent in expounding the Scriptures, to the great comfort and consolation
of his whole Family, and that he was very zealous in observing the Lord's day.

Fifthly, He said that the Lord's Spirit did witness with his spirit, That all
his sins were done away by Jesus Christ, and that he had peace with God, and
was assured that this was not come upon him for his iniquity.

They discoursed of many other things, but these were the chiefest, so far as
one then present could afterward remember. He parted very sweetly and lovingly
with the said Ministers, and they told him that they came then by the desire of
the Sheriff; But that they would willingly come again upon a Christian account.

Many Friends came to visit him whilst he was in that place, and found him full
of the joy of the Lord; so that some apprehended he was clothed with the
Spirit of the Lord.

The Sheriff came that morning that he was to die, and told him that in half an
hour he must be gone; He answered that he was ready and would not have him stay
at all on his account. But the Sheriff left him to stay a little longer, and in
the mean time, he was longing for the Sheriffs coming, and as his Friends
judged he was in have to be gone, and said, he was going about a great work for
the Lord that day, and that his support was, that his sufferings was upon the
account of Jehovah the Lord of Hosts: he said, he looked upon this as a clear
answer of his prayers; for many a time said he, have I begged of the Lord, That
if he had any hard thing, any reproachful work, or contemptible service to be
done by his people, That I should be employed in it; And now blessed be the
Name of God, who accounts me worthy to be put upon this service for my Lord
Christ: Oh, this is nothing to what Christ has suffered for me!

He parted with his wife and friends with great joy and cheerfulness as he did
use to do when going some journey or about some service for the Lord; He told
his wife he had nothing to leave her but his Bible; but that he was assured
that God would make up all her losses in due time, and desired that those that
did love him should manifest their love in being loving and tender to his dear
wife.

Some passages at the Dungeon door as he came forth, The Sheriff commanding
the Keeper to acquaint Mr. Harrison he must go to suffer; the Keeper came forth
and returned answer, that he was ready when he pleased: Then the Sheriff
commanded the Keeper to fetch him forth; so he came forth immediately, sooner
then was expected; (running down the Stairs with a smiling countenance) by
reason of his sudden coming, the door (that he was to go up a pair of Stairs
at) was not opened, which occasioned his stay in the Hall till the Keeper could
be found; and there one Mrs. M. took him by the hand, and said, with a loud
voice, Blessed be the great God of Hosts, that has enabled you and called you
forth to bear your testimony, the God of all grace and peace be with you, and
keep you faithful to the death, That you may receive a crown of life. With
that one of the Officers pulled the woman away by the shoulder, saying, Away
with this woman she stands prating here. But the Maj. General replied, Be not
offended with her, she speaks Scripture Language: So they thrust her away from
him, and would not permit any to speak more to him in that place. Then he
spoke, saying, I bless the Lord that has called me forth, and has enabled we
in the power of his strength, to offer my life with satisfaction and
cheerfulness in obedience to the will of God. I bless the Lord I am full of the
manifestation of his love in the Lord Jesus; It Is a day of joy to my soul. I
say God has enabled me, to whom all the powers of the world are but as the
drop of a bucket; and said he, I do find so much of the joy of the Lord coming
in, that he was carried far above the fear of death being going to receive that
glorious and incorruptible crown which Christ has prepared for him.

Then he was carried into a Room where the common Prisoners were, and told them
what a sad thing it was to be condemned to die, and to want the love and favor
of God: But it is not so with me; for though I die, yet I know I shall live with
Christ to all eternity, and this is out of the exceeding riches of the grace of
God; for he it is that makes the difference; For as I am in my self, I am a
base, vile, and nothing-creature; but complete in him who is the Head of all
Principalities and Powers. Poor men! I wish you all as well as I do my own
Soul. Oh that you did but know Christ! his bowels earns toward the greatest
of sinners; his blood is sufficient to do away the deepest iniquity; he
waits to be gracious and is willing to receive all that come unto him: Oh
therefore labor to come to Christ; your time in this world is short and
uncertain; you are walking upon the brink of eternity, and are ready to drop in
every moment, if you die without the fear of our God you will be miserable for
ever and ever; but if you come to know Christ to be yours, it will be your joy
and happiness world without end. He then put his hands into his pocket and gave
them some money, and wished them to take heed of sinning against the Lord. And
from thence was carried upon the Leads on the top of New gate, so that he could
see the greatest part of the City, he then said, The earth is the Lords and the
fullness thereof, and there is nothing hid from his eyes. From thence he was
carried down two pair of stairs, where he was tied about the back, breast,
and shoulders; he took the rope in his hand and said, friends take notice that
God gives me power to receive this with thanksgiving and he helped the Sarjeant
to put on the rope. Then a friend came weeping to him to take her leave of him,
he said, hinder me not, for I am going about a work for my master. Then looking
about him said, Sirs, Its easy to follow God when he makes a hedge about us,
and makes liberal provision for us: but its hard for most to follow him in
such a dispensation as this; and yet my Lord and Master is as sweet and
glorious to me now as he was in the time of my greatest prosperity.

He also said, this I can say for my self, That according to the light that God
has given me, I have served him and my Country with integrity and
uprightness of heart, not willingly, nor wittingly wronging any; But this have
I done with much infirmity and weakness. One telling him, that he did not know
how to understand the mind of God in such a dispensation as this, He said, wait
upon the Lord; for you know not what the Lord is leading to, and what the end
of the Lord will be.

After this, addressing himself to a Gentleman, he said, I dare not nor cannot
be a pleaser of men: a friend answered, it appeared so by your declining
Cromwell's Interest; which words he assented to, and further said, the manner
of my speaking before the Court may seem strange to some; but my Design was not
to approve my self before Men but God; and what I said, was according to my
conscience. And as the Rope was tying on he repeated Isaac's words to Abraham,
Father, here is the wood, but where is the Sacrifice? and also said, if the
Lord see good, he can provide another sacrifice, he can deliver those that are
appointed to die; but his will be done, Death is not terrible to me; yea, it is
no more to me then a Rush, I have learnt to die long ago. And was often heard
to say, concerning the Lord's dispensation to him and his people, Shall not the
Lord do with his own what it pleases him? And so parting with his Friend, went
down stairs to the Sledge, and asked which my must I sit, for I am not
acquainted with this: Good is the Lord in all his ways. Then he was carried
away in the Sledge, having a sweet smiling Countenance, with his eyes and hands
lifted up to Heaven, his countenance never changing in all the way as he went
to he place of Execution, but was mighty cheerful to the astonishment of many.
He called several times in the way, and spoke aloud, I go to suffer upon the
account of the most glorious Cause that ever was in the world. As he was going
to suffer, one in a Derision called to him and said, Where is your Good Old
Cause? He with a cheerful smile clapped his hand on his Breast, and said, Here it
is, and I am going to seal it with my blood. And when he came to the sight of
the Gallows he was transported with joy, and his servant asked him how he did,
he answered, never better in my life: his servant told him, Sir, there is a
Crown of glory ready prepared for you, Oh yes said he! I see it; when he was
taken off the Sledge, the Hangman desired him to forgive him, I do forgive
thee said he with all my Heart as it is a sin against me; and told him he
wished him all happiness. And further said alas poor man thou do it
ignorantly; the Lord grant that this sin may not be laid to thy charge: and
putting his hand into his pocket, gave him all the money he had; and so parting
with his Servant, hugging of him in his arms, and went up the Ladder with an
undaunted countenance.

M. Genesis Harrison's Speech upon the Ladder.
Gentlemen,
I did not expect to have spoken a word to you at this time, but seeing there
is silence commanded, I will speak something of the work God had in hand in our
days.

Many of you have bean Witnesses of the Finger of God that has been seen
amongst us of late years in the deliverance of his people from their
Oppressors, and in bringing to Judgment those that were guilty of the precious
blood of the dear servants of the Lord, And how God did witness thereto by many
wonderful and evident testimonies, as it were immediately from Heaven; insomuch
that many of our Enemies, who were persons of no mean quality, were forced to
confess, That God was with us, And if God did but stand newter they should not
value us; And therefore seeing the Finger of God has been pleading this Cause,
I shall not need to speak much to it: In which work I with others were engaged;
for the which I do from my soul bless the name of God, who out of the
exceeding riches of his grace accounted me worthy to be isntrumental in so
glorious a work, and though I am wrongfully charged with murder and bloodshed,
yet I must tell you I have kept a good conscience both toward God, and toward
man; I never had malice against any man, neither did I act maliciously toward
any person, but as I Judged them to be Enemies to God and his people; And the
Lord is my witness that I have done what I did out of the sincerity of my
heart to the Lord, I bless God I have no Guilt upon my conscience, but the
spirit of God bears witness that my Actions are acceptable to the Lord
through Jesus Christ; though I have been compassed about with manifold
Infirmities, Failings and Imperfections in my Holiest duties; but in this I
have comfort and consolation, that I have pace with God, and do see all my sins
washed away in the blood of my dear Savior. And I do declare as before the
Lord, that I would not be guilty wittingly, nor willingly of the blood of the
meanest son, no not for ten thousand Worlds, much less of the blood of such as
I am charged with.

I have again and again besought the Lord with Tears to make known his will and
mind unto we concerning it, and to this day he has rather confirmed me in the
justice of it, and therefore I leave it to him, and to him I commit my ways;
but some that were eminent in the work, did wickedly turn aside themselves, and
to set up their Nests on High which caused great dishonor to the name of God
and the profession they had made, And the Lord knows I could have suffered more
then this rather then have fallen in with them in that iniquity, though I was
offered what I would if I would have joined with them, my Aim in all my
proceedings was the glory of God, and the good of his people, and the welfare
of the whole Commonwealth.

The people observing him to tremble in his hands and legs, he taking notice
of it said,

Gentlemen, By reason of some scoffing that I do hear I Judge that some do
think I am afraid to dye by the shaking I have in my hands and knees, I tell
you no, but it is by reason of much blood I have lo^t in the Wars, and many
wounds I have recceived in my body, which caused this shaking and weakness in
my Nerves, I have had it this twelve year, I speak this to the praise and glory
of God; he has carried me above the fear of death: and I value not my life
because I go to my Father and am assured I shall take it up again.

Gentlemen, Take notice that for being isntrumental in that cause and interest
of the son of God which has been pleaded amongst us, and which God has
witnessed to by Appeals and VVonderfull Victories; I am brought to this place
to suffer death this day, and if I had ten thousand lives, I could freely and
cheerfully lay them down all to witness to this matter.

Oh what am I poor worm that I should be accounted worthy to suffer any thing
for the sake of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I have gone joyfully and
willingly many a time to lay down my life upon the account of Christ, but never
with so much joy and freedom as at this time; I do not lay down my life by
constraint but willingly, for if I had been minded to have run away, I might
have had many opportunities, but being so clear in the thing I durst not turn
my back nor step a foot out of the way by reason I had been engaged in the
service of so glorious and great a God; however men presume to call it by hard
Names, Yet I believe ere it be long the Lord will make it known from Heaven
that there was more of God in it then men are now aware of: All the Gods of the
Nations are but Idols, they have Eyes but see not, and Mouths but speak not,
and cannot save those that trust in them. But my God is the King of Kings and
Lord of Lords, before whom all you here, and all Nations are but as a drop of a
Bucket. And he will never leave those that truly trust in him, unto whose Glory
I shall surely go, and shall sit on the right hand of Christ in Heaven, it may
be to Judge those that have Unjustly Judged me, Matthew. 25.33, 34. 1 Cor. 6.2.

The Sheriff minding him of the shortness of time, it he had any thing to say
to the people he might.

He said I do desire as from my own soul, that they and every one may fear the
Lord, that they may consider their latter end, and so it may be well with them;
and even for the worst of those that have been most malicious against me, from
my soul I would forgive them all so far as any thing concerns me, and so far as
it concerns the cause and glory of God I leave it for him to plead; and as for
the cause of God I am willing to justify it by my sufferings according to the
good pleasure of his will.

I have been this morning, before I came hither, so hurried up and down Stairs
(the meaning whereof I knew not,) that my spirits are almost spent; therefore
you may not expect much from me.

Oh the greatness of the love of God to such a poor, vile, and nothing
creature as I am! what am I that Jesus Christ should shed his hearts Blood for
me that I might be happy to all Eternity, that I might be made a son of God,
and an heir of Heaven! Oh, that Christ should undergo so great sufferings and
reproaches for me, and should not I be willing to lay down my life and suffer
reproaches for him that has so loved me! Blessed be the Name of God that I
have a life to lose upon so glorious, and so honorable an account: then
praying to himself, with tears; and having ended, the Hangman pulled down his
Cap; but he thrust it up again, saying, I have one word more to the Lords
people that desire to serve him with an upright heart: Let them not think
hardly of any of the good ways of God for all this; for I have been near this
seven years a suffering person, and have found the way of God to be a perfect
way, his Word a tried Word, a Buckler to them that trust in him, and will make
known his glorious Arm in the sight of all Nations. And though we may suffer
hard things, yet he has a gracious end, and will make for his own glory and
the good end of his people; therefore be cheerful in the Lord your God, hold
fast that which you have, and be not afraid of suffering; for God will make
hard and bitter things sweet and easy to all those that trust in him: keep
close to the good Confession you have made of Jesus Christ, and look to the
recompense of reward; be not discouraged by reason of the cloud that now is
upon you; for the Son will shine, and God will give a testimony unto what he
has been a doing in a short time.

And now I desire to commit my Concernments into the hands of my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ* he that has delivered himself for the chief of sinners;
he that came into the world, was made flesh, and was crucified, that has loved
me, and washed me from my sins in his own blood, and is risen again, sitting at
the right Hand of God making intercession for me.

And as for me, Oh, who am I? poor, base, vile worm, that God should deal thus
by me; for this will make me come the sooner into his glory, and to inherit the
Kingdom, and that Crown prepared for me! Oh, I have served a good Lord and
Master which has helped me from my beginning to this day, and has carried me
through many difficulties, trialls, straits, and temptations, and has always
been a very present help in time of trouble; he has covered my head many times
in the day of Battle: By God I have leaped over a Wall, by God I have run'd
through a Troop, and by my God I will go through this death, and he will make
it easy to me. Now into thy Hands, O Lord Jesus, I commit my spirit.

Some Occasional Speeches, and Memorable passages before Execution of Mr. John
Carew.
WHen the first tidings of the Adversaries intentions to seize and apprehend
him (being then in Cornwall) came to his knowledge, he uttered these words or
to this effect. That he had committed both his life and estate to the Lord; to
save or destroy, as he thought meet; and therefore he would not by any means go
out of the way, though provoked thereunto by several Friends.

After he was seized upon in the Country, and coming up to London, he had a
gracious presence of the Lord with him: sweetly supporting him in the sense of
the love of Christ to his soul; and being persuaded, that the cause of his
suffering from man was such, as he had no cause to be ashamed of; otherwise,
the many reproaches and hard usage in the way to London had been sufficient to
have troubled his spirit. In most Towns where he came, the Generality of the
people Reviling him, with such words as these: hang him Rogue, pistol him, said
others, hang him up said some (at Salisbury) at the next sign-post without any
further trouble Look said others how he does not alter his Countenance; but we
believe he will tremble when he comes to the Ladder. This is the Rogue will have
no King but Jesus. Indeed, the rage of the people all the way was such, that
had he not been endued with strength from on High, he could not have under-gone
the wicked and Barbarous Deportment and Carriage of the Giddy multitude which
he was subjected to.

After he came to London, and had many opportunities of Escape, if he had
thought it meet (before he was sent to the Tower) yet he would not, knowing how
much the Name and Glory of God was concerned in his faithful witness to the
cause of Christ for which he was in Bonds. And the truth is, his joy in the
Lord was such* that when many came drooping in spirit to him (by reason of the
Gloominesse of this present dispensation) they went away refreshed and
comforted by those many Gracious words that came out of his mouth.

When word was brought him that Maj. General Harrison was dead, he said well,
my turn will be next, and as we have gone a long in our Lives, so must we be
one in our Death. The Lord God grant, that I may have strength from himself to
follow courageously to the last breath; and that I may much honor and glorify
God, whom I have made profession of; I can do nothing of my self, but my
strength is in the Lord of Hosts, who has helped me from my beginning to this
day, and will help me to the end. The night before he suffered, some of his
Natural Relation came to take their leave of him, and when they were parting,
they shed some tears, but when he perceived it said, O my friends, if you did
know and feel what joy I have, and what a Glorious Crown I shall receive from
the hand of Christ (for this work) you would not Mourn, but Rejoice, that I am
counted worthy to be a witness to this Cause, and said further, The Lord
preserve you all from the portion of this Generation; for assuredly, There is
great wrath from the Lord that will reach them to their destruction. When Mr.
L. came to take his leave of him, he asked this Question ( viz.) how it was
with him? he Answered, very well I bless my God; as to my interest in him I
have not the least doubt, but do know assuredly, that when my soul shall be
separated from this body, I shall be taken into his presence where is fullness
of joy, etc. And by Jesus Christ be presented to my Father, without spot and
blame, in his own complete and perfect righteousness which is free, and not
for any of mine own works: for I am a poor sinful and wretched creature, and
compassed about with many infirmities. And when it was asked him, if he had any
thing of conviction upon him as to what he was to suffer for? he answered no,
not in the least, for said he, Though man have Condemned, yet the Lord has and
does justify; he added, the Lord had justified it in the Field once already in
this Nation (but that is now accounted as a thing of Naught) but he will again
do it with a Witness, and prayed that the Lord would deliver him ( viz.) Mr.
L. from that Judgment that was at hand by which he would do it. To this effect
spoke he also to many that did quere with him about this matter -- being told
that his Nephew and some others were doing their utmost for his Reprieve, he
replied, that there is nothing to be done: For the Sheriff has brought me
word (just now) that I must Dye to morrow, and that there was some that desired
I might not be Quartered, but it would not be granted. But Death is nothing to
me, let them Quarter my body never so much, God will bring all those pieces
together again. It was asked him if he had assurance of the love of God? he
said, yea, yea, he had Fought a good Fight and had overcome, and he was ready
to suffer the will of God. One asked him if he thought there would be a
Resurrection of the Cause? he Answered, he Dyed in the Faith of that, as much
as he did that his body should rise again and if he did not believe that, he
should not be so cheerful at the Sentence of death, he said also he had not
the least regret or disturbance on his spirit about that for which he was to
die, for what he did was of the Lord, and if it were to be done again he would
do it. And the way they took to suppress and destroy those that did not think
the Kings person Sacred, their blood will make many hundreds more persuaded of
the truth of it: it was grievous to him, to hear how at his Trial they
blasphemed God and his people; but he was resolved he would own the Lord among
them, which they could not bear, Therefore they were so violent against him: he
said the Gospel was going from London, and Popery and Superstition, etc. was
coming in, and it would be a rare thing to find a professor of religion in
London shortly; he encouraged those about him, to keep close to the Lord in
this evil day Oh! said he, who would have thought some years since, that Poper*
and Formality should have been let in again to these Nations? he said, they
were so Barbacus, they would not allow him some small time to take a little
Rest before he was to suffer; which was all he needed or desired of them; For
he was much tired with speaking to company which came continually in: He
desired to be remembered to some Friends, and tell them, That this was the last
Beast, and his Rage was great, because his time was short. Some more
Expressions he uttered to this effect. But in all his words and manner of
speaking, he manifested the highest Christian Magnanimity and holy Greatness
of mind, and such a spirit of joy and glory rested upon him, even to
astonishment. It was asked if he apprehended his confidence would contniue to
the death? he said, he was not strong in his own strength, but in the Lord's
strength, which he still relied upon. And he said to one by him, will you not
see how God will carry me through next day? and desired prayers for him. One
asked him, what he thought of this severe hand of God? He said, that which was
hid secret in the bosom of the Father, should be manifested in due time: Oh!
said he, it grieves me to think how Popery is coming upon us like a flood in
this poor Nation, and the great judgment that will follow. But the Lord will
be a hiding place for his poor people until the indignation be overpast: let
not our enemies think to break the Spirit by putting us to death; for I am
confident, That God will give his Spirit sevenfold unto those that are left;
but the enemy, the Lord has set their feet in slippery places, so that when
they come to their measure, they must be cast down: Therefore it is the the duty
of the Lord's people to wait patiently and he that shall come, will come, and
will not tarry. It Is a trying time, and none but those that are endued with
power from on High, will be able to hold out. One asking him, where his Chain
was? he said, here it is; and though I have worn it so long, that it has
entered into my flesh, yet it was not as Joseph's, it had not entered into his
soul. He was highly raised up in admiring the grace of God, That he should be
accounted worthy to wear a Chain for Christ, saying, They have been blessed
Chains to me; adding, that the Lord had crowned him beyond many of his
Brethren, being counted worthy to seal Gods work with his blood; admiring that
God should accept of such a crasie body: much of his strength being already
spent; yet, That God should so honor it in the end; he much admired the depths
of the love of God to such an unworthy worm. The Lord will bring my blood
(says he) to cry with the rest of the Martyrs, How long, O Lord, Holy and
True, etc. As for death, or the fears of it, I am got above them, in and
through the beholding of the glory of our God, into which I am entering: which
glory shall be shortly for the reviving of the spirits of his Saints, and
destroying his Enemies. A friend speaking to him (the night before he died) of
this dispensation he said, he was persuaded, That their blood would be of much
advantage to the Cause in Foraign Nations. Two Friends that came to visit him,
being (as he thought) under some trouble of spirit, he directed his speech to
them, as follows; Be not troubled, there is nothing stands between me and the
Father; for I go with all clearness and freedom, and, I know, That Jesus
Christ is my complete Righteousness; and this is my crown of Rejoicing, That I
die not in the Lord only, but for the Lord; And think not that this blessed
Cause shall be lost; for it shall reach to the end of the Earth. Think not your
prayers lost; for your prayers and tears with our blood, shall come down
shortly upon Babylon, although they think to heal her, yet they shall give her
a greater blow then ever we could have given her in our persons. Those who have
been pleading for suffering, who so ready to run away from it? While the Lord
has given us a little of the spirit of Rejoicing, that has made us willing to
be giving up our selves unto him. And, although the Enemy think to Conquer us,
they shall never do it; for we are got above them in the Spirit of the
Kingdom; we trample upon them, and they are under our feet; and this blood
that now shed, shall warm the blood that has bin shed before; and shall come
down and do notable Execution upon the Enemy. The Lord has (in much wisdom)
hid this death from us, and has alured into it; but he has fitted us for it,
and be not troubled that he has taken away two or three drops of the spirit;
for he will in the room thereof pour it out upon you.

The day he suffered and the hour being come, The Rope being tied about him, he
rejoiced exceedingly, saying, Oh! what am I, that I should be bound for the
Cause and Interest of the Son of God? And when he was coming down
Newgate-stairs to go into the Sledge, in a very smiling, cheerful manner, his
countenance shining with great glory, uttered words to this effect; My Lord
Jesus, for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised
the shame and is now set down on the right hand of God; whose steps desire to
follow. It was also observed that the cheerfulness of his countenance all the
way as he went to the Gibber, remained, to the encouragement of the Faithful,
and admiration of enemies, uttering by the way many cheerful expressions
setting forth his joy in the Lord.

When he was brought to the gibbet, before he went up the ladder (his hands
being bound) he exhorted several friends standing by, to be faithful unto
death; and not to be ashamed of the cause for which they suffered, and they
should receive a Crown of life. And further said to a friend that stood by,
That he hoped the Truths of the Kingdom which he had preached up and down would
not be the less esteemed, for that he now came to seal it with his blood.

Mr. Carew's Speech upon the Ladder.
TRuly, it is not words, nor that which I have to speak in mine own spirit,
will glorify God; or give any advantage to your souls, or unto me: but it is,
if I may speak a few words in the Spirit of the Lord, and in the power of his
might, and from an unfeigned love unto Jesus Christ: that would indeed give me
an open entrance, and make my passage very sweet; and a blessing may be left
behind, even upon you. The first thing (indeed) that has been very weighty
(and I desire to leave it upon all, upon Saints as well as upon those that are
not acquainted with Jesus Christ) that Eternity, Immortality, and Eternal
life, it is a wonderful thing; the thoughts and apprehensions of it are able
to swallow up a poor soul: we little think what it is; he that knows most of
God, and most of Christ, and has the greatest measure of the anointing, he
little, little knows what it is to appear before the holy, the most glorious,
the most righteous God of Heaven and Earth: to stand before his judgment seat,
before Jesus Christ that is at his right hand: and where all the holy Angels
are so ashamed (because of the glory of God) that they fall down and cover
their faces, and cry Holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and
art to come. And therefore if such glorious creatures, if such excellent
Spirits as these Seraphins and Cherubins be, if they do fall down before the
glory and Majesty of this most excellent and wonderful God, how should dust
and ashes do? and how should they fear and tremble to appear before him? And
therefore, I say, think of this, and of the righteousness of God, as well as of
his glory and Majesty, and of his justice; that when for one sin he threw
down the Angels (those glorious Spirits) into hell, and he would take no
ransom or redemption for them; and though he has mercy on the sons of men
(according to his own election and purpose, and according to that that he has
purchased for himself in Christ Jesus before the foundations of the World was
laid) yet in time he made his Son a Sacrifice before men, and Angels to bring
his chosen ones to glory. That he should take pleasure to send his own Son
out of his bosom, who was the delight of his soul, and bruise him for our
sins; yet it pleased the Father to bruise him. The most holy and righteous
God, that had but one Son, one only begotten Son (that was the delight of
his soul) and should take pleasure to bruise him, that we might be healed, and
laid stripes upon him that we might be healed. oh! the height and depth, oh!
the length and breadth of the love of God in Christ Jesus unto poor souls. Oh!
this is that the Angels do desire to stoop down and look into, and to know
more of this great mystery of the love of God in Christ: and that God should
take upon him the nature of man, and put him into that glorious union with his
own Son; and that he should leave the Angels, though Christ was made a little
lower then they for suffering death for us: yet now, because the nature of man
is united to the Godhead by virtue of that marriage and un^on, we become the
sons of God, and heirs of glory. Those that are adopted by Jesus Christ are
brought near to the Throne of glory, are in a high and glorious communion and
fellowship with the Father and Spirit, owned of all the holy Angels. And
therefore they do stand without the Throne (as in several places of the
Revelations) and round about the Elders, and round about those that were given
to the Lamb (as in the fifth of the Revelations, and many other Scriptures)
they stand without, but there is another company within which is the 24 Elders,
and four living creatures, they fall down and worship God, they are nearer then
the Angels; Oh! who has credited, who has believed this report, and to whom
is the arm of the Lord revealed? Oh! how many professors are there in this day,
in this Nation, that call upon the name of Christ, and that say they shall be
saved by Christ, and do live and trust most in their awn works and
righteousness; and never come to the knowledge and understanding of this great
mystery of the love of God in Christ? who never received those teachings from
the Anointing, and according to the new covenant, where it is promised that
they shall be all taught of God, all the children of God shall be taught of
him, and there is no one can teach these but the Father, none can draw them to
the Son but the Father; and no man can come to the Father but through the
Son: and this great mystery is both by the light and opperation of the holy
Spirit, who makes the new creature in the soul: o that God would pour out of
his holy Spirit; that God would pour out the Spirit of the new Covenant, and
the spirit of the Gospel, and the spirit that can declare the mystery of Gods
word in the Spirit, and that he has made manifest through Jesus Christ. oh!
there is much talking and speaking in the name of Christ, and how many men
spend little time in getting evidences in the power and demonstration of the
Spirit, and come to apprehend God in Christ, that speak of him? Oh! time are
few of these the Lord knows. O that the annoynting may be poured out more now,
according to this faith, in the way of this grace, and in this love of God,
even in the electing love of the Father; and in the redeeming blood of Jesus
Christ, according to the purchased possession that he has obtained through his
own righteousness, wherein God has been just also, in justifying the ungoldy;
and among them, such a poor simple piece of dust and ashes as I have been, and
have to this day little glorified my father; and yet I can call him father,
through some measure of his spirit, and father according to the spirit of
adoption to; and can say the Lord Jesus has given himself for me, and I take
the Lord Jesus Christ as the great gift of the Father, desiring to bear
witness of that love, and of that wonderful grace and glory, that he has
made me partaker of in and through him. Oh! blessed be the God and Father of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who has called me to this hope, and who
has made me partaker of this glory, that the Saints an enlightened in. And now
I long to see the face of this father, and of his Son, though I have such a
number of sins in me; and though I have an interest in him, and can call him
Father at any time without doubt, and in full assurance of faith in the holy
Spirit, yet if Jesus Christ were not there, to present me faultlesse before the
presence of God, I should be afraid to appear e before him; but he is able to
do it, and therefore says the Apostle, Now unto him that is able to save you,
and to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with exceeding
joy, etc. I am a poor sinful piece, full of iniquity, laden with many
burdens, that have a body of death that I carry about me, and I am now about to
lay it down, and my soul shall enter into eternal life, and be made perfect
in a moment, through the mighty power of God that has wrought that glorious
work of raising Christ from the dead. Oh! all my strength, and all my joy, and
all my life is in Christ, and in him alone; and I have a righteousness already
of his working, according to his own grace, and according to his own mighty
power, and according to his own mercy, that he has been pleased to work in
me; and so has been pleased to keep me in a very wicked and in a very evil
day, by the power of his grace. And I desire to glorify my father, and many
years have I been in that work, that has been of late in this Nation; few and
evil have been the days of my pilgrimage, but I have desired to serve the
Lord with faithfulness, and in the integrity of my soul, without prejudice
against any creature; and it has been the desire of my soul to approve my
self faithful toward God, and toward man: and what I have done I have done
it in obedience to the Lord; that I had in my eye, and in my heart. There are
many things laid upon many of those that profess the Kingdom and glorious
appearane of Jesus Christ, as if they were enemies to Magistracy and Ministry;
and, as if so be we were for the destruction of the Laws and properties of
mankind, therefore shall I speak a few words unto that. And if indeed we were
such, we were fit to be turned out of the World; as some now think they should
do God good service in sending such poor creatures quickly from hence. There
is no such thing; I desire to bear witness to the true Majestracy, that
Majestracy that is in the Word of the Lord. And that true Ministry, which
Ministry is a Ministry from the annoynting; that does bear witness to the
Lord Jesus, and has his holy Spirit. That testimony I desire to bear; and
that testimony I desire to stand faithful in, with integrity to the Lord
Jesus, as King of Saints, and King of Nations. And therefore it is, I say, to
have a Majestracy as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning, men
fearing God and hating covetousness. And that Ministry as does preach the
everlasting Gospel.

Here Mr. Sheriff interrupted him saying, it is desired that you spend the rest
of your time in preparing your self. Another said, you spend your self, Sir,
in this discourse. Another said, it raines. Then Mr. Carew said, I will pray,

Mr. Carew, his Prayer.
O most holy, and most glorious and blessed God, the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ* the Father of all Glory; The God of the spirits of all Flesh;
unto thee, unto thee does my soul desire to come through the new and living
way, even through Christ my Righteousness: And in him and through him to be
offered up by the Eternal spirit, a living and acceptable Sacrifice, in which
thy soul delights. O Lord, thou know my frame, and thou know my life,
and what a passage this is; and what a wonderful thing it is, to enter into
Glory. And what a wonderful thing it is to stand before thee, and to stand in
thy presence. O Father, father, let my soul be filled with thy joy, and with
peace in Believing; O Let my heart be in heaven while my body is here; and O
Let me be joined unto the Lord, through thine own spirit before this separation
be -- O Lord, thou only art able to take hold of my Heart and Spirit; poor
Creatures may speak words to thee, but Oh! it is thine own power, and it is
thine own spirit, that must take hold of the heart; it is thine own spirit that
must carry through all, and it has heen thy spirit (Blessed be thy Name) that
has carried me through many Trials, and many Temptations, and many
Difficulties, that thy poor Worm has met with in this Pilgrimage for many
Years. O Blessed by thy Name for all the Goodness, and for all thy Grace, and
for all thy presence that has been with thy poor Creature far and near. Oh!
Blessed be thy Name that thou have kept me in any measure faithful to ^to thee,
and made me willing to lay down my life for thy ^ous Work and Cause, Oh Blessed
be thy Name, that the Lord and Christ (that is at thy right hand) has bought
me with his own most precious blood. He has Redeemed me indeed. Therefore it
is but my reasonable service that I should be offered up a sacrifice to him, my
joy is in him, and my confidence is in him, that I shall be presented by him to
my heavenly father. O father, when thy servant is to be presented before thee,
let him know what it is to find mercy. Let him know what it is to have Jesus
Christ an Advocate; and what it is to be presented before thee by such a
Redeemer. O that Jesus Christ might bid me welcome into the presence; and may
say to my soul, Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy
of thy Lord. O blessed Father, it is not that I do expect any thing from thee
upon any account below the account of the Lord Jesus: and wherein soever thou
have been glorified by thy poor servant, it has been by thine own power and
thine own working. O nothing unto thy poor creature is due, but unto thy holy
name be praise and glory. O holy father, behold thy work in the Kingdoms, and
behold the cause and interest of all thy people. O do thou revive it in thine
own appointed time; O do thou strengthen the starts of thy poor Saints: O
scatter all clouds, speak comfortably to their souls, that they may be able to
stand under all storms, faithful into the death, and receive a Crown of life
and glory. O bless the poor Saints in the City, and bless thy Saints in the
Country: and bless thy Saints in the West: O bless thy sons and thy
daughters; O bless all the meetings of thy people, let the blessing of the
Lord appear unto them, let the glory of the Lord make haste; let the glory of
the Lord be upon these Nations. O remember thy promise to thy ancient people
the Jews; O let thy people be taught of thee, O let these dry bones live, O
let the Spirit of life breath upon them. O dear father let the fullness of the
Jews and of the Gentiles be brought in. Let multitudes be gathered out of
every Kindred, and Tongue, and Nation, unto the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. O
Father, Father, advance thy Son; set him as King upon the mountain of thy
holiness; give him all glory, and power and dominion over the whole Heavens,
that thou have promised according to thy word and covenant to give unto him:
that he may reign in thine own word and law, through his own Spirit for ever
and ever. Lord, lord I desire thou would gather up my soul, O gather up my
soul O Lord, make this passage sweet, O make it comfortable. Lord Jesus thou
have taken away the sting of death, and born the burden of all this shame, and
of all this reproach. And thou have given thy poor servant something of thy
presence, through the riches of thy grace this day. O Lord, now receive, O open
thine everlasting arms: O now let me enjoy thy presence O God, which I have
desired to behold and see, and to behold thy face in Jesus Christ, O, and now
let me enjoy what thou have prepared for me: and fill me with the joys that
are at thy right hand, and those pleasures that are in thy presence for ever
more. O thou lamb of God lead me to the everlasting Fountain, that living
fountain that is able to supply all our wants. O Lord bless, bless thy poor
people; O comfort them in this day. Pour out sevenfold of thy Spirit for what
thou do take away in any of thy servants, for thy holy Names sake. O let the
cause and kingdom of Christ be dear and precious in thy sight, and live
always. Lord little do these (poor creatures) know, or these Nations know,
what a controversy thou have with them. O that thou would be pleased
graciously to spare this people, spare thy people however; and let them that
love Zion, and favor thy righteous cause, be glad for ever and ever. O now
Father be near to me do thou receive my spirit, take me into thine own glory,
take me into thine own glory; let me know it is my portion, let me know there
is a Crown in the hand of Christ prepared for my soul. O blessed Lord, thou
have honored thy poor creature, and brought him hitherto, O reward all the
labors of love in any to him, in bonds or death; and give them a double reward
into their own bosoms. Reward it so to them and theirs. Blessed be thy name
that thou have brought thy poor own hither to suffer in thy cause. And O Lord,
let thy spirit be powered forth upon the Nations, until the whole Earth be
filled with the knowledge of thy Glory. And that Christ Jesus may have all the
Honor, and Praise, and Glory, and Dominion for Ever, and Ever. Amen.

I am so exceeding Dry that my Tongue is ready to stick to my Mouth. But I
would fain speak a little more. Oh blessed be God! oh! how many are the
Refreshments I have had from the presence of my God and Father, sweet, and
secret Communion betw'xt him and my soul to day. And for that my soul has seen
of his Riches and Kindness. O that I might be more like Christ! for I have
been very unlike to Jesus Christ, very unlike to my Father. But I shall leave
all that is unlike Christ behind; And all his own Work manship he will purify
and perfect through this passage into Glory. O my Dear Father, receive my soul,
O! make this passage sweet, for now I am coming to thee; Lord Help, Lord Spirit
me, fill me with thy Spirit, let me be ever with thee, let me know what it is
to have thee at my Right Hand, that I may not be moved; that in my soul going
out of the Flesh, I may be let into the presence of God, and into the Arm of
Jesus Christ. Oh! That my soul may be breathed forth into the Arms of God, into
the Bosom of Jesus Christ, through the Anointing of the Spirit.

A Friend that stood by said, it is expected you should speak something to the
matter of your suffering; The under Sheriff said it is not to be suffered, What
are you? that you put on men to speak, What are you Sir?

Mr. Carew said, Farewell my dear Friends, Farewell; the Lord keep you
faithful. The Friend said, we part with you, with much Joy in our Souls.

Mr. Carew said to the Executioner, stay a while, I will speak one word, and
then said very solemnly and with a loud voice,

Lord Jesus receive my Soul, Lord Jesus into thy Arms I Commend my Spirit.

And so fell a Asleep.

Some occasional Speeches, and Memorable passages of Mr. Justice Cook, during
his Imprisonment in the Tower and Newgate. With his Speeches and prayer upon
the Ladder.
HIS Wife coming to visit him in the Tower of London, but not having Admittance
to him, he saw her forth of his Window, and said to home to thy Friends my Dear
Lamb I am well, Blessed be God they cannot keep the Comforter from me.

His wife asking the Gentleman Jailer to see him (another time) He answered,
she might see him suddenly in Newgate, her Husband hearing of this, said, If
the way to the new Jerusalem be thorough Newgate, blessed be God for Newgate,
the King of Glory will set open his Everlasting Gates to receive me shortly,
and then I shall for ever be with the Lord.

A Note sent by him from the Tower.
My D. L. chear-up, Heaven will make amends for all, blessed be God I am full
of spiritual Joy, and do must God to make what bargain for me he pleases, for
he knows the appointed time of my Composition and Dissolution, let us look to
Jesus Heb. 12.

After Mr. Cook was brought to Newgate discoursing with some Friends there, he
said, I am now going to my Trial, wherein the Lord strengthen me. If I be
attainted yet my Estate in Ireland is not thereby Forfeited without an Act of
Parliament to that purpose, and indeed it is much set upon my heart, that if my
small Estate be taken away from my poor Wife and Child, it will prove as poison
to those that enjoy it, and Consumptive to the rest of their great Estates, for
I bless God I never Acted Maliciously, or Covetously, but in a spirit of
Simplicity and Integrity, however the good will of the Lord be done.

I commit and commend my Dear, Loving and Faithful Wife and Child to their
blessed Husband and Father, with three scriptures especially for their portion.
The Widows cruse and barrel of meal, 1 King. 17. Isa. 54. ver. 5. to 10. Jer
49.11. Earnestly desiring that my Child may be Religioussy Educated in the fear
of the Lord. Thus if God has appointed it, I shall go from the Cross to the
Crown.

Speaking to some in prison, for the clearing of himself from false Aspertions,
said, whereas some say I have done them wrong, they do much wrong me in so
saying, I have relieved many so far as by law I could, knowing that the worst
of men ought to have Justice; I bless God I durst not wrong any man, for I
know that I shall meet them at the last day before the Bar of Christ's
Judgment, where I can with boldness look all men in the Face as to matter of
Justice, for which I have great cause to bless the Lord, Holy be his Name.

Some in the prison speaking of the Differences in Religion, Mr. Peter's said,
pray talk not of controversies now, we have but a little time to live and
cannot spend it in such discourses.

Whereupon,

Mr. Cook said, Blessed be God brother Peter's we are going to Heaven, where
the Saints are all of one mind, which my soul has long desired to see, it
rejoices my heart to think what a perfect happiness I shall have there; the
best condition here is but mixed, but in Heaven there is no sorrow nor trouble,
neither have I one drame of trouble upon my spirit at this time, blessed be God
he has wiped away all tears, and I could with Paul and Silas sing in prison
for Joy, Blessed be the Comforter.

Discoursing after he came into the Dungion, he said, when a poor Creature
comes about so Solemn a work as to Dye, what a blessed thing is it to have a
Helper, and what can help but the holy spirit; blessed be the Comforter for I
am full of spiritual Consolation; if one of you was to have a Thousand pounds a
year after the death of an Old man Consumptive, that would not live three
days, how would you rejoice; this is my Condition through Grace, I must in a
little time put off the Old man, and enter into the possession of Heavenly
Glory. Let no good people fear a prison, for it is the only place, wanting
other books to study the book of self.

A Friend going about to comfort Mr. Cook from the consideration of the
brevity and uncertainty of man's life* using some expressions of love, etc.

Mr. Cook replies, what do thou speak thus for, if I were sick of a Feavour
this might be a suitable discourse, but we must talk at a higher rate then this
now; were I to choose, I would rather choose this death then to Dye of a Feavour,
for there is much pains and sometimes distractions, but here a man is well when
he goes upon the Ladder and out of all pains in a quarter of an hour; And
speaking to a Friend said, I am now going to Heaven and shall leave you in the
storm.

Mr. Cook to some Friends in prison
Friends I beseech you rejoice with me, O let us bless the Lord that he counts
us worthy to be sacrifices to follow his steps, was not the Captain of our
Salvation made perfect through sufferings, and shall not I, Oh I long to be at
home, out of the body with the Lord, though I go through a sea of Blood to him;
truly I think every Hour Ten; little do my Enemies think what a Friendly part
they do me, to hasten me to my Fathers Kingdom, to my Crown and Glory; I had
rather go to my Dear Jesus with my Chain and Cross, then to sit down with an
Earthly King on his Throne and wear a Crown of Gold.

Some disaffected to him being present said, the Jesuits suffered cheerfully
and confidently.

Mr. Cook replies, I bless God my justification is not built upon the merits
of Works, but alone upon Grace in the blood of Christ.

The said person compared him and his fellow prisoners to Corah, Darhan and
Abiram.

Well friends said he, it matters not who condemns, when God justifies.

Mr. Cook (said they) do not justify your self, but confess your sins, your
heinous crime against the Lord and his Anointed, and Resent.

Mr. Cook replies, I must needs tell you that if Repentance was now to do, I
was in a sad condition, but I bless my God he has enabled me to confess my
sin, and has sealed my pardon in the blood of his Dear Son, and given such
peace as none can give or take away. I have no Guilt nor Trouble upon my spirit
touching what is done, but such sweet peace in God as I cannot express, and I
shall leave all with God who judges righteously, who will decide all things.

Mr. Cook to Mr. Peter's in the Dungion said
Brother Peter's we shall be in Heaven to morrow in bliss and Glory, what a
blessed thing is that, my very heart leaps within me for joy, I am now just as
I was in the Sea his Relation of his passage by Sea to Ireland, and his dream.
storm, almost in sight of Heaven, read me the Isa. 43.9.10. Isa. 61.10.11.
Hos. 13.14.

Then looking upon his bed, said, that shall be my last Pillow, I will lay me
down and sleep awhile, and he slept about an hour and half, and then awoke,
saying, now farewell sleep, no more sleep in this World, and farewell Darkness
and Night, I am going where there shall be no Night there, neither need of a
Candle, nor of the Sun, for the Lord will give us light, yea the Lord will be
our Everlasting light and our God will be our Glory.

And welcome every thing that gives notice the hour is at hand, welcome the
Cock that crows, welcome sweet death my good Friend that will bring me so near
Eternity. O blessed be God, blessed be his Name, Oh this Christ is a blessed
Christ, he answers all things, and within few hours we shall be crowned with
Glory and Victory; blessed be our Lord Jesus that has given us the Victory
over Sin and Death. Welcome Mr. Loman my keeper, welcome Angels, that will
within few hours take the Office and Guard me into Eternity.

At midnight he prayed very fervently, and the common prisoners heard him, and
seemed very sorrowful by their expressions saying, Sir the Lord be with you, O
that our souls might go where your soul goes.

About the Morning speaking to Mris. Cook said, Lamb do not dishonor my last
Wedding day by any trouble for me; For if all my Judges did but know, what
Glory I shall be in before Twelve of the Clock they would desire to be with me.

And let the Executioner make what have he can I shall be before hand with him,
for before he can say here is the Head of a Traitor, I shall be in Heaven. Come
Lord Jesus come quickly, my soul longs for thee, and I wait to hear thy voice
saying, come up hither, and immediately, I shall be in the Sprit; and then
shall I for ever be with the Lord. At and midnight there was a cry heard the
Bridegroom comes, and they that were ready went into the Marriage; This day I
shall enter into the joy of my Lord.

Come brother Peter's let us knook at Heaven Gates this morning, God will open
the doors of Eternity to us before Twelve of the Clock, and let us in to that
innumerable company of Saints and Angels and to the souls of just men made
perfect, and then we shall never part more, but be with the Lord for Ever, and
Ever, Singing praises, Singing praises to our Lord and Everlasting King to all
Eternity; he said further, O what a good master have I served, that stands by
me now, and supports me, with his Everlasting Arm he bears me up; (then said)
come away my beloved make have, and be thou like unto a young Roe, or a young
Heart upon the Mountains of Spices, Behold I come Lord Jesus, I come full sail
to thee I come upon the wing of Faith, Lord Jesus receive me; and going to lie
down upon his bed he said, it is no more to go to dye to morrow then it is to
go to sleep to night. I bless the Lord I am free from trouble, and my poor
heart is as full of spiritual eomfort as ever it can hold, And this joy can no
man take from me.

The doors of the prison being opened in the morning, he spent that little time
he had left in prayer and heavenly discourse with Friends that came to visit
him, preparing himself, for his suffering, with such a cheerfulness, as was an
Astonishment to the spectators.

Then speaking to his Wife said, farewell my Dear Lamb, I am now going to the
souls under the Alter, That cry how long O Lord holy and true; do thou not
Judge and Avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth, and when I am gone
my blood will cry and do them more hurt then if I had lived. But I am now going
to eternity, blessed be God, be not troubled for me, but rejoice, because I go
to my father and your father, to my God and your God. And after some time spent
in prayer, he desired his wife not to withhold him by an unwillingness to part
with him now when God called for him, to be offered up as a sacrifice for his
name and cause.

After a little pause she freely gave him up to the Lord; to which he replied,
Now all the work is done, and said, I resign thee up to Jesus Christ, to be thy
husband, to whom also I am going to be married in glory this day.

His wife shedding tears, he said, Why weepest thou? let them weep who part and
shall never meet again; but I am confident we shall have a glorious meet in
heaven; here our comforts have been mixed with chequer work of troubles, but in
heaven all tears shall be wiped from our eyes.

He asked several times if the Sheriff was not come, saying, why staieth the
wheels of his chariot? why do they drive so heavily? I am ready blessed be
God, I have nothing to due but to die;

Word being brought that the Sheriff was come, he makes have to be gone, and
his wife stepping after him took him by the arm, whereupon he said, O do not
hinder me from going to Jesus Christ.

And then with a cheerful countenance, taking leave of his friends, he went to
the sledge that carried him, whereon was also carried the head of Major Genesis
Tho. Harrison, with the face bare toward him; and notwithstanding that dismal
sight he passed rejoycingly through the streets, as one born up by that Spirit
which man could not cast down. Being come to the place of execution, when he
was taken out of the sledge, he said, this is the easiest chariot that ever I
rid in in all my life.

Being come upon the ladder, and the rope put about his neck he rejoiced,
saying, Blessed be the name of God, that I am bound for the sake of Christ.

Then his work was to address himself to God, and to that end said, if you
please I shall speak a few words to God in prayer.

Mr. Cooks prayer before his speech.
Most glorious Majesty, this day is a representation of that great day when all
thy poor people shall meet together, multitudes, multitudes in the valley of
derision, Thy poor poor servant is now come to pay the debt which he owes to
nature, blessed be thy name that thou have prepared him for it, blessed be thy
name sweet Jesus, blessed be thy name. O that all thy poor people that are here
if possible may feel something of that divine power and assistance of God, that
thy poor servant now feels at this time; blessed be thy name. I am a poor
creature, a poor sinner, and the Lord might justly withdraw from me, and leave
me to horror and fearedness, if he should deal with me in justice. But this
has not been his method (blessed be his name) to leave and forsake his poor
servant. Lord let thy blessing be upon us at this time, and let thy blessing be
upon England, and let thy blessing be upon all these Nations, and let thy
blessing be upon all that are here; Assist O Lord, by thy divine power; give us
to see much of thy power, and let not this meeting be in vain, but let every
one here receive benefit thereby, to the praise and glory of thy great name,
and the everlasting salvation of all our souls (if it be thy blessed will)
through Jesus Christ our Lords

Having ended his first prayer, he applies himself to the Shieriffe and
spectators in this following speech:

Mr. Shieriffe and Gentlemen,
The most glorious sight that ever was seen in the world was our Lord Jesus
Christ upon the Cross; and the most glorious sight next to that, is to see any
poor creature suffer for him in his cause.

I desire to speak a few words, briefly to let you understand what a glorious
work the Lord has been pleased to accomplish upon my spirit. I bless the
Lord, I have ransacked into every corner of my heart, and I have searched into
all my sins, actual and original, secret and open, known and unknown, so
far as the Lord has discovered them to me; and I have confessed them all
with a penitential bleeding heart, and contrite spirit; blessed be his name he
has been pleased to come in abundant manner, and has been pleased to show me
that the only remedy is the blood of Christ; and I have, blessed be the Lord,
applied that precious blood to my poor soul, and have laid hold upon a Christ,
by a true and lively faith; and there is a sweet calm and serenity in my soul,
and conscience, blessed be thy name. I desire to glorify God, and to give him
the glory of all, and to take shame unto my self for any sins that I have
ever committed, that I know to be sin. and therefore I desire to rejoice in
the God of my salvation as, Isai 61, 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my
soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the garment of
salvation; he has covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a Bridegroom
decketh himself with ornaments: and as a Bride adorneth her self with Jewels:
Even so the Lord delights in me. And as the earth brings forth her buds,
and as the garden causes the things that are sown in it to spring forth: so
the Lord will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all Nations.

And Isaiah 43.9, 10. Ye are my witnesses, says the Lord, I do desire to bear
a testimony unto God, and to Jesus Christ, for justice and truth, and
righteousness and holiness.

The Lord knows I have no malice upon my heart against any man or woman living
upon the face of the earth; neither against Jury that found me guilty, nor
Court that passed sentence; I desire freely to forgive every one from the
bottom of my heart. And as concerning this great dispensation you may (it may
be) desire to hear something of it. Truly, I say, as to the Kings Majesty, I
have not any hard thoughts concerning him: my prayer shall be for him that his
Throne may be upheld by truth, and by mercy; for by mercy, as Prove. 23. the
Throne is upheld. But I must needs say, that poor we have been bought and sold
by our brethren, as Joseph was.

Brother has betrayed brother to death; and that Scripture is in a great
measure fulfilled, Matthew. 10.21. The father against the son, and the son
against uhe father; and brother shall deliver up brother to death. I desire for
my own part to kiss the rod; and I do desire (if it may please the Kings
Majesty) that no more blood may be shed after miae: it may be the Lord will put
it into his own breast.

Here is a poor brother coming, I am afraid that he is not fit to die at this
time; I could wish that his Majesty might show some mercy.

The Shieriffe interrupted in words to this effect: let that alone, for the
Kings Majesty has clemency enough for all but his fathers murderers.

Mr. Cook replied, then I shall proceed to speak something concerning my
profession and faith, which I bless the Lord, is founded upon the rock Christ
Jesus. I do not expect salvation for any thing I have ever done, but only lay
hold upon Christ as a naked Christ, and there to bottom my soul.

I can say to the praise and glory of God, that I have endeavored in my place
and to my power, to do that which might be to Gods glory, according to the
best of my understanding. I have stood for a Gospel Magistracy and Ministry,
and that many delays in the law might be removed, (and that thing I have much
suffered for) I say its good both for King and people, that many delays in
matter of justice should be removed, and that public justice might be
speedily and cheaply administered.

And as for my profession, I am of the Congregational way, I desire to own it,
and am for liberty of conscience, and all that walk humbly and holily before
the Lord; and desire to walk in the fear of the Lord; and I believe it is a
truth, and there can be nothing said against it. I do confess I am not
convinced of any thing I have done amiss, as to that I have been charged with,
I am not indeed; neither did I understand the plea of the Court, that if the
Lords and Commons had brought the King to the Bar, and set him over them again,
their bringing him to the bar had been treason.

I desire never to repent of any thing therein I have done; but I desire to own
the cause of God and of Christ; and am here to bear witness to it, and so far
as I know any thing of my self I can freely confess it.

Here the Sheriff interrupted him again, desiring him to forbear any such
expressions.

Mr. Cook replied, it has not been the manner of English men to insult over a
dying man, nor in other countries among Turks or Galliasses.

The Lord bless every one of us, and help us that we may look more to the
honor and glory of God then the concernments of our own lives: for alas what
is a poor miserable life to us, but that therein we might give honor and glory
to the God of all our mercies.

And if there be any here of that Congregation to which I was related in the
time that I lived here, I would commend to them that Scripture, Phil. 2.17, 18.
Yea and if I be offered up upon the sacrifice and service of the faith, I joy
and rejoice with you all, for the same cause also do ye joy and rejoice with
me. And Deuteronomy. 18.11. The Lord God of your Fathers make you a thousand times
more then you are, and bless you as be has promised. The Lord be pleased to
speak comfort to them, and to all them that fear the Lord.

The Lord keep England from popery, and from superstition, and keep it from
profaneness, and that there may not be an inundation of Antichrist in the
land. And that is all the harm I wish unto it.

The Lord has forgiven me many thousand talents, and therefore I may well
forgive those few pence that are owing unto me. I bless the lord I have nothing
lying upon my conscience, but I can unbosome my self to every one, and to the
throne of free grace, in the simplicity of my spirit, I have endeavored to do
nothing but with a good conscience, and through the integrity of my heart
though accompanied with many frailties.

I desire to bless the Lord, my lot was rather in Ireland then here, here I
have been more known where I have given the Offense.

The Sheriff again interrupted him.

Mr. Cook replies, Sir I pray take notice of it, I think I am the first man
that ever was Hanged for demanding of Justice, therefore I hope you will not
interrupt me.

I suppose yon were there, and do bear me witness in your conscience, that
there was not any thing then, that I did not communicate to the Court that I
now speak upon the Ladder.

If you will believe the words of a dying man, I say as I must give an account,
I have nothing lies upon my conscience. We must all meet together at the great
day of the Lord to give an account of all our Actions, (and then it will
appear) the Lord grant we may meet with Joy and Comfort.

I have a poor Wife and Child and some Friends left, I desire you that came
along with me, to commend to them, Esa. 54.4.5. and 10. ver.

I hope the King and Parliament will consider our poor Friends as to their
Estates, you know that those Lords that formerly suffered under the Parliament,
did not loose all their Estates; I hope there will be some consideration as to
Justice, (least that our small Estates prove a poison amongst their great deal)
and my poor Wife and Relations suffer.

The Lord grant that mercy may be showed, that mercy and righteousness may
magnify and exalt it self above Justice. I shall not hold you long; I shall
desire in the fear of the Lord to give my self (as in the 12 Romans 1.) A living
Sacrifice, Holy and Acceptable unto God, which is but a reasonable service.

And so do entreat that I may have a little time to call upon the Lord,
unless there be any thing more desired, or any one to would ask me a question.

Truly I forgive all from my heart, I have nothing upon my heart to accuse any
of them withal. I bless the Lord I have a clear Conscience, I say it in the
integrity and simplicity of my heart, (I do now appeal to the great God, to
whom I must give an account of what I have done) knowing that all my Guilt is
washed away in the blood of Jesus Christ, (and before him I hope to appear,)
and have nothing else to plead any thing at all for me.

And so I hope that I have declared my self with simplicity and integrity, in a
few words that you may understand my mind.

I shall speak a few words to the lord in prayer, and shall not trouble you
further.

Mr. Cooks Prayer.
MOst Glorious Majesty, I beseech thee, so to warm my Heart, and fill it so
full of the love of Jesus Christ, that it may never be cool any more; Oh that
the Lord would now appear Graciously to show himself a wonder working God, in
bearing up the Heart and Spirit of thy poor creature, it is no matter how
bitter the Cup is, if the Lord give strength to drink it, and no matter how
heavy the Burden be, if the Lord be at one End, and uphold the other, and bear
the burden himself, or lay no more upon his poor Children then they are able to
bear; the Lord give strength to all that are to bear this burden; the Lord be
with all that are yet to suffer in this cause, and double and treble sevenfold
of thy Spirit upon us, let us not stand it out against our Reasons and
Judgments and Consciences. If any did pursue power and interest, and did not
look after the good of Gods poor People, and the good of the Nations, the Lord
forgive them. The Lord knows the Simplicity of the Hearts of his poor Servants
that are gone before, and of those that are to come after; I desire that all
thine may have hearts willing to suffer for thee, to make confession of Faith
in Christ Jesus, I know is nothing, I know it is not enough only to confess
in Words, to confess in Doctrinall Evangelicall Truths, and to confess by a
holy life and conversation; and if the Lord call any of his poor Children to
seal the truth with their blood, yea their precious blood, it is their duty
also; if the Lord Jesus had come down from the Cross, and had not shed his
most precious blood, and had not by that blood gone to heaven our Salvation had
not been. Lord let it be well with England, the Lord hear me for my poor
Friends and Relations, for my poor Wife and Child; unto thee Lord I commend the
cause of God, and of Jesus Christ, And remember poor Ireland wherein I had a
lot and interest, the Lord remember them all, and help thy poor Children to
continue Faithful unto Death, that so we may receive a Crown of life, for the
sake of our Lord Jesus Christ: and so I come Lord Jesus, Oh receive my soul!
Send down a Guard of Angels to convey my soul into Abraham's Bosom; Receive my
soul, O Lord, into thy hands I commend my Spirit. And I desire to appeal to
thee O lord, thou art the great God of Heaven and Earth before whom all
controversies must come.

I believe there is not a man in the world what ever he be, but has some
reverentiall fear of death; but for any sinful vicious fear; I bless the Lord
I have not the hundredth part of a dram upon my conscience; if it were my
wedding day I could not more rejoice in the Lord, because it is a consummation
of that blessed marriage that my Lord Jesus has made up with me. Blessed be
thy name, me thinks I do see with Stephen, even by the eye of faith, Heaven
open, and the Lord Jesus ready to receive my poor soul. And oh that I may with
Ezekiel see the glory of God; and see, with Isaiah, the Lord sitting on his
Throne of glory. And oh that the love of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Spirit may warm my heart, and carry me up from the beginning of this
passage to the end and close of it. Lord Jesus come and receive my spirit, and
sweeten this cup, and let me say, The cup which my Father has given me, shall
I not drink of it? And I leave all into the hands of the Lord, that if it be
the Lords will every one that belongs to the election of grace my meet with
comfort at the great day, and that we may shake hands together, where no office
of love shall be unrewarded, nor any unkindness showed to the people of God.

But within a few hours I shall be in the harbor; I am just now entering into
it, I would not go back again for all the world.

Blessed be the Lord I despise the shame, and am willing to endure the cross,
for Christ's sake; because the Lord Jesus, who is the author and finisher of my
salvation, did it for me. The Lord pity those that follow, and bear up their
hearts.

The Lord help his poor people that find any thing upon their soul; that
they should stand fast unto the truths of Jesus. Alas, we shall be but a few
days here, and Heaven will make amends for all, and we shall glorify God in
eternity, where we shall enter into a sinlesse, timelesse, and temptationless
estate, and never meet with sorrow or troubles any more; but the Lord will
receive us to himself, and then the innocence of thy poor servants shall be
vindicated, and we shall be ever with the Lord, blessing and praising his holy
name.

When Elijah was taken away, the spirit of Elijah rested on Elisha, who stood
up in his stead. And when John the Baptist was cut off, the Lord had his
Apostles to supply that office. The Lord will have profit in the Death of his
Children. I believe that an Army of Martyrs would willingly come from Heaven to
suffer in such a cause at this that I come here to suffer for.

I desire to bewail that I have not had so much love to the Glory of God
therein as I ought. But as to the thing I come to suffer for, I have not had
any thing or act come to my mind with less regret, and greater comfort then
this.

And as for those that brought me hither, I do forgive them, I have not one
hard thought concerning them, the blessing of the Father Son and Spirit be with
them.

Oh that the Lord would grant that no more might suffer; and so Dear and
Blessed Father I come into the bosom of thy love, and desire (to enter into
that Glory which is Endless and Boundless) through Jesus Christ.

A Letter written from the Tower to a Christian friend, by Mr. Justice Cook.
Sir,
NOw in answer to your loving inquiry how it fares with my better part, I
bless God I never found so much internal spiritual solice, and unmixt joy
and comfort, as I have experimented in these five months indurance, 2 Cor.
1.3, 4, 5. Let never any Christian fear a prison, it being the only place
where (wanting other books) a man may best studdy the book of the knowledge of
himself, having a long vacation from all business; but praying unto, and
praising God in Christ, by the spirits assistance. I cannot take Marthas part,
for none must come to me; nor Marys part to wait upon the ordinances, which my
soul thirsts after; therefore my chamber is like the sanctum sanctorum, where
wittingly none may enter but the high Priest of our profession the Lord Jesus.
I did not think that there had been so much ignorance, impotence, impatience,
ingratitude, pride, inordinate affection to creature comforts, revenge,
diffidence of God, self-love, and iniquity of all sorts in me, as I find there
is; who am not only a poor sinner, but sin it self, a very mass of sin. I
find it very hard to rely nakedly on Gods goodness, not to feel the heat of
persecution, nor to be careful when all is taken away. Jer. 7.17 Lo, so this
darkness and filthiness of spirit is only discovered by the light of Christ,
by whose lowliness in washing the Apostles feet, I see my loftiness and want of
condescension when I had power; by his patience my many passions and
heart-risings against instruments; by his obedience to the death, my
reluctancies; by his faithfulness my former backslidings; by his fruitfulness,
and doing good, Act. 10.38. my barrenness and the little good I did when I had
opportunity; and by his liberality, my penuriousness; whereby I adore and
acknowledge his justice that he has most righteously deprived me of my liberty
and estate: all which drives me nearer to Christ, and makes me take faster hold
of his righteousness. I now understand (through grace) how precious he is; 1
Pet. 2.7. if it were not for Christ what a miserable condition were I now in?
that might suddenly be sent to contend with the wrath of God in everlasting
burnings; and this makes me love Christ the more, having forgiven me more then
others: and having had ten thousand talents forgiven me, I would forgive any
wrong doers; and this keeps me humble and from censoriousness. I bless God I
have ransackt into every corner of my soul, I have with David, Job, Esaias, and
Paul, bewailed my hereditary disease and heart-corruption. I feel it is as a
rotten tooth that aches, would fain be rid of it, have condemned my self for
it, cried out aginst it, as the ravished damsel, Deuteronomy. 22.26. The like for sins
done in my inclination, which by preventing grace are secret and only known to
God; and I have mourned over my secret sins, only known to God and my self;
over the sins of my youth, which were committed faster then can be named; for
those which I did not know to be sin, and those that I have forgotten? and
especially for my actually known sins committed against love and light,
promises and covenants. I have confessed them all with a heavy bleeding broken
and contrite spirit, and O that I had all sin, as sin, in a greater execration;
my grief is for having offended so gracious a father* that will not damn me for
it; if there were no hell nor judge I would rather dye then willingly offend
him any more, and I cannot satisfy divine justice for one vain thought*
therefore I fly to Christ, and close with him upon a free promise as a poor
penitent sinner; no merits but the merits of my Savior; I take in whole
Christ, and not one drop of my pudled water shall be mingled with the ocean of
his pure and perfect righteousness; and I give up my self wholly to him, as by
a deed of gift, to be at his dispose; and I know he has received me, I am my
beloveds, and my beloved is mine, and all is mine, 1 Cor. 3.22. death it self;
I have a sweet certificate from Heaven of the pardon of sin, justification,
reconciliation, and adoption. I know Gods heart and his eyes are upon me
perpetually, 2 Chro. 2.15. that no tender father or mother can have so special
a care of any sick imprisoned child, as he has of me. I believe that God who
has given a property to the needle to keep fixed though the ship overturn, will
keep me faithful to the death, and that I shall receive the crown of life, and
stand with as much confidence at the great day, as if: had never sinned; and
herein I am confirmed by the testimony of the spirt, and Scripture evidences.

Blessed be God I do love the Saints, every one that suffers in this cause is
at dear to me as my own soul, my sighs have been many, and my heart faint,
since I came hither, not for my own condition (for it is happy) but for the
afflictions of Joseph; scarce a poor Saint permitted to breathe in Irish air;
those that will not swear and be drunk, or have prayer in their families, are
counted Fanatics. Esaias 50.15. I have a dear respect to all Gods commandments,
spiritual joy is no stranger to me; I love the Word and Ordinances more then my
appointed food. I desire that all my thoughts, words, and actions may please
God; and that all that he does may please me; and I do freely forgive my
adversaries, the Lord herein increase my faith, Luke 17.5. and I bless God I
have a quiet conscience as to the world, and which is good also for being
justified by Christ, apprehended by faith, I have peace with God, Romans 5.1. and
so I descend to the cause for which I am in bonds, which is as good as ever it
was; and I believe there is not a Saint that has engaged with us, but will wish
at the last day that he had sealed to the truth of it with his blood, if
thereunto called: for I am satisfied that it is the most noble and glorious
cause that has been agitated for God and Christ since the Apostolical times;
being for truth, holiness, and righteousness, for our liberties as men and as
Christians, for removing of all yokes and oppressions, for a gospel Magistracy
and Ministry and not only for the Priestly and Prophetical offices of Christ
Jesus, but for his Kingly also: the peculiar light and work of this generation
being to discover and oppose the Civil and Ecclesiastical tyrannies intended
upon the Nations, by the Popes Legerdemain, to exalt Christ as Lord and King
over men's consciences, to magnify and make the law of God honorable, and
authentic every where, and to give justice and mercy the upper hand. As I
hear nothing what they intend to do with me, so I am not much sollicitous
about it; I do freely trust God to make what bargain for me he pleases. I
believe they are as angry with me as any man in the nations, because litera
scripta manet, but their cause requires rather silence then eloquence; as for
that against Monarchy unaccountable they will be ashamed to oppose it, that
which nettles them, is the stating the Case for which I had Vouchers, and
Warrants for every word, but now they plow with our Heffer; yet great is the
truth and that will prevail, as for Petitioning there is not any. I cannot
confess any guilt, it is such a Cause that the Martyrs would gladly come again
from Heaven to suffer for, if they might, though too many object against me, 1
Pet. 4.15. Let none of you suffer as a Murderer: I look upon it as the most
noble and high Act of justice that our Story can parallel; and so far as I had
a hand in it, never any one action in all my life comes to my mind with less
regret, or trouble of conscience, then that does; for the blood must lie upon
Him, or the Parliament; and I am sure I had no more malice in my heart, then
when I was in my Cradle: all that I can be sorry for, is, that I had not such
pure, and unbyast Aims, at the glory of God and exaltation of Christ therein, as
I should have had; I neither said nor did any thing dubitante, or reluctante
conscientiae I was so far from a rainsaying conscience in any thing I acted,
that I never scrupled in the least, and the generality of the people have since
owned it: I was in mercy a poor Advocate for Christ, and the people of England,
and if by my blood their cause may be watered, I say (as Phil. 2.17, 18.) to
you and the rest of the Church of Christ, if I be offered upon the sacrifice
and service of your faith, let us rejoice together: it has been counted
shameful for Soldiers to run from their Colors, or desert their Masters, and
Principles, but it is more odidus for a Councellor to prevaricate and betray
his Clients Cause: I am persuaded that all those that have had a chief hand and
are now giving Judgment against themselves, and all good people, in all those
points which they formerly contended for, against the King; as the lawfulness
of the War, which was granted both here and at Edinburgh. The Militia, Negative
Voice, power to dissolve Parliaments, conferring great Offices (as King James
said, so long as I make Bishops and Judges, I will have what Religion and Laws
I please) As they are most abominable prevaricators of the honest interest, for
they will wish at the last day, that they had been Jews, Turks or Indians for
the greater light, the greater is their Apostasy and ingratitude, 2 Pet. 2.21.
and sure they will have a peculiar Judgment by themselves; for they do openly
proclaim the cause of Barrabas before the cause of Jesus. Peter denied Christ,
and Judas betrayed him, but it was before his passion and Assention, they never
saw the wonderful works which our Eyes have beheld; but what shall we say, if
the treachery of Judas help forward the work of our salvation, why may we not
hope, that God is whetting his Tools, and gone back to fetch a greater blow
against his oppressors, Isaac must not dye though the Knife be at his Throat,
Genesis 12.14. our case seems to be like theirs, under proud Homan the Gallows was
erected, but the Royal seed preserved. Hest. 6.13. Numb. 23. the story of
Baalam is much upon my heart, the shout of King Jesus to Reign in Holiness and
Righteousness is among his people, I hope as much as ever; and there is no
enchantment against Jacob therefore he must not be afraid; I am persuaded we
shall fare the better for the thousand curses we had between Chester and
London, 2 Samuel 16.12.

Now having endeavored to satisfy you that the great work is over as to my
eternal salvation, and my opinion of the goodness of our Cause; I shall further
entreat your patience to tell you that I am fully convinced, that next to that
unspeakable gift of Christ, the greatest grace and mercy that God can bestow
upon any of us, is to call for and enable us to lay down our lives upon this
account; suffering for Christ being a strong Argument of his Electing love,
Acts 9.15, 16. and a greater matter of rejoicing, Acts 23.11. be of good cheer
Paul; therefore he forbids tears for him upon that score, Acts. 21.13. and I
have charged my poor lamb not to wear any black for me (if she have where with
to buy it;) for I shall be in white, Revel. 6.11. the Apostle rejoiced to be
counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ, and would not but speak what they
saw with the eyes of Faith, and heard with the ears of the Spirit, Acts 4.20.
and the 5.41. and Paul gloried in the tribulation, rejoicing in hope of the
glory of God, Romans 5, 23. and took pleasure in reproaches, necessity and
persecutions for Christ, 2 Cor. 12.10. so Moses, Heb. 11.26. for the recompense
of reward which is God himself, Genesis 15.1. and the times cannot be so full of
terror and discouragement as the Scriptures are full of comfort and
incitations in this particular, to us the Lords prisoners, Mat 5.10.12. why are
we sorrowful when Christ bids us to be joyful, Mat. 10.25.27. there is no
safety but to be on Christ's side, for the Son of man shall come in his glory
and the Saints also, Mark 8.33, 38. they are not the words of a Child, but of
Christ, not spoken to affright us, but for our animadversion; Oh this
perfidious Generation! how will that word be made good to the Amazemeat of our
Timorous professors, John 16.21. The Axe or a Halter will be less pain then
the pangs of Childbirth, John 15.18, 21. we are in nothing to be terrifyed, 1
Phil. 28.29. constancy in suffering for good principles is matter of glory in
the Churches, and Tribulation will be the portion of our troublers, 2 These.
1.4. to the end is very precious, 1 These. 3.8. we live if ye stand fast in the
Lord: I know you, and my dear Brethren and Sisters are of Paul's mind, if I dye
in my bed being a Church member, you will by the rule of Charity judge me
happy; I cannot do you more service then to bear my witness in this Cause of
Christ wherein you are so much concerned, I find our Text appropriate to our
Condition, Joh. 12.23. to 27. Christ's death was like sowing of Corn, which
seemed lost, but was our life; so he that counts not his life dear for Christ,
though the world count him miserable, yet he has two special promises to be
where Christ is, and that the Father will honor him, it is a following of
Christ in Dying for him, Actively or in Affection as appears, John 13.36, 21,
19. by a conformity to his death, Phil. 3.10. Rev. 14.3. some read which dyed
for the Lord, as Rev. 20.4. and 19.10. which now is counted as bad as Treason,
Heb. 12. has an ineffable sweetness in it, Chapter 11. is the little book of
Martyrs, 12.1. the spirit says follow your leaders, he is a Coward that will
not follow such free Examples; Christ and the Saints behold you and ye are
witnesses for Christ as they were, but must forsake all sin, especially your
Dallilaes, Herodias and Rimmons, and strive against it; and ye have need of
patience, but ye will faint and be weary unless yea look unto Jesus and fear
not, for he is as well the finisher of your Faith as the Father of it, he
despised the shame, what need you care if they say behold the Head, or the
heart of a traitor, when your better part is in heaven, and reproves us for
being too parsimonious of our blood; we must be prepared for suffering eruore
sanctorum rigatur Ecclesiae. Luther was troubled that he carried his blood to
his grave, he loved the Christ's cross more then the 24 Letters, and loved not
half Christians, that were only for doing and not for suffering; and though
our sin deserve death as from the Lord, yet our enemies mind them not, they
punish us for being judges, advocates, and soldiers for our Lord Jesus, Psalm.
38.20.

And as the spiritual man overcomes the Animal, so I am reasoning my self
against sense into a willingness to dye, for either the times will be better or
worse; is there not in probability a great flood of Oppression and Persecution,
coming upon the Godly; will not the righteous soul of a just Lot, be vexed
with the horrible profaneness, malignity, and contempt of Christ's pure
Ordinances that abounds every where; we have heard Justice and Tyranny, Truth
and Falsehood, the form and the power of Godliness pleading together, and
Judgment was given for God, and his people, but all seems to be reversed, and
what was but an injury or nesciente before, is now a formal and material
contempt, and despite to God and Christ, and the spirit of grace in whom
soever breathing; and what, comfort is there in a son, if the Ark be taken, 1 Samuel 4.20, 21. she regarded it not, the blessing is to see our children with
peace upon Israel, Psalm. 128.5, 6. it is a mercy to be taken away from the evil
to come, Esaias 57.1. bestowed upon Josiah as a favor, being tender hearted, 2
Kings 23.19. it is a rich mercy to get into our heavenly house, and harbor
before the storm come, 2 Cor, 5. how much more blessed to give our polluted
blood for his sake who shed his most precious blood for us; and if the times
prove good, for civil or sacred liberties; Moses envied not those that were to
go into Canaan, because he was invested with a better possession, a heavenly
Country, Heb. 11.16. if there be such glorious times to be expected upon earth
as you and I have discoursed of, I am sure there is no less joy in heaven; and
we that are there shall have no cause to envy our millitant brethren; besides,
as for my self I can expect to do little for God, I am three parts dead, 70
being divided into four, the shadows of the evening are upon me, and aches and
pains are inseparable companions, if now Christ should graciously accept of my
poor crazy body, and bring me to an honorable and an easy death for him,
blessed be his name forever, 1 Chro. 29.10. to 16. The heathen could say, Dulce
est pro patria mori, pro Christo mori dulcimum. How did the Romans glory to die
for their liberties, and after for the glory of their Cesars? and how glad are
the poor Spaniards and Muscovites that they have a life, a wise, or a son,
for their King: and how glad are the City that their feastings will be
received, A Popish Friar told me lately, that if he were of my opinion for
assurance of salvation, he would not willingly live an hour longer for all
Ireland; yet Saints too much fear this grim porter death, though when executed
we go from the cross to the Crown, Jam. 1.12. indeed it is below the
profession that we have made, to be now troubled; in prosperity I would be a
worm, but now the Lord makes us bold as Lions, that being called to suffer
after so blessed an example, we may think it an honor to pledge our master in
his own cup, and commit the keeping of our souls to him in well doing as unto a
faithful creator, 1 Pet, 2.21. and 4.19. for he will never leave nor forsake us,
but will give us shoulders to bear what he lays upon us, 1 Cor. 10.13. let us
therefore who are the children of Zion be joyful in our King, as others (who
one day will appear to be fanatiques indeed) rejoice in them, for these present
sufferings are not worthy to be compared with our future glory, Romans 8.18.

Sir, I bless God I have an invincible peace and a secret joy surpassing my
expression; and I press toward the mark, Phil. 3.14 yet divine cordials are
not constant, but often some fainting fits, and dispondencies; the spirit
blows where it lists; where it is not comforting it is supporting, Esaias
40.29, and 41.10. if I were not very feeble, how could Gods power appear in my
weakness. I bless his name that his arrows are not within me, nor do the
terrors of death take hold upon me, as Job 6.4. for I never was better as to
the frame and temper of mind, and body, then since my restraint; and blessed be
the comforter I am not long without him. My cousin Harrison is very full of
spiritual comfort (as the Gentleman Jailer tells me) and bids me cheer up, and
indeed it will be a mercy if those who are called forth to testify for Christ
prove courageous, as Jos. 1.9. but truly as for my part, in does not lie on
that side, I fear least I may be too much exalted with the honor of it though
I know the Lord can soon withdraw; we live by faith and not by sight, our
happiness is in our union rather then in communion and sensible gusts; and I
rather fear a lingering death with severity, some for banishment, Ezekiel, 7.16
etc. but let the Lord do with me as he pleases, as Joab siad, 1 Chro. 19.13.
Omnia cooperatur in bonam, Romans 8.28. So having unbosomed my heart unto you,
that you and such whom you judge faithful and secret may the better spread my
condition before the Lord, I would entreat you to beg for me more particularly,
1. That God would set home upon my heart, and fulfill in me with power your
sweet Scripture (for which I heartily thank you) 2 Timothy 1.7, 8, 9, 12. that I
may not be afraid of their terrors, nor troubled but may sanctify the Lord at
that time, and be able to answer all opposers, that they may be ashamed when we
suffer for well doing, 1 Pet. 3.14. to 18. 2. That I and the rest of our
brethren and companions in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of
Jesus Christ, for the word of God and his testimony may be strengthened with all
might according to Christ's glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering
with joyfulness, as Paul prayed for the Collossians, Col. 1.9, to 14. being
filled with knowledge, wisdom, and spiritual understanding and feeling those
grounds of joy as an inheritance of light, and deliverance from the power of
darkness: that we may be testes and contestes to agree in our testimonies, and
not disparage so good a cause. 3. That we may be ready (not only to be bound
but to die for Christ, and the vindication and justification of his Evangelical
doctrine; we have made high profession and confession of the everlasting
Gospel, and it is a blessed thing to believe with the heart, and confess with
our mouths, and in our lives and by active martyrdom, as Brook, Ireton,
Hampden, Pickering, and others have worthily done, who are safely arrived
expecting us, and we are yet upon the waves; but the most excellent,
honorable, rich and fruitful confession of Christ, whereby we can make the
most efficacious demonstration of our election and faith in Christ, and love in
his glorious person with most supreme illustration of Gods glory is to lay down
our lives as the martyrs did to seal and confirm the truth of our professions
with our blood, for the cause of Christ, and safety of our brethren, Romans 16.4.
1 John 3.16. as our blessed master, after he had confessed and preached the
glory of God, and our salvation, confirmed and approved all by miracles, and
his most holy life made a good confession, under Pontius pilat, 1 Timothy 6.13.
without which all had been ineffectual: So I have often thought for the
discovery of hypocrites, cementing of the Saints in more concording affections,
trial of faith, exercising of patience, and love to Christ, and for many other
glorious ends God would call for some of his childrens blood, which will be the
greater favor to them whom he shall count worthy of it, because I think this
will rather be a Julian then a Heronian persecution, always provided that we be
found in the doctrine of the covenant of grace, that God does not love us
because we live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, and are
willing to forsake all, and loose our lives for him.

But because he loves us, and has singled us out from the world, therefore he
enables us so to live, and to do singular things for his honor and glory, and
willingly to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, Revel. 14.4. for the love
of Christ constrains us, 2 Cor. 5.14. O that we had more enlarged hearts for
our King Jesus. 4. (That you may fully hit my condition) I have some trouble
upon me concerning the loss of my temporal estate, especially for my poor,
tender loving wife and child: I was a purchaser, and had a stock of cattle, and
being wrongfully made prisoner two months before any speech of a King I was
surprised and could save nothing nor get 20 l of my estate since Michaelmas
last They promised to bear my charges to London, but at Chester I was forced
to borrow money, or must have come a foot: therefore pray be earnest with the
Lord, that we may take the spoiling of our goods more joyfully, knowing that we
have in heaven better and an enduring substance, Heb. 10 34. and that we may
not faint at these momentany afflictions, which work so well for us (wherein
riches and honors are not so) according to that passage, 2 Cor. 4 3 last
verses, and be affected with eternal joys. It is said that I shall be put down
into the hole for non-payment of great Fees: my comfort is that God will be
with me, there they cannot shut out Gods spirit from me, which is an
everlasting spring and Jubilee; nor will that be so bad as Jeremiah's Dungeon,
nor as Joseph's Irons which entered into his soul, though indeed we are sold
by our brethren as Joseph was, that the scripture may be fulfilled, The brother
shall deliver up the brother to Death, Matthew 10.21.

I know not how to conclude, not knowing when I may have another opportunity to
converse with you, I am overjoyed to think they cannot reach my soul, and that
our cause is invincible and it will be a happiness if God see it good that
none might suffer death, but such whose souls are out of danger; but being upon
the account of civil liberties as well as spiritual, our only wise Father will
order all for his own Glory, and this only silences all murmurings, and master
save thy self, that what he pleases must needs be least for us; he being
Infinite, Wisdom, Love, Power and Goodness. Had the King made his way by the
Sword, we might expect his sorest strokes; but for the men of Keilah to deliver
us up for the Parliament to sacrifice us, these men that sit by a Commonwealth
Writ, for whose privileges we adventured our all, and who cannot condemn us
but must give up the Cause, and give Judgment against themselves, and all the
good people in the Nation; let the Indians judge of it, if any of the Elect
think hardly of us, that we do not cry peccavi, and make our recantations, it
will not last long, and it is no matter what others say, for they must receive
their Judgment at the Bar of Christ, and we shall Judge our Judges; therefore
let us not entertain damps of dispondencies. My rejoicing is in a good God, a
good Cause, a good Conscience, I have the Justice of Heaven on my side, and
Gods loving kindness which is better then life, if we find injustice and
cruelty here, men's Law at Westminster will be adjudged Treason in Heaven, it
will not be long before all tears shall be wiped from our Eyes, and if our
innocencies be not vindicated, and cleared up in this life, as Jobs Mordecas,
Joseph's, and Daniels and Susannas were yet at the revelation of the righteous
judgment of God, it will appear before men and Angels, that we are not
Traitors, nor Murderers, nor Phanatiques, but true Christians, and good
Commonwealths men, fixed and constant to the principles of sanctity, truth,
justice, and mercy, which the Parliament and Army declared and engaged for; and
to that Noble principle of preferring the Universality, before Particularity,
that we sought the public good, and would have infranchised the people, and
secured the welfare of the whole groaning Creation, if the Nation had not more
delighted in servitude, then in freedom. And if we now suffer a martyrdom of
body, we shall be some of the souls under the Altar crying, How long O Lord holy
and true, and though we can patiently digest their Tortures, and leave all
vengance to whom it belongs, yet who knows but that our blood may be their
poison; but then after all unjust sentences of men how sweet and honorable
will the Judgment of Christ be, Matthew. 25. (Euge bone serve) of entering into
our master joy, when the Kings of the Earth and the chief Captains and Dukes
of Edom shall wish the Mountains and Rocks to fall upon them, Rev. 5.16. I
bless God my poor Wife (...) much encourage me, to be faithful to the Death,
and she is a (...) who helps her Husband so to Heaven, as in a Fiery Charoit;
she is one who bears an unfeigned love to Christ and all the Saints; I entreat
your tender care of her and my Child, providebit Deus, Ier. 49.11. I shall leave
her that Scripture and Esa. 54.5. to 8. while they cannot take away by
confiscation; when we were in the storm we took our leaves each of the other,
See the relation of his passage by sea from Wexso^d to Kingsale.
and though we have not paid our Vows at Pethell, yet I trust (as was then
promised) we shall be willing to go to Christ if he call through a Sea of blood.
But O the infinite wisdom and love of God, and the unsearchable riches of his
Grace, that if I had been drowned the Malignants would have said, though he
escaped by Land, yet Divine Vengance over took him at (...)ow he should
vouchsafe me (poor me as Gideon said, (...) 15. one of the meanest Lawyers in
Wesminster-Hall) (...) of bonds and an affectual if not effectual Martyrdom
for being an Advocate for my blessed Advocate and the good people of England.

I have been the larger not knowing what use this may be of, if my mouth should
be stopped; if you hear any report of me contrary hereunto, believe it not, so
you have my heart; and I had rather be buried alive, then my Tongue or Hand
should differ from it. O pray much for me, and pray again and mend your prayer,
as I have great need to do, if you know what pitiful poor short and confused
prayers I make in a day; yet Father into thy hands I commend my spirit is a
prayer, no period better then prayer, therefore now unto him that is able to
keep you (and me) from falling, and to present you (and me faultlesse before
the presence of his glory with exceeding joy: To the only wise God our Savior
be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power now and for Ever, Amen.

Your for ever in our Dear Redeemer, John Cook.

A Letter written by Mr. Justice Cook from the Tower to his Wife.
MY dear lamb, blessed be God for Jesus Christ, and for a prison, where I
find much of his comforting presence; tell sister Jones that she keeps but two
or three Sabbaths in a week, but in prison every day is a Christian Sabbath;
not only to cease from sin, but to praise God, singing Hosannaes and
Hallalujahs. I can but smile to think that they cannot hinder me from
preaching, for I preach twice every day to my self, and yesterday, blessed be
the Comforter, my heart was brimfull of joy and consolation from Psalm. 73.25,
26. wherein I observed three points, or doctrinall conclusions.

1. That a Saint should love and esteem nothing but God, and for God; all
discourse is vain but what aims and tends to Gods glory 1 Cor. 10.31. a
husband, wife, child, friends, and all creature comforts are to be loved so far
as we see God in them; as the creatures do not serve us but God susteines us
in them, and by them, so our affections and desires must not be fixed upon
them, but terminate in God; as the waters in the river never rest till they
return to the Sea, so our loves must only pass by the creatures, and settle
in God; and the more well see the image of God in any one, there our love is to
be most in the Lord, and for his sake this love is the greatest weight of our
souls, and transforms into the nature of the thing beloved, let us endeavor
to put out more acts of love to God in Christ, Cant. 1.16.

2. From those words, my flesh and my heart fails me, but God is the strength
of my heart, the chief residence of the soul being in the heart, I observe,
That there is something more dear to a Saint then his own soul, which is the
soul of his soul, and the life of his life, and that is Jesus Christ, who
dwells in our souls by his spirit, Romans 8 10, 11. for as the body is dead
when the soul leaves it, so the soul is dead without Christ; which may teach
us two lessons. 1. To love Christ more then our own lives or relations, because
he is the soul of our souls; this did Moses, Exodus 32.32. and Paul, Romans 9.3.
they preferred the glory of God in the salvation of their brethren before their
own souls, if it could have been, which is a Christian duty, though very hard;
and if divine justice should say to us at the great day, the soul that sins
must die: we may say, why then did God punish our Lord Jesus who is the soul
of our souls, more dear to us then our souls; and if God had seen it good we
had rather have suffered in our own persons to have saved him; but we not being
able to undergo the wrath of God, that innocent and immaculate lamb was put
to death, who is the heart of our hearts, the soul of our souls, and the
spirit of our spirits; for justice is more then abundantly satisfied, much more
then if our wills, souls, and bodies had suffered, and the debt was all paid
together which had always been paying if we had gone to hell, for as to Christ
our salvation is all pure strict justice, who felt nothing but extremity, the
father would not spare him, Romans 8.32. but as to us it is all mercy that his
satisfaction should be accepted for us, and that thee and me, and dear Da^t^;
and sweet love I trust should be vessels of that mercy and free grace, O
blessed be his glorious name for ever.

3. My meditations were principally carried out from the joys of heaven and
from those words, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and thou art my portion
forever, I was ravished with this consideration, that the joys of Heaven are
eternal: or thus, The Saints pleasures have a beginning, but no ending. No
doubt but this is infinite matter of joy to Abraham, and all the Saints in
heaven, to think that they shall continue in their joy and glory, not 100. or
10000 millions of years only, but for ever, that when they have been there
100000 millions of millions of years, as to what remains it will not be a
minuit, but then we begin our felicity, therefore Christ calls it a life eternal,
Matthew. 25 (...). Therefore if a man could live here 1000000 millions of years
and enjoy his hearts desire, and all the variety of pleasures which (...) world
can afford, and afterward be deprived of Paradise, (...) damned, what a sad
bargain would that be; for the S^its (...) that while in heaven, and shall be
there for ever: and (...) a (...) might (...) its ^ounger and live here for
ever if such a (...) possibl(...) not that content him, because he is capa^ of
go(...) and (...) to the choice of an illuminate Christi^ whether to (...) ^000
years in health, wealth, and all the (...) to be in heaven but one day, he
ought to choose the lat(...) 40. so one minuits being in heaven is to be
preferred before a perpetuity of all worldly pleasures, for to be absent from
the Lord is more grievous then all humane delights can be comfortable, if it
were but a pretty good condition, if men were sure always so to continue it
would be comfortable: therefore to think of an everlasting crown of Glory, is a
soul-melting consideration. If then this life be not a minuit in comparison of
the perpetual life of the blessed souls in heaven; how greatly are they to be
blamed that for a little vain honor flattering pleasure or the momentany
sinful delights of this evil world, squander away their precious souls, 2 As
the joys of Heaven are eternal, so they are exceeding great: If the men of the
world which have their portion here, Psa. 17.14. have such stately horses and
pleasant palaces and delights, shall we not think that God has provided
inestimable treasures and pleasures in the world to come for his children* for
whom do earthly parents treasure up, but for their children; but if we could
hut apprehend what they are, they are not the joys of Heaven, for no heart can
conceive what God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 29. the eye has
seen much, and the ear heard more, and the heart may conceive much more, but
eternal pleasures are inconceivable, yet the spiritual eye has some glamps of
it: a poor Saint finds more solid and zeal joy in a crucified Christ, poor
and naked and despised in the world, then all the Dukes of Edome in their rich
and glorious pomp and magnificence; but all the Saints living here have not so
much joy and splendor as the least Saint has in heaven. The Scripture
mentions three heavens, where the Fowls are, the starry Heaven, and the Heaven
of heavens, 1 Kings 8.27. the sun is conceived to be 300 times bigger then the
Earth, and every star bigger then this lower world, and that all the earth it
but as mote and not so big as a flee in comparison of the Imperial celestial
Heavens where the souls of the Saints are with God and Christ; and by the
largeness of the place we may guess at the greatness of the joys and pleasures,
that the Elect are but few in comparison of those who shall be turned into hell,
Psa. 9.17. as it were thrust into a hole together, Matthew. 25.23. our Lords joy
can be no little joy, and it is too big to enter into us, we must enter into
it. Next I consider wherein the substance and essence of heavenly joys does
properly consist by 1 Cor. 13.12. it seems much to be in sight and knowledge.

1 For sight to see God face to face, to see the beautiful person of our dear
Lord Jesus, to see all the blessed saints and Angels, and to be one of them,
how joyful is the thought of it; for if the damned (between whom and the
saints there is a great gulf fixed, Luke 16.26.) shall see Abraham and the
prophets in the Kingdom of God, Luke 13.28. when themselves are thrust out
(poor saint-haters that now persecute the heirs of glory, and scorn their
companies would then feign crowd into heaven with them) much more the Elect
themselves; but the difficulty is, how we can see spirits with bodily eyes, and
bodies with spiritual eyes. I rather think that Job 19.25, 27. is to be
understood of Jesus Christ, whom Job shall see with the Eyes of his hody, and
by the Eyes of our souls we shall see God the Father and the blessed spirits;
and our comfort is that we shall for ever be with the Lord. But here the
Scripture has no Tongue to speak, we must not too curiously inquire for
knowledge, it is a wonderful expression, we shall know even as we are known,
God knows us perfectly and what shall be our last thoughts, Psalm. 139.1, 2. All
the saints upon Earth do not know so much as one saint in Heaven, where faith
is turned into Vision, and hope into Fruition; then shall we know the love of
Christ which passes all knowledge here below, Ephesians. 3.19. how all the love that
ever God vouchsafed to the world, is but as a spark to the Oven red hot in
comparison of giving Christ; but I believe we shall never know God
comprehensively [but apprehensively] that is so much of his glory as we shall
never know more, for there will he new springs and fresh discoveries of his
infinite Grace, Glory, Goodness and perfections streaming forth continually to
us, that will be as everlasting fountains of joy and glorious rejoicing to our
souls and bodies; as one at sea sees a great way but not to the end or bottom
of the sea, for we shall know as much of God as our heads can hold, and love
God as much as our hearts can contain; and no doubt but there are different
degrees of Glory in Heaven, as the Saints know more or less of God, here as
when Vessels of several sizes are cast into the sea, they are all full, but
some hold more then others, 2 Cor. 5.4 God works upon our Hearts as ingravers
upon Gold or Marble, and the more of his image he stamps upon us in this life,
the liker shall we be to him in Glory, but every saint shall have his own
fullness of knowledge.

3. I think that heavenly joy does much consist in the will, in the
transformation of our wills into the will of God; for as we heard an excellent
sermon from 1 Cor. 6.17. at Northampton, he that is joined unto the Lord is one
spirit; for I believe that mistical oneness which our dear Lord so sweetly
prayed for, Joh. 17.11, 21, 22. is meant of oneness in will and affections,
when the soul shall have all that it can desire and nothing but what it does
desire, and shall will nothing but what God wills, and not only to be
satisfied with the will of God, but but to taste a sweet complecency and delight
in it, that it is infinitely best to be there.

4. This transforming of the will proceeds from the apprehension of divine
love, where the soul finds that God has loved it from all Eternity, that his
eye and his heart are perpetually upon it for good, and knows that it is a
free, pure, unchangeable, and eternal love, this causes an eternity of joy; and
a love is the sweetest grace in the heart (the very sugar of the soul) that
makes a Heaven upon Earth, where it is without dissimulation and spiritual, so
heavenly joy will consist much in love, which must needs flow from sight and
knowledge, for as Paul says, 1 Cor. 2.8. it is only ignorance of God that
makes so many to oppose the way of truth and holiness; so the sight of divine
glorious beauty, and the knowledge of infinite wisdom, power, love, and
goodness in Christ, causes the soul to love God, and Christ, and the Spirit,
much better then it self: for if the Spouse be sick of love here, Cant. 5.8.
and if the fire of love constrain militant Saints not to live to themselves, 2
Cor. 5.14. ingenuity being the great principle of the Gospel not to work for
life, but from life, and to do all from a spirit of love, much more the Saints
triumphant: but the more I think of this blessed state of glorification, the
more I am at a loss in it, Psalm. 16.11. in Gods presence there is fulness of
joy, and at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore: and David says,
Psalm. 123. that they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever: but one Star differs from
another in glory; and Matthew. 13.43. the righteous shall shine as the Son in the
Kingdom of their Father, And our Lord says, in my Fathers House are many
mansions, and Paul calls it, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
2 Cor. 4.17. and a building of God a House not made with hands eternal in the
Heavens, where we shall be so soon as the soul parts from the body, 2 Cor. 5.1,
8. and that it is an inheritance in light, all light and no darkness, 1 Coloss
12. and that the Saints shall judge the world, and when Christ shall appear, we
shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. the New Jerusalem
there shall be no sorrow, no crying, no pain, Rev. 21.4. and the gates of the
City are pearls, and the street is pure gold, ver. 21 the glory of God lightens
it and the Lamb is the light thereof, v. 22. in it there is a pure river of
water of life and a tree of life, which bears fruit every month, Rev. 22.1, 2.
and there shall be no Curses there, and there shall be no night, and we shall
reign for ever and ever, ver. 5. All these are soul ravishing considerations,
and I have sucked much comfort from, Psalm. 17.15. I shall be satisfied when I
awake with thy likeness; and 1 Thessalonians. 5.10. who died for us, that whether we
wake or sleep we should live together with him; therefore let us comfort our
selves and edify one another with these words, and Mr. Burton's Text, Heb.
12.22, 23. it is sweet also to consider of the glory of the body, 1 Cor. 15.42,
43. it shall be an incorruptible, glorious, powerful, spiritual body, there
will be charity, agility, penetrability, impossibility, no hunger, no cold, it
shall be fashioned like unto Christ's glorious Body, Phil. 3.20. What a comfort
is it to thee as me* that have such crazy bodies! ulcerous Lazarus shall be as
sound as a Fish, and we shall have an everlasting spring of health and strength
which shall never decay.

Use. Let this teach us more to mind eternity, to study the joys of Heaven,
that we may receive a full reward, 2 Ephesians. to 8. as Mr. Whitfield once
exhorted Oliver in every thing to mind and eye eternity; for they are the brave
men and women that will be so at that day: the pleasures of this world are so
far from satisfying the understanding and will, which are capable of God, that
they cannot satisfy any one sense; never any Music so sweet, but a man will
desire to hear better, no object so beautiful, no meat so pleasant, but a man
will covet to see that which is more lovely and tastes sweeter, Eccles. 1.8.
study that Book and Canticles well, that the spirit may convince us of the
vanity and vexation of all creature-delights, and of the fulness and
excellency that is in Jesus Christ the best condition in this life is but a
bitter-sweeting, all our comforts are impure mixed with Wormwood, no Rose
without thorn, and the bitter is more then the sweet, but in Heaven all our
delights are pure and unmixed, there is perfect joy without any grief, sollid
comforts and no afflictive misery, no Envy, no Emulation which abounds here;
for every Saint has what his heart can desire, it is a Sinlesse, Sorrowlesse,
Temptationlesse, Oppressionlesse, Sicklesse, Timelesse and Endless estate,
where being once Arrived we shall never fear parting any more, therefore (my
dear sweeting) let us wait patiently and cheerfully for that blessed
translation from Earth to Heaven; we must begin our Heaven here, the more
prepared to dye, the fitter we are to live, so let us live, so let us dye, that
we way live Eternally. If thee likest such poor breathings and broken
Meditations, thee may command more of them, I leave thee and me and my dear
child and our Christian relations with thee in his Arms who is in Heaven at
the right hand of the Father, therefore we need not fear what man can do unto
us, Esa. 51.12. To him I am, thine for ever,

Thy loving Husband during this Life, John Cook.

Another Letter from Mr. Cook to a Friend after Condemnation.
DEar Brother, beloved in the Lord, condemnatus sum ad vitam, and this is my
Cordial Farewell to you and all Saints, from my Jeremiahs prison; to morrow I
shall be in eternal glory, in the bosom of Christ, where our father Abraham is,
and a guard of Angels will convey my soul thither. Never let Gods people fear a
prison any more, for the Lords supporting or comforting spirit has not been
absent from me since my indictment. I writ a letter to you formerly,
acquainting you with my spiritual condition, to which I refer you; and fearing
lest wrong may be done to the cause when I am in heaven, I think fit to leave a
few words with my dearest love to all Christian friends.

1. Upon my trial it came to this, that the Judges said, that all have been
treason since 1642, so that the Lords and Commons are not to meddle with the
King. I said, that I acted obedientially by order from the house of Commons,
and the Commons being the representatives of the people cannot commit treason,
for there can be no trial of all the people. And as for any force upon the
House in 1648. they were the only judges of it and no inferior Court can
judge of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of their acts or orders. But they said,
all our Acts and Orders are treason. So that now it is brought to that it was
in 1642.

2. I intend by Gods assistance upon the Ladder to bear my testimony for Jesus
Christ to all his Offices, and for a Gospel Magistracy and Ministry, and to
speak something so far as God shall enable, and will be permitted, for the
good Old cause, or righteousness and holiness. I can at present only leave my
dear love and respects for you and my dear sister, beseeching God, and not
doubting but that we shall shortly meet in eternal glory. Company so spends me
that I can write no more; I shall suddenly enter into the joy of the Lord, O
blessed be his name, blessed be the Comforter, my soul is full of consolation
Farewell, farewell, Renede in Paradiso. Yours forever,

John Cook,
For my dear brother F.



Some Notes taken of a Sermon Preached by Mr. Hugh Peter's, the 14th. of October
1660. (after his Condemnation) in the prison of Newgate, wherein he was much
interrupted, by the coming in, and going forth, of strangers that came to see
him, and the other prisoners, in the Room with him, and so was constrained to
break off the sooner; And though they are but brief Heads, yet it is thought
convenient here to insert them, for the better satisfaction of any, touching
the frame of Mr. Hugh Peter's at that time. The discourse was from,
PSALM. 42. ver. 11. Why art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou
disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the
health of my Countenance and my God.


AFter Analyzing the Psalm, he Observed this Doctrine.

Doctrine, That the best of Gods people are apt to be disponding.

This was the Man's case in the whole 88 Psalm.

Also David's case, when he complained of the breaking of his Bones, etc.

This was Christ's case himself, when he cried out My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me.

The Reasons why the best of Gods people, are apt to dispondencies, are,

First, When something falls out from God more then ordinary, when God put's
weight in Sorrow and Affliction, that makes it sinking; Although that
Afflictions are heavy of themselves many times, yet it is the weight that God
puts in Sorrow, that makes it sink us.

2ly, Over-valuing our comforts, putting too much upon Wife, Children, Estate,
or Life it self, a man is apt to be cast down when he thinks of parting with
them.

Thirdly, Our unpreparednesse for sufferings, and afflictions that makes us
dispond. Alas I thought not of it say some, it is come unexpectedly upon me.

Fourthly, We are apt to dispond when our Afflictions are many, when they are
multitudes, when all is struck at together, Name, Estate, Relations and Life it
self.

Fifthly, When Afflictions are of long continuance, a man can bear that
Burden a while, that he cannot stand under long.

Sixthly, When afflictions fall upon the noblest part of man, which is his
soul; then are dispondencies apt to come in.

Seventhly, When we have more Sense then Faith.

Now it should not be so, Gods people ought not to dispond.

1. Because it discovers impatiency.

2. Because it discovers want of Faith, they lean not upon the Rock that will
not fail them.

3. It discovers want of Wisdom, etc.

4. We should not be thus, because it gratifies the Enemy, who in such a case
is ready to upbraide us, and say, where is now their God? what is become of
their God?

Now what cure and remedies are there for disponding.

This Eleventh verse gives you two.

First, Hope in God, Hope thou in God.

Secondly, Faith is set on work, I shall yet praise him, etc.

But more particularly take these directions.

1. Be careful of exercising faith, for no condition of man superceeds his
Faith, do all in Faith, pray in Faith, and hear in Faith, etc. Now what is the
exercise of Faith but rouling upon Christ, and staying on him, here I Will stick,
if I perish I perish.

The miscarriages of Christians, is either because they have no faith, or else,
because, if they have faith, they give it not food to live upon; faith must go
to Christ, as the Liver Vain, and fetch blood and life thence. We quarrel that
we have not Love, and Patience, and meekness, etc. but the defect lies in our
faith, if we had more faith, we should have more of all other Graces.

Now what is the food of Faith.

Answ. Faith will not feed upon every Dish, not on a stalled Ox or fatted
Calfe; prosperity is not faiths food. But it will Eat a word, live upon
promises, these nourish faith, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, all
things shall work together for good, and the like promises.

2. Be marvellously careful of things below, measure things not by sense, or
by a day, but by faith, and Eternity; we are troubled at the loss of this and
the other Creature, and comfort, but what is the value of them, the over valluing
things is our mischief.

3. Go and tell the Lord Christ I have a defiled conscience, and if thou do
not wash me, I am undone for Ever. See the necessity and worth of Christ; there
must be something better to look at then what we loose for the present,
something above Estate, and Life, and Relations, and Name. See the worth of
Christ's blood, it is worth all the world, because what the blood of Bulls and
Goats could not do, his blood does cleanse from all sin.

4. Keep close to the use of Ordinances much of our mischief has come from
neglects of this kind; the safety of a Christian lies in the enjoyment of
Church Communion, Psalm. 27.4, 5 and 6 Verses, One thing I have desired of the
Lord, and that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord
all the days of my life, etc. for in the time of trouble he shall hide me in
his Pavillion, in the secret of his Tabernacle, shall he hide me, he shall set
me upon a Rock; and now shall my head be lifted up above mine Enemies round
about me, etc. The greatest fears are dispelled there -- you shall find before
troubles pass over (for you expect some) it will be a hard matter to break
Churches, they are so fast chayned together, and yet there has been mavelous
miscarriages amongst Saints in their Church Relations. Finis.

He also during his imprisonment in the Tower, wrote some sheets of paper to
his Daughter, leaving them with her as his last Legacy, containing in it very
much sound and wholesome advice as to her souls health. It carries with it
such a savor as denotes it proceeds from a spirit that has learned experience
in Christ's school, and has been aquainted sometimes with sunshine as well as
foul weather, it is too long here to be incerted, but if it be made public by
it self, doubtless the Experienced Reader will be no looser by perusing this
legacy.

Some Memorable passages of Mr. Hugh Peter's, in his Imprisonment at Newgate,
and at the time of his Execution at Charing-crosse October 16 1660.
Mr. Peter's, as is well known, was exercised under a great conflict in his own
spirit, during the time of his Imprisonment, fearing (as he would often say)
that he should not go through his sufferings with courage and comfort, and said
to friends, that he was somewhat unprepared for death, and therefore unwilling
to dye; something he said he had committed, and other things omitted, which
troubled him, but though it was a cloudy and dark day with him for a season;
yet the light of Gods grace and favor would break forth at last.

And surely the favor of God did at the last appear, for a little before he
went forth to Execution (as many can testify) he was well composed in his
Spirit, and cheerfully said, I thank God now I can dye, I can look death in
the face and not be afraid.

As for that slanderous report which was too much received by good people as
well as bad, to wit, that he was guilty of Uncleanness. A Friend coming to him
in prison, put that question seriously and soberly to his soul, to which he
replied, that he blessed the Lord, he was wholly clear in that matter, and that
he never knew any woman but his own Wife.

A night or two before he suffered, two of the Episcopal Clergy, who as some
report were the Kings Chaplains, came to give him a visit; they endeavored to
make advantage of the present temptations wherewith he was then assaulted, and
to persuade him to a Repentance and Recantation of his former Activity in the
Parliament cause, which they endeavored to enforce upon him by a promise of
pardon from the King, in case he would therein hearken to them, But though he
was then much afflicted in his spirit, yet the Lord did help him to bear up
with much courage against the insinuations of that sort of men, and told them
he had no cause in the least to repent of his Adhering to that interest; but
rather, that he had in the prosecution thereof done no more for God and his
people, in these Nations, and with civility dismissing those Visitants, he
applied himself to some other Ministers then present, whom he judged more
able to speak a word in season to him under these great Trials, wherewith the
Lord was then pleased to exercise him.

Being carried upon the sledge to Execution, and made to sit therein within the
Railes at Charing-Crosse, to behold the Execution of Mr. Cook. One comes to
him, and upbraided him with the Death of the King, bidding him (with
opprobrious language) to repent: he replied, Friend, you do not well to trample
upon a Dying man, you are greatly mistaken, I had nothing to do in the death of
the King.

When Mr. Cook was cut down, and brought to be quartered, one they called
Coll. Turner, called to the Sheriffs men, to bring Mr. Peter's near, that he
might see it, And by and by the Hangman came to him, all besmered in blood, and
rubbing his bloody hands together, he (tauntingly) asked, come, how do you like
this Mr. Peter's, how do you like this work? to whom he replied, I am not (I
thank God) terrifyed at it, you may do your worst:

When he was going to his execution, he looked about and espied a man, to whom
he gave a piece of gold (having bowed it first) and desired him to go to the
place where his daughter lodged, and to carry that to her as a token from him,
and to let her know that his heart was as full of comfort as it could he; and
that before that piece should come to her hands, he should be with God in glory.

Being upon the Ladder he spoke to the Shieriffe, saying, Sir, you have here
slain one of the servants of God before mine eyes, and have made me to behold
it, on purpose to terrify and discourage me, But God has made it an Ordinance
to me for my strengthening and encouragement.

When he was going to die, he said, What flesh, art thou unwilling to go to God
through the fire and jaws of death? Oh (said he) this is a good day, he is
come that I have long looked for, and I shall be with him in glory, and so
smiled when he went away.

What Mr. Peter's said further at his Execution, either in his Speech or Prayer,
it could not be taken, in regard his voice was low at that time, and the people
uncivil.

Some Passages and occasional Speeches of Mr. Scot's before he came to
Execution.
When he was in the Tower, a Relation sent to know how he did; To which he
returned this answer, That he had been very ill all night, and had some
Apprehensions that it might be unto death. But, said he, I was not at all
displeased; for if it be the Will of God, that I may not live his Servant, I
would dye his Sacrifice.

The first day that he came to Newgate, some friends came to see him, and
asked him how it was with him; he told them, he was well; but he waited and
much longed for a word of Peace from God: But (said he) I Bless God (though it
is somewhat dark with me at present, and I know I have a very naughty heart)
yet I have not one Temptation to desert that good Cause, which God has so
signally (many a time) owned.

The next day, which was the day Maj. Genesis Harrison was Condemned, some of his
Relations came to him, and told him, They supposed he had heard what dismal
Sentence was passed on him; And, O Sir, said one of them, my heart fails me to
think how you will bear it. Why, said he, flesh and blood will recoil; But,
blessed be God, I am not troubled at that; A fit of an Ague would cost a man
more, I believe.

The day after he was Condemned himself, his Wife and other Relations and
Friends came to him: O Sir, said some, how is it now? Why, said he, Blessed, O
blessed Chains! I would not be without these Chains. Indeed, it was a very
dark, dismal, cloudy morning, I was brought to be content to perish. Truly, I
thought I could not plead at all, my soul was so sad, because God hid his face:
But I was resolved, said he, if I could have said no more, to tell the Court,
That the Cause was the Lords; and the fault was not in the Lord, but my great
personal unworthiness, that I could not assert it; And that though I did sink
into the Bottomless Pit immediately, yet I durst not, no not for a World, but
own that Cause, which God had often honored. But, said he, the Lord for your
sakes did help me to say somewhat; but, truly it was but pitiful. I thought if
I might have been suffered, (although I have not slept, to speak of, these two
nights) I could have spoken three or four hours longer. And now, said he, as
dark as it was in the morning, it is so bright, so quiet and calm, that truly I
think, if I were to be executed to morrow, I could sleep all night as well as
ever. But (lifting up his eyes) Lord, said he, I would not be too confident: O
pardon thy servant. But, being in a very cheerful frame, his Friends and
Relations left him at that time, and, because of ilness, could not visit him
next day.

But on the next first day of the week, being with him, he told them he found
an increased strength. That day about noon; the Warrant for Execution was
signed; at which time, he was desirous to have a Repreeve gained, if possible:
not (said he) that I expect Life; but methinks my Wedding Garment is not quite
ready: a little more time, that I may, as a Bride, be ready trimmed. That
evening it was told him, that Sir O. B. would speak with him the next morning;
and some told him, it may be that would prove an hour of Temptation. Truly
(said he) I bless God, I am at a point, I cannot, no, I cannot desert the
CAUSE.

The next morning they two were together, the matter of their discourse I know
not, but I remember when his Wife desired to go to O. B. that evening, to see
if he would be her dear Husbands (or rather her) Mediator to his Majesty for
his Life. It may be (said he) Sir O. B. may say, That I should confess guilt,
and do the King some service. Prithee tell him, I would engage to live quietly;
but for owning Guilt, that I cannot do: For to this day I am not convinced of
any, as to the Death of the King, and that I went but too far, in asking the
benefit of the Proclamation; and I cannot go any further, no not to save a
Thousand Lives.

That evening came in two Ministers: one, or both of them, (after they had
talked with him a good while) I heard them ask, Whether he did acknowledge his
Guilt? for they believed his owning of that, would be the most likely (if not a
most certain) means, to prolong his Life. To which he answered, That although
he had often, and that with many tears (and he thought with some brokenness of
heart) sought the Lord to convince him of it, if he had any Guilt in him, as to
that particular Action, (for which he was then in Chains, and under
Condemnation) for, said he, I would not for a World die with one Sin unrepented
of: But, said he* Really, to this day I have no such Conviction. But, said the
Doctor, Sir, If any such do come in, will you tell us? Yes, said he, I profess
I will, if it come in at the last moment, even at the Gibbet, I will tell the
World of it. And it is observable, that some of his last words were, That God
had engaged him in a CAUSE, not to be Repented of, I say, Not to be Repented of
--

The night before Execution, when he was in the Dungeon, he was (as he had been
that day) some sadder than at other times; And one asked him, if any particular
thing lay on him? He said, No, But the Lord was pleased to suspend his
Comforting presence: but, said he (with an humble boldness I would speak it)
The Lord shall not put me off with any thing besides Himself. After, having
spent some hours in Prayer, as at other times, about midnight we left him, and
his Fellows, that they might get a little rest, for the support of their
natural spirits; and in three or four hours his Wife, Children, and many other
friends returned. When we came, we found them praying: As Soon as Col. Scroop
had ended, Mr. Scot turned about, and opening his arms, he embraced his Wife,
and one of his Daughters: Ah, said he, my dear ones, God is good, he is come,
he is come! I am full, I am full. O bless the Lord for me, and with me; O my
soul, and all that is within me, magnify the Lord. By and by he went to prayer
himself; and one would have thought he had been (as it were) in Heaven, his
soul was so enlarged in blessing, praising and magnifying the God of his
Salvation. O! said he to his Wife, I would not change this dark Room for the
best Star Chamber under Heaven. He desired his Friends and Relations would not
be solicitous for his Body; but let them do what they pleased, and exercise
what Cruelty they would; saying, it was meet it should be so: And that the dead
Bodies of the Witnesses must be unburied, that the Scriptures might be
fulfilled.

Some part of his prayer was, to bless the Lord, That (as the Psalmist said)
though he came in there weeping, and fearing that he had not yet been bearing
precious feed, yet now they were returning rejoicing and triumphing, and
carrying their sheaves with them. Call us not (said he) Marahs (as she once
said) but call us Naomies: for we came in hither (some of us) empty; but we are
going out full: The Lord has not writ bitter things, but good of us; for this
is glorious Grace, That We are counted worthy to suffer for GOD and His CAUSE.
Oh! what shall we render to the Lord? We will take the Cup of Salvation and
call upon the Name of the Lord. Oh our souls, bless the Lord! And we do with
our souls bless Thee, that we have an Eternity to bless Thee in; for no less
will satisfy our souls, And now, O blessed and glorious God, shall we be among
thy Worthies? Meaning N. G. H. Mr. Carew, and Mr. Cook.
if Possible, let us attain to the first Three; but if we attain not to so
glorious a Testimony as that, yet O Lord, let us be among thy Worthies. We
desire to glorify thy great and blessed Name, that Thou have in any measure
enabled us to encourage our hearts in the Lord our God, at such a time as this,
when Eighty is (as it were) in the flames; and the people speak of worse than
stoning us. When some spoke of the Reproaches of the people, he said, he
accounted that his honor.

Mr. Scot's Speech upon the Ladder.
GENTLEMEN, I stand here a Spectacle to GOD, to Angels, and Men: To GOD and
Angels, to whom I hope I am shortly a going. And now to you I owe it; to God,
and the Nation, and my self, to say something concerning each. For my self, I
think it may become me to tell you how and why I came hither: and something in
the general, concerning my capacity. In the beginning of these Troubles I was
(as many others were) unsatisfied: I saw Liberties and Religion in the Nation,
in great danger, to my best apprehension; I saw the approaches of Popery in a
great measure, coming in upon us: I saw --

Upon which the Sheriff interrupted him in these words:

If you will betake your self to prayers, you may.

Mr. Scot replied, I shall not speak to reproach any --

The Sheriff interrupted him again, saying, You have but a little time, Mr.
Scot, Therefore betake that little time to prayer.

Mr. Scot replied, I shall speak --.

The Sheriff interrupted him again, saying, I beseech you Sir, betake your self
to prayer.

Mr. Scot said, It may become me to give account of my self, because --

The Sheriff interrupted him again, saying, It does not become you to speak any
such thing here; Therefore I beseech you betake your self to prayer; it is but
a little time you have to live: you know, Mr. Scot, that is the most needful
thing.

Mr. Scot replied, It Is so. --

The Sheriff interrupts again, saying, Sir, But when you came upon the Stage,
you deprived your self very much.

Then said Mr. Scot, I thought to tell you how I came hither -- Here the
Sheriff interrupted again (or else some one besides the Sheriff) and spoke to
this effect. Every body knows, that --

Mr. Scot said, Sir, it is hard that an English man has not liberty to speak --

The Sheriff interrupted again, saying, I cannot suffer you to speak any such
thing.

Mr. Scot said, I shall say no more but this, That it is a very mean and bad
Cause that will nor bear the words of a dying-man: it is not ordinarily denied
to people in this condition --

The Sheriff interrupted again, saying, Sir, you had a fair Trial, and you were
found guilty.

Mr. Scot replied, It Is according to my mind to speak what may be said --

Hear the Undersheriff interrupted, saying, It has been denied unto your
Predecessors, and will be denied unto you.

Then he Prayed as follows.
HOly Lord God, the great and glorious God of Heaven and Earth; King of
Nations, and King of Saints: in both which capacities, thy poor and unworthy
Creature comes now to bear his Witness in this great spectacle, before Thee,
Angels and Men. O Lord, were it not for Sin, none of these things had befallen
this Nation, nor my unworthy self: We have all transgressed and gone astray
from thee by a perpetual backsliding; even all, of a sorts, conditions, ranks
and orders of men: And among them none, none more than thy poor unworthy
Creature, who acknowledges the same here before Thee, in the face of Heaven,
and in Thy Presence, to which he is very shortly a going. That glorious Grace,
which thou have been pleased to afford unto his soul in it. Thou art gone to
the highest extent of mercy that ever was showed to any of the sons of men. Thy
poor servant does acknowledge himself to be the greatest of transgressors. And
thy glorious Grace is magnified above all thy Name, in what Thou have done for
thy poor Creature. But Lord, so it is, because such is thy good pleasure, such
was thy design from Eternity; through or in the great Transactions that was
between Thee, and Christ thy blessed Son, and our blessed Savior; that Thou
should in thy dispensation, in the governing of thy Church in the World:
That thou should glorify thy Free Grace in pardoning of the Sins, and in
the Salvation of some of lost Mankind, which was the great Masterpiece of thy
Love, that thou should choose out of poor lost Mankind one or other, it is
of admirable and incomprehensible mercy: And that thou should choose thy poor
Creature as one in the number, is matter of Adoration, Admiration, is matter of
Eternal Ecstasy, and is matter of Thanksgiving for ever: And this is the
comfort of his poor soul, that he shall have an Eternity with thy self; Thou
have so assured him, that he shall be blessing, honoring and magnifying of
Thee among a company of Saints and Angels, and the souls of just men made
perfect. O blessed Lord, thou have called him forth as a public Spectacle to
some, in a condition of Shame and Reproach; to others, of Comfort; and to thy
Blessed Self, as one that is a Witness for Thee, that has served Thee with all
faithfulness in his trust and public capacity and employment. O Lord, thy
Dispensation to thy poor Creature has been wonderful gracious, and merciful;
and he must say, to the praise of thy Free Grace --

Here the Hangman stooping down to take Drink, which was reached up to him upon
the Ladder, interrupted him; Upon which Mr. Scot said, prithee let me alone, I
have not done; and then proceeded in Prayer as follows.

-- That this very Condition to which he is now brought, he acknowledges, is
the answer of his Prayer before his going out of England. Thou know Lord, he
did many times in prayers and tears seek thy blessed Majesty, for Counsel and
for Advice; whether it were his duty to stay and suffer, or to shelter himself
abroad: And if it were thy will to take more honor to thy self, by his
Suffering than his Living; thou would be pleased to Remand him back again,
and bring him hither. And he has observed thy Providence checking of his way,
and in preserving him all along until he came to this. O blessed Lord, thy poor
Creature does acknowledge, that thy ways to his poor Soul, have been of
wonderful grace and mercy. It was a great mercy to him, that having had (by
reason of many sinful temptations, and many encumbrances, and many incessant
Businesses in the World, whereof he has been a perpetual drudge) many years
past; and he has not had the convenience, though his duty: The Lord knows he
had not the convenience, nor the heart, so to improve and keep his own
vineyard, while he had been looking after, or keeping others vineyard: Thou
did therefore all along (while he was abroad) give sweet opportunities, and
precious seasons, (while he was abroad, of seeking thy face, and studying his
Souls good concerning Eternity, and the Eternnal pleasure of thy holy will: And
he blesses thy name, that thou have been pleased to open to him, both the
Scripture and his understanding; and so to answer the one by the other, as that
he is (through the grace of God) comfortably persuaded, that his eternal estate
is out of hazard. But O Lord, thou have been pleased, all the while that his
condition has been doubtful, to make his Comforts to his poor soul doubtful
also; sometimes fear, and sometimes hope, have been mixed: Again, and again
wanting those Consolations that might support his soul to such an issue. But
blessed be thy glorious Name, the great God of Heaven and Earth, he has been
pleased to bear him witness to himself, to Angels, and to all that hear me this
day, this very day, thy poor Servant that now stands to suffer, had joy and
much Consolation from God, and from his Cause, more than ever he had before: I
say again, to the praise of the Free Grace of God, I bless his Name, he has
engaged me in a Cause not to be repented of; I say, in a Cause not to be
repented of --

Here the Sheriff interrupted him, saying, Is this your Prayers Mr. Scot?
desiring him to forbear those kind of Expressions, Others also told him, that
he contradicted himself, and spoke Blasphemy.

Then Mr. Scot said, I shall say no more but this; The Lord I do acknowledge,
that this very morning in the Dark Chamber, I had very much of the presence of
God; and from thence I take Consolation to my self, that his Spirit is with me,
and that he has sealed unto my soul the Decrees of Heaven, at least persuaded
my soul, that it will be well with me, and that I am out of all danger as to my
Eternal Condition; and that I shall live and reign with him there, where all
sin shall be done away, which is the growing glory of my soul, and all tears
wipt away also; In the mean time I pray thee O Lord, that thou would
remember England, and remember thy Cause in England; and remember me with the
joys of thy Salvation in the instant of my departure; O Lord, it is an narrow
entrance, it is a strait passage, it is an entrance into Eternity. O Lord thou
have once to day showed me something beyond it, something of the glory of God;
I pray thee forsake me not while I am here and sensible, or afterward in the
passage of my soul; to thee I leave it, and to thy Providence, and do
acknowledge thy goodness to my soul, in fitting me to receive that good which
thou in thy infinite pleasure, do think fit for me; And therefore O Lord,
into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Lord I desire to have some more testimony
of thy Love, if it be thy blessed will: It is enough that I live upon what I
had to day; but if it be agreeable to thy holy will, I would honor and
eternally bless thee, if thou would be pleased to shine upon me, with some
more particular immediate discoveries of thy presence; but not my will but thy
will be done. The Lord be pleased to settle the Nation in peace, and in the
power and purity of Religion, and thy Ordinances in purity: And Lord, for thy
Son, that is the darling of thy Soul; Be thou pleased to give him a glorious
entertainment in the world; and let the Kingdoms of the world, become the
Kingdoms of Jesus Christ. Lord thou have a Cause in the world, dear unto thee,
I pray thee own it; though it may not be owned in all places, and by all
persons, yet Religion is the Interest of them all. O Lord Remember the price of
Blood, that has been shed for the purchasing of the Civil and Christian
Liberties. And remember thy Enemies, that are not incorrigible Enemies to thy
Truth and Holiness; and give them understanding to see their Error, and to turn
to thee; a heart broken, and with humiliation, that they may seek God with
their whole heart; that they may be a Holy or Immanuel Nation, A Chosen
Generation, A peculiar People, zealous of good Works, careful to show forth the
virtue of him that has Called them from Death to Life. The Lord call in all
that belong to the Election of Grace speedily, into that Number; Let no Weapon
formed against thy Church prosper; But Lord Remember Zion, if it be thy good
pleasure, and repair the Walls of thy Jerusalem. O Lord, thy CAUSE lies near
the hearts of thy People; And I bear thee Witness, that I have this Income from
thee, as the Return of their Prayers; And that we are Supported to bear Witness
for thee very cheerfully and with satisfaction. I desire to be found of thee in
Jesus Christ: I do now abhor all my sins, and renounce my Services; and do
account them all as dung. Lord thou know, I have desired to live, that I
might serve thee better, and love thee more; but that I may be with thy self,
Oh it is infinitely better; and to confirm that Testimony that is concerning
thy glorious Will; And thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven, by me and
all thine, from henceforth, and for evermore, Amen.

Some Memorable Passages of Col. Adrian Scroope, after his Condemnation, and in
his Imprisonment at Newgate, which (though they are but few) may discover the
excellent christian frame of his heart, and how he was born up under so great
Sufferings.
AFter his Condemnation, one of his Children hanging upon him, and weeping over
him, he said, Peace, Child, peace, be still, not a word; thou have a blessed
Portion: Who would be troubled to dye? for can any one have greater honor,
than to have his Soul carried up to Heaven, upon the wings of the Prayers of so
many Saints?

When the Jailer called him, and Mr. Scot, Mr. Jones, and Mr. Clement, to go to
the Dungeon, saying Gentlemen, you must got to the Room where Mr. Harrison was.
Says Colonel Scroop, Must we all go? He repleyed, Yes. At which, laying his
hand on his breast, and elevating his eyes, with a serious countenance, said,
Blessed be God that we are not parted.

As he sat at Dinner he spoke to a Minister that was with them saying. I would
speak it for glory of God's Free Grace, and and comfort of you all, That my
sins are all pardoned; not one and in the strength of this, will I go to Heaven.

Speaking to some Friends that came to visit him, said, I desire all the People
of God, to look at the Lords hand in this Dispensation, and own his
Soveraignity; speak well, of him, whatever he does; lie at his feet with their
mouths in the dust; and live more in love and unity one with another.

A tall Gentleman coming into the Dungeon to see Col. Scroop, the night before
he dyed, said to him, Uncle, I am sorry to see you in this condition, and would
desire you to repent of the Fact, for which you are brought hither, and stand
to the Kings mercy; and more words so the same effect. Whereupon Col. Scroop
put forth his hand, and thrust him from him, using these words, AVOID SATAN.

When the time approached for his Execution, Mr. Scot and Mr. Clement were
first carried away in the Sleds, and the same Sleds was afterward to come and
carry Col. Scroop, and Col. Jones; during that time, says Col. Scroop, Well
Brother Jones, do you spend your time as the Lord shall direct you, I intend to
take a little steep, for I slept not well the last night; and my Countenance is
not so fresh as I would have it. Thereupon he laid him down, and slept so
soundly, that he snored very loud, and so continued until the Sled came for
him: whereupon, being awakened, he rises up; and a Friend taking him in his
Arms, asked him how he did? he answers, Very well, I thank God, never better in
all my life.

And now, says he, will I wash mine hands in Innocence, So will I compass
thine Altar, O Lord: And so with great cheerfulness went to Execution.

Colonel Adrian Scroop, and Colonel John Jones (two comely ancient Gentlemen)
were both drawn upon that Sled which carried Mr. Scot; and being come to
Charing-Crosse, the place of Execution, Col. Scroop was first brought up to the
Ladder, where he spoke as follows.

Col. Scroop's Speech at Execution, October. 17. 1660.
YOu see an Object here, that has been in a better place; but howsoever the
Lord Jesus Christ has sent me to this place, that in this place I should die.
I have no Animosity nor Malice against any man, nor ever had I; neither have I
any evil will to those that brought me hither, nor to the Jury that found me
guilty, nor Judges that passed Sentence; nor to him through whose means I was
brought here to suffer. I say, once more, the Lord forgive him, I shall not
name him; for I come not hither to reflect upon any man's person.

I will not tell you what my Breeding has been, because it is not good for any
man (especially at such a time as this) to boast of his Lineage or Breeding; But
this I shall say, that I was born and bred a Gentleman.

As for my Carriage, it may be some that looks upon me here, knows what it has
been: Howsoever the Lord knows all, and the Lord God is Judge of all, and he
will judge; I shall submit my self to his Judgment, which is a Righteous
Judgment. The judgment of men may go wrong, but Gods Judgment is right, I
shall submit to his way, The Lord he is the Rock of Ages, and my Support under
this great Weight that is now upon me: I look up to him alone, the Lord Jesus
Christ is my Savior and my Redeemer; I am going into his Arms, blessed be his
Name: I follow him, he is gone before me the same way: Therefore it is no
reproach or shame to follow the Lord Jesus Christ, to die in his Cause; for
that is it which I judge I am now going to do.

That which I do desire of you (here are a great many Spectators both on the
right hand and on the left) is, That this day may represent to you, the general
Day of the Judgment of Christ, where you must appear, and there every man must
receive according to their works: And at that time it will be known; I say, at
that time it will be known and seen, whose works are righteous, and whose are
not: Therefore I would wish you, and desire you, to judge charitably of me.

Col. Scroop having given a brief account of himself to the People, his last
work was, to give up himself to God in Prayer, as follovveth.
O Lord, thou art my Father, a present help in trouble; Thou art my Father, I
believe in Thee: I come unto thee, Lord Jesus, that went unto thy Father, and
my Father, thy God and my God; and this is that which does support my spirit,
and enable me to undergo this Death with cheerfulness and readiness. Lord, thou
know my heart and affections, and my desires, Oh deal not with me according
to my sins, I am a miserable wretched sinner; If thou enter into Judgment, who
is able to stand before thee? but there is forgiveness with thee, that thou
may be feared. O Lord let it be known and seen, that there has not been any
heart in me, to do any thing with Malice or Revenge, or that might show any
Revenge: If there be any Revenge on the other side, the Lord lay it not to
their charge. The Lord bless those in Authority, the Lord bless his Majesty
that he may reign prosperously, and that he may receive a blessing from the
hand of the Lord. O Lord, thou see my failings, my infirmities and
weaknesses: O Lord, I beseech thee that thou would bear with me, thou art a
tenderhearted Father; Thou art my strength: When my heart and my strength
fails, then thou art the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. O
Lord be with me in this hour of Temptation, and carry me through it; for thou
art my God and my Father, into whose hands I commend my spirit, for thou have
redeemed me.

The Copy of a Letter sent from Col. John Jones, when Prisoner in the Tovver of
London, to a Relation.
I Am very much grieved, to find (by the Note I received from you) such dark
and sad Apprehensions upon your Spirit concerning me: We are in the hands of
the Lord, and what he has appointed for us, will be our portion, and no man
can frustrate his holy purpose concerning us; which I question not will be
found to be in love, what ever appearance it may have to men. My Advice is to
you and all that love me, That (in case I be removed from you) you do not,
neither in reallity, nor outward garb, mourn for me; but rather rejoice, that
my Portion is in Heaven; and that my Dissolution or Removal out of this earthly
Tabernacle, is but in order to my Clothing with Immortality, and possessing my
Eternal Mansion; and to my being for ever with Christ, to behold his glory; And
therefore that you do not behave your self, as those that have no hopes but of
this life.

Secondly, That you take off your mind from me, and fix it unmovably upon your
eternal Relation, the Lord Jesus Christ; in whose glorious and blessed
presence, we shall meet ere long, to our Eternal Rejoicing; It is the goodness
of the Lord to us, to remove all Creature Comforts from us, that our Souls
might have no resting place to delight in, or to promise them safety; until we
return to the Ark of his Testimony, the bosom of his love manifested and
exhibited for us, in our blessed Lord Jesus Christ. I write in have, therefore
excuse my abruptness.

Thine in Sincere Love, JOHN JONES.
Tower, Sept. 19. 1660. Let the First and last Verses of Psalm 27. be
constantly fixed upon thy mind.

Ver. 1. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is
the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?

Verse. 14. Wait on the Lord, be of good, courage, and he shall strengthen thy
heart; wait I say on the Lord.



Some few living Sentences, that fell from a Dying Man, Col. Joh. Jones, when
he was in his Chains in Newgate.
OBserving one of Col. Scroopes children weeping, he takes her by the hand,
saying to her, You are weeping for your Father, but suppose your Father were to
morrow to be King of France, and you were to tarry a little behind, would you
weep so? why he is going to reign with the King of Kings, in everlasting Glory.

Speaking to a Friend, that was to have accompanied him into Ireland, Ah! dear
heart (says he) thee and I were in that storm together, going to Ireland, and
if we had gone this journey then, we had been in Heaven to have welcomed honest
Harrison and Carew; but we will be content to go after them, we will go after.

Speaking of those that were gone beyond the Seas, (O dear hearts, says he) in
what a sad condition are our dear Friends beyond Sea, where they may be hunted
from place to place, and never be in safety, nor hear the voice of the Turtle;
how much have we gotten the start of them, for we are at a point, and are now
going to Heaven?

Speaking of the Sled in which he was to be carried to Execution; it is (said
he) like Elija's Fiery Chariot, only it goes through Fleetstreet.

The time of his departure being come, this Aged Gentleman, was drawn in one
Sled, with his Aged Companion, Col. Scroop, whose grave and graceful
Countenances, accompanied with courage and cheerfulness, caused great
Admiration and Compassion in the Spectators, as they passed along the Streets,
to Charing-Crosse, the place of their Execution; And after the Executioner had
done his part upon three others that day, he was so drunk with Blood, that like
one surfeited, he grew sick at stomach: and not being able himself, he set his
Boy to finish the Tragedy upon Col. Jones; who coming up the Ladder, with the
like cheerfulness that his Brethren did before him; and being placed fit for
Execution, he proceeds to speak as follows.

Col. Joh. Jones his Speech upon the Ladder, Oct. 17. 1660.
THere is two things that are necessary, now I am going through this narrow
gate or passage, to the Eternal Majesty; I say two things are necessary, as to
the occasion of my coming hither, to receive my Fathers good pleasure.

First, Peace with God. Secondly, Peace with Man.

I shall speak something to each of these; and in the first place, speak
something of the Court wherein I received the Sentence; It has been reported,
as I was told, that I confessed this Fact, and confessed that I were guilty of
Murder, as under those several expressions that are in the Indictment, Viz. --

I desire to clear my self before the Lord, and before the world, in that
particular; for should I grant that I was guilty in reallity and truth of
Murder and Malice, (Viz.) --

I should belie my own Conscience, and draw upon me a greater weight than I
could bear; But this far I do confess, I was willing to make the work as short
as I could, And because I would not stand so long, I told them I would take the
first Jury that came; And when a Jury was called, then I did confess so much as
I was convinced of, as to the matter of Fact, I desire you will judge
charitably of this that I speak at this time, as in the presence of the Lord,
that it is not so really ( viz. that I acknowledged my self guilty of Murder) I
had no such thing in my heart.

I must confess I very freely quit his Majesty, considering what he does in
this case is the part of a loving Son to a Father, especially the Judges
telling him that it is the Law; and I conceive that the Court did nothing, but
what they to their best understandings, judged right as to Law; Therefore I
freely acquit the Court, though there was not enough said, to satisfy such a
poor Creature as I am, in so great and deep a point as that was: As for all
others, I do not know any man on the Earth, to whom I do bear any Malice, but I
am in perfect charity with all men; and I hope the Lord is in charity with me:
And therefore as I desire to have forgiveness my self from all those that I
have offended, even so, I do freely forgive all those that have in any measure
offended me.

The next thing is toward God, and it is that which should be last upon my
heart, It is not expected that I should give an Account here of my state and
condition, for that is betwixt God and my own soul; And I do, through the Grace
and Goodness of God, firmly believe, that my Redemption is wrought, and my
Pardon is sealed, and that I shall be immediately in my Fathers arms, and that
I shall be translated and brought to behold the Lord Jesus Christ in glory,
with comfort and fullness of joy.

Col. JONES his Prayer,
BLessed Lord God, Thou art the great Opener, open unto my soul the Lord Jesus
Christ, who will lead me into the ways of truth and life; O God save me, make
good all the pledges of thy love unto my soul; Oh make all the Promises which I
have believed all the days of my life, make them now good unto my soul, giving
me the full enjoyment of thy self: I desire to bless and praise thy Name for
this hour that thou have brought me to, Oh, what am I poor worm, that thou
should give me this opportunity to suffer for thy Name, and to acknowledge thy
Mercies before so great a Congregation at this place. Holy Father, Holy Father,
Oh that thou would now rain down Blessings from Heaven upon thy poor
creatures, that do hear and behold this Action, this day; Oh that thou would
sanctify this thing to them, and let poor England be a Land of truth and
happiness, O Lord let England flourish: And oh that thou would make thy
Angel of Light to go before thy people: Good God we pray thee keep off those
great Judgments that hang over the heads of these Nations, because they have
sinned against thee: Through thy Name sanctify us, let not thy Name be
reproached. Dear Father, receive my soul, I am ready to come unto thee: Blessed
Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit: thou have redeemed me, blessed be
thy Name, in that thou have opened the treasures of thy love unto my poor soul.
Thou have given me this hope, whereof I need not be ashamed. Blessed be thy
Name, my Spirit is full of joy. Oh Holy Father, holy Father, I pray thee let
thy blessing come down upon thy poor people. Look upon me, Holy Father: Stretch
out thine arms to carries me over this brook. I pray thee stand by me, Dear
Father, I cast my self into thy hand, I commit my soul unto thee.

Then speaking to the Sheriff, said, Mr. Sheriff, I must needs return you many
Thanks for your Civility.

Sher. Repl. I am glad to hear such an Ingenuous Confession, and that you make
such an end, and that you have not gone into any reviling language, as some
others have done before.

After this he committed his soul to God, and so departed.

Something as to Mr. Gregory Clements, take as follows.
PErhaps some may think it strange, that there is so little said, as to Mr.
Gregory Clement, who suffered with the rest; Therefore this only is to be sa^
more, (which is known to many) That Mr. Clement was very silent both in the
time of his Imprisonment at Newgate, and at the time and place of his Execution
at Charing Cross, only this it is said, that he expressed his trouble, (to some
Friends in the Prison) for yielding so far to the Importunity of his Relations,
as to plead guilty to the Indictment: And though he spoke little at the place
of Execution; yet (so far as could be judged by some descerning persons that
was near him) he departed this life in peace.

Some Additional Passages of Col. Scroopes, Col. Jones, and Mr. Cooks; with his
Letter to his Daughter.
Some more Passages of Col. Scroope.
COl. Scroope, when a Friend asked him at parting, the same day, how he did,
answered him, Better and better I thank God every moment, my life doubles upon
me, and multiplies.

He also heard him say, when mention was made, that there was some Endeavors
for his Pardon, That only would prove a snare to him, but he was fully
satisfied what to do, and should not to save his Life, do any thing to
prejudice his Conscience.

He also heard him when one was discoursing to him the Happiness of Heaven, and
telling him it consisted in three Things, viz. A perfect Communion with God; A
perfect Conformty to God; And a perfect Enjoyment of God. He made this reply,
Those three Things you mention are but one, we are entering into it, and can
tell. And that Friend asking him futher about it, he said, That God was but one
pure Act, and in whom there was no succession nor distinction of Acts; and that
Souls led forth in his Spirit, were in a manner made like to him; for their
Enjoying was their Conformity and Communion, and one was all: In which he
seemed to be swallowed up, and even then gat so far into Heaven, that all
seemed to be but one Act with him.

Some Friends being present, heard both him and Col. Jones say; You can say,
God is better than all the World, and say it truly; but you cannot say it with
so much feeling and experience, as we now can: we find he is so indeed.

Some more Passages of Col. Joh. Jones in Prison.
COL. Jones, the night before he suffered, told a Friend he had no other
Temptation upon him but this, Lest he should be too much transported and
carried out to neglect and slight his Life; so greatly was he satisfied to die
in that Cause.

The day he suffered, he grasped a Friend in his arms, and said to him with
some expressions of Endearedness, Farewell: I could wish thee in the same
condition with my self, that thou might share with me in my joys.

Some more Passages of Mr Cook.
MR Cook speaking to his Wife a little before his Death, said, My Lamb, now I
am going where I shall meet the Saints all of one mind, which thou know was
the desire of my heart to see. At another time, says he, Truly, my Lamb, if I
might have my choice now, I would not desire Life; for I could not live where I
might not enjoy the Liberty of my Conscience: and when I can do nothing for
God, what should I live for? O welcome sweet Death! thy sting is out, blessed
be God, I do embrace thee with rejoicing: thou art a good Potter, that will
suddenly open to me the Gates of Eternity; O those Everlasting Gates will my
Father set open to receive me. O blessed be God for Jesus Christ the fountain
of all Mercies! Lord Jesus, I come flying to thee upon the wings of Faith; I
come, Lord, full-sail to thee, Lord Jesus receive me. That which the world
counts shame, says he, I count it my Joy, my Crown, and my Glory.

A little before he parted with his Wife, she laying her head in his bosom and
wept; whereat he said, My dear Lamb, let us not part in a shower, God has
wiped away all tears from my eyes, blessed be the Lord.

Mr. Cook's Letter to his Daughter, October. 15. 1660. A little before his Death.
To my dear Child, Free-love Cook: These, with my most Fatherly endeared Love.
My dear sweet Child,
LEt thy Name, Free-love, put thee in mind of the free Love of God in Christ,
in giving thee to me and thy dear Mother; and know, so soon as God gives thee
any understanding, That thou art the Child of one whom God counted worthy to
suffer for his sake, and to seal to the Truth of his Law and Gospel with his
Blood, which will be a great Honor to thee in the judgment of all that truly
love and fear God. I leave thee to the Lord, who I know will take care of thee,
and be thy Portion, so thou shall never want. Learn with all speed to read the
Scriptures, and to understand them; and have a great care to serve God, and
study to love Jesus Christ, and be obedient to thy dear Mother, and good
Grandmother, and thy loving Uncle and Aunt Massey. I pray thee never learn any
Pride, but be humble and meek, and courteous, and wait upon Gods Ordinances:
love the Word more than thy appointed food. When the Lord shall please to alter
thy Condition, be sure to marry one that is gracious, and a man that fears
God; be sure to prefer Grace before Wealth and Parts: for a little with the
fear of God, is better than great Riches with an Ungodly man: The Lord make
thee Religious; for Beauty is Vanity, and Favor is deceitful, but a Woman that
fears the Lord she shall be praised. If the Lord give thee Children, be sure
to bring them up virtuously and religiously, in the Nurture, Admonition and
Fear of the Lord. I charge thee never to marry without the Consent of thy dear
Mother, if she be then living. In all thy Actions have an eye to Eternity, and
never do any thing against the Light of thy own Conscience. Know that thy dear
Father is gone to Heaven to thy dear Brother, -- and be sure so to live, that
by Gods Grace thou may follow after. If God give the ability, I charge thee
to do good to thy Friends, and to all Gods People: And if my last Will may be
of force, do not violate it in the least. So I leave Gods Blessing with thee,
praying for thy Temporal and Eternal Happiness, and rest,

Thy dear loving Father, JOHN COOK.
October. 15, 1660.
(...) Some occasional Speeches, and Memorable passages of Col. Axtell and
Col. Hacker, during their Imprisonment, and at their Execution.
BEing asked by some Friends how he found himself sitted to Encounter with
Death.

He Answered, I can say nothing until I come to dye, I dare not boast till I
put of my Armor, but desire your prayers until there be no more need of them.

Returning from his Trial at the Court to his Prison with a cheerful
countenance, and his Wife coming to him full of Trouble, he said, not a Tear
Wife, what hurt have they done me, to send me sooner to Heaven; And I bless
the Lord I could have freely gone from the Bar to the Gibbet. They had nothing
against me neither by Gods law nor their own low to condemn me, was it ever
known that a man should dye for such Words, and further said, though men had
Judged yet God had not Condemned.

Some taking notice of his course lodging, he said what matter is it to have a
little durty way, when we have a fair House to come into.

Then looking upon Friends about him said, if the sight of so few of Gods
people be so comfortable, what will it be to enjoy all the Saints in Heaven
together.

Toward the close of that Evening he went to prayer (diverse being present who
admired the blessed frame of spirit that he was in) admiring God in all his
appearances for his poor people, he laid all his comfort in the blood of a
crucified Christ, and upon the Covenant of Free Grace; he did heartily desire
pardon for all his Judges, Jury and those witnesses that had sworn falsely
against him.

Returning again from the Court when he had received his sentence, he came into
the prison very cheerfully with a Bible in his hand, saying, I shall have the
use of this book two days more, and then enjoy the fullness of the Gospel to
all Etetnity.

His Daughter coming in to him, he said where have thou been all this while, I
thought thou had been ashamed of my Chains? but they that will not bear the
Cross, shall not wear the Crown.

A Gentleman coming to visit him, said, shall I petition for your life? Col.
Axtel replied, Sir you offer me to my loss.

The Gentleman told him he was going for Ireland, Col. Axtell said Sir pray
remember my love to all Christian friends there, and tell them (said he,
shaking of his Chains rejoycingly) that you saw me in my chains; and I recon
all these links as so many Pearls to Adorn me, and am sure they are so in
Christ's account; and tell them that for that Good Old Cause which we were
engaged in, under the Parliament, I am now going to be their Martyr. And as for
the King, I wish him as well as my own soul. But they have merely murdered
me, and they might as well have done it at the Tower, as have brought me hither
to make this bussle; I wish my blood do not cry to the third and fourth
Generation. But I shall do them more hurt in my death, then I could do in my
life. They had nothing in Gods law nor their own to condemn me, the Court
condoled me, but it was enough my name was Axtell, I wish that I may see them
all in Heaven.

A Friend going into Gloucestershire, said to him, Sir what message will you
now send to the good people in the Country.

Col. Axtell Answered Remember my dear love to them all, and tell them that
their prayers are Answered. Bid them keep close to Christ, and let them not
touch with Surplis or Common prayer book; and bid them (what ever they do)
love the image of Christ where ever they see it, in Presbyterian, Independent,
Baptized or other; And take heed of striking in with any thing, that will
strike out any of the Offices of Jesus Christ.

Four of his fellow prisoners passed by his Chamber door, as they were going
forth to Execution, and being denied sight of them, he called them by their
Names, and with a mighty fervent spirit said, the Lord go with you, the Angel
of his presence stand by you (and then turning about to his Friends said) Oh
they are gone to Heaven before me, but we will give them up to the Lord, and so
went to prayer and presently after he went to prayer again, saying, God has
said that he will make us joyful in the house of Prayer: and many observed
that he did perform the duty of prayer Five times that day himself, wherein he
laid himself very low before the Lord, acknowledging himself the worst of all
the prisoners, and that he should have the least to say for God, and would say
to his Friends, say nothing of me tell you see me on the upermost round of the
Ladder.

His Daughter coming in he told her that he had left Jesus Christ an Executor
in trust for her.

Having given an Account to some persons for their satisfaction about his
proceedings against the Rebels in Ireland, said, I can say in Humility, that
God did use me as an instrument in my place, for the suppressing of that boudy
Enemy, and when I considered their bloody cruelty in murdering so many
thousands of protestants and innocent souls, that word was much upon my heart,
give her blood to drink for she is worthy; and sometimes we neither gave nor
took Quarter, though self preservation would have said, give that which you may
expect to have.

One coming in told him that his fellow prisoners dyed Nobly and Cheerfully,
(well said he, but how do they stand?) Answer was made upon a Ladder. Blessed
be God said he, it is a Jacobs Ladder.

The Sun shining into the room, he said, if it be so glorious to behold the
Sun, what will it be to behold the Son of Glory.

Laying his hand upon (his fellow prisoner) Col. Hacker, he said, come brother
be not so sad, by this time to morrow we shall be with our Father in Glory, and
what hurt will they do us to bring us through the Cross to the Crown. Well,
our God is the God of Newgate.

Then the Officer coming to carry them down into the Dungeon, he took his leave
of many of his Friends then present, saying love the Lord Jesus, love the Lord,
and weep not for me, for God has wiped away all tears.

And coming to the door of the Dungeon said, I am now going to my bed of Roses
my last bed.

Many Friends being with him, there was an Eminent Godly Minister of the
Presbyterian way; and Col. Axtell taking him by the hand, said, I have one word
to speak to you, it is much upon my heart, that one great cause why the Lord
contends thus with his people, is for want of their love toward them that were
not of their minds; to which the Minister replied, truly Sir I think so too,
the Lord help us that wherein we see we have done amiss, we may do so no more.
Then said,

Col. Axtell, I bless God I have not much to charge my self with in this
matter.

Col. Hacker then said, but I have much to complain of in that matter.

Col. Axtell, Afterward sitting on his bed side clapping his hands, said, if I
had a thousand lives, I could lay them all down for the Cause.

Whereupon another godly Minister then present asked him what he meant by the
cause.

Col. Axtell replied, Sir I tell you I mean that cause which we were encouraged
to, and engaged in under the Parliament, which was for common Right and
Freedom and against the Surplis and Common prayer book; and I tell you, that
Surplis and Common prayer book shall not stand long in England for it is not of
God.

And afterward thinking that he should not dye that day, desired some
retirement, but news coming that he must dye within an hour (though it was not
so) he quickly made himself ready to go, and looking upon his Gloves, said,
these are my wedding Gloves, my mortal must marry immortality.

Some Friends going to see him the night before he was Executed found him at
supper very cheerful, and many being present, he said take heed of temporizing,
etc. for that has been the occasion of great Evil. Then speaking to an Officer
there present, that had continued tell of late in the Army, said, Brother thou
have been greatly Guilty herein, the Lord forgive thee, thou have a great hand
in this.

To which the person replied, I confess I have been so too much.

Col. Axtell answered, there is yet mercy for thee if the Lord give thee
repentance.

Moreover said, the Lord forgive that poor wretch Lieut. C. N. for he has
sworn falsely in his Evidence; and now is that word made good, that brother
shall betray brother to death.

And speaking of Col. T. said, Ah he has appeared Five pound lighter in Twenty
then I thought him to be.

And for Col. H. he was the uncivillest of all about the late King, and yet he
comes in a witness against Hacker and me.

That Evening many Friends being with him, he prayed with them, and in that
duty the Lord by his spirit filled him with Excellent Expressions, to the great
refreshing of those about him. And bewailing the great Divisions amongst Gods
people, he said, Lord if they will not live together in love, thou will make
them lie together in sufferings. Then minding their present condition, said,
Lord Death is the King of Terrors to Nature, but it is a believers choice
Friend, it is thy high way to lead us into Glory.

After prayer taking notice of his Daughter, he said to her, get an interest in
Christ and keep close to him, he will be a better Father to thee then I, and so
took his leave of her.

The day of their Execution being come, several godly Ministers spent some time
with them in prayer, Viz. with Col. Axtell and Col. Hacker, and many friends
coming in to pay their last respects, Col. Axtell seeing one of his Familiar
Friends and companions, said, my Dear brother thou art better then I am, and
yet I must go to heaven before thee for all that.

He very cheerfully said to diverse then with him, dear Friends Rejoice, I am
going where ye shall be also, yea where we shall be for ever with the Lord and
never part, and be without any more change; I beseech you follow the Lamb
wherever he goes, though he may lead you in a harsh, dismal and difficult way;
yet at last he will bring you into a pleasant path, and cause you to lie down
in green pastures, in the land of rest, Oh be faithful unto the death, and he
will give you a Crown of life, as he has given to your suffering Brethren.

Oh! all that we have, or do suffer, is but to make Christ and heaven more
sweet, dear and Glorious to us; all the sad steps we shall tread on this
Ladder, is but to mount us to heaven, for at the top are Angels ready to
receive us, as was on Jacobs ladder. All the things I meet with move me not I
bless my God, for I am sure to Fight a good Fight and finish my course with
joy.

Afterward taking his leave of his Son, embracing him in his Arms, he said, my
dear son fare thee well, I must leave thee, get an interest in Christ and love
him, nothing else will stand thee in stead but an interest in him.

Then calling for his Bible he hugged it, saying, this has the whole Cause in
it, and I may carry this without offense. And calling to a Friend he desired
him to remember his love to the Congregation, where he was a Member, and after
took his leave of all his Friends, exhorting them with much cheerfulness to
love the Lord Jesus Christ, and keep close to him, and so with great joy
addressed himself to go to his next work

It will be convenient in this place to give you a brief account of Col.
Francis Hacker, in regard that Col. Axtell and he were fellow prisoners and
sufferers together. He was a man of few words, and had not the gift of oratory,
to deliver himself as others could, yet was very sweetly born up under his
suffering, and had a very comfortable assurance that God had pardoned and
accepted him in the blood of Christ; he had been a professor of Religion many
years in the Presbyterian way, and a great lover of godly Ministers; a man of
just and honest conversation amongst men, and one that desired to walk
blameless in the sight of God; his fellow prisoner did say he did believe that
Col. Hacker had an interest in Jesus Christ.

Col. Hacker declared to several of his own friends, a little before he
suffered, that the greatest trouble he had upon his spirit was, that he had
formerly born too great a prejudice in his heart toward the good people of God
that differed from him in judgment. And then broke forth into this admiration*
O what am I poor vile worm, that God should count me worthy to suffer with
such precious souls as these are, against whom I have been formerly so much
prejudiced.

And thus these two gracious persons having finished their course, and the time
of their departure being at hand, were both brought forth of prison, the sledge
being ready for them, they took their leave of some friends that stood at the
door, and Col. Axtell desired them to be at the place of execution; and both
entering the sledge they cast up their eyes toward that God to whom they were
coming; then with a cheerful countenance, setting themselves down, they were
drawn to Tyburne, the place of execution, where a cart was set ready, into
which they both ascended, their countenance not at all changed, though now the
King of terror stared them in the face; the Ropes being then put about their
necks, and a burning fire kindled before their faces; and being there ready to
receive that sentence which nature would have sunk under, if grace had not
supported, first Col. Axtel applies himself to the Sheriff in these following
words:

Col. Axtels speech at Tyburne, October. 19. 1660.
Mr. Shieriffe, I am now as you see come to the place of execution, according
to my sentence. I desire your leave that I may speak freely and without
interruption; first to this people, and then to God, for it is the last that I
shall speak in this world, and I hope it will redowne to your account.

Mr. Shieriffs reply. Sir, you know what the Court prohibited you to speak and
what was spoken at the bar of the Court was there desided, therefore it is
needless to repeat it here. I hope you will keep to the present business that
concerns you, and not go out into impertinences; and because you have but a
little time spend it to your best advantage, and the good of the people, and
then you shall not be interrupted. Or to the same effect.

Col Axtel begins. I say the very cause for which I have engaged is contained
in this book of God, (having the Bible in his hand) both in the civil and
religious rights of it, which I leave to you (giving the book to Mr. Knowles.)

You see a dead man living, and yet I hope I shall live to all eternity,
through the mediation of Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the covenant of free
grace,

I must truly tell you, that before (...) late wars, it pleased the Lord to
call me by his grace, through the work of the Ministry; and afterward keeping
a day of humiliation in fasting and prayer, with Mr. Simeon Ash, Mr. Love, Mr.
Woodcocke, and other Ministers, in Laurence-lane they did so clearly state the
cause of the Parliament, that I was fully convinced in my own conscience of the
justness of the war, and thereupon engaged in the Parliament service, (which
as I did and do believe) was the cause of the Lord, I ventured my life freely
for it, and now die for it.

Then Mr. Shieriffe said to this purpose, Sir, remember your self.

Col. Axtell proceeds, And after the work of the Lord was done in England, my
lot cast me in the service of Ireland, and I thank the Lord I was serviceable
to the English Nation in that Country, and have discharged my duty fully
according to the trust committed to me there.

As for the Fact for which I now suffer, it is for words, only for words, and
but for words, and the sentence is already reversed in my own conscience, and
it will be reversed by Jesus Christ by and by, I pray God from the very bottom
of my soul to forgive all that have had any hand in my death, both Witnesses
and Jury, and the Court that passed sentence; for considering the Doctrine of
our Lord Jesus Christ, as he has laid it down, Matthew. 5.44. It has been said
of old time, love your Neighbors and hate your Enemies, But I say unto you
love your Enemies, and pray for them that hate and despitefully use you, that
you may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven.

I desire according to this Doctrine from the bottom of my heart that God
would give them true repentance, and not lay their sin to their charge, nor my
blood which by Gods law and man's, (I think) could not justly have been brought
here to suffer. But I bless God I have some comfortable assurance, that I
shall be embraced in the Arms of Christ, and have cause to hope that his spirit
shall carry my soul into the Fathers hands.

And if the Glory of this Sunshine be so great (the Sun then shining bright)
how much more is the glory of the Son of God, who is the Son of
righteousnessse.

I think it convenient to give you some Account of my Faith.

I believe all things written in the Old and New Testament, as the principles
and doctrine of a believers Faith, I believe the blessed Ordinances of Christ,
that it is our duty to hear the word preached, to seek unto God in prayer, and
to perform Family duties, and to walk in the Communion of Saints; and for my
own part, I am a Member of a Congregation, which I judge to be the way of
Christ, (and were it for that only I were to dye, I could witness to it) which
is a company of men born again by his grace, that walk in the ways of Christ
blameless and harmless. I believe Jesus Christ dyed for poor sinners, of whom
I am chief, as the Apostle Paul says, this is a faithfully saying, and worthy
of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of
whom I am chief. And if the Apostle might say so, much more may I.

My friends and Countrymen, I have reason to bewail my own unprofitable life,
having been very unfruitful unto the people of the Lord, the Lord knows I have
much fault upon my heart; were it not for the blood of Christ that cleanses
and washes me, according to his promise, saying, I loved you, and washed away
your sins in own blood. For there is no remission of sins without the blood of
Christ. I desire you all to loath and cast off sin; it were better to suffer
then to sin, it is beter to die then to sin; nothing could grive our
Savior but sin, and therefore have a care of that you and I must meet one
day at the bar of Christ and the Son of God shall be our Judge, for God has
committed all judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the Son as they
honor the Father. This day is a resemblance of that day, therefore be serious
beg as much good to your immortal souls as I expect to enjoy by and by. I
beseech you beg of God that he would save your souls, and omit no opportunity
through the strength of the Lord to believe, and put your trust in the Lord
Jesus Christ; be sure to labor after assurance of your interest in him, or
else you will be of all men most miserable; for I of all men were most miserable
if I had not believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living.

Blessed be the Lord that brings me into this state, let the way or means be
what it will; it is Gods sovereignty who made these creatures so to dispose of
them how he pleases and God has ordained this death for me, from all
eternity. The Lord Christ often prayed thy will be done, this is the Lords will.
He has numbered my days, and my times are in his hand. Many seek the Rulers
favor, but every ons judgment is from the Lord. When Pilat said unto Christ,
Know thou not that I have power to crucify thee, Christ answered him, thou
could have no power against me, except it were given thee from above.
Therefore I acknowledge the righteous hand of God, he is righteous but I am
sinful, Therefore will I bear Gods indignation, because I have sinned against
him.

It is said of Jesus Christ, that for the joy set before him he endured the
cross, and despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of God, where
I hope to see him by and by, in glory and Majesty, and to see his Angels and
believers worshipping of him, and therefore I despise the shame. Our Savior
died upon the cross without sin, I am a sinful creature, a wretched sinner,
and shall I expect better then he that was my master? he who was holy, and
never had a sinful thought in all his life; and died not for himself, but for
us, that we might live through his death; that through his poverty we might to
made rich. And Christ having done this for his people, it should not be in
their eyes thought a despicable thing that we should suffer for him, having
been engaged in the work of God. But Christ must prevail in righteousness, and
he will prevail.

Now Mr. Sheriff, I thank you for your civillity, and for this leave.

After this Col. Hacker spoke something privately to him, whereupon Col. Axtel
said, Mr. Shieriffe, must we both die together?

Mr. Shieriffe answered, Yes.

Then Col. Hacker read a paper which he had in his hand, a copy whereof
follows:

FRiends and Countrymen, all that have known me in my best estate, have not
known me to have been a man of Oratory, and that God has not given me the gift
of utterance, as to others, therefore I have only this briefly to say unto you
that are spectators: As the Parliament stated the war, I did out of judgment
and conscience join with them, in the common cause, and have through grace been
faithful to it according to my measure. And as for that which now I am
condemned for, I do freely forgive both Judges, Jury, and Witnesses, and all
others; And I thank the Lord, to whom I am now going, at whose tribunal I must
render an account, I have nothing lies upon my conseience as guilt whereof I am
now condemned; and do not doubt but to have the sentence reverst. I do now
apply my self unto God by prayer, and do desire the hearty prayers of all
that fear God, that I may have a sweet passage from this mortal life, to that
immortal life which God has prepared for all that are in Christ Jesus.

Francis Hacker.

After the reading of this he desired that Col. Axtell would be both their
mouths to God in prayer.

And then Col. Axtell said, I desire all that fear the Lord to hear me with
patience, and to lift up their hearts to seek the Lord with me, that we may
have his strength, and the presence of his spirit from this world to
everlasting life.

And with a wonderful composed frame of spirit, and with an audible voice
entered upon the following duty, wherein the Lord helped him with excellent
expressions suitable to both their conditions.

The prayer follows.
OH! blessed Lord, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who art the
great God of heaven and earth, heaven is thy throne, and the earth thy
foolstool, thou upholdest all things with and by the word of thy power. The
issues of life and death are in thy hand, oh God. Blessed Lord, we pray thee
let us have communion with thy self, and the glory of thy face, let the
shining rays of Christ shine continually upon our souls. Lord, let there be no
interruption between the brightness of thy glory and our souls, til we come
into the fullness of the possession of it. Blessed Lord, we desire to take shame
before thee and this multitude, for all our iniquities and transgressions; we
were born and came great sinners into the world, the root of bitterness was in
us, that flowed from that bitter fountain Adam: but thou, O Lord, have been
pleased to send the second Adam, that as by the sin of one man death entered
into the world, so by the obedience and righteousness of one Jesus Christ many
should be made righteous. Blessed Lord, thou know all our original guilt,
all upon our hearts, and upon our consciences, all our personal defilements and
transgressions; we pray thee Lord, wash them all away in the blood of Jesus
Christ. Lord we have nothing of our own to rely upon, but a Christ; for all our
goodness and righteousness is but as polluted rags and menstruous clothes.
Therefore, O Lord, thou have said by the works of the Law no man shall be
justified, but by the righteousness of Christ Jesus. Therefore, oh Lord hold
out the covenant of grace to poor believers, and make Jesus Christ the Mediator
of the covenant, to perform Gods part to us, and our part toward God. Oh lord,
in thee are all our spring, thou art the fountain of all grace, let us have
mercy and pardon from thee. Lord it is by grace that any here are saved. Thou
should be a righteous God if thou should not only suffer us to lie under
the condemnation of man, but to exclude us from heaven and glory for ever.

But Lord if thou should be strict to mark iniquity, who should stand in thy
presence? but there is mercy with thee that thou may be feared. Lord thou
have said, Who is a God like unto thee, pardoning iniquity, and passing by the
transgressions of the remnant of thy people, for thine own names sake. Lord, it
is thy covenant, that thou will put thy spirit into our hearts, and erect thy
law in our inward parts, and our sins and transgressions thou will remember no
more. Blessed be the Lord for the Lord Jesus Christ: for had it not been for a
Christ we were undone forever. Blessed be our Lord, that has written our names
in heaven, and given us a portion in Christ, in whom we have believed and
trusted. We humbly beg of thee the pardon of all our personal and family guilt;
the sins of our public employments, which thou know we have not willingly
committed, though it may be through infirmity and temptation, and the sins of
our nature. Lord, we humbly pray thee, let us see our selves justified in the
blood of our Lord Jesus that we may say with the Apostle, Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods elect. It is God that justifies us, it is Christ
that died, yea rather that is risen again for our justification. He is risen
that he might be our advocate, intercessor, and mediator. He is filled with all
the fullness of the Godhead, to distribute to us according to our need. Thou
have promised by the Apostle, that God shall supply all our wants according to
the riches of his own grace. Lord thou will have the passover eaten with sour
herbs, and Lord we are contented: but Lord thou have provided sweet Wine for
us, and have thou not kept the best Wine, and the best of thy divine comforts
until now? til now? to carry us over this bridge, and passage from earth to
heaven; sanctify this our passage, for it is best to have the cross with the
crown, they go together, and are inseparable: therefore says our Lord they
that will suffer with me, shall also reign with me.

Dear Lord, we pray thee give us a full experience, and let thy holy Spirit
witness to our souls that we are the children of God, and reconciled to thee in
the covenant; and that we shall through thy Son be glorified with thee.
Strengthen our faith, that we may be purged, washed and cleansed, and for our
justification, sanctification, and acceptance with the Father.

Glorious lord, we desire to leave our requests with thee on the behalf of
this poor people, as the last request we have to beg of thee on this side
heaven; if there be any here not belonging to Christ, and not friends to him,
Lord convert them; and show them their own undone and miserable estate, and
give them the pardon of a dying Savior* (thy poor servants would not part with
a Christ for ten thousand lives.) Lord make Christ precious to their immortal
souls, Lord convince them of the evil of their sins, and the evil of their own
ways, and break them off from them; and cause them to close with Jesus Christ.
Thou have promised that those that come unto him thou will not cast off.
Remember all thy people and help them to persevere in thy grace and love, and
make them able to hold fast the truth till thou come, and to quit themselves
like men, to stand fast in the faith.

Blessed Lord, we humbly pray thee to have mercy upon that great City, the
place from whence we came. When thou resolvedst to destroy Sodom, thy servant
Abraham expostulated with thee, and thou said, if there were but ten
righteous thou would save it: but Lord there are many tens of righteous ones
in that City. It has been a place where thou have been glorified, and where
many godly Ministers have been encouraged. O Lord, let it go well therefore
with that great City, and let thy Gospel have free passage in the public
worship of it. Bless the government and governors thereof, and make them
instruments to thy glorious praise. We pray thee have respect to the chief
Magistrates that are come here by command to see execution done. Oh Lord we beg
mercy for their souls. O that Christ would evidence himself more to their
souls, and that we might meet in Heaven together, and be embraced in the arms
of our Lord Jesus Christ. And him that shall be the Executioner, and must now
wash his hands in our blood, do thou wash his soul in the blood of Jesus
Christ; O lord, we pray thee that thou would have pity upon his soul, and
let him know what it is to be washed in the blood of Christ, that fountain set
open for him, and for uncleanness.

Blessed Lord, help us thy poor creatures with strength, for we have no
strength of our own. Thy word says, that death is the King of terrors; but
blessed be thy Name, thou have taken the sting out of it, and the poison from
it; and therefore as faith the Apostle, Oh death then, where is thy sting? oh
grave, where is thy victory? Thanks be to God, through Jesus Christ, that has
given us the victory. Thou have said by the Apostle, We have the sentence of
death in our selves, and therefore should not trust in our selves, but believe
in Christ that raises the dead. Lord, we will not trust in our selves, but in
the living God -- Oh my God, that art the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and of
Jacob, strengthen and support our poor souls. Stephen when he was stoned to
death, saw the Heavens opened and the glory of the Father and of his throne;
Shall we but see the Face of Jesus Christ, bearing up our hearts under all, and
we shall go through. Thou have promised that thou will never, never, never
leave us nor forsake us. Thou have said, Who can separate us from the love of
God in Christ Jesus? Come life, come death, or what can separate a believer
from Jesus Christ, let thy Angels come down, we are persuaded that the Angels
are ready to receive our souls, and to carry them into thy bosom, and into
the company of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of the blessed Apostles and
Martyrs, and witnesses of Jesus, and just men made perfect in thy Kingdom.
Blessed lord, thou art our support and comfort, support us with the cordials of
thy love.

Blessed lord, before we make an end of praying, O thou father of mercies, and
God of all consolation, we beg one request for the chief Magistrate of this
Nation, That thou would give him a glorious Christ into his poor soul, and
magnify thy grace toward him, that he may become a friend unto Christ, and a
friend to the people of Christ, and reign in righteousness; and may be a
terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well; that he may cast
away iniquity with his eye, and rule for God, before whom he and all others
must render an account in the day of judgment; Lord hear us for him. And
blessed lord do the like for all that had any uncharitableness toward us, we
would have none toward them, but we beg their souls might live in thy
presence; make them to see their sins, and let them receive their pardon, that
we might embrace one another through the grace of God, in Jesus Christ, one day
in Heaven. Dear Father, we pray thee for them, as we would beg for our selves.

We now desire to resign up our selves into thy bosom as it is thy Command;
thou have said, Ye are bought with a price not with silver or gold, but with
the precious blood of Jesus Christ: and we offer up our bodies and souls unto
Christ, which is but a reasonable service, that thou should have all when
thou call for them, our estates and lives themselves. The Earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof, and we are all his works: It is God's
sovereignty to command whatsoever he pleases. Blessed Lord, we desire with our
Lord Jesus, when he offered up himself upon the Cross, he said unto thee, O
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit; and with Stephen when he was put to
death, Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

So say we Lord Jesus receive our spirits, pity us, love us, and accept us, in
thy Son upon whom we rest for life and salvation. Lord let us know that death
is a passage into Glory; it is appointed for all men once to dye, and after
death to Judgment. This is a decree and statute law of Heaven, that all must
dye, and this is some comfort in our death, that from this time forward, we
shall sin no more, grieve Christ no more, dishonor God no more, nor offend
any else no more; set thy love upon our souls and let our prayers be dissolved
into praises, where we may embrace thee, and thou embrace us.

We humbly entreat thee do more abundantly for us and all them we have prayed
for, then we are able to ask or think, in the name, and for the sake, of our
Lord Jesus, who is the intercessour with the Father, who has promised that he
will pray the Father for us; he is the Mediator of the new Covenant, betwixt
God and us, our fullness, our strength, our comfort and our support, our all,
in his name we ask all our requests; to whom with thy self and thy holy spirit
we desire to give all Honor and Glory and Praise for ever more, Amen.

After he had ended his prayer, he gave the Sheriff thanks again for his
civility, and then turning to Col. Hacker, they saluted and embraced each other
in their Arms, and said, the lord sweeten our passage and give us a happy
meeting with himself in Glory.

Then pulling his Cap over his Eyes, expecting as is supposed that the Cart
should be drawn away, with his hands lifted up, he uttered these words with a
loud and Audible voice, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; but the Cart staying a
little longer, he lift up his hands the second time, and with the like audible
and loud voice said, into thy hands Oh Father I commend my spirit; and yet in
regard there was no man found to put forward the horse to draw away the Cart
until the common Hangman came down out of the Cart himself to do it. The
Carman as many witnesses affirm, saying, he would loase his Cart and Horse
before he would have a hand in hanging such a man; by this means he had
opportunity to lift up his hands and utter the like words the third time also.

One thing more is very remarkable, that when Col. Axtell and Col. Hacker were
taken out of the sledge into the cart; the spectators being in great numbers
there, behaved themselves very civilly, only two persons among them as soon as
the Ropes were put about their Necks, cried out very earnestly, hang them, hang
them Rogues, Traitors, Murderers, Hangman draw away the cart; whereupon a man
that stood by them, desired them to be civil, and said, Gentlemen, this is not
civil, for the Sheriff knows what he has to do; and thereupon they were
silent and gave attention to Col. Axtell's speech and prayer; but before he had
done, those very persons were so affected, that they could not refrain from
pouring out many Tears upon the place, and went aside to a place a little more
retired to weep, and that man that before desired them to be civil, went after
them and beheld them, to his great admiration, as himself has Narrated.

FINIS.
Reader, In regard that the Press could not conveniently be attended, there
are many faults committed in this Impression, some Sentences left out, and
others misplaced, which does much alter the sense; therefore thou art earnestly
desired, before the reading of this book, to take thy Pen and Correct these
following Errors, and for others which are less considerable, it is hoped thy
ingenuity will help thee to Correct them.
ERRATA.
PAge 14. Line 11. for but the enemy, read but for the enemy. P. 15. l. 19
Allured us. p. 21. l. 22. by, r. be. p. 23. l, 28. own, r. one. p. 26. l. 28.
love, r. Job. p. 28. l. 21. take the, r. take your. p. 33. l. 9. and all, r.
for all. p. 33. l. 18. therein I have done, r. I have done therein p. 33. l.
26. Galliasses, r. Gallislaves. p. 33. l. 35. the faith, r. your faith. p. 36.
l. 9. and if, r. but if. p. 37. l. 22. they should, r. they may. p. 38. l. 26.
wittingly, r. willingly. P. 39. l. 20. any, r. my. p. 41. l. 15. teahes thence,
r. netles them. p. 41. l. 34. in mercy, r. through mercy. p. 43. l. 31. our, r.
one. p, 44. l. 5. most, r. must. p. 44. l. 9. Father, r. Author. p. 45. l. 13
dulcimum, r. dulcissimum. p. 45. l. 32. them, r. theirs. p. 47. l. 7. in, r to.
p 47. l. 21. Heronian, r. Neronian. P. 48. l. 23. least, r. best. p. 49. l. 28.
while, r. which. p. 50. l. 8. Know, r. Knew. p. 52. l. 37. solid and zeal, r.
solid comfort and -- p. 58. l. 23. the Man's, r. Hemans. p. 62. l 6. dele the
same. p. 62. l. 7. that glorious, r. that that glorious. p. 62. l. 10. in it.
Thou, r. in it thou (without the full point.) p 62. l. 15. through or, that
must be left out. p. 64. l. 5. the Lord r. O Lord. p. 71. l. 8. truth of r.
truth guilty of. p. 85. l. 8. redoune r. redound. p. 89. l 6. much faith r.
much filth. p. 89 l. 8. I loved r. I have loved. p. 89. l. 15. honor the
Father r. honor the Son as they honor the Father. p. 89. l. 26. these r. his.
p 89. l. 27. leave out (so) p. 90. l. 9. their r. your. p. 91. l. 17.
interruption r. interposition. p. 92. l. 9. erect r. write. p. 92. l 35.
experience r. evidence. p. 92. l. 38. that we may r. that we may lay hold upon
a naked Christ that by his blood we may, etc. p. 93. l. 34. upon his soul, r.
upon his soul, and remember him in his low estate. p. 93. l. 36. for him r. for
sin. p. 94. l. 16. come life come r. can life can death. p. 94. l. 23. of thy
love, r. of thy love, O thou Father of mercy and God of all consolation. And
leave that sentence out in the next line.


