Marginall Antidotes, TO BE Affixed over against the lines of R. H. and E. B.
their PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, The Rebukes of a Reviler.

Written and Prescribed by JOHN STALHAM of Terling.

PROVE. 26.4, 5. Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be
like unto him.
Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit.
LONDON, Printed for Edward Brewster, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Sign of the Crane in St. Paul's Churchyard 1657.

Marginal Antidotes, etc. Their Pamphlet thus Prefaceth. page 3.
[WHereas the ancient of days has appeared, etc.]

A transforming mist, to amaze the simple Reader page 3. 4. 5. 6. as
afterward, page 18, 19, 20.

Page 7. [shamelesly stiling the pure light of Christ, perverse principle, and
selfe-adorning-light]

Quakers adore their own light, and magnify natural light, as if it were
Gospel-saving light: this is from the perverse principle of their fleshly
wisdom.

Page 8. [O! How fain would J. S. sinful indeed]

In the sense that Regenerate men have acknowledged. see Page 149. of my Book,
entitled, The Reviler rebuked.

Ibid, [Whether he means any one may not, (I determine not) strike them
Corporally, etc.]

Not any but those authorized, and that either Se defendendo, or for a
criminal offense.

Page 9. [Would wickedly make men believe, that these men's Tenants, sc. the
Quaker's: are as Reprobate stuff as the Jesuites]

Some of their Tenants, I said' witness their Doctrine of Justification.

[Their blasphemies as horrid as the Popish Parasites.]

Witness Jam. Nayler and his followers.

Page 10. [Would have some Stigmatized]

For their crimes (I said, not bare opinions) which are notorious, and gross
seandalous practices.

Ibid. [Who art a reviler of the light of Christ, calling it perverse Principle]

The liberty these men take to wrest, add, or detract, is hereby evident; for,
I never called the light of Christ perverse Principle, but (as above) in that
they set up something in the room, of Christ. i. e. themselves and their common
candlelight of reason, which they worship and adore (as some have of old the
light of the Firmament) this self-adoring light is their perverse Principle.

Page 11. [In the sight of his Church, that his shame may not appear before
them]

The Church here is ashamed of your Doctrines and walkings.

Page 12. [All are Reprobates, but such in whom Christ is within them]

Then all the Elect are Reprobates before Conversion.

Ibid. [I ask a proof of this, sc. Christ's blessing of Infant-Baptisme]

Many thousands have and will seal unto it.

Page 13. [He seems to charge the Scripture with false Translations]

The Scripture in the true sense, is the believers Rule. True Translations may
vary in words, yet not Deviate from the true sense.

Page 14. [His wickedness appears by reproching, and reviling dead men, such
as H. N. Jacob B. W. E.]

This is no judgment (in my Epistle) passed upon the men, but upon and
according to their Doctrines.

Page 15. [ Shall the honest Reader receive this for truth, that the light of
Christ Jesus is a perverse Principle]

This the fifth time the Answerer has falsified my sense and words, as to this
one passage. See Antidote upon his page 7. and 10.

Ibid. [Wee demand what these Jesuiticall plots and designs are, we do carry on]

They are your scattering seeds of Popery, and fomenting seeds of division
among Protestants and Puritans in profession, to carry them more and more back
to Babylon.

Page 16. [ We do not allow that J. S. be our Interpreter]

Your words compared, one Book, and page with another, and all examined by
Scripture, interpret themselves. which was J. S. his faithfullness to discover
how contradictious they are.

Ibid. [His judgment is but out of his old lying heart]

This is their charity (if we confess we have something of the old man in us)
to judge that all we write and speak, proceed from the old principle, and
nothing from the new creature.

Page 17. [Not in the light of the Spirit, do we in any one particular insisted
upon by him, contradict the Scripture.]

You do not see your contradictions, through want of Spiritual light, and eyes
together.

Ibid. [Out of J. S. deceitful heart]

*I shall not retort, but pray for all simple Readers, and Revilers.

Page [ 18, 19. For as much as many have been moved]

Another transforming mist, and a bold, but feigned imitation of Luke Chap.
1.1. etc.

Page 20. [ And now as the Prophet Joel Prophesied, is it come and coming to
pass, Joel, 2 2, 3, 4. 10, 11.]

An abuse of the Prophet Joel, who is literally to be understood in the place
quoted, and Chap. 2. to be Expounded by Chap. 1. ver. 3.6.12. etc.

Page 21. [The ground in him, and the heart, out of which this abundance of
words in his book proceeds, is the root of all errour]

see 2d Animadversion upon page 16.

Ibid. [ Yet the root of all sin is in him, and seen by him not mortified]

Because Paul, said there dwelt no good thing in his flesh, did he therefore
write no truth in his Epistles? It follows as well as these men's reasoning.
An old Heart and a new, are both at the same time; not reigning, but the old
remaining in part, and the new reigning over the old, in the same Christian.
See 113. 114. pages of my Book,

Page 22. [Such who be in the state as J. S. confesses he is]

J. S. said not that he is in the state of sin, but that sin (the root of every
sin) is in him, and others during the state of natural Life.

Page 23. [The Letter taken strictly, being legal, etc. The Spirit is given by
this]

Not by this, but by that part of the word which is the Gospel promise. See my
Book page, 4. Yet the Spirit works by the Legal Letter, see how page 6.

Page 24. [Though J. S. say, that not one man in the World knows God to be God,
till he finds him in the Scripture,

If he had so said, it were to be taken in, the sense given in my Book, page
66. but my words are to be read as they are page 69. Not one man etc. knows him
(speaking of Christ) to be God, till he finds him in the Scripture. John 1.45.

Page 25. [Again, I. S. says, that the Authority of the Scriptures is owned
among the Jews to this day]

The Authority of Moses and the Prophets. I only speak of. see my 13. page.

Ibid. [ J. S. says, as deep things as the Spirit has revealed, they are all
in the Scripture. Answer, Nay.]

As Gold pieces of 10. and 20.^ are in the gold One.

Ibid. [There was things revealed which was unutterable, and many things
written which is not in the Scriptures, as the Book of Nathan the Prophet. etc.

we know by Scripture the e was such things revealed, and such Books written.
see my 17. and 18. with 67. pages.

Page 26. [Why does he not as well hear witness that Paul's Epistle to the
Laodiceans was read as the Word of the Lord amongst the Colossians?]

Because he is no Jesuit, nor one that would be wise above what is written.

Ib. [Why does he not read to his people that which was written to the
Laodiceans?]

Paul speaks not of any Epistle that himself, or any other (appointed as Pen
men of Scripture) did write to the Laodiceans, but of one sent from Laodicea.
Let the deluded read Colos. 4.16. once more.

Page 27. [ We know John's Testimony is true, Joh. 21.25.]

John means nor, that there was any substantial truth necessary to be known
to salvation, which is not revealed in the written Word, but that the Spirit
ordered the copious mysteries of the Gospel (with respect unto our infirmity)
to be contracted within a narrow compass of lines. R. H. in this and former
page does but murmr and object, as the popish Rhemists, The Heretics will
needs have all in Scripture.

Page 28. [Working all their works in them, and for them according to the
Scriptures.]

Agreed, in true Scripture-sens.

Ibid. [See if the sword of the Spirit was ever in the Divel's mouth.]

The Devil takes up the sword without the Spirits aim and edge.

Page 29. [By this Scripture Prove. 22.19, 20, 21. the Lord is made the ground
of faith, and not the letter.]

See the true explanation of this Scripture in my 32 page.

Page 31. [He here adding his own, etc.]

R. F. sure means what he speaks of, viz. Every man's light, and this he says
is pure: Can it be pure and not purify, and renew?

Ib. [ We never have said, that every man's judgment is renewed with the light.]

What then is that which G. F. has prompted to his Novices in his Catechism?
page 22. which light (speaking of every man's light, if owned) gives them the
knowledge of the glory of God, and brings them to true judgment.

Ib. and Page 32. [ 2 Pet. 1.20. To this J. S. adds, not heart-prophesie, nor
breast-prophesie.]

Arising and residing only in the mind, but written down in books, etc. J. S.
added also; As the Apostle excludes not heart-prophesie, so he includes
expressly Scripture-prophesie.

Ibid. [The Apostle did not bid them wait till the Day Star did arise in the
Scriptures.]

No, but till the Day Star did arise in their minds, by the reading and heeding
of the Scriptures, that is his plain meaning.

Page 33. [And in another translation says, that he is the express figure of
the Fathers substance.]

The Popish English Rhemists.

Ib. [Till he find the word three Persons, and Trinity in the Scriptures, let
him own his own rule to judge him to be no messenger sent by God's Spirit.]

If we find the word [^^e son] in one place, and the word [Three] in another;
where Father, Word and Spirit are spoken of, it is enough to justify the use
of the word [Trinity] and to prove the thing.

Ib. [Mark this, A person dwell in the Saints not personally.]

No, not so, as to make the Holy Spirit and a Saint one person, does he dwell;
but mystically, as in his spiritual Temple.

Page 34. [Saying, that the Godhead-light is not the Redemption-light.]

Objectively so called (not Subjectively) that is, light or knowledge given to
every man about the Godhead.

Page 35. [As God is, so is his light, and so is his Godhead, not created, etc.]

God's own essential light is, uncreated, and his very nature. The light that
Adam was qualified with before the Fall and which every man (as a man) has a
spark of since the Fall, was and is given from the Creation, and by the things
that are made. Read Romans 1.20. and believe.

Ibid. [ In page 64. saying, Light without Scripture is no light.]

i. e. Besides, or not according to Scripture, as is explained in that page.

Ibid. [Was the saving light made by that which was written.]

I never said [made] but made known it is by the Scripture, and there to be
found.

Page 36. [ As page 68. he says, That God was, and is the Word, according to
Joh 1.1.]

I said not so, nor is it so expressed, Joh. 1.1. But the Word was [and is] God,
yet God the Father is not the Word.

Ib. [ In page 70. says, Christ is more in the Scriptures, then in the Saints,
which is false.]

There is more of Christ's purity in the Scriptures, then in the Saints, yet is
he greater then the Saints, and the Scriptures also.

Ibid. [ In page 73. he says, Christ speaking in the Scripture, saves by the
Scripture, which is false, etc.

Christ saves by his life and grace meritoriously, and efficaciously, by the
Scripture declaratively, through faith, given as a means of our application of
him. All this witness is true.

Page 37. [Neither is there such a word written in the Bible, that say, men is
saved by Scriptures]

Read Acts 11.14. with Acts 26.22. and understand.

Ibid. [Doth that light (of Scripture) etc. darken men's minds.]

Yes, by accident, (as the Sun dazleth and dimmeth weak eyes) but of it self,
and from the Spirit, it enlightneth men's dark understandings.

Ib. [ He says 75 page, Gospel Light never entered, never shined into men's
hearts.

i. e. By the power and product of nature, read my 75 page to this effect.

Ib. [To this let all take notice, and consider whether of these two
(Contraries) they are to believe; the one saying, God shines in their hearts
by Gospel Light; and the other says, It never entered into men's hearts.]

Both are to be believed, although Paradoxes to carnal reason.

Page 38. [Priest J. Stelham etc.

Or what you will call him.

Ibid. [The Scripture speaks of no such distinction as of a Moral Law, etc.
And Ceremonial etc.]

Gross ignorance or wilful blindness.

Page 39 [But I say that Covenant in which Adam was etc. he stood in that, and
by that etc.]

But you know not what to call it, whether that of works, or Christ's of grace.

Ibid. [He speaks of three Covenants]

not so, see my 90 p.

Page 40. [I say that there is but two Covenants spoken of in Scripture, as the
Apostle to the Hebrews; In that he says a new covenant, he makes the first
old.]

These (mentioned, Heb. 8. last) are but two different Administrations of one
and the same Covenant of grace; the one antiquated and out of date, the other
in force: see my 91. page.

Ibid. [That which said, do this and live, promised life, and mentioned Christ]

J. Nayler did not so understand it, See my 104. page.

Ibid. [And such denied which speak of a Covenant, that mentions nothing of a
Savior: and that to be the Rule of true believers.]

The moral Law, or decalogue, in it is Rigor, and as a covenant of works
formally is not a believers rule: but materially, or in respect of good things,
and evil things forbidden therein, It is Christ's rule to every true Believer,
and none of his Commandments, are grievous to the Regenerate heart, and part.

Page 41. [ The more a soul is sanctified, the more he sees a Mote, to be a
Mote; and a Beam, to be a Beam]

Yet he sees so much in his Motes which was my expression ( in my 112. page.)
that he sees more evil in a sin of a thought, a vain thought, then another
will, or can see in a wicked oath, or blasphemy: and he will aggravate them in
confession, according to due circumstance, as a Beam.

Ibid. [ Paul had not victory over sin and death, while he groaned under it]

How boldly and falsely is this spoken? When as (with one breath) Paul is both
groaning and giving thanks about his present condition. Romans 7.24.25. see it
farther cleared in my 114. 115. pages.

Ibid. [God never justified any as a sinner, but as made obedient through faith]

What will you make of those Scriptures? Romans 4.5. and chap. 5. ver. 8.10. see
my 120. 121. pages.

Page 42. [The ungodly, they were first called (out of their ungodliness) as
whom he called, them he also justified]

Whom he calls he justifies, but he calls sinners, them therefore he
justifies; He calls sinners, that they may believe to their justification
from guilt, to their sanctification from filth, and them he glorifieth, First
in Title, last in Possession.

Ibid. [ J. S. Would set the Law, and justice of God at a difference with the
Gospel, etc.]

This Scribler Rants here (if you observe it) with his Pen, as if he understood
neither Law nor Gospel.

Ibid. [The Righteousness of God, will not leave men disobedrent, nor sinners,
if ever they come to mercy]

But till they come to mercy does Law-Justice set them free? Gospel-Justice
indeed, for Christ's, the sureties sake, moved by mercy, absolves them; But the
Justice of God unsatisfied by men's best conformity to the Law, finds them
guilty, binds them hand and foot over to condemnation, and execution.

Ibid. [That Doctrine is accursed from God, which says, the Justice of God's
Law, finds men sinners and leaves men so]

Let sinners tremble (who believe not on true Gospel-justifying righteousness
in Christ alone) nor at this man's Cursing, but at the Curse of Gods Law, Gal.
3.10.

Page 42. 43. [He concludes, it had been better the Scripture had not been
known or written.]

It had been better (I said) for him that shuts out Scripture from being
Christ's Organ, or the Spirits Instrument, and means of Regeneration, that he
had never known the Scripture, or written a word about it, see my 138. page,
and observe a mere forgery in this Answer.

Page 43. [ J. S. Saying, the Saints in Heaven hoped for the perfection of
their bodies: at the Resurrection, and again contradicts that saying, that at
death they have a final perfection, etc.

not at all, for the Saints perfection at death is only in their Spirits, or
souls separated from their bodies; which Bodies though they be perfectly
redeemed already by prayers, yet not so by power: till the Resurrection.

Ibid. [ If people mind the Scriptur, there is no such Doctrine in it, as the
Saints have not received the Redemption of their bodies.]

If the blind lead the blind, what will follow? Let people turn to Romans 8.23,
24, 25. And preserve their eyesight, or recover is, if lost.

Page 45. [If any turn from the truth into any act of uncleanness: then they
take that as a proof against those that abide in the truth]

It is proof sufficient a against absolute perfection in this life, from which
none (had they it) shall ever fall, as did Adam, and the Angels.

Page 46. [These are they that plead for a life in sin, while here: and that
say, the Saints glorified in Heaven do yet hope, etc.

Christ himself expects the final prosternation of his enemies, Heb. 10.13.
The Saints glorified may well hope for the Resurection of their bodies, when
Death, the last enemy, shall be destroyed.

Ibid. [He speaks of a warfare (which yet he himself never came unto)

How then feels he himself to be sinful, and hates the body of sin, so as to
desire and wait for the utter extirpation of it in himself?

Ibid. [It is not sin that is the Condemnation, but the light: which lets men
see their sins.]

We must pardon his Ignorance (who thus writes) for sin is the proper cause,
and light but the accidental casion of men's condemnation.

Ibid [ This I shall affirm, that none comes unto godly sorrow, but they deny
dwelling sin; and they that do not deny in-dwelling sin, denies godly sorrow.]

Here is a pretty subtilty couch't under ambiguous terms; but know, it is one
thing to deny pleasure in consent, love and obedience to in-dwelling sin, as do
all humble godly-sorrowing Saints, and another thing to deny that sin dwells,
or remains in all the Saints upon earth, as has been the Quakers Doctrine,
the consequence whereof is to disclaim godly sorrow, for fin dweling in them;
for have they any cause to be sorry (as to themselves) for that which is not
radically in them?

Page 47. [He is setting up obligations]

No legal ones

Ibid. [Of Reading, Hearing, Praying, Preaching, to which he says, Life and
Salvation is promised]

As they are ordained means of grace, to which God has annexed his promise in
their right order and use, not as mere duties done with a legal frame of
Spirit.

Ibid. Page. 47. [All promises are to the seed]

What seed? but that one Seed Jesus Christ, primarily, Gal. 3.16. and to all at
Second-Hand, who are Christ's true seed. Gal. 3. last.

Ibid. [Who reads his Book, may see his proofs for Infant Baptism; By
consequence, he would have Scripture speak etc]

So let him read, and search the Scriptures, where many a truth is only taught
by consequence.

Page 48. [He never commanded them to be Baptized with water.]

This is as true as that the Holy Ghost is no Person.

Ibid. [He cannot prove in Justice, that ever Infants-Baptisme, was either
commanded, or practised]

with what equity or reason can you call for a command for water-Baptisme to
Jnfants, who deny it to the Adulti, or them of years?

Page 49. [ J.S. Proves not that any thing which Christ instituted amongst the
Saints only, was practiced in the World, among such who are not called]

He never undertook to prove the Lord's Supper, (for which R. H. is speaking)
to be common to all.

[Pag. 50.] Wast paper.

Page 51. [He has condemned all his own praying, who confesses he is wicked,
etc.]

Wicked was not his expression (...), but sinful; it is his shame, and grief
to be so; but it is his glory and comfort that he (...) himself to be so.

Ibid.] All the saints upon earth, who have the Spirit of Christ, shall
witness against J.S.]

(...) is a wide (...) as any (...) pamphlet is stuffed withal.

Page 52. [What is this to the purpose, to prove the world must sing]

(...) The Reader will here find much waste paper.

Page. 54. [The Call to the true Ministory and Eldership is not by man, nor of
man, but by the Lord, according to Gal. 1.1.

That Scripture is vindicated and cleared in my 211 page.

[Pag. 54.55.]

More waste paper.

Page 56. [When the Law of the Land ceases to maintein them, which will come
sooner then they expect, then may they beg their bread, or perish for want.]

This man may as well prove a falls Prophet as false Teacher

Page 57. [If he have not the same Call, by the same Spirit, as the Apostles
had, he is no Minister of Christ.]

Are all Apostles? or is this man blinded with --

Page 58. [God promised to teach his people himself, and this man holds forth
that he intended it not, etc.]

He intended it not only by an immediate way. God teaches his people himself,
when he teaches them by the Ministry of men of his sending, Mat. 23.24.

Page 58. [Which Spirit is immediate.]

He comes immediately from the Father, and the Son, yet gives out himself
ordinarily, and only by means of his own appointment.

Page 59. [He separates betwixt the words and the voice, or breath.]

By voice Joh. 5.37. is not meant breath, or Spirit, but what you read of Deuteronomy.
4 12. Mat. 3. last. and 17.5.2 Pet. 1.18. Christ distinguishes between God's
written Word, and his immediate voice from heaven, and yet divides not his
Spirit and Breath from either. His Word is not his Spirit, yet his Spirit is in
his Word: his voice is not his breath, and yet it is not without it.

Page 60. Waste Paper.

Page 61. [As if there were two righteousnesses of Christ.

Yes, as well as two natures.

Ibid. The righteousness of Christ is but one, by which all the Saints are
justified.]

More truly said then you are aware of.

Ibid. Acts of holiness, etc. this is a righteousness of ours, says he.]

Yes, in thematter of justification not to be admitted.

Ibid. Let men see his ignorance.]

Blind men.

Ibid. Though it be wrought by the strength of Christ in us, yet as to
justification, Paul (he says) would not be sound in it. This mark again,
Reader, can thou see any thing here but ignorance?]

The blinded Reader he must needs be, whose eyes the Lord open, and then he may
see a mystery of godliness in our doctrine, and a mystery of iniquity in
yours.

Ibid. Mark again, What was the converting of many hundred of souls by Paul,
and many other works of God wrought by him but dung and loss, so J.S. holds
forth, i.e. in the matter of Justification, this is ignorance indeed, etc.]

None but your Ignoramus's will believe you.

Ib. The Question is, what this honor is that he calls civil?

When you com to you selves you will understand it.

Page 63. Neither Major nor minor proved.]

They were proved before in the whole discourse about swearing, from page 235.
to 241.

Ibid. They that charge Christ and the Apostles with contradicting Scripture,
are enemies to God, etc. but J.S. has done so, ergo.

When you prove your minor, your conclusion may be true.

Ibid. He charges us, that we contradict our selves, which accusation we bear
with as much patience as we do his former.

That is, none at all, that is visible in your writings.

Page 64. These things I leave with the Reader.]

Wise and intelligent let him be, and not one of your Novices.

Ibid. To deny Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John's declarations of the Gospel, to be
Gospel, is no denial of the Scripture.]

You neither know what you deny, nor what you affirm, but go to School (in
time) to Mark 1.1, 2. and know what that means.

Page 65. rightly paged. [The example of Abraham's servant is nothing etc.]

It is something to prove my servant may and cought to call me, as I am, his
Master.

Ibid [ J.N. does not say the Letter is the Believers witness?]

Where learnt J.N. that the believers witness is in himself, but from the
Scripture, see my 245, 246 pages.

Ibid. [ Joh. 5.39. Does say, the Scripture testifies of him, but it does not
say, that he is revealed in the Scripture, etc.]

What difference is there between testifying and revealing, in this case
especially? You, and your whole sect love to contend about words.

Page 66. The Apostles of Christ did not preach what they had gathered from
Scripture.]

Go learn what that Sermon of Paul means, Act. 13. and whence he had his
Quotations, verf. 18, etc. verse. 22, 33, 34, 35, and verse. 40.

Ibid. [In the next he will be proved a false Prophet.]

When the Scripture is found false, from whence I preach, then I shall be found
a false Prophet.

Ibid. [That E.B. compiled a book out of Scripture-Collections is false.]

I supposed you would pretend to it, at least, who affixe above a hundred Texrs
of Scripture to your warning to Under-Barrow: Did the Spirit bring every
Chapter and Verse to mind? and did you read none of the Quorations before vou
wrote them? Did the Spirit teach you to misapply them?

Ibid. [Neither is this self Contradiction, to ask which of the Saints had
witness of their souls union, to seek in the Letter, and yet to affirm the
Spirit opens, and brings that which is spoken to remembrance]

The contradiction is discovered in my 253.254. page

Page 67. [Let J.S. first answer the Quere in plainness, which is an honest
Quere.]

The Quere (not over honest, while put forth in disparagement of the
Scriptures) was plainly answered in my first Book, to this effect: The witness
of a souls union is not in the Letter only, but also in the Counter-pane
written in a believers heart. See contradictions of Quakers page 21.

Ibid. [Who says, the Spirit is in the Letter]

See how cleared in the Reviler rebuked, page 4. and 254.

Ibid. [He has also slandered Christ to be imperfectly holy]

Christ was none of the Penmen nor are the Secretaries of the Holy Ghost
slandered, if judged inferior, in wisdom and holiness: to what they wrote.

Page 68. [And though we say the Saints teacher cannot be removed into a
corner, as says the Scripture: and that the Saints will find their Teacher as
they lie in their beds, both these are true]

The Scripture says not [cannot] but [shall not] see Isai. 30.20. speaking of
the teaching Levites, Prophets, and men of God: But if your Saints. Teacher
cannot but be public, how will you find him in so private a place as your
beds?

Page 69. Rightly Paged, [Undervaluing words of the pure light of Christ]

Ibid. [It is no contradiction to say, that every man is lightened by Christ
with the true light, True saving light, turns men out of their natural
condition. Act. 26.18.
and yet to say, some men are living in a natural condition.]

But comparatively in respect of Christ himself, and Gospel-saving-light.

Page 69. [He that lights every man, etc. Is not base beggarly scraps, as
J.S. it is.]

Learn I beseech you, at last, to distinguish between the Light-given, and the
Light-Giver.

Page 70. [I would know of him where the Gospel works, if not in men's
Consciences.]

Albeit Gospelconviction is feated in the Conscience, yet it works about the
conviction, which arises merely from a natural Conscience, as such, see my
266. page

Ibid. [He that can understand that Scripture John 1.5. Shall see the truth,
etc.]

Whether you understand it or no, let the judicious Reader observe by the
context opened in my 54. page.

Ibid. [The rule of the Spirit of God is above the Scripture]

As Much as to say, he Scripture is above the Scripture. But the naked truth is,
the spirit of God rules by the Scriptures. He is above his Rule, but the
Saints (even as such) are under it.

Page 71. [Let him charge them that are guilty sc. for putting off that for
redemption light, which is but old-creation light.]

That is R.H. and E.B. with men of their deluded and deluding persuasion.

Ibid. [His whole Section I leave to be read in his Book]

See my 276. p. I understand not this nonsense.

Ibid. [Neither did we ever affirm, that Christ is not in the Reprobate, and
so is not in all]

Ibid. [Neither do we concerning Justification contradict our selves.]

You must take their word for it, who will, not or cannot try their Doctrines
by the Scripture Touchstone, and compare one of their sayings with another.

Ibid. [What would J.S. have said of John, who told them they needed no man to
teach them.]

The Apostles meaning 1. Jo^ 2.27. is vindicated from these men, and cleared in
my 41. page

Page 74. [Though God spoke by G.F. to him (viz. E. Bor.) ough) this does not
contradict the teaching of the Sporit of God]

It clearly shows that E.B. had not all by the immediate teaching of the
Spirit, and still your contradiction holds, as I have demonstrated it, in my
280.281. pages, or if you will say, and it be your meaning, that God teaches
mediately here, to bring us to immediate teachings altogether in Heaven; and
that outward teaching, leads to inward, and inward to outward: while we are
here, it will argue ingenuity, a concession of truth, and an eating of former
clashing expressions.

Page 73. Rightly paged [ E.B. does never say, that the light of Christ is
nature all and carnal, but the light of man]

Who gave man that light? Answer E.B. for your self, and others.

Ib. [ E.B. Speaks of man's light, and J.S. foolishly opposes him, etc.]

Who, I ask again, gaveman that light?

Ibid. [Neither Christ nor his blood, is in Scripture.]

This is your ignorant Blasphemy.

Ibid. [Let it be moved.]

Where and whither? If it be moved at the Mouth by Alder-gate, let a room be
built for it in the Land of Shinar.

Page 74. [He says the Scripture was given by the Spirit for a Rule, this we
desire a proof of by plain Scripture, till then we deny it]

If any man will be ignorant and obstinate: Let him be ignorant and Obstinate.

Ib. [He says, the Spirit gives out himself by Scripture, and yet he says, he
never said the Scripture did give the Spirit, and this is an absolute
contradiction]

In your apprehension, who knew not what a contradiction is, and what it is not.

Ib, [He says, our possessing perfection, and Quaking after Moses example,
cross shins on the other.]

Professing (I said) yet I will hold, in your languager, much more.

Ibid. [But wherein he does not shew]

The thing shows it self; see my first Book, page 25.

Page 75. [And yet does own Prayer in the Spirit, and who are moved by the
Spirit morning or evening, or at meals, or otherwise]

The Spirit moves to payer (as to each other duty) by the Scripture-Rule, and
according to it 1. These. 17.18. Tim. 4.4. Act. 27.35. Rom 14.6.

Page 76. [And this is truth, let J.S. gather what he can from it.]

J.S. gathers, that you would engrosse the Spirit to your selves, which if it
breath in your prayers, well; he is sure it breaths not in your Writings.

Ib. [Speaking that which is not in the Spirit, we check.]

You check the Spirit in others, and grieve the Spirit (where it is) in any of
your selves.

Page 77. [According to the light of Christ Jesus in every man's conscience,
which is but one in all.]

This helps your nonsense, page 71. (rightly paged) but contradicts what was
there delivered [ Christ is not in the Reprobate.]

Ibid. By these words [No Law must be concerning Religion] we do not mean, that
we should not have a Law according to Religion, but no Law to limit to, or from
this or that manner of Religion.]

It appears by this you do not always mean as you speak: but it were well your
meanings were better then your sayings; now learn to write and speak better,
and we shall the better judge of your meanings.

Page 78. [Wee are not they that would have any Magistrates to bind themselves
from striking at offenders, who are truly able to judge of offenses.]

Agreed, and then all in my Epistle Dedicatorie (charged with lies, slanders,
presumption, arrogance, flattery and cruelty) will stand good against your
charge.

Ibid. and Page 79. [As for the rest of his Book (sc. the Appendiz.) etc. His
lies I do deny, from first to 8. Animadversion]

Here is all along, but your nay, against my yea: Whereof I give too home
proof, for your patience to bear it. Let my Appendix be viewed and reviewed.

Page 79. [So that from the first of his Book to his last, his whole work is
borne witness against not to be of God, but of the Devill]

If R H. (as it seems by the posture of letters) listed himself to fight in
the Front of the Pamphlet, and E.B. in the Rear, although they toss and racket
my name up and down as a Tennis-ball, from the beginning to the end, yet they
do but beat the Air, and strike at themselves, and hurt not me; For page 50.
one says, he pursues me not in every Argument; the other says, From the first
of my Book to the last, my whole work is born witness against. How these
things accord, let the Reader judge. Now R.H. and E.B. if you can receive the
censure of a discerning Christian (of no inferior rank) it was this; All the
reason of this your Book may be put into an Egge-shell, and for my part, I have
no more taste of it (except in such few passages, where you are reduced to a
better explication of your minds) then of the white of an Egg.

Page 80, 81, 82, 83. [Ah! J.S. against whom have thou set thy self, etc]

To all these four last pages (with many other passages in the book) it is the
King of Heavens commandment, Prove. 26.4. not to answer you a word.

FINIS.

