THE REVILER REBUKED: OR, A RE-INFORCEMENT OF THE CHARGE AGAINST THE QUAKERS,
[So Called] For their Contradictions to the Scriptures of God, and to their own
Scriblings, which Richard Farnworth attempted to answer in his pretended
Vindication of the Scriptures; but is farther discovered, with his
Fellow-Contradictors and Revilers, and their Doctrine, to be Anti-Scriptural,
Antichristian, and Anti-Spiritual.

By JOHN STALHAM, a Servant of the Great Bishop and Shepherd of Souls,
appointed to watch his little Flock at Terling in Essex.

Titus, Cap. 1. ver. 7, 10, 11, 13. A Bishop must be blameless -- holding fast
the faithful Word, as he has been taught, that he may be able, by sound
doctrine, both to exhort, and to convince the gainsayers. For there are many
unruly and vain talkers and deceivers -- whose mouths must be stopped --
wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the Faith.

Zach 3. 2. And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even
the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness. 1657.

To His Highness OLIVER Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland
and Ireland, AND To the Right Honorable, The Council of State.
SIRS,
IF the Highest himself shall establish Psalm 87. 5.
Zion, there is encouragement, sufficient and abundant for You his Servants
rejoycingly to serve him, in the countenancing of his Truth, and contending
with the men of this Generation for the Faith once given unto the Saints, by
the most proper means and methods which the Lord of lords in his wisdom has
directed, and shall lead you unto. The Liberty proclaimed to
Godly-Gospel-Preachers, and your fostering of Orthodox Pastors and Teachers,
will much conduce, by the Spirit of Christ's mouth, to the consumption of the
Man of Sin; and what abuse soever is made of the Press for the spreading of
Anti-Scriptural and Antichristian Errors, yet it needs not to be feared,
while Pulpits and Presses are open (through Your Highness and Honors favors)
for a Testimony against them, but that God will confound their Language, who by
false and perverse Interpretations of the Scriptures, would seduce the minds
of the simple, into an expectation of nothing but Immediate Raptures and
Revelations.

Some indeed cry up nothing but Clublaw against the men, called Quakers, and
can give no other measure then their Prelatical Fathers to those that dissented
from them: But by Your Indulgence and Forbearance of Saints erring and
otherwise minded, many have conscientiously made enquiry after those Truths
which lay hid, or were defaced; and have the more heartily embraced them, and
do hold them fast, after Scripture-conviction. And however the Men, I deal
with, for the present do debate the Scriptures, and decry the Ministry,
Churches, all New Testament external Worship, and whatsoever bears the stamp
of Divine Authority, as not to be found among us, yet by Your Lenity and
Gentleness exercised toward them (while You espouse, or patronize none of
their Errors) it may be firmly expected that the Elect (supposing such among
them) shall be reduced: And as for others that are evil men and seducers (from
that perverse Principle of their Self-adoring Light) they shall wax worse and
worse, and as the madness of some is evident, so shall the folly of other be
made manifest (...) 2 Timothy 3. 9.
to all who are not bewitched with their Spiritual sorceries.

MY LORDS, Let but the Saints, and the Churches of Saints, according to
Scriptureevidence, be protected and cherished (as You have graciously begun)
and the Officeministery will soon be known, settled and established. Let every
stumbling block, as speedily and safely as lies within Your Power, be removed
from the way of the blind, and occasion cut off from them that seek occasion,
and ere long the Lord himself will rebuke them to silence, that they shall
neither talk nor write so presumptuously, nor shall arrogance come out of their
mouth. The lip of truth shall be established for Prove. 12. 19.
ever: but a lying tongue is but for a moment. Let Learning be advanced among
pious men (for God has his Wits, and his Learned ones) and through the
sanctified Improvement thereof, Ignorance (its froward enemy) will creep into
corners, as darkness vanishes before the light. Some of these men Lip of truth
opened, by Tho. Lawson, page 13. Christ's innocence pleaded by Tho. Speeds
Epistle, with his Guilty covered Clergyman unvailed. page 69.
begin to appeal unto the Consciences of the Learned, for Idioms and propriety
of speech, in Hebrew and Greek, with the Dorick dialect: they will give us
leave then to make use of our English dialect also, and speak vulgarly, while
we think as the Philosopher. Our contentions with them are not about (...),
(...), tu, or (...), or (...), but pro aris and focis, for the lamp and life of
our Religion, the Rule of the Holy Scriptures, the Glory of the Blessed
Trinity, the peculiarness of the Covenant of Grace; the sole matter of our
Justification before God, the continuance of our Christian warfare, during this
natural life; the truth and efficacy of Christ's own Institutions, etc. Amidst
which digladiations, our Lord Jesus is fighting against them with the Sword of
his mouth, and him we will trust with the issue of the battle; whereupon

I humbly supplicate, That every person whatsoever may not, impune, strike them
corporally, in the Steeple-house, streets or prison; for they think it a great
triumph to have this to object, That any are tolerated with this mutinous word
in their mouths, Answer to the Quakers Catech. p. 19.
Fight Lads for the Gospel; and they will still cry out Persecution, as they have
done, if every Turn-key or Tapster in the prison, may, without check, be
permitted to wreak their teem and spite upon them, with some base, illegal and
inhumane usage or other. But while any of this Sect, for their exorbitant
courses, meet with legal and due correction, Be pleased to let them all know
that we are guarded by a better Law then what they Teachers of the world
unvailed, p. 29, 30
upbraid us with, enacted in the Marian times: And, that while they carry
Popish and Jesuitical Doctrine along with them, they are to have no more
liberty for divulging it in our Assemblies, then the men of that profession.
Popish Doctrines and Idolatries are as abominable as ever were the Paganish:
And some of these men's Tenants are as reprobate stuff as the Jesuits; Their
blasphemies as horrid as the Popish Parasites. What is Rome but Babylon the
Mother of Abominations? And what is this Sect, but a daughter of that great
whore? who doubts but the Romish Emissaries are abroad to seduce? Some quondam
Professors of the Gospel have lost their Garments, and men see their shame.
They bid farewell to Imputed Righteousness, in the Scripture-sense, and how they
can be girt with inherent Graces, who put off the Saints, or believing sinners
best robe, I see not. The Setters and Abettors of this Sect, would be more
narrowly watched, and according to their crimes stigmatized. There is one This
for each Parliament man, by George Fox, page ult.
has suggested to the Right Honorable Parliament, after this manner, All that
have a word from the Lord seek not to stop them, and limit them from speaking
it, by the counsel of those Teachers which are made by the will of man, and
have not the word of the Lord; according to the word of the Lord they are to be
stopped, and to be silent. And after the same measure, shall it not be meted out
to them? But whereas he concludes with an Interrogation that has a sting in
the tail, Is there any law or limit to be made to limit the Spirit of God? I
shall close with Christ his own charge (for the purity and peace of the
Churches) which some Brightman Cotton.
of no mean account do conceive was partly fulfilled by the Edict of Darius,
Ezra 6. 11 13. Cant. 2. 15.
Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, that spoil the Vines, for our Vines have
tender grapes.

Now, that Your Highness, and Your Honors may be all as Angels of God,
discerning the false spirits and the true; such as proceed out of the mouth of
the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the
false Prophet, from Him that proceeds from the Father, and from the Son; that
Ye may be established in the old and present Truth; that Ye may be preserved
blameless; that all men may acknowledge their Mercies under Your Government;
that Your Graces may be heightened yet to farther Service of the Lord, and his
peoples Interest in the three Nations; And, that Ye may be prospered in all
Your high undertakings, at home and abroad, for Glory to the Highest, is, and
shall be the Prayer of

Your HIGHNESS and Your HONORS Meanest Servant in the Gospel, JOHN STALMAM.

TO THE CHURCH of CHRIST Which is at TERLING, Grace be with you, mercy and
peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the
Father, in Truth and Love.
Beloved in our Lord JESUS,
AS you were obedient in my absence while I was removed from you for a season,
so I have endeavored since my return, that the Truth of the Gospel might
continue with you; and therefore have I not given place, by subjection, no not
for an hour, to any that have attempted to bring another Gospel among you,
though there is not another; but there be some that have troubled others, and
would, by perverting the Gospel, have troubled you also; Yet blessed and
praised be God who has kept you in the hour of temptation, and helped you to
keep the Word of his Patience, and not deny his Name.

That you and yours may ever be preserved, when this my earthly tabernacle
shall be dissolved, I have drawn up this REPLY, and do commend it to your
diligent perusal, charging you in the Lord, that you redeem some time for the
reading of it; especially, such of you as have allowed spare hours for the
reading of the Adversaries Pamphlets.

It is above a year since the first of the Sect, called Quakers, came into the
Town, and scattered his opinions. You had then cautions given you from the
Lord. Remember them, I beseech you, lest you be carried about (as the stubble
whisked and Heb. 13. 9. (...)
whirled about here and there in a circle) with the wind of diverse and strange
doctrines; diverse in color from the truth, and strange to the
Scripture Language, or meaning of the Spirit speaking in the Scripture. Beware
of wheeling to the right hand, or to the left. Take heed what you hear, and how
you hear. Beware of the leaven of the Quaking Pharisees and Sadduces. It argues
weakness at the best, and childishness in the best, if they be tossed to and
fro with every wind of doctrine. Children will run after a bubble in the wind,
or on the water; a feather on the ground, or froth upon the waves: Be not like
them, or as giddy hearers that have no mould but what the next Novellist casts
them into. Diverse and strange doctrines (such as these men I deal with
especially open out of their packs) tend much to the unsetling of the
judgment, and disquiet John 10. 5.
of the conscience. It is a Character of Christ's sheep to keep the ear close to
his voice; they know not the voice of strangers, whereas goats will receive
those that come in their own name; and they whose names are not written in the
Lambs John 5. 43.
Book of Life, will wonder and wander after the beast and the Rev. 13. 8.
false prophet; the Doctors and Doctrines of Antichrist. But it is a good thing
Heb. 13. 9.
(says the Holy Spirit) that the heart be established with grace. It is
eminently ben^ficial against all distracting opinions, to have your souls and
consciences established with the doctrine, faith and sense of Gods free Favor
in Christ, and with the experimental exercise of Grace in Gospelworship. 1. The
doctrine of his redeeming, purchasing grace, his pardoning of sinners, and
reconciling them to himself, according to his free electing love, establishes
against the thoughts of our greatest unworthiness; for the free gift of Christ
and his righteousness for justification of life, reigns over all your guilt,
and the design of Grace is to bring all that obey the doctrine of Grace, into a
kingdom of Grace, and to settle a crown of Life, and Glory upon the poor
unworthy sinner. Hold fast to this, as not only it is free, but full. The
Gospel of our salvation is so full, as it answers all the souls necessities;
partly, from the fullness of the person the Son of God, our Savior, God and man,
in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily; If there be all sufficiency
of power, love, will, faithfulness in God to save, it is in Christ, yea, the
fullness of Gods vindicative Justice is satisfied and glorified in him. This we
teach for your heart-satisfaction and settlement: partly from the fullness of
the covenant, whereby God makes over Christ and Life to us, which is
heart-establishing, as it is founded in the blood of Christ, as it is the efflux
and issue of Gods everlasting love, as all the promises are Yea, and Amen in
Christ, and as the Covenant is of the nature of a Testament (which is more
absolute then ordinary contracts) in full force Heb 9. 16.
by the death of the Testator, written not only in the Scriptures [the Old
Copy and the New] but in the hearts of Believers. Heb. 8. 10.
God begins with promises and writes them, and then his Commands are all
inlayed and inamel'd with the promises. This Heb. 6. 17.
Covenant is confirmed by an Oath, to show the immutability of his counsel, and
to settle the hearts and hopes of them, that flee thither for refuge, with
strong consolation. In a word, the Covenant of Grace excludes works, as any
condition of life, for it is the declaration of Gods way of saving by Grace,
according to the Election of Grace; which if it be of Grace (as it is) then
Romans 11. 6.
is it not at all of works. These meditations are heart-establishing, you will
say, in wavering times; and all Doctrines agreeable to the fullness of Christ
and his Covenant, are so. David found it so, so may you. It was a soft pillow
to David [God 2 Samuel 23 5.
has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure] on
his Deathbed, whereon to rest his head, so it will be to all that take hold on
it, and mix it with faith: For, secondly, it is not the Doctrine of the Gospel
abstractly considered, but as believed, that will establish you. Faith
establishes Col. 1. 23.
by its object, acts, reflections and fruits. Continue in the faith grounded
and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel which ye have
heard. Consider, brethren, what you believe, and in whom ye have believed.
Christ and his righteousness without you, is a sure foundation for your Faith
to Isaiah 28. 18.
build upon: He that believes on him shall not be ashamed, unsettled, beaten
off. Faith gives you an evidence of things not seen, and makes things absent,
present. Every act of Faith tends to your establishment, having some certainty
in its bosom and bowels, and so much as strives against doubting, and that
shall not miscarry in the issue and event: But reflections of Faith help on yet
more to stedfastness; When you know you do 1 Pet. 3. 21.
believe, then you have the answer of a good conscience, wherewith comes peace
and liberty; Peace with God is discerned, and peace with Conscience is settled
hereby in much serenity, with liberty of access to the Throne of Grace, and of
making your Appeals to God, by virtue of Christ's blood sprinkled on the
Conscience, and by reason of the Acquittance which Christ received for the
Believer at his resurrection; His discharge is ours, and hence the other
benefits which Faith brings along with it, of Union with Christ, Communion with
God, Justification, Redemption, Adoption and Sanctification. But if with the
Doctrine and Faith of the Gospel, there comes thirdly, the Grace of sense, or
the sense of Gods grace and love in all that is taught and believed, how is the
heart established by the holy Romans 5. 5.
Spirit that is given us? This Spirit is both the seal of what is past, the
witness of what is present, and the earnest of what is to come; making all that
is in reversion as sure to us, as that which is already in our possession. Add
unto this, fourthly, Experimental exercise of grace in all Gospel-institutions,
and what establishment shall your hearts want now or hereafter? Communion with
God in Gospel Ordinances gives rest and satisfaction, when we find the effect
of Water Baptism, and of Infant Baptism in Christ's blood, and the Spirits
regeneration; when we discern the effect of Bread and Wine-Lords-supper in
Christ's presence at his Table; and the quicknings of his Spirit in our singing
David's Psalms and Scripture-spiritual songs, use of public (as private)
Prayer, ministry of the Word, etc.

Your souls, brethren, cannot but find it eminently helpful to be established
with this Gospel Grace: First, you have hereby an Antidote against all poison
of diverse and strange Doctrines. Your hearts are as ships well-ballasted
against all contrary winds. The Doctrine of Free Grace, rightly understood,
believed and adhered to, does at once dispel and scatter all Popish and
Arminian fogs. The fullness of Christ believed, lays open the emptiness of
Quakerism. The Covenant and Promises, grasped by Faith, are as the little
stone, which, they say, the Be takes up to fly with in a high wind, so as the
biggest blasts shall not dash you to the ground. Let who will say, that Christ
does not justify by a righteousness without us, the Scripture says, We are
made the righteousness of God in him; 2 Cor. 5. 21.
and the Grace of Faith carries out the Soul for righteousness and life in
another, viz. Christ: of this the Spirit, with the Conscience and Experience of
Believers bears witness. Let the poor Quakers say that the Scriptures are not
the word of God; the heart, that believes and experienceth the power of the
Scripture changing and transforming, will find him a liar and blasphemer. Let
them say that will, they have no sin dwelling in them, and their warfare is at
an end; a gracious heart will slight and despise these Contradictions to all
the Experiences of the Saints held forth in Scripture. Let them say there is no
Baptism of water, or let them call the Lords Supper (as used by the Churches) a
humane Invention, because they have found no comfort in it, or by it; the heart
established in the faith of the Institution, will give them the lie; and
although he finds not these seals always alike efficacious, yet he knows and
believes them always to be the Lords Ordinances, and to have a promise of
efficacy annexed to them, which God will make good at his day and hour, and not
at our season.

Secondly, The fears which false doctrine terrifieth the Conscience withal are
removed, and made to vanish. Fears of nonacceptance by reason of daily failings
in duties; fears of falling away totally and finally, are expelled by the pure
doctrine of faith, and of justification by grace alone, and by nothing inherent
in us, as a habit, or adherent to us, as an act, etc.

Thirdly, There is this advantage, all pretended Revelations are cast off,
dreams are not hearkened unto, leading from the Scriptures. The faith of a
Promise makes things as sure to your souls, as if God had spoken immediately
from the Clouds. The sense of Gods Love is as sweet as a rapture into the third
Heavens. Moses and the Prophets are as sure to a gracious heart, as if one
arose from the dead; for he could not bring up greater Truths or stronger
Arguments of persuasion then are found in the Scriptures; he could not speak
more pathetically, with higher strains, and stronger lines, with more majesty
of style, and elegancy of phrase, or sweeter floods of eloquence, or with more
plainness and godly simplicity, then the Spirit expresses himself in the
Scripture, holding forth all along an evidence and demonstration of himself,
with holy harmony and efficacy.

Fourthly, When your hearts are established with Gospelgracious Doctrine,
Faith, Sense and Experience thereof, you are fortified against all powerful
temptations. Sometime the soul is tempted to forsake Ordinances, but faith of
that promise, that the house of Jacob shall not seek God in vain, keeps Isaiah
45. 19.
the heart close to means of Gods appointment. Sometime the Christian is
tempted to go to a second Baptism, or to deny Water Baptism altogether; but the
Experience of Christ's blessing Infant Baptism, and the un-warrantableness of
Rebaptization keeps him from these extremities. If you be tempted to absent
your selves from the Lords Table, or leave Church Fellowship, the Promise and
Experience of the Love of God in the use of these Ordinances, aws and keeps you
in order. When Christ, until his second Coming in the clouds, and visible
Glory, is looked at as spiritually present with his own Institutions, they are
neither trusted to, nor neglected. Sometime you have been tempted to go hear
known Seducers, but an established heart will not step out of doors, unless he
has the more special call, to bear witness against them, and to strengthen
others.

Lastly, Let your hearts be established with Gospel Grace, and it will produce a
well-ordered conversation to the end of your days; it will make patient in
affliction; joyful in suffering; even under darkness and in desertion the heart
is willing to wait, and is made ready for Heaven; for it stirs up to
watchfulness, to have grace in exercise, and the soul in preparation for death,
and then it cannot want boldness at the day of Christ's appearing.

Why then, my Brethren, dearly Beloved, and longed after, my joy and crown, so
stand fast in the Lord, my dearly Beloved; see that none of you fail of the
grace of God; Be not as reeds shaken with the wind, but as unshaken rocks and
pillars in your profession. Prize and press after more of heart-establishing
grace; to this end, Hold fast the purity of Doctrine about Justification,
Election, Redemption, the Covenant of Grace, and the whole pattern of sound and
wholesome words in the Scriptures, and in the Churches Confessions of Faith
consonant to the Scriptures. Be active in faith upon the Author and Finisher of
your Salvation. Be obedient to the Spirit, who witnesses and seals the
Truth, and sheds abroad the Love of God in your hearts. Make much of your
Experiences, built upon and backed with promises: cry not woe unto them, as some
upon their revolting to Quakerism have done. Set before you the example of
stable Christians, as so many Jerome's, standing like old wellrooted Oaks, and
breaking the winds of Doctrines and Oppositions which assault them on every
side. Decline infectious company: cease to hear the instruction that causes to
err from the words of knowledge: Beware of a blinde-zealousaffecting of any
man. Take heed of curiosity, and a itching desire of Novelty, or of knowing any
new way to Christ and Heaven? Stand in the paths and enquire for the old and
the good way, that ye may walk therein. Maintain a humble spirit, daily abased
in the sight and sense of heart sinfulness and instability: The Lord will teach
and root the humble. Exercise a clear Conscience in profession and communion
with the Saints and Churches. The mystery of Faith is held in a pure
Conscience; when men put away a good Conscience, or prefer a natural Conscience
before a Conscience purified by Faith, they make shipwreck of the doctrine of
Faith. Let Gods power be looked after, in and with Gods own Form. The Kingdom of
God may be among men, when it is not within their hearts; so Luke 17. 21. Christ
speaks to the Pharisees, enemies of his Gospel; The kingdom of God is among
(...). i. e. (...), in medio vestri, Bez.
you, i. e. was preached in the midst of his enemies, and working upon others
hearts, while they were not aware of it. They madly wrest the reading of the
words [within you] who apply it to a Kingdom of Grace begun, in the enemies of
Christ, by the light in every man, and would thereupon have all Christ's outward
Forms, and positive Institutions laid aside; But what God has joined together,
power and form (where and to whom he pleases) do not you separate You have not
hitherto been like these sheep which eat no grass more greedily then that which
rots them. If our new Teachers, and their disciples boast of an astonishing
Power coming along with their doctrine, remember 2 Cor. 6. 7. The word of
Truth, and the Power of God (whereby Christ's Ministers are approved) do go
together. If power goes forth with a word of falsehood, it is Antichrists power,
which is after the working of Satan, not the Lords. It will be sad with any
Churchmember, under Gods institution and form, to fall short of his 2 These. 2.
9.
power: But while you use his Ordinances in Faith of a promise of Christ's power
annexed to them, you are and shall be more wrought up to, and brought under the
power promised. And that I may be partaker of the Gospel-power, as Privileges
with you; yea, that this Reply (as weak as it is) may be accompanied (according
to the truth of it) with the mighty power of the Lord, Let it be your prayer,
as it is and shall be mine, who am, through grace,

Your Loving Brother, and Faithful Pastor, JOHN STALHAM.

To all Honest, Godly, Conscientious and Judicious Readers.
BELOVED,
AS Honest, Godly and Conscientious, you are invited by Richard Farnworth in
his Epistle (before his pretended Vindication of the Scriptures, in Answer to a
piece I put forth in Scotland) to the reading of all the Quakers Pamphlets
(with mine) which I referred to in the Margent, and of his Answer thereunto, if
any of you can find the leisure: Now it is my request, that such as have met
with his reviling Vindication, would in honesty do me the favor, yea, the
right, so far as to bestow a few spare hours in the perusal of this my Reply,
and attending Truth, as it is after godliness, exercise in your reading a good
conscience, according to a renewed principle, joined with the diligent search
of the Scriptures; And

As you are judicious, and grown up to mature and manly knowledge, I speak as
to wise men, judge ye what I wrote before, and now write again. Many Charges my
adversary casts upon me in his Epistle, as so many fiery darts; I list not to
recriminate, but have undertaken to make good my Collection of the
Contradictions at first found among this sort and Sect of men. Judge ye whether
I have wronged any man's books, or mixed my deceit with them? Judge ye whether I
have violated any of Gods Precepts or Truths, and taught men so? Judge ye which
of us twain, is given over to lie, slander and falsely accuse: Judge ye whether
I have discovered a spirit of envy against them and the Truth? I know the
Scripture says, the spirit that dwells in us, i. e. Believers, so far as
unregenerate, lusts to envy; yet I can appeal to the Searcher of hearts, that
I found none of this stirring, in my bearing witness against these men's
doctrine. What I see of the truth and of Christ in any, I love. I wish there
was not to be seen in this Sect, that which is to be pitied, not envied. Judge
ye, who is the Antichrist, the Deceiver; whether I deserve his Anathema (had he
authority to denounce it). Let all honest, godly and tenderly conscientious
about the Scriptures Authority, vote as the Lord, the Spirit leads them.

The reason of this my Reply is not any consciousness of wrong done to Richard
Farnworth, nor of any injury I have done to the Truth and Cause of God: What
Mr. Tindal writes in an Epistle to John Frith concerning his Translation of the
New Testament (so vilified by his Adversaries) that I can say, in reference to
my dealing with Gods Scripture, and their Scriblings, I call God to record
against the day we shall appear before our Lord Jesus, to give up a reckoning
of our doings, that I never altered one syllable against my conscience, etc.
But I must follow the call and ducture of his providence; R. Farnworth's Answer
was brought me by one of their disciples: A precious Brother informs me, they
boasted much in Scotland that John Stalhams Book was answered: Another endeared
Brother relates from their opened mouths in that country, that the Answer
should be dispersed and scattered throughout the nation: Next to the vindication
of Gods Name, I must look to the preservation servation of my own, while I
trust the Lord with it, wheresoever his bespattering pamphlet, or this Reply
shall come. I read of a Popish lie about Luther's death, the lie coming forth
in print (while he was alive) He professes, as he detested some things, so he
could not but laugh at Satan's, the Popes and their Accomplices hatred against
him: So when I first read R. Farnworth his Legend, as I abhorred one way, so I
could not but smile in another respect; But God turn (as he said) this man's
heart and others from their diabolical malice. It was some stay to my thoughts,
to call to mind how ordinary it is with Betlarmine to cry out of Calvin's and
Chytraeus lies, when himself is found the Mouth and Pen of the great Lie of
Popery. I am not moved at R. F. his great swelling words and threats. When
Bishop Morgan spoke so proudly and falsely to Mr. Philpot, I tell thee, Philpot,
thou art an Heretic, and shall be burned, and afterward go to hell fire; John
Philpot was bold to reply, I tell thee, thou hypocrite, that I pass not a rush
for thy fire and faggots; and as for hell fire, it is prepared for thee, unless
thou speedily repentest. It is written on Heavens door (says Martyr Bradford
in one of his Epistles) Do well, and hear ill. I am content Qui ^escit far
calumnias, obtrectationes, convitia, injurias, ille vivere nescit. Chytr.
to bear all the blots of my name for Christ's sake and his truth. It was David
Chytraeus his usual saying, He knows not how to live, that knows not how to
bear slanders, backbitings, railings, wrongs. Obloquies and scorns have been
one of the best projects Maleficum quidam megarriunt; titulum fidei servus
agnosco; magum vocant and Judaei Dominum meum. Hier.
of Enemies to discountenance the truth. To call Christ a wine bibber and a
glutton, a friend of publicanes and sinners, is enough (they think) to disgrace
his Doctrine. Some talk I am wicked (said Jerome) or misohievous. I being a
servant of Christ, do own the title of faith; The Jews also call my Lord Jesus,
magician. Is the disciple greater then his Maller? I have endeavored to avoid
all Arguments of retortion. I know not how to give reviling for reviling. If
the discovery of their Contradictions be to be vile, I will yet be more vile.

For the direction of my Reader, I have a few things to prefix. All that
concerns any passages in my former piece (which R. F. quotes in his Epistle)
I do (in this Reply) deal with them in their due place. What remains in his
Epistle, is but an Invective against the Scots; where he fights in the dark, or
with his own shadow, fancying me, because I was in Scotland (at that juncture
of time) to be a Scot, and often in his book he lets fly against them of that
Nation for my sake: But what is Christ's Gospel in England or Scotland (as
elsewhere) I am not ashamed of: what I preached there, or what the Scots affirm
there of the Scriptures, and Doctrines consonant thereunto, I affirm with them.

The method I follow is after my former piece, under the several miscellaneous
Heads, and Sections, of their Scripture and Self-contradictions. The word
[Contradiction] I use in the Scripture phrase, in the largest and most
Theological sense, for gainsayings, as in Acts 13. 45. Titus 1. 9. (...).


By R. F. all along I mean no other person then Richard Farnworth, concerning
whom I received a Certificate, by the hands of two worthy Gentlemen, from a
Minister in Yorkshire of note and esteem for piety, and pains in his place: The
character of my Antagonist is this: These may certify, That Richard Farnworth
was born at Tickhil in Yorkshire, where he has Lands of five pounds per annum
after his mothers decease. He lived about seven years with Mr. Lord of Bramton,
carrying very fairly, till at length reading some parts of Mr. Saltmarsh, he
turned Antinomian and Perfectionist, pretended to internal Teachings, and
immediate Revelations, renouncing all outward public Gospel-administrations,
and refusing to join in Family* worship; whereupon his Master cashiered him;
since that I do not hear he has had any place of settled abode, save only one
year, that he served Coronet Heathcoat in husbandry: The last five years he
has gone about deceiving and being deceived, leavening all that possibly he
could with Familism and Quakerism: He has committed to the Press some books of
higher account, then the sacred Scriptures amongst those deluded wretches; two
of them I have seen, wherein he expresses malice more then humane against al
Christ's Institutions and Ambassadors; they are indeed full fraught with nothing
else but prodigious railings, asperst with abhorred blasphemies. About two
years since he attempted the seduction of Mr. Lord himself; he told him he was
sent to him of God, and he would not receive him: upon his inquiry what he was?
he said, He was more then a prophet; what art thou then? said he, Art thou
Christ? he replied, I am. Hereupon with holy indignation he expelled him; and
where he has been since I hear not, nor that ever he resided at Balby, though
he much frequented and impoisoned those silly souls. This I declare this
November 26.-55.

S. K.




Upon the perusal of this sober Narrative, I think fit further to advertise my
honest godly Readers, that are and desire to be judicious, how far R. F. and
his associates have made up a litter and fardel of erroneous divinity, the
spawn of many ancient errors, brooded by some modern writers, and backed by some
of the present age. Whatsoever R. F. observed in Mr. Saltmarsh writings, and
howsoever he abused them, he might have learned better Divinity from that
Author, if he had read him advisedly, and compared his writings one with the
other, and with the Scripture. Against their magnifying of every man's light,
and the Law within them, Mr. Saltmarsh has this savory passage: The natural
Law, Romans 2. 14, 15. Flowings of Christ's blood page 6.
is but weak in respect of any transforming power it has, as the Law of the
Spirit has in it self. We see in a clear frosty night, though the moon shines
very bright, and the stars too, yet not so, but it is cold and hard, as if
there were no light at all, etc. If R. F. stumbled at that passage, Ib. page 146
Though the Law be a beam of Christ in substance and matter, yet we are not to
live by the light of one beam, now when the Sun of righteousness is risen
himself: He might have recovered himself by that which follows, Ib, page 150
There is a doctrine of holiness in the Gospel as of grace and love. Gospel
commands fits man who is made up of flesh and spirit; and so has need of a Law
without and in the Letter, as well as in the heart and spirit. The Law is
spiritual, but we are carnal, Romans 7. nor can such a state of flesh and spirit
be ordered by a Law only within, etc. He might have learned how the justified
person is perfect while his sanctification is imperfect. A person justified, or
in covenant, is as pure in the Ib. page 129.
sight of God, as the righteousness of Christ can make him (though not so in
his own eyes, that there may be work for faith) because God sees his only in
Christ, not in themselves. He might have been instructed, That Christ is not
ours by an act of our own, but Gods; Ib. page 188.
God imputing and accounting. Against the dream of perfect sanctification (in
their sense) he might have observed such a passage as this, The body of sin is
in a Ib. page 67.
Believer more or less, till he lay down this body, and take up a glorious one;
And again, Can you have any assurance that the change that is in any child of
God in this life, or their sanctification is such in any particular act or
work, as there is no spot of sin in it? is it not mixed of flesh and spirit?

If he grew sick of opinion by one passage, he might have been cured and
relieved by some other. But whatever were that good man's Naevi, blemishes or
specks my Antagonist and his fellows are transported with another kind of
spirit, even with that of Marcion and Montanus, and his Enthusiastical
Associates, and the Manichees, who troubled the Church (as a very learned
Brother Dr. John Owen vindic. Evang Pref. to the Readers page 4.
has already hinted) with their madness and folly; and with that spirit, which
acted the fanatic and furious Libertines (who called themselves spiritual) in
Calvin's time ninety years ago, who placed our redemption in this, That Christ
was but as a Type, Image, or Exemplar, in whom all those things were figured
which were required to our salvation. Moreover as they imagine (says Calvin)
Caeterum, ut imaginantur, nemo nostrum non est Christus, quodque in ipso factum
est, in omnibus effectum dicunt. Calvini Opuscula. Instructio adversus
Libertinos. page 214.
there is not one of us, but is Christ, and what was done in him, they say, is
performed in all.

Hence one Quintinus Quomodo? inquit, an Christus male habere potest? page 215.
was very angry, as often as he was asked, How he did? How? said he, can it be
otherwise then well Christ? Christus ipsis. idolum est. 10. a Deum blasphemari
alunt, siquis limentetur, aut sensum aliquem doloris prae se serat* ibid. page
217.
They (as that most learned and godly man says) make an idol of Christ.
Further, as he notes, a They say, that God is blasphemed if any bewails his
condition, or makes a show of any sense of grief: So as a by their opinion to a
Sic, little sententia veterem Adamum mortificare, nibil aliud est, quam nihil
discernere. ibid. page 218.
mortify the old man, is nothing else but to be sensible of nothing. Siquis
peccata sua considerans sibi displiceat, ac moerore afficiatur, peccatum adhuc
in ipso regnare aiunt, and sensu carnis suae captivum teneri. ib. page 219.
For, if any be displeased with himself, and grieved upon the consideration of
his sins, they say, sin reigns in him, and that he is held captive by the
feeling of his own-corruption.

Such a spirit follows these men as acted H. N. in Flanders, who wrote seven
and twenty small Treatises and Epistles, to brood the Sect, and broach the
doctrine of the Familists, admired by some at this day, that understand not the
mystery of iniquity See Answ. to a famous Libel of ^. ^. by John Rogers,
printed An. 1579.
therein, or love not the truth in Scripture, but are given up to strong
delusions, that they might believe a lie: The lie of perfect holiness and
justification thereby: The lie of the light in every man to be Christ: And,
that Adam was nothing but the old man or corrupt qualities, and Christ nothing
else but the new man, or new qualities. Hence our men make nothing of the
Historical letter of Christ's Death, Resurrection, etc. but turn all into an
Allegory, and according to H. N. Joyful message of the kingdom, by H. N. p. 170.
they are ready to call those things mere lies which the Scripture-learned
(through the knowledge which they get out of the Scripture) bring in,
institute, preach and teach. From what spirit that H. N. wrote, may clearly be
discerned by that one piece of his, translated out of base Almayn into English,
An 1652 wherein after all his exotic and uncouth divinity, See from page 153.
to 163.
he plainly cries up the Catholic Church of Rome, the Holy Father the Pope,
his Cardinals, his Bishops, his Parish Priests, his Deacons, his Sextons and
Monks, and condemns them that have deserted Rome, as having unorderly
rejected and blasphemed the Services and Ceremonies of the Catholic Church,
rented the Concord and nurturable Sustentation of the same, and turned away
therefrom. The scope of the book is but to lead captive to Babylon, all blinded
Professors who hold not the Truth (if ever they received it) in the love of it.

Yet again, such a spirit haunts these men (called Quakers) as professed Jacob
Behme in Germany, about thirty years bypast. He slights Two Theosophical
Epistles, p 24.
the righteousness imputed from without, so do they: Concerning the Election of
Grace, by J. Behme p. 81 and 142.
He magnifieth the little spark within, whereby the Father, he says, draws
them all to Christ, and teaches all within them, thereby: so say they. In
Adam, Ib. page 118
quoth he, stood the kingdom of grace, and R. Farnworth will not have Adam
stand in innocence under a covenant of works. His Doctrine is, Ib. 175.
That there is no certain ordination from eternity upon any soul particularly,
which is yet to be born, but only a common universal foreseeing of grace,
which will suit with the light in every man, held out by Quakers, as the
beginning of Christ; and the good use of that light; as that grace foreseen. He
jerks at Ib. page 182
our feeding upon bread and cup of Christ, and so does R. F. In many other
things they are agreed. He has stamped a name upon his book of Election, Ib.
page 195
The longer, the better liked, the more sought, the more found, which, I hope,
will among those that shall be saved, never prove true, but the contrary. The
longer, the more loathed, the more sought and searched, the more detected, and
the more found, the more rejected, notwithstanding all his Teutonick
Sublimations. There is a Dialogue between Launcher and Love-well, printed with
J. Behme's two Letters, which is said to be none of his, but it harmonizeth
with his Doctrine, and the Quakers, who build up a kingdom of works, upon as
sandy a foundation. A passage most notorious is this, Dialogue between Launcher
and Lovewel. p 89
Christ has his deserving, and I shall have mine, written in opposition to the
application of Christ, and of his merits by faith; and another is like
hereunto, Ib. page 112
He hits the nail on the head, who perceives that all his wen-lacing is, that
men believe to become as Adam was before the fall. Not Christ as a Redeemer
then, but the improvement of what Talent men have, and trusting thereunto, in
the mutability of their own wills, must bring them unto life, if they will have
it so.

Such kind of stuff, or worse, if worse may be, these men have learned (happily
at home) from Will. Erbury, of late, in his Call to the Churches, which book
was brought me by the same She-disciple that brought R. F. his Answer before;
who gave it out, that he was the forerunner to the Quakers, as John Baptist
was to Christ: it seems then he was to decrease, as they were to increase: but
I am of the mind, though he has by his packet of Letters and pamphlets helped
toward their increase, yet they shall decrease and consume away with the last
piece of Antichrists skin and bones. He denies it Call to the Churches by W
Erbury, page 4.
to be Gospel that few shall be saved, and expostulates the matter in these
terms, What Gospel or glad tidings is it to tell the world, that none shall be
saved but the Elect and Believers? He calls Christ a Legal Teacher, and says,
if you will believe him, The Gospel he taught was but in part, that which was
proper only to the Jewish Church, not that to be preached to the world. And
Ib. page 6.
the gospel which the Apostles preached to the world, 'twas not that which they
wrote to the Churches, nor yet what they read in the Scriptures of the
Prophets; But the Gospel was a mystery, which in the light of God they could
manifest to men, and make all men see themselves in God, that is in Christ, and
Ib. page 9.
God in our flesh, as in Christ's, that is (according to the Familistical
conceit) God dwelling as much and after the same way in our flesh, as in
Christ's. For the mystery of faith was more, says he, then men imagine, and it
may be more then Paul wrote to the Romans, and Churches of Galatia. Here are
sweet suggestions to set people a quaking indeed, among the devils, and to look
from the Scripture, for another Gospel (though there be no other, then that
which Paul preached and wrote to the Galatians, cap. 1. 6, 7.) in their own
hearts, and to lay down their lives in another way for the brethren (as the
fickle woman that brought me the book, told me she had thereby learned) then
the Apostle intended, 1 John 3. 16. viz. to die to the use of all our
Gospel Ordinances, for any of which, he says, Ib. page 19.
we have not so much as Scripture. As true as that, Ib. page 37.
Christ's coming again promised, Acts 1. 11. was nothing but his coming in
Spirit and Power in the Saints, and in their flesh, when they are most confused
and dark. Such kind of cloudy interpretations in Scripture these men have
drunk down, no coming of Christ in body again is owned by many of them; Christ
had a body only while he was upon the earth, which W. E. intimates in his
marginal note, Ib. page 39.
and infers, Because the days of his flesh was when he was on earth,
therefore his being now in heaven is all in the Spirit, for he is far above all
heavens; whereas the Apostle, Heb. 5. 7. uses the phrase of [days of his
flesh] to hold forth his state of infirmity and humiliation, and not to deny
his now being in Heaven in a true body glorified; which Heaven (where he is) is
far above all these heavens of air and sky, visible to our eyes at present; as
his person (which is not his manhood, though the manhood is-united to his
person) is far above ( i. e. in dignity and immensity) the Heavens as yet
invisible to us, and with the Godhead is not contained in the Heaven of
Heavens. But this of W. E. is like the notion and apprehension of J. Nayler,
who when he was asked by Justice Pearson, Is Christ in thee as man? answered,
Christ fills all places and is not Saul's Errand to Damascus, page 32.
divided, separate God and man, and he is no more Christ, whereas in Christ
God-man, his two natures are to be distinguished, although his person is not
divided.

Some strengthening to their fort of Babel our Quakers have received from the
followers of Pelagius and Arminius, who call Nature, Grace, as these magnify
Natures light, and call it Christ within them: who call the Notions of the
Godhead the Elements and first Rudiments of Salvation, as these call them the
first Principles of Religion, and the Cornerstone. How come they to lead men
from the Scriptures to the Creatures, but that some had said before them,
Christ was and is preached in the Sun, Moon and Stars? And again, how come they
to say, We cannot see how the Gospel of Christ is preached to every creature
under heaven, if it be not the Principle of light in the conscience, if they
were not acted by the same spirit? Or, how say they, produce one Scripture that
speaks of a natural light, if they had not read or heard of some Arminian
dictate to this purpose, viz. The Scripture knows not the word [natural] in any
such sense or signification, wherein it should express or distinguish the
unregenerate state of a man from the regenerate. How do they jump in one mind
concerning Peter's being out of the state of justification, when he denied his
Master? and about the Exposition of Rom 7. from ver. 14. to the end of the
Chapter, understanding it of a man unregenerate, in conflict with a natural
conscience, and not simply of one regenerate in combat with corruption of
nature, in every faculty of the soul.

How far the spirit of Antichrist works in these men, God will yet farther
discover, and what Jesuitical Plots and Designs there are carried on by some of
them unwittingly, by others as wickedly as wittingly, the day shall declare it.
And if any will take the pains to compare their Pamphlets, with the Charge
which Dr. Willet drew up about forty years Supplement to Synopsis Papismi.
bypast, against the Papists, he shall find that Quakerism is built upon the
Tetrastylon, or fourfold Pillar of Papistry, viz. 1. Sarcasms, slanders,
railings and forgeries. 2. Flat blasphemies and contradictions to Scripture. 3.
Loose arguments, weak solutions, etc. 4. Repugnant opinions and contradictions
among themselves, in all, leaving the consciences of people upon the Rack, or
full of doubts and uncertainties. For the undermining of which Pillars, the
learned and unlearned, the simple and judicious, are alarmed.

First, to a more assiduous and studious reading of the Scriptures. Get you
Bibles, it is your Souls physic, said Chrysostom of old, to the people his
hearers. There is no greater torment to the devils then to see men busied about
the Scriptures, said Orig.
another before him; But because it is as much pleasure to the devils to see
men abuse and wrest the Scriptures, ye are called Beloved.

Secondly, to the owning of them in their just Authority, above all Testimonies
of ancient Writers and modern Authors, who were but men, subject to infirmities
in the head, as heart; Above the Churches Testimony, which gives no authority
to the Scriptures, but only declare what is intrinsecally stamped upon them;
Above the testimony of your own hearts and consciences, which must receive a
true judgment from the right understanding and application of the Scripture;
bove all visions and revelations, which if false, draw from the voice of
Scripture, if true, they send you thither as to your Rule, and a more standing
Rule, and above all the Pamphlets of the Quakers, now swelled to above two
volumes.

Thirdly, to a dependence upon the Spirit speaking in the Scriptures, to seal
up their Authority to you, and to give the efficacy of what you read and hear.
Gods Spirit breathes in good men's books, much more in his own, and is there as
to seal up the truth of his Word, so to stamp the goodness of every truth upon
our hearts.

As for this Reply, what you find therein agreeable to the Spirit of God his
language, of plain and naked Scripture-truth, receive in the love of it, and
give God the glory. I only entreat (as Tantum oro, ut cum petitis, etiam
Tertulliani peccatoris memineritis, Tert. lib. de Bap.
one before me, of his Readers) that in your prayers (which should usher in all
our other work or recreation, and that of reading books) you would remember him
also who (though he has obtained mercy to be faithful, yet) has cause enough
to subscribe himself

The sinful JOHN STALHAM.

The Heads of their Contradictions.
1. To the Scriptures.
1 Concerning THe Scriptures. 2 Concerning The Trinity. 3 Concerning The Light
within. 4 Concerning The Law. 5 Concerning Sin. 6 Concerning Justification. 7
Concerning Regeneration. 8 Concerning Sanctification and its Perfection. 9
Concerning Christian warfare. 10 Concerning Repentance. 11 Concerning The means
of Grace. 12 Concerning Baptism. 13 Concerning Lords Supper. 14 Concerning
Prayer. 15 Concerning Singing. 16 Concerning Elders and Ordination. 17
Concerning Ministers maintenance 18 Concerning Immediate Calling. 19 Concerning
Immediate Teaching. 20 Concerning Questions. 21 Concerning Civil Honor. 22
Concerning Swearing.
2. To themselves.
1 Concerning THe Scriptures. 2 Concerning Hearing the Word 3 Concerning The
Light within. 4 Concerning Sin. 5 Concerning Christ. 6 Concerning
Justification. 7 Concerning Immediate Teaching. 8 Concerning Perfection. 9
Concerning Quaking and Trembling. 10 Concerning Growth in Grace. 11 Concerning
Forms of Religion. 12 Concerning Fruits of the Spirit. 13 Concerning
Ordinances. 14 Concerning Speech and Silence. 15 Concerning Elders. 16
Concerning Conscience and Laws.
THE Reviler rebuked. OR A Reply to R. FARNWORTH HIS INTRODUCTION.
BEfore I can fall upon the Subject of the Controversies between me and my
Antagonist, I must touch at his Introduction wherein he mentions his
receiving of my Book renews his charge against me, gives a seeming proof of his
charge, and concludes with a Thundering Anathema.

1. What he received, A Printed Paper (as he calls it slightingly) that came
out of Scotland into York and Yorkshire in England, published by one John
Stalham, Preacher of the Gospel at Edinburgh. That little piece, of three
sheets and a half, J. S. owneth, as published by him, and that he called
himself Preacher of the Gospel at Edinburgh ( for the present, as was inserted)
it was because for some time, he had been, and then continued preaching of the
fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, to his Auditors, from Romans 15.
29. with other Scriptures; And for as much as that great truth of the Gospel
was openly opposed by one of the Sect, called Quakers, touching the
justification of a believing sinner, he was called to enquire after the
opinions of the said Sect, and to draw up his collections from diverse of their
Pamphlets, which he referred unto several Heads of their Scripture and
Self-contradictions, wherein he is,

Secondly, Charged by R. F. to have manifested himself, and his subtle
serpentine Spirit, by his lies and slanders, for all his glosses and covers, to
be a minister of deceit, and so of Antichrist, of all this, or any part of it,
J. S. is no ways conscious, nor of his falsely accusing the people of the Lord
(suppose any people of the Lord be fallen into the errors and opinions of the
Quakers, as he is charitably jealous some are surprised therewith) nor of
showing forth a bitter spirit of envy against them and the truth. The Lord
knows he loves all the people of the Lord, for the Truths sake that dwells
in them, and pitieth those who are overrun with these errors (as with a
running Itch, or sore) as he himself would be loved and pitied, who is not
absolutely free of error; although the particular fruit is not (in these
matters of difference) visible to him; yet the root of all error, as of all
sin, is in him, and seen by him, not thoroughly in all degrees mortified. As for
any of his painted and decked Notions, Implications, and Contra-distinctions,
his gilded, colored, borrowed, and formed up imagined Expressions, he thinks
R. F. had a mind to please himself, and some of his Readers, with seeming
shadows of Rhetoric, which J. S. never affected, but clothed all he wrote with
a familiar, homespun style, as he shall, this Reply.

Thirdly, The seeming proof of the Charge is, That, with the Light, John 8. 12.
John 1. 9. R. F. thinks J. S. is seen and known to be one that hates it; and
why? 1. He bears record of himself against Christ and his Apostles: Let that be
found in any passage of his former, or present piece, and R. F. shall be no
false Apostle; J. S. will hide his head in a hole, or openly recant the folly
and wickedness. 2. He calls the true light (says R. F.) the Light of nature,
and the common Light of reason: Where Is the proof of this allegation? J. S.
does peremptorily deny, that he ever so expressed himself since he had the Light
of reason in him. The true Light (as it is printed both in R. F. his Book Page 2.
, and in the Bible, John 1. 9. with a great [ L] and there spoken of) is
Christ: J. S. never called Christ the Light of nature, or the common Light of
reason, (or reason, as Page 34. R. F. clamoreth and clattereth.) Happily, he may
say again and again, That Christ, as the very God, and the true Light, gives
the Light of nature to all men, and common light of reason (more or less) to
every man: for he is able to distinguish betwixt the Donor and his Gift;
betwixt the un-created Light-living God, and created Light-given, before the
fall, to Adam; or given back since the fall to him and his posterity. If R. F.
or any man will confound Christ-giving, or enlightening, with the Light-given,
or lighted up as a Candle in every man, he may as well confound God and the
Creature, and make them (as some blasphemously imagine) to be one and the same
Essence. Therefore, as in this, so in all other instances,

Fourthly, J. S. is confident (after R. F. his impudence in his Preface and
Proceedings) he shall neither be found Liar nor false Accuser; but, as he is
sure that Saint Paul's Anathema was out long since, Gal. 1. 8, 9. and is still
in force against those that preach another Gospel-way of Justification, as do
these Quaking-Papists, or Popish-Quakers; so the Anathema, Maran-atha, that R.
F. denounces imperatively and imperiously [ Let him be an Anathema, Maranatha]
against J. S. shall be as the curse causless, that shall not come; but that God
will do him more good, as already he has done something for him, by Shimei's
railing. Tyrants, Sectaries, Seducers, and Heretics (as Luther said) do
nothing else but drive us unto the Bible, to make us read more diligently
therein, and with more fervency to sharpen our Prayers; and I may add, (by
their buffetings) to be more taken off from self-estimation, and to be viler in
our own eyes, then we can be in the eyes of our Adversaries, who know not our
hearts.

THE Reviler rebuked. PART 1.
(1. Head of Scripture-contradiction.) Touching the Scriptures themselves.
Section 1.
THe holy Scriptures (by one thunder-stricken in spirit, and blasted in
profession with the Quakers Books and company in Scotland) were denied to my
face to be the word of Truth; which I noted as the first and great
Contradiction. R. Farnworth in answer returns me thus much of truth in form of
words, That the Scriptures are words that proceeded from the Spirit of Truth,
we do not deny, but own, and so they are the words of truth. Plainly he does
not say, they are the words of truth, nor plainly join Scripture the word of
truth to all.
issue with him that denied them to be the word of truth: but if they be owned
for words of truth, as proceeding from the Spirit of truth, then, for the
advantage of Truth I argue:

1. They are the word of God, and so should be owned. by them. Surely the
Spirit of truth is the Spirit of God, proceeding from the Father and the Son,
and these three John 15. 26.
being one, their word is one. That which is the word of the Spirit of truth,
is the word of the Father of truth, and of the Son of truth. The Scripture by
R. F. his confession is the word of the Spirit of truth, therefore he must
grant it to be the word of the Father, and of the Son of truth; and
consequently, the word of the true God.

2. If they be words of truth, as proceeding from the Spirit of truth, then
they are the Rule, Standard, and Touchstone of truth: the true Spirit being
known by his words, and directing us to know his mind by his words, what we
should believe as truth, and practice as truth, or according to it; but we
shall anon hear R. F. denying the Scriptures to be the rule of a Christian, as
of other men that are unchristian.

3. If they be the words of the Spirit of truth, then they are so to all men,
or but to some men.

1. If so to all men that have the Scriptures by them, then why does not R. F.
challenge him that denied them to be so to unbelievers, as I noted in my Book?
Why does he challenge me for falsehood? with a therefore too Page 2.
[ therefore thy saying is false.] What saying of mine is false, and wherefore?
I truly related what I had, from him I mentioned above, in discourse once and
again, That the Scriptures were not the word of truth: And does it follow,
because R. F. acknowledges them to be the words of truth, that, therefore I
heard not the contradiction, or mis-related what was spoken?

2. If they be the words of truth but to some men, ( not at all to wicked men
and unbelievers, no not condemningly, as were his expressions) then it seems,
the unbelief and wickedness of men, does make the Faith or Truth of God of none
effect: but S. Paul, Romans 3. 3. is of another mind; Rom 3. 3. cleared.
yea, the Spirit there (by the Interrogation first and second, What if some did
not believe? shall their unbelief make the faith of God of none effect?)
forcibly denies the frustration or making void of Gods word of truth, by the
Jews former or following continued unbelief. God has laid his faith and truth
to pawn (as it were) in the holy Scriptures, and as he is a God of truth, his
word is a word of truth, taking hold of men by the threatening (as Zech. 1. 6.)
who misbelieve or reject the promise. And, Is he the God of the Jews only, and
not also of the Gentiles? to justify and condemn all that are believing or
unbelieving, according to the Scriptures? Such therefore who will say, No more
is the truth of God or word of God to me then what I believe, (were they never
so dear friends) must be as roundly taken up and faithfully rebuked, as
sometimes Luther took up a man of no mean account, " Bullenger, you err, you
know neither your self nor what you hold. According to your falsities, if the
Word finds not the Spirit, but an ungodly Person, then it is not Gods word:
whereby you define and hold the word, not according to God who speaks it, but
according as people do entertain and receive it. Whereas (as he again) a true
Christian must hold for certain, and must say, That word which is delivered and
preached to the Wicked, to the Dissemblers, and to the Ungodly, is even as well
Gods word, as that which is preached to the good and godly upright Christians.
And I may add, even so are the Scriptures, that word which condemns
unbelievers already. But, as he again, "The Sectaries understand not the
strength of Gods word (read or preached) and we may wonder (with him) that they
write and teach so much of the Scriptures or of Gods word, seeing they so
little regard the same. For whatsoever R. F. says of his, and their owning of
the Scriptures, hearken to what follows in his backing of
Scripture-contradiction, That the Scriptures are the Word, God, and eternal The
Scriptures are the word of God, and truly so called.
Life, as thou would have them, thou can not prove, nor all the Magicians
to help thee. Here is good stuff, kitchin-stuff, or smoke out of the bottomless
pit.

1. Take the Word for the Son of God; where did I ever attempt to prove the
Scriptures to be the Son of God, God, and eternal Life? The Lord rebuke this
false spirit.

2. Because I with others call the Scriptures, as they are, and as they speak
themselves to be, the word of God; are we therefore Magicians? The Lord again
rebuke this reviling spirit. R. F. and others may talk of owning, and owning
the Scriptures as often as they fancy it; but they honor them not, I am sure,
who deny them that title of honor, The Word of God. Shall R. F. his Pamphlets
be called his Books, his Writings, and his Words; and shall not that which God
has written, be called Gods written Word? He answers nothing to that place in
Hosea, 8. 12. nor could that stripling J. P. At Coggshall sometime.
give any reason against the Argument drawn from it: viz. That which God has
written, is the word of God. But God has written the Scriptures, Therefore the
Scriptures are the word of God.


R. F. Objecteth, [ such as witness to the word, and Gods power, witness
against thee] to strengthen the new-coyned distinction is it, which was given
me in Scotland? The Scripture is not the word of truth, but the witness of Gods
power. Why, I grant it to be both the word, and the witness. The Scriptures are
Gods words, and Gods testimonies; some make The Scripture is Gods Word and
Witness also.
them two witnesses, Revel. 11. But I reasoned thus, by way of Quere, How can
the Scripture be Gods witness, if not true? how is it true, if not the word of
truth? R. F. undertakes to answer: "That the Spirit of truth, in the Prophets,
and in the Apostles, did carry them forth to witness what of Christ is declared
in the Scriptures, by words that proceeded from the Spirit of truth. Had he
gone no further, he had pretily well quitted himself, but he adds by way of
objection, The Spirit is not in the Letter, neither is the Spirit given by the
Letter, but by God and Christ, and yet he grants presently, in the same Page 2.
The Letter proceeded from the Spirit. By the Letter, I meant, (when I said page
22 of my book, the Spirit is in the Letter etc.) the whole Scripture, and so I
suppose does he: Now the whole Scripture is given The Letter (in a large sense)
and Scripture, all one.
by inspiration of God, the Father, Son and Spirit, who is,

1. Where he breathes forth truth, holiness etc. all along.

2. Where he speaks; The Scriptures are the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. Will
R. F. by denying the Spirit to be in the Scriptures stop the mouth and breath
of God? What How the Spirit is in the Scriptureletter.
profane boldness is this? Can he hold the wind in his fist, and restrain the
Spirit from giving forth himself, by the Letter, or Scripture, when the Spirit
will make good his promise, to bless the reading of it? I think he is not so
full of presumption, yet he presumes to say, The Spirit is not given by the
Letter: What thinks he of Scripture-promises? did he never find the Spirit
warming his heart, by the reading of them? He speaks as if he knew nothing of
the Spirits consolations, enlightnings, teachings or convictions, by the
Scriptures. And he writes, as if he would have none read the Letter of
Scriptures, in faith of a blessing by them, but to think, when they are reading
of them, they are cracking a hollow shell, that has no kernel in it, or
drinking a draught of dilute wine, that has no spirits in it; or reading of
his, and his fellows Pamphlets; wherein the Spirit of God is not present, by
any gracious operation, but the spirit of Satan (for the most part) unto
efficacy of delusion. His simple Reader may think the words that follow tend
much to the honor of the Spirit of God, [ The Letter proceeded from the Spirit,
but the Spirit did not proceed from the Letter] but such expressions as
disparage the Scriptures will never bring honor to the Spirit which is in them,
and works by them, what disparagement is there in these words to the
Scriptures? (will the simple-hearted say)

1. The phrase [Letter] is extenuating: as if all the The Letter (taken
strictly) is but legal administration. 2 Cor. 3. 6. explained.
Scripture were Law, or had a Legal administration as the Apostle uses it, 2
Cor. 3. 6. in a strict sense; The Letter kills: i. e, the bare legal command
without a promise of power, or pardon, (as a bare letter void of strength, life
and spirit) it leaves all men under a killing sentence and curse: Now thus to
represent all parts of the Scripture, is to affright men from the reading,
hearing or regarding of it.

2. The Letter or Scripture is set by R. F. (in other passages) in such
opposition to the Spirit, as if the Spirit disowned it after he has caused it
to be written, and no way accompanies it with his power. The Spirit proceeds
not from How the Spirit proceeds not from the Scripture, and how he does
proceed from, by, and with it.
the Scripture-Letter, in respect of his Essence, or Being, he is God of
himself, nor in respect of his personal subsistence, which is of the Father, or
from the Father, and from the Son (of which R. F. is ignorant, or inadvertent,
denying him, page 8. to be a Person) but in respect of his operation.

1. Improperly it may be said, the Spirit proceeds from the Scripture, as a
man goes from his outward shop, to work in his inner room, so the Spirit
proceeds from that (which he has put within the Book, or Bible) into the
heart, to work a sweet engraven work there:

2. Properly and plainly he proceeds by the Scripture, and with the Scripture,
to effect, and beget that in the soul which is like himself, Spiritual, and
like the Scripture, holy, and good. That is but a bravado therefore which he
adds, in the close of his second Page. [ Therein thou have erred, not knowing
the Spirit, nor power of God, declared in the Scriptures.]

Rep. 1. Wherein have I erred? who never expressed my self so dubiously, as thus
[the Spirit proceeds from the Letter] but thus, [ The Spirit is given by it.]
The Scripture is but instrumental to the Spirit, yet so instrumental he makes
it, as whatsoever R. F. thinks of me; I know, and remember, that my first
awakening of conscience was by the Spirit, and from the power of God, upon my
spirit, as I was reading that Scripture, Heb. 10. 26. For if we sin wilfully,
after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, etc. The Spirit which
gave this Scripture, gave forth his convictions by it to my heart; What if I
say, his Terrors? (as by that in Isa. 5. 18. at the ministers reading of the
Text and preaching upon it) will R. F. or any other say, why then do thou not
own our Trembling, and Quaking? I shall reply to R. F. why does he reject all
my Epistle to the Readers, in my former piece, where I gave some characters of
true Trembling? and to all others, with him I subjoyn, such is the power of the
Spirit in and by the Scripture, True Trembling is at the truth and power in
Scripture, and leads thereunto.
that there is a wide difference between the trembling from a supposed
Revelation, that is not by, nor according to the Scripture, but leads men both
from it, and from the due honor to be given to it; and the trembling which
arises from the Scripture-revelation, and from the Spirit speaking in that
which is read, and heard out of it. The former I judge to be theirs, who
pretend to the Spirit, without and beside the Scripture: the latter I own, and
all that the Lord has wrought upon, by the word, will own it with me. The
account which that famous Francis Junius, gives of the Spirits working by the
Letter of Scripture, is upon record, Vita Francisci Junii.
After he had drunk in that, which stirred up in him the seeds of Atheism, and
had vented something that way, before his father, and had profited nothing by
Sermons (to this present time) he takes up the new Testament (laid before him
by his father) and reads the former part of the first chapter of John, In the
beginning was the Word, etc. Ita commoveor legens, etc.
(as it first came to his hand and view) "Whereby (says he) I was so stirred,
that suddenly I perceived the divinity of Horrebat corpus, stupebat animus, etc.
the Argument, and the majesty, and authority of the style, very far excelling
all the floods of humane eloquence, my body trembled, my mind was astonished,
and I was so affected all that day, that I knew not where and what I was. And
from that time forward, he gave himself to the study of the Scriptures, and
read other books but coldly and carelessly in comparison. Here was the mighty
operation of the Spirit, accompanying the Letter: here was a right Scripture
efficacy from the Spirits application of it to the conscience. As God declares
his Spirit and power, or speaks of them in the Scriptures, so he declares, or
exerts, and puts forth his Spirit and power by them, and that upon their hearts
who do not believe. In this first Section of my book, I had noted another of
their Contradictions: viz. of James Naylers, A few words of J. Nayler, page 10.
and 11.
thus now more fully: Thou call the Scriptures a standing Rule, but it is
not so to you, who cannot believe that ever it shall be fulfilled in you, as it
was given out by the holy Ghost. Contrary, I said, so Luke 16. 26. They have
Moses and the Prophets (for a standing Rule) let them hear them, and ver. 31.
If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though
one rose from the dead. Here the Scriptures are asserted to be a more standing
rule then visions and revelations. R. F. Page 3. 4.
calls the simple-hearted to judge of my deceitful perverting of this Scripture
for my own ends, from it raising a false doctrine;

Rep. Let simple and wise also examine the proofs and reasons of this charge,
and of his denial of the Scriptures. The Scripture a standing Rule.


1. To be a standing rule (at all, or to any) 2. To be a more standing rule,
etc.
The show of reason he gives for the first, I shall faithfully and for
conviction (if the Lord please) of this Gain-sayer, uncase and discover the
weakness and nakedness thereof.

1. The verse says not so. Rep. The 29 verse means Luke 16. 29. cleared and
vindicated.
and intends no less; Scripture-sense is Scripture, as our Lord teaches us
to reason from John 7. 38. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said,
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. The Scripture no where had
said so, in so many express letters, syllables and words, but it says it in
the scope and sense, and it speaks as much as amounts thereunto. So does this
place, for the Scriptures being a standing rule, there is the sense of what I
spoke. They have Moses and the Prophets, for what? for a cipher? No, but for a
rule, Let them hear them; for what? if not to testify unto them, (as was
desired ver. 28.) that they might repent, (as was expected ver. 30. if one came
from the dead.) Hence I reason, They that constantly testify in their writings
from God, how unbelievers should escape hell torments, they are in their
writings a standing rule to them that do not believe; (as to all other) But
Moses and the Prophets do constantly testify in their writings from God, how
unbelievers should escape hell torments;


Therefore, Moses and the Prophets in their writings, are a standing rule to
them that do not believe.

And therefore again, R. F. his charging of me, in the presence of God, to be a
liur of the Scriptures, will by the Lord one day be made to fall upon his own
pate, or conscience; notwithstanding his second reason thus; If Moses and the
Prophets had been left (to all and for ever) for a standing rule, then Christ
and the Apostles might not have been after Moses and the Prophets for following
examples or rules.

Rep. It follows not, for Christ and the Apostles brought no new rule for the
substance, but only cleared and enlarged it, in what was Moral and
Evangelical; so that R. F. is beside the cushion when he adds, [ And therein
thou bring the old Covenant to contradict the new.] What he means by the
old Covenant, I know not very well, or what by the new. The old Covenant in
Scripture phrase and meaning, What the old Covenant, what the new.
was but the old administration; the new Covenant, the new copy of the same
Will and Testament, Heb. 8. 13. the same for substance before as now. Moses
wrote of Christ, John 5. 46. The Prophets from Samuel, and those that follow
after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days, the days
of the New Testament, and the things of Christ, Acts 3. 24. As God spoke by the
mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the world began, Luke 1. 70.
There is no contradiction between the Old Testament and the New, in the sense I
have given; therefore none in my collection from Luke 16. That Christ asserts
the Scriptures to be a standing rule.

3. Reason, It crosses many Scriptures, as Ephesians. 5. 1. Romans 8. 14. 2 Cor. 3.
17.

Rep. Not one of these, nor any other, for the Scripture cannot, does not
contradict it self, how ever it seems so to them that understand them not, and
have not will or skill to clear the harmony.

The first Scripture alleged Ephesians. 5. 1. requires, that Ephesians 5. 1. opened.
Christians be followers of God as dear children. Dear children of God will
mind their Fathers will in Moses and the Prophets; and if we be followers of
God, we must follow him in his whole written word, as it is plain in the Old,
or as it is explained and cleared in the Books of the New Testament.

The second Scripture Romans 8. 14. has nothing against Rom 8. 14. vindicated.
The Spirit leads by his Letter.
the Scripture rule, however R. F. improveth it to his purpose thus, They that
follow him in the Gospel, are led by his Spirit, and that is not the Letter:
for, although the Letter is not the Spirit, yet the Letter is the Spirits
Letter; and they that follow God in the Gospel, do, and dare not (upon the
hazard of disobedience to their Father) but follow him in the Spirits written
Gospel, seeing the Spirits inward leading and guidance is to the same obedience
which the Scripture leads unto. The Spirit leads by, and to the Scripture,
never from it, as the Spirit in Seducers does.

The third Scripture, 2 Cor. 3. 17. God is that Spirit; 2 Cor. 3. 17.
vindicated.
what then? Then the Spirits Letter is Gods Letter, I can conclude. Or thus,
The written word of the Spirit is the very written word of God; and again, God
that gave the Letter, gives the Spirit with it, and by it; [ with it] even to
those that yet are unbelieving, and are ever resisting the Spirit, speaking in
it and from it, Nehem. 9. 20. Acts 7. 51. [ By it] to those whom he effectually
preventeth and calls home to himself, or builds up, Acts 8. 35. Acts 10.
34. with 44. But R. F. his drift in quoting the words above, to make people
believe, that because God, or the Lord is that Spirit, as says that Scripture;
therefore, that, and all the rest of the Scripture, is not a standing rule,
which follows as much as if it should be said, God is the Lord, therefore the
creature is not his creature. I shall for his learning and better improvement
of that Text, turn the edge of his allegation against himself. If that
Scripture says, The Lord is that Spirit, then that Scripture is the rule for
me and him also to believe, the Lord is that Spirit: and if that Scripture be
not fallen out of its authority, it is a standing rule for us so to believe;
but that Scripture says as much, and R. F. runs to the authority of it as yet
in force, therefore that Scripture is a standing rule for the faith of that
truth; and consequently, other Scriptures are the rule for other truths; and
all Scripture, for all truth; what we are to believe, and what to practice.

A fourth Argument seems to be drawn from current experience; But we follow
God, who are guided by the Spirit, and that is our guide and rule, to wit, the
Spirit of truth.

Rep. 1. Whose experience is this? whom means he by [ we?] If only himself and
his companions, who deny the Scriptures to be a rule; then I deny they are
guided by the Spirit of God, who breathing forth the Scriptures, and guiding
men to write them, guides men to read, hear, believe, and obey them as their
rule. If by [ we] he means all sober Saints and godly conscientious Readers,
(not so in his opinion, but really so) and if he means by [ the Spirit] the
Spirit of God; then I appeal to all such, and all the Saints who love the truth
in sincerity, whether they have the Spirit for their guide without, or not
rather with and by the Scriptures? The Spirit indeed is promised to be the
Saints guide, John 16. 13. but it is neither there said (although John 16. 13.
vindicated.
R. F. affirms it) That Christ appointed him to be the rule; nor is he properly
the rule, but the giver of the rule, and the guide unto, and by the rule. The
schoolmaster which sets the copy, is not the copy; but he guides the hand of
the scholar to write after the copy: in like manner, the Spirit of God appoints
the Scripture to be written for a rule, and guides the Saints to believe and
live according to it.

Yet would R. F. have the force of a fifth Reason lie in these words, [ Since
he promised it] as if the Scripture was not a rule, since the Spirit was
promised as well as before. Surely, if it was a rule before, it is still the
same rule, as it is the same Scripture. And the promise of the Spirit in a
larger measure, does not in the least hinder the Scripture from being a rule;
but the larger measures of the Spirit help toward the understanding of that
rule, for a clearer and more Gospel-like administration and application.

6. Reason. If thou would have the Letter to be the rule, and Moses and the
Prophets only, then thou would not have Christ and the Apostles to be
followed, according to 1 Cor. 11. 1.

Rep. 1. I used not the word [onely] although the Books of Moses and the
Prophets, when Christ referred to them, Luke 16. were the only Scriptures
extant, and a sufficient rule for the present.

2. When Christ by his Spirit in the Apostles enlarged the Scriptures, he
altered not the rule for the substance of it; Moses and Christ, the Prophets
and Apostles are so to be followed, that he who leaves the one will forsake the
other; and he that loves the one, will cleave to the other. Had ye believed
Moses, says Christ, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me: but if ye
believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words? John 5. 46, 47. And
such is the harmony of the Apostles with Moses and the Prophets, that the one
preached (and consequently wrote) no other things, then what the other did say
should come; that Christ should suffer, etc. Acts 26. 22, 23. What if the new
Testament was written after the Old? the matter contained in both, is of the
same concernment to believers as unbelievers. What if Paul gives that godly
exhortation, Be ye 1 Cor. 11. 1. vindicated.
followers of me, even as I am of Christ; is Christ divided? Is not Christ in
the Old Testament and in the New, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever? He
that follows the Apostle, as he followed Christ; and follows the Prophets,
as they spoke and wrote by the Spirit of Christ, does the same thing.

7. Reason. Seeing we are not under the Law, but under Grace, the Spirit of
Christ is our rule and guide.

Rep. This is added to no good purpose, but still to contradict the Scripture,
and to blot it out from being a rule. For, R^m. 6. 14. cleared.


1. Albeit true believers are not under the Law in respect of its ceremony,
curse, rigorous exaction, and domination; yet they are under the direction and
rule that it holds forth, and that as they are regenerate, Romans 7. 25. With the
mind, that is the regenerate part, I my self (says Paul) serve, therefore am
under, the law of God. So again, 1 Cor. 9. 21. Under the Law to Christ, as the
rule of holiness and righteousness is dispensed in the hand of Christ, and for
obedience (with a Gospel-frame of spirit) unto Christ.

2. When the Apostle says, [We] are under Grace, he singleth not out a Sect of
men called Quakers, (unknown in his days) but he intends all true Christians,
and their condition, under a covenant of Grace, (not Legally, but Evangelically
administered) having the Spirit of liberty to lead them, from under the dominion
of sin, to the obedience of Christ, according to a written word or rule. What
if the vail be upon the hearts of unbelieving Jews? 2 Cor. 3. 15. because they
own not the Son of God, and Son of the Virgin to be the Messiah; is the vail
therefore upon my heart, as R. F. reasons? Yes, because thou setst up Law in
stead of Gospel.

Rep. I wish he well understood what it is to set up Law What it is to set up
Law instead of Gospel.
in stead of Gospel: It is not only to set up Jewish ceremonies and Typical
shadows, after Christ's abolition of them, as the Jews endeavored; but to set up
all, or any act or work, required in the Law or word of God, whether done in
natures strength, or by moral abilities, or by the Spirits strength, to be a
man's justifying righteousness before God; this is far from what I urge and
press, when I plead for Moses writings, etc. to be a standing rule to direct to
Christ, and to direct in a way of sanctifying righteousness when a soul is come
to Christ.

But we witness the glory that exceeds, etc. but thou art ignorant of that.

Rep. I confess, I know that glory of Gospel-ministration which the Apostle
speaks of, 2 Cor. 3. but in part; but this I know, that when our Lord appoints
men constantly to hear Moses and the Prophets, as writing of him, and as giving
out the same rules for Faith and Holiness, which himself gave; he that shall
take men off from attending their writings, according to their true scope,
seduceth and draws off from Christ. And as ignorant as I am, I can see to the
end of that which is abolished, which is Christ, the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes: and I can see that he that believes
not in the same Christ, which Moses pointed at, believes not at all, or but in
a false Christ; yea, with half an eye (through the same grace) I can see that
he who takes not Moses writings, as he wrote of Christ, and makes them the rule
of his faith and manners; and also refuses the writings of the Prophets to be
the like rule; he does more then implicitly refuse the writings of Christ and
of the Apostles, from being a rule also R. F. Page 4.
therefore holding to the first contradiction, That the Scriptures are not a
standing rule; may well pass on to a second, That they are not a more standing
rule The Scriptures a more standing Rule then visions etc.
then visions and revelations; as I had collected from Luke 16. 31. If they
hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose
from the dead. The reason hereof is strong; rising from the dead (which is of
the same nature with visions and revelations Matthew. 27. 53.) may be
counterfeited (as we find, 1 Samuel 28.) Moses and the Prophets were extant in
the volume of Gods book, and their authority is owned among the Jews to this
day: and it is so authentic, that when either particular Jews have been, or
the Nation shall be converted to the Lord, they presently adhere to it, as to
their Rule; so the Apostle prophesied, 2 Cor. 3. 16. when it, any poor Jew, or
rather 2 Cor 3. 16. with 14. opened.
collectively, when the people and children of Israel, the ten Tribes, with the
two, Shall turn to the Lord, the vail shall be taken away, which is now upon
their heart in the reading of the Old Testament, that is, of the books thereof;
The books and writings of the Old Testament stand, and shall still abide, at
their conversion (though the old administration of the Covenant of grace is
abolished) and they shall be their Rule (together with the books of the New
Testament) which they will then understand, own, and embrace, as more certain
to them, then if one rose from the dead, not in a feigned but real way. Hence
it is that Christ after himself was risen (as others with him) and appeared,
called his disciples to the Scriptures, and opened them unto them, Luke 24. 29.
yea, he urges his own death and resurrection, that it ought to have been so;
And beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself. This made their hearts burn within
them, ver. 32. when as the rest were cold at heart, through fear, at their
first sight of Jesus, supposing they had seen a spirit, ver. 37. Let visions
and revelations be never so certain, yet the Scriptures quoad nos, as to us,
are a more standing Rule. Why they are not so in R. F. his judgment, and
others; we shall know by his reasons.

1. Christ says in Matthew. 11. 27. No man knows the Son but the Father,
neither knows any man the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son,
(not the Scripture, but the Son) will reveal him: here revelation is the surer
rule of knowing God.

Rep. If I should deal as rudely with R. F. as he with me, Matthew. 11. 27.
vindicated.
I should not only say, the assertion is thine, not the Lords, but therefore
thou art a liar, and accuser of the Lord: but I will not exchange words, I will
prove him to be what he would fasten upon me. He that sets the Son of God, and
the Scriptures at distance, belies Christ, accuses the Lord; R. F. does thus,
by his Parenthesis ( not the Scripture but the Son) his conscience will draw up
the conclusion one day. Again, he that grants one part of truth, and denies
another part, wrongs the truth, and the Lord of truth; But R. F. granting one
part of truth, viz. That the Son reveals, and denies the other part, viz. That
the Scripture reveals; when as he has this from the very Scripture, that the
Son reveals, and what he reveals; therefore he may be (if he be not)
condemned in his own conscience that he wrongeth the truth, and the Lord of
truth. Again, he that understands Matthew. 11. 27. of immediate revelation onley,
and shuts out all mediate revelation, by the Scripture, falsely accuses the
Lord of the Scripture; but R. F. understands that place of immediate revelation
only, and shuts out all mediate revelation by the Scripture; therefore, R. F.
falsely accuses the Lord of the Scriptures. If he understands it of mediate
revelation by the Scripture, then it Section. 1.
will follow by his reasoning, that the Scripture-revelation is surer then the
Scripture. If he says, the Spirit, by the Scripture, makes the truth more
sure, not in it self but to us, it is that I contend for, and that which all
believers are to pray for, Ephesians. 1. 17. There is the light in the air, and the
Ephesians. 1. 17. opened.
light of the eye: now though as to bodily sight, the light in the air does not
give the light of, or in the eye, but only to thee ye; yet the Spirit of
revelation (which is peculiar to Saints, and common to all Saints, by the light
of Scripture that is as the medium or means of light in the air) does give the
light in the understanding as it brings light to it, therefore it follows, ver.
18. the eyes of your understanding being enlightened: But still the Spirit of
revelation is not a surer Rule, no nor properly our Rule, but our guide and
leader to, and by his Rule, the Scriptures, which are the more sure word of
Prophecy, as to us, especially in a ordinary, and standing way, in all ages.

2. R. F. reasons, Visions are a way of Gods making known himself, after
Moses and the Prophets, as to Ananias, Paul, and Peter. Act. 9. cap. 10. Gal. 1.

Rep. 1. These visions were but occasional and extraordinary; as sure as the
Scriptures (as all true visions and revelations of God are) in themselves, and
to the particular men that had them, yet not to us that saw them not, but know
from the Scriptures they had them: those Scriptures, viz. Act. 9. cap. 10. Gal.
1. and so all the Scriptures are as sure, yea to all Saints more sure: compare
2 Pet. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 16. 19, opened.
16. [when we made known unto you] with ver. 19. [we have also a more sure
word] we, that is, you with us, and we with you. Visions were but of rare use,
the Scriptures are of long, and constant use; and by such as receive them to be
of divine inspiration, they have ever been acknowledged more firm (as to us
still) then occasional visions.

2. If God had known (as Chrysostom upon Luke 16.) that visions from the dead,
would have done more good to the living, he would not have omitted or waved
such a way, in an ordinary course.

3. As sure as the Gospel was to Paul, given him by immediate revelation, yet
he confirmed it to others by the Scriptures, Act. 26. 22, 23. and the Bereans
examined it by the same Rule, Act. 17. 11, 12. Searching the Scriptures daily
whether those things were so, therefore many of them believed, Wherefore?
because they found, what Paul taught, as had been revealed to him, was
agreeable to that Lydius lapis, that infallible touchstone, and most standing
Rule, the holy Scriptures.

3. Reason. Paul knew much of the writings of Moses, and of the Prophets, and
Letter of the Scriptures whilst he was a Persecutor, but then he knew not
Christ, as after he did, and went up to Jerusalem by revelation, Gal. 2. and
not by the Scriptures, therefore the Scriptures are not so sure a Rule as
visions and revelations by the Spirit of truth are.

Rep. 1. Paul had nothing of Gospel Truth, given him by revelation, but what
for matter and substance, was before in the Scripture: which Gospel, although
he knew not while he was a persecutor, yet as a Jew he walked up strictly to
the Letter of the Law, or Rule in outward acts.

2. His special revelation for going up to Jerusalem, was a special application
of the general rule of Scripture, viz. to do what God commanded him; but in it
self it is no rule for our imitation in the like matter of fact.

3. His true revelations never lifted him up above the Scriptures.

4. The same Spirit of truth which gave out his revelation, gave forth the
Scripture by inspiration, and as immediately directed him to write all his
Epistles, for the more certainty, to others, that they might know he had his
Revelations from the Lord; therefore to us the Scriptures are as sure, yea a
more sure rule, and the only standing rule, for faith and manners.

4. Reason or allegation of R. F. is, The Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 13. exhorted
others to wait for the grace that was 1 Pet. 1. 13. cleared and vindicated.
to brought to them at the revelation of Jesus Christ.

Rep. 1 By [grace] here is meant glory, as cap. 5. 1. that which is to come, is
the glory that shall be revealed; first Christ's glory, cap. 4. 13. at his
coming in the clouds, his glory shall be revealed; secondly, the Saints glory
(which they shall have out of free grace, or favor from God) Col. 3. 4. When
Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall they also appear with him in
glory.

This glory, to be brought at Christ's coming, the Apostle exhorts the Elect,
and called, to hope for perfectly, or (...)
to the end, to death, and in death; yea they may and do carry this hope with
them into heaven; viz. hope of a glorious resurrection etc. When? at his
coming, 1 Cor. 15. 23. When the Lord shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty angels, in flaming fire, etc. 2 These. 1. 7. this is not a Revelation by
the Spirit, that Paul, or Peter (in the places mentioned) speak of, and
therefore makes nothing to R. F. his purpose; no more then what follows, in a
fifth Reason or Allegation.

The deep things of God are revealed (not by the Letter, but) by the Spirit, 1
Cor. 2. 10. Therefore revelations by the Spirit of truth are more sure then the
Letter.

Rep. 1. Did not R. F. grant us at first, page 2. that the Scriptures proceeded
from the Spirit of truth? Whether then they be revelations, or doctrines, or
writings, or interpretations, as they come from the Spirit of truth he must
yield they are all alike sure, in themselves, or he still fights against the
Scriptures, or the Spirit, or both.

2. The Apostle says not that the Spirit reveals the deep things of God, but
searches them, that is, he exactly and infinitely knows them, as God knows
them, (and thence by the way, he is proved to be God) but while he can, and
does go to the bottom of all things in and concerning God, his revealing is ad
placitum, when, to whom, in what measure, and in what way he pleases. Although
the Spirit knows all things infinitely, and therefore God reveals what he
reveals of the things of grace and glory, by his Spirit: yet to some he
reveals nothing immediately; to others, he reveals but some things, or but
something of every thing (needful to consolation, sanctification and salvation)
as they are capable of it.

3. As deep things as the Spirit has revealed, they are all in the Scripture.
It is one way of the Spirits revelation, to give forth deep mysteries, in
writing, and that as mysteriously, Section. 2.
as if it were by Hieroglyphics, Stenography, or Characters. The Spirit
reveals by Paul to the Romans, cap. 9. and 10. and 11. deeper things then
Paul can fathom, which makes him cry out, cap. 11. 33. O the depth! And the
last piece of Scripture which God has left us, is the Revelation of Jesus
Christ, which God gave unto him to show unto his servants: and he sent and
signified it by his Angel unto his servant John, that he should write it to the
Churches, and leave it (with the rest of Scripture) as a complete and
sufficient Rule, not to be added unto, nor to be subtracted from; unless
therefore R. F. will be liable to the plagues threatened, Rev. 22. 18, 19. he
must not bring in his un-written Revelations, no, though they were un-written
Verities, as any part of the Rule, to be added unto the words of Gods book. And
from all that has been replied to him in this Section, I conclude, He that
denies the Scriptures to be our Rule, denies them to be the Scriptures of God;
and he that denies them, or some of them, to be a standing Rule, denies them,
or some of them, to be no Rule. (as if sometimes they were a Rule, sometime
not) And he that denies them to be a more standing Rule, denies the scope and
sense of Christ's words in Luke 16. 31. and other places; But such a Denial we
have from R. F. in the name of others of his judgment. Therefore, thus far (in
stead of vindicating the Scriptures) he, with his fellows, have contradicted
them.

Section 2.
IN my second Section of their Contradictions to the Scriptures themselves, and
their Authority, I had quoted Francis Howgil in his own phrase, [ The Scripture
is other men's Words] contrary to 2 Timothy 3. 16. R. F. Page 5.
tells me, that by a piece of Logic I would raise a false accusation against
F. H. and make a false conclusion, to wrest the Scriptures to serve my own
turn, but cannot. The Scriptures not man's word, but Gods.


Rep. 1. He denies not but the words I quoted are the words of F. Howgil. 2.
How does my Logic make either the Accusation or Conclusion false? The word of
Scripture is Gods, I said, as is the Inspiration; and because it was given by
Inspiration, therefore it is, and is known [or proved] to be his Word; as thus
I make it out further, and more plainly: That which is given by Inspiration of
God, is not one man's word or another, but Gods word; But all the Scripture was
given by Inspiration of God; Therefore all the Scripture is Gods word, and not
one man's word or another.


What an under-valuing Expression then is that of F. H. to call the Scripture
other men's words? And what Chop-logick have we from R. F. Holy men of God spoke
as they were moved, and spiritual men spoke forth those words; therefore they
were words spoken by the men of God? this is idem per idem, a proof of the same
thing by the same; a delighting to hear himself speak, and a tyring of his
Reader before he has read five pages of his book.

3. Why will R. F. yield one part of the Argument, and not the other? He
yields the Scripture to be given of God, and by the Spirit, the Spirit of
truth; why then yields he not the Scriptures to be the word of God, but that he
will continue to contradict the Scripture and himself also? while he joyneth in
confederacy with F. H. and speaks disdainfully of the words of God, as the
words of men, this man and that. Grant we that both of them F. H. and R. F.
sometime alleviate that harsh expression, as if not used in opposition to God,
but to us [ The Scriptures are others men's words that spoke them freely, says
the one: And, They were spoken by the holy men of God [other men] that were
holy, and spoke them freely, and not by you that are sinful, and preach for
hire, says the other; yet will they not confess they were spoken by God, and
are the very word of God: nay R. F. page 4. Line 18 and 21.
had before set the visions of Ananias and Paul in a comparative Opposition to
the words of Moses and the Prophets, and preferring the former before the
latter, viz. the Scriptures, these being but the words of other men, and the
words of others: what is this but to sow seeds in men's hearts of alienation
from the Scriptures, which the young man should take heed to, and cleanse his
ways by in youth, which children shouldbe trained up in from their childhood,
and which are not to be despised or forgotten when they are old? Such a
contradicting scope has all R. F. his pains taken, page 6. to prove the
Scriptures are other men's words, and not mine, or theirs in Scotland. I would
ask him, what did the Preacher, Eccl. 1. speak? his own words or Gods? but that
he prevents the question by telling us Page 6.
King Lemuel was a man, and his mother (who taught him the words he penned
down, Prove. 31.) was a woman. And the Song of songs was Solomon's, and he was a
man, Cant. 1. What follows from hence? therefore Solomon's words are not Gods
words: it better follows from R. F. his reason, viz. he was a man, and not
God, then that the Scriptures are not ours; for we are men as they were that
penned them; and although we were not the Penmen, we are the Readers, and God
only is the Author of the Scriptures, which in a way of disparagement R. F.
calls a Printed Bible, and reasons vainly against our use of the Scriptures,
because, neither did Jeremiah, nor any Prophet, or any Apostle ever stand with
a Printed Bible in his hand, and say, Hear the word of the Lord: Then the word
of the Lord was declared and spoken without Printed Bibles, and before Printing
was invented.

Rep. 1. They had a written Bible or Volume, and did many Scripture to be read
and preached from
times speak out of that, as always according to it. Exodus 34. 28. with cap.
35. 1. Moses speaks what was written on the mount upon the Tables of stone: And
Deuter. 31. 19. Write ye this song for you, and teach it the children of
Israel: verse 22. Moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it
them. When Jeremy could not go into the house of the Lord, he sends Baruch his
Scribe, to read what was written from his mouth, even the words of the Lord in
the ears of the people, etc. Jer. 36. 4, 6. See also Jeremiah 28. 1.
Paul had his Tertius to write the Epistle to the Romans, cap. 16. 22. and he
orders the Epistle to the Colossians to be read amongst them, and that they
cause it to be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans, Col. 4. 16. and read
it was as the word of the Lord unto them; yea, God has so honored his written
Bible, that he has ordered as well the Copies, as the Autographum, or the
Pen-mans own handwriting, to be his Scripture also. Those Proverbs of Solomon
which the men of Hezekiah copied out, Prove. 25. 1. are as authentic as any of
the rest; so was the Copy which the King wrote out, according to Gods command,
Deuteronomy. 17. 18.

2. Printing was a rare Invention, and the gift of God, Printing invented
betwixt the 1440 and 1450 year of our Lord. See Mr. Fox, vol. 1. p. 927.
above two hundred years ago. The benefit is sufficiently noted by Mr. Fox,
"Hereby Tongues are known, Knowledge grows, Judgment increases, Books are
dispersed, the Scripture is seen, the Doctors be read, Stories are opened,
Times compared, Truth discerned, Falsehood detected, and with the finger
pointed. And by the printing of the Bible, the doctrine of the Gospel has
sounded The benefit of Printing, and of printed Bibles.
to all nations, and that with great expedition. So many Printing-presses of
the Bible, so many Clock-houses against the high Towers of Antichrist: none but
Papists have envied Gods people and Christ's Preachers, a Printed Bible: Who
were they that obstructed (what they could) the printing of it in English, in
King Henry the 8. days, but the Popish Prelates and their creatures? The Popish
Vicar of Croyden, Caiaphas-like prophesied, Either we must root out Printing,
or Printing will root out us. Every good Christian have been glad of a piece of
a Printed Bible, when it came first out in our Mother-language.

3. The later this Mercy has been vouchsafed to have Printed Bibles, the
greater Gods favor to his people, and the greater their Ingratitude who slight
the Mercy; the greater their pride who would rather have their own Scriblings
in print, then the Scriptures of God, who prefix to their writings (as these
Quakers, so called, in many of their Pamphlets) This is the word of the Lord,
but are against such a Title to a Printed Bible, or such a Preface, before a
Sermon from a Bible-Text, as this, Hear the word of the Lord.

4. If the printed Bible be according to the Original Copy, or a true Extract
or faithful Translation of Scripture, it is as warrantable to preach out of it,
as out of a written one; for Printing is one kind of writing, what is first
written by a pen, is after written by a stamp: The Press is but an handmaid to
Orthography, or right-writing, and a Midwife to help forth the conceptions of
the Mind, formed at first by the pen.

But, says R. F. Page 6.
if Printing had not been invented, what would you h^ve preached by, that knows
not the word of Life, which was before Writing or Printing was?

Rep. 1. The written Copies were before those printed, and by the former only
Gods servants preached, till the latter came forth; and according to those
Copies and Volumes of Gods book would I have preached.

2. Those Copies would have taught me, as now they do, that which R. F. has
not learnt by the printed, although he might learn it, namely, to distinguish
between the Essential word of Life, Christ the Son of God, and the The word of
God essential scriptural.
Scriptural word.

3. As the Essential word was before the Scriptural, so he was before Visions
and Revelations were given to men, yea, before there was a holy man to receive
them, or a world for holy men or others to inhabit.

Lastly, As no true prophet or preacher ever rejected a written or a printed
Bible (truly so, and so called) no more has he denied it the Title of the
word of the Lord. Never did the Lord send such an ignorant prophet, like J. P.
at Coggeshall, to turn to the nineteenth chapter of the Revelation, and tell
the people, because ver. 13. Christ's name is called, The word of God; therefore
the Bible and Scriptures he plucked out of his pocket, and held in his hand, was
not the word of God. But though false prophets pervert the Printed Bible, and
use that Sword of God to cut its own throat, Gods faithful Messengers and
Interpreters know how to handle it dexterously and faithfully. What is the
chaff to the wheat, says the Lord? Jer. 23. 28. What are man's words, our own,
or other men's words, to the Lords? What is a false Interpretation or
Application of Scripture to the true?

Section 3.
IN answer to the third Section, R. F. owneth John Lawsons words, which I had
noted; viz. [W^ have nothing to try men by, but the Letter, the Bible, or
written word which is natural and carnal,] with his own words, [ Your Tryer is
a Chapter or Verse of the Scriptures declaration] and now upbraideth us for
having no better way to try men's Doctrine and Spirits by, then the Letter.

Rep. By the Letter, or writing of the Spirit of God, which The Scriptures the
tryer of Doctrine.
is the Law and the Testimony, we do know what is the Doctrine of the Spirit.
The Spirit gives his sense and mind by letters and words of Scripture all
along, take one place with another. And when men speak according to that word,
of Scripture, Law and Testimony, Isaiah 8. 20. (which cannot Isaiah 8. 20^
cleared.
be, but when they take the word in, and with its true sense) then they bring
not man's Doctrine, but Gods: but if they speak not according to that word, it
is not because there is not light sufficient in the Scripture-word; but because
there is no light in them that handle it and speak of it; their hearts are
dark, their judgments blind and ignorant; and they bring not the Spirits
Doctrine, but their own. As for instance, R. F. (if you will believe him
without trial) says for himself and his fellows, [ We speak according to it,
viz. the Law and the Testimony, and therefore there is light in us.] But
fearing he should not be believed upon his own testimony, he brings a verse of
Scripture for it, 2 Cor. 2 Cor. 4. 6, vindicated.
4. 6. where,

1. He allows that in himself, which he condemns in us; viz. to make a Chapter
or Verse of the Scripture the tryer.

2. He sets that Scripture in opposition to Isaiah 8. 20. and while he
pretends to speak according to Law and Testimony, he perverts the testimony
given by Paul of himself, and of true Gospel Ministers and believers; viz. That
God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, had shined in their
hearts; for it is not Paul's scope to disparage Scripture light. The light that
shined in Paul's heart, and the light that shines in the Scripture, is the same
light; and God who shines in the heart by Gospel Light, (of which the Apostle
speaks ver. 4.) shines in the Scriptures by the same light.

3. It follows not, because there was light in Paul, and such as he incl^des
with himself, that there is light, and the same light in R. F. and such as he
includes with himself: nor does it appear to me and others, that God shines in
his or their hearts, who give a new, and dark interpretation of that Scripture,
(as of other Texts) For R. F. Page 6. Isaiah 8. 20. vindicated.
with J. Nayler expound it of the Law of the New covenant written in the heart
by God, etc. Now, though the Scriptures do witness, that the Law of the new
Covenant is written in the heart, Jer. 31. 31. Heb. 8. 10, 11. yet that is not
the meaning of the phrases [Law and Testimony,] Isaiah 8. 20. but the meaning
is, The Law and Testimony written in the Scriptures, is the touchstone of what
men speak as a Doctrine taught from God: but if they speak not according to
this word written in the volume of Gods book, it is an evidence that their
hearts are not taught of God; or that the Scripture written without, is not
written within their hearts; for what is written by God in the heart, is
consonant and agreeable to what he has written in his Book; and it never
taught any man to call the Bible, or written word, as John Lawson calls it [
natural and carnal,] this I said, was to blaspheme the Scripture.

Here R. F. Ibid.
takes me up as one not regarding what I say, and as ignorant of what the
Scripture says concerning the same, which speaks of a carnal commandment.

Rep. Must the written word, or Gods holy Scripture, be natural and carnal,
because it speaks of a carnal Commandment? He might as well imagine and affirm,
because it speaks of Types, Figures and Shadows, therefore it is all but
typical and a shadow. When the Apostle Heb 7. 16. opened.
makes mention of the law of a carnal Commandment, (according to which the
Priests in the Law-Levitical were made, but not so, Christ our high Priest) he
is treating of the Ceremonies now abolished, The Scriptures not carnal, but
spiritual.
which were laws of things weak and frail (as all flesh is) considered in
themselves, not lasting and abiding: he gives not the title of carnal and
natural to the Scriptures, (as J. L. and R. F. do) nor is he speaking of the
Scripture, as Scripture, (which is all spiritual and heavenly in its pedigree,
proper scope, energie and virtue) but he calls the Ceremony (mentioned in
Scripture) carnal, i. e. as to the materials appointed in the Legal Ceremonies,
they were outward, bodily, weak, dead things of themselves; this makes the
Scripture no more carnal, then because it speaks of the Earth, therefore the
Scripture is earthy; or of Esau the profane, therefore the Scripture is profane.

Section 4.
TO my fourth Section R. F. Page 7. In what sense the Scriptures are the word
of God.
says no more but this, (which is too much unless it were better) Thou cannot
with all that thou have scraped together, prove that it [the Scripture] is the
Word which is eternal life, and so the Word that was in the beginning with God,
John 1. 1.

Rep. 1. I had indeed collected several Scriptures, [ Isaiah 8. 20. Isaiah 6.
with Acts 28. 25, 26. John 10. 34, 35. Psalm 82. 6. Ephesians. 6. 17.] but it is an
unhandsom and reproachful expression, put upon my collecting, and comparing
Scripture with Scripture, for him to call it scraping together.

2. My collation was not to prove the Scriptures to be the Word, i. e. the
eternal life, and that essential word spoken of John 1. 1. But insomuch as Jam.
Nayler put us to John 1. 1. cleared.
prove the Letter is called the Word in plain words, and that then there are
two words, I showed that this phrase [the word of God] is taken two ways in
Scriptures; sometimes for Christ himself, the Essential word of the Father;
sometimes for the Scriptural word it self, which being evidenced by my
aforesaid collections, what trifling and absurdity is it in R. F. to call for
the proving of that which was not to be proved? as not being affirmed by me, or
any other that I know, that the Scriptures are the Word spoken of John 1. 1.
but the Scripture, or inspired, written, created Word, does there, as elsewhere,
speak of the Essential uncreated Word, as a man's tongue, pen or secretary, does
speak of himself. Ephesians. 6. 17. opened.
That last Scripture I quoted, Ephesians. 6. 17. one would think were enough to
convince gainsayers, where the sword of the Spirit, a piece of spiritual armor,
is said to be the Word of God. What means the Apostle by the sword of the
Spirit? but the spiritual sword, the Scriptures, put into the hands and mouths
of Christians; no carnal, but a spiritual weapon; mighty through the Spirit, to
run into the heart of Errors, and to cut asunder Temptations, and to repel the
Tempter. Christ himself made this use of it against the Scribes and Pharisees,
Mat. 5. Against the Sadduces, Mat. 22. 31, 32. And against the Devil, Mat. 4.
4, 7, 10, ver. Once the Devil has Scripture in his mouth, but Christ has it
thrice in his mouth, It is written, It is written, It is written; and is too
hard for Satan at this, as all other weapons. Here the very power of the
written Letter puts to flight the adversary. And if J. N. or R. F. will read
over and over the 119 Psalm, they will find matter enough to cure their
contradictions Spirits, who are more nice then wise in abstaining from
Scripture-expressions, or attributing to them their due title. There they will
find that holy David, professing his zealous affection to God and to his
Scriptures, uses this phrase of [ thy word] above thirty times, plainly
enough, and yet elegantly also. Let their consciences answer, Is not [ thy
word] as much as [ Gods word?] And that he speaks of Gods written word, the
Scriptures (as of what is according thereunto) is clear; in that he calls the
same word of God, the statutes of God, [ O teach me thy statutes! etc.] near
twenty times: now Gods statutes are his standing Laws, or Rules, put into
writing, as all the Statutes of England are, upon record, written down in Books.

Section 5.
I Had charged it as another contradiction of theirs to the The writing of the
Spirit the ground of the Saints acting.
Scripture it self, in that they say, The Saints ground of acting is not the
outward Letter, but the Spirit which gave forth the Letter: Hereby setting the
Word and Spirit at difference; whereas the Spirit gives forth his word in the
Scripture; and in the word written, lays down the grounds of the Saints actings
and believings also; yea, he has ordained the very Scripture to be one ground
of their acting. R. F. in answer, returns me this language. Page 7.
1. Here thou art blind, and knows not the Saints ground: and 2. Accusing them
falsely that witness to it. 3. With thy Logic and Magic Art would make the
Scriptures God and Christ, but cannot, and would make them the ground of the
Saints acting, when they are not.

Rep. 1. If R. F. will but understand what is, and may be said to be the ground
of a thing, he may possibly believe I know the Saints ground of acting, as they
are Saints. The word [Ground] is ambiguous, and has diverse acceptions. In
strict propriety of speech, the Earth we tread upon, and Ground are all one, as
the same Ground or Earth brings forth the same fruit. By a metaphorical
Allusion, the word [Ground] is sometime put for the Cause of a thing; sometime
for the first groundwork of a Building, or for the first Principles and Rules
of Art and Science, or for the first habits in a man, of his actings. The
Cause, and that [principal-efficient] Ground of the Saints acting, is God, and
the Father, by Christ through the Spirit. The Scriptures are How the Scriptures
are the Ground of the Saints acting.
instrumentally a Cause without which, since the Lord caused them to be given
forth, he does not ordinarily act upon the Saints, or draw forth their acts of
grace and godliness. They are the first external groundwork of all their faith
and workings, as Saints: They are the Rule and Warrant of all their ordinary
actings, yea, the grounding Touchstone of all extraordinary Impulses and
Revelations. By their Authority they are a sufficient ground or reason of our
faith and practice. The Scripture-commands are one ground, the
Scripture-promises another, the Scripture-threatnings another, the Scripture
examples (backed by, and bottomed upon a precept) another, the
Scripture-Prophecies and Revelations another. As every word of God is pure,
Prove. 30. 5. so every part of the Scripture is a pure grounding-rule for a
Saints faith and conversation, Rev. 21. 14. The wall of the City, the new
Jerusalem (made up of Saints indeed) has twelve foundations: and in them the
names of the Apostles of the Lamb, whose writings we have (with the doctrine of
the Prophets, Ephesians. 2. 20. founding-grounding doctrine) as that golden Reed,
Rev. 21. 15. to measure the city, and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.

2. If the Word and Spirit cannot be set at difference, but are inseparable, as
R. F. yields, yet I did not falsely accuse them (as he says) that witness to
the Saints ground, because by [Word] he and others expressly hold forth none but
the Person of Christ, and God the Word, but deny the Letter of Scripture to be
the Word of God; which is strange contradiction to God himself, and to his
Scripture, and to themselves also; For while they grant he wrote, or caused to
be written the whole Letter, yet they deny him to have written a word. It is
true in propriety of Grammar-speech, a letter is but the least part of a word,
yet it is a part: But the Bible consists of many books of letters, which God
has left written for his friends and people, to be grounded and settled in the
faith; yet because John 1. 1. speaks of God the Word, and 2 Cor. 3. 17. of the
Lord the Spirit, therefore Christ and the Scripture must not be called by the
same name; and because Christ and the Spirit are inseparable, therefore the
Spirit and the Scripture must be parted, as to the Case in hand; and if the
Spirit be the ground of the Saints acting, the Scriptures must have no part nor
lot in this business. I shall still accuse such Logic to be false reasoning,
and yet not accuse the Logician falsely.

R. F. thinking to mend the matter, marres it with his additional gloss, Page 7.
The Letter is not God, nor the Letter is not the Spirit, therefore not that
Word which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 23. by which the World was
framed Heb. 11. 3. and made, Heb. 1. 2. For what if it be not that WORD, yet it
is the word of that Word: it is the word of Christ, who is God the Word: And if
Christ be the ground or [meritoriously efficient] cause of the Saints actings,
his Scripture or written Word is the regular Card and Compass by which his
Spirit steers their course to the Haven of Happiness and Eternal Rest: And why
may not the [word] Peter speaks of in that place, be the Scripture? He sets not
1 Pet. 1. 23. with 25. opened.
Christ spoken of, in opposition to that Scripture in Isaiah 40. 8. but from
the Prophets testimony, advances the word that speaks of Christ, in
opposition, first to mortal and corruptible seed, and then to withering flesh,
and all the glory of man even in his words, fading away as the flower of grass;
And is not every Scripture-Gospel-promise that immortal seed? which being
emitted from the Scripture by the Spirit, and quickened as it is cast into the
heart, does it not there abide, and remain in life and power? If verse 25. may
give any light to verse 23. not Christ's person, but Christ's promise is there
(beyond all dispute) intended by the Apostle, when he says, The word of the
Lord endures for ever: for the Greek word is not that which is used when
Christ in person is spoken of, Logos, but Roma, both in (...).
the first and latter clause, which is an explication of the former: And this
is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto (...).
you: as if the Apostle should say, Would ye know what word is that which
endures for ever? even the Scripture-promise which we daily do evangelize or
speak of unto you, as constant good tidings. If any say in verse 23. it (...).
is Logos, it must be noted for a certain truth, that although Logos the Word,
be sometimes necessarily to be understood of Christ's person, as John 1. 1. etc.
yet not Apud Gracos late patet (...). Beza in Joh. 1. 1.
always; and this is as certain that Rema is never used for Christ's person, but
this is used ver. 25. and therefore ver. 23. in Peter, is to be expounded by it.

Again, Is it not the same with the sincere milk of the (...).
word *, cap. 2. 2. which nourishes and ministers growth to the newborn
babe? Was it the wonted manner of any of the Lords Nurses to bring up Gods
children by hand (as we say) as soon as they are new born, and not guide them
to the breasts of the Old and New Testament-Scripture, thence to suck and draw
for their refreshment, preservation and consolation? But such cursed step-dames
have we now sprung up, who would wean every newborn babe from any further
tastes of Scripture-milk, it must be no ground of their acting; then no means
of their growth, no food to them at all; nay, it shall be no seed
instrumentally to beget them, as not milk to nourish them.

3. They that deny the Scriptures to be in any good sense the ground of the
Saints acting, in effect deny them to be Gods Scriptures, and Christ's
Scriptures; for either the Authority of God and Christ is stamped upon them, or
not: if it be, then by their Authority may, and ought the Saints to act; if it
be not, then are they but humane, and not the Scriptures of God and Christ.

But let us examine what R. F. says for himself, 2 page of his Epist. and 7.
p. of his book.
and men of his judgment. The Lord God and his Spirit is the ground of the
Saints acting, as it was formerly, Isa. 48. 16, 17. For the Lord God and his
Spirit has sent me. And the Lord Isaiah 48. 16, 17. cleared and vindicated.
teaches his that he so sends, to profit.

Rep. 1. So reads he or writes (I must not say wresteth, lest I retort) but the
words are directed to the people or Church, and truly thus read, [which
teaches thee to profit] The prophets had more extraordinary impulses of the
Spirit, then the Saints in ordinary for their actings. 2. One way whereby God
then taught, and now teaches his people to profit, was by reducing them to the
written Rule, ver. 18. O that thou had hearkened to my Commandments! which
they had in writings from God, before the Lord God, and the Spirit sent Isaiah
to them. Christ who came with the Spirit, as he received it, not by measure,
came with the Scriptures, taught the people and his disciples how to profit by
them, Luke 4. 18. Matthew. 5. Luke 24. 27. and as the manifestation of the Spirit
is given to every man to profit withal (which Scripture 1 Cor. 12. 7. R. F.
alleges in 1 Cor, 12. 7. vindicated
part) so is all the Scripture given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in righteousness, 2 Timothy 3. 16. neither is there any manifestation of the Spirit in any Teacher, if
he does not manifest his doctrine from, or according to the Scripture, when
required so to do. It is not to be believed that God ever gave his Spirit to
such a Teacher, who does manifestly or covertly (under pretense of the Spirit)
fly from the light of Scripture. The Spirit of God never taught any The
property of the Scriptures.
to speak dishonorably or diminishingly of his written word; but to give unto
the Scriptures what is its due, viz. That they are Gods holy Scriptures, Romans
1. 2. able to make a child wise unto salvation, through faith which is in
Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3. 15. and given ver. 17. That the man of God [the
Prophet, Apostle, Evangelist, Pastor or Teacher; and others by their ministery]
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work: and unto the Spirit
what is his due The prerogative of the Spirit.
prerogative, to work by the Scripture when and upon whom he pleases, to their
saving profit. But happily I might have spared this pains, in reference to R. F.
(though others have need of it) because in his Epistle he has this passage [
The Scriptures in the Letter only are not the true ground of the believers
faith, as they in Scotland affirm] for he seems to be a little yielding that
they are the ground of the Saints acting, though not only: if in any good
sense he will grant them to be the ground of the believers faith, he must in
that The ground of the Believers faith, is the ground of the Saints acting.
sense yield them to be the ground of the Saints acting, for the Saint and the
Believer is all one; and all acts of holiness in general, as of any particular
grace, spring from the same root that the acts of faith do, and are built upon
the same groundwork that is laid by God, for the edification of faith and its
actings. Only I must advertise him and others, that I know none in Scotland
that so affirm, or express themselves as he speaks: They may say, and say
truly, that the Letter, i. e. the Scriptures (which never were without their
true sense, nor without the Spirit breathing in them, though it be not
manifested to every one that reads them, nor a like manifestation given at all
times to all the Saints) are the only visible and legible Rule of faith, and
Judge of Controversies: as all sound Protestants have hitherto maintained this
truth against the Papists. And they that are of a sound mind in this British
Isle (as in all Europe and the world) have (from Gods Authority stamped upon the
Scriptures) asserted them to be a true Ground of the Believers faith, which R.
F. weakly denies, Epist.
because Christ is the true Ground of faith, whereas the affirmative is hereby
the more strongly proved; For the true adaequate or proportionable Object of
faith, is the true Ground of faith; but Christ speaking in the Scriptures, is
the true adaequate Object of faith; therefore Christ in the Scriptures is the
true Ground of faith: And thus again, If Christ be the true Ground of faith,
then the Scriptures of Christ, which are his written truth, are a true Ground
of faith; as if the man be honest, I may build upon his word; so if Christ be
true, and Truth itself, his word is true, and the truth (as his Fathers word
is, John 17. 17.) when written down for a more certain ground, as to us, and
our actings, then if but spoken in the air, or to the ear. Let R. F. therefore,
or all that have a mind to be sound in the faith, if he has none, hear the
Scripture speaking for it self; and hear Christ together for himself and his
Scripture, Prove. 22. 19, 20, 21. That thy trust Prove. 22. 19, 20, 21. opened
and urged.
may be in the Lord, I have made known to thee this day, even to thee: Here is
a ground of faith laid by the Lord himself; What is it? his making known: of
what? Have not I written to thee excellent things in counsels and knowledge?
Here is excellent matter made known, as a ground of trusting in the Lord; and
here is the manner of revelation by writing, Have not I written? wherefore? That
I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth: Behold, the manner
of making known a ground also of certainty of knowledge, and consequently of
faith, for a man's self; and it follows, that thou might answer the words
of truth to them that send unto thee: Lo, here is the ground of our Embassy
and Message, for others persuasion and satisfaction with our selves; and here
is the ground of men's believing what we speak from, and according to what is
written. Will R. F. or any say, If our trust must be in the Lord, we are not
then to ground our faith on the Scriptures? I must tell him from Christ, that
the not grounding a man's faith upon the Scriptures, is an evidence that he
grounds it not upon the Lord: the very Scriptures will accuse such to be
unbelievers; for thus our Lord reasons against the Jews, John 5. 45, 46.
There is one that accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. For had ye
believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me.

Section 6.
I Had charged them with putting figurative Glosses upon plain Scripture. R. F.
page 7. shuffles in here and there a line or two for answer, but nothing to the
purpose, only in way of shift, he has these two subterfuges. 1 In quoting
John 1. 1, 2, 3. he adds, this is plain Scripture without figurative gloss,
the glosses are thy own.

Rep. 1. As plain Scripture as it is, it is alleged by him to set all the rest
of Scripture aside from being Gods word. For what if by the Scripture-letter
the world was not made, but by Christ, the Eternal, Essential Word, of which
John speaks, has it not been sufficiently showed in what sense the
Scripture-letter is, and is truly called the word of God?

2. By his unreasonable reasoning he does altogether hide and conceal from the
Reader of his book, what instance I gave in mine, of their figurative gloss
upon plain Scripture, viz. 1 Cor 14. 34, 35. By woman is meant the weak 1 Cor.
14. 34, 35. vindicated with 1 Timothy 2. 11, etc.
corrupt part, and by man, the Spirit in either sex; and by the Husband is
meant Christ; contrary to the true sense of the Apostle, given by the same
Apostle, not only in his reasons upon the place, but in that first Epistle to
Timothy 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. This Gloss is theirs, and yet unreasonably he calls
it mine, the fancy mine, and the meaning's mine, which he denies, whereas I
gave none but the Apostles own. Hence I argue, He who sets Paul against Paul,
or owns not Paul's plain exposition of himself, but puts figurative glosses
upon the Text, contradicts the Scripture; but thus does R. F. (with others.) He
that would be further satisfied about his egregious glossings this way, may
read his Pamphlet of a sheet Entit led, A woman forbidden to speak in Church.
printed 1654. by it self. A taste whereof, whosoever meets not with that
sheet, may take as follows: page 3.
The woman or wisdom of the flesh is forbidden to speak in the Church. page 5.
The Apostle says, Let your women keep silence in the Church, he does not say,
Let the Spirit of God keep silence in the Temple. page 7.
It is carnality that is forbidden to intermingle with Spirituality. If this be
not to play with Scripture, and grieve the Spirit that spoke it, I know not
what does.

A second subterfuge is in citing that Scripture, I will pour out my spirit,
and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, and such may speak of the
things of God.

Rep. 1. Who denies but they may speak according to their gift, place and call?
but women endued but with an ordinary gift, are set by, and not allowed either
the office of teaching, or the liberty of a gifted-brothers place, to speak to
edification etc. (had they the gift as eminently as some Brethren have) or so
much as to ask a question for their own learning, in the public meeting place
of a Church in order (and every place, and meeting of such a Church has a
publickness in it) because they are commanded to be under obedience; it becomes
not their sex, it is usurping of the males authority: they were the latter sex
in creation; the first in the transgression; and are easily led into deceit, as
Eve was: all which are the Apostles reasons, 1 Cor. 14. 1 Timothy 2. and the holy
Spirits, not mine; who dare contradict them, and their true sense and scope,
dare contradict the Spirit to his face.

2 Paul's limiting-order, issued out from Heaven, teaches us how to understand
Peter, Act. 2. 17, 18. taken out Act. 2. 17, 18. opened.
of Joels prophecy, viz. partly, as allusions to the old Testament-times (when
God, by dreams, and visions, by prophecies or predictions of future things,
revealed his mind in those ages past to a few) and so the pouring out of the
Spirit etc. notes a large and abundant measure of saving grace, in ordinary,
given to some, of Gods servants, of all sorts and sexes, in all nations where
the Gospel comes, far excelling the ordinary measures of Saints before Christ's
ascension; partly, that some of Gods servants, women as men, daughters as sons,
should have a prophetical instinct of foretelling things to come (which ever
has been a gift more then ordinary, and out of a Church Order, and course) as
Acts 21. 9. Philips four daughters, and virgins were inspired withal; or if
any say, why might not their gift of prophecy be the gift of explication and
application of the Scripture to the profit of the hearer (though it is not so
probable, yet) then I say, they were subject to the Apostles Rule aforesaid,
and were kept free from disorderly extravagancies.

3 That standing Rule and order of Paul 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35. leads us to the
understanding of ver. 31. ye may all prophecy, etc. i. e. as all called to the
office of Pastor, and Teacher 2 Cor. 14 31 vindicated.
must teach, exhort etc. so all the brethren, gifted with the abilities of
prophesying, or speaking to edification, exhortation and comfort, may
prophecy: the exception of women breaks not the Rule for men, but rather
confirms the liberty to the brethren, and to all of them so gifted, which are
but a few, when the number is cast up, in every Church: And again, what that
means, Thou shall not muzzle the 1 Timothy 5 18. cleared.
Ox that treads out the corn etc. which the Apostle applies to the laboring
Elders (not to women as R. F.) ver. 17 of 1 Timothy 5. and at the end of the 18
verse, there is light given to the beginning of it: for the laborer is worthy of
his reward; which words are a reason of the Prohibition, and the Prohibition
is, not to open women's mouths in public (for himself Chap. 2. had stopped them
by the injunction of silence) but, to beware of discouraging their preaching
Elders, and laboring Pastors, and Teachers, by abridging them of their
honorable maintenance: yea that Canon of the Apostle (above mentioned) is the
Key to open all those Scriptures which R. F. produces in his sheet (aforesaid)
concerning Phebe, Priscilla, Mary, Tryphena, and Tryphosa, Persis, Romans 16. and
those women, Philip. 4. Romans 16 1, 2. and ver. 6, 12. Phil. 4 3. vindicated.
which labored with him in the Gospel: for all these were employed (not
contrary to his order unto the Church at Corinth in public preaching, (or so
much as acting by their votes and suffrages in Church affairs) but) either in
succoring Paul, and others, or in messages, or in working out Paul's liberty
(mean while hazarding their own lives) or in composing differences, or in
entertainment of strangers, or in some other Christian-gospel-service, suitable
to their sex, gifts, and graces. And as for that which R. F. collecteth from 1
Cor. 16. 19. that, if Priscilla be not permitted to speak in the Church, and
the Church be in her house, she must not speak, but go out of her house; Sure
it is, that, as she 1 Cor. 16. 19. vindicated.
and her husband Aquila had taken up a house at Corinth (Act. 18. 3.) so they
had a godly family (like a little Church, for knowledge, piety and good order)
but the order of a godly family is after one way, and the order of a
ministerial Church is after another way: Besides, the Church at Corinth did
ordinarily meet in Gaius's house (therefore he is called Paul's Host, and of the
whole Church Romans 16. 23. and Paul at other times wrought with his hands at
Aquilas house Act. 18. 3.) and in some one place (compare 1 Cor. 14. 23. with
chap. 11. 20.) or other where that order was observed which was given to the
Church ministerial, and where Priscilla her self must not speak (in the case in
controversy with R. F.) though happily, she was more eminent in grace and gifts
then her husband Aquila, and upon that account her name may for once, Romans 16.
3. be set before his.

Lastly, as for her own house, it is not said the whole Church met there as at
Gaius's house, but it may well be collected, those of her family were part of
the whole, and so the name [Church] is given to it; and speak there she might
to teach her family, and with her husband to instruct an Apollos in the way of
God more perfectly, Act. 18. 26. without going out of her house, or out of her
place. Will J. Nayler (notwithstanding all this) persist in his bold opinion?
that Paul's words of a woman's keeping silence in the Church, must not be taken
in the Letter: and will R. F. defend him, with his own glosses? I must leave
them to the Lords rebuke, for being wise in their own conceit; and proceed to
the close of this Paragraph in my book, where I had given another instance of
their new gloss upon 2 Pet. 1. 19. 2 Pet. 1. 19. vindicated.
affirming the sure word of prophecy, there spoken of, to be the Prophecy, and
Spirit of Prophecy within them, and not the outward Prophecy, or declaration of
Gods mind in the Scriptures; R. F. page 7.
has nothing to say, but this, the sure word of prophecy we witness to, and do
not to it say, No, and then falls upon me with reproachful language, as his
manners serve him. But how does he witness it? If by the word of Prophecy he
means as Peter interprets it, ver. 20. the prophecy of the Scripture, then he
contradicts his fellow J. N. and does not say, no, where his fellow says, no:
if he witnesses only the prophecy within, or the light Discovery of the man
of sin by J. Naylar page 30.
(as J. N. glosseth) till the day dawn etc. which is not without, nor in books,
then he (with Nayler) contradicts Peter, and the holy Ghost moving him to write
of a more sure word of prophecy of Scripture then the voice on the mount. To
clear this further; As Peter v. 20. expounds v. 19. calling the more sure word
of prophecy, the prophecy of Scripture, or Scripture-prophecy (not
heart-prophecy or breast-prophecy, arising and residing only in the mind, but
written down in books) so this written-prophecy he sets in opposition to
cunningly devised fables, which ver. 16. he professes against: in which
fables, there was no sureness or certainty at all; and then he lays it in the
balance of comparison with his (and others) making known the Lords power and
coming on the mount. Peter, James, and John Mat 17 1 etc.
were ear-witnesses of a voice from heaven concerning Christ, and eyewitnesses
(which is ten times more then only to take a thing by the report of the ear)
of Christ's majesty, honor and glory: this Transfiguration of our Lord Jesus
they preached of to the scattered Jews (as others) yet notwithstanding their
preaching of what they had heard, and seen, and the certainty of the voice they
heard, and the glory they saw, We, says Peter (including James, and John with
himself, and the believing Jews whom he wrote unto, who honored the writings of
Moses and the Prophets as infallible) have a more sure word of prophecy, or of
the Prophets writings, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, hereby
commending them for their respect to the Scriptures, and encouraging them to be
intent thereunto, as unto a light shining in a dark place, the Scripture-word
being a lamp unto the feet, and a light unto the path of Saints amidst Psalm.
119. 105.
all the darkness of the heart, of the world, or of the Church; until the day
dawn, and day star arise in our hearts: i. e. until, by the study of the
Scriptures, more light be cleared up, and Christ make himself more manifest to
us, and within us. But lest any should stumble at the Apostles assertion,
which, (comparing ver. 19, 20. as before) is to this effect, that all or any
part of the Scripture is a more sure word, then what is spoken in the air, and
but to the ear, the Apostle preventingly adds ver. 20. Knowing this first,
let this be laid as for a fundamental truth, in your minds, that no prophecy
of the Scripture (whereof we speak) 2 Pet. 1. 19. with v. 20, 21. more cleared.
is of any private interpretation. Were it so, that every man might, as his
private mind leads him, interpret Scripture, the authority and certainty of it
would vanish, as the light Scripture to be interpreted by Scripture.
and truth of it would be eclipsed; it would be far from being a more sure
word; men might that way turn the Gospel into a Fable, and make the Scriptures,
as Antichristian Popelings do, a nose of wax: well, how proves the Apostle that
no Scripture is of any private interpretation? why, verse 21. For, or because,
the Prophecy came not in old time, or at (...).
any time, by the will of man; but holy men of God spoke it as they were moved
by the holy Ghost. As was the Genesis, such is the Analysis; as was the
composition, such is the resolution and meaning of it, from the same Spirit;
the public Spirit of the Saints, and of the Scriptures: the holy Spirit of
God composed the word of Prophecy, not man's will, but Gods digested it, his
Spirit indicted it, and has spoken all his sense under the words, which he
directed holy men to express his mind by; and therefore without going forth of
Scripture to any private spirit, the true and sure interpretation of Scripture
may be obtained; which, if first we know and be persuaded of, we may
confidently be persuaded still to take heed thereunto, as unto a more sure
word, and as a help in all our darknesses, etc. But J. Nayler thinks this a
blind absurdity, For, says Discovery, etc. page 30.
he, if the Testimony of the old Prophets was a more sure word then that which
Peter heard from the mouth of God, then it must needs follow, that the
Testimony of the old Prophets, who spoke but darkly of Christ, and did not see
his day, must be a more sure Testimony then the Apostles, who were
eyewitnesses; and the words of Books, a more sure word then the voice that
came from heaven, which was the immediate voice of God.

Rep. All this (grant but the testimony of Prophetical Writings to be Gods, and
the words of Scripture-books to be Gods books and his words) may, and does
follow without any absurdity at all: For,

1. Although the Apostles preaching was as infallibly true, as the Prophets
writings in themselves; yet, as to men, and as to the Jew first, and then to
the Gentile, and in respect of our capacity, our reception and retention of
truth, the word of the Prophets writings was and is still more sure: yea, the
Apostles writings (such as the holy Spirit moved them to write, and has
ordered to be the Scripture of the New Testament) are, in the forenamed
respect, a more sure word then their preachings; hence it is that Paul
persuaded the Jews, Acts 28. 23. both out of the law of Moses, and out of the
Prophets.

2. Although Gods immediate voice from heaven has as infallible certainty, as
when he orders his mind to be written; yet in respect of our frailty, and the
abovementioned cases, his written word is more sure to us; and we have it so
left upon record for our constant use. Let not then J. Nayler Discovery, etc.
as above page 30.
mislead the simple with great swelling words of vanity, concerning our
blindness, about the Spirit of prophecy, as the sure word and testimony of
Jesus; excluding thereby the Spirit from the Scriptures, and the Scriptures
from being the word of Prophecy, and the sure Testimony of Jesus. For Jesus
Christ appointed John to write, because the words he sent and signified to him
by the Angel, were true and faithful. And when the Angel observed what John was
about, viz. to worship him, Rev. 19. 10. he forbad Rev. 19 10. vindicated.
him upon two Reasons:

1. He was his fellow servants, and of the brethren that have the testimony of
Jesus. 2. The Testimony of Jesus, is the Spirit of Prophecy.
And John having the Testimony of Jesus, (as well as the Angel, though not so
immediately) he had the Spirit of Prophecy; so have all they who have the true
sense of Scripture, and of John's Revelation, though they received it not by the
Angel, as John did; because the Spirit was with John (as with others) when he
wrote: and he that has an Rev. 3. last.
ear is commanded to hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches in that
written word, with the rest of the Scripture. The Testimony of Jesus
immediately given and received, is, has in it, and carries with it, the
Spirit of Prophecy, as that Testimony which is immediately given and received.
All they that call off from the mediate Testimony, may boast of the immediate,
but do not discover it. Let not J. Nayler Saul's errand to Damascus, page 33.
again upbraid us with his ignorant question, Where read thou in the
Scriptures of a written Word? It is no more then if he had said, Where read
thou in the Scriptures of the Scriptures? Let not J. Parnel Christ exalted,
etc. p 3.
further revile us with doting upon the Scriptures without, with our dark
minds, when as God has appointed the voices of the Prophets, which are read
Acts 13 27.
(and preached upon with the voices of the Apostles) every Sabbath day, as a
light shining in a dark place; and as a more sure word for our daily use, then
his immediate voice from heaven. Let him not heap up Scriptures to press the
Scriptures to death. Let him not make the world believe we would take the
Authority from Christ, because we own Christ's Authority in the Scriptures; and
acknowledge them as instrumental unto Christ's saving, enlightening of us,
guiding, quickening, ruling of us. Let him beware of despising Scripture, lest
he sin more wilfully after his first conviction by the Scripture. He that would
set Christ upon his throne, (as he pretends to do) must not take the Scepter,
the Scriptures, and what is preached faithfully from thence, out of his hand.
This does J. Parnel with R. F. and that generation of men, who have learned (as
they imagine) beyond the Scripture Light, and need neither man nor Scripture to
teach them. Yet I will unteach their misinterpretations of Scripture, as they
fall in my way, that people may not further be deluded but undeceived. In that
one sheet of Paper Christ exalted, etc.
J. Parnel has put the Conceptions and Imaginations of his own heart, upon ten
places of Scripture; as he has disparaged all the Scripture at once in more
then one passage. Christ he says [ Page 1.] was that Lamp to David's feet,
Psalm 119. 105. Psalm. 119. 105 vindicated.
and that Light unto his paths. Christ indeed gave that word to David which was
his Lamp and Light; but David speaks not there of Christ's Person, but of his
Doctrine, which the holy Ghost, by his pen, gives several titles unto
throughout the Psalm. The word which David speaks of is called, and was as
called, the Law of the Lord, his Precepts or Commandments, Statutes,
Testimonies, and Judgments: Christ's person is not the Law of the Lord, etc.
besides what ver. 105. is in the singular number, thy word; is ver. 103, 57,
139. in the plural number, thy words. Christ's person is not two, or many, but
one; David therefore is commending that which J. P. is disparaging, the written
and declarative word of God. Again, [ Page 2.] he applies Jer. 20. 9. and 23.
29. in the like manner to Christ's person, when as the Section 6. Jer. 20. 9. and
23. 19. vindicated.
Prophet speaks of Christ's Doctrine. His word, or message of Doctrine which God
gave me to deliver, was in my heart as a burning fire, etc. which I could no
longer forbear from declaring it. And, Is not my word like as a fire, says the
Lord, and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces? By Gods word here is
meant, Gods saithful Doctrine, which must be spoken faithfully, ver. 28. then
it has the power of a purging fire, and of a battering hammer. Heb. 4. 12. and
Romans 10 8. vindicated.
Heb. 4. 12. The word of God quick and powerful, etc. is the word preached,
ver. 2. or the Scripture that we read and hear opened, if one verse may
interpret another. Romans 10. 8. The word is nigh thee, etc. This place (with the
former) must needs be Christ within men, not the Scriptures without, as J. P.
thinks, because the Apostle directs the minds of people within them, from
looking without: whereas, let people look into Deuteronomy. 30. 14. from whence the
Apostle quotes it, and compare that 14. ver. with the 11. and they will find,
it is meant of the word of a Gospel-command built upon a Gospel-promise: For
this commandment (of returning and obeying by virtue of the promise, ver. 6. of
heart-circumcision) is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off; it is not
in heaven, etc. nor beyond the sea, etc. But the word is very nigh thee, in thy
mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it: Which Paul expounds to be the
word of faith, or doctrine of faith (which comprehends the promise for and to
believing, and the precept of believing) written, preached, heard, and mixed in
the heart with faith. That Scripture, 1 John 2. 27. has no such meaning 1 John
2 27. vindicated.
as to exclude Scripture-teaching, and Ministers-teaching, and as if he that
has the Anointing were come to the end of man's teaching, as J. P. expresses
it [ page 3.] But only that we who have the Anointing (which is not Christ, as
he glosseth, for the Unction or Anointing is from Christ, Gods holy One, ver.
20. but that participation of Christ's Oil and Eye Salve, of Christ's grace, and
Spirit of knowledge and understanding, etc.) need not that any man should teach
us better things, or in a better manner, but as the Anointing teaches us. The
words include both inward and outward teaching and teachers, and exclude none
but seducers, ver. 26. of whom the Church and People of God have no need at
all, in Judea, England, Essex, or in any part of the world. Isaiah 30. 20.
makes not mention of Christ, or, but any Isa 30. 20. vindicated.
one true Teacher, but of Teachers; meaning the true Prophets and Priests, that
taught the good knowledge of the Lord, as in Jehoshaphats days, which should
not be removed into a corner; but the Lords people should see them, and have
with them, as is promised, ver. 21. A word behind them, saying, This is the
way, etc. i. e. Gods Spirit should prompt, suggest, and set home that which was
outwardly taught, upon their hearts, at every turn, and upon every occasion.
How does our Essex Seducer Christ exalted, page 4. John 15. 5. and Phil 4. 13.
vindicated.
gloss upon John 15. 5. and Philip. 4. 13. Without him we can do nothing, but
by him we can do all things; without the help of Scripture, or any thing else
without. Is this to own Scripture in its place, (as the Title pretends) to
put it quite out of all place, and office, or service; that it shall not be (in
the day of the Lords Battles, and a Christian warfare) in the place of an
Auxiliary, or of any help and use? When as Christ, John 15. 3. told his
disciples, they were clean through the word which he had spoken unto them; and
the word which he had spoken, was according to what is written. Psalm 119. 9.
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereunto
according to thy word. Did not Paul write that Epistle to the Philippians for
their strengthening? And did not Apollos, Acts 18. 27, 28. help them much who
had believed through grace? showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ.

Lastly, to make an end of these Instances of J. P. how ignorantly and rashly
does he twice quote Page 4 and 6 Ier 5. 31. vindicated and cleared.
Jer. 5. 31. (as R. F. In his Truth cleared p 3. and J. W. in his Enmity
between the two seeds, page 17.
others of his Sect frequently) The priests bear rule by their means, with a
glancing gloss at Ministers gain and maintenance? As if by [ means] there, was
meant outward estate, wealth, livings, etc. and by [ their] was understood,
their own lucre; when as the affix or pronoun [ their] relates to the Prophets;
and by [ means] is no more intended, but endeavor, or procurement of their
false messages, and pretenses to extraordinary mission. The priests bearing
rule, as falsely and corruptly, as the prophets prophesied falsely and unsoundly.
In the Hebrew, it is [by their hands] (...)
which is as much as the prophets false counsel and pretended authority, (as 2 Samuel 14. 19. Is not the hand of Joab with thee in all this? Have thou not done
this by Joabs means or counsel?) by reason whereof the priests were so
imperious, and the people (cheated by the false prophets) loved to have it so.
The edge of this Scripture may be turned against our present Seducers thus; The
Quaking prophets prophecy falsely, and Romish priests shroud themselves under
their new stamped Doctrine, (God knows how much they have influence, how soon
they may bear rule by these prophets means) and many people, who go for Gods
people, love to have it so; and what will ye do in the end thereof, when
prophets, priests and people, have confederately banded themselves against the
true Prophets and Ministers of the Lord?

That our new Prophet is not a true one, hear one line or two more of his
Christ exalted, etc. p. 4.
Sheet, and judge of his Judgment of the whole Scripture; He [Christ] is the
Word, and the Scripture is not; He is the Light, and the Scripture is not; He
is the Rule, and Guide, and Teacher, and Judge, and the Scripture is not, but a
declaration of him to be so. Is Christ (think you) exalted upon the ruins of
his Scripture? and are they not razed at the foundation, when as they shall
neither be the Word, nor Light, nor Rule, nor Guide, nor Teacher, nor Judge?
will that salve all, that they are acknowledged to be a declaration of Christ
to be so? when as the [ but] is sufficiently undervaluing: Are they but a
declaration of Christ Christ speaks by the Scripture.
to be so? Do they not declare of themselves also? or, does not Christ and his
Spirit declare in them, and of them, what they are, as what himself is? Do they
declare that Christ is the Word, and are not they the Word of that declaration?
Is Christ the living Word, and are not the Scriptures the Oracles of God? Romans
3. 2. The lively Oracles, Acts 7. 38. Do they declare that Christ is the Light,
and has he not put of his Light into the Scriptures for our enlightening?
Christ enlightneth by the Scripture.
Psalm 19. 8. Whatsoever does make manifest is Light, Ephesians. 5. 13. The
Scriptures declare, and make as manifest as the light in a dark night, where
our hearts are most obscure; and in some places, as the light at noonday, they
shine with their Light upon every man's conscience that reads them. Every Book
and Chapter, is a lightsom Book and Chapter, were not our eyes more then
purblinde. Every Verse is a little vessel of light; yea, how great and how much
light in some one line, or a few letters? [as in John 10. 30. I and my Father
are one,] And in that [ Romans 5. 6. When we were yet without strength, Christ
died, etc.] Does it exalt Christ to call him our Rule, and then deny it to the
Scripture? The Scripture exalts him higher, and calls him Christ rules by the
Scripture.
our Rule-giver, or Lawgiver, which comes all to one: And it exalts it self,
or is exalted by Christ to be Canonical, or our Canon and Rule, Gal. 6. 17. As
many as walk according Gal. 6. 17. opened.
to this rule, in the whole Epistle, and in the Verse before. If any say the
Apostle speaks of the [ new creature] as our Rule, I conceive they are
mistaken: For,

1. The new creature is too narrow for a Rule, nor of authority enough to be a
Rule; it is but imperfect here, as to degrees of renewed qualities, and one
Christian has more, another less, none are gradually perfect.

2. The new creature is subordinate and subject to Rule, the old man is not,
nor cannot be subject, if the new be not; nothing in a Christian is regulated,
and then he will not be found a Christian. If the new creature be subject, it
is to Christ the King, and his Laws: If it be regulated, it is by a declared
Rule, which is the written Word. Romans 7. 25. I, says Paul, (at that time a new
creature) do serve the law of God, as that Rule he speaks of to the Galatians;
and who so walks according to it, peace shall be upon him. Is Christ Christ
guides and teaches by the Scripture.
our Guide? he guides us by the Scripture without, and by the Spirit of, and in
the Scriptures, and within our hearts. Is Christ our Teacher, and does he teach
all without book? Christ had never such disciples since the Scriptures were his
Book, which is profitable for Doctrine or Teaching, 2 Timothy 3. 16. Christ
himself taught out of them, and by them; and so does he still continue to train
up the Scholars of his Christ accuses and judges by the Scripture.
highest form. Does not the Scriptures accuse, and judge also under Christ and
for Christ? John 5. 45. Ye have one that accuses you, even Moses; John 12. 48.
The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day, because
spoken from the Father, and according to his commandment, in the Scripture. To
return to R. F. again, and at last to close up this Section, I leave this with
him, and others. Christ's Scripture is of the same authority, with Christ's
Sermons; Christ's Sermons shall judge men at the last day; Therefore Christ's
Scripture shall have the same authority, of judging. It is one of the Books
that shall be opened, Rev. 20. 12. with the books of men's consciences, Revel
20. 12.
and of Gods omnisciency and Decrees, and all the dead shall be judged out of
those things which were written in the books. And they that now are unwilling
to be judged by the Scripture, shall at the last day be judged by it whether
they will or no.

(2.) Head of Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning the Trinity.
Section 7.
I Had discovered their contradictious language, that, There is no Scripture
for the Trinity, when the Scripture is plain before them, 1 John 5. 7. There
are three 1 John 5. 7. vindicated.
that bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Spirit: and
these three are one. Here is a Trinity, I said, or a Three-ness in one Essence,
and One-ness of Essence in a Three-ness of Subsistence. R. F. Page 7, 8.
challenges me for perverting the Scripture, saying, here is Trinity, when it
expresses no such word in that nor any other Scripture as Trinity. But the
Reader will easily perceive how he perverts my writing and fights against this
Text and five more which I referred to: for I said not, here is Trinity, or,
the word Trinity, but here is a Trinity asserted. He grants the Father, Son,
and Spirit are one, and then beating about the bush from John 14. 20. which
mentions but two of the three, he denies it to speak of distinct persons three.

Rep. What if John 14. 20. speak not of three, 1 John 5. 7. expressly says,
there are three etc. But R. F. falls pointblank in opposition to the third in
order of the three, and adds, The holy Ghost is no person. My work therefore
here is first, to clear out from this place in John's Epistle (and the five
other that I only hinted at) that there are three distinct persons, in the
Godhead. Secondly, that the holy Ghost is, and how he is, one of the three, I
cannot open any of the six Texts which I quoted, but the latter will be proved
by the former; only in clearing the latter by it self, R. F. his Heresy and
Blasphemy will be yet more evident and notorius. To the first then, I argue
thus in the general.

If the Scripture speaks of three [the Father, Son, and Spirit] that are one,
and yet three, then they are as distinctly three in their Persons, as they are
undividedly one in their Essence.

But the Scripture speaks of these three that are one, and There is a Trinity,
or three persons in one Godhead, proved from and by the Scriptures.
yet three.

Therefore they are as distinctly three in their persons, as they are
undividedly one in their Essence. The consequence of the proposition is thus
proved;

When the Scripture speaks of these three, either it is to be understood of
three distinct ways of Being, or of three distinct Beings; But it cannot be
understood of three distinct Beings, for the Lord our God is One; I am, or
Being of himself; Therefore it is to be understood of three distinct manners, or
ways of Being, each of which manners of Being is no other but that which the
Scripture expresses by the word Hypostasis, or Person, when it sometime speaks
of one of the three, sometime of another. The Assumption is clear from the
Scriptures that either expressly say, there are three, and these are one, or
reckon up three neither more, nor fewer; coequal, and of the same dignity, as
co-essential, and of the same Deity. More particularly,

1. Let that 1 John 5. 7. be viewed, and weighed; let 1 John 5. 7. opened.
not men shut their eyes against the light of it, and think lightly of its
Testimony, where Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity is set forth by words
equivalent, and of as great force, as if the very terms of [Unity] and
[Trinity] were put down. The equivalent words are [ there are three] and [
these three are one] and the meaning this, that three distinct persons are
united in the same Essence, and one and the same Essence is distinguished into
three persons.

2. Let Matthew. 28. 19. be heard speak for a Trinity. Here Mat. 28. 19: opened.
is express command for baptizing into the name of three [of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost] The phrase [ into the Name] compared with 1
Cor. 1. 13. 15. (...)
is as much as, into the divine service, honor and worship of some person, or
persons: Paul speaks of being baptized into his own name, as too great an honor
for him, or any creature. But if the disciples were, and are baptized into the
name of Christ, as they were dedicated to a dependence upon Christ; Christ
should have his due honor given him: and if according to Christ's command, they
are baptized, and by Baptism (as by an outward rite, and sign) given up to the
name, both of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, then are they
in one Essence, three persons, equally and infinitely honorable.

3. In 2 Cor. 13. 14. we have mention made of the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, there is one person; of the Love of God, or the Father, there is
another; and of the Communion of the holy Ghost, there is a third.

4. Again, Matthew 3. 16, 17. Jesus is baptized, there is one person; The Spirit
of God descends upon him, there is another; And a voice from the Father (This
is my beloved Son) there is a third.

5. In that Scripture John 15. 26. There you have the Comforter, the Spirit of
truth, one; sent by Christ, another; from the Father, a third; (though he is
the first, the Son the second, the holy Ghost the third, in order and manner of
subsisting within the Godhead, and of working outwardly upon the creature, yet
there as elsewhere they are spoken of promiscuously, to note their equality of
Essence, with the Trinity of persons.)

Lastly, to multiply no more places, John 16. 13, 14, 15. There you have the
Spirit pointed out as a person distinct from the Father, and the Son; [(...)]
ille, He, six times in ver. 13. and ver. 14. [(...) again] He, there is one
person, shall glorify me, there is another, and ver. 15. All things that the
Father has etc. there is another. Let R. F. or any other consult with his
Arithmetic, and reckon the number; then consult with natural Logic, or true
reason, and conclude; If there be neither more nor fewer, but three in one
Godhead; and that the holy Ghost is one of the three: Then there is a (...), a
Trinity: And if the Father, Son, and holy Ghost be coequal, and that the
Father has the place and dignity of one Person, and the Son has the place and
dignity of another Person, Then has the holy Ghost the place and dignity of a
third, and indeed is the Third in order of personality. Secondly, and more
directly in reply to R. F. who says, he is no person; I must tell him, and his
disciples in the general, what a Person is, viz. A living intelligent
substance, subsisting by it self, and What a person is.
truly and really distinct from others by his incommunicable property; more
particularly, "A Person in the Godhead What a person in the Godhead is.
is the divine, living, understanding, uncreated, infinite Essence, subsisting
by it self, and really distinct from the other by his incommunicable uncreated
property, yet each of them having one and the same Essence or Godhead in him
from Eternity. By this latter clause [each of them having one and the same
Essence, etc.] A divine uncreated person is distinguished from created persons:
for created persons, suppose an earthly father, and a son, are not the whole
Essence one in the other, but the uncreated are. One person in the divine
Essence is in and with the other. In humane persons the Essence of the one
stands out of the other; In the divine persons, the whole Essence of the one is
the Essence and substance of the other, and as the whole Essence of the Father
is in the Son of God, and the whole Essence of this Son is in His Father, so
the whole Essence of both the Father, and the Son, is in the holy Ghost. By the
former clause [a living understanding Essence uncreated subsisting by it self,
and is really distinguished from the other by his incommunicable uncreated
property] we have to consider.

1. Something common to all persons, viz. they are each of them a living,
understanding substance, subsisting by it self, and distinguished by its
incommunicable property.

2. Something to distinguish, Distinct from created persons.


1. God, and each person in the Godhead from the creature, viz. That God is a
divine un-created infinite Essence, the creature that is a person, is either
humane, or Angelical, and both created Essences, and each of the divine
un-created persons, has a distinct incommunicable un-created property; but the
created Essences, men or Angels, have (though distinct, incommunicable, yet)
created finite properties, and personalities.

2. Each of the persons in the Godhead from one another, How distinguished in
the Deity.
though relating to each other. The incommunicable relative property of the
first person, the Father, is to be of himself, unbegotten, and to beget his
natural only Son: the relative incommunicable property of the second person,
the Son, is to be (though he is God of himself, yet as the Son) begotten of the
Father: the relative incommunicable property of the third person, the holy
Ghost, is (though he is God of himself, yet as the Spirit) to proceed from the
Father, and from the Son. And hence I argue for the holy Ghost his being a
person.

If the holy Spirit be distinguished from the Father, and from the Son, by his
ineffable manner of being, or by his relative incommunicable property of
subsisting in the Godhead, then he is one of the divine persons.

But the holy Spirit is distinguished from the Father, and from the Son, by his
ineffable manner of being, or by his relative incommunicable property of
subsisting in the Godhead: Therefore he is one of the divine persons.

That the holy Spirit is distinguished by his ineffable manner of being, and
relative incommunicable property of subsisting in the Godhead, is clear from
that one Scripture (among others above cited) John 15. 26. In these words
[which proceeds from the Father] and in many Scriptures he is called the
Spirit of the Son, and the Spirit of Christ, and therefore he proceeds from
him also, and is known thereby to be a distinct person from him, and from the
Father. If any say, this doctrine of the Trinity is very mysterious, make it
out by some similitude; The Prophet answers him, or rather the holy Ghost by
the Prophet, Isa 40. 18. To whom will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye
compare unto him? or, we may in allusion thereunto say, Who shall compare the
essence of the Creator, to the essence of the creature; and who shall liken the
divine persons, with the humane? or the humane unto the divine? I shall only,
to clear out what has been said of the holy Ghosts personality, add this
argument.

If those actions are properly attributed to the holy Ghost which are proper to
a person, then he is a person.

But those actions are properly attributed to the holy Ghost which are proper
to a person; therefore he is a person. I shall mention but some (of many)
actions properly attributed to the holy Ghost; as 1 Cor. 12. 11. all these
works that one and self same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he
will. Here the Spirit is described, not as a motion or operation, but as a
person properly acting, willing, working. Act. 20. 28. he is said to constitute
elders or make overseers over the Church, the flock of God; Luke 12. 12. to
teach, John 16. 8. to convince, Acts 13. 2. to call, and ver. 4. to send forth
Barnabas and Saul, Act. 2. 4. to give utterance: and that very action which R.
F. grants to the Spirit, of dwelling in the Saints, is so far from disproving
him to be a person (for which end he produces it) as it clearly proves him to
be one. For how does he dwell in the Saints? not personally, yet properly (more
then by way of operation) as a owner, or inhabitant in his house; as a God, and
as a Lord in his Temple: this person dwells in the Saints, though not
personally, yet mystically and in a true spiritual way of inhabitation. 1 Cor.
3. 16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God
dwells in you? And do we-know that, and shall we not know, and acknowledge
him a person, and a person of note and eminency? He is not a Person, says R.
F. but he dwells in persons. If that be a reason why the holy Ghost is no
person, the Father (with this corrupt reason) must be no person, nor the Son
any (who yet have the very title given them, Heb. 1. 3. Christ the express
image of the Fathers person) for the Father dwells in the Saints, and the Son
also, John 14. 21. what have we next to make out R. E. his sense? [ he dwells
in persons or bodies of Saints] It seems he accounts none to be persons but
those that have bodies. Why beasts have bodies, yet are no persons, and Angels
are persons spiritual, immaterial creatures (...).
subsisting by themselves, (though not of themselves, as not any creature does
thus subsist) although they have no bodies of flesh and bones, Luke 24. 39. as
men have: nor is the body of a Saint the person of a Saint, as he is a man, but
a part of it (his person or suppositum consisting of body and soul) and of such
a composition is every humane person; but a divine person in the Godhead, and
in particular the holy Ghost (of whom I have briefly spoken for R. F. his
conviction, or for others consolation, as information) is no compositum or
third thing made up of other things different from the Essence, yet is he
distinguished, by his manner of subsisting (as has been showed.) To little
purpose, does R. F. Page 8.
conclude this subject with that Scripture, 2 John, ver. 9. He that abides in
the doctrine of Christ, has both the Father and the Son, but against himself,
for as 1 John 2. 23.
whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father; so, he that denies
the holy Ghost, in that manner as R. F. has done, abides not in the doctrine
of Christ, and has neither the Father nor the Son. Let him well consider, that
the holy Ghost dwells in the souls of Saints as well as in their bodies, let
him beware of conceiving him (with Samosatenus) only to be that (...).
un-personal energy, or operation which is in believers, And let him be far
from putting the Believer in the room of the Spirit, or from making no more of
the Spirit of God, then the believing soul in the bodies of the Saints, for
this were to turn the glory of the Creator unto the Creature.

(3. Head of Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning the light within them, and
all men.
Section 8.
IN this Section, I had noted what they say about a light that Christ has
purchased for every man, Warning to Underbarrow by Ed. Borough page 4.
which leads to the Father. These last words [which lead to the Father] (as may
appear by the Asterisk, or note of reference like a Star [ Page 8.
] between [man] and [which], I only observed as Edward Buroughs words, R. F.
* in answer has three things.

1. Christ is the way to the Father, John 14. 6. as Ed. Bur. says.

Rep. This Ed. Bur. and he may affirm, with us, agreeable to the Scripture, and
yet contradict the Scriptures in saying that Christ is in every man, or, that
the light in every man Light of a Deity in every man, no redemptionlight.
leads to the Father. Christ God, or as God, is in every man, and a spark of
his Godhead light is in every man, but there is not in every man that
Redemption-light which leads to the Father, as a Father, reconciling sinners to
himself in Christ as Mediator; nor is Christ given to every man, as a Mediator
to lead to the Father; nor does Christ give to every man that light which leads
him to the Father.

2. Says R. F. There is not such a word as [purchased] in that page of E. B.

Rep. 1. Nor did I say there was the word [purchased] in that or any other page
of his book, yet I have had that expression from others of their judgment in
this particular, concerning every man's light.

2. If every man's light leads unto the Father [ effective] so as to bring him
into reconciliation and communion with the Father, it is effectual light which
warms and works the heart to the love of it: But so does not the light [in
every man] and therefore deserves not the name of [purchased light.]

3. I received this passage In a Letter.
lately from a godly Preacher in Scotland, and observer of their new vented
Doctrines, That he has often wondered at one Expression of theirs, and what
they should mean by it, viz. That the Elect cannot, nor never did sin. But of
late one of them resolved the doubt, viz. That the Elect is the Light within,
that Christ purchased for every one. Sometimes it appears, they make the Light
within every man, to be Christ, which is the Savior and Redeemer of him that
loves it, as Ed. Borough Warning, etc. page 14.
expresses himself. Sometime, the Elect, as this man in Scotland; sometime one
thing, sometime another, that at last it will be found but an Idol of their own
brain and fancy.

3. R. F. for evasion runs to John 1. 9. Christ is the true light, that
enlightneth every man that comes into the world. Therefore, If thou say the
contrary, the Scriptures thou therein contradictest (and not he) take notice of
that; and withal, that Christ is the Light of the world, etc.

Rep. 1. That Christ is the true Light, is a very truth, and that he is the
Light of the world, John 8. 12. and gives the John 8. 12. opened.
light of life, or quickening salvation-light, to all his believing followers,
is thankfully acknowledged; but they that confound the Light-giver with the
Light, or Enlightening given, deceive themselves and others that hearken to them.

2. He that takes John 1. 9. in such a sense, as if every John 1. 9,
vindicated, and opened, with the Context.
man had the Light Christ, as Mediator and Salvationlight, understands it in a
sense contradictious to other Scriptures; viz. Col. 1. 26. [Hid from ages] Romans
16. 25. [Kept secret] whence I argue, That which was hid from ages past, and
kept secret from the most of men, (even from all Nations but the Jews) that
every man had not light into; But the Light of Christ as Mediator, or the
Gospel and preaching of Christ was hid from Ages, and kept secret from the most
of men: Therefore, every man has not had Light into it, nor about it.


And hence it appears, that the sense put upon John 1. 9. isfalse, as if it
were Salvation-light that John speaks of there, (which is given but to some
part of mankind since the Gospel came among the Gentiles) when as he only in
that Verse expressly instanceth in a lightning of every man that comes into the
world, in any Age of the world whatsoever, (past and preceding Christ's
Incarnation, as subsequent and present) with the sparkling light of a Deity;
which Deity, or Godhead, John is proving to be in Christ, as in the Father.

3. That sense of John 1. 9. which is beyond the Evangelists scope, from the
first Verse of that Chapter to the tenth Verse, is contradictious to the Text
in controversy and under debate. The direct scope of that former part of the
The Godhead of Christ asserted by Scripture arguments.
Chapter, is to assert and prove Christ to be God.

[Ver. 1. In the beginning was the word] i. e. the Son of God; therefore he was
before the beginning, even from eternity. He was in the first moment of time,
when time, place, and creation, and things in time and place began; therefore
he was before time, and place, and things, and therefore he is God.

the word was with God] distinct in personal subsistence from the Father, yet
existing in the Father, therefore he was God.

Ver. 2, and 3. He being in the beginning with God, all things were made by
him, etc.] therefore he is God.

Ver. 4. In him was life, and the life in him which he has of himself, was the
light of men; (as men and reasonable creatures, their life lies in their
reasonable faculty, which distinguishes them from beasts) The Word was the
author and giver of this their Light of Reason, which makes them live as men
among men; (the use whereof, if but suspended, renders them, with
Nebuchadnezzar, companions for beasts) therefore the Word is God.

But it might be said, If the Word be God, how comes it that all men know him
not to be God?

[ V. 5. it is preventingly answered, The light shines in darkness, and the
darkness comprehended it not] i. e. The Lightgiver shines by the Light given
back, since the fall, into men's dark corrupt minds; but they are unable to
rise so high, as to the knowledge of Christ's Godhead: (all creation-light
being much obscured and darkened, even about the creatures, since sin came into
the world, much more concerning Jehovah-Elohim, one God and three persons) but
as he is revealed in the Scriptures; and yet there, even the Jews understood
but little of him as God. Hereupon, [ Ver. 6. There was a man sent from God
whose name was John] the Baptist. [ Ver. 7. The same came to bear witness of
that light] i. e. Christ-God the Light-giver, [ that all men through him might
believe] that which their reasons could not reach nor attain unto, by the Light
given to all men after the fall. [ Ver. 8. He, John the Baptist, was not that
light, but was sent to bear witness of that light] and the witness he gave of
him was partly this; He is mightier then I, Mat. 3. 11. He is preferred before
me, for he was before me, John 1. 30. And the Jews knowing that John the
Baptist was conceived and born before Christ, the Testimony of that John must
amount to this, That Christ was in being [as God] before he (or John either)
was in being [as man] therefore by this, as by a fifth Argument, the Evangelist
John calls men to believe Christ's Godhead.

Ver. 9. (to which I have led my Reader along) he re-asumeth the Argument of
the fourth Verse still with the former scope, to assert the aforesaid Divine
nature of the Word: [That was the true light, which lights every man.] John
the Baptist was a burning and a shining light, and brought true light, but he
had only a borrowed light, Christ was the true light *, i. e. essentially, and
primitively Quae vere and proprie meretur lucis nomen, quum natura luceat, non
participatione. 6.
of himself, he derived it not from others, as mere creatures do; and hence may
be founded a sixth Argument for his Deity. He who has Light, and is Light
originally and all-sufficiently of himself, is God; (for no more can be said of
God, then, as 1 John 1. 5. that he is Light, absolute Light of himself, and in
him is no darkness at all) But Christ has Light, and is Light of himself
originally, all-sufficiently, absolutely, being the true Light: Therefore he is
God.


But as I said, the Argument of the fourth Verse is taken up again in the
latter and largest part of this ninth Verse. He that gives light to every man
that comes into the world, must needs be greater then all lights, in himself,
and of himself; But Christ does thus: Therefore, he is what he is, the very
God, and original or eternal Light (with the Father and Spirit) blessed for
ever.


But what light does he give unto every man? may some say.

I answer, 1. He was not bound, as God offended after the fall, to give any at
all, of any sort or kind; (whatsoever R. F. says elsewhere, Light out of
darkness, p. 19
None shall be condemned for that which they know not) he might have condemned
all, as some, for losing their light which once they had in Adam.

2. What light he gives to every man without exception since the fall, was
never obeyed to the full by any man, and has rendered men the more inexcusable,
Romans 1. 19. 20.

3. That place in the Romans answers the Question directly, together with the
fourth Verse of this first Chapter of John. The lighting of every man, is with
the candlelight of natural understanding, to empower them to behold that which
may be known of God, in and by the creation; where the invisible things of his
eternal power and Godhead, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made. And every man has this common benefit from Christ, as he is the
Creator of their souls, and does, with a reprieve of their souls out of hell,
give them back this privilege of humane Reason, as they are his creatures. But
do they (even every man thus endued with a light of reasonable creatures, as
such) hereby understand Christ's Godhead, or that he is God?

Ver. 10. It follows as a new Argument in the former part of it, He was in
the world] according to his Divine essence, general presence, and providential
power, governing and sustaining all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1. 3.
and therefore is God. But the latter part of the Verse with 11, 12. gives
answer to the question even now mentioned. The whole world (which Christ made,
and was in (before his Incarnation, as now he is) to rule and preserve)
consists of Jews and Gentiles: The Gentiles most commonly in Scripture are
called the world, and the Jews Gods people; Christ then being in the world, the
world, i. e. the Gentiles, knew him not. But [ Ver. 11. He came] i. e. by
Types, Figures, Sacrifices, Prophets, Scriptures, [ unto his own] the Jews of
his own nation, and account is given of them two ways; some disowned him, were
strangers to him, [ and his own;] the generality of the Jewish nation in all
Ages before he came in the flesh, as since [ received him not] for God, or as
the Son of God: (Thus far the world before Christ, will be convinced another
day of their ignorance, oscitancy, and neglect of Christ's Godhead; much more
the Jews, not understanding, nor owning him to be their Creator, who gave them
their natural being, life and light; and most of all, they who have had the
Gospel, and yet deny him to be God.) [ But Ver. 12. as many] of the Jews first,
and that before his coming in the flesh, as well as since, [ as received him,
or believed on his Name] i. e. his Person, Worth, and Dignity, as the natural
Son of God, equal with God, and the very God, [ to them he gave power,] right,
privilege, and dignity [ to become the (adopted) sons of God.]

A question yet might be put, How came some to know, receive, believe on
Christ, and become the sons of God, others not, when every man had a light?
ver. 9.

The answer is both general and special, ver. 13. Generally take it thus, [ Who
were born] they were born believers, and they were born the children of God, as
well as adopted to be so; but how?

In special the answer is 1. Negatively, and that three ways.

1. [ Not of blood] they became not believers and the sons of God, by the first
birth, which is of the blood and seed of earthly parents, no though the blood,
parentage, and descent be never so noble and royal.

2. [ Nor of the will of the flesh] that is, Their new second birth is not an
extract or product of corrupted nature; the will of the flesh is rebellion, and
the wisdom of the flesh, enmity against God and grace.

3. [ Nor of the will of man] i. e. Not of the power of that natural faculty,
the Will, nor of man's choice or direction, who should believe, and be Gods
children, who not; and therefore, not from that free arbitrament and umpirage
of man's Reason and Will together, nor from the light which every man has,
which is a low common benefit to this, and is no drop of this immortal seed.

2. Affirmatively, [ But of God] his own will, power, and good pleasure.

All this time the Evangelist having proved Christ's Deity against Ebion,
Cerinthus, and their followers, who denied it; then proceeds he Ver. 14. to
assert and prove his Humanity, and yet has one passage more of his Deity in
the same Verse: [ And the word, says John, was made flesh.] He that was God in
the second person, assumed the truth and substance of the humane nature into
the Unity of his person, and [ dwelt among us] in that tabernacle of his flesh,
and [ we] (who received of his fullness, and grace for grace, ver. 16.) [
beheld] through the lanthorn, as it were, of his Humanity [ his glory, the
glory as of the only begotten of the Father;] the glory of the fullness of the
Godhead dwelling in him bodily, as Col. 2. 9. i. e. really, personally, and to
visible manifestation. This is a light indeed, which the disciples had, that
leads to the Father; the light of Christ as Mediator, which now he speaks of:
For Christ, as Mediator, is a Mediator in both Natures; and though he that is
Mediator, gives the light that every man has, yet he neither gives that which
every man has, as Mediator; nor is the light which every man has, light about
his Mediation. R. F. would have it so, and so would others; but their Wills, as
their Judgments, are as over-thwarting to the the will of God, and judgment
of the Scriptures, as R. F. is in his Exposition of other Scriptures (with John
1. 9.) touching the Light in every man, as will further appear in the following
Section.

Section 9.
I Charged them here with magnifying the Light within them (and which every man
has, which is no more then the light of natural Conscience, or that which some
men have under the Gospel, but a common enlightening) above the light of
Scripture; and equal with the choicest light [for kinde] that Christ or his
Spirit gives unto the Saints. R. F. Page 8.
shifts it off with telling us, That they do magnify the Lord, as Mary did,
Luke 1. whereas the blessed Virgin magnified the Lord, and rejoiced in him, for
peculiar favor to her self, and for special mercy to his chosen Israel, all
along her Song.

Again, he throws dirt in my face, [ Thou also contradicts thy self, and lies
against Christ the true Light, calling him natural and common; and lies of such
as witness Christ, and the Light of his Spirit, and according to the
declaration of the Scriptures.]

Rep 1. As to any self-contradiction of mine, he discovers none, nor will it be
found by any sober and judicious Reader, and of things that are not, and that
do not appear, there is the same reason and bottom.

2. As for my lie against Christ the true light, calling him natural and
common, I am confident every faithful unprejudiced person, will turn it over to
R. F. and lay it at his door. For I only called the light which every man
has, natural; and the light which some men have under the Gospel, but common;
I called not Christ the true light so: For although Christ, as God, gives
natural light to all, and common enlightening to some men, (of which, Heb. 6. 4.
some men have it who never had special sanctified light) yet he is not to be
called or accounted as low, as some of his workings are. But we honor, adore,
and magnify him, as God, Christ and the Spirit above his gifts
who works but such common works, though we put them not into his own place,
nor lift up that natural or common light into the room of a Savior.

3. He that witnesses not Christ and the light of the Spirit (of which
witnessing he boasts) above the natural light which is given to every man,
and above the common light (though supernatural) which is given to some men,
does not witness Christ and the light of the Spirit home and close according to
the Scriptures. Christ, as Christ, the Lords anointed, anointed above his
fellows, is above all his gifts which he bestows on men, not only as he is
God, viz. natural and common gifts; but as he is Christ, viz. peculiar and
saving gifts: And the light of the Spirit, is either that which he is
essentially with the Father and Son, which is above all created and conferred
light, as high as God is above the creature; or that which he gives: now the
light which the Spirit gives, he gives in a common, or in a saving way. There
are but natural and common instincts, and lightnings of the Spirit; and there
are special; peculiar, and sanctifying. The Godhead and person of the Spirit,
is more above all these his gifts, then the heavens are above the earth. This
is to witness Christ and the Spirit according to the Scriptures. What light R.
F. has about the Spirit, the Reader may discern by what past before in the
seventh Section.

But to make good my Charge at the entrance of this, I noted from G. Fox, that
speaking of every man's light, he tells all that would know the way, This is the
true teacher; and the Light within is life, the Light in Scripture is death.
Contrary as I said to Ephesians. 5. 8. Jer. 10. 14. etc. For,

1. Grant there is some truth in every man's light, or as Vnivers^l light
teaches not the way of salvation.
Romans 1. 8. it could not be imprisoned, yet it is not the teacher of saving
truths. That which is but every man's light, teaches the true way to life, by a
man's own works; but it teaches nothing of the way, truth, and life, that is,
of Jesus Christ dying for sinners. The Ephesians and all the Gentiles were left
in the dark for all that natural teaching, and the Jews and every man left in a
brutish case, notwithstanding their natural wisdom; I say brutish, with that
Scripture in Jeremy, because the brute beasts are not more below the natural
reason of man, then the natural mind and reason of every man is below the
light of the new creature.

2. Grant again, (as I did in my former piece) that the light of the
Scripture-law, and bare Commandment, is death, sentencing the transgressors of
it to death, yet there is another kind of light mentioned, revealed) promised,
and shining forth in the Scripture, called the light of the glorious Gospel,
and Salvation-light; which if it be always death to G. F. or R. F. it is
because they are among them that perish.

All that R. F. in defense of George Fox returns me, is, [ Where thou art
offended at him for saying the Light of Christ is life, it is but to manifest
thy envy against the truth, and thy contradictions to the Scriptures; for the
Scripture says, Christ is the light, John 1. 9. And he is the life, John 14.
And such as follow him the true light, are led out of darkness, (error and
deceit) into the light of life, John 8. 12.

Rep. 1. I was offended at G. F. and am now at R. F. for defending the offense,
which is this, That the light within (every man) is said to be life, in
opposition to the light in the Scriptures, which he calls death; whereas there
is no light to bring men to life and glory, but it is taught in the Scriptures.

2. The light given to all men, John 1. 4, and 9. (as I said above) is indeed
the present life of rational creatures, and among men, but what is that to the
life of communion with God in grace and glory?

3. The light of life, or Salvation by Christ a Mediator, to lead such as (by
grace) follow him, out of darkness, is not known by the remnants of the old
creation-light, much less can that old creation-light lead into the
redeeminglight of life, although men follow it never so close and hard at the
heels.

4. To equal every man's light (as if it were for kind the same) with the
choicest light of the Saints, is to contradict the Scriptures.

1. This do all of the Sect. And 2. this does R. F.

1. The mouth of them all may be heard speak in one Pamphlet To all that would
know the way to the kingdom. Printed Anno 1655. page 17.
to this purpose. They will not endure the distinction of Natural, and
Spiritual, and Special. Produce one Scripture, say they, that speaks of a
Natural light. I can give them two or three, if it may do them any good, Romans
1. 21. [When they knew God.] Romans 2. 14, 15. [They do by nature the things
contained in the law, etc. Which show the effect of the law Written in their
hearts.] Jude verse 10. [What they know naturally.] Here is the natural light
given to every man; more or less; this is the light in every man's conscience,
which is but Natural, though they will not have it so called; but we will call
a Spade a Spade, and no more: It shall not be set off for Free Grace, and the
Saints Teacher, and sufficient to lead to salvation, etc. Yet to this effect
will they instruct the people, Page 8. as above
To you that tempt God, and say, Lord, give us a sight of our sins, you need
not tempt God, to give you a sight of your sins, for ye know enough, etc.
Praying to have more light then what every man has with them, is tempting of
God; and other light then that it seems they know none, or why must men stand
still there, and seek no further.

2. R. F. in another Pamphlet Light risen out of darkness, page 19.
has this passage, And here you lie, ye proud Priests, that say the Apostle
did not say to every man, [Col. 1. 27.] That Christ, or the Light, was in them;
for ver. 28. it is added, Whom we preach, warning Col 1. 27, 28. vindicated.
every man, and teaching every man. Here he would level the light of the Saints
with every man's light, and with Christ's person also: Whereas,

1. When the Apostle says, He warns every man, he does not speak of every
man that comes into the world; for never did every man live in one Age, nor
did Paul meet with half the men of the world in that Age.

2. The phrase [ every man] in that place must be interpreted by the 26 and 27
verses, [every such man] as is a Saint (in one place and another where he came)
not yet perfect, (except in Justification) that he may be presented perfect in
Christ Jesus in holiness.

3. Christ's person, with and by his Spirit, dwells in every Saint, with a
light that never was given to every man that comes into the world, nor ever
will be given.

4. Though Paul preached to the world unconverted, as well as to the Saints,
yet it was to bring them (who were of Gods election) among the Saints, that
they might be partakers of that mysterious light which they knew nothing of
before. But R. F. thinks if the Scripture make mention of [every man] it must
needs include every man, that is, was, or will be in the world; therefore he
adds, (in the abovementioned Pamphlet) The Apostle says to the Romans, That
as well as to them, God has given to every man a measure of grace, Romans 12. 3.
And none shall be condemned for that Romans 12 3. vindicated.
which they know not, but for that which they know, and do not obey. Whereas
here,

1. By [every man] is not meant every man that comes into the world, but that
comes into the Church, or company of Saints; or, whether in or out of the
Church yet, makes profession of Faith, and has received some supernatural
gifts in measure.

2. It is a measure of faith the Apostle speaks of, not a measure of grace.
Faith may be taken there for knowledge of Gospel-doctrine, and gifts flowing
from that knowledge which may be in men, that are not truly sanctified, or
endued with saving grace. 2 These. 3. 2. All men have not 2 These 3. 2. opened.
faith, not so much as knowledge of the Gospel-letter, nor the general assent
to Gospel Truth, as very Gospel; much less that justifying faith which only
the Elect have.

3. Every man that comes into the world has not that which is termed, and is
[but] common (though supernatural) grace, i. e. gifts freely given in common to
Hypocrites and Formalists, as to the Elect, and effectually called of Jesus
Christ.

4. Every man, that neither has true saving grace, nor ever lived in times and
places when and where God has given common supernatural endowments, will have
enough to condemn him, for that which he had in Adams loins yet standing; and
particularly for that which he knew in him, but lost, yea, put it away by his
voluntary disobedience, in whom all have sinned, Romans 5. 12. Besides, for not
obeying Romans 5. 12. opened.
that which he knows of God, of good and evil, as natural conscience dictates
for God. Every man, who has but every man's light, will at last be condemned.
Romans 2. 12. For as many as have sinned without law, i. e. without the written
word, shall also perish without law. i. e. by the law, witness, and judgment
of their own consciences, which is that we call the Light of nature, the Law of
nature, or natural Light, by good warrant from Scripture, and reason that
things should be called as they are. But to proceed.

Section 10.
TO call* the light within them, and which every man has, the word of God, as
they frequently express their natural impressions; To you all, this is the word
of the Lord, while as they will not have the holy Scriptures so called: This,
as I noted, is still to hold up Contradiction (as to the whole Scripture, so)
to that particular place in Isaiah 8. 20. whence I inferred, That Light without
Scripture Isaiah 8. 20. further vindicated.
is no light. This passage R. F. stumbleth at in his Epistle, and says, It
comes, as the rest of my sayings, from the deceitful Spirit that guides me.

Rep. What does he less then fasten deceit upon the Spirit of God, (as far as
he can) the Spirit of truth, who speaks in that, as in all the Scripture, and
guided me to write as I did? If they speak not according to this word (says
the Spirit there, speaking of the Law and the Testimony written in books and
tables) it is because there is no light in them. How Light without Scripture is
no Light.
What clearer and truer inference, from the words of the Spirit by the Prophet,
could I raise then this? viz. Light, though said to be saving Light, without
Scripture, i. e. besides, or not according to Scripture, is no Light. Men may
R. F. His reasons to the contrary, in his Epistle, dissolved.
call it light, and light of life; but the holy Ghost says it is not so, if it
be not agreeable to Law and Testimony, which is Scripture Light. R. F. would
fain disprove my inference thus:

then I know not the light that was before the Scripture or Letter, and so am
ignorant of Christ the true light.

Rep. 1. It follows not, for there was no light before the Scripture, but what
is now revealed in, and by the Scripture.

2. It is a learned ignorance to know no more in order to salvation, then that
which is in Scripture revealed: The Lord give me, and all his, more of this
learning.

3. As the Spirit shows me, by the Scripture, that God did teach the knowledge
of Christ to the Fathers before the Flood, and after, till Moses, without a
written Word; so I know, that all that light which the Patriarchs had
concerning salvation, and right worshipping of God through a Mediator, was
according to the Law and Testimony, committed to writing in Moses time and
since.

2. R. F. objecteth, By such a saying, [Light without Scripture, etc.] I would
not have God to be God, and Christ to be Christ, without the Letter of the
Scripture.

Rep. 1. What an absurd (that I say not, malicious) inconsequence is here? It Is
as if one should have cavilled against Isaiah, when he said, To the Law and to
the Testimony, etc. Why Isaiah, if there be no light in them that bring not
Scripture, and that soundly interpreted according to the Spirits word, thou
would not have God to be God, nor Christ to be Christ, without the
Scripture? The charge of R. F. is not against me, but contradictious to that
Prophet, and to the Spirit: For when God gives a written Law, Doctrine, or Rule
and Touchstone, to try even Prophets and Apostles Doctrine by; he that shall
speak things discrepant from this Canonical Word, speaks (as we say) without
book; without ground or warrant, without, or besides, and consequently against
the Light of a Rule, and against the Spirit that gave the Rule.

2. God, who was God from everlasting, and much more before he appointed his
mind to be delivered in writing, Isaiah 8 20. farther cleared.
has thus given out his mind in that written Text by Isa. 8. 20. consult but
the verse before. When they shall say unto you, seek unto them, that have
familiar spirits, etc. should not a people (Gods people) seek unto their God?
where should they seek him? should they go to the dead? to damned spirits in
men? and to wizards that peep and mutter? (as some now-adays) to seek for the
living God? Or, should they go to the dead, to seek help and advice from them,
for, and in behalf of the living? No certainly: whither then? the answer is
clear v. 20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, which is Gods written word, and
that which is spoken according to it: And if they [any that undertake to be
speakers, or writers] shall not speak according to this Law and Testimony; it
is because they have no morninglight in them, it is an evidence they follow the
moonshine of their watry-fancies, dark reasonings, and diabolical suggestions;
and if there be no light of saving truth in them, there will be no light of
comfort or relief which shall shine forth unto them: so that, if any shall come
and teach a God whom the Scripture teaches not, and a Christ, that the
Scripture does not teach, he speaks lies and darkness, and nothing else: yea,
if any set up a light against the light of Scripture, and will not be contented
with that, for the subject matter of it, and reduce all his light unto it, and
compare his light with it, to find out and maintain a harmony therewith; he
sets up Lies against the Truth, and in the room of it.

R. F. reasons, If the Scriptures should be lost, he would have no God nor
Christ, that would have none without them.

Rep. 1. This needless supposition might be spared; God who has hitherto
preserved them, will still maintain them while the world stands. John 10. 35.
The Scripture cannot be broken, and therefore not lost.

2. In the volume of the Book of Gods Decrees it was determined, there should
be a Scripture; and all should be written therein, which concerned Christ, and
salvation by him, Heb. 10. 7. And,

3. As all that have sinned, and shall sin against the Scripture Light, (since
it was given them) shall be judged by it at the last day, Romans 2. 12, 16. So,

4. All that is contained in the Scripture (which is more then is written in
the heart of every fallen son of Adam, and more then was written in Adams heart
before the fall) shall eternally witness in men's consciences, both for the joy
and comfort of those that believe and obey it; and against those that slight
and contradict it, to their everlasting terror and increase of torment.

To say (says R. F.) that without Scripture the word of the Lord could not be
spoken, is to limit the Spirit of God.

Rep. 1. But who said it? He would make his Reader believe, I said it, or to
that effect: But let him that reads us both, observe what liberty he takes to
note the effect of words, and to pass by the very words themselves, and yet
condemns it in others; although, as near as I could, I have every where
alleged their very words.

2. That which I said, the Reader shall find at the end of this Section, Page
8. of my Book, viz. Christ teaches us not to know any thing to Salvation, but
what is in the Scripture-Law and Testimony: For it is there either in express
words, or in a true consequential sense; and to keep our selves within the
bounds and limits which God has set us, is not at all to limit Gods Spirit,
but our own spirit, which has need of such a bit and bridle.

R. F. adds, If Samuel, Christ, his Apostles, and John, might have spoken
nothing but what was written, they might not have spoken much of what they did
speak.

Rep. 1. God might have revealed more then is in the Scripture, but he pleased
not so to do.

2. All that Samuel, and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, and John the
Revelation have spoken, is written, both according to what was written before,
and for substance the same. As Moses wrote what was delivered to the
Patriarchs, and Samuel with the Prophets spoke, and have left written what
Moses wrote; so, Christ and the Apostles spoke, and have left written what was
spoken by Moses and the Prophets, Luke 24. 26, 27. Acts 3. 22, 23, 24. Let him
that reads understand. Rev. 22. 6. These sayings are faithful and true. And
the Lord God of the holy Prophets, sent his Angel to show unto his servants the
things which must shortly be done. Nothing is signified in the whole Book of
the Revelation, but, for substance, was foretold by Isaiah, Daniel, Zechariah,
and other of Gods holy Prophets, whose writings were extant long before John
had his Visions and Revelations. But R. F. will not yet give over.

God reveals the deep things by his Spirit, and teaches by his Spirit, and
sends forth messengers by his Spirit, and guides by his Spirit into all truth,
etc.

Rep. 1. They do well to run to the Spirit, who have lost the sense of
Scripture, and love to it; but let R. F. and others of his way take heed they
mistake not Gods Spirit, nor substitute their own spirit in the room of the
Lord, the Spirit.

2. The Spirit of the Lord reveals no deeper things, nor will do to all
eternity, then are already wrapped up in the volume of the Scriptures. The
Spirits-light and Scripturelight are very harmonious, albeit, the Spirit gives
eyes by his own power to see that light, which the Scripture does but
instrumentally help unto.

3. Such messengers as speak more then is in the Scripture, are not sent by
Gods Spirit, nor guided by him to what they say.

Thus I have taken up what R. F. has in his Epistle, upon occasion of my
lifting up the Light of Scripture into its due place, above that which is every
man's Light; let us review what he has further in his Book Page 9.
, not according to the Title, in vindication of the Scriptures; but in defense
of George Fox, who calls the light (of every man) the word of God: but, as I
said before, will not have the Scriptures so called. All the vindication which
R. F. can give, is recrimination, in this as in other cases; Thou accusest G.
F. for saying the light is the word, but it is but to manifest thy further
contradictions to the Scripture. As how? For the Scripture says, God is the
Light.

Rep. I no where find it so expressed in Scripture-text. The place he quoteth is
printed John 1. 5. but let the Printer bear the blame, it is likely he
intended, 1 John 1. 5. there 1 John 1. 5.
indeed it is said expressly, [ That God is light*] not [ the light] in every
man's conscience. The light in every man is given of God, but that light is not
God, nor is God that light. God is light, pure absolute essential light,
knowledge, wisdom, How God is light.
holiness, and perfectly so of himself: but the best light that G. F. or R. F.
or any man has, or is qualified with, is but created, diffused, derived-light.
Again, God is the word, for which R. F. quotes John 1. 1. but it is not so
expressed by John; only thus, The word was God: it is granted he was and is so,
what then? Must I needs be ignorant of the Scriptures, because I confound not
Father and Son together, as R. F. does in that expession of his, and what
follows? [ As God is the light and the word, so also is Christ, John 8. 12.
Rev. 19. 13. and the Father and the Son are one.]

Rep. How are they one? not in person, but in nature and essence. The Father is
not the Son, the Father is not the Word, nor ever so called. Let R. F. learn to
distinguish their persons as clearly, as he would be far from dividing their
essence. But, what if God be light, and Christ be the true light, and very God
with the Father in essence? and Christ be also the word of God, and so called
in that, as the word is the image of the mind, so Christ in his person is the
express image of the Fathers person, Heb. 1. 3. Must the light in every man,
which G. F. or R. F. speak from, be the word of God, and so called in that
sense, as Christ is the word of God, and so called? not to mention how such a
conceit borders upon blasphemy, this kind of reasoning is as good and true, as
that of R. F. Because I preach publicly, therefore I am a Priest; or because
I preached at Edinburgh in Scotland for a while, therefore I am a Scotch Priest;
as he every where calls me at his pleasure, and from his blind mistakes. But
to undeceive the simple, let me close this Section Superadded Conclusions.
with a few brief Corollaries.







Romans 2. 15.
of God, (not Christ-Mediator, nor Christ-God) because it is a piece of the
declaration of Gods will, made perfectly known to Adam before the fall.









Let R. F. and the men of his fellowship ponder what I say, and the Lord give
all his understanding in all things.

Section 11.
I Had discovered page 8. of my book in this Section, how they send people to
read the Scriptures in the Creatures, as if the Creatures taught us more then
the Scriptures, contrary to Psalm 19. and to Solomon in his Ecclesiastes, and
to Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 21. R. F. Page 9.
in answer tells me, That book George Fox his Parables. The Scripture a more
excellent teacher then the Creatures.
shall witness for the truth against thee, and thy generation.

Rep. If I were of the generation of Ranters, he might have cause to write as
he does; for as I hinted in my Epistle before my former piece, Some of them,
viz. Quakers, may happily be raised up against such, viz. Ranters, who have (to
their utmost) extinguished all common light of nature, and would level all with
sin and hell: And G. F. in his Parables, bends himself against men of this
hell-begotten brood. But as I own the light of Nature, which Ranters endeavor
to put out; and the Light of Scripture, which the men called Quakers (with
Ranters) would eclipse: so I acknowledge, there is much in the Creatures to be
learnt, by way of allusion; but to prefer that knowledge above the Scripture,
as is the scope of G. F. I am averse, and abhorrent in the case. And R. F. has
nothing more to say for G. F. only for his own security, he shifts from the
Creatures, viz. the Heavens, and the Earth, and things contained therein, as
parts of the first Creation, (of which G. F. gave his dictates) to those that
are in Christ, new Creatures, who are Epistles written in one another hearts,
seen and read in one another that are such Creatures, 2 Cor. 3.

Rep. Who sees not the man's evasion, here is blinded with prejudice, or gross
ignorance; for,

1. The Apostle, 2 Cor. 3. 1, 2. speaks not of what is 2 Cor. 3* 2. vindicated.
written in the hearts of all men, who have stony hearts, but in the hearts of
Saints, whose hearts are fleshy, or soft, v. 3.

2. He sets not forth those Epistles as Rules, equal with Scripture, much less
to be preferred above the Scripture: Paul's plain meaning is no more but this,
that the efficacious and cleared.
grace of the Gospel stamped and printed upon the Corinthians hearts, and made
visible and legible in their conversations, was a sufficient Testimonial for
his Apostleship, and faithfulness; and far better then Epistles of commendation
to and fro, which one Church, by Ink and Paper* might send to another
concerning him, or others* what is this to the question in hand concerning the
doctrine of the Gospel and its knowledge to be had, by the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, fire, water, air and earth, etc. which G. F. had instanced in?

3. What if new creatures be seen and read in one another that are such
Creatures? Sun, Moon and Stars, etc. are not such creatures, nor are these the
Epistles which the Apostle speaks of.

R. F. next to his evasion falls upon clamor, and would fasten the imputation
of ignorance of those Epistles and of lying upon me.

Rep. If it be enough for him to say it here and every where without proof, I
cannot be innocent; but,

1. In the case of Epistles recommendatory, such as Paul had at Corinth;
whether I know what they are or no, let those (whom the Lord has effectually
wrought upon, by my poor labors in Norfolk, or Essex, in England, or Scotland)
stand forth (as some have in their life time, some on their deathbed, and all
the rest shall at the great day) witness for me.

2. In the case of lying, it is charged here in a double respect.

First, I have lied of the truth, and of them with a deceitful Page 9.
spirit by twisting and winding about: nothing being alleged for color of
proof, I must entreat the Reader to peruse this whole Section 11. in my book
Contradictions of the Quakers, etc. page 8. 9.
(which consists not of above a dozen lines, and three words) and then I shall
have better measure given me.

Secondly, whereas he adds [ Thou may well lie of us that lies of the Apostle
Paul, and wrests not our words only, but his also] Let any indifferent person
judge how he makes this out; I had showed how contrary they are (who would set
up the teaching by the creatures against the Scriptures) to Paul asserting, "1
Cor. 1. 21. that, when by the wisdom of 1 Cor. 1. 21. opened and
this world (in all the study of the creatures) men knew not God (to life and
salvation) it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching (a Text, a Doctrine,
a Reason, a Use out of the word) to save them that believe. R. F. excepteth two
ways.

First, There is not any such words of the Apostle, as Text, vindicated.
Doctrine, Reason, Use, to save them that believe, and here thou have lied of
him.

Rep. 1. The words (a Text, a Doctrine, a Reason, a Use) were in a Parenthesis,
as a part of the Paraphrase, with what went before. By the foolishness of
preaching Paul means the matter he preached, Christ crucified according to
Scripture Text, Doctrine, Reason, and Use, which very subject preached of, the
Greeks and Gentiles counted foolishness, and being preached according to
Scripture Text, etc. R. F. accounts a lie. That Paul preached according to
Scripture-Text (which laid together one place compared with another has
Doctine, Reason, and Use in it) let who please consult Act. 26. 22, 23. and
chap. 28. 23. and it will be abundantly evident.

2 That God has converted millions, and saved them, by this way of preaching,
R. F. will know one day, whether he be one of the number, or not.

3. I used that paraphrase the rather, because preaching of Christ from a
Scripture-Text, etc. is so much despised by men of R. F. his profession, and by
himself after his manner jeered at, See Part 2. Sect. 27.
(as I afterward noted in my book, page 26) But let him and the rest know,
that heaven and earth shall fail, before one Text, Doctrine, Reason, Use or
Iota of any of these in Scripture shall fall to the ground, for want of truth,
or accomplishment.

Secondly, he excepteth against my calling the Letter the Word, as if I would
make the Letter a Savior.

Rep. 1. This exception arises from the passage before mentioned [ a Text etc.
out of the word] meaning out of the Scripture, which how it is the Word, and
that it is so called by the holy Ghost, and his Penmen of the Scripture, has
been already cleared.

2. Christ, the Author of salvation to them that obey him speaking in the
Scripture, saves by the Scripture, read, soundly interpreted, rightly divided,
faithfully applied. If R. F. says the contrary, as he does, [ Christ the alone
Savior, or perfect Savior, being able to save all that come unto God by him
(not by the Scripture) but by him] he dares affront the Lord Jesus himself, who
directs his very enemies to the Scriptures Joh. 5. 39. to find eternal life
by him, as he is in, and by the Scriptures discovered.

3. If the Scripture declares of Christ, as R. F. grants, either Christ makes
that declaration of him saving to some, or not: If not, it does not declare him
to be an able Savior; if yea, then he saves by that declaration, or by the
Scripture. One word more we must animadvert Page 9.
from R. F. ere we close this Section. He that has the Son has life, 1 John
5. 12. (if he have not the Letter) but he that has not the Son has not life
(though he may have all the Letter.)

Rep. 1. Would not R. F. or his friends think it rash and 1 John 5. 12.
vindicated.
broad language, if I should salute him with [ thou lyest] because John has no
such words as [ if he have not the Letter] nor [ though he may have all the
Letter] and yet this kind of usage I had even now from him.

2. It is no part of the Apostles meaning to exclude the Scripture from being a
means to espouse Christ and a Christian together. Having of Christ relates to
the Brides having the Bridegroom. It becomes not the Bride to reject the Letter
of her Bridegroom, and the word of the Covenant by which she is married to him,
which is the word of Scripture preached, opened and applied.

3. If they that have all the Letter in form, may yet have none of Christ in
power, and therefore not life; how shall they be thought to have Christ in life
and power, who will have none of the Letter as they ought to have, and hold it,
viz. a glorious means of their knowledge of Christ crucified, and of their
salvation by him?

Section 12.
I Had instanced yet again, about their magnifying the Light which every man
has above the light of Scripture, from what George Fox says in his Parables,
It is the Light The light of nature no Interp^eter of Scripture, and the grace
therein revealed.
that gave forth the Scriptures, and will open the Scriptures to us; and it is a
more sure word of Prophecy, yea, the Grace that appeared unto all men, etc.

R. F. says nothing in defense hereof, nor in opposition to what I discovered
of its Scripture-contradiction from 1 Cor. 2. 9. It is written, Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him; yet by what he has elsewhere,
we may not conclude his silence (as to this Section) to be an Argument either
of his consent or dissent; but I shall evidence my charge against G. F. a
little further.

That Christ, the Son of God, gave forth the Scriptures, by his Spirit
inspiring them that wrote as he moved and acted them, is a most undeniable
Truth: For Christ is the great Light giver; he gives common Creation-light, and
he gives special Scripture Light, and all that is truly called Light-given; and
he is above all that he gives: But when men speak of the light given to every
man (as G. F. does) and then attribute as much to it, as to the person of
Christ, viz. That the Light [in every man] gave forth the Scriptures, and will
open the Scriptures to us; this is palpable darkness, and contradiction to the
Scripture I quoted: 1 Cor. 2. 9. opened.
for as man's eye, or mind (as he is a rational creature, and but so) never
reached the things of God, which he has prepared in a way of salvation for his
own; so the Gospellight about matters of Salvation (of which the Apostle
speaks) never entered, never shined into man's heart; take him, with all the
light given him, as a man, before the fall, or since at his coming into the
world. Gospel and Salvation-matters never entered into Adams heart before the
fall, and since, there is not any of his posterity that (by the light he
brings with him into the world) can tell what he should do, what way or
course he should take to be saved, no more then his first parents, when they
hid themselves amongst the trees of the garden. And that light which cannot
discover Salvation, cannot open the Scriptures to us. Nothing gives that which
it has not. Nothing can act beyond the sphere of its activity.

As for what G. F. adds, [ And it is a more sure word of prophecy] speaking of
every man's light; we will believe him as much as if he told an old wives fable;
if either he would have it to be more sure then the Scriptures, or then
Gospel-Sermons preached out of, and according to the Scriptures. Heretofore it
became a proverb, As true as the Gospel, there being infallible certainty in
the Scripture-Gospel; but now there is a Light discovered in every man that
will antiquate that Gospel, and put the proverb out of date. There is something
in the heart of every man (say No Gospel, in light of nature.
they) and that a word of prophecy, or a declaration of Gods mind, for
salvation too, (or else it is nothing) more sure then all the Gospel throughout
the Scripture; and yet (say I) no part of the Gospel at all: For no man shall
be able to spell out one Gospel-syllable, or letter in it, or by it, viz. in
all that is written in every man's heart, or by all that is written there from
their coming into the world. And yet it must be with G. F. the Grace that
appeared unto all men. Titus 2 11. vindicated.
Such an expression indeed has the Apostle, Tit. 2. 11. concerning the free
favor of God in Christ, which is the fountain and original cause of Salvation,
now shining to all Nations by the Gospel, and saving effectually some of all
sorts of men in the world; But as Paul never called every man's light; the Grace
of God, i. e. in Jesus Christ (although that Light be a free gift) so never was
it every man's light or gift, nor will be, to understand what is the
Scripture-grace of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ; But the Doctrine of it is
turned into wantonness, when it is laid waste and common with the universal
light of every individual reasonable creature, which 1. is but a part, a spark
of that which Adam had before the fall: 2. Gives not a crevise of light about
Christ crucified: 3 Is but a Legal-light and effect of the Law written in the
old-stony heart of every man.

Section 13.
R F. passes over this Section also, and says nothing to it, where I gave a
farther instance of their advancing this common universal light, by calling it
[ A perfect Light, or how could they be judged by it?] And [ the first
principle which will change the mind.]

Whereas 1. The Prophet David, Psalm 19. 7. advances Creature and
Scripturelight compared.
the Law or Doctrine of God in the Scriptures, as Paul does, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
to be the perfect Rule of faith and manners. The light found in, and by the book
of the creatures, and men's natural consciences is dim, weak and imperfect, in
comparison of Scripture Light.

2. The light in every man's conscience (where the Scripture comes not) draws up
a Bill of condemnation, discovers no Charter of Salvation.

3. It is imperfect to what Adam had before the fall; the Scriptures have more,
and higher light then Adam in his innocence received.

4. The Law of God, take it as a Covenant of works, or under such a notion,
requires as much as Adam had: That is not legally perfect, which in all degrees
and circumstances answers not a perfect legal Rule.

5. The least true Light sinned against, is sufficient to judge the sinner, if
God enters into judgment with him. The other clause shall be examined in the
fifteenth and sixteenth Sections.

Section 14.
R F. answers to what concerned himself in this Section, but not in its due
place, I shall endeavor to reduce him.

From his Book Entitled (how truly let the Lord and Father of Lights be judge)
Light risen out of darkness, I had noted what he says, The light is pure,
standing out of all corruption, meaning this light of every man, which, where
it is (and it is in every man) it renews the judgment, and where the
judgment is renewed, there is no corruption in that judgment; (as was told me
by one of them in Scotland) But this beam of God-head-light in every man, is no
part of the new creature, or of such a renewed mind as the Apostle calls for,
Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 4. 23. And although that which is a renewed principle in
some is pure, (so far as it is renewed) yet the faculty where it is [ the
minde] has darkness, corruption and pollution in it, as well as light and
purity, as is clear from 1 Cor. 13. 12. Now we see through a glass darkly, but
then face to face.

But R. F. page 10. line 12.
tells me I have slandered him for saying, The Light is pure, standing out of
corruption, but my slander has no weight, nor does him no harm.

Rep. 1. I slandered him but with the truth (if it were so) and did him more
right then he does himself, for I cited his words to the full; [standing out of
[All] corruption]

2. Although a slander, when the truth is spoken, may be charged upon him that
speaks it, if he relates the truth of another, with an intent of reproaching
the party, yet I was clear of such an intent, and shall still endeavor his, and
his companions reproof and conviction, without their reproach: If the word of
the Lord be a reproach unto them, let them look to it. 1 John 1. 5. cleared and
vindicated.


3. His evasion, to avoid the dint of the reproof, will not serve his turn; [
God is Light, 1 John 1. 5. and he is pure, and discovers corruptions, and has
no union with them, and what communion has light with darkness?] For, whosoever
consults his book Light rison out of darkness, page 24. line 13* and 15.
will find he speaks of the Light, created in men's minds, and given back
since the fall, That light is your condemnation, and that will show you your
corruptions.

And now in answer to my charge he tells us, God is Light, and he is pure, etc.

Rep. 1. Will he confound God and his essential Light, with light given into
men's minds? or will he have his words [ The light is pure, standing out of all
corruption] to be understood of Gods Essence only, and not at all of that
which is but a quality in the creature? If he would be understood to speak of
Gods Essence only, we agree in the light and understanding of the Text, 1 John
1. 5. But if he would have it partly meant of God, and partly of the Light
either innate, or regenerate in the creature, then he confounds uncreated and
created Light, and shows his own woeful darkness.

2. He that would speak aright of God, must say with the Apostle, God is light,
and in him is no darkness at all, no ignorance, 1 John 1. 5.
impurity, or corruption to be discovered or found in him; And he that would
speak aright either of the inbred, or of the new-bred light in the creature,
must distinguish of it either as it is in it self, or in the subject-person.

First, in it self, created light is pure, such as it is, and so much as there
is of it since the fall, but yet imperfect.

Secondly, in the subject, (the person in general, particularly the mind or
understanding) and there is a mixture of light and darkness, purity and
pollution, the one discovers the other; and if the Saints should say, We have
no darkness, no ignorance, no sin, they are so much the more dark, sinful,
ignorant, and there is no truth in what they say, 1 John 1. 8.

But I say, quoth R. F. and so does the Scripture, that he that abides in
Christ sins not, 1. John 3. 6.

Rep. Will R. F. make no Scripture of 1 John 1. 8. because 1 John 1. 8. with 1
John 3. 6. compared, cleared, and vindicated.
this in the third chapter is Scripture? or will that perverse and wicked
evesion pass with him, which one at a meeting of their fraternity in Essex not
long since, vented to him that urged the Emphasis [ if we, we that have
communion with the Father and with the Son, if we say we have no sin etc.] That
the Scriptures have been much altered and corrupted, and though it be now so
written, yet at first it was thus, If we (that have fellowship) say we have
sin, we deceive our selves, etc. Oh the diabolical strong delusion that these
kind of professors are under, and leading others into! or let me farther
reason with those who are not so far infatuated, either the Apostle John, and
such as he wrote unto, did not abide in Christ, or there is some other sense of
his words in the third chapter, then R. F. or his fellows would give of it: for
as full of contradictions as men are, the Holy Ghost by the Apostle does not
contradict himself: Let God be true, and his word true, and every man a liar,
and his words lies, which agree not with the Canon, Doctrine and harmonious
Sense of the Scriptures: And therefore when it is said, He that abides in
Christ, sins not, the words and sense must be reconciled in our minds (for
in themselves they were never at variance) with the words in the first chapter:
thus,

1. Although every man that is in Christ (while here) has sin in him, and he
is neither perfectly free from the presence of original, nor actual sin, yet so
far as he abides in Christ, he sins not. It is no sin to cleave to Christ
and his Doctrine, Spirit and Grace, and to persevere in it and him.

2. The meaning of verse 6. must be gathered from verse 1 John 3. 6. cleared by
ver 8, 9.
8. and 9. where the Apostle speaks of committing sin, or of trading in sin,
and that in a constant course. That this is (...)
the very sense and mind of the Holy Ghost, is clear from the reason, for the
devil sins from the beginning; He therefore that constantly goes on to sin,
plots sin and practices it with delight, he is of the devil; He that abides
in Christ sins not, after such a manner. And yet more clear from ver. 9.
whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed, Gods seed,
remains in him, and he neither does (...)
nor can commit sin, as the devils, nor as those who have no regenerate part in
them, because he is born of God, and so far as born of God be sins not, nor
shall he ever be left to a total and final relapse into sin, seeing he has a
contrary principle of the new birth abiding and remaining, yea, reigning in
him. And me thinks R. F. his conscience tells him he should be captivated by
the truth of this interpretation; For he tells me [ thou commits sin, and so
art a servant of the devil, for thou go on with thy lies.] It is not then
the presence of sin that makes one to be of the devil, but the purpose,
practice, and procedure in a way of sin. If we say we have not sin present with
us, and dwelling in us, we lie* and if any say, that every one that has sin in
him, is a committer of sin, a workman in sin, he is in a foul error: If any say
he has not sinned since he was converted, he goes about to make God a liar,
and his word is not in him, 1 John 1. 10. That, nor any other Scripture (that
speak of the Saints sinnings) is not written in his heart, nor believed by him.
But although I have an old lying heart, and flesh wherein there dwells no
truth, no good thing; yet R. F. has not hitherto detected and proved a lie in
my right hand, or in my pen; nor will he be able to make good what he boldly
calumniates me with. Let trial be made in what follows.

Section 15.
R F. here reviles me with [ thou lies of Ed. Burrough] because I had noted the
expression which he puts upon every man's light, (which is but common light at
the best) viz. The cornerstone. And how does he prove it? not by denying there
is any such expression as the Cornerstone, but [ there is not such a word as
common light there.]

Rep. Nor did I use the word (common) as E. Burrough's, and therefore put it in
a Parenthesis (as now) and ordered it to be printed as my own phrase, not his,
in a differing letter from his; and accordingly it was so printed. What lie is
here in my mouth, that deserves the lake which he threatens? Had I not studied
brevity, I might have more fully given it thus,

How can he teach (says E. B. Warning to the inhabitants of Underbarrow, p. 7
) and direct toward true Religion, who denies the Cornerstone, the first
Principle of Religion, which is the foundation, the light of God, which has
enlightened every one that comes into the world; which he denies (speaking of
the Preacher at Vnderbarrow) to have enlightened every one. R. F. backs him
thus, Christ is the Light, and Christ is the chief Cornerstone, Acts 4. 11. 1
Pet. 2. 6, 7. and so says Ed. Buroughs; therefore, he agrees with the
Scripture, and his saying (as thou says) is not contrary to Ephesians. 2. 20. but
agrees therewith: there thou art taken with a lie in thy mouth; Liar be ashamed
and blush.

Rep. 1. To hold forth Christ to be the chief Cornerstone, and yet to insinuate
and wind into peoples bosoms a new mystery, That the light which every one
has is a Cornerstone, is to teach diverse from, and contrary to the mind of
the holy Ghost in that as other Scriptures, Ephesians. 2. 20. for Christ is so the
chief, as he is the only Ephesians. 2. 20. vindicated. (...).
Cornerstone. The word in the Greek is of full force to this purpose,
signifying such a Cornerstone, as does not only unite the sides and parts of
the building of the Church-Catholique, consisting of Elect Jews and Gentiles,
and that strengthens the whole building; but that which reaches from the
bottom to the top of it, and is all but one stone in the whole foundation, and
in all the corner from one end to the other: As no other Foundation, so no
other Cornerstone can be laid, then that which is laid, the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Christ, as he enlightneth every one that comes into the world, is not the
Cornerstone; Christ, as God, consider him only so, and with the common gifts
which he bestows upon every man, is not laid as the Foundation of the Church;
but Christ, as Mediator, God-man, the Word made flesh.

3. As the light which every man has given him is none of the six Principles,
Heb. 6. 1, 2. (much less the first principle of Religion) so neither is it the
Cornerstone, though given by Christ, yet not to that end. It is not light
wrought in us, but Christ the light-giver, and in his person, not his gifts,
who is both Foundation, and himself (...).
the chief and only Cornerstone, so Ephesians. 2. 20. Will R. F. say to me, as he
has to others, Light out of darkness, page 21.
You are ignorant of the first principle of Religion, that make a scorn of this
light? I shall return him this for his information, That as I own every man's
light in its due place, and am far from scorning it, or him for it; so I cannot
by warrant from Scripture, admit it into the place of Christ's person, or of
Christ-Mediator; nor farther acknowledge it a principle of Religion, but such
as is common to Pagans and Heathens, that teaches them a God, and that he is
to be worshipped. But if it be a stone, it is of the old foundation, of life by
works, and not any principle of Christian Religion, [as such] nor any stone of
the New-building, by, and according to a covenant of Grace in Jesus Christ.

Here I may take occasion to answer a Quere made by a company of this Sect, in
one of their Pamphlets Entitled, To all that would know the way to the
kingdom, p. 16
, How is the Gospel of Christ preached to every Creature under heaven, if it be
not the principle of light in the conscience, it being that many never come to
read or hear of the Scriptures?

One would think, if their light were not darkness, or that their minds were
not darkened with the light of the Scriptures, those two Texts which are
referred to in their Margent, might have resolved them sufficiently, Romans 10.
18. Rom 10 18. opened.
and Col. 1. 23. In the former of these, alluding to that in Psalm 19. 3, 4.
the Apostle invincibly clears it, that the Jews could not but hear (who had the
Scriptures with them, wheresoever they were dispersed, and besides) as the Sun
casts its beams all over the world; so had the Gospel by the Apostles ministry
shined forth into all known habitable parts of the earth. In the latter of
them, Paul speaks of Col. 1 23. opened.
such a preaching and hearing of the Gospel, whereof himself was a minister,
and that was sent forth, according to Christ's commission, Mark 16. 15. by the
ministry of man, to every creature, i. e. to Gentiles, as to Jews; and to all
nations, as to some, Matthew. 28. 19. Nor did the Apostles and Evangelists at any
time so preach, without book, in any place, to any reasonable creature, but as
they carried the Scriptures with them; so they made all the world ring of one
Christ crucified, according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15. 3. This, says Paul
to the Corinthians, I delivered unto you first of all. The principle of light
in the Conscience, will never discover this first principle, or fundamental
truth, Christ dying for sinners, where the Scriptures and Preachers of the
Scriptures come not, as it never preached it in the Ages past. Those Preachers
will be ashamed of their work, who do not rightly divide the word of truth;
much more they who say, they are Apostles and are not, but are found liars, as
all they are who reject the Scriptures, the word of truth, from being the Rule,
Card, and Compass of their work; and who drive people, that have the
Scriptures, to the light in their consciences, as a surer and better light; and
that which will change the mind, as I had noted Sect. 13. whereas there is not
the light of a Mediator, or Christ crucified in it; nor the power of God in it,
but to restrain, moralize, and civilize; it never reached to renovation, nor
ever will renew the mind, (according to a Gospel sense) though men abide in it
till doomsday.

Section 16.
I Had noted here what J. Nayler says, If thou know, own, and obey it,
(speaking of the common light of every man) it would lead thee out of the fall:
which, because I brought it in as another instance of their
Scripture-contradiction, R. F. Page 10.
tells me, I go on with my Lies: And how proves he it? Why, [ The words in it
(J. Nayler's book) are not as thou says.]

Rep. Let the honest Reader be judge between us, if he please to view the
Pamphlet, Entitled, A few words occasioned by a Paper, etc. Page 10. The words
of James Nayler are these more at large: Thou go about to make people
believe, that the light of Christ, which is given to every one that comes into
the world, is a natural or fallen light; but if thou did know, own, and obey
it, it would lead thee out of the fall. The very words I cited, and in the very
sense of the writer; for J. N. speaks of the light given to every man, which
though he calls not common, nor will not have it called natural, yet we must
call things as they are; for The natural light of every man leads no man out of
the Fall.
that which every one has, is no more; and although to own, and obey that dim
light of nature is every ones duty, yet to set it up as the light which shall
lead out of the fall, is beyond Gods intention of giving it, and beyond the
sphere of its activity to effect. From the Scripture, Romans 7. 7. (which I
briefly pointed at, as contradicted by J. N. and others of this opinion) I had
not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shall not covet, I hinted an
Argument, which I shall now give forth in form; That which will not so much as
discover the fall, will not (though owned and obeyed) lead out of the fall: But
the light given to every man, will not so much as discover the fall: Therefore,
it will not (though owned and obeyed) lead out of the fall.


The first proposition I thus confirm, There is no delivery without a
discovery. The other thus, Paul's light did not discover the fall; nor other
men's light, which they have from their coming into the world, did never, will
never so much as discover the fall. In the fall, will be found Adams sin, all
men's sinning in him, their being born in the guilt of that sin, in the want of
Gods image, and in the roots of all actual sin. What a stranger was Paul, in
his Pharisaism, to all these Discoveries? who knew not the least lusting of the
heart to be sin, till he was enlightened by the Spirit into the commandment of
the written Law, which says, Thou shall not lust: the same ignorance is in
every man (notwithstanding their inbred light) concerning inbred lust, and
original corruption, till by the light of the same commandment, the Spirit of
conviction brings it home to his heart.

With what an impudent evasion does R. F. entertain his Reader? by telling him
that J. Nayler witnesses with Christ who is the true light, and such as obey
the light and follow Christ, they are led thereby out of the fall.

Rep. 1. James Nayler says not, such as obey Christ, but such as obey it; he
speaks of the Light-given, and its power.

2. R. F. confounds the Light-given and the Light-giver (as often elsewhere)
together, and yet attributes the leading out of the fall to it, [the
Light-given] rather then to Christ the Light-giver.

3. Should he express himself more plainly, and say, Christ thereby, that is,
by the Light given to every man, as it is obeyed, and himself is followed, does
lead out of the fall; yet would he speak short of the truth, and contrary to
Scripture; For,

1. The Scripture speaks not of such a way whereby Christ led any man out of
the Fall, before the Scriptures were given, but only of the way of offering
Typical Sacrifices, and by the promise of Christ-mediator.

2. The same way he has chalked out in and by the Scriptures, since they were
given, all along the Old Testament; and when Christ's sacrifice, typed out and
promised, was once exhibited by his own blood, He that was the way yesterday,
is the same to day, and for ever, while the world stands, to lead men out of
the fall, and to raise them up to communion with the Father.

3. Although R. F. adds [ they were saved by him, and that is not contrary to
Scripture] it will not save his judgment from error, nor his writing from
contradiction, if he says or thinks that Christ ever saved any man by the
mere light, which (as God) he gives to every man. No man ever was, or will be
saved by his best obedience yielded to the light which every man comes with
into the world. Every man, and only such, as through grace have obeyed, and
shall follow Christ according as he is revealed in the Scripture, is and shall
be saved.

What a loud calumny is that which R. F. has cast upon me at the foot of his
tenth Page? [Thou contradicts, and so sins against Scripture, and against
Christ that calls him a natural light.]

Rep. I have no such words, had no such meaning, nor can it be picked out of
what I have any where spoken. Although Christ as he is God (as every where I
express or intend it) gives to every man that which is but natural light, yet
is not he therefore a natural light: For,

1. He and his works are not the same. He who is the divine, spiritual,
supernatural Being, gives to every creature its proper nature and being, and
is incomprehensibly above them: He is indeed his own nature, and his own most
simple essence and being, present with all beings in created nature, and yet
not confounded or mixed with created natural beings or lights, irrational or
rational.

2. Albeit, as the God of created-nature, he gives that nature, life, and
light of Reason to all men; yet as Mediator, he gives a distinct, spiritual,
excelling light, to lead men out of the fall; partly from the whole written
Law, How Christ leads men out of the fall.
and the discovery of its spiritualness, reaching the motions of the heart to
show men the fall, which prepares for a delivery; partly from the Gospel, which
shows himself the only effectual way whereby men may come out of their lapsed
condition, as they are taught and drawn of the Father to believe in him, who
has satisfied and merited for a certain number of sinners their deliverance;
and who applies that merited deliverance by remission of sins, and by
regeneration; and by both, a translation out of the power of darkness (which
all men with their best natural light are under) into his own kingdom of saving
light and life.

But to proceed: In this Section I had hinted another Argument against the
power of natural light, given to every man to lead him out of the fall, by way
of question; R. F. takes it up, and me up, after this manner: [ To manifest thy
blindeness and ignorance of the Scriptures, thou says, Where is there any
promise in Scripture of spiritual and saving Light, to lead man out of the
fall, and out of his natural estate?

Rep. Here like Satan the father of lies (I will not say he is his son) he
leaves out part of the question: My words Page 10. are these, Let a man use
his common natural light and moral gifts to the utmost, where is any promise in
Scripture of spiritual saving light and grace, annexed to lead him out of the
fall, or out of his natural state? The word [ annexed] he leaves out in the
reciting of my words, which refers to the good use of natural light and moral
gifts; and in a shifting way he answers, [ If there were no promise of
spiritual saving light to lead out of the fall, man might continue in it, and
under the curse.]

Rep. 1. Take this passage by it self, it is very good, and one of the best that
has dropped from R. F. his pen. But,

2. It is produced as an answer to my question, and will The light of a promise
leads out of the fall.
prove rather a knife to cut the throat of these men's opinion, and an Argument
for what we assert;

That, It is the light of a promise (by R. F. his concession) which shall lead
men out of the fall; But in the light which every man has (say I, and
thousands more) there is not the light of a promise, nor any promise of
spiritual saving light annexed to the good use of that universal light: And
therefore, that universal light (though never so well improved) will not, shall
not lead men out of the fall.


Promised light is only found in the Scripture, and according to what is there
revealed; but where is the answer to my question? R. F. tells his Reader of
promises of saving light in Scripture, and such as follow and obey the same are
saved by it.

Rep. [By it] (let the simple-hearted and ingenuous Reader observe) refers to
light; which light he makes one with grace, as he adds: For by grace are we
saved through faith, and not of our selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8,
9. How fairly does R. F. his conscience here bid for the truth? but this is no
faithful answer to that particular question, to beg the main question, viz.
Whether every man has sufficient saving light to lead him out of the fall?
Such as follow and obey saving light indeed, through faith, freely given of
God, are saved by it out of the fall; but every man has not that saving light
to follow, nor the gift of faith to obey it. But my particular question was, No
promise in Scripture of spiritual light and grace, annexed to the good use of
natural light.
Whether to the good use of universal light, there is in Scripture any promise
of special, spiritual, saving light, annexed not to saving light, and saving
grace, as R. F. puts it, but to the good use of common, or natural light, as I
expressed it? Who knows not, being conversant with Scripture, that in Isaiah 42.
6, 7. speaking of Christ his person, God promises, I will give thee for a
covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles? which is one place R. F.
quoteth, but with this additional gloss; This light has grace annexed, that is
a covenanting light. Why? what is this to the question still? It is but a low
expression to say this light (namely Christ himself) has grace annexed: For
Christ, the promised Mediator and Foundation of the Covenant, and the Fountain
of all saving light to the Gentiles, (as Jews) has all the fullness of Godhead
grace, love, holiness, power, etc. in him. But has God promised to give Christ
for a Mediator to every one that well uses the relics of created light? Or
has he promised to admit all or any into a covenant of Grace, who do their
best to get life by a covenant of Works? Nay, rather he has threatened the
contrary, as I hinted in my former piece, Gal. 3. 10. As many as are of the
works of the law, that is, will be doing for life, and depending upon their
obedience to the law (written in the book of Scripture, which is more, or in
every man's heart, which is less) are under the curse; and if under the curse,
they are (as I said) sure enough under the fall. R. F. quoteth other
Scriptures, as Isaiah 49. 6. Isaiah 60. 19, 20. Luke 2. 22, 23. I suppose he
intended, Ver. 32. but let him or any man make the best, or the most rather, he
can of them, he shall never be able to extract such a promise, as I called for,
of that tendency as he would have it, out of them all. That which I called for,
was a promise of spiritual saving light and grace, annexed, or adjoined to the
use of natural light and common gifts; spiritual, and saving light and grace,
is light of a higher sphere, and a gift of another kind, i. e. which differs
not in degree only, but in kind, from every man's natural light, as much as
the work of Redemption, from the work of Creation. Nor does it follow, because
Christ is promised for a saving light to the Gentiles, that therefore he is
promised to them upon such an account, if they use inferior light as they
ought; or, that because Christ's grace is promised to the use of his grace,
therefore his grace is promised to the use or actings of nature: Or that
because this light (as R. F) has grace, or a promise of grace, annexed,
therefore every light has grace, or a promise of grace attending it. I know
there are those, who are Lights of a greater magnitude then R. F. that have
prompted such a promise, as I call for; yea, many, but the Doctrine which they
would shore up thereby, savors so strongly of the Popish merit of Congruity,
and the Jesuits, Facienti quod in se est, etc. fleshing up every natural man
in a good opinion of himself and his endeavors, that I abhor their
prevaricatings upon the Scripture, which, as to a way of salvation, is one, and
God is one, Gal. 3. 20. i. e. Ever (since he revealed the covenant of Grace)
like himself, and of one mind. But these men we Gal. 3 20. opened.
have to do with, are inconsistent with the Scriptures, and with themselves, in
this as in other cases: God having founded all his promises of saving Light,
Grace and Glory, in the death and satisfaction of his Son; he never laid
another bottom, or founded any such promises in the Light within every man, or
upon their good improvement of that Light. But sometimes they say, Stand still
in the Light, and it shall lead thee out of the fall; sometimes there are
promises of saving Light, or else a man might continue in the fall and under
the curse: either that alone must save, or that and Christ together, by their
Doctrine; whereas Christ alone (above the help of that light which every man
has) leads out of the fall, unto the Father, and unto heaven, those that the
Father has given to him, to be a Leader, Commander, and Savior unto.

(4. Head of Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning the Law.
Section 17.
TWo things chiefly I noted in this Section; First, that they affirm, the
Levitical Law was the covenant of works.

Secondly, they deny, that the Law which Adam had in Innocence written in his
heart was the moral Law, R. F. calls me to the disproving of what they affirm,
and to the proving of what they deny. As to the [ first] it being affirmed by
them, it should be proved by them, but he intends The Levitical Law was Typical
Gospel. Col. 2. 17. opened.
to put me to business: now that one place of Scripture I quored Col. 2. 17.
But the body is Christ, might determine the controversy, but he says nothing
to it, makes nothing of it, unless you will interpret his silence to be a
seeming consent or conviction at least. From that Text I argue thus; That which
was the Type and shadow of Christ, the truth and body of those shadows, that
was Gospel, and not a Covenant of works; But the Levitical Law, and Legal
figures were the Types and shadows of Christ, the truth and body, as says the
Apostle; Therefore it was Gospel, and a Covenant of Grace, and not of Works. To
clear out this farther for the sake of Gods chosen, who may be for a while, in
this point, seduced, I shall open three things.

1. What the Covenant of Works, and what the Covenant of Grace are. 2. Show the
different administration of the Covenant of Grace. 3. Give some arguments
farther to disprove the Levitical Law from being a Covenant of Works.
1. The Covenant of Works is that part of the word, or What the Covenant of
Works is.
declaration of his will which is pure Law, and a Covenant of Justice; which
promises life to them that personally, perfectly and perpetually fulfill it,
but is the ministration of death to them that break it, in the least Iota, or
Punctilio, as we may say, of it. The Covenant of Grace is that part of the What
the Covenant of Grace.
word, or of Gods revealed will, in and according to Scripture, which is pure
Gospel, issuing forth from Gods absolute free love, wherein he promises Christ
for righteousness and life, or upon condition of Christ's satisfaction, to give
righteousness and all that appertains to salvation, unto all that are Christ's
peculiar purchase, whether of years, or infants. These two Covenants are of
differing kinds, and contradistinct each to other.

Defferences. specified.
the other wherein mercy, and grace or Gods free distinguishing love does
reign, though in a righteous way also.



satisfaction thereby to the justice of God, on others behalf, for whom he
freely becomes a surety: Hence the Covenant of Grace is called a Testament, as
well as a Covenant, not so, the covenant of Works.



2. The covenant of Grace admits of a twofold administration; thence it is
called the Old and New Testament. A covenant, yea, a Testament or will of
Christ it was before his death, and since. That, which the Scripture expressly
call's the Old testament, or covenant, Heb. 8. 20. was but the old
administration of the covenant of Grace, the old copy of Christ's will: that,
which it calls the new The Covenant of Grace
covenant, is the old, is the old for substance, though new, for the
administration, the new copy of Christ's Will.

One for the substance.
by Jesus Christ; from the first promise to Adam, and Eve, after the fall, to
Abraham; from Abraham to Moses; from Moses to the Prophets; from the Prophets
to Christ's death; from Christ's death to this day; from this present time to the
end of time, and to all eternity. For the clearing of this, let the Apostle be
heard speak, or the holy Ghost rather by him, Heb. 13. 8. Christ the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever. As Christ-personal, so the doctrine of Christ,
and of salvation by him is the same in essence and substance, without change;
and in his covenant, without alteration, Heb. 11. 13. The true believing
Fathers of the Old Testament, did, all of them, embrace the same promises, for
the substance, that we do. Christ then to be exhibited, and Christ now
exhibited in the flesh, and in his grace and Spirit, is all one, yesterday, to
day, and for ever. Adam and Eve had Gospel preached to them, Genesis 3. 15.
Christ, that eminent Seed of the woman, which should break the Serpents head,
i. e. by sufferings, and satisfaction to God, should overcome all the power of
his accusations of the elect, the redeemed seed, before God. Abraham had the
Gospel preached to him, Gal. 3. 8. concerning justification by free Grace. The
promise of Christ's coming out of his loins contained in it the promise of life
and salvation: so did the promise of Gods being a God of him, and of his seed.
God holds up the same covenant from Abraham to Moses, for he renews it to
Isaac, Genesis 26. 4. And when he puts a message into Moses mouth, he calls
himself the God of Jacob, as of Abraham and Isaac, Exodus 3. 6. 16. which shows
he dealt with Jacob after the same covenant, and so would he carry it on with
his posterity then in Egypt. In Moses time it holds in force when the Law is
given, as the Apostle clears it, Gal. 3. 16, 17. The moral law was not repeated
to disanul the promise, but to make way for a discovery of the need of the
promise: and Moses preaches the righteousness of faith, Deuteronomy. 30. compared
with Romans 10 In David's and the Prophets times the same Gospel Covenant is
upheld: thereupon we have the account of Christ's line and genealogy all along,
Matthew. 1. Luke 3. and many precious promises of him accordingly, Romans 1. 1, 2.
That which Paul preached was promised before by his Prophets in the holy
Scriptures, and as any believed, they were partakers of the saving benefit of
this gracious covenant, Romans 3. 21. The righteousness of God, or his Romans 3.
21. opened.
righteous way of saving sinners by Christ (without our personal obedience to
the Law and without the Laws discovery, as it is a covenant of Works) is now
manifested by the preachers of the New Testament, that before was witnessed by
the doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, under the old administration. The
Apostles, all of them preached for substance, what was in Moses and the
Prophets, Act. 26. 23. that Christ should suffer, etc. and be a light and
salvation to the ends of the earth. Act. 13. 47. Peter professes, Act. 15. 11.
this was that he taught and believed, that we through the grace of the Lord
Jesus shall be saved, as they; as who? as the believers of the Old Testament.
It was the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ that saved, then and now; and if any
mixed Gospel be taught, not that which was of pure grace from the beginning,
the holy Ghost, Gal. 1. would have the doctrine and the Doctor accursed.

Secondly. The manner of dispensation of this Gospel Covenant 2 In the manner of
dispensation.
was different from that it is since Christ's death.

1. It was administered after a legal and servile way, urged with legal
conditions of doing, and darkly veiled over with Types and Ceremonies. They
heard of doing more then believing, and the administration gendred, as the
Apostle says, Gal. 4. 24. unto bondage: every carnal heart conceiving there
was nothing ministered of righteousness or strength at all from another: and
being called and counted nothing but Law, hence it is that the spirit of
bondage is said more commonly to suit that Old administration: The Church, in
this time, was considered as an Heir, in its minority. As an Heir it was free,
but as an Infant, or in its minority, it was but as a servant, under Tutors and
Governors, Gal. 4. 1. As an Heir, true believers had then the Spirit of
Adoption, and Liberty; As a Child, it had the spirit of fear and servitude.
And as it was but a dark and servile administration, comparatively to what it
is; So,

2. There was but a scanty proportion of graces and gifts (as to the generality
even of true believers) they had little illumination, and a small measure of
sanctification (I speak of the greater number of the Saints) to what is, and
will be given since Christ's Ascension, from the greatest to the least.

3. The dispensation of Grace, and its covenant was but to a few families for a
time; and afterward but to one nation, springing out of those families; under
the new admistration the Covenant is made with all sorts of families, and with
some of every nation. In stead of one there have been, and are many Churches,
Acts 9. 31. and 15. 14. Every where God has had, and will have a people taken
out from among the Gentiles, or nations, a select company, for his Name.

4. The seals, and witnesses of the Testament are altered from Old to New; and
although the writings of the old copy remain, i. e. the Books of the Old
Testament, because the substance of the covenant is there to be read, and
understood by the shadows, yet there are new writings added, i. e. the Books of
the New Testament, for clearer understanding, and more assurance of faith, when
both are compared together. The reason of the whole change of the old
administration The reason of the change of old into new administration.
to the new, in the particulars named, was faultiness or imperfection. It is
the wisdom of God to proceed from ways less perfect, to that which is more
perfect. Heb. 8. 7. If that first Covenant or Testament, that is, the first
administration of the covenant of Grace, had been fault less, Heb 8 7. opened.
then should no place have been sought for the second. How was it faulty?

1. In that it made nothing perfect, Cap. 7. 19. All in that old way,
especially the Sacrifices, being typical and shadowy, they of themselves could
not take away sins; therefore Christ, whose body was fitted for a sacrifice, he
comes and puts by the shadows and types, Heb. 10. 9. He takes away the first
administration, that he may establish the second; the perfection of his own
sacrifice, and all that attends it in the new administration. His blood
stancheth all other blood, stays the further shedding of the blood of Bulls and
Goats; and he coming by Blood, and not by Water only, has left to his Church
a commemoration and obsignation of both, in his new Institutions of Baptism,
and his Supper.

2. In that people could not (as it was dispensed after the manner of a covenant
of Works, though not so in it self) possibly see how to stand or continue in
it. They stumbled at the Ceremonies, and stuck in the Letter of the Law, and
could not see unto the end of that which is now abolished, 2 Cor. 3. 13. But
whence was the fault? God was not to be blamed, nor the substance of his
Covenant; but he lays the blame upon them, who were willing to stand under such
an administration, and would not look to the kernel, marrow, and substance of
it, which was Christ. But as it was the Jews infidelity which turned (as to
them) that which was a covenant of Grace into a covenant of Works, sticking in
the rind and bark of the Ceremony, and which excluded and shut them out from
the Grace of the covenant; so do many thousands under the new administration
(the greater is their sin) insist upon terms of doing and obeying the Light
within them; and God lets them go on, and work their heart out, if they will,
for life; let them get it, win it, and wear it; although he tells them it is
impossible; for if the Jews in all the Ceremonies of old should have looked to
Christ in them, and beyond them; the Gentiles should upon the first hearing of
Christ, believe on him, and begin and end all their duties, with the use of all
New Testament Institutions in him, or they will lose all their labor, as did
the Jews.

Arguments to disprove the Levitical Law as no covenant of works
3. I shall add a few Arguments to disprove the Levitical Law from having been
a covenant of Works.

by sacrifice, Psalm 50. 6. But the covenant of Works was never made by
sacrifice, it admits of no expiation or atonement. The sacrifices under the Law
were shadows of that blood, which is the blood of the everlasting covenant,
Heb. 13. 20. The blood of Christ, the blood of the New Testament, or the new
administration of the covenant of Grace, not to be altered, but to abide for
ever in its all-sufficient virtue and efficacy.

Heb. 9. 22. with 18. without shedding of blood there is no remission;
whereupon the first Testament, or (...)
disposition of Christ's will, was not dedicated without blood: but that there
might be assurance of remission to believers even then, that blood was shed,
which, not being able to take away sin of it self, did type out Christ's blood,
which could and should effect it. A covenant dedicated by blood, first typical
and then true, is the same for substance.

mediation in the Holy of Holies; in the covenant of Works there is no
Intercessor or Mediator; but we have in the covenant of Grace, Christ our
Priest, and high Priest, answering that in the new, which was typed out in the
old dispensation. Heb. 9. 15. For this cause he is the Mediator of the New
Testament, etc. and Ver. 12. by his own blood he entered in once into the holy
place, etc.



Testament, and called the first Testament, being the first disposition and
discovery of free Grace; but a covenant of Works is no Testament, nor any where
in Scripture so called: for a Testament requires the death of the Testator,
Heb. 9. 16. Christ of necessity therefore must die to ratify the Will. A
covenant of Works exacteth death if it be transgressed; but it is the death and
blood of the sinner. Under the Levitical Law the transgressors did not die, but
the beast died for the transgressor; which plainly showed it to be a covenant
of Grace and gracious Testament, wherein the death of Christ is accepted, not
the sinners, as that by which, all the Legacies of the Will, and good things of
the Covenant, are both purchased and assured.

As to the [ Second] particular noted in the beginning of this Section, viz.
That the Law which Adam had in innocence written in his heart, was the moral
Law: this they deny, and R. F. Page 11
to back J. Nayler adds, [for thy saying that Adam was under a covenant of
Works (and the same) then can not prove it.]

Rep. What he means by ( and the same) I do not well understand; it is well
if he understands himself. If his sense be, that I cannot prove Adam to have
been under a covenant of Works, and the same with the Levitical Law, which he
holds to have been a covenant of Works; I acknowledge it is against my
judgment, and conscience ruled by truth, to confound the covenant of Works and
of Grace together. I have even now disproved the Levitical Law, as no covenant
of Works, for the substantial matter and living form of it, and therefore
cannot speak daggers, or contradictiously say, That the covenant which Adam in
Innocence was under, was the same with that which true Believers of the Old
Testament were under. If his meaning be, that I cannot prove Adam to have been
under a covenant of Works, and the same which is contained in the moral Law, or
ten Commandments, given on mount Sinai, and written in Tables of stone; I shall
premise a few positions of truth, Positions of truth about the covenant of
Works in Adam, and the Moral Law.
and then produce a few Arguments for the Affirmative. The positions I premise
are these.

Adam was created in the image of Gods goodness, holiness, justice, etc. Genesis
1. 27. else his nature had not been perfect, Eccles. 7. 29.

Romans 7. 12. ordained to life, by the keeping of it, but found to be unto death
after the breach of it, ver. 10.

Adam stood and fell as a public person, representing all mankind that were
in his loins, Romans 5. 14.





1. Abstractly, It is a bright beam of Gods holy, good, and righteous Nature
and Will; and the Idea or express representation of that which was perfectly
written in man's heart, in the time and state of Innocence.

2. As clothed with circumstances, and so it is, either inservient to Adam
standing, and his fallen posterity that would rise, and stand in and by the
covenant of Works: or subservient to Adam and Eve, and the Seed of the woman,
(Gods chosen) who being fallen as others, were to be raised, ruled and saved,
in and by the most free covenant of Grace.

The circumstances that make the Moral Law subservient to a covenant of Grace,
are,

1. The Preface to the Precepts, a free Promise; so God began with Adam and Eve
after the fall, as with the Israelites, Exodus 20. 2. Genesis 3. 15.

2. It is given in the hand of a Mediator, Gal. 3. 20. Moses was the Typical,
Christ the true Mediator, who (because God loses not his Justice in the
covenant of Grace) undertakes as a surety for some (the Elect) to pay their
debt, both forfeiture and principal: the forfeiture, by his Passive obedience;
the principal, by his Active obedience, for their justification, John 1. 17.
and Romans 3. 31.

3. It is a directory and rule to true Believers (as it is also in Christ's
hand, guiding them by his Spirit) for the ordering of their sanctification,
Mat. 5. from ver. 17. to the end.

The circumstances that make the Moral Law serviceable to the covenant of Works
made at first with Adam, are the ingredients, attendants, and effects of that
Law: As,

1. The absolute perfection of it.

2. The manner of promulgation, with thundering, fire, blackness, darkness,
tempest, sound of a trumpet, terror of voice, etc. Exodus 19. Heb. 12. 18, 19,
20.

3. The rigorous exaction of all the debt, at the hands of sinners, with
threatening of death, Genesis 2. 17. and the curse, Deuteronomy. 27. 26.

4. The trial of the creatures strength, as was that prohibition to Adam, Genesis
2. 16, 17. Exodus 20. 20. to restrain from sin.

5. The discovery of transgressions, Gal. 3. 19. increasing of wrath in the
conscience, Romans 4. 15. and holding the whole world under guilt, and some under
the sense of a sinful estate, Romans 3. 19.

Intentio agentis, the scope of God, to work by contraries; not Intentio
operis, properly the work of the Law before Faith; but what it does work (upon
the Elect) it is by accident, as the Spirit by his effect of keeping them under
bondage a while, wearieth them out of conceits of self-righteousness, etc. that
they look after Christ. For the Moral Law is not contrary Gal. 3. 21. opened.
to the promise, or so against the promises of God, that it can forbid a
Mediator, or a pardon, from another way, though it provides none of it self;
nor so against them, but that God can, and does provide a Righteousness in a
Surety, when the Debtor, the Sinner, has none of his own; and neither the Law,
nor Sin, can put God besides his purpose.

Adams heart in innocence, as it was never perfectly revealed, nor half so
clearly known after he fell, till the Lord gave it in writing upon Tables of
stone, and upon Books. Romans 5. 13. Romans 5. 13. opened.
It is granted, Until the Law (in was in the world, but sin is not imputed when
there is no Law. Diverse kinds of sins were not known to be sins; original
guilt and filth was not taken notice of until the Law. Albeit God imputed sin,
yet men would not charge it upon themselves; nor did God charge it in this life
so closely, fully and particularly home, either upon the Jews or upon the
Gentiles consciences, till the written Law came amongst them.

Adam standing as a public person, representing all mankind. It was never
made with any else since the state of perfection. Distinguish we must between
entering or striking this covenant and maintaining or holding of it up. God
enters not, strikes it not up with any fallen son or daughter of Adam; he will
never trust any mere man with it upon his single bond, when as Adam betrusted
with the whole stock, broke himself and his posterity: but only he keeps it up
with reprobates, and with them that insist upon the condition of their own
obedience, thinking by their own strength to fulfill the Law; and by their own
righteous and religious performances, to make amends to his offended Justice,
and to attain life in such a way of works, Matthew. 19. 17. Romans 2. 13. Gal. 3.
10.

These things premised and pondered, it will neither be difficult (as R. F.
imagines) to draw up proofs, and Arguments, nor yet to believe, or be
convinced of this Affirmative truth; which he, J. Nayler, and others, have
formerly Adam in innocence under a covenant of works, and stood by the Moral
Law. Arguments to prove it.
denied, viz. That Adam in innocence was under a covenant of Works, and that he
stood by the Moral Law written in his heart, and by the observation of the
positive branches given him in command, according to that Law.

Argument 1. Either he stood under the Covenant of works, or was under the
Covenant of Grace, or he was under no Covenant. Under none he could not stand,
live or breathe: He was certainly upon some terms of agreement with God, being
made in his image, and in communion with him, and yet a creature under the Law
of his Creator. The covenant of grace and reconciliation by Christ it was not;
for there was no variance nor breach of friendship as yet, between God and
Adam. If it was not of Grace (except a common-creation favor to be in some sort
or other) it was a covenant of works. Some indeed speak of a covenant of
Nature, but that is all one with the covenant of Works: variety of expressions
must not lose us the truth, as they do not alter the thing it self.

Adams case and state in innocence; he must conform to all that which he had
perfect light and strength for; A perfect stamp there was of Gods Law, (which
we call the ten Commandments upon his heart) they being the perfect beam of
Gods holiness and righteousness: none stand bound for him, all his posterity
are bound in him: the promise is only that he shall live, if he continues
every moment as perfect as he was made, which we gather by the threatening; if
he fails but in the least, eats but of the Tree of knowledge, a Tree of trial,
he shall surely dye. And the Moral Law says the same, consider it with its
rigor, out of the hand of a Mediator; Do this, and live; do it not, fail in the
least, at the last moment of time, or sin but at the first moment of being, and
thou shall dye the death. Therefore he, and all in him, were under a covenant
of works, and while he stood, he stood upon his own legs, given him in the
first moment of creation.

Adam, as a public person, and all in his loins, fell under the penalties of
the covenant of works; for as all sinned in him, by that one transgression, in
eating the forbidden fruit, (a sin both against his inward created principles,
and against a positive Moral precept) so death passed upon all men, Romans 5. 12.
And all are born (for that sin) children of wrath, and under the curse of God,
Ephesians. 2. 8. Therefore Adam stood under the covenant of works, and its legal,
conditional performance, and promise of life, no longer then he continued
perfect as he was made, and sought out no inventions and wanderings from the
law of his creation and Creator.

Adam in innocence, (seeing he was a public person) God could not in justice
require satisfaction of his posterity under the fall, and in misery: But he
requires just satisfaction of Adams posterity under the fall, and in misery.
The just satisfaction that is due to him, is not only the suffering of
infinite punishment, for the offense against him, who is infinite; but that
perfect obedience, due to him from creation, which Adam had strength to have
performed in innocence, viz. strength to have kept in that perfect state, and
to obey any command, that God, as a Creator, might, in a just way, give unto
his creature. This just satisfaction, some poor creatures since the fall, will
attempt to give to God, first, in a way of suffering, partly here, partly in a
feigned Purgatory; and moreover they will undertake to satisfy God in a way of
active obedience, endeavoring to compound with their offended Creator, and to
pay a part for the whole; and while they attempt impossibilities, they are
found debtors to the whole Law, Gal. 5. 3. Now, albeit God makes not, nay,
renews not the covenant of works, no not by the death of Christ (as some would
have it) with any man since the fall; yet keeping them under the penalties he
loses not his right of exacting the principal debt, and he does require it of
those who will be paying a part for the whole, to get life thereby: Therefore,
such a covenant Adam was under in innocence, as obliged him to pay the whole
debt of the Moral Law in its rigor. Again, suppose a poor soul falls under the
conviction, that all is due, which was given, but lost; and does not say to
God, Take a part for the whole; or, have patience with* me, and I will pay thee
all: but I can do nothing at all, I can suffer nothing, to satisfaction of an
infinite Justice, in finite time; God now standing upon his Justice (and he
must not let his Justice fall, though the creatures righteousness be lost, and
the sinner fallen so low) cannot give life to this poor sinner, upon the terms
of his father Adams covenant in innocence. And if Gods infinite grace, his
peculiar electing-love, finds out another way of life, and the only way of
salvation (for the way of works, by a mere creature, as to preservation of Gods
image and communion-life is lost, and as to salvation, i. e. recovery of a lost
life; that is not to be found by the invention of men or Angels) this way that
God himself finds out, or makes discovery of, is in so just and righteous a
way, that he lays the foundation of the covenant of grace, in the satisfaction
of a righteous Surety, the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ; who was not bound
to pay the forfeiture or principal for himself; nor was he bound to become man,
or assume our nature, but (upon supposition of Gods decree) he voluntarily
undertakes the office and work of redeeming and saving the Elect, (fallen with
others) thereupon he stands obliged to assume their nature, (in which only he
could obey and suffer) and he does assume it, for the persons (the children of
the Election, Heb. 2. 14.) for their sake, and on their behalf, according to
that Scripture. And having taken their nature upon him, he is made under
Section 1 is.
the law, deeply now in debt for their sakes, all which he pays actively and
passively; and by the meritorious satisfaction given now to Justice, (accepted
by grace at the hands of such a Surety) he obtains eternal redemption for
Gods chosen. But I ask of R. F. Why must Christ the Surety, pay the Elects debt
of obedience to the Moral Law in all perfection, of nature and life, if they
did not owe it? How came they to be so indebted, if their father Adam was not
under the debt, broke, and run away among the trees of the garden, and left
them under the obligation wherein he was before he turned bankrupt?

Adam in innocence had (as a perfect bond and obligation) written perfectly in
his heart: But every son of Adam has some relics of the Moral Law, and ten
Commandments, with the ingredient rigor of attendant condition and effects of a
covenant of works, written in his heart; viz. That he ought to have a God, and
a worship, and that suitable to the Deity, with solemn time for worship; and
the characters of the second Table, are yet more legible in every man's heart,
with impressions that produce the effect, which the Apostle speaks of, Romans 2.
14, 15. the work of natural conscience, that tells him of an obligation to his
Creator, and excuses or accuses (in matter of fact) as he acts according,
or contrary to the light of the Law written in part, upon his stony heart, and
afterward perfectly, upon Tables of stone: these forfeited relics are given
back, of Gods common goodness and bounty to mankind; and as the remains and
ruins of a stately fabric, they demonstrate what was once standing in beauty.
The best light in men (without the new birth) carries them to the repairing of
this fabric by works; although that way Gal 1. last.
to life is shut up, and kept as by the flaming sword, impassable, after every
man's best endeavors. But when the children of Adam are laboring after life, in
the way of their working, as the condition and cause of life, it is strange
they should not know what stock their father had in his hands, nor upon what
terms he and they stood in with God. I wish it be not the scope of R. F. and J.
N. with others (as is the Papists design) to extol Adams state in innocence,
above a covenant of works; not to magnify the grace of God, but (as holy and
blessed Expos. upon Ecclesiastes, page 163.
Mr. Cotton says) to derogate from the grace of Christ.

James Discovery of the man of sin, page 23.
Naylers Objection is of no force against what I have argued for: The covenant
of works says, Do this and live; but he had the life already, while he stood
in it; and so it was not to be obtained by working.



the Law was added because of transgression, which if it had been before the
transgression, could not have been.

viz. of Adam, Adam had not been under transgression, for what is sin but the
transgression of the Law? 1 John 3. 4. And it was added, not to the Gal. 3. 19.
cleared.
transgression, but because of transgressions; sins were now multiplied in the
world, and men would neither charge the first sin, nor the last, nor any upon
themselves as they should, to become sensible of the need of the promise, and
of him to whom the promise of salvation was primarily made; therefore, the Law
was as a glass held before them, to show them their spots, and it came with an
arrest to selfjustifiers (as to this day it will come) to be clapped upon the
backs, the consciences of transgressors.

Moses by the Moral law? J. N. tells us, That Law which was given to Adam was,
Thou shall not eat (of the Tree of knowledge, I suppose he means, for an
absolute prohibition of eating, Adam had not, but a liberty of eating of every
tree, that excepted) which no where in Scripture is called the covenant of
works.

in one kind; but to stand obliged to all kind of obedience, answerable to
the written Law, with the tag (as the Martyr called it) at the end of the
point; death and the curse attending the first transgression, is no less then a
covenant of works; and as has been showed and proved, (as such a covenant) was
only then made and entered with all mankind.

R. F. his reason Page 12.
any better? Adam had not the Law in which the ten Commandments were given, for
it was written (the Law with the ten Commandments) several hundred years after
Adam, and not given to him in paradise; therefore he was not under that Law and
Covenant of Works.

Answ. 1. The Law [ with] the ten Commandments, is more then the Law [ of] the
ten Commandments. Although no Law but the ten Commandments was written in
Tables of stone, yet the Ceremonial Law (which has been disproved from being a
covenant of works) was given at the same time, or in the same forty days that
Moses was upon the Mount. Now, no man (that I know) says the Ceremonial Law
was given to Adam in Paradise, or that he was under that Law before the fall.

2. As Adam was under the Ceremonial Law after the fall (above two thousand
years before it was given to Moses) so he might be (and it has been proved he
was) under the whole Moral Law, as a covenant of works, before the fall,
notwithstanding the long space of time between his innocence, and the
promulgation of the ten Commandments on Mount Sinai.

3. The reason of R. F. to the contrary, is of no more force, then if one
should argue; The promise was given to Abraham two thousand and fourscore years
after Adams sin, therefore it was not given to the Patriarchs, nor were they
under a covenant of grace before Abraham: which to say, would be manifest
contradiction to the Scripture, and a Non sequitur in Reason; and such is R. F.
his Divinity and Logic also.

Section 18.
OF this Section R. F. takes no notice; wherein I had noted what Ed. Buroughs
says in his Answer to choice experiences, page 6, 7. (not 9, 10. as was
printed before) That is no command from God to me, what he commands to another:
Scripture* general commands include particular persons, and oblige to acting by
virtue of such commands.
contrary to the whole Decalogue, Exodus 20. which speaks to all, in speaking to
one; [ Thou] And the mystery of iniquity in this kind of doctrine lies here,
The word Command in Scripture is not a command to them till they have a word
within them, neither (as E. D. adds) did any of the Saints, which we read of in
Scripture, act by the command which was to another, not having the command to
them selves; I challenge to find an Example to it. By this doctrine,

The absurdities of the contrary doctrine.
stand for Ciphers, are of no Authority by them selves, and no ways binding to
carnal men, who want the perfect principle that Adam had; or the Spirit of
grace which the Saints have; whereas moral commands in Scripture, are of
perpetual obligation; whether men have a principle, or a Spirit to hear or
forbear; Ezekiel. 2. 7. And,

Mark 13. 37. and Luke 12. 4. I say unto you my friends; Fear not them that
kill the body, etc. is a command obliging all his friends; Or,



These. 4. 2. 1 John 3. 23. Josh. 1. 8. Have not I commanded thee? yea by the
written commandments he presses Christians upon duty, Ephesians. 6. 2. Honor thy
Father, and thy Mother, Ephesians. 6. 2. explained.
which is the first commandment with promise. The motive here is threefold.

1. The Commandment of the written moral Law.

2. The promise annexed, That it may be well with thee, etc.

3. This fifth commandment is the First of the second Table; and the first of
the Ten that has a promise, and a special promise expressly added to it. All
the ten have (as the Decalogue is subservient to the covenant of Grace) a
general promise prefixed, and the second, a general promise inserted; but this
is the first and the last indeed, the only one of the ten, that has a special
express promise added to the keeping of it. A command so backed and supported,
is no small encouragement; it being also a command of the holy Ghost, as
certain, as any he brings to the heart; Or,

Ed. Buroughs Page 7.
weighed in the balance of truth, will be too light.

1. I challenge to find an example. 1 Objection answered.


Answ. What are all the examples of the Saints actings after the pattern of
other Saints who had the express precept? 1 These. 1. 6. ye became followers of
us, and of the Lord, etc. so that ye were ensamples to all that believe in
Macedonia and Achaia. Christ gave the Apostles an example of Self-denial, with
a command of taking up the cross, and following him: The Saints at
Thessalonica, acted by this Command, and after the Lords, and the Apostles
example, and became exemplary themselves, for others that believed, to act
after them, and suffer also. Commands of this nature to others, they took to be
to themselves, and are commended for such kind of obedience. Acts 1. 4. The
Apostles have a command to keep together, and not to deport from Jerusalem etc.
and Act. 2. 42. the converted three thousand (which are a superabundant number
of examples) continue steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and
in breaking of bread, and in prayers: here is acting sufficiently, and
constantly by virtue of the command, for keeping fellowship, given to the
Apostles more immediately, and to them but remotely, and at the second hand.

The Saints obeyed every one their own command; one was sent to Baptize, and to
preach the Gospel: another was sent, not to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel.

Answ. 1. Saints, as such, have general duties incumbent upon them, and none of
the commandments of God, that belong to them as Saints, are grievous unto
their regenerate heart and part.

2. To Baptize, and to preach the Gospel, are duties imposed but upon some
Saints, and acts belonging to special office and commission, or mission at
least* Some may be sent to preach the Gospel, that have not office-commission
of Baptizing, as Act. 11. 19. But none were in officecommission to preach the
Gospel, but might and did, as opportunity was offered, baptize also, as Act. 8.
35. 38. And Paul himself did Baptize, and was commissionated for it, though his
principal work was preaching, 1 Cor. 1. 15, 1 Cor. 1. 15, 16. cleared.
16, 17. Christ sent me not to Baptize: [not] there is hyperbolical; That seems
simply and absolutely to be denied, which is to be understood but in part, and
comparatively, in respect of the greater and more constant elaborate employment
of preaching, as is the Lords manner of speech, Jer. 7. 22, 23. But such as Paul
Baptized, (as few as they were) he did not Baptize, short of, besides or
without a command. And in short, every one in his particular vocation, the
Apostle in his place, the Pastor in his, the Church in their relation, the
Husband in his place, the wife in hers etc. are to obey the commands given to
those relations; But,

You go to duty, as you call it, by imitation from the Letter without.

Answ. 1. Imitation properly respects examples; and obedience, precepts; and
it is but duty, and obedience to hearken to Scripture-commands for imitation of
holy, and godly examples, Jer. 6. 16. Philip. 3. 15, 16, 17. and chap. 4. 9.

2. While professors old and new decline the old and good paths, let them
beware of dangerous precipices, of Apish, Popish, Monkish imitations, and of
un-warrantable pretenses to the Prophets extraordinary Raptures, and Postures,
such as those, Isa. 20. 2. Ezekiel. 4. 9, 10. etc.

in your own wills and time, your sacrifice is not accepted.

Answ. 1. They that look rightly to a Scripture-command, will eye the manner,
end and other circumstances, and watch unto seasons of prayer, reading,
hearing, etc. required in Gospel Times.

2. Every duty, or performance, to which a Saint is duly tied by a command,
respecting his relation, and calling (and consequently his person) is accepted
by God for the matter of it, because he requires it: but his person is
accepted as he is a Believer, within the covenant of Grace, and has Christ's
righteousness reckoned to him for his justification; and he is also accepted in
the sincere Gospel performance of a duty, not for the works sake, but for
Christ's fake.

You go without the moving of the Spirit, in your own strength, and you know
not what a command from God in the Spirit is.

Answ. This might be laid in a carnal man's dish, and at an unbelievers door,
but being an objection against Saints, to beat them off from performing duties
by reason of a Scripture-command, is as false, as it is bold and daring; For,

1. Every true Saint has the Spirit dwelling in him.

2. There is no warrantable evidence that the motion is from Gods Spirit, if it
be not according to a Scripture command; and if it be according to it, it is as
uncharitable, as untrue, to say the holy soul goes without the moving of the
Spirit. A command from God in the Spirit, is no other, What a command from God
in the Spirit is.
for the matter of it, then what already he has commanded in the word of
Scripture, and that which he forms and stamps upon the fleshy tables of the
heart, by the Spirit of the living God, so effectually that the mind
understands it, and the will obeys it, in newness of spirit.

3. The Spirit of God is free to move when he pleases, in and upon the heart;
but the Saint is obliged to duty, when, through the flesh, he is very dull, and
indisposed to it, Matthew. 26. 41.

4. He goes in his own strength to duty, who follows Who act in their own
strength.
the light of a natural conscience only, or undertakes it in the strength of
his natural parts, or moral abilities, or common gifts of the Spirit: but it is
one of the greatest scandals which I have known cast upon the Scriptures, and
upon the Saints together, to say, they go in their own strength to duty who act
by virtue of a Scripture-command: for although Who in the strength of Christ.
they have not such movings and stirrings of the Spirit, at one time as at
another; yet, in sense of greatest deadness they act their faith for
acceptance of their persons, and believing the work is duty indeed, trust not
to the stock of grace within them, but act faith again upon Christ for fresh
influence, and new supply in the present performance, ordinance, or exercise;
And another is like unto this, that they know not what a command from God in
the Spirit is: when as Saints experience about a command. 1 Past.
every Saint more or less has had a twofold experience about the commandments
of God, and from him: one in a legal way of ministration; when the commandment
comes, as Paul speaks of himself, Romans 7. ver. 9. 10. that Romans 7. 9. 10.
opened.
is, in the light of its spirituality striking at heart-corruptions, which in
their native rebellion rise up [ sin revived] the more against the commandment
(and by the way, it was the written-commandment) as that opposed the
Pharisaical pride of his heart [ and I died] here is yet no Gospel
mortification, but legal consternation, Paul is slain in his false persuasions,
and presumptuous hopes of getting life by his own blameless obedience to the
Law. Thus the Spirit of God sets home the law, in its vigor of spirituality,
and rigor of exacting absolute freedom from the least swerving thought; and
takes off a soul from expecting life in his own righteousness; or by the best
frame of heart that he may reach unto: and keeps him (for longer or shorter
time as he please) under fears of the second death; and of the first, because
of the second. The other in a Gospel dispensation 2 Present.
is experience, by the Saints, when they are through Gospel-enlightning faith,
and renovation, made to understand what the covenant of Grace is, and what a
Gospelcommand: The covenant of Grace calls for satisfaction at Christ's hands,
and has it: The Gospel command from God in the Spirit, is not some sudden
impulse, or rare impression upon the soul, which few Saints meet with, but it
is every Scripture-precept which the Spirit of faith, holiness, and liberty,
works the heart to a sweet compliance withal, according to the measures of
grace received, amidst the present and constant conflict with in-dwelling sin.
This was Paul's experience after conversion, as he lays it forth, Romans 7. from
ver. 14. to the end, and in the following Chapter. The command wherewith he had
no compliance before, as to the spirituality of it, now he consents to, and
delights in, and complains against that contrary frame of corrupt nature
which remained (though it reigned not) and rebelled in him; but as sin served
it self, and its own ends; grace, and the new creature made him serviceable to
the law of God, the Scripture-command, with which he and his new nature was
reconciled; and he that cannot find something of this experience, will not
find himself a Saint, he that elasheth with Scripture-commands, so far
discovers himself to be unregenerate. Let E. B. and R. F. a little more examine
themselves, by what spirit they are acted, while they decline the
Scripture-Gospel-Rule.

(5. Head of Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning Sin.
Section 19.
TO this Section also R. F. is wholly silent, where I had noted from discourse
with some of them in Scotland, That, sin is not a visible enemy to a Saint; Sin
visible in and to the Saint.
contrary to Romans 7. 23. And I may add, Psalm 51. 3. And my sin is ever before
me. Isa. 6. 5. Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips.
They that see not their pollutions, have no part nor lot in the work of
Sanctification; and they that see not sin as an enemy, and their in-dwelling
enemy, are friends, and in fellowship with it. As any are more or less
sanctified, they have the less or the more to see; but the more a soul is
sanctified, the more he sees his motes to be beams, and the more visible and
sensible is the body of sin and of death to him.

Section 20.
WHereas I had charged them for saying, All the children of light are called to
judge them that say the children of God are found groaning under the burden of
sin, which I called an arrogant assertion, contrary to Romans 7. 24. R. F. Page
12.
minceth the matter by a new distinction; For groaning under sin whilst it is
working out, that may be, but to say that the children of God groan under it
all their life time, it Sin groaned under (while here) by the Saints.
contradicts the Scripture. Thus R. F.

To which I Reply, 1. The new distinction (and new, because not founded in
Scripture) lies here, that he makes a difference between the time, whilst the
Saints sin is working out, and their lifetime: For let us consider how long
they are working out their sin, or the Spirit for them, and in them, is that
but a part of their lifetime? It Is a truth, we teach that groaning under a
legal bondage of guilt and curse, and fears of damnation, is but for a time,
Luke 1. 74, 75. Romans 8. 15. But when they are formed Saints, and endued with
the Spirit of Adoption, then they groan, and sigh, and cry out under another
bondage; not of guilt imputed, but of guilt deserved, and of corruption felt,
as tyrannizing In what respect.
over the whole soul and body of a Saint, in part: i. e. in every faculty of
the soul, and member of the body, there is some presence of sin with them all
their days.

2. What Scripture is it that our assertion of continued groaning under the
body of sin and death, in the Saints, does contradict? R. F. quotes Romans 8.
etc. 1 john 3. Rev. 14. but never a Verse in all these Chapters he has to
produce for evidence. What shuffling is this and cunning craftiness, whereby he
lies in wait to deceive the simple with appearances of that which is not to be
found? If so be would put off Errors by wholesale, he may do it this way.

After this, he throws dirt in the face of that Scripture, Romans 7. (which I had
said from ver. 14. to the end was spoken Rom 7. 14. to the end vindicated.
in the name of the regenerate) Here, though Paul did cry out of the body of
death, he did not always groan and sigh as dissemblers [and Scots] do.

Rep. 1. If he did it not as dissemblers, he groaned as a real Saint; then the
truth is granted, at least seemingly.

2. Must all be dissemblers that always groan, and are sighing all their life
time under the body of sin and death? then Paul was one.

3. Has the Lord no real Saints among the Scots? Grant, there is a formality
of groaning among the common people, (not for the body of sin, but the sin of
their bodies, or merely in imitation, and out of custom; which latter, I could
not but tax a little, when I was there) dare any condemn the generation of the
righteous, or impute that formality to the whole fraternity or society of
Professors at large? among whom God has hidden ones, and some, who do mourn
for the abominations of the Land, and pollutions of the Kirk, and would
willingly come forth to more visible shame, for all that is amiss in their
Worship and Government Ecclesiastical; were they not overpowered partly by
inbred self, partly by their super-intending, and super-extensive Presbytery.

R. F. answers, and asperseth yet further, Paul did not groan in the name of
all regenerate, as thou says, but spoke his own condition there.

Rep. 1. Grant he speaks his own condition from ver. 14. to the end, it is
either as he is regenerate, or as wholly destitute of grace; but he does not
speak it of himself as devoid of grace: for when he opened his legal state as
yet unregenerate, from var. 8 and 9 to 14. he speaks in the Preter tense, or of
the time past; but from ver. 14, etc. he expresses himself all along in the
Present tense, and time: and therefore he speaks of the present state wherein
he was at the time of the writing of that Epistle. Now, was he a Saul or a Paul
then? Was he Paul the Saint, or Saul the Persecuter and Blasphemer? Was he not
then Paul the Servant of Jesus Christ? Chap. 1. 1. And have we not the
characters he gives of himself, as regenerate? Ver. 15. What I hate, that do I.
Ver. 16. I consent to the Law that it is good. Ver. 17. It is not I, but sin
that dwells in me, (where he divides his qualities into two sorts or kinds,
as Ver. 20.) Ver. 18. To will is present with me. Ver. 22. He speaks of his
inner man, and of his delight in the Law after that renewed principle. Then he
cries out, Ver. 23, 24. of what he sees and hates Now, no man that is
unregenerate can truly hate sin, as sin, which he did; nor has he two contrary
principles in him, all over, of grace and sin; nor has he a will present with
him, to do a spiritual good action; nor has he an inner man, the new man to
delight in the spiritual law of God; nor does he feel the universal warring
law, or power of sin in his members, as Paul does: Paul therefore speaks of
himself as now he is at present, regenerate; yea, he gives the account of
himself, as such; and therefore he lays forth the estate which is peculiar to
the regenerate, and common to one and other as they are such, more or less.

But says R. F. Paul did not always groan under that body of sin, and Law in
his members, but witnessed a Redemption from it, for which he thanked God that
made him more then a Conqueror.

Rep. 1. The Apostle writes of the present constant frame of his Spirit, to
see, feel sin, hate it, and groan under it.

2. The Redemption that he witnesses and gives thanks Romans 7. 25. vindicated.
for, ver. 25. was first, that the guilt of this in-dwelling sin was not
imputed; there being no condemnation to him, nor to any in Christ Jesus; which
privilege, cap. 8. 1. enlarged to others, as to himself, shows also that in
the latter part of the seventh chapter, he had spoken of every true believer,
and in the name of every sanctified regenerate soul: And Rom 8. 1. cleared.
(...) 1 Cor. 7. 14. and cap. 12. 20.
cap. 8. comes in with an Inference, [ There is therefore now no condemnation,
etc.] the Inference is double and strong [ therefore now] or [ now then] as the
Geneva Translation has it: [ now] is not here an adverb of time, but a note of
inference, as [ therefore] or [ then] conjunctions gathering up the Argument
before; which use of the Greek language R. F. understands no more then Thomas
Lawson An untaught Teacher, etc. p. 25.
who would have Paul's inference, Romans 7. 25. [ So then] to imply a condition
and disposition which he had passed through, then it was so, and so; and Romans
8. 1. But -- to declare his present condition; upon which mistake, Th. Lawson
triumphs in a supposed Antithesis or opposition of time;

So then who is not blind, may see. But now who has an ear, may hear.
Whereas the words Romans 7. 25. [ So then] in the Greek * are (...)
no Adverbs of time at all, there (or in any place) but two conjunctions
rational-collective, or gathering up the reason, and setting down the
conclusion, that he and all the regenerate have matter of thanksgiving, and
Gospel-humiliation together; of humiliation, that sin in him and them will be
sinning; of thanksgiving, that grace in him and them will be serving the Law of
God. And the words, cap. 8. 1. [ Now then] or [therefore now] are as [So then]
conjunctions rational also, gathering up the reason, inferring and concluding,
That if such as are under the conflict, have matter of thanksgiving (as
humiliation) and if they have the law of the mind, a sweet frame of Grace
wherewith they serve God (while with the flesh or unregenerate part they serve
sin) therefore now, or now then, it follows upon good Section 20
reason and by force of Argument, That neither he nor they who are in Jesus
Christ, are in a state of sin and condemnation, but are delivered from the Law,
i. e. the rigor, curse and domination of it (though not from the direction and
rule of it, cap. 7. 6. For,

Secondly, he witnesses that the victory was begun in him over the power of
sin, and that sin did not reign, and though it remained in him and them, yet
they walked not after the command of it, but after the commands of the Spirit.
Constant groaning and perfect justification, with sincere sanctification, may
and do stand together.

It is from the question what R. F. adds, [ Such did not commit sin, 1 John 3.
9. and then not always groaning.]

Rep. They groan for that which always is in them; though they have ceased the
trade of sin, they sigh in their warring with it; and that it so easily besets
them, and presses down.

This is my confusion and condition R. F. says, That I grant the children of
God from their new birth do put off the body of sin, as to guilt and reigning
power, and yet we are easily beset with it; and hence he draws forth a most
sophistical Syllogism against me, it may be ere he is aware: Where sin so
casily besets and presses down, it reigns; But it easily besets and presses
thee and you Scotchmen down, that are in the filth of it; And therefore you let
it reign in your mortal bodies, contrary to Romans 6.


Rep. 1. As to the form of his sophistry, I except against it, for the fallacy
of four terms, by foisting in [ so] and [ that are in the filth of it] quite
altering, by augmenting, the conclusion I held forth from Heb. 12. 1. which was
Heb. 12. 1. vindicated.
this; Sin easily besets them [Gods children] and presses down by the remnants
of filth. Now it is one thing to have sin easily beset by its filth, which is
the case of Saints, and another to be so beset and pressed down, as they that
are in the filth of it, which is the case of the un-sanctified. Saints have
remnants of filth in them, but are not drowned over head and ears in the filth
of sin.

2. Let the conclusion be taken, as I gave it, from the Apostle, and I deny his
major, or first proposition: Where sin easily besets and presses down, (and so
easily, that is, by the remnants of filth) it reigns, he; it reigns not, say I;
for it reigned not in Paul, and in the godly Hebrews, and yet it did easily
beset them; and the very remnants of filth was a burden and pressure to them:
if they had not been a grievance, sin had reigned; the more grace there is, the
more sensible the soul is of every weight. The word signifies (...)
whatsoever is gross, heavy, burthensom, and troublesome, which being upon a
man's back, in a journey, makes him stoop, or hinders him in a race: every lust
is clogging, and where the roots of all are, there are many to beset us; if it
be but the inordinate love of the creature, of honor, riches, pleasure, or
excessive cares of this life, they are every of them a weight upon our spirits;
and where they are felt as weights, and groaned under (with the whole body of
sin) sin reigns not; if it does, we must indite all the believing Hebrews;
but that we will not at R. F. his pleasure.

3. As to his minor, or second proposition, He must better know me, and all
Scotchmen, before he will have ground to indite us for being in the filth of
our sins: neither sanctified Scots nor English, are in the filth, though filth
be in them. Let me go for a poor sinful wretch, and worm, as I am; I pleaded
not my own condition before, but the Saints; now I must break forth with the
Apostle, and give thanks, that I know my self to be a sinner; and that as I
have perfect victory in my Head, so, that I now my imperfections in part, and
have a sense of these weights, and a sight of this encompassing Enemy
in-dwelling sin; which yet we are exhorted to get free of the very presence of
it, as much, as fast, and as far as grace shall enable; and hereunto I strive,
according to Gods working in me: Oh, that it were more mightily! As for that R.
F. alleges and adds Page 13. 1 John 3. 3. vindicated.
of the hope that purifieth, even as Christ is pure, 1 John 3. 1, 2, 3. The
Apostles words are not in the Preter tense, that a child of God has purified
himself, or done his work perfectly here, but that it is his constant daily
work; he is not therefore fully cleansed, as to his sanctification, while he
lives, but he goes on with his best endeavors, in the strength of faith and
hope in Christ, to be made like him in perfection of soul and body-holiness
when he appears. What has R. F. done all this time, but strengthened his own
and fellows Contradictions to the Scripture?

Section 21.
HEre I took up two passages, the one of James Parnel in his trial of Faith
Page 4.
While sin is, there no purity can dwell: The other of James Nayler Few words,
etc. page. 25.
God and sin cannot dwell together in one. Both contrary, as I no^ed, to 1 Cor.
3. 16. The Saints at Corinth had sin, and the holy Ghost dwelling in them at
the same time; so had Paul, Romans 7. 17. compared with 1 Cor. 7. 25. lets this
Section pass without answer, and I shall dismiss it with, but, a little more
animadversion, whether their Doctrine or mine will stand, Sin and purity dwell
in one soul, not as one
let him that reads understand: I am sure of Contradictions, one part must be
false, both cannot be true. And if it has been already cleared as a truth of
Scripture, and experience, That Saints and Regenerate upon earth, in whom God
dwells, have sin in-dwelling, that must be false.

First, which J. P. teaches, While (or where) sin is, there no purity can
dwell; by which dictate, he would destroy the faith of all those who believe no
perfect freedom from the body of sin, in this life.

Secondly, which J. N. teaches; That God and sin cannot dwell together in one.
I suppose he means, in one soul, by what he has before; Did ever Jesus
Christ redeem such a people, or dwell in such a people? If he would say, God
and sin cannot dwell together as one, or at agreement, but as enemies, warring
and fighting one against another, in the same field or house, that is a truth
evident enough: For as Jacob and Esau were in one womb struggling, so are grace
and corruption in one heart: As Hannah and Peninnah were contending in one
family, so are holiness and sin in one soul: Even as two contrary qualities,
light and darkness, are in the same air at the same time; and heat and cold in
the same water, though one in a remiss, the other in a higher degree. God
dwells as a Lord, sin as a slave; purity as a prince, sin as a tyrant, in the
same Saint and Christian. If any that is called a Saint thinks otherwise, he is
either not as he is called; knows not himself, as every Saint does in part, and
in this case: or, if he be one really sanctified, he is under a strong
delusion, and in a most drowsy dream for the present, the Lord will awaken him
in his good time.

(6. Head of Contradiction to Scripture.) Concerning Justification.
R. F. adds, [ And the end of the reighteous and wicked, or unrighteous.]
This I treated not of, but he was disposed to darken counsel by words without
knowledge.

Section 22.
THe first contradiction I noted here, was that which publicly I had given me
in Scotland, That God justifies not a believing sinner, contrary to Romans 4. 5.
He justifies the ungodly that believes on him. R. F. Page 13.
returns me for answer, That such as are born of God do truly believe, and
faith in God purifieth their hearts, and gives them victory over the world,
and so frees them from sin, 1 John 5.

Rep. Here is enough (before I examine the rest) to discover the man, and what
a friend he is to the man of sin; to lay the bottom of a believers
Justification, not upon Christ's Obedience, but upon his new birth, etc. This is
plainly to build a man's Justification upon his Sanctification; unless his
meaning the better then I have reason to judge it is. I The new birth is not
our justification.
shall look to the words, more then to the writer.

First, It Is one truth, that such as are born of God do truly believe:

2. It Is another, that faith in God purifieth the heart.

A third, that faith gives victory over the world;

But put these together to make a compound for Justification, and that so, and
so, and so, we are freed from sin, that is from the guilt and punishment of it
(to speak ad idem) and accepted as perfectly righteous in the eye of Gods
justice; This is so Popish a tenet as nothing is more unfound, for it makes
sanctification wrought within men, the material, if not the meritorious cause
of their justification. And that no better construction can be made of R. F.
his words, taken in any true Grammatical sense, may appear by what follows* [
Such] Believers are justified, form sin and ungodliness, and not in sin and
ungodliness.

Rep. That Believers are justified from sin and ungodliness, and not in it; I
have always and every where taught (and was then teaching it at Edinburgh when
I was publicly affronted) but the mystery of iniquity lies in the
qualification [ such] the Believer considered, not as a sinner, yet in himself
short of Legal obedience, but as a Saint, conformable in his heart and life to
the Law, who must, in his sense, be the subject of justification. For by
Christ, says he again, such as are so born, and believe, are justified, etc.
And so Christ is their justification, who are sanctified, and from sin by him
redeemed.

Rep. But how? as they are so born, thinks he; by way of evidence, say I. It is
not known to whom Christ is righteousness But an evidence of it.
for justification, but as they are found sanctified; yet for the thing it
self; He that is justified, is justified by God, not under the aspect or notion
of a Saint, and as such, but of a sinner, and as a sinner believing in Jesus.
That Saints are justified is a truth, but that they are justified by their
sanctification is a falsehood; and that none are justified but as Saints
perfected in holiness, is a notorious contradiction to the whole Scripture, and
the tenor of the Gospel; For, God justifies sinful persons.


1 That God justifies him, who in legal strictness (not only before he is
sanctified, but after the work of holiness is begun) would otherwise stand a
sinner at Gods Bar; and who has sin yet dwelling in him; is clear by all the
instances in Scripture of justified persons: think of Abraham, David, Paul,
Peter, the Corinthians, Galatians, or whom you will there mentioned; you will
find they had sin dwelling in them; not holiness enough to answer the absolute
perfection of the Law; all their days, while yet their sins and imperfections
were not imputed. The imputed righteousness of Christ was the cause why their
sins were not imputed, why their persons were accepted as perfectly righteous
in Christ, who were but imperfectly (at the best) righteous in themselves. The
best Saint that yet lives upon the earth, is yet a sinner in himself, or his
worser part, and has not wherewithal to cover his nakedness of any deserved
guilt, no not by his best in-dwelling, and inreigning holiness, but as Christ
gives him of his white raiment, Rev. 3. 18. All they are Laodiceans, in this
case, who have no need, or feel not the want of a righteousness without them,
to hide their personal failings, the defilements of their fairest and holiest
performances. Again, as persons were considered in Christ's death, so they are
to be considered when they come to be justified; Christ, dying for men and
women, considered them not as Saints, but as sinners. Herein God commends his
love to us, Romans 5. 8. that while we were yet sinners, and ungodly, Christ died
for us. Yet further, Law and Justice finds us, and leaves us sinners, Gospel
and mercy declares and pronounces us righteous, and continues us such as it
accounts us. If the Gospel did not pronounce sinners righteous, that is, in
the righteousness of another, till they had a righteousness in themselves, and
of their own, it would do no more for us then the Law; Gospel would become Law;
And therefore R. F. in denying that God justifies a sinner, denies the
Gospel, and would turn it into strict Law, a covenant of Works.

2. God justifies a sinner (not continuing in his unbelief, God justifies the
believing sinner.
though some unbelief continues in him) not as he loves God, or overcomes
the world by faith etc. but as he believes on Christ dying, and on God raising
Christ from How justified by faith.
the dead, Romans 4. 24. Believers, as believers, are justified; that is;

called the righteousness of Faith (not the righteousness of Love, of Patience
etc.) Romans 9. 30.

by Faith, and through Faith. The (...) and (...)
Preposition, in the Greek, construed with a Genitive Case, signifying the
instrumental cause, means, or way: at least faiths passive capacity, or that
service it does the soul, in reception of Christ, and his righteousness, is
held forth thereby, Philip. 3. 9. Romans 3. 25.

So believing, respects the truth of faith, not the measure. A weak believer is
perfectly justified, as is the strong believer. There is no ingredient
qualification of ours, or of a work in us, that does cast the balance; nor
does the Apostle Paul put in the ingredient of the new birth for Justification
in that place, where R. F. seems to shelter himself, and his Popish opinion
(Heresy I might call it) Act. 13. 39. And by him Act. 13. 39. vindicated.
all that believe, are justified from all things, from which ye (Jews who did
more then the Gentiles) could not be justified by the law of Moses. R. F. his
gloss upon allusion to this Scripture Page 13.
is; By Christ such as are so born and believe, are justified from all sins,
and such like things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of
Moses.

Rep. 1. By Christ such as are new born are justified, but they are not
justified because so born, nor for their believing. The new birth and true
faith go together, but the infusion of new qualities, or the qualities infused
at the new birth, take them all in the lump, are not concerned in
justification, have no causality, nor any manner of efficiency toward it.

2. Christ does not justify us by his own Righteousness, and by our Faith as a
quality, habit or act together, but he singleth out the grace of Faith (from
the rest of the newcreature-work) to apply what himself has done and suffered
(as a surety undertaking and paying the whole debt) and to rely upon him for
the Fathers gracious and just sentence of absolution, and acceptance, for his
righteousness alone, made ours in a way of imputation.

3. Believers in the new Testament times, are not only justified from all sins
(as to the guilt and curse) but from all the Ceremonies of Moses Law; which are
not called such like things (as R. F. expresses it) as if they had the
appearance of sin upon them: but understood (with sins) under the general
phrase which the Apostle uses [ from all things] from which ye could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. For the Moral Law considered strictly as Law,
once broken could not, cannot absolve, first, from Guilt, nor secondly, from
Punishment, nor thirdly, from Obligation to the whole, by the payment of a
part, which part, is either according to what was written at first fully;
after, but in shreds and pieces left in man's heart; or to what was positively
given in command, for trial of man's obedience, and strength, before or since
the fall, and therefore the new creature in us a beginning of that image of God
which was lost by the first Transgression, is no ingredient in our
justification: for by Christ they who believe in him, and him alone, are
justified from all Legal obligations, and conditions of their own workings,
within them, or without them. Christ's Righteousness, without them, makes them
complete, Romans 3. 22. 2. Cor. 5. 23. Col. 2. 10. To assert this way of
justification is not pleading for sin, as R. F. Page 13.
objecteth; For,

Gal. 2. Gal. 2 17, 18, opened.
17, 18. But if while we seek to be justified by Christ we our selves also are
found sinners ( we our selves, Jews also) is therefore Christ (by his way of
justification) the minister of sin? God forbid. For if I build again the things
which I destroyed, I make my self a transgressor, I can make Christ none: the
fault is not Christ's, but mine.

ver. 19.) I through the Law, am dead to the Law, I G^l 2 19. opened.
have (as if he should say) a sufficient lesson from the clear sight of the
Laws rigor, to teach me, never more to seek my justification from my own
conformity to the Law, that I might live in the righteousness of another, the
righteousness of him that is God, Jesus Christ; and not only that I may live
in God, but unto God. This the Gospel teaches Paul, and us, by faith to go out
of our selves for life in another, in Christ (by his imputed righteousness)
which when we find, we find also a heart renewed and quickened in, and unto
holiness, and the desires after sin in a degree mortified and crucified: which
by way of evidence, is enough to quench the fiery dart of Satan cast against
me, by R. F. and so art an * Page 13.
unbeliever and not redeemed. (So, because I pleaded for the right way of
justification, not in his Popish way) For, through grace I can say, with the
Apostle, ver. 20. I am crucified with Christ. i. e. As I was represented in
Christ Gal. 2. 20. 21. opened.
my surety when he was upon the Cross, and God was in him reconciling me unto
himself, not imputing trespasses unto me, seeing they were then condemned in
Christ's flesh, and put out of office from ever accusing and condemning me at
Gods Bar, so I am thus crucified with Christ, that I will never look to any
other way for the payment of my debts, then what my surety has laid down to
Law, and Justice; and not only thus, that I am conformed to the Pattern of
Christ crucified, by the power of his Cross, to make me die to sin, and self;
while Christ lives in me: yet is not that life of Christ so sensible, or so
perfect in me, as if nothing was there but the life of Christ; for there is a
body of sin, and of death dwelling in me also; and therefore, the life which I
now live in the flesh, or the weak, frail body, I live [as to my
Justification-life] by the faith of the Son of God, (on whom I believe and live
also, for degrees of Sanctification which his life has begun in me) who loved
me, and gave himself for me. And as the Apostle further, Ver. 21. being of this
Faith and Judgment, I do not frustrate the grace of God as they, who would
have Justification by their outward or inward conformity to the Law; which is
all one as to frustrate or make void the death of Christ. If R. F. says, I
plead for sin, because elsewhere, Section 29. I said, the roots of sin would
not be plucked up perfectly till soul and body part: I shall take off his
calumny in the due place.

Section 23.
HEre I noted what I had from them in discourse; That in Justification, all
guilt is not only taken away, but all All filth not removed, where all guilt is
pardoned.
filth of sin: Then could there no filth remain upon the Saints performances,
as there does by their confession in Scripture, Isaiah 64. 6. We are all as an
unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. The defilements
of sin in its presence remain, when the defilement of sin in respect of guilt
is taken away. R. F. says nothing to this Section, unless it be answer
sufficient to revile and say, [ Sin thou art pleading for,] while I produced
the Saints and justified persons confession of sin, and hinted a difference
between Justification and Sanctification, which these men (as Sin confessed is
not pleaded for.
if they would profess themselves members of the man of sin) do confound,
mistaking one thing for another. If Saints confess their sin, cleaving to their
holiest reformations, they plead against sin, not for it: To say we have sin in
us, is to plead against the Lie of dreamers, who think themselves perfectly
free from the remnants of filth. But to awaken them, let R. F. and others of
his persuasion (before they drink deeper into Babylons cup of fornications)
perpend, and conscionably weigh these differences between a Believers
Justification and Sanctification.

Section 23. Distinguishing notes between Justification and Sanctification.
inherent in himself, and absolutely perfect, admitting of no degrees: the
matter of our Sanctification is wrought within us, imperfect as to degrees, and
admits of wanes and increases. The very faith whereby we receive pardon, is but
as a grain of mustard seed at first, it admits of degrees; but the object
apprehended, Christ, and his righteousness is always the same; and as much of
Christ's obedience (even all) is given to every Believer, to the weak as to the
strong; and hence it is they are once and together perfected in Justification,
before they have all or half the measures of Sanctification, which the Lord
will give them in his time. Let Francis Howgil put off no such counterfeit ware
to Christ's disciples and Church Members, for it will not be received; viz. The
inheritance of Jacob page 24. 25.
That is not true faith which is imperfect. And again, The righteousness
wrought in the Saints, is, as it was the righteousness of Faith.







Francis Howgil The inheritance of Jacob page 8.
either heard some unsound Teachers, or mis-relates them; as giving it out for
Doctrine, That sin was taken away by Christ, but the guilt should still remain
while he lived, etc. Or, whom does he expostulate with, in these words, Page
28. What Christ is this you preach? What Gospel is this you preach, which saves
you not from guilt and condemnation? For surely Christ's blood and obedience
reckoned to the believer, does this to purpose and effectually, at present, and
for ever. The contrary to Sanctification, is inbred pollution and filth of
sin, which by Christ's power is destroyed, as to the regency; and hereafter to
be removed at our death, as to the residence. Hence, Justification is Gods
gracious and just sentence, pronouncing us righteous, and entitling to life; as
Condemnation is his charging of guilt, and vindictive punishment accordingly:
Sanctification is Gods special grace shed abroad in the heart, called the
first fruits of the Spirit.





i. e. after the first infusion of the Spirits newborn qualities, being acted,
we act in the strength of Jesus Christ. Although too many be willingly ignorant
of these, and such like distinctions, yet they are necessarily useful to
deliver people from natural Popery, and artificial Babylonish Confusion, in and
about this great fundamental Truth, of a Believing-sinners Justification.

Section 24.
ANother piece of unsoundness in their Doctrine of Justification, I had noted
to be, That they deny Peter to have been in a state of Justification when he
denied Christ, contrary, as I said, to Christ's Prayer, Luke 22. 32. I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. R. F. Page 14. Peter's fallings in
carnal counsel to his master, and of denial of him, puts him not out of the
state of Justification.
undertakes the defense of this unsound Doctrine of J. Nayler, but how? He
challenges me for bringing a Scripture which speaks no such thing: now had my
pen or Printer failed, the words would have led him to the right Verse; but he
will needs outface all with Luke 22. 23. (which speaks of the Disciples
enquiry among themselves, which of them it was that should betray him) as if I
had quoted the three and twentieth Verse, and not (as I did) the two and
thirty: and hence he compares Judas denial and Peter's together, with this
groundless Aviso, (in this case) See how blind thou art, was Judas in a state
of Justification when he denied Christ and betrayed him? no more then Peter was
when Christ called him Satan.

Rep. 1. Here R. F. goes further then J. Nayler, and shuts Peter out of a state
of Justification, not only when he denied his Master, but when his Master
called him Satan; so as by this addition, one would think they hold, That every
act or sinful word, as act of a Saint, puts him out of the state of
Justification: or, let honest men observe with what a shuffler I deal, and
suspect him in all the rest of his writings for this deceitful trick.

2. Who will say that Judas was ever in a state of Justification? Who but
those, that envy or extenuate the free grace of God, and the fullness thereof,
will say that Peter was un-justified, when he gave carnal counsel to his
Master, or when he denied him, out of frailty and self-confidence?

3. Let me judge the best of R. F. that I ought by Scripture-rule, I must say,
this contradictious opinion of his arises from his ignorance and prejudice
together, of the very nature and state of a Believers Justification before God;
as may further appear by what follows.

[ But after Peter had repented of his denial of Christ, and wept bitterly,
upon his return, and after he was united to the faith, then Christ prayed for
him.]

Rep. 1. How confused, cross, and thwart this is to the Text I alleged, Luke
22. 32. let my sober truly conscientious Luke 22* 32. vindicated.
Reader weigh with himself.

First, Christ says, [I have prayed] not, [I will pray.] Woe were it with
Saints, if Christ's prayers did not prevent their repentance and tears,
returnings and unitings to the faith, as he expresses it.

Secondly, The promise, that his faith should not fail, respects his very fall,
and Satan's winnowing of him as wheat; some grains of wheat, or substance of the
grace of faith, there was then left in Peter, as the effect of Christ's prayer:
For, either Christ's prayer was heard, or not; if any say, not, it is contrary to
John 11. 42. I know (speaking to his Father) that thou hear me always: if it
be yielded, as it must be, that Christ was heard, (not if Peter failed not, but
that he might not fail) then Peter's faith failed not totally, or altogether,
howsoever it was shaken, sifted, or winnowed: and if it failed not utterly, he
was, in that act of Christ-denial, in the state of Justification. And hereupon
is R. F. (with J. N.) detected for a contradictor of Christ and of his
Scripture-pure and faithful promise.

Section 25.
WIth much impudence J. Nayler had said, The man of sin is discovered in them,
who say, Believers are pure, and spotless too, by reason of imputation, or
covering of Christ's righteousness. For the denial of imputed righteousness, and
justification that way, came from Rome, and the race of Roman Prelates and
Teachers, that make up the man of sin: Yet as impudent a Contradiction as it is
to 2 Cor. 5. 21. R. F. Page 14.
will take part with it, and tells me, I wrest James Naylers words, and make
covers for the man of sin, and by my policy go about to make Christ a sinner.

Rep. 1. Let standers by judge how I wrest James Naylers words, who, D^scovery
of the man of sin, p 28. 29.
in answer to the Ministers of Newcastle, brings them in thus expostulating,
May not a man be in part unclean, (viz. as they meant it, through defects of
Sanctification) and yet pure and spotless too, by reason of imputation? And
then he takes boldness to accost them Gods imputation of Christ's righteousness
no covering for sin, but his covering of sin.
with this high language, Here now you show your confusion, and I command you
to show plain Scripture for this without twining; and tells them at last, By
their pleading for sin, the man of sin is discovered in them. Now, how did they
plead for sin? as R. F. says, I make covers for the man of sin. He that
acknowledges impurity in himself, and teaches that sin is inherent in the
Saints, though it be not imputed, must be censured by these men, as a patron of
sin, or a pleader for it: when as poor souls they little know their own hearts,
or what defilements are in their lips and pens, and what woe attends such
contradictious calling of good, evil; and evil, good. They call Gods good and
gracious act of imputation of Christ's righteousness, a covering for sin: this
is to call good, evil. That it is, and may be so called, a covering of sin, is
warrantable by Scripture, Psalm 32. 1. with Romans 4. 7, 24. but to say, it is a
covering for sin, and for the man of sin, is to speak blasphemy against God:
and to say, our pleading for Gods not imputing of iniquity, or for his covering
our sins, is to make a covering for sin; is, with Antichrist the man of sin,
Rev. 13. 6.
to blaspheme the Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. In this Doctrine
of Justification they call evil, good, by attributing that unto outward and
inward acts of a Believers holiness (in all which there is some mixed evil)
which properly and only belongs unto the personal acts of Christ's own
finless obedience and sufferings, in the nature which himself assumed to
perform the work of Mediatorship. J. Nayler speaks plainly enough for them all,
and for all the children of the man of sin. Discovery, etc page 27. ^
Our walking with God in his righteousness, is our covering from wrath -- you
know not the covering of Christ's righteousness and holiness, in which whoever
walk with God, are covered from wrath. Which walking with God, he means not
of our living by faith in Christ's personal actings and sufferings for us to our
perfect justification from wrath, and from the guilt of sin binding over to
wrath; but of our personal acts of righteousness and holiness wrought in us, by
Christ and his Spirit; which although they be good, as wrought by the Lord in
us, yet meeting with mixtures of defilement in the hearts of Saints; as they
are their acts, are but filthy rags, and no covering at all, to hide our
nakedness from appearing in the eye of Gods strict Law and Justice. This J.
Nayler (or some in his coat) has much for discovery of the rottenness of their
judgment, in this case, in a piece lately come forth Love to the lost, page 4.
. With him, Christ, his righteousness is freely imputed, or put into the
creature. Again, This righteousness is wrought into the creature, in that
obedience which is contrary to the will of the flesh. Imputing, here, is all
one with infusing, to him. Justifying righteousness and sanctifying
righteousness, is the same individual obedience; which is pure Popery, or
impure Babylonish Doctrine. More yet, Page 5.
Your faith, without his works, will be little worth to salvation. Christ's
works for us are only of worth with the Father for our salvation. Christ's
workings in us, are not to be joined with our faith in Christ's works, or
obedience for us, in the business of our Justification. This latter is intended
by him who by his Title pretends Love to the lost, but by his baits and
snares would hold fast some, and carry others back into the wilderness; witness
his confounding of Justification, Sanctification, and Mortification: Page 15.
The living Faith is never without works; which works are Love, Meekness,
Patience, Mortification, Sanctification, Justification, etc. We grant a
presence of works, the fruits of the Spirit, in the subject or person that is
justified, and these works are evidences of the life and truth of our faith;
the fruits are evidences of the tree: but to put Justification in us with the
fruits of the Spirit, and to say, as afterward Page 51.
he does, men are so justified, as they are sanctified and mortified, and no
further; is to deny Protestant Doctrine, which is according to Scripture; that,
who so is justified, is justified semel and simul, once and together, perfectly
and for ever, Heb. 10. 1, 14. And to revive the old Popish Tenet, of degrees of
our Justification, according to the degrees of our Sanctification, and no
further; whereas we say, and say truly, men are not at all justified, as they
are sanctified, Two Arguments against Sanctification as the matter of our
Justification.
when we speak of the thing it self, and not of its declaration: For,

Romans 3. 24. Romans 5. 19. 1 Pet. 1. 19.

But the Sanctification and Mortification in Believers is not the immaculate
Sacrifice for sin; Christ is the sole and entire Sacrifice for sin, that is, to
expiate and take away the guilt and curse of sin, by his perfect obedience, and
sufferings in his own natural body:
And therefore, as that only merited our Justification, so it is the only
thing that properly, and for its worth, is imputed to our Justification.

Rep. 2. For R. F. to all it my policy, to go about to make Christ a sinner, is
pitiful weakness in him: For it was no How Christ was made sin, or a sinner. 2
Cor. 5. 21. cleared.
man or Angel-invention, but the masterpiece of Gods infinite wisdom, to have
his Son, who knew no sin, be made sin, i. e. a sinner, by imputation; and a
sacrifice for sin, in and by his sufferings, in the room and stead of sinners;
which could not have been, if their sins had not been imputed to him: but
seeing their sins were imputed to him, they are, in that way of imputation,
made or reckoned righteous in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 21. What foolishness soever
there seems to be in this way of our Justification, Christ crucified, as a
sinner, and for sinners bearing their guilt and curse, is the wisdom and the
power of God; and a poor sinner justified this way, is the object of the
eternal unsearchable riches of Gods wisdom and grace, or freest, choicest favor.

As for that contradiction to Scripture which R. F. Page 14.
says is seen in this our doctrine, because it is said, He was made like unto
us, sin excepted; it is but in his imagination, (and something he must say to
color over, and hide his own gainsayings) for that place, Heb. 4. 15. and 2.
Cor. 5. 21. are Heb. 4. 15. vindicated.
no ways at variance. Christ was in all points tempted like as we are, yet
without sin; so are the words, to the Hebrews. He yielded to no temptation; He
had no inherent sin to comply with a temptation; He knew no sin (as in the
other Scripture) yet was he made sin, reckoned as a sinner, tempted like a
sinner, deserted like a sinner, yea, accursed as a sinner; the feelings and
experiences whereof make him, experimentally, a sympathizing High priest, and
moves him to succor them that are tempted: And his being free from sin of his
own, (while he was tempted to sin, as others; and while he was charged with the
sin of others) frees us, or justifies us, from our sin, as to the guilt, curse
and damnation, which he bare in his own body on the Tree. Yea, and such as are
in him, are at present redeemed out of sin, as to the dominion, and reign of
it, but we are not therefore justified: and when sin shall wholly be rooted out
of us, that shall not be our justification at Gods tribunal, because we are
perfectly holy, but because Christ died for us, to justify us by his blood.
Let him that throws off Christ's imputed righteousness, go shift for his
justification where he can get it. He is a foolish bewitched Galatian, and
Christ shall profit him nothing; For bring in any one act of ours (though
wrought by the Spirit) whether of mortification, self-denial, love, or faith
(as an act) to be an ingredient to the essence of our justification, and it is
as bad, as to be circumcised, and as destructive to the souls peace, and
safety, as to be a debtor to keep the whole Law.

Section 26.
I Had noted what I found in J. Nayler, That no imperfect thing can be
reconciled to God is plain Scripture, plainly contradicting, Romans 5. 10. If he
means by no imperfect thing, no man that is not perfectly sanctified; But R.
F. makes out the sense thus* Page 14.
No sin can be reconciled to God, nor any such imperfect thing.

Rep. 1. If this were the only sense, why was it not spoken at first? for we
know by the Spirit in the Scriptures, Our persons are perfectly reconciled,
before our natures are perfectly sanctified.
that it was Gods design to reconcile sinners only to himself, persons (as I
hinted before in my book imperfect enough) and to abolish sin, in guilt and
power as first, and in the presence, at the last: and we can prove it by
clearer Scriptures then R. F. produces (which is only Rev. 21. 27.) that sin
and God cannot be reconciled and as Psalm 5. 4. Thou art not a God that has
pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee: Hab. 1. 13. Thou
art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity; But,

2. The scope of J. Nayler Answ. to perfect Phar. page 9.
was to prove, that we are not justified by a righteousness without us, but by
what is perfectly wrought within us; and therefore I mistook him not (in my
former piece) when I subjoyned, Their meaning is, till sin be wholly abolished
in its residence out of the heart, and all imperfections in sanctification be
done away, there is no reconciliation of our persons with God, or to him:
whatever be R. F. Page 14.
his flourish; And as for our meaning thou speaks of, thou art without our
mind, and so know not our meaning by thy imagining; therein thou show a
spirit of error: It suffices, that by Scripture-truth (wherein the Spirit of
truth reigns) I can detect this for an error: viz. Christ's work in us is that
which justifies our persons before God; and what if his work for us, be joined
with his work in us? if they mean no more then what is inherent righteousness
wrought by Christ's strength in himself and in us together, so F. Howgill must
be construed (if he quadrates with his other passages in the Book) when he
says, The inheritance of Jacob. page 29
Christ fulfilled the Law, and he fulfils it in them who know him and his work,
and herein man comes to be justified in Gods sight, by Christ, who works all
our works in us, and for us. Christ's obedience and ours, his work for us, and
his work in us put together for our justification, is Babylonish mixture; but
this I can maintain as a clear, and pure truth, viz. That it is not the work of
Christ in us which justifies and reconcileth our persons, but his sole working
for us by his own personal obedience, and satisfaction to justice. The plain
Scripture is this, Heb. 10. 14. Christ by one offering has perfected for ever
them that are Heb. 10. 14. cleared.
sanctified. It is not said in any Scripture, that Christ has first perfectly
sanctified any persons, and then reconciled them unto God; but the sense of
that, as of other Scriptures, is, that Christ, by one offering of himself, has
perfected their justification, and reconciliation, whom he does also sanctify,
in the truth of it, at what instant he applies their perfect justification.
And the plain truth, according to Scripture, is this; That, no person is
reconciled to God, How the sinner, and yet none but the perfect person is
reconciled to God.
who has not a perfect Mediator of his reconciliation, and who is not
accepted, as perfectly righteous, in the righteousness of Christ, his surety;
and so it is true, none but the perfect person is reconciled to God: but how? not
by his qualifications (at first an enemy, and always carrying about with him
(while here) some wisdom of the flesh which is emnity against God) but as he
had on Christ's Cross, his person represented, in Christ his head, and his sins
not imputed, upon the account of Christ's righteousness made, or reckoned to be
his, 2 Cor. 5. 19. 21. To clear this a little further; we must distinguish
between the reconciling of our individual persons, and the reconciling of our
individual natures, dispositions, or qualities and acts: both are a fruit of
Christ's satisfactory obedience and sufferings; and they cannot (as J. N. Love
to the lost. page 50.
acknowledges this truth, though not truly) be divided in the possession: But
personal reconcilement is done at once, by imputation of the perfect
righteousness of the Lord Jesus: nature-reconcilement admits of degrees
according to the measure of the Spirit of sanctification. As for J. Nayler, and
R. F. and such as imagine, that while sinful imperfections remain in the
Saints, they, in their persons, are not, cannot be perfectly reconciled to God;
then not themselves, nor any that adhere to their doctrine, are or can be
reconciled to God, in person, as not in judgment, and affection, while they
harbor such fleshly and legal conceits of a poor sinners justification, and
reconciliation: and they shall see, if by this they get no eyesalve (Oh, that
it might not be too late!) how (till they be better bottomed) with
contradictions of Scripture, they contradict, and come short of true
salvation-light, right, and possession. For I judge it is absolutely necessary
to salvation, rightly to discern the way of a man's justification before God,
and reconciliation to him; which discerning, I perceive not in these men's
writings, although, sometime in discourse with some of this Sect, I have had
their confession of the truth; yet their bad principles make them fly off
again: as it fares with many a natural ignorant countreyman (I wish there be
not more then a few such in Cities, and populous places) who have a notion of
the Gospeltruth, but practically and experimentally cannot for their hearts,
but stick in themselves, and think a Bird in the hand, is better then two in
the Bush; a little of their own, within them, far beyond all Christ's
righteousness without them; although we call for the witness within them, that
will not suffice, they must have the groundwork of their justification within
them, as well as the evidence: nay some work within shall be ground and
evidence too; or they fly off, and will not believe till they see and feel; but
groping, in the dark lose themselves in the wilderness of self-fulness and
sufficiency.

(7. Head of their Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning Regeneration.
Section 27.
I Had noted what they say, He that believes is born of God, without
Scripture, and yet witnessed in Scripture, contrary to James 1. 18. and 1 Pet.
1. 23* 25. which Regeneration by the Scripture promise
not only bear witness of a new birth, but says also, it is wrought by the
word of truth, the word of God, the word that is preached, which was never
[without] or besides, much less directly against, but always according to the
Scripture; both as the Apostles preached it, and others after them, and their
written doctrine. R. F. Page 15.
returns me, in a retorting way, as is his wonted manner, this for an answer. If
thou was not blind, thou would see that thou contradicts the Scripture, and not
they: that attributes the work of regeneration and the new birth to the Letter,
which thou calls the word, and so therein denies God, who begets by his own
will, by that word which lives and abides for ever; which was in the
beginning with God, and was God.

Rep. 1. Gods essential will, and the free act of his love and good pleasure is
the primary impulsive cause of his regenerating a soul.

2. Christ by his death purchases the grace of regeneration, and by the power
of his resurrection applies it. 1 Pet. 1. 3.

3. The Spirit of the Father and the Son comes with the Scripture-promise, and
quickneth the soul, to believing, and by believing of the word of truth (which
at the beginning R. F. acknowledged the Scriptures to be) and at that instant
the believing soul is (as Isaac) conceived and formed a child of promise; a
believer, and a new creature together, by the word of grace, which the Spirit
uses as the external means of regeneration; yea, he carries the word and
voice of the Son of God, John 5. 25. from the ear to the heart, and makes them
hear, and live. That part of the Scripture which is pure Gospel, is the
ministration of the Spirit, as of righteousness and life, 2 Cor. 3. 8.

4. They that speak of a regeneration, such as the Scripture helps them not to
know and obtain, speak wildely of it, as J. Nayler in his new piece, Love to
the lost. page 34.
treating of the new birth; he tells his lost creatures, There is the old man,
and a new man, but he does not say there are two contrary qualities, in the
same regenerate soul; lusting one against the other, as the Apostle describes
their state, Gal. 5. 17. He says, Page 35.
Nicodemns knew not the new birth, though he loved Christ. He did not know the
manner, and mystery of it, before his coming to Christ, but if he loved Christ
before, it was a fruit of the new-born-seed of grace, or spiritual principle;
for even J. N. confesses, as is the man, so are his works, and as is the Tree,
so is the fruit. And I may add, as is J. N. so is his Book, and his his love
to the lost: for (if the man may be known by his writing) he may happily, know as
little of the new birth as Nicodemus did, though he would be a great Teacher in
our Israel. Some may say, he speaks Love to the lost. p. 35.
of a Promise as well as a power that puts off the old man with his deeds,
lusts and affections; but if you mark it, it is to them who remain in the seed
of God, and it in them; he does not say, the new creature has a promise, that
it shall remain: although the Scripture says it shall: Joh* 15. 16. 1 John 2.
27. Well, if he holds but to what he says, That all who remain in this seed,
and it in them, has the Promise; I would have R. F. ask him, whether it be the
Promise that begets the new man, which helps to put off the old? if it be, we
shall find the new man quickened, as the old man crucified and slain, by a word
of promise, in several places of Scripture, scattered. The word of promise
serves to regenerate, and begin the work, as well as to preserve, nourish and
maintain the regenerate man in his state. He that shuts out Scripture from
being Christ's organ, or the Spirits instrument and means of Regeneration, it
had been better for him he had never known the Scripture, or written a word
about it.

(8. Head of Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning Sanctification, and its
Perfection.
Section 28.
I Had noted from a little conference with them in Scotland, That sin dwells
not in act, where Christ reigns. Sin dwells and acts in the Saints. Romans
7. 17. opened.
This R. F. defends as true, though never so contrary, as I hinted in my
book, to three (as many more) places of Scripture. Romans 7. 17. It is not I that
do it, but sin that dwells in me: sin is doing, as well as dwelling: it will
not be idle, and in whom? in Paul's heart, where Christ reigned. Gal. 5. 17. The
flesh lusts against the Spirit, and Gal. 5. 7. cleared.
the Spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary one to the other; in
whom? in the Galatians, the sons of God, in whom (considered in their better
part) Christ and Grace reigned, yet they could not do what they would: they
could not be so gracious, as their regenerate part would have them, nor yet so
sinful as their unregenerate part would have them. Here is sin active enough,
and yet its force is broken, that it cannot reign where Christ reigns, but
there it dwells and remains, very troublesome to a good heart. Romans 7. 23, 25.
Romans 7. 23, 25 explained.
I see another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin, that is in my members: here is
action and passion too; here is fighting and scuffling, a continual conflict.
Sin in the Saints is no sleepy habit; it will be plotting, using stratagems,
striking, and serving it self, and its own turn, as ver. 25. With my flesh I
serve the Law of sin: sin is very active in the Saints, when so officious to
its self, and its own ends. What weapons think you will R. F. find for defense
of the Tenet? none spiritual I dare say, but carnal and weak, as follows.
Page 15.
Where Christ reigns, the body is dead to the acts of unrighteousness,
because of sin being destroyed, and the Spirit is life because of
righteousness, living and ruling.

Rep. I suppose he refers, in this answer, to Romans 8. 10. though he quotes not
the place, but some of the words, adding his own gloss. The words of the
Apostle are these. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin,
but the Spirit is life because of righteousness: By the body here Romans 8. 10.
cleared in its genuine sense*
is meant the natural body (consisting of flesh, blood and bones) as appears;

1. By the scope of the Apostle to comfort them against the Law of death, ver.
2.

2. From the comfort which he raises; grant the Body is dead, frail,
corruptible, mortal, subject to death, yet, first, it is not totally dead, for
the sting of death, which is the guilt of sin is plucked out, ver. 2. and the
Spirit (by the law of opposition here to be taken for) the soul of a believer
is life, or a living soul immortal, and shall live gloriously to immortality;
and may and does live comfortably here, because of righteousness, i. e. while
it takes up this consideration, that Christ's own personal righteousness is
imputed, as the cause of a glorious life, and Christ's infused holiness is the
evidence of Justification-life, and Glory-life. Secondly, the body shall not be
always under the power of death, v. 11. for he that raised up Christ from the
dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies: which epithete [mortal] is added
to show he spoke of the natural body, ver. 10. and to strengthen and comfort;
in that the same spirit dwelling in Christ and true Christians, look as he
raised up Christ's body, so he shall raise up theirs. This being the genuine
sense of the Apostle: we may grant a pious truth in something R. F. says, but
not as properly grounded on this place. The truth is, the natural body is
mortified in part to the acts of unrighteousness, as the habits of sin are
mortified in the soul; Romans 8. 10. vindicated from improper and abusive
interpretation.
but the Apostle says not the body is dead because of sin being destroyed, as
R. F. has glossed, but because of fin, that is, the natural body is a mortal
dying body, has many partial deaths upon it, and will dye at last (soul and
body will be separated for a time) because of sin, which remains in the soul,
dwells and acts in and by the body, and will not be absolutely and in all
degrees rooted out, till the body dies a natural death. Sin is such a
troublesome in-mate, or like some old inhabitant pleading prescription, that it
will not out (God suffering it so to be) till the House be pulled down over its
head: therefore the Apostles reason [ because of sin] discovers them to err
who deny sin to dwell in act where Christ reigns. Sin dwells in the soul,
the inward rooms chiefly, but it so lodges within, as it acts and works in
the outward room, and shop of the body, till body and soul be dissolved, when
this troublesome inmate is cast out totally, finally and for ever from the
Saints. Let not R. F. go on to say [ here thou art contradicting the
Scriptures, and opposing the work of Christ; which is to take away sin:] for
there is not one Scripture which speaks of a perfect Saint, absolutely free
from the in-dwelling presence, and in-working power of sin, in the least
degree, while he lives here upon the earth; and the work of Christ, in taking
away sin, is, in a way of Sanctification, to carry it on by little and little,
as was his casting out of the Canaanites, Exodus 23. 30. Let not him that puts
on his armor boast as he that puts it off.

What is it for R. F. Page 15.
to reason? [ And such as abide in him sins not, then sin acts not; he that
acts sin commits sin, and there Christ reigns not, but Antichrist, under whose
dominion thou art, that pleads for him and his work.]

Rep. 1. Sin may and does act in the Saints, not they, but sin is acting, when,
as Saints, and so far as regenerate, they do act against sin. This is not
committing of sin in John's sense (as has been cleared before, Sect. 14.) but
as Paul, speaking of himself in the name of all the regenerate, (as has been
proved, Sect. 20.) Romans 7. 16, 17. If I do that which I would not, etc. it is
no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.

2. Although Christ reigns not where sin is committed (in John's sense) yet he
reigns where that in-dwelling principle of sin is mortified in truth, and in
some degree, and where the actings of sin are, resistings of sin are hated,
resisted, and unfulfilled. Gal. 5. 16. They that walk in the Spirit, do not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh; yet the flesh is lusting and acting what it can
against a Christian, to make him stumble, while he is in a good walk.

3. Antichrist reigns in none more then in filthy dreamers, who while they
preach perfection, are found in their pollutions. It is Antichrists design to
represent a sinners Justification imperfect, and his Sanctification perfect,
that he may glory in himself, and not in Christ. Antichrist pretends as much
to Holiness as these men (called Quakers) but out of order, and to a wrong end,
as they also.

4. To plead for perfect inherent Holiness, as the Believers Justification, as
J. Nayler See Love to the lost, p. 21. and 51.
and R. F. do, is to serve under Antichrists colors, and to wear his livery,
and to make void the obedience and sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ.

5. He is not under the dominion of Antichrist, who pleads against his
imaginary perfections, is made perfect in his Justification, by coming unto
Christ's sacrifice, Heb. 10. 1, 14. and in a way of Sanctification, presses
after more of the power of Christ's death and resurrection to be conformed
thereunto.

But R. F. goes on Page 15.
to mis-apply Scripture, and contradict the true scope and sense, [ He that is
begotten of God, keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not]

Rep. 1. It is true, the words are so, and I believe it is so as the Spirit
speaks in that place, 1 John 5. 18. what then? 1 John 5* 18. vindicated.
Does not sin dwell and stir, therefore, in the regenerate? Look back to ver.
16. and you may conclude, That not only sin is in every Christian Brother, but
you may sometimes have it visibly acted before your eyes: for says the
Apostle, If any man see his brother sin, etc.

2. Although he sins, yet we know that whosoever is born of God (as every
true Brother is) sins not, i. e. unto death; as every sin is not unto death,
so no sin of the truly godly is unto death: but he keeps himself, as he is
kept, and he acts, as he is acted, by the principle of the new creature, by
the Spirits, and Christ's fresh influence, against such a sin; and that wicked
one, Satan, touches him not with his sting, nor instills such deadly poison
into him, as brings him into the sin that shall not be pardoned, must not be
prayed for, which is the sin unto death.

What has R. F. more to say? nothing but from misapplyed Scripture; [ And he
that acts and does righteousness, is of God; but he that acts and does
unrighteousness, is not of God, as says the Scripture.]

Rep. But where? he names none. The Scriptures which he might guess at, are 1
John 2. 29. and 1 John 3. 10. In the 1 John 2. 29. cleared.
former, Every one which does righteousness is born of him; the Greek word for
doing (...).
is emphatical, as if he should say, he that makes a trade of righteousness
(not every one that stumbleth upon an act or two of righteousness) but every
one that is a constant practitioner of it, is born of God. In the latter,
whosoever does not righteousness is not of 1 John 3. 10. vindicated. (...), etc.
God, i. e. whosoever does not make a trade of righteousness, or godliness, is
not of God. The Scripture says not, [ He that acts unrighteousness is not of
God,] neither there, nor any where else: Sin's acting in the Saints, does not
argue that they make a common practice of it. Let them who make a trade of
perverting Scripture, and of crossing the mind of the Spirit, constantly, in
almost every place they allege, examine whether they can be of God or no. They
that judge the Saints, for having sin-dwelling and acting in them, not to be of
God, (that is, not to be Saints, or born of God) shall be judged themselves by
the Lord, for trading with Satan in his common shop and office, of accusing the
Brethren.

Section 29.
WHat I noted touching J. Naylers denial of perfection of holiness to be
reserved till after death, R. F. calls Whether perfection of holiness be not
reserved till death.
the Reader to see if there be such words so expressed by James in that page,
if not, etc. then let them take notice of my deceitful spirit.

Rep. 1. I would know whether I may not have liberty to put down the effect of
his or any man's words, though not just the same, and so expressed. Although
very seldom I have done it, yet R. F. could take this liberty himself, and much
more in his Epistle, where he tells his Reader, that I say, [ Without the
Scripture, the word of the Lord could not be spoken, or to that effect.] My
words were neither so, nor to such purpose, as he would have them construed, as
if the Lord were not above his Scripture. All that I said was this, Christ
teaches us not to know any thing to salvation, but what is in the Scripture,
Law, and Testimony: and my plain intent therein, I have cleared before, in this
part of my Reply, Sect. 10.

2. J. Naylers express words Discovery of the man of sin, page 28.
are these, I challenge you to bring one Scripture, which does say, That
Perfection and Holiness are reserved till after death. What he propounds by
way of a challenge, I put down as his negative position; denying, in effect, a
Reserve of perfect holiness to be given into the soul at the instant of death,
and to be only enjoyed in soul and body, long after, at the resurrection.
Justification perfect here, Sanctification imperfect.
Perfection of Justification, by a most perfect imputed righteousness, we have
as soon as we believe; but perfection in all degrees of Sanctification, we have
not in life, none ever had it till death, and then they possess it, in their
souls, ever after. He that holds, the Saints perfect fulfilling of the Law, in
all degrees of obedience and conformity to it, in this life, before death, has
drunk of Antichrists cup, and contradicts the whole tenor of Scripture, and the
experience of all the Saints mentioned therein (so far as their state of
holiness in this life, is spoken of.) J. Nayler Discovery, as above.
gives the lie to them that say, The righteousness of the Law is not fulfilled
in this life, in any of the Saints; and thinks that Romans 8. Romans 8 3, 4.
vindicated by the scope and true sense.
3, 4. will patronize the Saints perfect fulfilling of the Law in this life;
which only speaks of Christ's fulfilling of the Law for us, and in that nature
of man which himself assumed. If he says, Christ came for that end, to fulfill
the Law in the Saints; and not in his humanity only, for them; still the
Apostles words and sense must be regarded, and not J. Naylers. The Apostles
scope is not to prove the Saints Justification, by Christ's enabling them to
fulfill the Law, (which is J. Naylers scope in pleading for perfect Holiness in
this life) but to comfort against the want of perfect Holiness, which is ever
wanting while sin dwells in us. What is the comfort? this, that the inherent
sin of our natures is not imputed: we (who believe) are absolved and set free
from the guilt and punishment of it, by the law of the Spirit of Life that is
in Christ Jesus; Ver. 2. that is, by the perfect holiness of Christ's humanity
reckoned to us. A necessity of which appears, ver. 3. The Law could not
justify any that have sin in-dwelling; That which the Law could not do (not,
that which the Saints could not do, as J. Nayler reads it) in that it was weak
through the flesh, (residing not in the Law, but in the best of Saints here)
God sent his Son, that is, to justify us from the guilt of our
sinning-natures, and how? ( for sin, by reason it sticks in us while we live)
he condemned sin in the flesh of Christ; he kept sin from having inherency in
Christ's humanity: And why? ver. 4. That the righteousness (the word signifies
the utmost which (...).
could be exacted) of the Law, absolute holiness of nature (as of life and
death) might be fulfilled in us, (he does not say, by us, or of us) that
believe in him, who all the time he was upon earth, had a perfect nature for
us; and who walk not after the flesh (which is in us) but after the Spirit
(which is in us.) All along the intelligent godly Reader may see that this
Scripture makes more against J. Nayler, and his associates, then for them: For
if flesh be in all that the Law would have to do with, (if Christ did not
undertake for them) and this flesh disableth both us from keeping the Law
perfectly, and the Law from justifying us; our main comfort lays not in the
measures of our Sanctification, but in our perfect Justification; by Christ's
fulfilling the Law, without us, and for us; which fulfilling of all the Laws
exactions for us, is said to be in us, because the application of it Rom 8. 4.
cleared.
to us, is by Faith, which is in us; and forasmuch as Christ had it for us, in
that nature of his, which he assumed, with which we are mystically united; and
in as much as it was fulfilled in our Head, it is ours as surely, by imputation,
as if it had been possessed in, and performed by our own persons.

3. Lest R. F. should think I have neglected him to attend his
Brother-contradictor, let us hear what he says to the Scripture I quoted, for
a bottom of that truth we maintain against all gainsayers, viz. That the
Saints are not in all degrees perfected in Holiness till they dye, or be
dissolved. Page 15.
As thou have lied of James, who witnesses purity, as the Saints did; so also
have thou lied of the Apostle, and those spoken of, Heb. 12. 23. saying, that
the spirits, (that is, souls separated (as thou says) from the bodies) of just
men made perfect in holiness; which is at death, or at the instant of
dissolution, when the spirit is separated from the body.

Rep. 1. Whether I belyed James Nayler or no, will appear before, where I have
cleared the faithfulness and freedom of my Spirit.

2. How James witnesses purity we have heard, and proved it not to be after
the Scripture-Saints judgment, who never went about (after they knew Christ's
fullness, and their own emptiness) to bottom their Justification upon their
Sanctification; and establish a righteousness of their own, which is said to be
our own, if it be materially inhercut What is our righteousness.
in us.

3. How I have lied of the Apostle, and of those spoken of, Heb. 12. 23. let it
come to the trial.

First, I shall clear out and strengthen the Exposition of that place. Heb. 12.
23. cleared in the last clause, by the scope.


Secondly, examine what R. F. has against it, or the truth thence deduced, of
sins continuance in the Saints till death.

First, The Exposition I gave is cleared and strengthened partly from the Scope,
partly from the Grammatical sense of the words.

1. The Scope of the Apostle is to press the exhortations and consolations
preceding, Ver. 5. That Christians should not faint under afflictions: Ver. 12.
That weaklings in grace may be encouraged: Ver. 14. That peace and holiness be
pursued: Ver. 16, 17. That by no means Saint-ship be undervalued: and why all
this? because they are not under the Old Testament administration at mount
Sinai, Ver. 18. which was terrible; but Ver. 22. under a New Testament
condition, which is amiable; the more by reason of that holy and sweet
communion which is now cleared out, as with God, Christ and Angels, so with the
Saints in heaven, described by this Character, [ The spirits of just men made
Communion of Saints on earth with Saints in heaven.
perfect] with whom we (that are but weak in Faith, and imperfect in Holiness)
have

1. A communion of right; our grounds of right to heaven, are as good and firm
as theirs who are now in possession.

2. Of Interest; Saints departed are in living communion with that God and
Christ in heaven, with whom we have communion on earth.

3. Of Praises; Begun praises by the Saints on earth, are echoed and resounded
by the perfect Spirits in Paradise.

4. Of will and desires; They are doing the will of God perfectly, and we (as
Saints) are aiming, endeavoring, praying, striving after that state.

5. Of Hopes; They hope for the perfection of their Bodies at the resurrection,
and we hope for the perfection of Soul at death, and of our Bodies at the same
resurrection day.

6. Of Membership; They are a part of the Church-Catholique, and so are the
Saints on earth; fellow-heirs we are of the same inheritance, children of the
family, etc. Thus for the Scope.

2. The words themselves carry their sense with them at Heb. 12. 23. cleared in
the terms.
the first look: By [ spirits] cannot be meant Angels, for of them he had
spoken before: And he adds, We are come to the spirits of [ men.] The word in
Acts 23. 8. is used for souls separated; The Sadduces say, there is no
resurrection, neither Angel, nor [ Spirit,] that is, souls of men separated
from the bodies, (to which yet they retain a relation) for they held the soul
dyed with the body; others in our time (as in Calvin's) say it sleeps with the
body. But the word [Spirit] notes out a living intelligent substance in action,
or sensible passion; as the souls of them that were disobedient before the
Flood, in Noah's time, are 1 Pet. 3. 19. called spirits in prison; those are
souls of wicked men, made miserable; these in our Scripture controverted, are
souls of [ just] men, while they were here in the body perfectly justified; and
at parting out of the body made perfect in holiness. In that it is said, [
Spirits made perfect,] it implies they were not in that sense perfect in the
body, as they are now out of it. Here, in life, the Saints have (...), a
fullness of the Spirit, (comparatively, in respect of what they had at first, or
that others have at present;) at death they have a (...), a final perfection,
as to a perfect freedom from the roots and remnants of sin, and a fruition of
as much inherent holiness as they are capable of. Here the Lord finds fault
if our works be not perfect, or filled up (as the word (...).
signifies, Rev. 3. 2.) with acts and exercises of grace in all kinds: but
when we dye in the Lord, then our works are perfect, or finished (...).
in degrees, and at an end. The word for perfect in our Text to the Hebrew is
(...), which comes of a verb (...),
that in its root (...)
signifies an end, or the end; therefore sometime put for death, John 13. 1.
To the end, that is, to the death he loved them: And, 2 Cor. 1. 13. I trust you
shall acknowledge to the end, i. e. to my death, or yours, or both. When Christ
was giving up the ghost, and was ending the work of satisfaction with his life,
he cried out, It is finished *, John 19. (...).
30. so shall we (who have the first fruits of the Spirit) be then able to say,
with that clear conscience which now cannot in that manner and measure be
exercised, even as we give up our spirits into the hands of God, now Lord, the
work of mortification and holiness is finished, and not before. The sense of
the Scripture stands clear.

Secondly, Let us examine what R. F. has against it, or against the Doctrine
of sin's continuance in the godly till death.

Against the true meaning of the Apostle, now cleared, he excepteth, Page 16.
[ Th^se that thou speaks of in Heb. 12. 22. did not say it should be at an
instant, of death, when their bodies Heb. 12. 23. vindicated.
and souls parted, that they should be perfected.

Rep. 1. I have had no revelations from them, nor speech with Saints departed
(since their departure) nor need I, I have Paul, and other Penman of the holy
Ghost to assure me, it was not before. The word in the Text is [ Spirits] (not
bodies, nor souls continuing in the bodies) of just men made perfect, and that
is enough to me.

2. For conviction of gainsayers, and confirmation of the weak, I might call to
mind the sayings of several Saints before Christ's coming and since, who have
had no other faith, nor persuasion, but that while they were here, sin remained
with them, and within them; and till death parted their souls from their
bodies, Christ parted not sin perfectly from their souls.

What will R. F. say to that cloud of Witnesses? Heb. 11. who while they lived,
lived by Faith; and when they dyed, ver. 13, they dyed in Faith, (not only in
respect of a heavenly country, but) that what they felt not the moment before,
they should be in sensible possession of, the moment of, and the moment after
dissolution. Then, as Samson slew more at his death then in his life, so Christ
would, and did give them a perfect revenge upon their old enemy sin, and all
the roots and remnants of corruption.

What will R. F. say to old Saint Jacob? who on his Saints experimentally
imperfect.
deathbed makes this confession, Genesis 49. 18. I have waited for thy salvation,
O Lord. Salvation, as to perfect sanctification, being yet to be finished at
death. And what to precious Saint David? 2 Samuel 23. 5. who quieted his heart
with this on his deathbed, that God had made with him an everlasting Covenant
etc. although things were not perfect in his house, nor heart, for then he had
been perfect (I speak still of perfection in all degrees) in the discharge of
his relative family duties, but that he was not. And were any in the New
Testament as perfect in sanctification before, as at and after death? does
Paul, for himself and the Saints, speak of any more then the first fruits of
the Spirit? Romans 8. 23. does he not make mention of his and their infirmities?
ver. 26. which are, not only afflictions, but sins; if, not Romans 8. 26. opened.
to know what to pray for, in every prayer, as we ought, be a sin; but so many
ignorances, and defects (in prayer, and duty) which ought not to be in us, are
sins. There ought not to be any sinful infirmity in us, yet there are, and will
be, do we our best.

Let R. F. hear what our English Saints have acknowledged at the instant of
death, or immediately before. "I am drawing on a pace to my dissolution, (said
M. Bolton famous for piety) hold out faith and patience, your work will quickly
be at an end. His work of holy faith and patience, was not at an end before his
end, his death. Our English precious Jewel (who by his Popish adversaries
confession in his life was an Angel, though in his faith (as they deemed, an
Heretic) immediately before his death he brake forth into these words,
"Christ is my righteousness; Father let thy will be done: thy will, I say, not
mine, which is imperfect and depraved. Our dear Countreyman M. Deering has
this farewell; "Poor wretch and miserable man that I am, the least of all
Saints, and the greatest of sinners etc. And again. If I were the most
excellent of all creatures in the world; if I were equal in righteousness to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, yet had I reason to confess my self to be a sinner.
Holy M. Bradford, How often does he subscribe, in letters to his friends, "either
an Hypocrite, or, a very painted Hypocrite, or, The sinful John Bradford? for
the same man or person (as he writes in one Letter, which describes and
compares the old man and the new man a little better then Ja. Nayler in his
Love to the lost) may be called, always just, always sinful. Even men perfectly
justified, are not made perfectly holy (according to his faith and experience,
which as to this case is the same in all Saints) while living here: and
hereupon, when he hourly looked for the Porter to open to him the gates to enter
into desired rest from the very molestations of indwelling sin, and was every
moment expecting the executioner to dispatch him (in a letter to his dear
Fathers, Dr. Cranmer, Dr. Ridley, and Dr. Latimer) "he is bewailing his
unthankfulness and hypocrisy; clear he was and sure of justification and
heaven, yet sensible of the remnants of corruption:" As also M. Philpot, who
leaped for joy, when his martyrdom was at hand, "yet cried for mercy, against
his present unthankfulness and unworthiness." And if we look abroad, instances
are pregnant and plentiful, I shall mention only two or three, one in Germany,
Melanchthon, who not only complained, that old Adam was too hard for young
Melanchthon, but continued in a sense of his sinful corruptions to his dying
day, confessing himself at last to be a miserable sinner: So did blessed Calvin
(in France) as appears in his last Will and Testament. I close up with that
noble French man Philip de Morney Lord of Plessis, though he died with full
assurance of a house not made with hands, etc. yet he put up this request, a
little before his death; "Lord make me to know my sins, to weep for them, to
detest them, and to have them in execration." These with thousands like them,
have so believed in life, and spoken, to this effect, at death, that when their
bodies and souls were parted, and at that instant they should be perfected in
holiness; they felt it not, believed not, it would be before that time.

R. F. Page 16.
has another exception: Heb. 12. 22, 23. [In the present tense, they there
spoke, and not in the future.]

Rep. He that knows any thing of Grammar may well question whether R. F.
understands himself, or what is the difference between the present tense, and
future, [ in the present Tense they there spoke] who spoke? There is but one
Paul, or some other Penman that wrote the Epistle, by the dictate of the
Spirit, and he speaks of believers already come to mount Zion, etc. and to the
Spirits of just men made perfect, before he wrote the Epistle: The word for [
made perfect] in the Greek (...).
is a Participle of the Preter Tense, or time past (not of the present, nor did
I say it was of the future) only what was a Truth then, is now a Truth, that
Saints living in their bodies, in imperfection of holiness, have relation to,
and communion (as has been showed) with Saints living out of their bodies, i.
e. the spirits of just men made perfect.

A third exception R. F. has against the simile I used, [ sin is as the wild
fig tree thou says, rooted in the joints of a stone wall, and when the wall is
taken down, the stones cast asunder, body and soul separated, then is sin (thou
says) plucked up by the roots, as the roots of the fig tree not before.]

Rep. This illustration (of a light-some ancient writer Epiphanius.
) seems to dazzle R. F. till he staggers again, and swaggers twice or thrice
against me for mentioning it. Once he chewed upon it before Page 13.
(out of its place) and tells me, thou have no proof for thy saying but thy
policy, and that is contrary to Scripture, Psalm. 37. 37, 38. Mark the perfect
man, etc. for the end of that man is peace. But the wicked shall be cut off,
and the transgressors shall be destroyed together at their end, as he reads
them; but according to the right reading, viz. [But the transgressors shall be
destroyed together, the end of the wicked shall be out off] nothing will be
found in these two verses, contrary to, or differing from what I held out by
that simile; for we have marked the end, or death of many perfect or sincere
Saints mentioned before, and it was found to be peace, their warsare then being
at a full period when they dyed: as while they lived they had perfect peace with
God by their perfect justification in Christ: so at their death they had a full
harvest and reward of peace; such shall be the end of every upright soul,
Isaiah 57. 2. He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, each
one (while he lived) walking in his uprightness. This perfection of integrity
and sincerity they have, who have respect to all Gods commandments, though no
absolute conformity Sin continues in Saints: Saints continue not in sin.
to them: nor do they continue in sin, though sin continues in them till
death. As for the wicked it is not so with them; in life, they continue in the
state, love and practice, and under the power of sin: and when they dye, their
end and reward is to dye the second death, with the first, both the wages of
sin. Twice afterward Page 16.
does R. F. let fly against me, for the above mentioned simile [ Thou subtle
Serpent, and Scotch Politician, how have thou wrested the Scripture? and [ By
this thou have manifested thy Scottish policy, and Antichristian deceitful
spirit, and to be one that would uphold the kingdom of the Devil in people, and
so art an enemy to Christ, and his work.]

Rep. To all which I say no more, but the Lord rebuke this reviling Spirit in
R. F. my work is not to attend his ink-horn terms, but what he pretends to
from Scripture against the continuance of sin in the Saints during their abode
in these vile bodies. Page 16.
The Apostle says, that the word of the Lord is quick and powerful, (so is not
the letter of the Scripture) to divide asunder soul and spirit, joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4.
12. Here Soul and Spirit is divided by the living word, and the ground of sin
shaken at the roots, and rooted out of such, before their souls and bodies part
asunder.

Rep. If I should deal with him, at the weapon which he uses against me, it
were enough to ask, But does the Apostle indeed say expressly [ the living word
is quick and powerful] or find thou these words [ the ground of sin shaken,
and rooted out of such before their souls and bodies part asunder] in that
Scripture? and tell him he belieth the Apostle, etc. but I have not so learned
Christ. Better language there is, and a surer way of arguing then barely to
word it: the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but spiritual and mighty
through God, to cast down strong holds, Mis-interpretation, and mis-application
of Scripture is a strong hold for error and delusion. I shall first discover
the true and genuine sense of that Scripture, agreeable to the scope, and then
R. F. his mis-application, and false inference from thence.

1. The right and genuine interpretation is to be drawn Heb. 4. 12. cleared in
its genuine sense.
from the context, as high as Chap. 1. on-wards. By the word of God, Heb. 4.
12. is meant his word spoken, and his word written, and spoken according to
what is written, Chap. 1. ver. 1, 2. God in these last days has spoken to us
by his Son, while he was upon earth. What word was spoken? Chap. 2. 2, 3. That
which concerned great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the
Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him. And Chap. 3. 7. the
word written is quoted out of Psalm 95. wherefore as the holy Ghost says, To
day if ye will hear his voice. Withal, Chap. 4. 2. it is clear, that the word
preached, according to what Christ preached, and to what the holy Ghost has
written of Christ, is the same with that he mentions ver. 12. For (says the
Apostle) unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them (in the
wilderness, and in David's time) but the word preached did not profit them, etc.
This is no other then the declarative word of God, which declaration made by
Christ, and by his Spirit in the Scripture, and by preachers from, and
according to the Scripture, is,

First, quick or lively, no dead letter, though the Penmen, (...).
or many preachers thereof be dead long since; and though many that heard the
Gospel heretofore be now dead, yet it has as much life in it self as ever.

Secondly, it is powerful, of constant efficacy and operation, even to the
ransacking of consciences, searching of hearts, and to the critical discovery
of thoughts and intents of the heart; it is proved to be so, ver. 13. because
God, By the context
whose word it is, is omniscient, has all things before him with the face
upward; and therefore by the Scriptures, and by his Ministers, as by his Son,
by whom (in these last days) he spoke first, he can, and does discover, and lay
open the hearts of all men, etc. Of all men, I say, where the Gospel comes, i.
e. of those that believe not, as of those that believe: for that is the scope
of the 12. ver. as by its immediate connection and scope.
with ver. 11. appears; Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest, lest
any man fall after the same example of unbelief: For the word of God is lively
in its effects, etc. It is, and will be a swift witness against unbelievers,
and quick to their condemnation, a favor of death unto death in them that
perish; as it is, and will be a swift witness for believers, and quick to their
consolation, a favor of life unto life, in them that are saved.

To understand by [ the word of God] here, Christ's person, is not suitable to
the context from the beginning of the Epistle, Heb 4 12, and 13. compared and
vindicated from 1. indirect glosses.
nor to the scope* and this sense, being brought to set aside the Scripture,
and the preaching upon it, and from it, is therefore to be suspected and waved:
Others, who seem not to deny the authority of the holy Scriptures, yet would
have it meant of Christ, for this reason, because the [ word of God, ver. 12.
is in the 13. ver. described as a person, [ in his sight] and [the eyes of him
with whom we have to do.] Now this is but their mistake, for albeit Christ in
person is the living word, yet it is the Apostles scope to gain honor to him,
by gaining honor to the declarative word, which (being Christ's word, spoken by
him, written by the inspiration of his Spirit, and preached accordingly) is
therefore quick and lively, powerful and piercing, because it is his word: and
the words of the 13. ver. are not a description of Christ's person [as he is the
living word] nor of the declarative word spoken, written, preached, but of God
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; who being the living God, his declarative word
is like himself, and from the knowledge of his nature, we may know what his
word is. If God has an all-seeing eye, his word has an all-searching power.
He puts not one but two edges upon this sword of his Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. and
makes it sharp and piercing for conversion, or conviction at least, and for
such ends as he has intended, by his word and the ministry of it, to effect
and work out; therefore the words of ver. 13. [ his] and [ him with whom] must
be referred to God, ver. 12. (distinguished into Father Son, and Spirit) i. e.
to all three, or any of the three. Let sinners, in whom sin reigns, and Saints,
in whom sin remains, look to it, for God by his Scripture-word is able to find
them out, even them that pretend to present perfection, and have it not, for
whom these words speak nothing at all. Should we take [God ver. 12.] not only
at large, and personally for any of the three, but strictly for Christ's person;
yet we must take [ the word] to be, as I have said, the word declarative, and
read it thus, The word of Christ is quick or lively, etc. We cannot read it out
of the Greek, [the word-Christ] nor [the living word is lively,] nor [the
living word is powerful,] but as it is read in our new Translation, [The word of
God is quick and powerful,] or as in (...).
the Geneva Translation, [The word of God is lively and mighty in operation,]
that is (as their Note is) The Doctrine of God is so and so, has lively and
mighty effects; why? because it is Gods Doctrine, Gods Word, Gods Scripture; if
it be but his Letter, or outward ministry, it is Christ's two-edged sword,
which serves unto his design, of searching hearts, of comforting the believer,
of cutting off and excluding the unbeliever from rest. But this place of
Scripture will not serve R. F. his design hitherto.

Here the ground of sin, is by the living word shaken at the roots, and rooted
out of such, before their bodies and souls part asunder.

Rep. 1. Granting, it is divine power that makes efficacious Mis-application.
the divine truths of the Scripture, and that the Spirit does by conviction
shake a sinner at the very heart-root, and by conversion shake, yea kill sin at
the roots, (for sound conversion is more then lopping of branches, or moral
restraints, the best fruits of Quakerism) yet is not all sin at first
conversion, nor all the life time, extirpated or plucked up absolutely, totally,
and as perfectly as at death: and if R. F. proves not this from the place (as
he does not, but only say it) he had better never have quoted it. Nay, he dare
not affirm it in plain words but obscure: [ The ground of sin, etc.] What makes
he the ground of sin? If he means the subject where sin dwells, and is
rooted; what is that subject but the faculties of the Soul, Mind, Will, and
Affections, Conscience, etc? Now these are shaken, I confess, but not rooted
out; for neither Law nor Gospel, the word of Terror, or Grace and Peace, nor
the Power and Grace of the Word, does abolish or destroy the faculties and
being of the soul. If he means by [Ground of sin] the cause of sin; it must
either be guilt of sin, or the original stain and filth: if the guilt, it is
granted that sin is abolished, and there is no ground or cause, why a Believer
justified, and discharged from guilt and curse, by the imputation of Christ's
obedience, should be condemned, Romans 8 1, 33, 34. and the abolishing of guilt,
is the cause and reason why the inherent roots of sin are shaken and mortified,
in their regency or reigning power, for the present, and why they shall be
rooted out, as to residency and inherency, at the last; yea, why no justified
believer should allow the least sin, that yet remains in him. If by [ ground
of sin] he means the original stain and filth, it is the same with the roots
of sin; and then he proves nothing but idem per idem, the same thing by the
same, namely, that the roots of sin are shaken at the roots, and rooted out
when they are rooted out: but the question is, when are they perfectly, and in
all degrees rooted out? I have said, and proved it from Scripture, it is not
till the parting of Soul and Body.

The truth then, and the illustration by the simile of the fig tree stands firm
and good, for ought that R. F. has objected to the contrary, yet we must hear
him Page 16.
out; [ It is Christ's work to take away sin here, and to sanctify by his
Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 11. 1 John 3. 5.

Rep. We know that he was manifest to take away sin, in 1 Cor. 6. 11. and 1
John 3 5. compared, cleared, and vindicated.
and from us; as in him is no sin, according to that in John, and that of Paul
to the Corinthians, expressing two ways whereby he takes away sin; by the way
of justification, from defiling guilt and damning curse; this is perfectly done
here, as to Gods act of reckoning and account, though as to manifestation in
us, to us, and concerning us, it comes by degrees, and not till the day of
Judgment, will all the world know who are now Gods justified ones. By the way
of Sanctification, he takes away the dominion of sin in the very root; and the
strength of the roots of filth is mortified here in some Saints more, in some
less, as he pleases, who puts forth the power: but in none are the roots of
every sin, nor of any sin, wholly, perfectly plucked up, till bodily death. I am
for purity and holiness here, in heart and life; but I am for purity of the
Scriptures also, according to their pure sense.

What says the Scripture, which R. F. next calls forth? As he that has
called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 15. 2
Pet. 1. 15. vindicated.


Rep. This is a command of, and exhortation to what should be* viz. imitation
of Gods holy nature and will, as long as we converse upon earth, in all manner
of conversation. Let holiness not only be mixed with all you do in all your
relations, and actions, but let it reign and bear sway in your whole life; and
be growing up to perfect holiness in Gods fear, having promises, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
to encourage, quicken and convey, as well as precepts to oblige and bind us
unto holiness. But thou denyest the holy call also, as well as the holy
conversation, that pleads for sin, to act, and press down, and make you all
your life time to sigh it out, and under it groan.

Rep. 1. I plead against no commands nor means of holiness; through grace I
have obeyed Gods call to universal holiness, in a Gospel Covenant.

2 It is one thing to plead for the truth, viz. that by Gods wise and righteous
ordering of our condition here, sin is left dwelling, acting, and stirring in
us; and another thing to plead for sin, which must be granted from his own
words we do not, if all our life time we sigh it out, and groan under it: Oh,
that we could do it more sincerely, and sensibly with the Apostle! Romans 7. 24.

Section 30.
TO what I noted of one, answering to the holy Ghosts question, Who can say his
heart is clean? I can, and see all your hearts unclean, (because there wanted
the marginal reference to the particular page) R. F. Page 16, 17.
shifts off answering, or taking off so foul a contradiction with railing at my
supposed policy and serpentine subtilty, and particular lies; not one piece
whereof I am conscious, in this matter. What if the words [I can etc.] are not
so set down there, to wit, page 1. This was the reference to the second charge
against that book (entitled, A short answer to seven Priests) which the author
thereof arrogantly calls The word of the Lord; not to the first charge, which
had only a reference to that Book, not to the Page, as may at first view
appear to any heedful Reader. See contradictions of the Quakers page 13.
That arrogant contradiction to the holy Ghosts question (which implies a
strong negative) will be found in another Page, by any that meet with the Short
answer etc. before mentioned, which I had to peruse in Scotland, but cannot
here obtain it, for the Readers direction and satisfaction. The rejoicing
testimony of my conscience suffices me for the present, that not in fleshly
wisdom, but in godly simplicity I drew up this with other collections; and I
hope it will cause the unprejudiced Reader to exercise his candor and charity
toward me, if he does but observe R. F. his reservedness [ they are not so set
down there] not denying but they may be found in an after page; and his
ungrounded inference, as false, as groundless, [ therefore thy policy has
manifested subtlety, etc.] for as neither I intended, nor used deceit. so it
had been poor policy to mis-guide him, whom I purposed to set right in his way.
But (says R. F.) all thy pleading is against purity.

Rep. How appears it? I discovered indeed a double contradiction, and a triple
arrogance, in him that proclaimed No heart perfectly pure from sin. Prove. 20 9.
and Matthew. 5. 8. compared, cleared, and vindicated.
his cleanness from all sin and challenged the knowledge of other men's hearts,
etc. as I specified it in my Book: but this is a threadbare cavil; does R. F.
produce any new Scripture for absolute purity and perfection? yes, Christ has
said, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Matthew. 5. 8. then
there was and are pure in heart, as Christ said.

Rep. If this man would have added, [and as Christ meant] we might soon agree.
Albeit Christ was greater then Solomon, yet he never spoke a word, nor that
word in particular to cross what Solomon said from the holy Ghost, who is
equal, and of the same essential mind and will with Christ. What says the
holy Ghost by Solomon? consult the place, Prove. 20. 9. Who can say I have made
my heart clean? I am pure from my sin? the sense of this place is, there is
none could ever say it; none, in any age, before, or in Solomon's time: before
or in Christ's time, or since: none can now say it truly? It Is a question that
will silence all the world, all the Churches; a question that will hold
un-answered till every Saints dying day, and in this last age till the
resurrection day. Shall we believe R. F. and take it upon his word, with his
own meaning; that is thus, There was and are pure in heart, as Christ said, and
as Solomon meant it? this were not to reconcile seeming differences of
Scripture among our selves, but to set Christ and Solomon at variance between
themselves. What then? will any help R. F. with an evasion? Solomon does not
say, God gives not pure hearts, but, Who can say, I have made my heart clean?
this will not serve his turn; for it follows; and I am pure from my sin? i.
e. Who can say that either he has cleansed his own heart, or that he is pure
from his sin? which way soever he comes by it; and if it be true and perfect
purity he must come honestly and purely to it, or even in that respect he is
impure, and far from truth of purity. I would to God, the generation of Quakers
would better attend this question: Art thou pure and perfect? how came thou
by it? Is it not a dream? a delusion? may not a foul and filthy heart be
transformed into a fancy of pure perfection, and perfect purity, as well as a
black devil be transformed into an Angel of light? Solomon how ever must be
understood, as denying absolute purity in any man: and Christ, when he
asserteth Blessedness to the pure in heart, intends not to nourish any in a
conceit of their present perfect seize, but to encourage them who were
sincere, and have truth of holiness set into their hearts, and the purpose of
their hearts with the Gospel endeavors of their lives, set upon purity: for
from the context Ver. 1. they were his disciples he spoke unto, whom Ver. 3.
(compared with Luke 6. 20.) he pronounced poor in Spirit: Blessed are ye poor;
not yet enriched with all perfections, but sensible of their spiritual wants:
and Ver. 4. they are mourners under sin, and after more of God and Christ: Ver.
6. they are hungring and thirsting after righteousness, not yet filled; but
blessed in their present state of hunger and thirst, and in their hopes (by
that promise) of being filled. These are the pure in heart whom Christ
pronounces blessedness upon, who are poor mourning souls, hungring and
thirsting after more purity; in the mean time not Pharisaical and hypocritical
in their profession of holiness, as were others. And had these been pure in
heart in R. F. his sense, they had then enjoyed the perfect beatifical vision
of God, which they have but a promise of: for they that are sincere in holiness
have here some communion with God, and one day and to all eternity they shall
enjoy him* and his presence in fullness of that holiness and joy, whereof now
they have but the tastes and first fruits. He that boasts of more, has
neither (as I said in my former piece) pure lip nor pen for the least degree
(how much more larger measures?) of purity, makes a soul sensible of continual
impurities intermixed therewith.

R. F. Page 17.
returns to this, That is thy own condition.

Rep. I acknowledge it.

Again, And so thou judge others by thy continual impurities, and therefore
thy judgment must needs be false, and not true.

Rep. I spoke not my condition only (who may more deservedly be called, less
then the least of all Saints, then Paul styled himself) but the condition of
every one truly sanctified, and yet living upon the earth. Yet more,

And so thou denyest their doctrine, who said, Seeing ye have purified your
souls (have purified in the present Tense) in obeying the truth through the
Spirit; see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently: but thou art
against a pure heart, and so against the Scripture, 1 Pet. 1. 22. 1 Pet. 1. 22.
vindicated.


Rep. 1. If the Printer mistook not the [ present tense] for the preter tense,
R. F. does grossly apprehend that to be the present [have purified] which in
English, and Greek (...).
is expressly the Praeter, or time past.

2. Were the Apostles words in the present tense [ ye do purifie] it would make
(in show and form of words) more against R. F. then for him: but the truth is,
the word in Peter being a Participle of the time past, and in the Active voice,
it shows the work of purifying themselves, through the Spirit, was not so done,
but that yet it was in doing. And as their habits of purity were not perfect,
so they were far from perfection in the act, but have need of stirring up (as 2
Pet. 3. 1.) fervently to exert and put forth their love, and purity according
to their principles: for the growth of both which, viz. act and habit of grace,
he exhorts, and exciteth them chap. 2. 2. to desire, as new born babes (far
from highest perfection) the sincere milk of the word, and Chap. 5. 10. he
prays, that after they have suffered a while, the God of all grace would make
them perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle them.

3. I find R. F. perfect in nothing that savors of a Gospel purity, nor
growing in any thing, but his perverse abuse of Scripture: But I shall pray for
him and others, that they may be awakened out of their dream of Perfection, may
see their present pollutions, and be ashamed of their Gospelcontradictions;
till then, they will not understand what Purity is, nor whereof they affirm.

Section 31.
TO the Quere of one of them, Did ever Paul deny perfection? I asked what he or
others thought of that in Phil. 3. 12. Not as though I had already attained, or
were already perfect: which R. F. Page 17.
undertakes to resolve, He is so far from denying it, that he pressed hard
after it.

Rep. Is this an answer, or an evasion? Denial of such a How perfection may be
denied, how not.
perfection as Paul meant, ver. 12. is twofold; either that it is here
attained, or, that here we must press after it: Although neither he nor we deny
it in the latter sense, yet in the former, expressly he does for his own part;
and such as come short of him, may well and truly deny it. And our work in this
life being to press after it, does sufficiently imply, it is not here to be
attained.

But says R. F. (to mar, not mend his own case) He said to such as had
attained it, press others on after it, and they did, Heb. 6. 1.

Rep. 1. Let not people take these men's words for infallible oracles, but
search the Scriptures, and find, if they can, where Paul wrote to any such,
Churches or Saints, as had fully attained; and till they find it, suspect R.
F. for a deceiver, and when they find it not, conclude him a false teacher.

2. Whereas the Apostle had set before the Philippians Phil. 3. 11. and 15.
compared, vindicated.
and us, his own example, I press toward the mark, etc. In the next ver. 15. he
adds his exhortation, Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded:
where Paul either puts in himself with the many perfect, or not; if not, but
that he is to be understood, as speaking to them that thought themselves
perfect, he would then take them off from the conceit of perfect seize,
and have them so minded as he was; that is, as ver. 14. to press toward the
White of perfection, as he did. If he joins himself with the many perfect, then
must the word [perfect] in the 15. ver. be taken otherwise then in ver. 12. For
there he had denied himself to be already perfect; and if ver. 15. he should
say he were perfect in that sense, wherein he had denied his perfection, he
should be led (by the Spirit of truth) into a contradiction, which were
blasphemy to imagine: let all the Quakers in earth and hell be first found
liars, then one lie be found in the Scriptures, or the penmen of them, as
such. The many perfect therefore must be taken (when Paul was one of them, not
yet without imperfections) for such, as by Paul's and the Apostles ministry,
and with Paul, through the Spirits teaching and working, were grown up to a
farther pitch and degree of holiness then some other sincere Christians, who
were to press on themselves, as well as to press others on, after the highest
degrees of grace attainable: which is the more clear by ver. 16. Nevertheless,
whereto we have attained, let us walk by the same rule: [ whereto] i. e. to
what degree (suppose the fourth or fifth Phil 3. 16. opened.
stair, though not at the top) we have attained, let us [ walk] which implies,
they are not at the end of their journey.

3. What have we in Heb. 6. 1. but the same truth? Let us Heb. 6. 1. vindicated.
go on unto perfection. He that brings half an eye in his head to that text,
will collect no more but this, That Paul, or the Penman of that Epistle, is
traveling on toward perfection, and putting on his companions in the way; but
neither he, nor the Hebrews he writes unto, are at their journeys end. Is the
Post therefore at York, Berwick, or Edinburgh, because he is footing or riding
thither? He that is half way up the hill, calls upon others to accompany him,
and go on-wards and up-wards yet more and more, he is not therefore at the top
of the hill.

But says R. F. such obtained, as so pressed after it, Heb. 12. 22, 23.

Rep. But how? They, the Hebrews, obtained communion with the perfect, while
they pressed after them: and when did the just men (whom they pressed after)
attain a full perfection of holiness? when their spirits and bodies parted, not
before, as has been showed in Section 29. And as for the Saints he wrote to,
they were yet in a conflicting condition, striving against sin, ver. 4. of that
12. Chap. and not so diligent in their way and work, but they had need of
spurs, Chap. 6. Yea, Chap. 5. so dull of hearing, ver. 11. and such
non-proficients, ver. 12. that they had need of an alarm, of a rod, or of a
ferula, Chap. 12. 6, etc.

Another dart yet will R. F. throw against this truth, Paul obtained it, and
preached wisdom among them that are perfect.

Rep. 1. But he cannot tell us at what stage of his life he attained it. He
obtained perfection of Justification indeed betimes, and so does every believer
at his first believing; but he cannot show us when he attained to the
perfection of Sanctification till his death. He had it not when he wrote to the
Romans (as was made to appear Section 20. and more may be said Section 35.)
which Epistle was written after that to the Corinthians. He had it not when he
wrote to the Philippians (Chap. 3. 12.) which Epistle was written after that to
the Romans, as might be demonstrated if it were needful. He had it not when he
wrote to the Hebrews (supposing, as we may most probably, it was his Epistle)
consult again, Heb. 6. 1. which Epistle was written after that to the
Philippians. If Paul had it before his death, it was when, a little before his
departure and martyrdom, he wrote his second Epistle to Timothy, (the last of
all his Epistles) when he tells him, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7. I am now ready to be
offered, etc. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith: yet even then, he puts in himself with the weaker Christians,
Chap. 2. 12, 13. who might fall into an act of Christ-denial, or a fit of
unbelief; [If we deny him -- If we believe not] and even then, he sends for
Books and Parchments, Chap. 4. 13. He was no perfectist therefore lifted up
here above a possibility of sinning, or above the use of means for preserving
and perfecting the understanding, memory, affections, etc. to the very last
period of his course.

2. It is true, he preached wisdom among them that were perfect, 1 Cor. 26, 7.
but this is not truly alleged by R. F. 1 Cor. 2. 6. vindicated.
for perfection in the highest degree; for Paul understands with sincere
Saints, such also as were grown Christians, taller by head and shoulders then
their Brethren, in the faith and fellowship of the Gospel; comparatively
perfect, in respect of weaklings and babes in Christ: they were of more able
understanding and riper capacity in spiritual mysteries, and as the Apostle
describes them, Heb. 5. 14. who are of full age, can digest strong meat, and by
reason of use have their wits exercised to discern both good and evil; yet not
perfect in all degrees, but, at most, Christians of a higher form then their
fellows. R. F. Page 17. 2 Cor 13. 11. vindicated.
yet alleges, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally brethren, farewell, be perfect, as if the
Apostles exhortation did argue, they had it already; or as if I denied the
exhortation to perfection, which is given to none, but such as are in some
degree imperfect. The word which the Apostle there *uses, has reference to
their Schisms and (...).
Divisions, and intends no more then if he had said, Make up your Rents, and
reform your ragged Communion and tattered Conversation. Whether he or I do
contradict the Scripture, cross the Apostles Doctrine, and therefore to be
holden accursed, (as he charge it upon me) must appear by the premises,
proofs, and demonstrations from the Scripture, till the Lord comes with ten
thousands of his Saints, to the full conviction of gainsayers, Jude v. 14, 15.

Section 32.
I Had noted how they plead for present attained perfection much from that
Scripture, 1 John 4. 17. As he is, so ^ John 4. 17. vindicated.
are we in this world. This R. F. says nothing to in its place, nor can he
justly hold up any plea from hence for that which the Apostle intends not by
the words, or against the exposition I gave of them, which was this, That the
Apostle speaks only of the sincerity of our love, manifested like to Christ's,
in a single, plain, sound-hearted way, that we may have boldness in the day of
judgment. [As] notes not here equality, but quality and likeness, (as Matthew.
5. 48. and often in Scripture.) It is arrogance to think, and contradiction to
say, that, as Christ was without sin, so are we in this world; when we speak of
Sanctification, which is that under debate. Afterward Page 18.
he calls my exposition wresting and twisting, and by windy words, of no force,
he would maintain the corrupt gloss, of being without sin as Christ was, as may
appear in the following Section.

Section 33.
HAving discovered G. Fox his express Negative answer to the Question, Have ye
no sin? No, contrary to 1 John 1. 8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, etc. R. F. Page 17.
stands up here in his fellows defense, and does not answer to the place of
John which I quoted in the first Chapter, but tells me, If his answer was No,
it was not contrary to such as were in the eternal life, and did abide in
Christ, but he (G. Fox) is in the life of truth, and abides in Christ, and
therefore his answer did not contradict the Scripture in the third Chap. ver. 6.

Rep. 1. If G. Fox his [ No] contradicted but one place of Scripture, it
contradicts the whole Scripture; for Gods truth is uniform, and a sweet
harmony there is of every string; break one link of the chain, you break the
chain.

2. To say [ No] to such a Question, Have ye no sin? is far from agreeing with
1 John 3. 6. in its true meaning. 1 John 3 6. vindicated. See Sect. 14.


First, The Apostle says not, whosoever abides in Christ has no sin in him:
for that he (according as the Scripture elsewhere, 2 Cor. 5. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 22.)
only asserteth of Christ (as God, and God-man) ver. 5. And in him is no sin,
to distinguish him from Saints that (while here) have sin in them; and to prove
him to be fit and able to take away sin.

Secondly, As there are no such words, so it is not the Apostles scope to hold
out R. F. his Doctrine of present Perfection, but to discover all those who
abide in Christ to be such as do not abide in sin; and all those who abide in
sin, to be such as have not seen him nor known him.

Thirdly, So far as they stick to Christ (who are in him) and suck virtue from
him, they sin not; yet at that time when they abide in Christ, sin dwells in
them, not in the old regency and power, but as a troublesome in-mate, which they
would gladly be quite rid of, from the first moment of conversion (if the Lord
so pleased) but it is there, and remains for their exercise, till the combat
of flesh and spirit be at an end; viz. at the end of our days.

Section 34.
THe Reader may observe, that R. F. answers nothing to this Section, wherein,
having showed how they cry out against all that teach, Sin is not perfectly
mortified in this life, to be upholders of the Devils kingdom: I asked, Were
Paul, John, and the Apostles, upholders of the Devils kingdom? And, does the
Scripture uphold the Devils kingdom, when it positively asserteth there is sin
in every good man while he is doing good? according to that Eccles. 7. 20.
Eccles. 7. 20.
There is not a just man upon earth that does good, and sins not. A
Scripture that stands as an impregnable fort un-assaulted by the enemy, and
impossible ever to be taken or battered down, although this generation of
Perfectists (rank and file the same with them spoken of Prove. 30. 12.) should
night and day lay siege to it, and shoot all their Granado's against it. The
new gloss Lip of truth opened, p. 18.
of Tho. Lawson is but a flash of gunpowder without bullet, it will not
batter; It Is true (says he) there is not a just man upon earth, etc. for all
that dwell on earth worship the beast, Rev. 13. 8. but John saw 144000.
redeemed from the earth: whereas the material earth is understood by Solomon,
the mystical earth is meant by John* set in opposition to the mystical heaven,
or the true Church, ver. 6. men redeemed from earthly ways of worship,
perfectly justified before God, sincere in their sanctification and
reformation, and growing up, indeed, unto perfect holiness in Gods fear; yet
not one of them (except in Gods account) without their inherent failings,
adherent blemishes, and conflicts from their in-dwelling concupiscence, or
unregenerate part.

(9. Head of Contradiction to Scripture.) Concerning Christian Warfare.
Section 35.
HAving noted their denial of Saints to be always in the Warfare, R. F. page 18.
returns me his justification of this Doctrine; If they do, they deny not the
Scripture, but agree with it. How makes he it out? Why, Such as have overcome
are more then conquerors.

Rep. This is a truth in some sense, but proves not that Saints in this life
not out of their warfare.
Saints are past the warfare. Every Christian is an overcomer as well as a
warrior; but how? when, and in what measure?

1. In Christ his Head and Captain he has overcome, 1 Cor. 15. 57.

2. When shall he have a perfect conquest over inherent corruption? when the
warfare is at an end; when is that? when his wayfare is at an end, not before.

3. In what measure is it wrought here? In some more, in some less (as to the
conquest of Sanctification, of which is the Question) in none absolutely and
totally. A victory the Saint may have to day, in some particular combat, a
foil to morrow. Shameful foils some of these men have had, who have thought
themselves at an end of their warfare, if half that which is reported be true.
That of Atkinson at Norwich, was true enough, one who cried up Perfection as
loud as his fellows, but became as unstable as water, and was easily captivated
to the act of Fornication. I list not to rake in such kennels, but I abhor
boasting before the final victory. That practice which violateth the seventh
Commandment, is as far from perfection, as that Doctrine which contradicts
the seventh Chapter to the Romans 23.

R. F. tells me, Thou brings that of Paul in the warfare; but thou brings not
his after experience, where he says, The law of the spirit of life in Christ,
has made me free, Romans 8.

Rep. I flatly deny that Paul's experience, Romans 8. 2. was Romans 8. 2. vindicated.
an after-experience, to what he speaks of himself, and regenerate persons,
Chap. 7. 14. to the end, as his, and their present state; which was no other
then what he was in, Chap. 8. and so to the end of the Epistle. For Chap. 8.
and ver. 2. is brought in as a consolation under the combat. The words are
these to the full; For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made
me free from the Law of sin and death. What is that Law of the Spirit of life
in Christ Jesus? but the power and authority of spiritual endless life in him;
and particularly, that habitual frame of holiness in Christ's humane nature,
which from birth and conception he had; and which (being made meritorious by
his Divine person, in which the humanity subsisteth) is imputed to Paul, and
every true Believer; by reason of which imputation, he is made free from the
law of sin and death. What is that Law of sin? The condemning power of sin (yet
inherent and permanent:) As if Paul should have said, If sin that wars and
fights in me, has no power to condemn me, then there is no condemnation to me;
(the sentence, that is cut off, and where no sentence passes, there is no
execution according to Law.) But sin has no Law, no power to condemn me; for
the Law of grace and holiness in Christ's own flesh, condemned sin there, kept
off filth from him, and condemned all my guilt charged upon him; so as sin is
put out of office, and cannot so much as serve a Writ of condemnation upon me:
nor can sin have a commanding power over me (while it dwells in me) seeing
the Spirit which dwells in Christ, brings life and power from him, to quicken
holiness and kill sin in me; and that grace which reigns in Christ, reigns
in me, while sin is rebelling. And concerning the Law of death, the sting of
death, which is sin, being taken away by removal of guilt, bodily death can do
me no hurt; sin may kill and pull down this earthly tabernacle, it shall never
slay my soul; I am already free from the sentence of the second death, it shall
never have power over me, though my present, as bypast sin deserves it, yet
Christ has freed me from it. Thus Paul speaks his own and the Saints victories
with their combats, at one and the same time; while they are warring, they are
Romans 8. 37. cleared.
conquering, and have more then earthly conquerors ever attained to. How is
that? for R. F. cannot conceive there can be any warfare continued, where there
is more then a conquest already gotten. To clear this, let us take all the
Apostles words before us, ver. 37. in all these things we are more then
conquerors through him that loved us. He does not say, after all these things,
but in them, during the warfare, we have the better by many degrees; or as the
* word (...)
signifies, we have an overplus of conquest. It is enough for men after
worldly encounters, to go out conquerors at the end of their Battles; but as we
conquer while we fight, so we are sure of the victory ( i. e. have sure grounds
of expecting the last victory) when we strike the first stroke; which
conquerors of the world are not assured of. To sense we may seem to be
overcome, between times, but to faith the victory is sure on our side. This is
a Paradox to R. F. but let him know, we are not beaten out of the field (by all
his and other oppositions) but keep our ground, what is that? Gods love to us in
Christ, which is the cause of the beginning and end of the conquest. It is
that, and not inherent grace, or our love to Christ, only, or chiefly, which
strengthens us to combat and conquer also: Our grace is weak, and gives back
many times, but Christ our Captain never starteth, and the love of God to us
abides, and union with him who gives the victory holds R. F. had best keep
to that, lest his inherent perfection fail him altogether. It is granted by R.
F. according to 1 John 4. 4. That greater 1 John 4. 4. vind^cated.
is he that is in the Saints, then he that is in the world; which is brought in
by the Apostle as another ground of their present victory over the seducing
antichristian part of the world the strength is not ours, but the Lords,
whereby we go on conquering, and to conquer; and are enabled to keep up our
warfare, and assured we shall have the day, of whole troops of perfect and
imperfect Quakers, because as the word of God abides in them that have
overcome (in the Apostles sense, 1 John at 14.) so it does not abide in them,
who say they have no sin abiding in them, and will not be known to abide in the
warfare: such were either never in it, or are run from their colors. Let R. F.
Page 18.
prate or print what he will; [ carnally minded, as thou art] and speaking of
his conquests, [ which thou art ignorant of and know not that plead for sin,
and so for the devil, therefore his servant thou art, expect his reward for
doing his work] none of these fiery darts shall be able to separate me from the
love of God which is in Christ Jesus, nor from the service of my generation in
this or any other way which the Lord calls me unto.

(10. Head of Contradiction to Scripture.) Concerning Repentance.
Section 36.
IMet with a question in one of their Books which employed a denial of
Repentance in the godly: viz. what remorse can there be in him that does not
commit sin? now taking remorse, for godly sorrow (as they phrase it) this is
(as I showed) contrary to 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11. where godly sorrow wrought in the
Corinthians (with the effects of it) although they committed not sin, in John's
sense; i. e. they made no trade of it, R. F. bids me take heed, etc. for we
know that the goodness of God loadeth to repentance, Romans 2. 4. Romans 2. 4.
cleared.


Rep. The Apostle there speaks of the unconverted, but the question is about
the Saints. As for the unconverted, Gods goodness (in providential ways) is a
motive and inducement to repentance, but no Physical means, energetical and
operative to give what it leads, or directs unto. We witness, says he
obseurely, the gift from the godness.

Rep. 1. That God gives aim for repentance by his providential goodness (of
which the Apostle speaks) is plain, but that he gives the thing thereby, is
denied, Ver. 5. showing what abuse is made of it by impenitent hearts, and such
who by providence have the Gospel preached unto them. Repentance is not given
to all where Christ is preached.

2. That which I charged, was their disclaiming a godly remorse or sorrow, viz.
in the godly. Remorse, properly Remorse what?
and strictly is the biting, and sting of conscience, by upbraiding guilt;
this, believers are freed from, Heb. 10. 1. and 22. And Francis Howgill (in the
account he gives of his dark condition The inheritance of Jacob, etc. by F.
Howgtll. page 8.
will hardly find a sound Protestant Preacher, who ever told him, [ sin was
taken away by Christ, but the guilt should remain while he lived, and brought
him the Saints conditions, who were in the warfare, to confirm it] for such a
remorse is for them that are unpardoned, and unsanctified, and shall so
continue while they live; and the warfare of justified, sanctified believers,
as such, is only with the sin that deserves guilt, and hell; not with guilt it
self: Because sin is pardoned, and the reigning power removed, the Saints are
to rejoice, and give thanks: but that sin remains, and the roots of all their
old pranks, and wickednesses (now brought to remembrance) are not perfectly
mortified, this is matter of repentance, and godly sorrow all their days.

R. F. tells me I have uttered another lie, in saying, they disclaim godly
sorrow.

Rep. 1. Where was the first lie, or one, to which another was added? Hitherto,
the honest godly conscientious Reader, who is also judicious, I trust, will
find none.

2. That my charge was true, will further thus appear. They that all along
disclaim in-dwelling sin in the godly, (which is the chief matter of their
grief) disclaim Godly How Repentance is decryed.
sorrow; R. F. and others disclaim in-dwelling sin in the godly; what follows
but the truth of my charge? Again, They that cry down the doctrine, and
practice of continual sighing, and groaning under the roots, and remnants of
sin, they disclaim godly sorrow; But R. F. and his associates de-cry the
doctrine and practice of sighing, and groaning all our days, under the burden
of sins remainders, (as Section, 20. was evidenced, and elsewhere) Therefore
they do disclaim godly sorrow. If R. F. his simple hearted Reader say, but we
must believe him, he says, they do not so, and so: I ask then what means he
by godly sorrow? (which I never called remorse, but seeing they used the term,
I called the sorrow of the godly, a godly remorse or sorrow) using the word at
large, for no other but grief in the affection, not for gripes in the
conscience,) and in whom does he not disclaim it? Happily, the simple heart will
say, he means sorrow for sin, as sin, past, and present; past defilements,
present stirrings, and inclinations to sin; Does he so? then he must deny his
doctrine of present perfection true of some Saints, you will say; but then he
disclaimeth godly sorrow in the rest that are already perfect, and free from
the matter of sorrow, as I said above, and so he will put them (if not himself
and some imperfect ones) among the ninety nine that need no Repentance, which
yet is not so with them in reality, but in supposition. If you say, they preach
that men should repent; I ask, how shall the ungodly sorrow after a godly
manner? If they lay the burden upon the ungodly only, and absolve the godly
altogether, they may by that way preach down all godly sorrow, and startle the
wicked with legal convictions, and that which is remorse of conscience, but no
way help toward the pulling down the old man, or building up the new, in the
true Believer.

(11. Head of their Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning the Word, and means of
Grace.
Section 37.
I Had expressly cited C. Atkinsons words, viz. I deny that God did ever, or
will ever reveal himself by any of those things thou call the means of
grace, which were spoken of before in his book, as, reading, hearing, prayer,
etc. contrary to 2 Timothy 3. 15. Romans 10. 17. Luke 11. 13. etc. R. F. in answer
Page 19.
says I would raise a slander, etc. as if they should deny the way and means
that God uses to reveal himself to his people by. How makes he it to appear?
why, Christ is the light, and the way to the Father, and that they own; and he
reveals his secrets by his Spirit.

Rep. In all this confession, here is no acknowledgement Christ and the Spirit
give light and grace by outward means.
of reading, hearing, prayer, etc. That Christ is the light, and light-giver,
has never been denied by me; and that, with his Spirit he is the author and
worker of all grace, who but graceless men will gainsay? We do, with the
Scripture, attribute higher things to God, and Christ, and the Spirit, then to
be the means of grace; but R. F. will not ascribe so much to the Scriptures,
read, heard, sung, prayed upon ( i. e. according to the rules, and patterns of
prayer there set down) to be so much as outward means of grace; we can have no
such outward ingenuity from him: But what says he? The Scriptures are not
Christ, nor the Spirit.

Rep. What if they be not, they are Christ's word, and the word of the Spirit,
as has been showed; and what the Scripture says, Christ says, and the holy
Ghost also the same; He therefore that rejects the Scripture, and its several
exercises from being the means of grace, rejects Christ and his Spirit also.
But the Spirit he says, teaches us how to pray, and profit. Gal. 4. 6. 1 Cor.
12. 7. etc. and this does not contradict the Scriptures.

Rep. No, for the Spirit of grace, and the outward means agree very well, yet
this is not a yielding them to be the means [ by which] Christ and the Spirit
reveals their secrets, and convey grace. It is one thing for the Spirit to
teach how to pray, and read, another thing for the Spirit to work by reading,
praying etc we grant the former, but he grants not the latter (as he ought)
that I can find. Yes, may some say, what think you of that which follows? we
know that faith is given by the ministry of Christ in the Spirit.

Rep. But speak plainly, is it given by reading and hearing the Scriptures
opened and preached? as, 2 Timothy 3. 15. Romans 10. 17. hold it forth; And we know
that God gives us his holy Spirit.

Rep. But does he give it in a way of preaching and prayer? as Act. 10. 44. and
Luke 11. 13. bear testimony. As soon as Paul is converted, is he not at Prayer,
and had he not the fillings of the Spirit given him in that way, as by Ananias
putting his hands upon him? Act. 9. 11. 17. And the wisdom, says R. F. which
is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated;
and the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make peace, James
3. 17, 18. for which we praise God.

Rep. 1. But does he give this wisdom by asking? as says James. 1. 6. If any
lack wisdom, let him ask it of God; is not prayer a means of wisdom?

2. I wish we could find the wisdom James describes in R. F. As yet I discern
not any seeds of it sown in his books, one or other.

3. Let him beware of taking Gods name in vain, by praising him legibly, in
print, for that which he has not printed in his heart, nor holds forth
visibly in practice. Why, but he adds, we own reading, hearing, prayer, and
the teachings of God according to his promises.

Rep. I wish he does well understand the promises of Means of grace have a
promise of blessing annexed.
God. Gods promises are made of a blessing upon such means, as reading, hearing
and prayer, as well as of gracious abilities to read, hear and pray with,
Isaiah 55. 3. He that hears, and inclines his ear, shall live, 1 Timothy 4. 13.
16. If Timothy attend to reading, meditation, preaching to others watching
himself, In doing this he shall save himself, and those that hear him. To
prayer is promised salvation, Romans 10. 13. Christ's presence, Matthew. 18. 20.
Returns and answers, Matthew. 7. 7. To preaching Christ's presence, assistance,
and blessing, Matthew. 28. 20. To the Saints conditions (which C. Atkinson
rejected with the ordinances) all blessed success, Romans 8. 28. They shall look
unto him, and run to him, and their faces shall not be ashamed. Psalm. 34. 5.
why so? Ver 6. This poor man cried and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of
all his troubles; and therefore we may from others experiences, together with
our own, have hope, Rom 5. 4. And Hope, in and by a promise, an experimental
promise and a promised experience, makes not ashamed. If therefore R. F. does
own these means, and the teachings of God according to Gods promises, he must
own them otherwise then C. Atkinson, even, as means by which God has revealed
himself, and will communicate his grace; and then I will not accuse him, as I
have not slandered C. A. when I speak the truth, I harm them not. The more
nakedly their Errors are detected, by the Truth, the more good it may do them,
and I wish it with my heart.

(12. Head of Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning Baptism.
Section 38.
THat they are against Infant Baptism, I had noted* contrary to Acts 2. 38, 39.
where the command for application of Baptism, reaches as far as the Promise;
and, as I hinted, in my shorter piece, the Promise extends it self to
Children, while Children, they are part of the Saints of the Church at Corinth,
1 Cor. 7. 14. if but one of the parents be a Believer and a Churchmember. R. F.
is for the Negative, in a transition, from what was spoken of before; But your
brain-imaginations we deny, and sprinkling Infants with water.

Rep. 1. If he puts this scandalous title of brain-imaginations, upon the other
means of Grace, reading, preaching, hearing, prayer, experiences, etc. he does
but back his sellow Atkinson. Suppose God should leave him, as one of that
name, (if it be not the same C. A.) to Fornication, were it not just for his
casting reproach upon the ways of God?

2. No reason is given for his denial of sprinkling Infants with water, which I
called Sacramental water, but he puts it upon a Quere, Can thou prove it?

Rep. What I affirm and practice, I am not without grounds of proof from the
Scripture, as touching these three things.

1. Sacramental water, or Baptismal water, or Baptism with water, let it be
called any of these, it matters not which.

2. Baptism of Children, or Infants.

3. A sprinkling Baptism, or application of water by sprinkling or putting
water upon the party baptized.

First, What more clear then the appointment and use of Baptism with Water
proved.
Water Baptism?

1. Water was appointed by God to be used as the outward material sign of
inward spiritual washing, and cleansing by the Blood and Spirit of Christ, John
1. 33. He that sent me to baptize with water, etc.

2. Where there was much water, there were many baptized, and the sooner
dispatched, as not only at Jordan, but in Aenon, near to Salim, John 3. 23.
and at Jerusalem, Acts 2. 41. Where there was no water, the ordinance could not
be administered, and therefore the Eunuch till he came where water was, called
not for it, Acts 8. 36. See, here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized?
Philips answer, If thou believe with all thy heart, thou may, has no such
intendment, as Martin Mason in his Reply to Jonathan Johnson, p 8
one puts upon it; to intimate Water Baptism to be a thing indifferent, nor any
such sense as he would dawb upon it, with his untempered mortar: viz. As much
as if he had said, If thou believe outward water to be necessary to
salvation, thou may be baptized, etc. For the Eunuchs Reply (out of which
the scope and sense of Philips answer is to be gathered) is not touching his
faith of the necessity of water, (of which he stood convinced that the use of
it in Baptism was an ordinance) but respecting his faith of Jesus Christ to be
the Son of God.

3. When the inward Baptism of the Spirit, and that by extraordinary gifts of
Tongues was obtained, it sufficed not; but the ordinance of Sacramental-water
must be obeyed, Acts 10. 47. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be
baptized, etc. And ver. 48. He commanded them to be baptized. Whosoever is
against Baptismal-water, forbids or denies that which Peter, by the Lords
authority, dares any man to forbid.

4. When Paul baptized Lydia and her household, the Jailer and all his, Crispus,
Gaius, and the household of Stephanas, what was it but with water? He could do
no more then John Baptist, except in exercise of gift of tongues and miracles,
and laying on of hands upon those that were baptized before, Acts 19. 6. with 4.

5. Baptism with water is by Christ's institution to continue, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
opened.
as long as Christ's presence is with the Apostles, or such as teach the same
Gospel they taught, and make Disciples as they did, which is to the end of the
world, Matthew. 28. 20. The words * in the Greek are the same with them in Mat.
(...).
13. 40. * (except a small variation of the Preposition and Case, or addition
of a Pronoun) so shall it be in the end of this world; which is not the end of
the Age wherein the Apostles lived, but of all Ages then and yet to come. And
that baptizing with water is meant in Matthew. 28. is clear enough, because
Christ reserved the gift of the inward Baptism to himself, but he commands
his Apostles and Ministers to give forth the outward, as subservient to his
saving ends and purposes. And although we prefer the inward, before the outward
part of one and the same Baptism; yet we must not reject the outward part,
because the inward is to be preferred. It will not excuse R. F. Page 20.
or any man to tell us, Yet Baptism by one Spirit we own, while Water Baptism
is wholly dis-owned. Nor do the Scriptures which he produces for the Baptism
by the Spirit, exclude the Baptism with water, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. The Apostles
scope in 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. cleared and vindicated
the Chapter is, to press on to a right use of spiritual gifts, by every
member, for the good of the whole body, as from other Arguments, so from this,
ver. 12. The body is one, though the members are many. How is it proved, that
the Church is one body? because ver. 13. by one Spirit are we all baptized into
one body: Hence the force of his Argument for right imparting of gifts; If we
all agree in the same Spirit, and are taught by one Spirit, and baptized into
one body, why should not our gifts be used for the mutual good of the members,
the whole, and every part of the body? Now, what is in the inward part of
Baptism, among other things, incorporation, that is held forth by the outward
part. Water Baptism, declares and ratifies our being set, ingraffed, and joined
to the body mystical, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. There is one Body, one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism. Is it Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. vindicated.
enough for R. F. to mention this? Here is nothing intended against
Baptismal-water, by the Apostle, what ever be men's intentions now adays. It Is a
wresting of the Scriptures, though the bare words be but mentioned, to quote
them for another end then they were written. Both the inward and outward
washing are appointed by one Lord, to confirm one and the same Faith; and they
make but one and the same Baptism, which consists of the sign and the thing
signified. He that would divide them, or more then distinguish them, crosses
the mind of the Lord Jesus. Whatsoever R. F. adds, Such as are baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ; and that we witness, as does the Scripture, which
is not contradiction, Gal. 3. 27. The Scripture witnesses the Gal. 3 27.
vindicated.
outward part, and the inward; and the Apostle intends both in this place;
for pressing faith in Christ alone for Justification, without dependence upon
any of our acts, in obedience to the Law; he draws an Argument from Baptism,
the outward part as well as the inward: As many of you as have been baptized
into Christ, have put on Christ for Justification alone; as if he should say,
Ye did sacramentally put on Christ in Baptism, you must not now put him off,
and be clothed with your own rags again, in stead of his robes. He that denies
either part of complete Baptism (as the Scripture expresses it of Water, and
of the Spirit) has so much Contradiction to the Scripture in his denial.

Secondly, As to the Baptism of Infants, what ever R. F. Infant Baptism Christ's
institution.
thinks (with many others) that it is an Invention, and none of Christ's
Institution; The grounds from Scripture for the Affirmative, must be raised,
otherwise then he undertakes it, ere I will clear him of his Christ and
Scripture-contradiction, in this very particular. To those two Arguments I
produced from Acts 2. and 1 Cor. 7. mentioned in the beginning of this Section,
he says little or nothing; nothing at all to the latter, and little to the
former, and that as falsely, as weakly; according to his wonted language: But
thou perverts the Scripture, Acts 2. 38, 39. saying, Be baptized every one of
you; you and your children: Here thou art a liar, it does not command Children
to be baptized with water, neither did they ever so baptize them, that thou
can prove, by one plain Scripture.

Rep. 1. He attends not my reason, which I must repeat, for help to his memory,
or others understanding: The Command there reaches as far as the Promise; the
Promise extends it self to Children, not to all, but to their children, [ To
you and to your children is the Promise made,] and therefore the Command [Be
baptized every one of you] is made to the Parent, and concerning the Child,
and Children also of such Parents, as gladly receive the word of Promise for
them and theirs, as it is said they did, ver. 41. And although it is not there
plainly expressed, the Children and Infants were baptized, yet the Promise is
plain enough, and the Precept is explained and enforced by the Promise; which
had been of far less force to the Jew, and Proselyte also, if their Children
(formerly circumcised upon their Parents taking hold of the Covenant, Isa. 56.
6.) had been excluded, and left un-baptized; and why may not the youngest be
included with the eldest among those three thousand souls? (according to
Scripture Phrase elsewhere, Genesis 46. 26, 27.)

2. Why should R. F. (if he were not unreasonable) tie me, or himself, to one
plain Scripture? That which one place gives not forth so plainly, another
compared with it, may explain that and its self also. Let him consult Ephesians. 5.
26. opened.
Ephesians. 5. 26. There is plain mention of water, and washing of water; by whom?
by Christ, [He that sanctifies and cleanses the soul] Whom does he sanctify
and cleanse? or whose souls? His Church, his mystical body, ver. 23. How? By
water, and the word; both which are the outward means, by which he applies his
Blood and Spirit, to all that he cleanses. The water distinguished here from
the grace of sanctifying and cleansing, can be no other then Baptismalwater:
The word Greek, (...).
in this place distinguished from Christ himself, can be no other then the
Scripture-command for the use of water; and the Scripture-promise, for the
blessing of water to the ends he has appointed it in Baptism. The
Scripture-promise, we have found, belongs to Children, and the
Scripture-command for the use of water to all that have the Promise, and to all
that are of Christ's mystical body. Now some Children will be found to belong to
his body, the Church. I hope R. F. will think, if he does not, others will
believe, the Scripture is plain enough for that, Luke 18. 15, 16, 17. In one
Verse we read of Infants, in another, of little Children, whom Christ owned, as
belonging to the Kingdom of God: The Kingdom of God, and the true Church that
is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus, 1 These. 1. 1. differ not an
hairs-breadth: of some of that age, or nonage (we may call it) of young ones,
and little ones, is Christ's body made up in part; yea, he is so far from
setting all Infants by, and shutting them out, that he professes with
vehemence, ver. 17. Verily, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God, as
a little Child, shall in no wise enter therein. Let R. F. be humblypassively
capable of what a little Child is capable, and he may enter, with Christ's
little ones, into the knowledge of this mystery, and benefit of Infant Baptism.

Thirdly, I shall prove the sprinkling of Infants, or application A sprinkling
Baptism warrantable by Scr^pture. (...).
of water to them, or others that way, by plain and sound consequence from
Scripture.

1. Although the word Bapto signifies to dip, the word Baptizo signifies to
wash diverse ways. The Jews had diverse Baptisms, as the words are, Heb. 9. 10.
(...).
translated diverse washings: Some by sprinkling, or putting water upon
persons, or things, to which Ezekiel. 36. 25. and Heb. 10. 22. alludeth. Some
civil, or superstitious, as Mark 7. 4. washing of vessels, tables, or beds;
which way was by casting water upon them, as by dipping some things into the
water: so that the command for baptizing is a command for sprinkling, as for
dipping, as the word is used, 1 Cor. 10. 2. They were all baptized, in the
cloud, and in the sea; some might be more drencht or wet then others; but they
(whether young or old, whether more or less washed, or moistened with water) were
all baptized. It is not the quantity, but the quality, and use of water that
was then, and is now significative in Baptism. The general end and use of water
is washing, (the effect whereof is cleansing) and such is the use and force of
the word, (as before) hence I reason, That action which fully represents the
main end and use of Baptismal-water, is lawful and sufficient: But sprinkling,
pouring, or putting water upon the body, does represent this main end and use,
etc.


For the main general end, and use of Water Baptism, is to signify spiritual
washing and cleansing of the soul from sin, Acts 22. 16. Arise, and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins: and this is done significatively, by a
sprinkling-Baptism (of young or old) as well as by a dipping.

2. When John baptized Christ, and Philip the Eunuch, their going down to the
water was one action, and the baptizing another. I stand not convinced by any
plain, or forcible Scripture Phrase, or by any circumstance in
Scripture-history, that there was any other action, or rite of baptizing (when
it came to that) then sprinkling or casting water upon the person baptized.

3. Sprinkling, or putting water upon the baptized, is the more ready and easy
action; and Christ has not burdened his Church in the New Testament with
painful Ceremonies. Dipping and plunging, is either of the whole body, or of a
part only: if but of a part, it is hazardous and troublesome, not only to
Infants, but to persons of years. Once upon a time, I asked a neighbor of mine
(who was for Dipping) how Paul dipped the Jailer? his answer was, He took him
plum up from the ground, and put him into the water. (By the way I told him,
there had need be good store of strength in all Administrators of Baptism in
this manner, and little Paul might not be strong enough for the service, if
Silas was) I asked again, whether there was a pond or river in the yard,
betwixt the prison and the Jaylors proper lodgings; and was answered, there
might be a brook running through the yard. These are strange conjectures, which
men will assume and fancy to themselves. I may ask again, what brook or pond
was there in Judas's house, where Paul was, Acts 9. 11. who when weak and
feeble was baptized, ver. 18. and was not strengthened in body till he had
received meat, ver. 19. sure, sprinkling or putting a little water upon Paul at
that time, and at all times upon feeble Infants, as upon feeble Paul, is a work
of greater mercy, which God prefers before sacrifice. Who may not observe, that
dippers, and the dipped are more put to their shifts, to make out their way by
Scripture, then we are straightened, to prove a sprinkling Baptism, or a washing
by sprinkling, or such kind of application of water to the party? And
therefore if water be appointed by Christ, and Infants are not excluded the
Covenant and Promise wherein their parents (if but one) do stand; and if
sprinkling or casting water upon the Churchmember, or confederate with God,
and his people, be sufficient, and suitable to the main end of Baptism, I
apprehend we depart not from the mind of Christ revealed in Scripture, when we
so Baptize them.

4. As I forbear judging of Saints who differ in some inward notions, and
outward forms, so I cannot but condemn this sect of men, who are against all
outward Baptism with water, what way, or to what persons soever it be applied;
and vent many falsehoods and absurdities in their dictates concerning the
baptism of the Spirit only. I shall instance but in one or two of the busy
Penmen, J. P. and J. N. His sh^^ld of the Truth, page 11, 12.
James Parnell dictates thus; They who would have one Baptism outward, and
another inward, would have two Baptisms, when the Scripture says the Baptism
is but one: As for the Baptism of water, which the Apostles used, it was a
command of Christ for its time. Whereas the contrary has been showed from
Scripture (in this Section) that the two parts, outward and inward, make but
one Baptism, by reason of the relation that the outvvard sign has to the
inward thing signified; which relation, by virtue of Christ's ordaining it to
be so, is the foundation of the union, and one-ness. And as for his limiting
the Baptism of water to the time past and now out of date, it is but a
Tradition lately received, to make void the commandment of Christ, which will
stand in force, effect and virtue, when the Tradition will vanish and come to
nothing. James Nayler, a greater doctor ( J. Lilburn Resur. of J. Lilburn. *
Love to the Lost. page 38.
calls him a tall man in Christ) dictates thus. * It was not laid on the
Apostles as of necessity, but as they found it of service or dis-service. This
is rotten, groundless stuff. It was always of service, since Christ did
institute it, and not to be denied to the proper, and capable subject. If the
Apostles did not always administer it themselves, they appointed Evangelists,
Pastors, or some that were commissionated to preach to do it, according to
Christ's command, Matthew. 28. 18, 19. which they were to teach others to observe
and do; And a necessity there was for Necessity of precept, and of means, in
water Baptism.
them to obey their masters command: and administer, or cause to be
administered, as a necessity on the Believers part to use it for him, and his as
a means of faiths confirmation, etc. not but that God can and does save without
it, where it cannot orderly be had. But then will J. N. say, As above, page 40.
If any shall come in the power and Spirit of John's Baptism, or if any had a
call from God thereto, such we judge not, nor gainsay. But what call does this
man imagine? observe what he says, afterward, Page 42.
God never called any to Baptize; but first he called them out of the world,
and their habitations there, to follow Christ, as into the wilderness, which
were prophets and Apostles called immediately. No call will please him but that
which is immediate, no minister but an Elijah, or an Elisha, a Peter, or a
Paul. This man is yet a Seeker, and not a perfect finder, though he speaks much
of present perfection attainable, and gives them that deny it, this jerking
abusive character, [ who preach up imperfection, and sin for term of life]
whereas it is one thing to preach, there will be sin in the Saints, and need
they shall have of the meditation of their Baptism, to confirm their faith of
the nonimputation of that which is inherent; and another, to preach it up. I am
more then afraid, I do certainly discern it, that the late preaching of present
perfection in sanctification, has raised and preached up the pride of many a
Pharisaical spirit to such a height, that we shall not expect their saving
fall, by many years labors, unless Gods Almighty arm be revealed. And to preach
up that which is in deed the Baptism in Spirit, on purpose to overthrow Christ's
institution of water, is, I dare say, not from the dictate of Gods Spirit, but
of self and flesh in Ja. Nayler. That which he says in one page Love to t^^
Lost. page 4
is true, The Apostles did not baptize Believers over again with water, who had
had it, because they had it not before in their fashion: But as false is that
which he has in the page before, Page 41.
That Paul preached Baptism in spirit in its stead, i. e. in stead of Baptism
with water: for it is a great injury to the Apostle to represent him as a
justler out of any of Gods ordinances and as one like himself: who says pretty
well, one while, Page 42.
[ no form we deny into which Christ leads in Spirit] yet presently as ill
again, and blows as cold as before he blew hot, But all forms we deny, that are
used by men to keep people from following the Spirit. For, suppose it we may
with grief enough, that some men do abuse forms this way, all men do not, nor
dare admit the thought, but tremble to think any should be so formal; and
again, what warrant has he to deny any of Christ's forms, though he may (with
the best wisdom and zeal he has) help to batter down the Images that men have
set up? Christ has withdrawn from men, but he never sent for Water Baptism to
heaven, though it came from thence; He never repealed the Covenant made with
Believers, and their seed. The Promise holds to all Christ's New Testament
institutions, to Baptismal-water, applied to all Christ's little ones: He that
denies it, puts down Christ, and his ordinance, and sets up Idol-self in the
room. Let J. Nayler make a more privy search into his heart, and ponder well of
what I have animadverted briefly, and of what I shall close with; none of his
stumblings at the divisions about forms, should make him out of love with that
which had a divine stamp, and is not worn out but in his apprehension, as in R.
F. his fancy.

(13. Head of their Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning the Lords Supper.
Section 39.
I Had noted out of a Pamphlet (as it fell out) of R. F. what a title of
dishonor he gives to the Lords Supper, no better then a Carnal invention; as
strong a contradiction to 1 Cor. 11. 23. as his reason is weak, because he
wanted that assurance which he expected at the Participation of that ordinance;
whereupon, he takes me up with his old reviling language, * I charge thee in
that to be a gross The visible outward Lords supper no carnal invention.
liar, I said that your imagination was a carnal invention, but the Lords
Supper I own.

Rep. What Lords Supper does he own? that in the heart only, for he owneth
what he witnesses; and what does he witness? it follows in his book, and
witness that he is come in to sup with me, Rev. 3. 20. Rep. But at that Supper
I never heard, or read before, of one drunk with the opinion, That the
commemoration of the Lords death (by breaking and eating of blessed Bread and
drinking of blessed Wine* i. e. bread and wine set apart by prayer and
thanksgiving, as he appointed) was man's imagination, and a carnal invention. It
is matter of Faith (and not imagination) to me (as to many thousands) and as
with my heart I believe, so with my mouth and Pen I make this confession, that,
That Lords Supper which Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 10. 16. and 11. 20. and which
chap. 10. 21. he calls the Lords Table, was and is something besides the inward
mystical communion with Christ, Rev. 3. 20. even the visible sign and seal of
that Communion, and of other effects of his death; and if this be proved and
found to be none of mine nor man's imagination, it will appear to all men who is
the gross liar, and that R. F. has called that Lords Supper, or the ordinance
of bread and wine, instituted by Christ, (in the night wherein he was betrayed)
a carnal invention. But he goes on, And the bread which we break it is the
Communion of the body of Christ, and the cup which we drink, it is the
Communion of the blood of Christ; and as Paul said, so say I, Let those that
are spiritual judge what is said.

Rep. Agreed, in Paul's sense, not in the apprehension of R. F. but where has
Paul these words? Let those that are Spiritual judge, etc. It is true, the
spiritual man judges of colors, white and black, truth and error, grace and
corruption, something he can judge of all spiritual things, which a natural man
cannot; But it is the wise man, which the Apostle appealeth to, in that place,
which R. F. shot at, at rovers, 1 Cor. 10. 15. I speak as to wise men, judge ye
what I say* If any man think himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual, and be not
wise, he may think, as R. F. that the words ver. 16. are meant of bread broken
only in the heart, and of the cup drunk in the heart, etc. but no wise man,
that ever yet I met with, nor any truly spiritual, have so thought, or will so
judge; excluding outward bread, and the visible Cup, from being the sign, and
pledge of inward communion in and with the body and blood of the Lord, as R. F.
Page 20. Bread and wine the outward matter of the Lords Supper.
does.

Thou can not prove that Paul broke outward bread and drunk outward wine,
with the Corinthians, nor the manner how.

Rep. The truth does not rest upon my proof, nor needs there any more but the
reading of the words, 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25. which I shall transcribe at large,
for the memorial of the institution, as the blessed Apostle has left it to the
Saints. "For I received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that
the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread: and when
he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my body which is
broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he took
the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the New Testament in my blood:
this do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. What proof lies in
these words, which R. F. calls for, I shall demonstrate, in this argumentative
way, What the Lord Jesus brake, and drank with his disciples, and after what
manner; that Paul brake, and drank with the Corinthians, and after that manner:
But the Lord Jesus brake material, or outward bread, and drank material, or
outward wine, with his Disciples Mat. 26. 26, 27 Mark 14 22, 23, 24.
(having first blessed the bread, and given thanks distinctly at the taking of
the cup) and then gave it to them, to be used in remembrance of him: Therefore,
Paul brake material, or outward bread, and drank material, or outward wine,
with the Corinthians, after the manner that the Lord brake, and drank, and gave
it to his Disciples, to be used in remembrance of him.


The Major, or first proposition, is undeniable, else Paul had been unfaithful,
to teach and practice among the Corinthians, and to write it over, to them and
us for imitation; but Paul obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful, 1 Cor. 7.
25. The Minor, or second proposition, is as true as the first, for Christ took
of the Bread upon the table (the reserve of it, after the Passover Supper) and
blessed that, brake that, gave that to be eaten; and he took of the Cup upon
the table, and gave thanks (afresh) and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all
of it: For this is (i. e. this is a sign, pledge, memorial, seal, or assurance
of) my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you, as Luke has it,
Chap. 22. ver. 20. and for many (as Matthew and Mark record it Mat. 26. 28, 29
Mark 22. 24, 25.
) for the remission of sins: which Cup put (by a Metonymie of the Subject for
the Adjunct, i. e. the thing containing, put for the thing or outward matter
contained in it, i. e.) for the Wine in the Cup, he calls the fruit of the
vine, as it was in its own nature and substance; it must of necessity follow,
that Paul following his Masters institution at the heels, or to a hair, (as
even now was cleared) the bread that he brake, and the wine that he drank, (and
ordered for the future to them and all the Churches to be broken and drunk, 1
Cor. 11. 26.) was the fruit of seed-corn, material outward bread; and the fruit
of the vine, material outward wine: which because R. F. in another piece of
his, had said was carnal, I added for explication, and to discover how he
contradicted 1 Cor. 10. 16. that albeit the bread and wine (which we use
according to the Lords precept, and Paul's practice) in the Lords Supper, are in
their nature and substance very bread and wine, yet they are Spiritual in the
institution, end, and use, during our corporal eating and drinking of them, at
that Supper of the Lord.

The word which I used in the Concrete [Spiritual] he turns to the Abstract
[Spirit] and thus clamors me; * Therefore it is thy reason is so weak, that
says, The bread which you break, although it be bread in the nature and
substance, yet it is Spirit in the institution, etc. What blasphemy is this, to
say that the Spirit is in the bread, which is natural in the substance? Here is
a Papistical trick indeed, Oh horrible delusion!

Rep. 1. I brought not 1 Cor. 10. 16. or any reason from thence, to prove the
bread to be material and outward, (though I could, as above I have from the 11.
Chap.) but to show it was not carnal in R. F. his sense, set in opposition to
the spiritual institution, end, and use: For that which is appointed by Christ
to be used for signification and assurance of many a souls interest in, and
communion of his natural body and blood, broken, and shed upon the Cross, that
is not mere carnal bread and drink: But the bread and wine is after Christ's
institution to be so used, as Paul admonishes the Corinthians, and not to be
abused and profaned, i. e. used in a common manner, as if it were but ordinary
bread and wine, and had no special signification, and end stamped upon it. That
natural body and blood of Christ (which we remember in the Supper, as broken
and shed at his Passion) was and is a true natural body, (then on earth, now in
heaven) and yet it was and is spiritual food; his flesh, meat indeed, his
blood, drink indeed; there is no sweeter, no better; there is none to that: So
the bread and wine, is truly bread, materially wine, and yet withal, in the
Lords Supper it is Christ's body, and it is his blood; How? significatively; a
spiritual memorial of Christ's death, and a pledge of what Christ is (to us that
believe in him) dying for us.

2. This man R. F. coyneth phrases, and then fathers them upon me; [ The Spirit
in the institution] and [ the Spirit is in the bread] and would make the world
believe he were as ignorant of Popery, as of true Protestant Doctrine. The
Doctrine I held forth (according to Scripture) was, and is in professed
opposition to all Papisticall tricks and devices, touching the Lords Supper. I
said, the bread, as the wine, was so, and is so, in its nature and substance,
but spiritual in the institution, end, and use: And I add, neither Christ's
Institution, nor the Ministers Blessing, does transubstantiate them, or turn
them into the natural body and blood of Christ, as the Papists imagine, after
their consecration. They do not say, that I know, the Spirit is in the bread,
nor did I ever so express my self in preaching at Edinburgh (or elsewhere) and
what I wrote there page 20.
is to be seen and read of all men; yet more then this, of confused stuff,
would R. F. (in his return to the Agreement of 42. Ministers Contradiction of
the Quakers (so called) p. 16.
) make the world believe, he can produce under my hand (and the hands of other
Preachers in that City.) Had his mistake * See page 18. with the marginal not.
been only in a letter of my name, to put ( e) for ( a) it were a very venial
offense; but to refer (as he does) to my whole name (except that letter) is a
most impudent forgery.) But to return to the Pontificians, this they hold;
Popish Transubstantiation a blind dotage.
The body of Christ is corporally under the show of bread, and the blood of
Christ is substantially under the color of wine; (as if the accidents or
qualities of roundness, redness, or whiteness, could be without the subject and
substance of those creatures; and as if Christ's natural body and blood, for
substance, could be there, and neither be seen, felt, nor tasted; and as if
Christ had laid down the qualities of a true natural body, and were in more
places then one at once, with many such blind dotages) this is to make a very
carnal Supper of it indeed. Hence it is that (they maintaining (in words only,
and with fire and faggot, not by any Scripture rightly understood, nor sound
Argument from thence) the real, corporal, carnal presence of Christ) we protest
against them, as Antichristian: And so must we enter a protestation against R.
F. and men of his way, to be yet more mysteriously Babylonish. For the grosser
Papists speak broadly, and make a nullity of the Lords Supper, by their feigned
Transubstantiation and carnal-corporal presence; but these speak subtly, and
nullify it, by transforming of the Institution, and spreading the Lords Table
with another cloth (as it were, and as will more appear anon) while we hold up
the Ordinance, according to Gospel-primitive simplicity, and do maintain (upon
sufficient Scripture-grounds) both the outward and inward matter, and form of
the Lords Supper, with the spiritualness of the Institution, and the
truly-spiritual presence of Christ, with his own ordained signs; who, in
relation to them, and to his own promise, and his peoples faith, is there (as
at Baptism, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Lo, I am with you, etc.) by his Spirit, to
quicken, confirm, and seal up our communion with himself, as crucified for us.
Hence The benefit of the Lords Supper.
it is, that the Churches of Christ, and every true believer, active in his
faith, have found it, and do still experience it to be a faith-strengthning,
conscience-refreshing, soul-comforting, love-increasing, sin-mortifying,
salvation-assuring Ordinance; although they have not always a like sense of his
presence. But to cast off this Ordinance, and call it a carnal invention, as R.
F. has done, for want of expected assurance at the participation of it, is a
rash fruit of unbelief, and proud impatience; and to call us Deceivers Page 20.
for keeping to the Institution (which remains firm in it self, while it
proves ineffectual to many an unworthy communicant) is to hide himself, in his
self-deceivings: Finally, to cry out, Oh horrible delusion! is to cast a mist
before others eyes, that they may not see where the juggling and the jugler lie
close together.

For what says he further? The Kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink,
but in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; and in that Kingdom,
wheat-bread, and red wine is not the souls food, but the precious blood of
Christ.

Rep. 1. Where the Apostle speaks of the choice things, wherein the Kingdom of
God consists, viz. righteousness, etc. Romans 14. 17. he is not treating of bread
and wine at Rom 14. 17. vindicated.
the Lords Table, but of meats and drinks, which Jews and Gentiles made a
difference about, ver. 2. One believes he may eat all things, another that is
weak, eats herbs. He was the stronger Christian who found his liberty to eat
of all things, i. e. all creatures appointed for natural and bodily food: He
was the weaker, who confined himself to some particulars, as only lawful, viz.
Herbs, etc. This Scripture, of the Apostles preferring righteousness, etc.
before meats and drinks, is impertinently and sinfully alleged, to contradict
the observation of the Lords Supper, wherein he will be remembered by the use of
natural bread and wine, till his second coming. 1 Cor. 11. 26. As often as ye eat
of this bread, 1 Cor. 11. 26* cleared.
and drink of this cup (for natural substance, the same with other bread and
wine; but for signification and assurance, different) ye do show (by such a use
and participation) the Lords death till he come. That clause [ till he come]
and others, of his coming, are usual in the New Testament, to denote his second
and glorious coming, visibly in our nature. If I will that he tarry till I
come, etc. John 21. 22. So shall also the coming of the Son of man be, Mat. 24.
37, 39. Even so, come Lord Jesus, the voice of the Bride, and of John, echoing
to Christ's Surely I come quickly, Rev. 22. 20.

2. Although wheat-bread and red wine be not souls food alone and by
themselves, yet stamped with the Lords Institution, his word of promise, This is
my body, This is my blood, with his word of command, Do this, etc. and this
done in faith accordingly; in and by them, Christ does feed our souls. If the
sacred signs of the Old Testament had this significancy and excellency, that in
respect of what was represented by them, they are called spiritual meat, and
spiritual drink, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. (Manna was appointed to feed the faith of the
Fathers, and Water out of the rock, to refresh their soul-faith) surely, the
blessed signs of the New Testament come not short of such spiritual
significancy and excellency, which they have not from themselves, but from
Christ the institutor and ordainer of them; who will, and does make them souls
food, instrumentally; because he thereby, and therewith gives forth himself, to
be their assured food and nourishment:

But says R. F. Page 20.
for a close, He is my meat, and drink, and food for my soul to feed on, and
for such as are in him, John 6. who is the bread of life.

Rep. But how, he does not tell us, only he says it is so; and I wish it be
so, and that he does not feed upon ashes, nor that a deceived heart does lead
him aside, nor that a lie be found in his right hand; I Am sure it is in his
tongue, or pen, who shall say or write, Christ feeds not souls, by wheat-bread,
and red wine.

1. It is a true exposition of John 6. which we hold up against the Papists,
that all along that Chapter, Christ speaks not of the Sacrament, called the
Lords Supper (consisting of sign, and thing signified, outward and inward
matter) but only of his natural flesh and blood, given and shed for all that
eat and drink him spiritually, or by faith; which daily they may, and ought to
do* Believe, and thou have eaten, as was Augustines counsel and encouragement
of old, to the Christians in his time.

2. It is a proud and disdainful practice, altogether to reject the use of
wheat-bread and red wine, or any fruit of the vine, frequently, as a help to
memory, faith, love, and all the graces of the inner man; especially, by fresh
remembrance of Christ's death, in the application of the signs, to be
strengthened in believing our interest and propriety in him, that we may feed
the more strongly upon him, and live cheerfully by faith, every day and hour.
By this time, me thinks, I hear James Nayler crying out of divisions about the
form Love to the lost, page 43.
(of the Lords Supper) which the worlds Teachers and Professors, are all out
of, and have lost, and the power also; and then spreading his new cloth (that I
hinted at before) as some wet napkin over a Corpse, so he, over his new
Communion Table, and then sets on his new-transformed Supper, and what is that?
Hear if you can, and read, without their trembling, but in true fear, take
notice of his horrible delusion. For the sake (says he Pag^ 45.
) of such who are lost in this thing, and troubled in mind concerning it; what
I have James Naylers transmutation of the Lords Supper.
received of the Lord, that I shall declare unto you, which all shall witness
to, who come to partake thereof, as the truth is in Jesus Christ. If you intend
to sup with the Lord, or show the Lords death till he come, let your eating and
drinking, so often as you do it, be in remembrance of him, and in his fear, that
at death you may witness to the lust and excess, etc. If this man were not lost
himself, could he write thus wildely, falsely, impudently, or minister such a
miserable comfort to a troubled mind? Why, where, will the poor lost simple
soul say, is the fallacy, wildeness, impudence? The fallacy in this, that by
eating and drinking, as often as you do it, he means, your ordinary meals, of
Breakfast, Dinner, or Supper; for so he expresses it, Page 43. This was to be
done at all seasons when they eat and drank. The wildeness in this, For the
sake of such as are lost, and that at death you may witness to the lust and
excess. The impudence in this, that he says, He received it of the Lord; and
to avoid excess, and of becoming reprobates in the faith, it was Page 44.
that the Lord Jesus commanded his Disciples, in eating and drinking, to show
forth his death till he came. And this was that the Apostles received of the
Lord, and so practiced, till he was come to them; and then Page 46.
they continued it for their sakes who were weak in the faith, to whom he was
not yet appeared. What His colorable Reasons dis-colou^ed.
color, will the lost simple soul say, has he for all this? He has something
surely to set forth his new dish?

Page 43.
this Lords Supper was done and instituted by Christ, as they sat at meat, and
did eat, Mat. 26. 26. Mark 14. 22. But must it therefore be confounded with
every ones common ordinary meal? That Supper which he instituted a new, was, if
Luke 22. 20. be consulted, after the Paschal Supper: and Paul says, 1 Cor. 11.
25. after he, the Lord had supped, yea, after he had risen at the end of the
Paschal Supper, John 13. 2. he took a towel, washed his Disciples feet, sat
down again, ver. 12. and had given the dipped sop to the Traitor, who upon the
receiving of it, went immediately out, ver. 30. and came in no more. But now
Christ and his chosen ones are alone, they not having removed the Table; the
Lord enters his Sermon, John 13. latter end, with Chap. 14. 15, 16. and having
taken bread and then the cup, he either prayed that in Chap. 17. or (after his
distinct consecrating words of blessing, and thanksgiving; and his giving, and
their taking of the bread and wine) at the end of the whole action; for John
18. 1. compared with Mat. 26. 30. the prayer (after the Sermon) ended, and the
(...).
Hymn sung by them all, they go forth, over the Brook Kedron, into a Garden in
Gethsemane, near to the Mount of Olives. It appears by what is said, it was a
distinct Supper from the rest, attended with solemn Speeches, Prayers, and
Praises in prose, and in a Song. If all the Quakers drink in James Naylers
Doctrine, they will then take up Prayer, and Thanks at meals, which many have
laid down, they will be frequent in singing Hymns; even as often as they eat and
drink, it must be done, if they will believe what he says the lord has
revealed unto him. But some will be wiser, I hope, then some other, and hear
reason, as it divinely lies in the Scripture. The Scripture calls the
instituted bread and wine, this bread, and this cup, and this cup of the Lord,
1 Cor. 11. 26, 27. And this bread it calls Christ's body; and this cup, the cup
of the new Testament; and the wine, Christ's blood. Will J. N. or any of his
friends be so profane, as to call every piece of bread he eats, and every
draught of drink, with such an Emphasis, and such a title? Will he make no
meals of any thing but of bread and drink? or, will he have all his own, and
Believers drink, to be of the fruit of the vine? Thus the Scripture describes
the Lords Supper to consist, for the outward matter, of bread and wine (as I
have before proved for R. F. his conviction.) The Scripture, neither from
Christ's mouth, nor Paul's pen, says, As often as ye eat and drink, it is the
Lords Supper; but as often as ye do this, eat of this bread, drink of this cup,
ye do show the Lords death till he come. What boldness is it to make that
temporary, and of short continuance, which the Apostle says is to be held up
till he comes! 1 Cor. 11. 26. And such a coming he speaks of there, as in
other of his Epistles, but especially, consult, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2.

Love to the lost, page 43.
That the Church at Jerusalem did continue in the Apostles doctrine, etc. and
breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness, etc. What
then? If their breaking bread, and eating meat be confounded, that in ver. 42.
with that in ver. 46. here was confusion in the Churches greatest purity, which
J. N. denies. If bread and wine was distinctly used (after the Lords
institution) and apart from their civil repasts and meals; then he has nothing
makes for his transfigured Supper, from this Scripture: But ver. 42. speaks of
Church-ordinances by themselves, Acts 2. 42. 46. cleared.
and ver. 46. of Family-repast, as distinct from the other; and the latter
words explain but the former, their breaking bread domatim, or at home, is said
to be eating meat, which was not the Lords Supper. J. Nayler reads it, daily
breaking bread from house to house, but it is not so read, or to be read (though
it is a truth to be supposed they did daily take their ordinary repasts, more
then once a day) but, they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, etc.
There is nothing of certain ground for daily use of the Lords Supper, but Acts
20. 7. will show us the primitive practice of assembling every first day of the
week, for that breaking of bread at the Lords Table; and so Tremelius out of
the Syriack, has it, 1 Cor. 11. 20. When ye come together In die Domini nostri.
on our Lords day, ye do not eat and drink, as is meet. And if it be read after
the Greek, as we read it, When ye come together into one place, etc. it shows
the eating and drinking of the Lords Supper was, and should be (by the Churches
respectively, as that at Corinth for one) in some one place together; and civil
ordinary meals should be (as they were at Jerusalem at first) in their own
houses, 1 Cor. 11. 34.

J. N. page as above
In their eating and drinking, at all seasons, they were to do it to the Lord,
and therein to have communion with his Body, and his Blood; and for that end
were to keep themselves pure from all pollution. It is a truth, nor they, nor
we are to sin in any action, but whether we eat or drink, etc. do all to the
Lord and his glory: we are not to feed without fear, we are to keep from all
excess, do all in a mortified way, think and speak of Christ at dinner and
supper, but this must not nullify or make void the peculiar Ordinance of the
Lords Supper, but rather we must frequently observe it, as a solemn help to
purity and mortification, influential into our whole conversation. Communion
with Christ, and his Body and Blood, is to be perpetually held up in all our
actions, natural, civil and sacred, by faith and the communion of his Spirit;
but the communion with him, in the use of the memorative signs of his body and
his blood ( viz. bread and wine) solemnly set apart by his special appointment,
for that end, is yet an advancing work, distinct by it self from other actions
of ordinary communion.

J. Nayler in the place aforesaid presumes, when the Christians were to eat
with Gentiles-unbelieving, they were to partake of the Table of the Lord, as is
plain, 1 Cor. 10. which is neither plain nor true, understood of the same time,
place and company, as this man holds it forth: for their eating with the
Infidels was at best (when there was no meat offered to idols, or no knowledge
of it, no scruple made about it) but a civil correspondence: and there was more
then Bread and Wine (the only outward materials at the Lords Table) even
whatsoever was sold in the shambles, ver. 25. Besides, the place and company,
where and with whom they did eat and drink at the Lords Table, was in some one
Meeting House or other (as the house of Gaius, Romans 16. 23. for one) where the
whole Church, and only the Church did participate. It is to no purpose what he
says afterward, Page 44.
Whether they eat or drank, they were to do it to the Lord, as at his Table;
for every like is not the same: and although different actions meet in the same
general ultimate end, yet there are special subordinate ends to each of them.

There is no other thing can keep from feeding in the lust, and eating to the
lust, but to eat in remembrance of Christ's death til he come, etc. And I
subjoyn, It is not our eating every day in fear and moderation (as it ought to
be) that will mortify a lust, but only give a check of restraint: Bodily
exercise of fasting profits little that way. Acting of faith upon Christ's
death every day will do much, as well out of meals, as at them; yea, he that
does not remember Christ at his plowing, and sowing, when he lies down, when
he rises up, goes out, or comes in; or at other times, as at breakfast,
dinner or supper, will go near to forget him then: But that we may never forget
him, and his death, and his power and love to take away our sin, he has left
us his solemn sacred Supper, as an instituted means of a Remembrance of him, to
be used as often as with convenience we can meet at his Table.

Let not J. Nayler or any man upbraid us with eating and drinking in a
Self-solemnity, once a month, or three times a year. The superstitious
observation of times (by man set up) is laid down, I think, by all the Godly in
the three Nations, as to that business. None have impositions upon them for
once a month. Were hearts and purses large enough in all the Churches, they
might meet every first day of the week (our Christian Sabbath Day, a day that
the Lord has made for solemn conventions and exultations, Psalm. 118. 24) at
the Lords Table. Let him look to the idols in his own heart, and beware of
imposing upon others his New-model, or putting off his Gibeonitish old clouted
shoes, and moldy bread, I mean his pieces of old Familism: For what shall we
make of that passage? Love to the Lost. page 45.
[ It must needs be so (viz. to spend upon their lusts) with such as do not
discern his body in their eatings, who is the Body of all creatures] but a chip
of the old block, H. N. the old father of the pretended Family of Love, his
Doctrine; to incorporate Gods Essence into the creatures, and the creatures
into his? For, said he, In the beginning one God, and one man, had in all one
order, being and nature: And, God was all that the man was, and the man was all
that God was: Accordingly says J. N. He is the Body of all creatures, and
fills all things in heaven and in earth; but by them that are in the lust,
Christ is not discerned present, who is the fullness and virtue of every
creature. Here is, it may be, an Ubiquitarian mystery, Christ's glorified Body,
deified, and to be discerned every where in every creature. But will the lost
soul be carried away with this wind of doctrine, so diverse and estranging
from, and contrary to the blessed Apostles intention? 1 Cor. 11. 29. where, by
not 1 Cor. 11. 29. vind^cated and cleared.
discerning the Lords Body, he holds forth their sin, who confound their own
meals with the Lords Supper: whereas it is the duty of all the Churches, and
every Communicant, to distinguish both notionally and practically between that
Bread and Wine instituted and set apart for special, sacred, spiritual use, and
common ordinary food, used for civil repast and corporal nourishment. The Bread
at the Lords Table, is to be discerned as a pledge, sign and memorial of the
Lord Christ his natural body once broken and crucified: The Wine is to be
discerned as the sign, pledge and memorial of his natural blood shed in the
garden, and upon the cross; And the relation which Christ has unto his
appointed signs, together with mystical union, and special spiritual presence,
promised and given to the true partaker of the signs, is to be discerned also;
all which James Nayler is ignorant of (or wilfully shuts his eyes) with his
fellow creature R. F. who threw off the ordinance because he wanted the
assurance that he expected. But how to reconcile these two men's writings about
the Lords Supper, I was at a loss (while the one says, Wheat bread and red
wine is not souls food (as before) and the other dictateth, The Lords Supper
was to be at all seasons when they eat and drank: one would have the Supper to
be altogether within; the other would have it to be at all times when men eat
with moderation, and without excess; it is well if they understand themselves)
until I compared their other words, viz. of R. F. The Lord is come in to sup
with me, with James Naylers, God's Son the fullness and virtue of every
creature, which all know, who come to his Supper, where the Father and the Son
are come in, and sup with the creature: And hereby (as by other of their
expressions) it appears they do, both of them, cast off the external visible
ordinance of the use of particular bread and wine, at some times, for the ends
appointed; and resolve it into an imaginary transformed communion of God in and
with every creature; which, so it speaks like H. N. the old branded Familist,
they care not how unlike the Holy Scripture they write, as one said long since
of his first followers.

Section 40.
THat they may with the fairer show make void the Lords institution, at his
Table; they have devised false Interpretations of that place in 1 Cor. 11. 26.
one of which 2 Cor. 11. 26. vandicated.
I discovered in this Section; to which R. F. answers nothing, although I had
it out of one of his Pamphlets, viz. of showing the Lords death till he came to
his disciples after his resurrection; which to mention only carries
confutation in the forehead: J. Nayler notwithstanding its grosness, favors
this sense, and adds another. First, he gratifies R. F. in his sense, by
reading or writing it in the Praeter tense Love to the lost. page 43.
: They were to do it in remembrance of him, showing his death till he came. Now
Paul's words are plainly respecting the time to come; till he come, i. e. till
the very instant hour of his coming; for the * Adverb of time notes duration,
having (...).
another Adverb and Particle added to it, which imply a drawing out of the
time; that should the Lord stay never so long ere he comes, the Supper is to be
continued till that coming of his, which I hinted in the former Section, was
his coming the second time (as it is called Heb. 9. 18.) in that humane nature
which at his first coming he assumed into the unity of his person: The word for
[ he come] used by Paul, is the same, and in the same subjunctive Mood, as in
Luke (...).
9. 26. when he shall come in his own glory, and in his Fathers, etc. so it
might be read in Paul, as our Latin Beza.
Translation has it, usquequo venerit, and Tremelius out of the Syriack, usque
ad adventum ejus, even till his very appearance in the clouds: For that meaning
must stand, whatsoever.

J. Nayler Love to the Lost. page 46.
, secondly, adds to the former Fiction; viz. That Christ charging his
disciples to wait for his coming, at Jerusalem, the promise of the Father, of
which he had told them before his death, which they were to show so often as
they broke bread, till he came, and after he was come to the Apostles, they
continued it for their sakes which were weak in the faith, to whom he was not
yet appeared. Where, by the coming of Christ, he would have his lost Souls
understand his coming in the Spirit only: and not mind what Paul says of the
after-continuance of the Lords Supper, till his visible glorious appearance:
only if he has appeared in the Spirit, it is enough, the Lord is come, they
are now perfect, and may cast off Gods instituted Forms of Worship, in the
former figure, only for others sake, they may keep them up; but then, poor
souls, what will follow? You that are not yet arrived at their perfection, must
hold fellowship with them that may forget Christ's death (for they eat and drink
no longer in remembrance of him) and put doomsday out of their thoughts, and
then the sensuality charged by James Nayler upon others, seizes upon
themselves. But against this poison let me give you a few Antidotes.

Antidotes.
in Spirit, as it came at first to the Apostles, before Christ's death, and to
the Corinthians by Paul's ministry, at their first conversion, 1 Cor. 2. 4. and
to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.

Phil. 3. 12.

3. The Apostles continued the Lords Supper (after the pourings out of the
Spirit, Acts 2. 1.) for their own use and benefit; for it is said, Acts 2. 42.
The converts continued in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of
bread, and prayers: not that the Apostles continued it for their sakes only
who were weak in the faith. The strongest Believer walks but by faith here, and
not by sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7. and will have need of such wheat-bread and red-wine,
as a bait in his walk and journey: And although the Apostles had gifts
extraordinary Acts 2. 1, etc. conferred upon them, their Sanctification was not
then perfected. Peter, one most forward, slipped and stumbled now and then, Acts
10. 14, 15. Gal. 2. 12, 13, 14. Barnabas, a good man, and full of the Holy
Ghost and of faith, Acts 11. 24. yet fell into sharp contention with Paul,
stumbled on the blind side, in siding with Mark his sisters son, Col. 4. 10.
Acts 15. 37, etc. and halted with Peter, Gal. 2. to instance in no more.

David, Psalm. 51. 11, 12. Heman, Psalm. 88. 11. 15. and others are upon Record
in Scripture. Famous is that of Mr. Robert Glover Martyr, who two or three days
before his death, was lumpish and desolate of all spiritual Consolation, till
going to the Stake, the Lord restored his Joys, and then he cried out to his
friend Mr. Bernher, Austine, he is come, he is come. Christ is free to come, or
go, and withdraw as he pleases, both as to the in-comes of joy, and of power
also: and look to it, O ye lost souls, who trust to these deceivers, that trust
to their present manifestations, were they never so true, their hearts deceive
them, and their doctrines deceive you; if only you keep to ordinances, and
that of the Lords Supper, till you have got a little comfort, and then bid
farewell to all. Great is the pride and unthankfulness of such, who, after they
have been enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God (the
sweetness of the promises) and the powers of of the world to come, do fall off
from the means, and ordinances; a great forerunner it is to the unpardonable
sin, to wilful, malicious Apostasy, which if it be total, will be final and
irrecoverable. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. etc.

(14. Head of their Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning Prayer.
Section 41.
I Had noted their express contradiction [ we are against public Prayer] to
what we have, 1 Cor. 14. 14. and 1 Timothy 2. 8. for prayer in the public
meetings of the Church, and in every place.

R. F. Page 21. Public prayer not forbidden by Christ.
tells me I have wronged the words, by turning them into a wrong sense.

Rep. What is their sense?

He says, they are against a public prayer, which is in the state of the
Pharisee.

Rep. What is a prayer in the state of the Pharisee?

He tells us, that which Christ forbids, Matthew 6. 5. Matthew. 6 5. vindicated.


Rep. 1. What have we there? let the words be read: And when thou prayest thou
shall not be as the hypocrites: for they love to pray standing in the
Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men.
Here is no prohibition of public prayers in public places, but of
affectation of private prayers, in public places to be seen and observed of
men. It is indeed Pharisaical to fall to private devotion, when a public work
is in hand, in the same place; or when there is none, yet there is company to
observe, it is without, and against rule, to pray by a man's self, when the
company cannot be edified, by that which a man speaks unto God, and not in the
hearing of the persons present, and to their understanding; but R. F. has not
this sense, but judges rather we are all in the state of the Pharisee, who are
the mouth to the rest in our public meeting places.

2. We have found their practical opposition, and refusal of joining with our
public prayer, which is the best interpreter of their sense, and speaks more
what is in their hearts, then R. F. his gloss upon it. Once at Edinburgh, one
of theirs, went out, at the end of my Sermon, after he had spoken what he had
to say, when I told him I would go to prayer, for the discovery where the error
laid, on his part or ours. Another time since at Cogges-hall in Essex (on a day
of prayer and fasting) when I was about to pray before Sermon, one J. Parnell,
first, being called upon by the magistrate to put off his Hat, ask't why he
bade not him in the Pulpit put off his Cap, and then turned his back upon the
ordinance (although he was offered liberty to speak further, if he would stay
quietly till our work was ended) if this be their manner of owning public
prayer, it is neither after the way of truth, love, or peace, nor after the
order of the Spirit of God, who teaches better manners, and behavior before
God, and men. R. F. must not think to put us off with [ but the praying with
the Spirit we own] as if they that pray in public, did not pray with the
Spirit: or that it agrees with the saying of Christ, Matthew. 6. 6. Matthew 6. 6.
vindicated.
when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, etc. as if the public ordinance
may not stand with the private; for the most retired and secret duties, are to
fit and make ready for the public: only it is our Lords scope there to
confine a private prayer, to a private place: as it is the Apostles order, from
the Lord, 1 Cor. 14. 14, 15, 16. when 1 Cor. 14. 14, 15 cleared and vindicated.
we pray publicly (in Church-conventions, all which have a publiqueness in
them) to pray so as others may be edified thereby, who are Saints; and those
who occupy the room of the unlearned, may testify their consents by saying
Amen; which they could not do if either the person praying spoke only to his
own hearing, or in the heart, not with an audible voice to others; or when they
heard him, they could not understand him, because he expressed himself in an
unknown tongue. All that I drive at (with the Apostles and our Saviors scope)
is that every ordinance, and outward part of worship be owned in its place, and
that this of public prayer may not be disowned ere the more, because of these
men's crying up their praying by the Spirit, in opposition to the Churches
public prayers, which the Primitive Church at Jerusalem Act. 2. 42. attended,
and continued in, and which the present Saints and Churches in these nations
hold up according to president, and precept. R. F. in another Pamphlet of his,
Truth cleared of Scandals. page 2.
says, they are led by the Spirit, and he makes intercession for them
according to the mind and will of God. But their practice shows they are not
in this led by the Spirit, when they cross the mind and will of God, by
refusing to join with the Saints in a public prayer; we acknowledge that no
wicked man's prayer is accepted, publicly, or privately made by him. It is
their duty to pray, but not their privilege, who are destitute of the Spirit,
and out of Christ; But to profess prayer from the second birth, while yet they
know not how to pray as they ought, but as the Spirit makes intercession with
sighs and groans (which are J. Parnells words Shield of truth. p. 14, 15
) is to contradict their doctrine of perfection: And to give a dash at all our
public prayer, as the long prayer of the Pharisees, is to strike at the
Spirit, and contradict the Scripture allowance of the publiqueness and length
of prayer, upon occasion, while we give no allowance to Pharisaical ends and
pretenses, but can approve our persons and hearts to God in Jesus Christ; our
persons in Christ's righteousness reckoned to us, by faith: our hearts, so far
as renewed, by the grace and power of his in-dwelling Spirit. James Nayler has
expressions, one would think, of this tendency, that complies with our
doctrine, in his common place of Worship Love to the Lost. p. 8, 9.
(wherein he instanceth in no part of worship but prayer) he acknowledges, as
we teach, The worship of the true and living God stands out of man's will; and,
before any man can rightly worship God, he must wait to know the Spirit; But
now let the lost soul beware of his counsel; where should they wait? you must
(says he) know the light, and in it wait, till therein you find the Spirits
leading, acting, and ordering. This counsel, if followed, keeps men off from
the positive parts of worship, revealed in the Scripture: The light that every
man has, as he comes into the world (which is the light they nourish up people
in, in opposition to Scripturelight) makes known nothing of public ministry,
Church officers therein, of Water Baptism, Lords Supper, public order of
prayer etc. nor of Christ mediator, nor of the The Spirit of Prayer to be found
in the publ^que ministry.
Spirit of promise; nor of one promise of grace, or gracious acceptance in
Christ: Had not the lost soul better counsel, while he was under public
ministry, to attend there for the coming of the Spirit, the Spirit of faith
and prayer; where God uses to give it, Acts 10. 44. and promises to pour it
out, Prove. 1. 22, 23. with 20. 21. verses. How true is that which J. Nayler
has, in the same place, according to our Scripture-doctrine? when a man has
been doing evil, neglecting good, and then he runs to act a worship to get
peace, the prayer becomes abomination; for he that regards impurity, the Lord
will not hear his prayers, nor accept his worships; that is Cains sacrifice, and
Esaus prayers: but either must your worship be performed in one that never
sinned, or it cannot be accepted with the pure God. Yet here is his
mis-guidance of lost souls,

1. That he would lead them off from joining with him that makes long prayers*
such a one, he seems to speak of, who hides his wickedness with pretense of
godliness; but he makes no difference of any that serve Christ and his people,
publicly, in the nation, as if they were all such, and to be separated from.

2. He directs to the commands in Spirit, in opposition to the
Scripture-Letter: for thus he delivers himself; Page 11.
All the Saints have their commands in Spirit, but yours is in the letter; and
so of another ministration; for the literal ministration is done away in the
spiritual. As if the Spirit did not give out his commands by the written
letter, or the Scripture, and his power also, by the reading and hearing of it;
and by praying according to the rules and patterns of prayer therein contained.
But something, O ye lost souls, you will find (when the great Shepherd seeks
up his lost ones, and brings back that which is gone astray, Ezekiel. 34. 16) ever
and anon that alienated your hearts from the Scripture, by the spirit of
Contradiction that is in these men's Teachings and Writings.

(15. Head of their Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning Singing.
Section 42.
I Gave account of their express words, We are against all your David's Praises
and Prophecies in meeter; contrary to Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. and other
Scriptures. R. F. Page 21.
makes me this return, Singing of Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, we
are not against, but own; but your Poetry we deny.

Rep. He might as well say, your translation of them into English meeter we
deny: But if Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs be owned, they are either
David's, and other of the Saints penning, and the Spirits inditing in the
Scripture, or of their own composing: if they own none but of their own
composing, they reject David's, and what was left for Psalms cannot be sung
without meeter, or due measures of speech.
our use in Scripture; contradicting both it by that rejection, and themselves
also, by owning Psalms, Hymns, and Songs, and dis-owning meeter or Poetry: for
never was there Song, Hymn, or Psalm sung forth, as it ought to be, but it had
some modulation, musical measure, or tune. What is Poetry, but a confined
speech, or words bound up into verses of so many feet? Or, what is meeter, but
a form of words ordered into set pauses and rests, and sung in its due
measures? And what better Poetry then that in the Scripture? which is
translated and ordered as suteth best to our own mother Tongue, for singing,
and teaching others to sing David's words and praises, with David's spirit.

But says R. F. We deny your teaching people to sing lies in hypocrisy,
saying, they are not puffed in mind, when they are puffed in mind; and, they have
no scornful eye, when they have.

Rep. 1. We call none to sing that which is not true, for the matter; and we
exhort them to sing in a sincere manner, with an upright heart.

2. A sincere heart may sing that, or other Psalms, as David's frame of spirit
more then his own; yet, with desires and breathings after a farther measure of
humility, weanedness of affection from the world, faith, joy in the holy Ghost,
etc.

3. If the wicked take the name of God in vain, sin lies at their door, we warn
them against hypocrisy. For this man therefore to say, We teach people to sing
lies in hypocrisy, is to speak a falsehood in plain English. He may think his
tongue and pen is his own, and none shall control him, yet I would have him
remember, Psalm 52. ver. 2, 4, 5.

(16 Head of their Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning Elders and Ordination.
Section 43.
ORdaining of Elders was not by man, said one; this I noted as contrary to Acts
14. 23. where by the direction and assistance of the Apostles, with the
suffrages, or consenting voices, and gestures of the Brethren, in the Churches,
Elders (Teaching and Ruling) were ordained; or being chosen, were set apart to
their office, by Prayer and fasting, in every Church. R. F. Page 21.
represents me, as if I had not truly quoted James Nayler, his Discovery of the
man of sin, Page 38. and calls the wisehearted to read that book, and it will
witness, and clear him, and the truth declared in it.

Rep. Agreed, let the wise-hearted read all that book, if they please, and
gather up more of his Errors, to witness against it, then I have done* But for
that which concerns Ordination, I again affirm, says J. Nayler, that the
ordaining of Elders by the direction of the Spirit, was not by man, nor of man,
nor any created power, etc. The wise-hearted here appealed to, will soon grant,
that which they never denied, That the direction of the Spirit was his own, not
man's; and the gift of the holy Ghost, was his gift: But if the holy Ghost makes
use of the Apostles, and of the Churches, to choose and set Elders apart, as he
did; then the wise-hearted will conclude against J. Nayler: this call is not
immediate, but mediate; a call of God by man, or by the ministry and service
of man, and is not disproved by what he has said to the contrary.

What has R. F. to say against it? This I say, The holy Ghost made Overseers,
and so Elders in the Church, Acts Acts 20. 28. vindicated.
20. 28. and the holy Ghost is not such men as you are.

Rep. 1. It were well for R. F. if he knew what or who the holy Ghost is. Under
that Head of the Trinity (as before Section 7.) he was no person, in his
judgment, distinct from the Father and the Son; and now he tells us, he is not
such men as we are: Why, what is he? Is he a man, or Angel? speak out R. F.
tell us what he is in thy judgment: for in ours, and according to the grounds
of our faith, laid down in Scripture, he is neither such men, as we, or the
Sect of men, called Quakers; nor is he such a person as man, nor is he man or
Angel, but the very God. And as he is God with the Father, and the Son, so he
is a divine person distinct from the personal subsistences of the Father and
the Son, as has been proved above.

2. What the Father and the Son do, he does, as to the making of Overseers, or
Bishops and Elders: he gives the office, he designs the officer, he furnishes
the Elders with graces and gifts fitting for the function, and he directs the
Church by his word and rule, whom to choose and set apart, 1 Timothy 3. Yea, he
approves of men's service in the setting apart of men to this, as other
offices; he made use of the Prophets and Teachers at Antioch, to separate him
Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto he had appointed them, as R. F.
acknowledges; but if he thinks that which follows, [ and they were sent
out by the holy Ghost] cuts off Ordination by man, it is a
contradicting-thought to the very Scripture he quoteth, Acts 13. ver. 3. When
they had Acts 13. 2, 4. vindicated.
fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away; and yet
are said to be sent forth by the Spirit, because they were but instrumental to
the Spirits sending; but if he sends by them instrumentally, he sends by them
mediately. If R. F. thinks the Spirits sending in this manner, does not cut
off Ordination by man, then he contradicts his fellow J. Nayler, who says,
Ordaining (no not so much as) of Elders was not by man.

(17. Head of their Scripture-contradiction) Concerning Ministers maintenance.
Section 44.
I Had noted what R. F. says in another Pamphlet, viz. The Apostle had a free
spirit, and was chargeable to no man, building this assertion upon 2 Cor. 11.
9. and 2 Cor. 11 9. vindicated.
mounting it up against Ministers taking any maintenance: He attends not the
Apostles limitations, I preached to you at Corinth, the Gospel of God freely,
ver. 7. With you, I was chargeable to no man, ver. 9. nor how he used his
liberty elsewhere to take wages, ver. 8. But he Page 22.
returns me some truth, and some railing (as his manner is) Paul coveted no man's
silver, nor gold, nor apparel, but preached the Gospel freely, and his hands
ministered to his necessities; That is truth, and will stand as a witness
against all proud, covetous, self-seeking, hireling Priests in Scotland and
elsewhere; and at the Truth which witnesses against your deceit, thou art
offended.

Rep. It no ways offends me that R. F. or any man can write out a
Scripture-truth, viz. That Paul was free of covetousness (in outward manifest
acts, while he had the body of all sin within him, take that truth with the
other, Romans 7.) but it offends me, and much more the holy and true God, when
his words are alleged to bad ends and purposes, and when more is collected
from them then he intends; as in this case of Ministers maintenance, and in
these instances of Preaching freely may stand with taking maintenance.
the Apostles words and practice: For,

[First,] Preaching the Gospel freely, may stand with taking allowance and
maintenance three ways.

1. When it is preached with a free and cheerful Spirit, as it should be
always, by all the Preachers of the Gospel, not by constraint, but willingly, 1
Pet. 5. 2.

2. When it is preached not for filthy lucre; that neither being the first nor
last end of the Preachers service, for then the wages they take becomes (to
them) filthy lucre.

3. When it is upon free-cost, in respect of some such as 2 Cor. 11 7. cleared.
we preach unto. They give, they contribute nothing; nothing is demanded of
them, but supplies are given and received from other persons, or places: This
was the Apostles case in reference to the Corinthians; he preached all upon
free-cost to them, took nothing of them; but took he nothing of others? Did he
live upon the Air? It Is fit for Ministers to live by Faith, but wanted other
Churches their Love, or did he refuse supplies from elsewhere? No, ver. 9. That
which was lacking to me (at Corinth) the brethren which came from Macedonia
supplied.

[Secondly,] From the Apostles working with his hands, Acts 20. 30. cannot be
collected, either that Ministers are Acts 20 34. vindicated.
bound to follow a trade, (for it is ordained of the Lord, they should live of
the Gospel, i. e. of the Allowance due to them for preaching the Gospel, 1 Cor.
9. 14. and not of a trade) 1 Cor. 9. 14. opened.
or, that Paul, and consequently others, might not have forborne working; for
expressly he tells the Corinthians, and others by them, what was the mind of
God, and is to this day. 1 Cor. 9. 6. Or I only and Barnabas have we not power
or liberty to forbear working? Observe it, [ Or I only and Barnabas] it
seems other Apostles used their liberty every where; Peter, James, and John
had left their nets (as to a trade of fishing, thereby to get their livelihood)
long before, as Matthew his Custom-house; and Paul and Barnabas might have left
their work of Tentmaking (as they had left off the trade) But at Corinth,
because Section 44
Paul met so providentially with Aquila and Priscilla, who by their occupation
were Tent-makers, and he had the skill, he practiced it with them, Acts 18. 3.
and at Ephesus, and at Thessalonica, 1 These. 2. 9. he labored with his hands,
to minister to his necessities; but there was no necessity, from any direct
precept, that he must so labor, or Sylvanus, or Timotheus: but says he, ver.
6. we might have been burthensom, as the Apostles of Christ.

[Thirdly,] Although the Apostles example, and what follows, Acts 20. 35. may
stand as a witness against all Acts 20. 35. vindicated.
loyterers in the ministerial work; and against all covetous, self-seeking,
hireling Preachers, in every place, (who make hire, and gain the end of their
preaching) yet does it not so much as once appear for witness against them, who
do what Paul himself did, by rule, viz. At some times, and in some places take
more allowance then otherwhile or where; nor against them that live merely upon
the allowance of Providence, for the preaching of the Gospel, not having learnt
a trade to help themselves withal; and if they had, may use or not use their
skill, and take pains, as it may be a furtherance or hinderance to their
Gospel-work. And these things well pondered, henceforth let not R. F. or others
go about to bind up Ministers where God has left them free; nor envy or
reproach their Calling, with the names of Hirelings and Priests, etc. without
distinction or difference, as if all were such who have their outward
livelihood (according to Gods ordinance) upon the account of preachingwork, and
labor, unto which, who is sufficient? Let not J. Nayler send abroad his
invectives against Town-teachers; his common place, concerning the ministry of
Christ Love to the lost, page 60, 6.
is little better: The Lord rebuke him, with his fellow R. F.

(18. Head of their Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning Immediate Calling.
Section 45.
THey pretend, as I noted, to an infallible judgment, and to a calling, not by
man, but Immediate; Whom God sends, he sends forth immediately. This, spoken
indefinitely, and meant universally, of all that God sends, is contrary, as I
hinted, to Gal. 1. 1. where Call to the Ministry, either, 1. Unlawful, of man
merely 2. Lawful, and of God.
Paul speaks of a sending of man, and by man, and by Jesus Christ. The sending
of man, is unlawful, when one man sends another who has no power to send, or
the man runs of his own head, upon his own errand; and either knows he is a
deceiver, or is deluded by Satan, and thinks himself immediately called, when
it is only the voice of his Fancy and Imagination. The sending of God is
twofold, either mediate, 1. By man. 2. Immediate. Gal. 1. 1. cleared.
or immediate; both lawful; God sends by man's ministry, that is mediate; or he
sends, at least, at first, without it: Now Paul's call, as it was not of man,
so, at the first, it was not of God, by man, but immediately, by Jesus Christ,
Acts 9.

R. F. Page 22.
is not herewith pleased, but thinks Gal. 1. Chap. will witness against what
I say; and why so? because, He that was immediately called and sent, does there
witness the same.

Rep. I affirm that Paul, at the first, was immediately called, so was he
immediately converted; were R. F. Ed. Buroughs, J. Nayler, J. Parnel, and
others, therefore immediately sent, because Paul was? We have a Proverb, I
would not have it offend, if I remember and mention it aptly, seasonably, and
justly; As the Bell tinketh, so the Fool thinks.

[ As for pretenses, we do not pretend to be immediately called (says R. F.)
and sent, but we witness that we are.

Rep. But who will believe them that witness of themselves, and have not the
signs of such a Calling upon them, but clash, and interfere with the Prophets
and Apostles Doctrine, at every turn almost? This is our present instance, all
mediate calls are cried down, and the immediate only cried up, and
misrepresented, mis-applyed, when as the Apostles, who had the most immediate
calls, were not against the other way of Gods calling men, by the Church, and
their own assistance of the Church in that work: But the holy Ghost has left
their practice with his Rule obligatory to us, 1 Timothy 5. 22. and 6. 14. with
Titus 1. 5. yet will R. F. proceed to say Page 22.
, We witness with him that thou accusest; and that is Ed. Buroughs, whose
words in my former piece I only hinted at; now take them as largely (though he
has much more to the same purpose) as is needful. Warning to Underbarrow, by
E. B. p. 16.
The Ministry called by the earthly powers, by earthly Magistrates, or at
Oxford, Cambridge, or Newcastle, all this Ministry, who is here called, is by
man, and their Gospel is of man, which the true Gospel is not; and he that has
the word of God, to declare from God, his call is not by man, neither does he
go to man to be approved; for he that preached the true Gospel, consulted not
with flesh and blood; and so it is now, the same thing do we witness, and to be
Ministers of the everlasting Gospel, called not by man, but by God. Thus far E.
B. Let the light in R. F. his natural conscience judge, whether I said not
truly, when I referred to E. B. his Book, as pleading only for an immediate
call; and that none preach the true Gospel, but such as have that call; and
then let the light of the Scriptures (above cited) to Timothy and Titus, judge,
whether such, as they laid hands on, were Ministers or no; and whether the
Gospel they preached was true Gospel or not. By Ed. Buroughs verdict such were
not called of God, because they had a hand in their call; nor could they preach
true Gospel, because their call; nor could they preach true Gospel, because
their call was but mediate: But praised be God, we neither stand nor fall to
these men's verdicts; the Lord himself, by the Scripture, shall judge them and
us. And as to All have not call to office, who have outward liberty of
preaching.
that which E. Buroughs says, about the Ministry called by earthly powers,
or at Oxford, etc. according to Scripture, I distinguish between their outward
encouragement, and call to office: Earthly powers are to give outward liberty
to such as by the Godly-learned are tried and approved, as men fit to have
public liberty, and encouragement, 2 Chro. 17. 7, 8, 9. The call to office,
in the Church, is by the Church. Again, we must distinguish between Paul's not
consulting with flesh and blood, whether he had a true call, or the true
Gospel, (being immediately called and taught by Probation an* approbation
requisite for whom?
Jesus Christ) and ordinary men's refusal to be tried, and approved, either for
the obtaining of outward liberty or office; for the Rule is clear as to
ordinary officers, 1 Timothy 3. 10. Let these also first be proved; which [ also]
presupposes the Bishops and Elders, to be under the command of Christ, for
submission to a trial, (as the Deacons) first, and before they be chosen to the
work. And as concerning those who assume liberty to teach, it is commended in
Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. that he spoke comfortably unto all the Levites, that
taught the good knowledge of the Lord: And in the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, Rev. 2. 2. that he had tried them which said they were Apostles, and
were not, and had found them liars; which is the plain case now in controversy
between us and the Quakers; whether they be Apostles, seeing they pretend to
immediate calling; and whether we are Pastors and Teachers, who are called by
the Church: or, whether they are not liars, who say they are Apostles, and
bring not the doctrine and zeal of true Apostleship. Till the Lord does more
discover them, and all pretenders to one call or other, I must attend R. F. and
examine what he further offers.

All thy mediate calls and sendings will not prove thee to be as Paul and
Timothy was, that had the gift within him, and the testimony by the holy Ghost,
as they had.

Rep. 1. I pretend to no such call of an Apostle, an officer in every Church,
as was Paul: or of an Evangelist, an assisting officer to the Apostles, where
they saw fit to send him, as was Timothy, Titus, and others.

2. All that R. F. says of his immediate call, will not prove him to be called
as Paul was, by a voice from heaven; for then, happily, he might have heard
sounding in his ears, Richard, Richard, why do persecute me, with thy
calumnies and reproaches? Or, Farnworth, Farnworth, why do throw dirt upon my
face, by pretending to honor me as the word of God, and ownest not my
Scriptures to be my word? Why do deny my Spirit to be what he is, etc.

3. I acknowledge the gift within, and testimony by the holy Ghost, when they
are found in us, to be the best Letters Inward call to be tried by the outward
fruits.
testimonial, as to an inward call; but these suffice not to prove the outward
call, unless the fruits of that inward gift and testimonial appear. If the gift
and testimony within would carry it before men (as to the man himself that has
them) and that R. F. did know it in those that he dis-owns for the Ministers of
Christ, I think, he would not crucify them so often with the ignominious
title, of Romish Priests and Hirelings: but how shall he, or we, be known among
men, if our words and works without, be not called forth, to bear witness of
what is within? By thy words thou R. F. shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned, Mat. 12. 37. I am to answer at the same Bar, and to be
tried the same way. Our words must be tried by Gods word, and our works also by
the same Rule. If Scripture of Old and New Testament be the Scripture of God,
there have been counterfeits of an immediate call; and some mediately sent of
God, by man, who with their mediate call have been and still are approved of
the Lord.

Section 46.
TO this Section R. F. says nothing (in his wonted show of words, but is
wholly silent) where I had noted, that (as they cry up their own pretended
immediate Call, so) they condemn any mediate call as carnal; for mediate (say
Glory of the Lord, etc. page 6, 7.
they) is carnal and natural. I granted there is a call of man, by man, which
is carnal; and I instanced in such people, as make choice of carnal men, by the
hands of a carnal, common, foreign Eldership; But this is not our Question: they
fight All mediate calls not carnal.
against the most orderly call, if man has any hand, or voice, or consent
testified about it: Hence it is that R. F. will not vouchsafe with patience, to
take notice of the two Scriptures which I desired the Reader to compare, viz.
Acts 14. 23. with chap. 20. 28. where the Elders, called by the Churches, and
set apart by their and the Apostles fasting and prayer, are said to be the Holy
Ghost's Bishops; such as He made Overseers. Accordingly are all Elders, Pastors
and Teachers called; if called of God: Even Evangelists were called of God, by
man: Mark by Barnabas and Paul Acts 13 5.
, Timothy, Titus, Silas, or Sylvanus, and others by Acts 16. 3. Titus 1. 5 Acts
15. 40.
Paul; much more fixed Officers, set in every Congregational Society. As the
Apostles had a power Paramount under Christ, to call and take Evangelists to
their assistance, so the Churches had a power from Christ to choose their
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, and to set them apart by prayer and
fasting: and what power they had then, they have still who are Churches, or
companies of visible Saints, called out, and distinguished from the wicked,
ignorant and untoward multitude, by their free consents, and professed
subjection to Christ, and his Laws of Worship and Government. Let these daring
men calumniate all Gospel-administrations, with the term of mediate stuff, and
think by their high swelling words of vanity all mediate call's are razed out
in the full, as their phrase is, the Scripture will stand, and the means of the
new Testament worship, and order, will stand immutable, to the Lord his
appearing in glory, at his second coming: according to the charge of Paul to
Timothy, 1 Ep. Chap. 6. ver. 13, 14. And as the command of Christ for
Church Order is perpetual, so the call of God, by the Church, is spiritual. The
The Churches call Spiritual.
holy Ghost in the Scripture lays down spiritual Rules, 1 Timothy 3. He confers
spiritual gifts according to his Rules; and the Church, a spiritual
Corporation, gives the outward call, where they find such spiritual characters
and qualifications: God owns this choice, while the Quakers with carnal
Parishioners, dis-own it; who will have the worst of it in conclusion, the day
shall declare.

(19. Head of their Scripture-contradiction) Concerning Immediate Teaching.
Section 47.
IHad noted how they pretended to be immediately taught. The teaching of God
(says one) is immediate in the least degree: contrary to Dan. 9. 1. 1 Timothy 4.
14. R. F. answers Page 22.
We do not pretend so to be, but we witness that we are so taught, and
according to the promise of the Lord.

Rep. 1. But who will believe him, and his fellows, when the witness is of
themselves, from themselves, and without proof? They that flee to an
experience, and a promise for proof, must first show the promise, and then the
performance of it to themselves. I am yet to learn the promise of the Immediate
Teachings of God, to be given to all that are to teach others, of which is the
question. The promise, John 6. 45. They shall all be taught of God, concerns
all John 6. 45. vindicated. All Believers not immediately taught.
that have truly believed, do, or shall so believe; all the children of Gods
election, all the children of the Church-Catholique, and of the new Jerusalem,
Isa. 54. 13. which teaching, if God had intended to be given immediately, i. e.
without any medium, means, or instrument, then would he not have sent Preachers
abroad for them to hear, thereby to be taught and drawn to believing.

2. Had all that the Lord sent forth as Gospel-dispensers, immediate teaching?
we grant Paul had it more immediately, Apostles immediately taught.
more fully, and more at once, then the rest of the Apostles, Gal. 1. 12. and
2. 6. will R. F. and his Brethren witness the same immediate teaching, with
Paul, and the utmost height of his revelation, that nothing can be added to
them? We grant the rest of the Apostles had the immediate teaching, and ducture
of the Spirit in their preaching and writing: But are all Apostles? 1 Cor. 12.
28. compared with Ephesians. 4. 11. There was a second sort of the Ministers of
Christ, who were called Evangelists, (assistants to the Apostles) these had
their light and knowledge by mediate Evangelists taught mediately.
ways: Timothy is instructed of Paul, 2 Timothy 2. 2. and 3. 10, 14. (as taught
out of the Scriptures, by his mother and grandmother, from his childehood, 2 Timothy 1. 5. with Chap. 3. 13.) Apollos was instructed (...)
in the way of the Lord, by the Scriptures, Acts 18. 24, 25. and had the way of
God more perfectly expounded to him by Aquila and Priscilla, ver. 26. These
Evangelists were of too low a form for R. F. and men and women too of his way.
There was a third Some prophets immediately inspired.
sort called Prophets; some of which were immediately taught, and inspired with
knowledge of things to come; some of these, men, as Agabus, Acts 11. 28. and
21. 10. some, women, as Philips four daughters, which did prophecy, Acts 21.
9. I do not find that Quaking men and women pretend to this kind of immediate
teaching, received about things to come. Other Prophets there were, Some
prophets mediately taught.
who were mediately taught; as they at Corinth, and elsewhere, who did, out of
the old Testament, expound, give the sense of the Prophets writings, and raise
Doctrines, confirming them by edifying testimonies, and reasons out of
Scripture, to edifying use and benefit of Believers principally and Churches; 1
Cor. 14. 3. compared with ver. 22. latter part. These I cannot call men quite
out of office (as the word Office is largely taken, Romans 12. 4.) Every member
has an office, that is, work and employment in the body mystical, as natural;
but as the word is taken strictly, they were, and may be persons out of office,
i. e neither Apostles, nor Evangelists, nor Prophets, foretelling things
future, nor Pastors and teaching Elders. As they were not Apostles,
Distinguished 1. from extraordinary officers.
nor Evangelists, (that is plain enough) so,

First, you will find them distinguished from the Prophets, immediately
inspired two ways.

1. These might be taken off by one that had a revelation: They might have a
Doctrine, ver. 26. who had not a Revelation; 1 Cor. 14. 26. and 29. opened.
which coming immediately for time and manner, when the other was speaking, was
to take place and be heard, while the Prophet, who only has a Doctrine, or
truth collected from Scripture, is to give place and hold his peace. This only
for order sake; not but that the doctrine from Scripture was as infallible as
the Revelation; and the immediate Revelation was to pass the trial, as the
doctrine, verse 29. and 32.

2. In so much as women are excluded from this kind of prophecy, by two or
three at a time, verse 29. with ver. 34. But if it had been extraordinary
predictions of things to come, they, i. e. women, might have delivered their
message.

Secondly, you will find these gifted brethren (endued 2. From ordinary.
only with a gift of scripture-exposition, and application) distinguished from
Pastors and Teachers in peculiar office, As two or three might exercise at a
time, for which a liberty is granted, ver. 29. Now if they had been Pastors and
Teachers in office strictly, there was no question but they might have preached
at all seasons, when the Church met together, and a necessity is laid upon
them, in season and out of season; a liberty only is granted to these
Prophets, and that liberry is limited also, as before. Would R. F. or his
Fellows be content with this low Form among gifted brethren in a Church, who
have received their gift, by reading, and study of the Scriptures, together
with conference, and observation of their own and others experiences (which
being sanctified and blessed by the Spirit of God helps men forth to teach
others, till they be called to office, or whether ever they be chosen to
office, or not) it would something savor of an humble spirit: But as some deem
this exercise of the gift of Prophecy too high for a believing brother, so he,
and those of his Spirit (not in this guided by the Spirit of God) think it too
low for themselves, and all other Teachers: and therefore whosoever are not
taught as immediately as the Apostles of the highest Form, are no Teachers with
them. Hence he adds, Page 22.
And thou that art not taught of him, shows that thou speaks a vision of thy
own heart, and not from the mouth of the Lord. This is his judgment, but
erroneous enough, and contradictious to the whole Scripture, as not being the
mouth of the Lord. And if I affirm (as I did) the true Prophets studied the
Scripture, True prophets studied the Scripture.
that is my imagination.

Rep. The true Prophets were either under the Old, or New Testament, before or
since Christ.

1. Before; some of them studied the word, who were at other times immediately
inspired, as I instanced in Dan. 9. 1. Dan 9. 1. vindicated.
If Daniel understood by books; he read, and considered what he read in those
books; what was prophesied of the captivity, when it began, when it should end:
and the writings of Jeremy were the Books, as Daniel himself tells us, by which
he understood the number of the years etc. Others were trained up in a ordinary
way, in the schools of the Prophets, under Samuel at Ramah, 1 Samuel 19 under
Elijah at Bethel and Jericho (although the Lord added impulses and
inspirations, more then ordinary, and more immediately, to some of these
afterward) this is none of my imagination; If R. F. goes on to charge it, I
shall still lay his Scripture-contradiction before him, and at his door it will
lie, till he repents of it, for he charge not falsehood upon me but upon the
word of God, whence I demonstrate what I affirm.

2. Since Christ; the true Prophets studied the word: The Scriptures studied
(Gods Spirit going along therewith) made them Prophets in ordinary, of whom
Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 14. (as it fitted A pollos and Timothy for Evangelists)
what has R. F. to say against it? no prophecy of the Seripture came in old
time by the will of man (then not studied) but holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost, and the Scripture is of no private interpretation.

Rep. 1. By prophecy of Scripture, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. is 2 Pet. 1. 20. 21
vindicated.
meant the word and mind of God declared in writing. God lest it not to man's
will, what, and when, and how he should write his Canon; But he did immediately
inspire, and dictate to the Penmen of Scripture, matter, manner, and time. It
follows Scripture is to be studied, because inspired of God
not because the Secretaries of the holy Ghost wrote by his immediate
inspiration, therefore the Prophets, and Teachers are not to teach others, but
as they are immediately inspired: But it will follow from hence, and make
against R. F. as it did in the first Section, and the sixth; that if there is
nothing of the will of man, or private-selfish meaning and sense, in the
Scripture, then is it a rule for Teachers, as Scholars; and they that will
teach sound doctrine, must teach from, and according to the Scripture; and
therefore had need study, and meditate on the Scripture, that he may be a right
man of God (the title of a true Prophet) thoroughly 2 Timothy 3. 17.
furnished to all the work of a Minister as of a Christian.

2. This truth is not only given forth by sound consequence, but directly, and
expressly the will of God is laid down, 1 Timothy 4. 15. Meditate upon these
things. Timothy an Evangelist must study that Epistle which Paul wrote to (...)
him, and be wholly in them, he must be taken up altogether therewith, refer
all his studies, bend all his thoughts to the knowledge of the Scriptures: And
2 Timothy 3. 17. with 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God etc. that
the man of God, the minister of the Gospel, may be perfect: i. e. have a sacred
library to converse with in all ages, and be made a complete Scholar, able to
teach, reprove, instruct and comfort out of Scripture store and furniture.
Hence we Bonus Textuarius, bonus Theologus.
use to say, A good Text-man, a good Divine, or an able man of God: and he is
likely to be a light and treacherous Prophet, who slights the meditation of
Scripture-Text, and speaks only quicquid in buccam venerit, what comes next to
his tongues end. A fourth sort of ministers are Pastors and Pastors and
Teachers, mediately taught.
Teachers, who having the grace of God, and gift of prophecy, are called out
from among the Brethren to office, and oversight of the flock, as Bishops of
the Lords institution. These were not so immediately taught, that I can find,
in the Apostles times; but rather by means and ways of the Lords appointment,
they were trained up and fitted for the office; as by the exercise of their
gift of Prophecy, beforehand, 1 Cor. 14. (each Church being as a School of the
Prophets, and that of Corinth eminently) so by their submission to trial, at
election, 1 Timothy 3. 10. And besides, none but disciples, of some years in
nature, and standing in grace and profession, were called to the office of
Pastor, or teaching Elder: now such disciples were first taught of others, of
catechized, instructed in an outward way; hence the (...).
Greek word for disciple, comes of another that signifies to learn by outward
teaching. Those that heard John Baptist were first called disciples (whereof
Andrew was one, Simon Peter's brother, John 1. 40.) They that heard and followed
Christ's Sermons were also called disciples, and so we are all believers and
members of the Churches, till at Antioch they were also called Christians;
disciples, as taught outwardly; Chrians, as anointed with the Spirit, and
partakers of Christ's grace and gifts: And such being chosen, who were outwardly
as inwardly trained up, I conclude, immediate teachings did not only furnish
men for a Teachers, or Ministers function, but mediate ways also: which is both
a warrant for them that desire the office of a Bishop first to study the
Scriptures, and an encouragement also for Churches to covet gifts, and chiefly
that they may prophecy; and for University Scholars to give up themselves to
present catechizings, and exercises after Sermons (as they have begun in the
Colleges) for the better storing of them with grounds of knowledge, and
discovery of such disciples as the Lord has begun to teach inwardly., by and
with outward teaching, that they may be issued forth for service in the
ministry; after grounds laid in their understandings, and some experimental
work of grace, approved of (if it might be) in some of the Churches of Jesus
Christ. And oh that, to this end, all the larger Schools of the Prophets might
become little Churches, and all the Churches of the Saints, might become little
Schools of the Prophets! that Universities might emulate the Churches for their
holiness; and Churches might emulate the Universities for their knowledge in
the Scriptures!

If yet R. F. be not convinced, nor contented, but will proceed to say as he
does; Page 22.
thou that denies immediate teachings and says the Spirit is in the Letter and
given by it, thou may well accuse us falsely, that so lies against God, and his
Spirit.

I Reply; 1. He speaks he knows not what, for the asserting of ordinary mediate
teachings of them that are to teach others, does not exclude the other, where
God is pleased to give them; but so to cry up what is immediate as to shut out
mediate, by ministerial instruments, and by the Scriptures, is contradictory to
the mind of God therein, and to the constant series and course of his
dispensation from the Primitive times downwards. Little does he or others (that
de-cry study, and industry, and mediate ways of preparation for the work of the
Ministry) either consider what is written, 2 Timothy 2. 2. The things that thou
have heard of me, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to
teach others also: or know, what dependencies we have upon the Lord, both in
our studies, and after all our travels; having learnt, a little, both to
prepare, as if no assistance should be given, and so depend (upon him that
called us, and uses us) in our delivery, as if we had not studied nor
prepared. Little does he know how far we can trust the Lord when we have no
time for study, or what more immediate assistance we have, after the less or
greater use of the means, upon occasion.

2. Less does he know of the immediate teachings of God (whatever are his
janglings about it) who thinks it a lie against God, and his Spirit, to say,
the Spirit is in the Letter of the Scripture, and is given by it. Never did any
that were most immediately taught, call off, not people only, but teachers
also from the Scriptures, which carry Spirit, Light, and Life with them, for
their own interpretation. Never did any but God-slayers, and Spirit-wounders,
go about to separate the Words of God, and his Breath, one from the other; but
of that passage and string which he harps so often upon, some account has been
given Sect. 1. and more shall follow in its due place Part 2. Sect 8.
.

3. Least of all does he understand of our Gospel-wideeffectual doors opened,
both for sending and going about our work, when he clamors, thou ran, as the
false prophets did; or how far the Lord has taught us to profit the people,
and what seals he has set to our ministerial labors, when he judges, and
concludes, and so does not profit the people at all. Men blinded with malice
let fly at all adventures; let R. F. look to his heart, for out of that in his
heart, does he write, be it good, be it evil.

(20* Head of their Scripture-contradiction) Concerning Questions.
Section 48.
I Am very well contented to read a Recantation about Questions; if it prove so
practically, that they will as well allow of our questioning them, as they
expect we should attend, or answer any of their Queries. In Scotland, as I
said, Questions were cried down, as of the Devil, and as so many snares: R. F.
owneth Questions in their place, he says Page 23.
, But such as are of the Devil, we deny. Agreed thus far: But to hold our
agreement, we had need know what are the Questions that are set in due place,
or what is the due place for Questions, and what are the Questions that are of
the Devil, what not? I gave forth some information in my former Collection,
touching the persons questioning, and questioned, the principle, and end,
manner, as matter of the Question. In Reply to R. F.

1. As to owning Questions in their place, I must tell Fit place for Questions
and Answers.
him, (if he be a member of a Family) it is a fit place, for superiors to ask,
and inferiors to answer Questions; and also for wives, lovingly, to ask
Questions (as the Apostle says) of their husbands at home, (whatsoever
tropical gloss R. F. would put upon the words, 1 Cor. 14. 35.) as for children
and servants, humbly and dutifully, to propound their doubts, and desire
resolution of their parents and governors, Exodus 12. 26. And it suteth my place
of a Replicant, to ask him, whether he, and others of his way, do own
catechizing, and instructing by way of Question and answer, in the Family?
Again, I must tell him, it is a fit place for him and his fraternity, to answer
to the Questions of Magistrates, but I have known some of them refuse to answer
unto such things as have been propounded in the pursuit of truth and peace. It
was also a fit place for one of them to have answered, when he had asked a
godly Pastor of a Church in Suffolk, Art thou for trembling? and the Minister
had told him, he would answer him that Question, if he would answer him
another; to which proposal he made a promise, but performed it not* for when
the Minister had told him, he did own trembllng; but withal added, to this
effect; I read of Moses trembling at the foot of mount Sinai; and of Saul's
trembling when the Devil appeared in the shape of Samuel; and of the Devils
trembling; and of the Saints working out their Salvation with fear and
trembling; the Question was, which of these sorts of trembling he owned; at
which, the man turned his back, and went his way discontented and speechless,
as if he had been strangled, as sometime Christ put the Sadduces to silence,
Mat. 22. 34. the Greek word is (...).
as much as haltered; alluding to beasts that have bits or halters put in their
mouths, or muzzles upon their chaps, to keep them from biting or doing
mischief. I asked J. Parnel once, whether he was not bred and educated among
ignorant Papists, but could have no answer: it is fit that Question should be
answered by some, but it was a silencing Question to him. If I should ask R. F.
as I have reason so to do, whether he be not employed (with some others) by
Satan's Engineers, as a cane, for some Jesuit or Socinian to blow through, and
fly-blow the truths of God, about the Scriptures, the Spirit, the Ministry of
Christ, etc. It is a dubious case whether he will heartily answer to it; or,
what he meant by his answer to his late masters Question, Art thou Christ?
whereto he said, I am, how he can, without blasphemy, make it out: Or, if I
should ask him, whether he writes any Scripture truth, in love of the
Scripture, or only to catch and cavil, I doubt whether I should not have some
of his old ware vended; for all his pack is not yet emptied, unless God
restrain and stop his mouth, and dry up his pen and inkhorn terms.

2. As to his, and his fellows denying such Questions as are What Questiona are
of the Devil.
of the Devil, I wish they would make good this denial: But since I heard in
Scotland, that Questions were of the Devil, I have read of many Questions of
theirs, which come from no better spirit, then the old Serpent and Satan: The
Question is, whether R. F. will own them as of God, or deny them as being of
the devil? I read in one A Declaration against Popery, Quere 6.
of their Pamphlets, to this purpose, Whether you, that say bread and wine (i.
e. in our Lords Supper) is the body and blood of Christ, be not they that mind
earthly things, and are carnal and natural? In my poor judgment, this Question
is from ignorance of the Lords purpose in his instituted Supper, which calls
upon us to mind spiritual and heavenly things, by what are earthly and
natural, i. e. bread and wine in their substance, but spiritual in their
signification and use, during the celebration: and unsavory this Question is to
such as truly own the remembrance of Christ in that Ordinance. Again they Quere
Quere 10.
, Whether every one may not purchase bread and wine, and whether any can
purchase the body and blood of Christ for money? Now, if ignorant, unsavory,
vain, needless, and unprofitable Questions come of the Devil, and R. F. denies
such, will he deny this to be any other? If he says, he yields it to be vain,
etc. his fellows do not, he must then, herein at least, deny them; if he
maintains it for good, he must so prove it: I judge it to be (as the former)
ignorant and unsavory; in that it arises from the not distinguishing between
the inward and outward part of the Lords Supper; and needless, vain, and
unprofitable, because not tending to edification, but merely to strife and vain
jangling. Another tempting and upbraiding Question Quere 21.
there is, Whether ever any of you received the substance since that which you
called the sign was practiced by you, and so bear witness to the substance, and
deny the sign, yea, or nay? The scope of this indeed is diabolical, to throw
off the sign of Christ's appointment, when they come to feel the substance;
whereas, the true method of Christians, is first to receive the substance,
Christ in the promise, before they join with the Church to receive the sign
(because the Ordinance of the Supper is not a converting Ordinance, if we speak
of the true initial work) for confirming and carrying on of the work of faith,
and love, holiness, etc. And, if none should receive the sign and memorial of
Christ's death, after they have by faith in the Gospel-promise received the
substance, they should, orderly, never receive the sign at all. How insolent
and ignorant a Question is that? Quere 27.
Whether do you wait and believe to be made heirs with Christ, yea, or nay? and
to have the same mind which was also in Jesus Christ, who thought it no
robbery to be equal with God? whether you witness this, yea, or nay? Will R. F.
acknowledge the subtilty and wickedness of this Quere (say I) yea, or nay? For
the blessed Apostle, Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7. presses to the same Phil 12. 5. etc
vindicated.
humble mind that was in Jesus Christ, who, being in the form of God (that is
left out in the Question) thought it no robbery, etc. But made himself of no
reputation, etc. all that in ver. 7, and 8. should have been added, if the
Question had not been snarling, and contradictious to the Apostles scope; which
is far from teaching Christians (as is the intent of the Question) to aspire
after any such thought, as to be equal with God: we may know and believe our
heir-ship and coheir-ship with Christ in glory, and yet stoop to mean estates
and conditions, with low minds here on earth, and carry no such proud thought
to heaven, as the Question does insolently dictate. Is this the perfection
these men talk of, to harbor proud thoughts in their bosoms, of being equal
with God, because Christ thought it no robbery so to be? Oh ye deceived
professors! lift not up your horns on high; speak not with a stiff neck, beyond
the Donatists of old, or as the Familists of later times, but remember those
who were nicknamed Puritans in Queen Elizabeth's days, and since, for their
sincere endeavors after Purity; be humble (in the midst of failings) as they
were, and forsake the tents of these Corahs, Dathans, and Abirams, or worse;
who not only think themselves as perfect as Saints in heaven, but hope
hereafter (if they be not here) to be equal in perfection and glory with God.
Lord, rebuke this Blasphemy in all thine, and convince all obstinate
gainsaying Questionists, which is not in our power to do, but instrumentally
we desire to be subservient in the work, according to thy word, Titus 1. 9. To
proceed, (...).
I shall instance but in another Pamphlet, (for their Questions are endless,
and to attend the Answers would be a needless endless work) As R. F. denies
Questions that are of the Devil, I hope he will not deny most ignorant and
proud Questions to be of the Devil, (as from old Adam also) as that for one,
Fruits of a Fast. page 19.
What rule have you in Scripture for putting off the Hat? That this Question
arises from pride, appears by another, Quest. 20. in the same Book, Page 20.
Whether is it for the Lords sake, that a man would have his fellow creature
stand with his Hat off before him, or for his selfsake? Fellow Creatures, they
think, must be all alike in honor. This might be the thought of those creatures
that are now Devils, which made them Devils; and by the 21. Quest. He that for
the Lords sake, etc. cannot bow to a creature, whether ought he to be
imprisoned for mis-behavior, or a contemner of Authority, yea or nay? The first
Question bewrays ignorance, which if R. F. justifies, he must be sent to the
Catechism, out of Exodus 20. 12. and asked, what is the fifth Commandment, and
what it means? and what Romans 13. 7. Render honor to whom honor is due. I hope
R. F. will grant that quarrelling Questions are of the Devil, as was that, Job
1. 9. Does Job serve God for naught? such is that in the forementioned
Pamphlet page 22.
, Whether is your Gospel free and without charge, as the Apostles was, yea or
nay?

For, 1. To clear God; He will not let his servants serve him for naught.

2. To clear his servants; This I say again (as before, Sect. 44.) they may
serve with a free spirit, yet take wages, (whereof the Laborer is worthy) for
they serve not the Lord in the ministry for wages. It is one thing (as I have
said elsewhere) to take hire for preaching, another thing to preach for hire.
By the Scripture, that Question also page 22. Qu. 4.
may be judged proud and malicious, as of the Devil; What rule have you in
Scripture to take a Text, etc. If R. F. justifies this (as it is likely he will)
we must bid him go and learn, and what that means, Luke 4. 17. our humble
Savior took up the Bible, and pitched upon a Text; let us learn, at last, of
him to be lowly in heart, Matthew. 11. 29. If it be said, it follows in the
Question, and to speak from it what you have studied, with your Uses, Points,
Trials, Motives, and Applications? We must send them again to 2 Timothy 3 16, 17.
The Scripture is given so to be improved, whether men will hear or forbear. Let
R. F. consider, if the scope of that Qu. 24.
Question [ Whether that Light which comes from Christ be natural, yea or nay?]
be not to make all Light-given alike for kind? as appears by Quere 29.
Whether the Light of the world (or of every man) be not a saving Light in the
least measure, yea or nay? and how can that be said to be natural? These
Questions come from the Devils envy against the Saints peculiar light, who see
all things after another manner then natural men can do. The Gentiles did things
by nature, or power of natural conscience, and the light of it; which yet they
perished in; their light and their works were neither of them saving, Romans 2.
12, and 14. This light of nature comes from Christ as God, not as Mediator: he
that is the true Light, enlightneth every man, but not with saving Light; I
must send back R. F. to Sect. 10. and the superadded Conclusions, in the end
thereof. If any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant, 1 Cor. 14. 38. But yet if
we examine those Questions, Qu. 44 and 45.
Where had you this Doctrine, to tell people they could never be wholly
cleansed, or be set free from sin, so long as they are upon the earth? And,
whether this be not in opposition to the Doctrine of Christ, who says, Be ye
perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect? What shall we find here but
ignorance and confusion? for want of will or skill, to distinguish between
Justification and Sanctification, which, according to the Scripture, I have
desired R. F. and others, to perpend and weigh in Sect. 23. And I must send all
Novices still to that Scripture, Eccles. 7. 20. There is not a just man upon
earth that does good, and sins not; which has no opposition to the Doctrine
of Christ, Mat. 5. 48. where the Lord (as all along the Chapter) Mat. 5 48.
vindicated.
urges sincerity and integrity of obedience upon his Disciples (in opposition
to the Pharisees counterfeit and partial expositions of the ten Commandments)
with further growth and endeavor after more conformity to their heavenly
pattern; still keeping perfection in all degrees, as the white in their eye,
unto which the Lord will bring his children at their dissolution, and time of
their souls immediate entrance into heaven, and not before, as has been
demonstrated in Sect. 29. As to that Question, Qu 48.
What is your own righteousness, and what is the righteousness of Christ, and
how do you distinguish betwixt the one and the other? He that did propound it,
tells us (at the foot of Page 25.) It was not as if he knew them not, (even all
that he enquired of) but for the satisfaction of the simple, and for the
clearing of the truth, and manifesting our deceit to the world. But that which
is a thorough good Question indeed, not coming from Satan, and a corrupt heart,
must arise from a sound and good principle, and be propounded to as good an
end: Now, this Quere, 1. proceeds not from a good principle, because their
judgments are vitiated, and in their Doctrine they confound (as do the
Papists) our inherent righteousness-sanctifying, with Christ's righteousness
which justifies. Christ's righteousness, which justifies a believing sinner,
is not the essential righteousness of his Godhead, but that obedience of his,
Active and Passive, which in the humane nature (that he assumed, and united to
his divine person) he wrought out in the room and stead of others; and which,
he presenting to Gods Justice, as a price and ransom for them, God accepts,
and reckons to every one that believes for his perfect Justification. That
righteousness which is in Scripture called our own, as inherent in us; is,
either what is done by the power of natural conscience, without the written
word; or, what is done according to the bare letter of the written command; or,
from a common gift of the Spirit; or, in a Gospel-way, from a living principle
of grace, habits and acts of holiness, by the holy Spirit and faith, given,
stirred up, actuated, and improved; this also (with all the former) is a
righteousness of ours, that men would establish in the room of Christ's imputed
righteousness, for their justification: But though it be wrought by the
strength of Christ in us, and be found in us, that are sanctified; yet, as to
justification of his person, Paul would not be found in it for a world; but,
says he, Phil. 3. 8, 9. I do count all things but loss (even what he had done
and suffered, since conversion, and what he was now a doing) and dung, that I
may win Christ; and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which
is of the Law, (or done in my person, from the best principles in obedience to
the Law) but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which
is of God by faith; this is every true Believers vote and resolution. If R. F.
be otherwise minded, and belong to God, God shall reveal even this unto him.

2. The above mentioned Quere, by the bare propounding does not attain the ends
pretended: our answer may satisfy some simple ones, some wise, not all: This
Quere (and other of the like stamp) does but obscure the truth, and help to
stagger and seduce Gods servants; as for our deceit, in this great business of
a sinners justification; if J. Parnell should arise from the dead, or R. F.
should tell us he has been in the third Heaven; nor one, nor other shall be
able to manifest that which is not. To conclude, whence came that Quer. 3^.
question, quarrelling more with God, then with us? How does it stand with the
impartial God, to give to one man a measure of grace, and not to another, and
yet require obedience from all? If R. F. thinks, there is ground for such a
Question, he must be sent to Romans 9. 18. 20. for his Answer; God has mercy on
whom he will have mercy etc. and, O man, who art thou that replyest against God?

(21. Head of their Scripture-contradiction.) Concerning civil Honor.
Section 49.
THeir discourse, papers and practice is notorious enough, in opposition to
civil honor, required in Scripture.

R. F. Page 2^
answers, Civility and Honor we own, and knows to whom honor is due, to whom
it is not.

Rep. But who will believe him, if none make it out by Argument better then he
does? and if his practice be no better then his doctrine, it is like to prove
but poor honor, and not such as the Scripture requires.

1. Says he, If I honor a proud man for his pride, I dishonor God in so doing
etc.

Rep. Who calls (that calls from Scripture) for honor to any for their pride,
and covetousness and oppression? This is but a shift of R. F. Is not the
ordinance of superiority, in State, Church, Family, set up among men to be
honored? and cannot men set up by that ordinance, be honored, but Civil Honor
due to superiors.
they must be honored for their sins? Sin we all know, is a reproach to any
person, as to any nation. But the relation wherein God has set them above
others is an honor to them, put upon them by God himself, and are not they to
be honored, as, and so far as he has honored them? viz. as Magistrates, as
Ministers, as Parents, as Masters, considered abstractly from their bad
qualities? and only looked upon in their place of superiority representing God,
and bearing his image of authority, which though lost by the fall, yet God has
given back, in some respect, to all men; Hence the Rule, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Honor
all men; all men, as men, not Beasts; and some men, as preferred by the Lord
before other. But says R. F.

2 All men that are joined to the Lord, and walk in union with him, and his
seed, I honor and love, and this I speak in sincerity.

Rep. This is no demonstration of giving civil honor, or knowing what belongs
to it, which was-by him at first professed. Did R. F. not only speak, but act
this in sincerity, yet there is an ignorant simplicity mixed with his
sincerity, while he thinks, that love to Saints must exclude his love to
other men; and if he can love his enemies, as he says, To all, as men.
civil honor is a branch of love to be given to them that are not joined to the
Lord and walk with him, though they be his enemies; which of the martyrs
refused to give civil honor to their persecuting enemies, when called before
them? But says R. F. again,

3. To follow foolish idle fancies, to worship men with cap and knee, and
flatteries, as the Serpents seed do, and which thou pleads for, we do that
deny, and against it testify.

Rep. Here he still mingleth the corruption of the act, with the act; as if
they could not be separated. If only he denies foolish, idle complements, for
insinuation sake, and in a way of flattery, that we deny also; but to judge the
honor of cap and knee (taken by it self, and given to men of place) as
inseparable from folly, fancy, flattery, is to deny a part of that civility and
honor which himself seemed in general to allow.

4. How can ye believe, that seek honor one of another, and seek not the honor
that comes of God alone? Joh. 5. 44.

Rep. As it is a sin to be ambitious of honor among men, and a compound sin, to
be careless of Gods honor, while we hunt after our own, and that by indirect
means; so it is a duty to go one before another in giving honor, Romans 12. 10.
yea, it is a duty and no sin, to take the honor that God has given to the place
and relation wherein he has set us. Preferring of creature and self honor, and
to hold up that with neglect of Christ, rather then take that honor which God
gives to every man, upon receiving of Christ, is that which our Lord condemns
in that place of John; But suppose John 5 44. vindicated.
a Magistrate, Master, Parent, has not received Christ, that Scripture does
not interfere with the fifth Commandment: nor simply forbid receiving honor one
of another; but only such as the worlds friends give and take upon a worldly
account, and not with respect to the ordinance of God, who has stated, and
ordered it, where, how, by whom, and to whom it is to be given, and of whom it
is to be received. R. F. adds;

5. What the Scriptures do allow, we do know, without thy ranking together.

Rep. I had mentioned some Scriptures, concerning civil Titles of honor, given
to Magistrates, Ministers, Fathers, Masters, which this man denies not but that
the Scriptures do allow, and he and others know, but he does not say, he
allows what he knows; Now to him that knows what is good, and approves
it not, and makes not confession of it when called to it, to him it is sin,
with greater aggravation. I shall now unto the rank of Titles, bring in a File
of Scriptures for civil gestures of Reverence, and due deportment of the body;
to know whether they will allow them or no, and practice accordingly; if not,
the whole File shall discharge against them, another day for their pride,
negligence, and contempt. In Scripture we shall find bowings of the knee, and
body of several kinds; some from base fears, as Saul's to the devil, 1 Samuel 28.
14. some Gestures of honor some bad, base and Idolatrous.
of base flattery, as Joabs to David, 2 Samuel 14. 22. Cushies to Joab, 2 Samuel
18. 21. of David's subjects to Absalom, and Absaloms to them, 2 Samuel 15. 5. Some
of Idolatry, such as Amaziah acted when he bowed himself to the gods of the
Edomites, 2 Chronicles. 25. 14. all these kinds we know, if R. F. does not; and we
disallow the practice, upon such reasons, (though we approve of the history of
the Scripture as true) because they were against a Rule of Scripture: but how
(by the way) will these rise up in judgment against those that deny what is
required by a Rule? If some have bowed for wicked ends, some to Idols, some to
devils; how will they condemn the stiff knees, and stout stomachs that will not
afford it for the ends, and to the persons which the Lord has designed, and
marked out, as honorable? There Some, civil and good manners.
are bowings of the knee and body, which the Scripture makes mention of with
approbation, being agreeable to the Law and Rule of the fifth Commandment. Such
as that of Abraham's bowing to the heathenish children of Heth, Genesis 23. 7. in a
civil neighborly way: And bowings to Rulers and Magistrates, as Jacobs sons to
Joseph, Genesis 43. 26. 28. according to Joseph's two dreams, of their sheaves
bowing to his; and of the Sun, Moon and stars, making obeisance to him: David's
bowing to Saul, though a wicked man, 1 Samuel 24. 8. as well as Mephibos^eths,
Abigails, 2 Samuel 9. 8. 1 Samuel 25. 23. 2 Samuel 24. 20. 1 King 1. 23.
Araunahs, and Nathans bowing to David, a good man, and pious Prince: Again,
there want not instances of respect and honor given to the Prophets, and
Ministers of the Lord, as that of the great woman, or Lady of Shunem, to the
Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings 4. 37. of bowing to the elder in years, or hours;
scarce a quarter of an hour it may be, was Esau born before Jacob, yet he gives
him the respect and honor of his Primogeniture, Genesis 33. 3. of bowing to the
rich, as Ruth to Boaz; Ruth 2. 10. of the wife to the husband, as Bathsheba to
David, 1 Kings 1. 16. and 31. of the son to the mother; as Solomon to
Bathsheba, 1 Kings 2. 19. These and many more, if R. F. knows, and allows
not; he disdaineth Scripture proof and testimony; if he allows, why is the
civil obeisance of the upper or lower part of the body, head, loins, or knee,
denied to any such relations? Blessed is he that condemns not in practice, that
which he allows in judgment; or that disalloweth not in judgment, that
which the Scripture countenanceth, and commands. Yet we have not all that R.
F. can say for himself and his companions.

6. Where does the Scripture say, put off your Hats, and flatter with your
tongues?

Rep. Here again, he would not seem to oppose the respect due to men, but as it
is done in a way of flattery (which carriage is of all to be abhorred) but
dutiful honor may be given without dissimulation; and if these men be perfect,
why are they no better examples? The Quere about the Hat, I have spoken to in
the former Section. The fifth Commandment requires all tokens of civil
respect, and honor; the putting off the Hat, is a token of such respect: Be
courteous, says the Apostle 1 Pet. 3 8. put not off humanity, by denying this
piece of common civility. Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor
the face of the old man, and fear thy God. I am the Lord, Levit. 19. 32. If
greater signs of honor then uncovering the head be required, we are not to
boggle at the lesser. But,

7. Says R. F. Where does the Scripture say, respect the rich, and dis-respect
the poor? Are you not partial, etc.

Rep. Where do you find any doctrine of this tendency delivered? The Word
would have poor and rich respected as God made them both his creatures, Prove.
22. 2. And as he makes poor and makes rich, himself will be magnified, 1 Samuel
2. and yet his order, set among men, regarded: As for respecting persons for
self ends, and carnal considerations, Let R. F. and every one look to his own
heart, and learn to be poor in spirit. Let the Brother of high degree (in the
James 1. 9, 10 opened.
world) rejoice in that he is made low, in spirit: Let the Brother of low
degree (in the world) rejoice in that he is exalted, in Christ. Degrees there
are of Saints, as Saints: and Saints, as men, are capable of different degrees
of estate, and place in the world; every one of them must know the place, and
station, wherein God has set him, and demean or carry himself accordingly. If
any man think otherwise, and teach it, and consent not to wholesome words, the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to
godliness, he is proud, or a fool, as it is in the margent, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4.
knowing nothing, doting about questions and strifes of words, etc. Let R. F.
and his fellows read on and tremble, lest they be branded and stigmatized with
such Characters, for their multiplied perverse Disputings; and
Scripture-contradictions.

(22. Head of their Scripture-contradiction) Concerning Swearing.
Section 50.
THey take up Christ's words (as I noted) Mat. 5. 34. Swear not at all, (as they
do other Scriptures against his meaning) to fight against all Oaths before a
Magistrate, in any case, upon any occasion. And now comes forth R. F. Page 23.
and fights with his shadow, [ Thou says, he forbids Oaths only by Creatures,
Heaven, Swearing by Creatures forbidden.
Earth, a man's head, etc. The same meaning has James, Chap. 5. 12.

Rep. My words were plain enough to him that has a mind to understand, First
(said I, which word [first] he leaves out) he forbids oaths by creatures; and I
added Mat. 5 34, 35, 36. vindicated.
[ onely] because the Lord does only there, i. e. ver. 34, 35, 36. make
exception of Creatures; Heaven, Gods throne; Earth, his footstool; Jerusalem,
the city of the great King; the Head, because thou can not make one hair
white or black.

R. F. Page 24.
returns me this nonsense for answer; Here thou art a liar of Christ, and his
words bear testimony, against thee, for he does not forbid swearing by
Creatures only, but he forbids swearing by all things else, whatsoever: for he
says, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, nor by earth, etc. And he that
swears not by heaven, must not swear by what is contained in it; and he that
swears not by earth, must not swear by what is contained in it.

Rep. The reason he gives why swearing by creatures only, is not here
forbidden, is because the Lord forbids swearing by all things else; which is a
reasonless reason, for heaven, and earth, and the creatures contained therein,
are all but creatures; and my assertion stands good, That Christ's words (in the
abovementioned verses, 34, 35, 36. of Mat. 5.) do not absolutely inhibit all
oaths before a Magistrate, while he forbids only swearing by creatures, heaven
and earth, and all creatures therein. I am aware of what Familistical Gods
essence is not mixed with the Creatures.
conceits these men have of God, and his Essence, as mixed with the creatures;
and hereupon they may think, that, if creatures are not to be sworn by at all,
at any time, in any case; neither may we swear by the name of God at all, at
any time, in any case: But,

1. Although Gods essence is where the Creatures essence is, yet he is a most
simple un-compounded Being: and though he is in heaven, and in earth, yet he is
not contained, bounded, or limited therein.

2. Our Lords scope is to wipe and wash off the dusty Glosses of the Scribes
and Pharisees, which they had cast upon the glass of the Law, and particularly
concerning oaths; for ver. 33. you will find it had been an old tradition,
they might swear by any thing, so as they did not forswear themselves. And
again, (by comparing Chap. 5. with 23. 16. etc.) we find how they distinguished
about oaths, some were nothing (they said) or not binding, as to swear by the
Temple, by the Altar, etc. but to swear by the Gold of the Temple, or by the
Gift upon the Altar, that was a binding oath; and made the man that swore, a
debtor; and if he kept not his oath, he was guilty: Now against these, and such
like Glosses, Christ opposes with a prohibition, I say unto you, (who am to be
heard and believed before Pharisees) Swear not at all; that is, neither by the
Temple, nor by the Gold of it; not by the Altar, nor by the Gift upon the
Altar, etc. nor by any creatures whatsoever. And yet while he is clearing out
the third Commandment, (which forbids not only perjury, but all profanations
of Gods name) and directing to the right use of an oath, he does Swearing by
God commanded.
not repeal, null, or make void the first Commandment, which requires swearing
by God, and unto God alone: For, as it requires prayer to the God we have, so
an oath is also there commanded (upon special occasion) it being an appeal to
God, or a solemn attestation and calling of God to witness, and judge, about
the truth affirmed or denied. And if we have a God, we swear our selves to him,
and are to swear by his name, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20. Swearing is such a part
of worship, and so eminent, that it is put by a Synecdoche (or figurative
speech of the part for the whole) for the whole worship of God, Psalm 63. 11.
and Christ was far from overthrowing the whole worship of God, or any part of
it.

3. The sense of the prohibition, Swear not at all, is given forth, Mat. 5.
ver. 37. But let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay. Communication (...).
Mat. 5 37. cleared.
there, is as much as ordidinary speech; from whence I granted, that not only
swearing by creatures, is forbidden, but all kind of oaths in ordinary
communication, (as, by God, or, by the Lord) and it was the furthest (I said)
that I find one of the Quakers A few words by J Nayler, page 16.
seems at least to carry the sense, Art thou come to yea and nay, in thy common
occasions?

Yet R. F. apprehends the Apostle James his words, Chap. James 5 12. vindicated.
5. 12. are express against all kind of swearing at any time, because he
says, Swear not at all.

Rep. The words of the Apostle are strictly thus; But above all things, my
brethren, swear not; neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any
other oath; but let your yea, be yea; and your nay, nay: the latter words God
not to be sworn by in ordinary speech.
explaining the scope and sense of the former. His scope is, particularly, to
suppress expressions of impatiency under afflictions and persecutions, which
from ver. 7, to 14. he was dealing with, and having commended Jobs patience,
ver. 11. he adds, ver. 12. Swear not, etc. that is, in your afflictions,
under sense of pain, trouble, or torture; beware of vain and rash swearing (as
at all times, so) when you think your selves provoked to it by the smart of
afflictions: Beware of swearing by any oath, directly by God, or indirectly by
creatures, in the greatest provocations; and much more avoid it, when you are
not provoked: barely, we are to affirm, or deny, according to truth, at some
extraordinary seasons, and always in ordinary course.

4. Of lawful oaths, there are two sorts; Assertory, and Two sorts of lawful
oaths
Promissory.

1. Assertory, when the truth of a thing is solemnly affirmed 1. Assertory.
or denied, by invocation of God alone for a witness and a judge, in such a
case, and at such a time, as a Controversy Heb. 6. 16. vindicated.
cannot be ended without it. Heb. 6. 16. where the Apostle does not so bring a
comparison from the men of the world, to whom, an oath for confirmation is to
them an end of all strife, as to shut out Saints from being men in the world,
or disoblige them from their common humanity; but by alluding to the use of an
oath, for such a lawful end, among men, he gives a hint of one of the hinges or
sinews of Humane society, which Saints have not been wont to throw off, or cut
asunder: but upon weighty occasions, they have asserted and confirmed the truth
of their speech by an oath. Such is that of Paul to the Romans, Chap. 1. 9. God
is my witness, etc. And to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1. 23. Moreover, I call God
for a record, etc. And to the Philippians, Chap. 1. 8. For God is my record,
etc. And to the Galatians, Chap. 1. 20. The things which I write unto you,
behold, before God, I lie not. And to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 2. 5. God is
witness. In all these forms of speech, there is the former part of an oath
expressed, calling God to witness, the other part is employed, appealing to him as
a Judge.

2. A Promissory oath, is when the truth of the hearts 2. Promissory.
intention, and of the lips expression, to do a kindeness, or keep promise, is
solemnly confirmed by attestation of God, and appeal to him alone: such was
that of Abraham's servant to his master, Genesis 24. 3, 9. Of David to Saul, 1 Samuel
24. 22. and to Bathsheba, 1 Kings 1. 29. Hence no warrant, for vain and rash
swearing by the Lord, can be collected; as for any to take up these forms of
speech ordinarily, [Before God] or, [As God shall judge me,] but sufficient
grounds for using of an oath in the same judgment, truth, and righteousness,
that the Saints of old and new Testament have sanctified Gods name by.

5. Mixed oaths, by God and Creatures, are forbidden, for Mixed oaths forbidden.
the Lord threatens to stretch out his hand in judgment against them that
swear by the Lord, and that swear by Malcham, Zeph. 1. 5. i. e. joined God and
idols (Milchom, or Moloch, the abomination of the Ammonites) together: But God
has promised to establish this part of his true and pure worship, to swear by
him alone, and that in truth upon the earth. Isaiah 65. 16. He who blesses
himself, shall bless himself in the God of truth; and he that swears in the
earth, shall swear by the God of truth.

R. F. makes other inferences; If a man must not swear at all, then he must not
swear by a Book, or any other thing.

Rep. Had he reasoned from Christ's and the Apostles words [Swear not at all] in
their true meaning; If a man must not swear by Creatures at all, then he must
not swear by a Book, or any created being, he had complied with the truth; but
to reason, and make inferences to no purpose, is to lose time, and consume pen
and paper in vain. If it may gain him, or any of his Sect, to the love of truth
and peace, I shall nakedly present my thoughts and desires: As Swearing by a
Book unlawful.
I had nothing before of Swearing by a Book one way or other, so never did I
say, that a Book was lawful to be sworn by; but I heartily wish such a
stumbling block were every where in the Land, taken away by the Magistrates,
for much profanation of Gods name has been occasioned thereby. I remember
William Thorp See Fox, Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 701 col. 2.
(one of J. Wickliffs followers) in conference with a Popish Archbishop, was in
the right when he bare witness against swearing by a Book: And so was the
Master of Divinity, of whom he tells the story, who said to the Lawyer, "It is
not lawful either to give or to take any such charge upon a Book; for every
Book is nothing else but diverse Creatures of which it is made; therefore to
swear upon a Book, is to swear by Creatures, and this swearing is ever
unlawful. This in effect will be found in Chrysostom, as his judgment, blaming
Book-oaths, and them that bring forth Books to swear upon. The aforesaid
William Thorp Page 702. as above.
(though he was ready to swear as God commanded it, yet) refused so much as to
lay his hand upon the Book, seeing to touch a Book in that case, is to swear by
it. If R. F. and his fellows Swearing upon a Book superstitious.
would be as rational and Christian-like as William Thorp, when they come
before a Magistrate, to deny the Superstition, and mind the Institution;
refuse not the oath, but the oath by, or upon a Book, they might well be born
with.

But R. F. concludes, (after he has talked of my Selfconfutings, and manifest
Contradictions, but proved nothing) Page 24.
We take Christ's words according to his mind, and so deny oaths, and abide in
his Doctrine.

Rep. Whether it were Christ's mind and Doctrine, absolutely to deny the use of
an Oath, may appear (by what has been said) to the contrary; no part of the
moral Law Christ came to destroy; to swear by Gods name, nature, or being, was
and is a part of the indispensable Law of God, that is to be obeyed and
fulfilled in a Gospel-way of worship, fear, love, and thankfulness. James
Nayler (of whom I had once some better thoughts) in a sheet of his All v. in
Janglers p. 8.
, tells his Novices, In the old Covenant swearing in truth was an ordinance of
God: And the Apostle who was come into the new Covenant, and did witness the
oath of God fulfilled, said, Above all things, my brethren, swear not any oath
whatsoever, lest ye fall into temptation. The place in the Apostle James James
5. 12. vindicated.
has been cleared already, and the consideration of his reason, does further
vindicate the prohibition from these men's opinions: Lest ye fall into
temptation; as if he should say, Swear by any, but by God, or swear by God,
rashly, passionately, in a strait and extremity, and ye will fall into
temptation: from swearing ye may be tempted to curse God, and yet further
blaspheme him; and from swearing by Creatures, ye may be tempted openly to
worship them, and run from the true God to plain idols and idolatry; and from
presumption, ye may be tempted to despair; therefore patiently endure, do not
passionately rap out oaths. But as to J. Naylers distinction of the time, when
an oath was lawful, when not; I must send him to Section 17. to let him know,
that the old Covenant and the new, was the same for substance; even the same
Covenant of grace, which obliges now as then, by way of love and thankfulness,
to swear by the Lords name: and if we live under a clearer and larger
administration of the Gospel Covenant, wherein God has fulfilled his oath,
that he made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by sending his Son; and that he made
to his Son, to consecrate him a high Priest for ever; we should reckon our
selves more obliged to swear our selves to the Lord for ever, then those that
lived under the old Testament. To conclude, They that will not expound
Scripture by Scripture, and compare the Precepts and examples for Swearing,
with the Prohibition against it, fall into Scripture-contradiction: But neither
R. F. nor J. Nayler (with others) will expound Scripture by Scripture, nor
compare Precept, etc. for Swearing, with the Prohibition against it; And
therefore, R. F. and J. Nayler, with many others, are fallen into
Scripture-contradiction.


THE Reviler rebuked. PART II. Their Self-contradictions.
1. Concerning the Scriptures.
Section 1.
I Had animadverted upon what they write, [ The Scriptures are within them, and
they own them in the life and sense of them] that while they pretend to speak
all from the Spirit that spoke the Scriptures, they are found in their
aforesaid Scripture-contradictions) to belie the Scriptures, and the Spirit of
God also. R. F. lets this Section pass without his controlment; and I believe
such as control the Scriptures (as R. F. and others have done) in their very
life and sense, touching the Spirits personality; the right way of Gods
justifying a sinner etc. will one day have their mouths stopped, and every tongue
and pen that rises up in judgment against the Lord, and his Scriptures, and
servants, shall be heaven-stricken, and self-condemned.

Section 2.
WHereas I said here, They deny the Letter of Scripture to be Scripture, and
yet stick to the letter, Matthew. 23. 8. 10. Call no man Father, neither be ye
called Masters, R. F. Page 24.
is so bold as to tell me this is one of my lies, but he proves nothing against
me; For,

1. I did not deliver out their very words in this place (as if they should
say) we deny the letter of Scripture to be Scripture: but referred my Readers
to the Pamphlet Paper sent into the world.
where they should find the effect, and substance of such a denial (albeit the
Printer or my self did unwittingly misquote the Page, 19. for 2.) their words
are these, They are such teachers as tell people, that Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John is the Gospel, which are but the Letter, etc. we therefore do deny them.
Whence I argue; They that deny the Denial of written Gospel, is denial of
Scripture letter.
written Gospel to be Gospel, deny the Letter of the Scripture to be Scripture;
But these men deny the Gospel written by Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, to be
Gospel; Therefore etc. The minor or latter proposition follows clearly from
their denial of such Teachers, as call the writings of Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John Gospel; and from their own exception [ which are but the Letter] the major
and former proposition is thus evidenced; The Gospel is a Good-spel, and as it
is written, it is made up of good and gladsom tidings, delivered in letters and
syllables, of which words are framed: deny the writing of Matthew etc. to be
written Gospel, and you deny the letters and syllables to be Gospel-letters and
syllables, making up such words as do give forth a certain Gospel-sound, and
consequently you deny the letter of the Scripture to be Scripture: For
Gospel-letter and Scripture or written Gospel is all one, and he that denies
the Gospel-letter, denies the Gospel-Scripture, as he that denies the
Scripture-Gospel denies the Gospel-letter. But they will say, Paper sent into
the world. page 2.
The Letter is the declaration of the Gospel: If it be so, then it is Gospel
declared by writing, and then the Letter (in that respect, as written) is
Gospel, which was before, by these men, excepted against as no Gospl

2. Their Self-contradiction in sticking to the Letter, denied to be Gospel, I
made to appear, from their urging the above mentioned place in Matthew, in the
very Letter, Be ye not called Masters. By this, R. F. would make the simple
believe I have cleared them, and contradicted my self.

Rep. But wherein, or how, no man can tell, unless accusing them be clearing of
them, and discovering of their selfcontradiction proves me one of them.

Thou art offended that they witness against thy deceit.

Rep. I am neither conscious of deceit, nor should I be offended at those that
discover it, were it discoverable from my words: but their sticking to the
Letter sometimes, and at other times condemning the whole Scripture-letter; I
witness to be an interfering with themselves: And when the very Letter is urged
against the sense and intendment of the Spirit, I witness it to be a deceit in
them that so urge it.

Thou cuts off thy master-ship by thy own Rule.

Rep. Did I urge the Scripture as they do, my servant must not call me, Master;
we have no such servants as Abraham had, who gave him this note of respect at
every turn, Genesis 24. 12. O Lord God of my Master Abraham etc. show kindness
unto my Master Abraham, ver. 36. And Sarah my Masters wife bare a son to my
Master when she was old, and ver. 54. Send me away unto my Master; but the
fifth Matthew. 23 8. 10. cleared and vindicated.
Commandment is not made void by Christ's words, nor by the true sense of them,
which is, that we should be far from affectation of Titles, from men; or
suffering any to cast their dependence, and lay the stress of their
conscience-determination upon us, in matters of faith, and salvation. In this
very Section, I had discovered another of their self contradictions: For J.
Nayler querieth, which of the Saints had the witness of their souls to seek in
the Letter? and with the same breath he quotes the Scripture-letter, for the
believers witness in himself. This R. F. takes up as if they did not deny and
cross the Scriptures.

Rep. But my work was to show how J. Nayler both denies, and grants the same
thing to be in the letter, without any distinction. If he had said, the
believers witness is one way in the heart, or in himself, and another way in
the Scriptures, he had not cross-shind himself: Nor does R. F. Page 25.
help to cure the wound, but makes it fester and rankle the more with his
railing words: Acknowledge thy lies, error and confusion, and upon them own thy
condemnation.

Rep. 1. He salves not J. Nayler: For the believer knows by the Scripture, and
by that in particular, 1 John 5. 1 John 5. 20. vindicated.
^0. that he has the witness in him self, and no generation of Saints ever
(since that Scripture was written) refused to seek and run unto it for
confirmation of their souls faith, seeing the Apostle adds so plainly, ver.
13. These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of
God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the
name of the Son of God: Here the Believer has both the rise and furtherance of
his faith and evidence from what is written; and if the evidence or witness in
the heart be not bottomed upon what is in the Scripture, and proved agreeable
thereunto; it is a false evidence though it lurketh within: as the faith which
has not Scripture for its warrant, and compurgator, is false also.

2. He makes the wound rankle the more, in that he would have me acknowledge
truth to be error and lies; and faithful discovery, falsehood; and in that he
requires, when I have acknowledged etc. thereupon to own my condemnation;
whereas upon confession of my fault, where I find it, I am acquitted, as in
Gods court, so in my conscience* and though I will judge my self for the root
of unseen failings (as for what in other things I see) yet he is near that ^
Joh. 1. 9.
justifies me, and I believe the Lord is faithful to forgive me my sins, and
to cleanse me from all unrighteousness.

Section 3.
HEre I pointed at J. Naylers concession, The word nigh in the heart, and in
the mouth, does not oppose it self, but is one with the Scripture;
contradictious to what at other times they say; the Scripture in the mouth or
in the book is not the word of God. R. F. takes no notice of this Section, nor
how that which drops from their Pens opposes it self, or the Scripture, or
from both sometimes; what else is that which J. N. in his Few words, etc. Page
8. -- thou need not try the inward substance, by the outward declaration,
the living by the dead, when as himself in page 7. had affirmed the outward
declaration, or Scripture to be one with the word within, and this one with the
Scripture; If the Scripture be dead, and yet one with the word in J. Naylers
heart, then is his heart, and the word in it dead also; If the word which is
nigh, in the heart, and in the mouth, be alive, and the Letter of Scripture be
dead, then the word within and the word without are not one. If the word in the
heart be alive, and the word in the Bible, and mouth be dead, then the word in
the heart, and in the mouth opposes it self. It will put any man to his shifts
to extricate, and wind off here from Self or Scripture-contradiction. How much
better or worse is that which follows? Page 9. The Saints witness the word
from Gods own mouth in Spirit, and revelation in Spirit, but never any in the
Letter; Let Saints indeed perpend and weigh seriously; is it so as J. Nayler
suggesteth? Gods mouth then, is not in the Scripture; he speaks not, breathes
not there at all, by this man's doctrine; but then let him tell the world how
the Scripture came to be the outward declaration of the mind and will of God;
and salve himself from Self-contradiction, who had said before, the word in
heart and mouth, is one with the Scripture, and now, there was never any word
from Gods own mouth in the Letter; and as he subjoyneth, That faith which is in
Christ, stands not in volumes; he means, of Gods book, or letter, of which he
spoke immediately before; If it be so as he says, then the faith of his heart
is not built upon Gods Testimony in the Scripture; He has a faith, and a
Christ too, which is not to be found in the Scripture, and then he opposes
himself, who granted at first, the word nigh in the heart, was one with the
Scripture. I hope the wary, and humble Saint will never pin his faith upon J.
N. his sleeve, nor suffer it to stand upon his Few words, or his multiplied
pamphletical volumes, who thus rejects the Law of Gods mouth in the
Scriptures, while he would but seemingly make Gods Law and the heart, to be one
with it. Another of this man's Self contradictions (though common to his
fellows) I noted in this Section crying up Thou and Thee to a particular, as
Scripture Language, and yet crying down the Letter as no Scripture that is the
mouth of God, the word of God, or a binding Rule. What J. Nayler means by that,
Few words page 14.
Thou will neither make Scripture thy Rule, nor suffer them that would, let R.
F. well consider; for if J. Nayler would have it to be a rule, R. F. and others
would have it to be none, much less a standing rule, as has appeared in 1.
Part, Section 1.

Section 4.
THe Scriptures (say they) were given us by inspiration, and by inspiration are
to be understood again. In this passage there is coucht another of their
Self-contradictions, which R. F. neither approves nor condemns, but passes it
over un-toucht, un-answered. The Reader may please to peruse what was said for
discovery of their clashing Principles, in my former piece: This I shall add,
The Spirit of God, who breathed forth the Scriptures, must give us the
spiritual understanding of them, (if we have it at all) but this he does in
another way, then that whereby he inspired the Penmen of the Scriptures. They
were so inspired when they wrote the holy Canon of Scripture, as men rapt up
with an extatical motion, 2 Pet. 1. 21. The word there translated [ moved]
signifies a forcible acting of the Spirit 2 Pet. 1. 21. (...).
upon them; they were mightily born away by the impetus and impulsive power of
the Spirit. The same word is used by Luke, Acts 2. 2. in the description of the
visible pouring forth of the Spirit, by a sound from heaven, as of a rushing
mighty wind; this rushing power of the Spirit invisibly acted the holy Men of
God, who wrote the Scriptures in a way immediate, when they had not a letter of
Gods Book before them. But thus the Scriptures come not to us, nor the
understanding of them: we have the Book and Canon written down, and by
providence, printed, translated into our Mother tongue, and preached to us: Now
then, they that profess they own the Scriptures, and they own the reading of
them, and they own prayer for the understanding of them, etc. and yet when it
comes to the upshot, they dis-own and deny all actings of the Spirit upon them,
by means of second causes, instruments, and ordinances, by which we are to get
understanding, and by which he gives it forth; it plainly appears, that as the
beasts that have no understanding, they kick down the good pail of milk
beforegiven by frustration, and neglect of Gods gift of the Scriptures, and
exercises about them, thereby to come to the knowledge of them, under the
conduct of the Spirit.

Section 5.
ANother of their Self-contradictions I showed to be this, That they profess to
own the Scriptures to be true in themselves, etc. but do not own them in their
true sense and meaning: I gave instance of their interpreting 1 Cor. 14. 35.
Husbands at home, to be Christ in the heart; and I referred to all the other
instances of their Scripture-contradiction, for conviction of their dis-owning
the true sense. R. F. Page 25.
would make the world believe I had confuted my self, and cleared them, because
I granted, they said, That they owned the Scriptures, etc. whereas this does
evidently make the more against them; that they will pretend so much to the
Scriptures, and yet rend the sense of them all a pieces. And although that
sense put upon the forementioned place in the Epistle to the Corinthians, be
broached by no man more then by R. F. in another Pamphlet by it self; and he
entitleth this Piece of his I now deal with, The Scriptures vindication: yet he
does not in the least undertake the vindication of this place, either when I
alleged it against them before, [Part 1. Section 6.] or now; only he speaks
his wonted swelling words of vanity,

Thou art under the guilt, and the pit which for others thou diggedst, thou art
fallen in thy self, and caught in thy own snare and craftiness, take notice of
that, and see how thou have contradicted thy self.

Rep. But that I desire some may be convinced of the folly and falsehood of this
man, and of his Sect, I would not spend time, and waste paper, to transcribe
such empty stuff If it be proof enough for him to accuse and recriminate, I
cannot be innocent; who shall, in the like case? That which hitherto I have
charged him, or other of this way withal, I have not given words, but
Arguments, for proof and demonstration of the Charge.

Let me give another instance, R. F. Page 2.
in answer to my first Section, Part 1. says thus, That the Scriptures are
words that proceeded from the Spirit of truth, we do not deny, but own, and so
they are words of truth. Now hear what An untaught Teacher, p. 2.
Th. Lawson judges of this matter, To say that the word of truth is called the
Scripture, or that the Scripture is called the word of truth, that is a lie. I
ask the simple honest hearted Reader, whether Th. Lawson puts not the lie upon
his brother R. Farnworth? or, whether these men do own the Scripture of truth?
(as it is styled Dan. 10. 21.) or rather, whether they do not contradict it,
and themselves also?

Let it be observed also, that R. F. does not quit himself of that other
Self-contradiction of his (which I closed this Section with) by bare words,
Page 25.
Thou have manifested the same, therefore take thou the shame.

Rep. It seems R. F. will take none, as one past shame, and blushing. Where I
have manifested my ignorance of the life of the Scriptures, and of the Letter,
(as he lets fly against me) I am willing to see it, and bear my own shame: but
will he be as the unjust, Zeph. 3. 5. that knows no shame, when his sinful
folly, and self-conceited Contradictions are detected? The words that R. F.
has in his other Pamphlet Light out of darkness* p. 18
are these, Herein you show your ignorance in the life of the Scriptures, that
are ignorant of the Letter, which is without life. This he charge upon three
Ministers, for asking a question to this effect; If the light wherewith every
one is enlightened be Christ, what then is become of the person of the Mediator?
Must they be ignorant in the life of the Scriptures, who acknowledge not every
man's light to be Christ? and must they be ignorant of the Letter of the
Scripture, who do not understand it as he does? But that which I inferred from
his words, was, If there be life in the Scriptures, as he grants there is, then
the Letter or Scripture is not without life, as he says it is: nor are they
ignorant of the Letter, who knew before he spoke it, that the Letter declares
of life, unless he will enwrap himself in the same ignorance: But as he is
ignorant of the Scripture-letter, who denies it to be a means of coming to
life; so he contradicts himself, who says, The Scriptures have life in them;
and yet with the same breath, says also, They are without life, as R. F. does.
What if the life, from which the Scriptures proceeded, be not the Letter, or
Scripture; yet the Scripture is the Scripture of life, given from Christ, who
is life. The chief subject matter contained therein, is Christ the light of
life, (not by the works of the Law, by which way the unbelieving Jews thought
to obtain life eternal, but Christ shut the door against them that way) and he
directs them to himself, John 5. 39. as revealed in the Scriptures, and more
then that, as conveyed by the Scriptures to a soul: For albeit, Christ says,
They are they that testify of me; yet he does not say, They do but testify of
me: This [ but] is R. F. Light out of darkness., page 18.
his additional gloss to corrupt the Text, to disparage the Scriptures, and
never a whit the more to advance Christ; for he is the more honored among men,
and savingly owned, as he is known to be that living Savior, that Way, Truth,
and Life, who is testified of in the Scriptures; and is come unto, or believed
on by the Scriptures. Wherefore Christ blames them, John 5. 40. that they
would not (taking the Bible and searching for him) come unto him by the
knowledge and faith of the Scriptures.

Section 6.
THis and the following Section R. F. returns no Answer unto at all. I had
noted what Ed. Buroughs says in his warning to the Inhabitants of
Vnder-barrow, page 2. "That he came not to them with enticing words, neither
what he had gathered out of the Scripture, from without him, but to declare the
word of the Lord, and not to speak his own imaginations and conceivings: How
cross is this to themselves? They use frequently to call the Scriptures the
Declaration of the Word; and if he came to declare the Word of the Lord as he
affirms, he either came with what he had gathered from Scripture, which he
denies, or he came with his own imaginations and conceivings, which he denies
also; but both his Negatives cannot be true; if there be any truth in his book:
for that is a Collection of above an hundred places of Scripture, quoted in the
margent, and transscribed in the line. The words he had from the Scripture, the
mis-applications he did not indeed learn from thence, nor from the Spirit of
God, who never teaches any man to mis-apply his own Letter; therefore it was
not, in true sense, the word of the Lord that he declared (if he spoke the same
doctrine for substance that he writes) but the visions of his own brain: And if
I speak a lie (says he page 8.) let me be accounted as accursed for ever: But
he that compiles a book out of Scripture-collections, and yet preaches not
what he gathered out of the Scripture, deals falsely in one of these ways, and
speaks a lie, and therefore he is found not only as a self-contradictor, but
as a self-curser. And to do him no wrong, I would know the meaning of that
passage, page 9. [He that has the word of the Lord from the mouth of the Lord
to declare unto you, him you revile and mock, etc. but he that speaks the
imagination of his own heart from the Saints conditions, him you own and hear.]
If he intends by the Word of the Lord, Christ only, what intends he by the
mouth of the Lord, but the Scriptures which are the Declaration of his word, by
their own confession? If he had the Scriptures to declare Christ unto the
people by, then he spoke what he had gathered out of the Scriptures, which is
contrary to what he said before: If the Scriptures be not the mouth of the
Lord, how are they a declaration of his word? if they be a declaration of his
word, why are they denied to be the mouth of the Lord? Again, if he speaks of
the Saints conditions, as discovered in Scripture, and charge him that speaks
from them, to vent the imagination of his own heart; he blasphemes the
Scripture written for our instruction and consolation, Romans 15. 4. If he
condemns another (as he does page 22.) for preaching that which is gathered
from without, by imagination, and conceiving upon that which the Prophet
prophesied, or which Christ spoke, etc. and judges it carnal and heathenish,
never commanded by the Lord; and yet makes mention of the Saints conditions
himself, and glosseth upon Scripture, according as his fancy works, he
allows that which he condemns, as he condemns what God allows; not,
that God allows the working of every man's fantasy but in a sanctified way;
if his works otherwise, God condemns what he allows.

Section 7. Section 7, 8.

THey call (as I noted here) the Scriptures, the Worlds Touchstone; and yet as
appeared [Part 1. Section 1.] Some of them at least, will not have the
Scripture to be the Word of Truth to the world. If it be not the Word of Truth
to the world, how can it be the Worlds Touchstone? This interfering of men of
his way, R. F. undertakes not to cure or touch at with the least of his
fingers; and beyond my skill it is to salve the Contradiction, only I heartily
desire of God, that the discovery hereof may prove good eyesalve, to let them
see the shame of their nakedness.

Section 8.
IN the second Section of this second part, I noted down two of their
Self-contradictions: the latter of them might have there been spared, and
entirely spoken to here, where I touched at it again, a little more plainly: But
R. F. though he glanced at it there, took it not off; nor does he any more here
then pass it over in silence, which of the Saints had the witness of their
souls union to seek in the Letter? thus querieth J N. in his Few words, page
11. I shall now to what was discovered as contradictory to himself, in Sect. 2.
or here add his other words in the same page, viz. The Spirit, it opens and
brings all that is spoken in Scripture to remembrance: this is so a truth, as
it crosses his Negative employed in the Interrogation, viz. That none have
their witness to seek in the Letter, and what he adds expressly, He that
believes has the witness in himself in Spirit, and not in the Letter: had he
said and not in the Letter only, it might have salv'd the contradiction; but
as it is contrary to the Scripture to say, the Saints have not comfortable
testimony of their union, and interest in Christ, in and by the
Scripture-letter; so it is contrary to himself to deny the Believer has his
witness in the Letter, and yet grant that the Spirit opens and brings all that
is in the Letter to remembrance: for to what end does he bring it to
remembrance? not only for explication of Scripture by Scripture, but for
consolation of our spirits, by the good words of the Spirit of God. When
heaviness makes the heart to stoop, a good word, seasonably remembered as
spoken* makes it glad, and he that slights the turning over of the sacred Pages
of the Bible, after he has got his evidence within, may be glad of crumbs one
day, after his high Feastings; and well, if seeking the Spirit where he lost
him, his comforts return at last upon him. Many lose the Spirits comforts, by
slighting his Love Letters in the Scriptures, where the Spirit is, and whereby
he gives forth himself: Such a passage I had in my former piece, That the
Spirit is in the Letter, and given by it, which R. F. has excepted against
once and again heretofore, but now in its due place, where it was spoken, he
lets it pass. I promised in the first part of this Reply, to clear it further
for his conviction, if it may be, or for the Saints edification. First, The
Spirit is in the Letter, or the whole Scripture; for so these men
comprehensively use the term [Letter.] How the Spirit is in the
Scripture-Letter.


1. As he owneth what he dictated to his Secretaries, the Penmen of Scripture.
He is in all their writings with the subscription of his own hand, as it were:
they spoke and wrote as they were moved, and inspired by the Holy Ghost. Rev.
1. 10. John is in the Spirit, viz. he is rapt up by the Spirit, and the Spirits
impulse is more then ordinarily upon him, when he is commanded to write; and of
all that John writes, the Spirit bears Testimony, that it is himself that
speaks it. Rev. 3. 22. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says
unto the Churches: what wretched men are they who will not suffer the Spirit to
be where he speaks?

2. If the Spirit was in the Penmen, he is more in the matter and contents of
the Scripture penned down: None will deny but he was in the Penmen, more then
ordinarily, when they wrote from his mouth or inspiration; and therefore he is
in what they wrote, much more: for the word written is of greater Authority,
and Spirit then the Writer or Secretary. They were holy men of God who wrote,
but that which is written, is the holy Truth of God: They were imperfectly
holy, but Gods word, as written from the Spirit, is perfect in all degrees of
holiness.

3. The Spirit is where there is, with perfect holiness, perfect Truth and
Majesty in the Matter, and in the very Style; and where is sweet Harmony in all
the parts put together: In the Scripture-letter there is not one Iota or Tittle
that shall fall to the ground, to eclipse the Glory, Truth and Majesty, or
spoil the Harmony of it.

Secondly, the Spirit is given by it, in this sense. How given by it.


1. As his mind is given out by it, whether the words be proper or figurative,
the Spirit has his proper intendment, scope and sense in the whole Letter, and
in every part of what is written; and as by his words he makes known his mind,
he is where his words are.

2. As his work is given by it; even what work he pleases, See second part,
Section 10.
of Conviction, Instruction in Righteousness, Consolation, etc. If the
Scripture convinces gainsayers, and sinners, evil livers; if it instructs
the ignorant, comfort the feeble-minded, it is as the Spirit gives out
himself thereby. He is there indeed as a free Agent, ad placitum, not tied to
work, or manifest himself, or put forth his power and grace; but as the wind
blows where it lists, so he works, where, when, and upon whom he pleases.

3. As the Promises of the Scripture are his Chariot to convey him whither he
pleases to go; into the hearts of the Elect, that they may believe; and after
they have believed, that they may be established. Thus, according to his
promise, he will fill a Believers sails of endeavor, in reading, meditating,
etc. with gales of grace, and advances toward glory. To conclude, that the
Spirit is in the Letter, and given by it, daily experience does demonstrate:
For such as forsake the Scriptures authority, and own not the Spirits dwelling
in the Letter, as truly as in the heart, they lose their faith of the Spirits
presence with them, in the reading and meditation of it, and losing this faith,
they run to other Doctrines and Gospels. The spirit of error is in all men's
doctrines which have not the Spirit in them, that breaths in the Scriptures.
We may easily discern whether R. F. his spirit be not in his writings, and
whether much of the spirit of Error, not conveyed and given out by his and
other men's Pamphlets of the same stamp. And shall the spirit of Satan, the
father of lies, be in Seducers books; and not the Spirit of God, and of the
Father of truth, be in, and go along (according to his free mercy) with his own
blessed Books of the Scripture? Yes verily, and James Naylers words import as
much, when he says Few words by J. N. p. 11.
, That the Spirit opens, and brings all that is spoken in Scripture to
remembrance; which if R. F. denies, he contradicts his fellow; if he grants it
a truth, he must recant his frequent descants upon that which I asserted, and
judge himself as erring, because he knew not the Scriptures, and the Spirit and
power of God dwelling in them, and acting by them.

Section 9.
WHat answers R. F. to this Section? where I evidenced another of their
Self-contradictions concerning the Scripture, which was this; He that believes
is born of God without Scripture; and yet, Let all see if we do not set the
Scripture in the heart of every one. Why, this is his answer Page 25.
,

1. So says the Scripture, 1 John 5. And that the word of God is nigh in the
heart, is witnessed, Romans 10. 8. And he that believes and is born of God, knows
the seed of God within him, 1 John 3. 9.

Rep. Do any of these Scriptures bear witness against themselves? or say, That
he that believes is born of God without Scripture? yet dare R. F. put it forth
in the front of his answer, So says the Scripture. The Scripture says the
full truth, He that believes is born of God; but the Pamphlet I quoted Answer
to 7 Priests, p. 13
said more then the Scripture; that the believer was born of God without the
Scripture; and R. F. pretends to answer to what their Pamphlets hold forth, but
cannot in his answers salve his own, nor his fellows contradictions.

Ans. 2. He is not born of the Letter as thou would have him, yet he is
begotten by the immortal word, which endures for ever, which the Letter
declares of, and that does not contradict the Scripture.

Rep. 1. How would I have him that believes born of the Letter? my words were
these, If the Scripture be in the heart of every one, sure he that believes is
born of that seed; even of the Scripture-promise set into the heart by the holy
Ghost; hence, he that is born of the Spirit, is born of the word, written and
preached, which the Spirit uses as the instrumental means of our regeneration;
as upon that place in Peter, 1 Ep. Chap. 1. ver. 23, and 25. has been cleared
heretofore, Part 1. Sect. 5.

2. The Scripture-promise, declaring Christ, is the more apt means by which the
Spirit begets a soul to Christ, or forms him in the soul.

3. That the Letter declares Christ, does not contradict the Scripture; but it
contradicts the Scripture to say, the declaration of Christ is not a means of
begetting a soul to Christ.

4. To say, Let all see whether we do not set the Scripture in the heart of
every one, and yet to deny the Scripture to be a means of the new birth, or
that the believer is born of God without the Scripture, is to say and un-say.

But R. F. page 26.
would retort this upon my self, and why? I have not the same mind with them,
and know not their meaning, and so raise lies (as he charge upon me) by my
imaginations.

Rep. 1. If I have the mind of Christ, as it is in Scripture, I shall not be
ambitious of, nor much regard their meaning: but as I know it to be cross to
the mind of Christ, I have (according to the grace given unto me) witnessed
against it, and yet studied to put the most candid and favorable construction
upon their words.

2. If their sense, of setting Scripture in the heart of every one, be nothing
else, but telling people they have a light of Conscience within them, and
stirring up that light which every man has that comes into the world; First,
they delude poor people, who never heard that Light called Scripture before;
yet this is, more then probably, their best Scripture for their Tenants and
Doctrines, (as might be gathered from the answer that J. P. a young stripling,
who came into this Town last summer, gave to a weak rebaptized woman,
shattered by his discourse; whose question was, But may I not read the
Scriptures? The answer was, Read thy heart woman, (as she told me) that was all
she could get of him.) There is a book of Conscience to be read indeed, but is
not the book of the Scriptures, and Gods Statutes to be read? according to
which (beyond the book of every man's Conscience) all that have that written
rule shall be judged.

Secondly, If every man's light be the only Scripture, in the mind that these
men are in, why does R. F. In his Book entitled, A true testimony, etc. page
53.
appeal to that which is the alone, proper, perfect Scripture in our judgment,
and which he calls for, to stand as judge betwixt them and 42. Ministers? Will
he stand to the judgment of the Prophets and Apostles, as it is the mind of
Christ the word of God? Will he not appeal (when all is done) to a higher
Court, of immediate Teachings in the heart? If the Scripture be judge, it must
be so from its own light, that is superior, not only to every man's light, but
also to the degree of light that is in every Saint, and that is superior to our
meanings and theirs; for the Scripture must judge by its own words and meaning
together; and from its own rule, we must not separate the Letter of the Law,
and the true interpretation of the Letter. The Lawmakers, we say, are best
able to give the right sense of the Law. The great Lawgiver gives out his sense
of one part of Scripture by another. Can any Law judge of Heresy but the Law
of God? says R. F. in the Book and Page last referred unto in the margent. If
he intends there any Law of God, but the written word and text of the Bible,
Gods great Lawbook, he contradicts in heart what he pretends to in words. If he
understands by the Law of God, the holy Scriptures of God, (called the Bible)
then he pretends to that acknowledgement of them as a standing rule, and a more
standing rule then visions and revelations; and if he intends what he pretends
to, then he must recant what he wrote in the 3. and 4. Page of his imaginary
Scripture-vindication, or else lie setter'd in his Self-contradictions.

2. Head of their Self-contradiction. Concerning hearing of the Word.
Section 10.
I Had granted, they say, and say truly (because the Scripture says so, Joh.
8. 47.) They that are of God, hear his word, and they that hear his word, hear
his voice; and yet they deny the hearing of Ministers that speak this word; and
consequently they do either un-say what truth they spoke before, or deny
themselves to be of God, in that they both refuse themselves to hear, and call
off others from hearing. R. F. Page 26.
because I granted the first part of their contradiction to be a Scripture
truth, runs away with the conceit of an advantage, when it is nothing so. Thou
says, They say and say truly (then they lie not) neither do they say and
un-say; and so thou art taken with the lie again, and clears them thy self.

Rep. How weak and giddy this man's apprehension is, may appear many ways, by
the review of this passage.

1. I attributed truth to their words no further then they agree with the word
of God in Scripture; and so far I will acknowledge truth, because I love it,
and the Scripture of truth; but this man, when I grant an inch, will take an
ell.

2. It follows not, if men say true in one thing, that they speak the truth
in every thing. The devil can speak a truth, the more cunningly, to put off his
lies. That may be a truth materially, which will not be found in men's practical
experience so acknowledged.

3. It is beyond all controversy, that in this (as many other instances) they
say and unsay; first owning the Scriptures, and ministry, and hearing of the
word, and then dis-owning all teachers and teaching, but what is within: first
saying, A discovery of some fruits etc. page 9.
the peoples Teacher cannot be removed into a corner, and by and by telling
them, you will find your teacher as you lie in your beds. Even as customary
swearers reproved for their sin, will swear they did not swear; so men
habituated in Self-contradiction, will vehemently protest against it; but it
helps them never a whit.

4. It is no new thing to have the reproach of lying cast upon me or others, by
one who cannot judge, or understand what is truth, or when it is spoken truly.

5. I am so far from clearing them, that I renew my charge against them, if
they be all like R. F. in this manner and form following, The more heartily the
men, called Quakers, are dealt with, the more abusive they are. If any do make
ingenuous confession (as the 42 Ministers, Pastors and Preachers) of their
failings, the more readily they will hang them up, in a legal way without any
Gospel-mercy. And if we grant they speak a truth (sometimes) they would make
the world believe they speak all truth, at all times; when as hitherto, so many
lies as R. F. (for his share) has charged upon me (and has proved none, nor
will be able, (God still keeping me, and guiding my Tongue and Pen) to make
good a proof) so many slanders will, by the Lord, be set upon his score and
account: The Lord himself rebuke him, in time, savingly, and to purpose; even
to the manifestation of the purpose of his love, to do him good for ever.

3. Head of Self-contradiction. Concerning the light within them.
Section 11.
I Noted how from John 1. 4. and 9. they (dreaming of a Christ and Savior in
all) deny the sense to respect the natural light of every man, and yet speak of
their own living in a natural condition for several years: And R. F. both
blindly and boldly answers, If we do, we have warrant for it, for it is the
light supernatural, John 8. 12. John 8. 12. cleared.


Rep. What if Christ speaks of supernatural light given to believers, and his
followers; John 8. 12. does it follow that he speaks of such a light John 1. 4.
9. a blind and bold consequence, it is, neither modest nor true. The Evangelist
indeed speaks of him chap. 1. 4. 9. as the Author of light which is given to
every man; and He, of himself, chap. 8. 1^. as the fountain of light which is
given to some men; but although the giver of light be the same, the light
given, and way of giving is different in its proper form, and kind.

First, the light given to all men, John 1. 4. and 9. is a dim Difference of
every man's light and the believers light.
light, (and as the light of the Moon) cold, and insufficient to salvation,
unable to make discovery of the true Savior: the light given to some men, is
the light of life, a quickening light (as the light of the Sun) a saving light.

Secondly, for the way of giving; Christ, as God, (as has been showed in the
first part of this Reply) gives reason, and common judgment about some things,
to all men; but, as Mediator, he gives only to some men, that saving
supernatural light, or light of supernatural things in a saving way, which
effectually brings them into a gracious life, and unto a glorious life.

R. F. goes on, Page 26.
If one of them did say he lived in a natural condition before his conversion,
is that such a strange thing? and then he instanceth in Paul, Gal. 1. and
others with him, 2 Cor. 4. 6. who had given them the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus etc. which is a mystery, Col. 1. 27. But tells me, I am
minded to cavil on purpose against the work of God, etc.

Rep. 1. All this does not salve the contradiction, viz. of every man's having a
supernatural light from his coming into the world, a light of life which is
saving, and yet yield his (as others) living in a natural state at that time
when he has such a light.

2. It is not strange to me, that unconverted men should live, as they are,
natural and carnal; but it was and is strange that men will grant a natural
life and condition lived in for several years, and yet imagine a saving
supernatural light in every such man, as if every man brought a Savior with
him into the world, at his first birth. That every man has a Pope in his
belly, I have heard, and believe that he has roots and seeds of all
Antichristian doctrine, of all heresy and sin in him, from and by his first
birth of men, as men sinning in Adam; this is not strange: But that every man's
light should be accounted supernatural, and saving light, and nature accounted
grace, though it be not strange to Pelagians, yet it is strange to me that
professors of the Gospel for many years, should now interfere, and halt, and
limp, as they do, and be bewitched with this notion. If the Apostle Paul, and
others (as R. F. grants) were natural before they were spiritual, what a
contradiction is it to their doctrine of every man's light, as they state it and
account it in a degree spiritual? while the best Saint upon earth is no more
but spiritual in some degrees of light and holiness.

3. This is neither my cavilling against Gods work, nor envy at the breakings
forth of light (as he would make men believe) but a naked representation of his
and others fallacies. R. F. thinks he had, in the words before, laid in a sure
proof of my cavilling and envy, for thus he wraps up his argument, Page 26.
He commanded the light to shine out of darkness, etc. and if it had not been
there in a mystery, Col. 1. 27 how could it in them have been so after
manifested (in them) but that thou art mindeful to cavil on purpose, etc.

Rep. 1. Here is a piece of the mystery of Iniquity, as subtle as Christ for
salvation not in every man.
any the Antichrist of Rome has in his budget, viz. The light of Christ for
salvation (which the Apostle speaks of 2 Cor. 4. 6. and Gal. 1. 16. Gods son
revealed in him, and Col. 1. 27. Christ in you) was [ there] and [ in them]
(twice repeated by R. F. for emphasis sake) that is, it was in the hearts of
Paul, and the Gentiles (as of every natural man) before their conversion; for
as my Antagonist reasons, If it had not been there, etc. how could it in them
have been so after manifested? but if he will have patience to hear, I will
tell him. A thing may be manifest at the very coming in to a place that was not
there before. A Sunbeam makes it self manifest at its first breaking into a
dark room where it never shone before. Christ, for salvation, was not in the
heart of Paul till God revealed him to him, and in him. Christ, by his Spirit
of grace was not in the Gentiles before their conversion, Ephesians. 2. 12. They
were all at that time without Christ, and without hope; Christ therefore was
not in them while they were in a natural state, as he was when they were
sanctified, viz. the hope of their glory. Were it as this man imagines,
Mysterious Absurdities.
"The grace of the Gospel is but a manifestation of natures light: A natural
state is but grace under an eclipse. The light in every man is their little
Savior, and at their conversion, it becomes their great Savior; for now the Sun
is come out of the eclipse. But,

2. To assert Christ-mediator to be in natural men, is contrary to the Apostles
sense, and to these men's plain words sometimes uttered.

First, The Apostles sense, 2 Cor. 4. 6. is, by allusion to 2 Cor. 4. 6.
vindicated.
Gods work in the old creation, to witness his power in the new. In the old, he
commanded light to shine out of darkness. He said, Let there be light, and
there was light, creating it of nothing. There was a pre-existent subject
before light was created, viz. darkness of the air; but no preexistent matter,
which light was made of; much less was light there before within the darkness:
(for though God commanded the light to shine out of darkness, it does not
follow that light was there before) So, God working by his Almighty power in
the new creation, he has (says the Apostle) shined in our hearts, to give the
light (which was not there before) of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the
face of Jesus Christ. The faculty of the natural understanding was there, as
the pre-existing subject, but there was no fore-existing matter, out of which
this light is produced. The Apostles sense again, in Gal. 1. 16. is not to Gal
1. 16. vindicated.
favor these men's opinion, as if Christ had been in Paul veiled over, before
conversion, and then revealed in him, as being there, but Paul did not know it
till his conversion: But God revealed his Son in Paul, when he did immediately,
effectually, and experimentally shine into his heart, and gave him the
knowledge of the glorious mysteries of the Gospel, in the clear knowledge of
Christ given for him, given to him, and now dwelling in him; and he does reveal
his Son in others ordinarily, when, after he has knocked at their hearts, he
opens the door by his Spirit, gives faith to consent, that Christ shall come in
and dwell there, Ephesians. 3. 17. Before faith, Christ is kept out of the heart;
but when a soul believes, and his faith works by love, and love by obedience,
as Christ came in and took possession from first believing, so, in his good
time, he does manifest himself unto the soul, John 14. 21. The Apostles sense,
Col. 1. 27. Col. 1. 27. vindicated.
is not, as if the light of Christ for salvation, had been in the Gentiles
hearts, in a mystery, before their effectual calling: (The mystery of salvation
by Christ, was wrapped up in the Scriptures of the old Testament, and in Types
and Figures among the Jews, not in the least hinted to the Gentiles minds
before the Gospel came) But when the Apostles When and how Christ is in the
soul.
came to preach Christ crucified to their ears, through grace they believed the
report for themselves, at Coloss, (as elsewhere) and knew the grace of God in
truth, had Christ his image stamped upon their hearts, and the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in them. This was not light breaking forth from their hearts, as
having been there before their union with Christ, and Christ's taking up their
hearts as his Temple; but the light of the glorious Gospel breaking into their
hearts, which,

1. Is called the riches of the glory, and the Pronoun [which] before [is
Christ in you] refers not to [mystery] (for that is of the Neuter, and the
Pronoun (...).
of the Masculine Gender) but to [riches] (...).
of the same Gender with [which] in the Greek. The glorious treasure and
substance of the mystery, which rich glorious treasure is Christ in you: the
light in every man is a poor, base, beggarly scrap, to this Gospel-pearl and
treasure.

2. This riches, summed up in Christ, and Christ the substance of the Mystery,
is confined to the Saints, ver. 26. and is only in them, ever after their
closing with Christ, reigning and prevailing to the purity, peace, and joy of
their souls, and evidential hope of their future glory.

Secondly, The assertion of Christ's being within men before conversion,
contradicts themselves, (as I discovered in my former piece) who say, In the
Ages past, Christ was not revealed, every man had not that light. The Son of
God is not revealed as Christ, but as he is Mediator; in the Ages past, Christ
was not (so) revealed, they had not (say they) that light, viz. as he is
Mediator; therefore Christ, as Mediator, was not within men by the light given
to every man. And here I leave them ( R. F. among them) as I found them, and
discovered them (in this Section) in their own darkness of Confusion and
Self-contradiction, till the Lord shall convince them thereof, and bring them
out of it.

Section 12.
ANother Contradiction of themselves concerning the Light in every man, I noted
in this Section; viz. That they magnify it, and vilify it in the same
respect, as it is the light of the first nature, and of every man in his first
state since the fall. R. F. Page 26.
takes up two of the passages to answer, but takes not off their
Self-contradiction.

The first, They magnify every man's light, to be a Law written in the heart,
to judge and condemn all sin, and therefore (they say) the day of judgment is
come: and anon they vilify the light of natural men (who are a part of
mankind) as filthy waters; and every man in his first state is a beast. To
this, all that R. F. has to say, is, Where judgment is brought forth into
victory, sin is condemned in the flesh; and there is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, etc. and such have boldness in the day of judgment;
for as some men's deeds goes beforehand to judgment, others they come after,
and therefore a day of judgment is to come.

Rep. If these men would disparage every man's light, in respect of the Saints
light, they would be something ingenuous; and if they did not put every man's
light in the place of Christ, the Spirit, and his writing in the heart; and
then call them waters of Babylon; nor sometimes say, upon Adams fall pure
reason was destroyed, etc. and anon call every man's light, pure light; they
would not be so Scripture and self-contradictious as they are; nor would they
confound what they ought to distinguish, as R. F. confounds the judgment of a
natural conscience, and the Spirits Gospel-conviction of sin, Righteousness and
Judgment together: Justification he confounds with Sanctification, and a day
of Judgment present, with the day of Judgment which is to come.
Scripture-expressions he uses here as elsewhere) but not with the
Scripture-scope and meaning. The passage I quoted out of Ben. Nicholson his
Returns to a Letter, Page 13. speaks of the Law written in the heart of The
Spirits conviction of judgment, beyond the judgment of a natural conscience.
every man, which (they say) does judge and condemn all sin: R. F. tells us of
a Judgment brought forth into victory; and when that is done, sin is condemned
in the flesh: but, say I, according to Scripture, the Law written in the heart
of every man, neither condemns all sin, nor discovers either the root of all
sin, nor half the branches of it; and Judgment is far from coming forth into
victory, till Christ brings it forth, not only by Gospel-conviction, (which is
far beyond and above the conviction of a mere natural conscience) but by
Gospel-sanctification, and by his second writing of the Law, not in old stony
hearts, but in new and softened hearts. But if natural conscience be so potent
to be victorious at last, why do they call every man in his first state, a
beast, his reason corrupt, but to manifest their Self-confusions?

Again, he speaks of sin being condemned in the flesh, a Scripture-expression,
Romans 8. 3. used by the Apostle, to set Romans 8. 3. cleared.
forth Christ's condemning sin in his own flesh, putting of it out of office and
power (to condemn believers) by his suffering Christ's condemning sin in his
flesh, far beyond the conscience condemnation of sin.
of the punishment of their sin in that flesh of his; yea, fulfilling the Law,
for them, in the same flesh: Hence, no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus; but this is another kind of condemning sin, then what comes merely by
and from a natural conscience; for that,

1. Does but condemn sin in part, not all sin, not original sin, not unbelief,
etc.

2. By way of discovery, not by way of satisfaction for sin, and of
justification from guilt, as is Christ's manner of condemning sin.

3. Natural conscience is never victorious, as to deliverance of a soul from
the state of sin, though it be never so far obeyed; but Christ's condemning sin
in his own humanity, assumed to that end, is victorious, both by merit with
God, and by application in the conscience of a believer, to stop its own, and
Satan's accusations; and throughout the Saint, to set up reigning holiness in
him, to prevail over corruption by degrees, in the state of a new creature.

Lastly, The Apostles words, 1 Timothy 5. 24. of some men's sins going beforehand
to Judgment, others coming after, 1 ^im. 5. 24. vindicated.
are used to another purpose, as appears from ver. 20. concerning Gospel and
Church-offences and offenders: some men's sins are discovered beforehand, these
the Church may judge; others are not disclosed, these God will judge. It is
well that R. F. grants a Judgment to come, I wish he could consider it better,
and judge no man so deeply, as he does me, before the time; reckoning me with
the wicked, who, indeed, will find it to be a day of torment; for he that
judges now, shall himself be judged at that day, and he that will show no
mercy in judging others, shall then have judgment without mercy, to his little
ease, joy, or rejoicing.

The second passage which R. F. Page 27.
undertakes to defend, is that of John Came, Every man in his first birth and
state may see himself to be natural, but is not able to judge of the things of
God. This is contradictious (in the first part of it) to Ben. Nicholson, who
said, Every man in his first state is a beast, for then he can reflect upon
himself, and judge of his state before God, no more then a beast. And the
second part of it is contradictious to the first; for if every man in his first
birth may see himself to be natural, (guilty, liable to sin, and the curse
before God) then he may judge something of the things of God: but that is
denied, why then is the other affirmed? but that the man fought with himself in
the dark.

R. F. his defense is, 1. By railing and falsehood, Let that Book (Particulars
concerning the Law by J. Came) be a witness to the truth, against thy ignorance
and sottishness, that sees thy corruptions, and pleads for them.

Rep. This I pass by, with prayer, that the Lord may rebuke and remit him.

2. By a truth and a falsehood together, The light which does discover the
natural corruptions, is not natural, as thou says, but it is spiritual: Here is
a truth in Scripture-sense, not in his meaning; that the light which discovers
natural corruption is spiritual; but a falsehood mixed with it, that I said, it
was natural. This will no where be found in my former, or this present piece;
for I every where deny the natural light of every man to be able to discover a
man's corrupt state: Reason cannot reach the breadth, nor fathom the depth of
this fallen condition. But let R. F. compare his own words last spoken, with
John Cam's, and consider if one does not clash with the other. His brother
says, Every man in his first birth may see himself to be natural: Himself
says, The light which does discover natural corruptions, is not natural, but
spiritual. Now I ask, Is it by the light of the first birth (as in the first
birth) that every man may see himself to be natural? then that light is either
natural, or spiritual; It is not natural, says R. F. It is in the first birth,
says J. Came: either these men do agree, or not; if they do agree with
themselves, it is more then we can make out by their words; only I find what
their sense is of the word [ spiritual] not after the Scripture sense: The
Scripture means by spiritual, that which is born of the Spirit; by spiritual
light, the light of the new or second birth: but these men understand by
spiritual light, that which comes with the first birth, a light in the soul of
every man. We know, says James Nayler, Antichrist in man, by J. Nayler, p 7, 8
there is a light in spirit, that testifies of Christ, before Christ be known
in the Creature; this light is that which the Gentiles had, whereby, says he,
they became a law unto themselves, and were Jews in spirit, whose praise was of
God, and not of men. This light led them to show the works of that Law God had
written in their hearts, their conscience bearing witness, and excusing them in
the day, when God shall judge the world by his Gospel. This light and the
fruits of it, he concludes, will stand at the day of judgment praised of God,
but not of men. Which magnifying expressions of the Heathens light, are
disparaged by what Ben. Nicholson, Returns to a Letter, p 16.
another of them says, viz. upon Adams fall, pure reason was destroyed, and
corrupt reason took place, as it does this day in every natural man: And if
this man speaks the truth, as he does, the other speaks what is false.

1. In that he boldly affirms, the Gentiles light made them Jews in spirit;
the Apostle, Romans 2. 29. has no Romans 2. 29. rescued.
such meaning. He describes a Jew in spirit, to be one who is circumcised in
heart, or who has the circumcision of the heart; whose praise is not of men,
but of God. Heart-circumcision, and the Gentiles light, are two things vastly
discrepant: the Gentiles light never attained to the mystery of
heart-circumcision. Fond men that write and speak after this manner! their pens
and tongues would be circumcised, and hearts also, which I shall pray for, that
these extravagant Errata's may be corrected.

2. In that (he says) the Gentiles consciences will bear them witness, and
excuse them in the day when God shall judge the world, etc. all which is remote
from the Apostles sense, Romans 2. 15. For, Romans 2. 15, 16 vindicated, and
cleared.


First, He is comparing a practical Heathen, with a bare professing Jew; and
preferring the working Gentile, before the talking Jew; but how? as to matter
of fact, not as to the whole state before God: For, as to the whole state
before God, they are both alike, (both falling short of what the Law written in
the heart, or in the book, required) only in matter of fact; the Heathen
sometime did more answer his light, then the Jew did; but did the Heathen
answer his light perfectly? No, he had accusing thoughts, as well as excusing,
a dark confused state was his.

Secondly, The Apostle does not say, the Heathens light and fruits shall excuse
him so at the day of judgment, that they will stand at that day, praised of
God, etc. for then No saving excuse, or testimony from a natural conscience.
conscience (fully awakened) will accuse more then excuse; and the accusations
will bear and weigh down the excuses ten thousand fold: nay, every mouth (and
the mouth of every conscience that now excuses but from his own acts, and has
not the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus upon it) will then be stopped; where is
his praise then of God?

Thirdly, The words ver. 16. In the day when God shall judge, etc. though they
immediately follow, yet they have not such a connection with ver. 15. but either
refer to ver. 11. and so four verses are to be taken into a Parenthesis, or to
ver. 12. and so three verses are parenthetically to be read, and the sense,
with such a dependence observed, runs clear and plain; viz. ver. 11. There is
no respect of persons with God, in the day when God shall judge: or, ver. 12.
As many as have sinned without the Law written, or with it, shall be judged, In
the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ: And this
reading quite cuts off James Naylers plea for the Gentiles saving light.

What starting-hole R. F. will have, we may gather by what went before and what
follows, in his commendation of this light, and such as love it: It is
spiritual, and such as love it, bring their deeds to be tried by it, and with
it the deceit is judged, etc.

Rep. But by the light of the Spirit shining in our hearts, by the Scripture,
we have found out the deceit of terms and phrases, as used by these men; and
withal how they clash with themselves (as with the Scripture) even in that
which R. F. adds, Such as with the Light have the deeds of darkness
discovered, and hates the Light, the Light is their condemnation. But say I,
the Gentiles never perfectly loved that light they had, therefore it was and
will be condemnation to them, and none of them will be excused in the day of
judgment; and therefore R. F. and J Nayler are here at a difference, and
contradict one another, it may be, when they consider not of it.

For a farewell R. F. concludes, As it [the condemnation] is thine, and they
that are in union with corruptions, as thou art, they are not able to judge of
the things of God, but err in judgment that judges with evil thoughts, as
thou do, and have done; therefore judgments is to thy head and crown of
deceit, pride and vain glory.

Rep. This verdict is from R. F. as a man, (to say no more) and I pass not for
man's judgment, but he that judges me is the Lord. Only let me advertise the
Reader, that to be in union with corruptions, is to have no division made in
the Soul by a contrary principle of Grace, hating that corruption. I would be
very loath to be found in the hatred of other men's errors and corruptions, and
in the love of my own. The testimony of my conscience herein, is my rejoicing,
that I lie open to conviction, studying always to exercise a clear conscience
toward God and toward men.

Sections 13, 14. Sect. 13, 14.

THese two Sections, are by R. F. passed over untoucht: In the one I showed how
George Fox prefers the light within, as life, to the light of the Scriptures,
which is death; and James Nayler acknowledges life to be in the Scriptures,
speaking of them that love the life in them. In the other, I noted how George
Fox disparageth the light of knowing God, and the Father, and the Spirit, and
Christ, and the Gospel, by the Scriptures, because men had never known them but
by the Scriptures. One would think (as I said) this to be rather a commendation
of the Scriptures, and that his disparagement contradicts his commendation; as
his after commendation, That the Scriptures came from the light and life,
contradicts his disparagement, That the light within was before the Scriptures.
The light, within Christ, was before, (we grant) in time, and excellency, being
uncreated light. The light within every man, in Adam (considered as in his
state before the fall, or as in his lapsed condition) was before the Scriptures
in time, not in excellency; because the Scriptures hold forth a higher light,
then either Adam (or we in him) had before the fall, or under the fall. The
light within some Saints (as they were Saints) of the old Testament, was before
any piece of Scripture in time, not in dignity and degree, seeing there is more
light in the first piece of Scripture-Gospel, Genesis 3. 15. then all the Saints
then, and since are worth (of themselves) and then they could comprehend, or
can to this day. The light within the Saints of the present Age, is after the
Scriptures, both in time and excellency; in time, as they were born, and
newborn since the Scriptures were extant: in excellency, as the Scriptures are
a rule, above their light, and unto it; not so, their light a rule above the
Scriptures.

Section 15.
WHereas I had reasoned upon James Naylers words, If the least degree of light,
manifested in the creature, be perfect in its measures and in its self, (as he
delivers it for doctrine) then it is every way perfect, and no longer the least
degree; and therefore J. Nayler contradicted himself; R. F. Page 27.
appeals to the book of Few Words page 8. and thither let him and the worst
Reader I have, go, and find out the subtilty he charge me with: After one
charge he gives another, Thou have here confessed, that if the light be perfect
in its measure, and in its self, it is perfect every way.

Rep. It is neither my confession, nor concession, but I reasoned after that
manner, to manifest J. N. his contradiction in adjecto, as we say, or in the
very terms; for it is as if he had said, the least degree is the greatest
degree, and the lowest degree, is the highest degree; which how absurdly
contradictious to it self, let rational men be judges. What has he further to
salve the contradiction? Thy imaginations cannot find out the highest degree,
that are not subject to the lowest, but acts contrary to it, and so to be
condemned by it.

Rep. Here are four fresh charges. For the first, I acknowledge my imagination
too shallow to reach unto others seize; but I deny the highest degree of
light to be here attainable, 1 Cor. 13. I know it is in heaven to be found. I am
content to look through Paul's glass, and the believers Prospective, and to know
things here in a Riddle, and in a Mystery. The Zenith of the Saints light, is
not to be seen while Saints light not at the highest pitch.
we are under the Sun, when that which is perfect is come (which comes not in
this life in point of light; and therefore not of holiness, by the way) then
that which is imperfect shall be done away: But this I know that I am more
brutish then a man, and have not the knowledge of the Holy. And how little is
the portion of the knowledge of God and Christ, that is to be found among all
the Saints? were it all put together, it would, happily, amount but to the least
degree of that which shall be known, by every of them, hereafter. The knowledge
of the love of Christ is the highest piece of knowledge, and that passes my
knowledge, if not R. Farnworths; yet this I know that nothing shall be known in
heaven, nor to eternity, but the foundation and subject matter of it, is
already laid in the Scripture. Besides Scripture-knowledge for the matter (I do
not say for the manner) I profess my self to know nothing; and the least degree
of that light which shines in the Scripture, concerning Christ and him
crucified, I esteem above the highest degree of the light that every man comes
into the world withal.

A second charge follows, But thou art not subject to the lowest [degree of
light.]

Rep. 1. Will R. F. grant the light which every man has to be the lowest
light? and Gospel Light to be a higher light? and what the Saints have in
heaven to be higher then what the Saints have on earth? then I hope the least
degree of light is not perfect in its measures as in its self, as his fellow
asserted.

2. What if I were perfectly subject to the least and lowest degree of light?
will that advance me to light of another kind? if not, I shall thank free
grace for giving light of a higher nature (though I never obeyed natural light
as I ought, and as I might; and every man might do more with his natural
abilities then he does.)

A third charge, But thou acts contrary to it.

Rep. This I take to be a third winnowing of Satan. What I have done herein,
the Lord has known, and knows (and not R. F.) And He knows how to pardon it,
and has pardoned it in Christ. But if I do not advance every man's light into
the place of the Saints light, I act not against natural light (though above
it) but for the light of Saints. And if I attribute more to true spiritual
light, then to natural, and do not call that spiritual, which is not so (in the
specifical or proper form and being of it) but call a Spade a Spade, I hope R.
F. will bear with me, or blame himself for allowing of that distinction (as
above) where he said, the light which discovers corruption is not natural, but
spiritual, without explication of himself according to Scripture.

A fourth charge follows [ and so to be condemned by it] A sentence I may
call it, as well as a charge; but it is well I shall be condemned by the light,
not in the dark as R. F. does adjudge me, at his pleasure: well, I say, that I
shall be tried and judged in another Court then his captious judgment; and
well for me still, that I have submitted to the sentence of Gods legal Court
for abuse of natural light, and yet have made use of my liberty in Christ, to
appeal unto a higher Court then Gods own Law (so far as it holds forth a
Covenant of works, and sentence of life or death upon my own works) even to the
throne of Grace, and to the Gospel-sentence, of Gods free justifying a sinner
that believes in Jesus; there, I am sure, neither R. F. nor the devil himself
can lay any thing to my charge, as to my condemnation before God. It is God
that justifies, who is he that condemns? But in way of Reply before men, I
must attend R. F. Page 27.
and desire my Reader to observe how he goes on to make good J. Nayler his
assertion. For it (the light in its least measure) is perfect, both in respect
of its truth, and sincerity, power and authority, and condemns the haters and
resisters of it. Thus R. F. To which I Reply,

1. What is this to perfection of degrees? Here is a mighty fall from the
highest to the lowest, for this kind of perfection, viz. of truth (which I had
granted) is so in the highest degree, that it belongs also to the lowest. The
least drop of Every thing is true, and perfect for the kind, as it is Gods
work.
water is true water, perfectwater in respect of its truth, as all that is in
the Ocean: so the least beam of light is true light, and (in that sense)
perfect, whether it be Creation-light, or Redemption-light, either is true (for
its kind) in the least degree, and perfect as to the true being; But,

2. The deceit lies here, when men will put off that for Redemption-light,
which is but old Creation-light. A Bristol stone is a true Bristol stone, but
if it be put off for a Diamond-spark, it is counterfeit; there is not truth in
it, as to the repute and estimation of it: so, the least degree of old
Creation-light, (as (...), that which may be Rom 1. 19.
known of Gods eternal power, goodness and wisdom, in and by the contemplation
of the creature) is true for the kind, and is called [ truth] Romans 1. 18.
which the Gentiles imprisoned in unrighteousness, but this has not the least
spark of Redemption-light, which Adam had not before the fall, and was not
manifested after the fall till the first promise, Genesis 3. 15. And if it be
commended, and set off for saving light, it proves false light, and darkness it
self, (so far is it from perfection of degrees, that it has not the least
spark of Gospel-sincerity.

3. As for any power and authority, that the least or the greatest degree of
old-creation-light has (as it is given back since the fall) (though it be
loved and obeyed) to lead into the life and power of the Saints comprehensions
of the redeeming love of God in Christ (which R. F. hinteth at) I know none:
God has never blessed it, nor promised to bless it, nor ordained it for that end.

4. If they intend it only of the Saints light or the Spirits light, which R.
F. in his Epistle says is perfect in its least measure, still that is only to
be understood (as I said in my other piece) in respect of its truth and
sincerity, and that has life and power in it already, and does not lead into
it (as R. F. speaks) but in respect of a further degree of the same kind: for
although the good use of natural light does not lead into Spiritual light and
life, yet the good use of the least true spark of Spiritual saving light, in
Christ the Mediator, has a promise of further increase of light of the same
Spiritual nature. There follows another passage in R. F. which I would scan a
little, They that love and obey the least degree of light, are in unity, the
highest and lowest in their measures and degrees.

Rep. 1. If this be meant of them that have the lowest degree Creation-light
and Redemption-light m^st not be confounded.
of Creation-light, and of such as have the highest degree of Redemption-light,
it confounds the natural and Spiritual man together, the sinner or graceless,
and the gracious Saint; yea, the meanest man, as a man, with the most glorious
Saint in heaven, as a Saint, but how erroneous is this notion? What unity are
they in (that is a saving unity) some of whom have not the Spirit, Jude v. 19.
others have; some have union with Christ a Redeeming, Sanctifying Head, others
not? Does R. F. think that such as obey the lowest degree of light manifested
in the Creature, are in unity with the Saints, that comprehend something of the
height and breadth, length and depth of the love of God, and Christ which
passes knowledge? or that men using their Talent of Nature well (could they do
it) shall meet the Saints in heaven, who are enabled to use their Talent of
Grace in a saving manner? far be any of his or my Readers Section 16, 17.
from such Popish, Jesuitical conceptions.

2. If he means only, that the Saints of lower or higher forms, and degrees
of Redemption-light and grace are in unity, this is granted in some respect,
viz. of perfect Justification, sincere Sanctification, and what one-ness the
Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. But why then does he and his sect
separate from them that have higher or lower degrees of light and grace then
themselves? and how comes it they are so full of Saint and Self-contradictions?

4. and 5. Heads of Self-contradiction. Concerning Sin, and Christ.
Section 16, 17.
THese two Sections, R. F. waves altogether; In the former, I delivered out
what I had from them in discourse, in Scotland, that sin is no visible enemy to
a Saint or to themselves, and yet they speak as if they had received higher
degrees of light then ordinary Saints. It seems it is to see sin in others, not
in themselves: but they carry their light in a dark Lanthorn, are in love with
their own shadow, and in friendship with their own lusts, to whose eyes of
understanding, sin, and the sin in the bosom, is not the most visible
adversary. In the latter I gave forth, what I had there also in discourse, and
in a Letter; They hold, Christ to be in all, yet none to be in Christ but
themselves. Whereas, in what way or respect God and Christ* as God, is in all,
all are in Christ as God; that is, In him we live, move, and have our being, as
men, and creatures: And were Christ in all, as Mediator, all were in Christ as
members of such a Head, Branches of such a Vinestock, and root of saving grace,
but He is neither in every man, nor is every man in Him by such a way of union.

6. Head of Self-contradictions. Sect. 18, 19.
Concerning Justification.
Section 18.
HEre I noted James Nayler in one place, denying that his sins, who is once
covered, are not daily to cover, yet in another place affirming, that what
Christ did formerly upon the Cross, he does the same now. If then he did cover
them, he does now cover them daily. R. F. Page 27.
answers not to take off the Contradiction, but only thus, He that has his
sins covered is blessed; but thy meaning is denied.

Rep. The manner and way of Christ's covering of sin is denied, if that my
meaning (which is not mine, but the Lords) be denied. For [to day] Heb. 13. 8.
holds forth a daily virtue Heb. 13. 8. cleared.
(in all the present time of the new Testament) of Christ's Cross, or his
personal sufferings upon the Cross, for covering as for crucifying of sin, that
is, for pardoning as subduing it. He does perfectly justify a believer at
once; but this he does daily also, by one continued act of imputation of
Christ's sufferings, whence comes the non-imputation of a believers daily sins.
If this be denied, then the way of Gods covering sin is denied to be by way of
pardon; and so David and Paul, Psalm 32. 1. Romans 4. 6, 7. are denied, and the
blessedness which they pronounce to the pardoned person; which is worse then
for R. F. to deny himself, or for J. Nayler to contradict himself, as before,
and as follows.

Section 19.
THat which I noted in this Section, in his other words, is, I own no other
Christ but that which suffered at Jerusalem, and by him I am saved from my
sins; yet, what righteousness Christ has performed without me, was not my
justification, neither was I saved by it. I inferred, if then he was not
justified and saved meritoriously, he is not now, nor ever will be saved
efficaciously. All that R. F. has to offer is, The righteousness of Christ is
our righteousness, who are saved from our sins by him, and we witness him to be
the alone Savior of all that obey him; and perfectly able to save to the
uttermost all those that come unto God by him.

Rep. 1. This salveth not the wound of J. Naylers selfcontradiction.

2. Let none be deceived with their expressions, for when they say Christ's
righteousness is our righteousness, they understand it of Christ's righteousness
wrought in them, by his Spirit, not wrought for them by his blood and
obedience. But I ask these men, Was not Christ Jesus without them, when he was
obedient to death, the death of the Cross at Jerusalem? Was the righteousness
he performed, for himself, or for others? Did he not stand and suffer as a
surety? Is not the sureties payment reckoned to the debtor, as sufficient? What
if Christ be so free and bountiful, as he will not only pay the debts of his
Elect, but stock them with inherent Grace: it is not a farthing of the money
that he puts into their purse, that justifies them; their friend and surety
had enough to do it without them. Proud and self-deceiving are they, who think
a little within them, is better then all that is in Christ without them; and
yet hope to be saved by him, whom they despise, and with whose white raiment
and wedding garment, they will not be covered.

7. Head of Self-contradiction. Concerning immediate Teaching.
Section 20.
I Observed what they clamorously object against us, That the Gospel we preach
is from man, and by man, from the Printers and Stationers, but theirs is
immediate altogether; and yet they write, print, and have taken their light (as
they call it) one from another: Here they condemn in others, what they allow in
themselves; and if the teaching of God, as they say, be immediate in the least
degree, and all their teaching be immediate; why do they condemn by their
practice, what they allow only in doctrine? why do they write or print any
thing? which is a mediate way of teaching. R. F. has nothing to say, but in
his old reviling language, Page 28.
All thy scraped stuff, and thy twistings and windings we deny; and so runs to
old matter already dealt with, except a few expressions which I shall touch at
presently; But,

1. I would know what he does deny of my scraped stuff, as he calls it, which
is but collections from their own words and writings? If he denies his
fellow-writers, then he makes out more contradiction among themselves: If he
denies that I have drawn up true collections, it is yet to be proved; for
either their very words (as in most places) or the sense and effect of them, I
have faithfully presented to the world; and because I know it pincheth them but
to have hinted Ed. Buroughs acknowledgement, how he was formed to Quakerism by
G. Fox, while they boast of none but immediate Callings and Teachings; knowing
also that the Book Warning to Under barrow.
is but in the hands of a few, I shall transcribe part of the said Ed.
Buroughs account of himself. After twelve years of age, he enquired where the
chief Presbyterian Priests (as he calls them) preached, and heard them. At
seventeen years of age he was struck with terror, falls a praying; but by a
voice was taken off prayer, reading, and hearing the Scripture; thought himself
in the light; followed the highest Notionists; but had the world in his heart,
pride and covetousness; lived in the lustful nature, and grew to be weary of
hearing any Priests, though never so high, for something that shined deep in
him, showed him ignorance in all profession, and he was put to a stand: Now
hear him further, verbatim. "Then it pleased the Lord to send his true and
faithful servant, and messenger, George Fox, he spoke the Language which I knew
not, notwithstanding all my high talking, for it was higher and yet lower; and
it pleased the Lord to speak to me by him, that I was in the prodigal state,
and above the Cross of Christ, and not in the pure fear of the Lord, but full
of corruption, and the old nature: though I had professed freedom, yet it was
but such as the Jews professed; for I saw my self to be in bondage to my own
will, and to my own lust; and through the word of the Lord spoken to me by him,
I began to see my self (the witness being raised) where I was, and what I had
been doing; and saw I had been making an image to the first Beast, which had
the wound by a sword and did live, whose deadly wound was healed, and was full
of airy notions and imaginations; and was worshipping the image which I had
made, and then I saw my self to be a child of wrath, and that the son of the
bondwoman lived, and that harlots had been my companions, and was no more
worthy to be called a son. And so he goes on to show his trouble and distress,
till he separated himself from the world, and his acquaintance, and betook
himself to the company of a poor despised people, called Quakers; and now he is
one of that generation, God has made him partaker of his love, in whom his
soul has full satisfaction, joy, and content: At last, he concludes, he has
traveled through the world, even unto the end, and is now come to the
beginning of that which never shall have end, which the dark mind of man knows
not. Will R. F. deny this to be his Narrative, truly taken? if not, then he
must grant there are some mediate Teachings in these days among themselves: or,
if God teaches not but immediately, then God taught not Ed. Buroughs by
George Fox; and then Ed. Buroughs is not much bettered by being of the
generation of the people called Quakers. Whatsoever have been his
apprehensions, sorrowful or joyful, the Heart is deceitful above all things,
and desperately wicked, who can know it? A new instance we have in J. Lilburn,
who professes himself to be one with the generation of Quakers, raised and
formed up to that fraternity, partly by conference with them, partly by reading
of their printed papers: His words in one place The Resur. of J. Lilburn page 7.
are these, Meeting here with one of those precious people, called Quakers, and
getting into my hands two Volumes of their printed papers, amounting to about
seventeen hundred pages, I have with serious discourse, and seriousness of
reading therein, been knocked down off, or from my former legs or standing; and
giving scope to my true teacher and guide, the Light of God speaking in my
soul, I am become, at present, dead to my fallen, or first natures reason, etc.
Yet elsewhere Page 9.
he pretends to the immediate power of God upon his soul. But notwithstanding
that, he exhorts his friend to read J. Naylers and W. Dewsberies Books, and
desires the Lord, by his Almighty power, to set them home to his soul. Is not
this a mediate way of learning, by a mediate way of teaching? And shall these
men's scriblings have Gods Almighty power at hand, and shall not his own blessed
Scriptures be attended therewith? I shall advise J. Lilburn, and all my
friends, and all such as are become my enemies for the truths sake, to turn
over those sacred Pages, and in particular, 1 Cor. 8. 2, 3. and Gal. 6. 3, 4,
5. desiring the Lord, by his Almighty power of free grace, to set them home to
their hearts.

2. As to what follows in R. F. Thou would have a letter-Savior, and a
letter-fulness, and give all the preeminence to the Letter of the Scripture.

Rep. Neither in what I wrote before, nor in this Reply, can any such passage
be found; but R. F. will take liberty to scrible, what comes next to the nib of
his quill. The preeminence I give to the Scripture, is,

1. In respect of natural light, or that which every man Preeminence of
Scripture light.
has: And if I call every man's light natural and common, I mis-call it not; (I
call not Christ so, who (as God) gives that light) As my natural body framed by
Christ (as he is God) is rightly called, as it is, a natural body; so my
natural reason, light, and understanding (though lighted up (as a candle within
me) by Christ the true God, working with the Father in all acts of Creation and
Providence hitherto) is truly called, as it is, natural light: and seeing every
man John 5. 17.
has some of it, (the most of whom have no saving light) it is truly called,
as it is, common, and universal light. Will R. F. allow Ed. Buroughs to call
some light natural, and not me so to phrase it? or, will he allow J. Nayler to
distinguish between common light and saving, and may not I and others with me,
have the same liberty? First, let Ed. Buroughs be heard, Warning to under
barrow, page 37.
I write not as from man, whose light Section 20
is only natural and carnal, and does only make manifest carnal
transgressions, etc. And again, By the natural light, through the earthly law,
is no natural man able to judge of that which is spoken, or declared from that
which is eternal. And again, I deny to have this cause put into the judgment
of carnal Lawyers, who judge by the natural light, etc. Let us hear J. Nayler
speak his mind, Discovery of the man of sin, page 29.
In your reply (meaning the Ministers at Newcastle) you deceitfully put in that
word (saving light) which is not spoken by me; for though Christ be the light
of the world, that enlightens all, yet none are saved by him, but who believe,
etc. There is a light then which is in natural men, unbelievers, and all the
Heathen, which is but natural, and a light which is not saving (and therefore
but common) by their own confession; what unreasonableness is it in them to
except against the term of distinction? what contradiction to their own reason?

2. The preeminence of Scripture Light is this, that it is our standing rule
for faith and manners; so are not immediate Revelations or Teachings, of which
see 1. Part, Sect. 1. Here is the Letter or Scripture-fulness that I assert,
There is sufficient light in it to guide men to salvation, seeing it is the
Spirits light, and given by the Spirit for a rule; yea, the Spirit gives out
himself thereby, for our clear understanding and satisfaction in the things of
God; insomuch as that very witness which a believer has in himself, the
Scripture bears testimony of. The Spirit tells us in the Scripture what he
works in our hearts, and he stamps upon our hearts what he had before caused
to be stamped into Scripture, or upon the Bible.

R. F. objecteth, Thou would have the Spirit to be bought and sold, if it
were in the Letter.

Rep. How the Spirit is in the Letter, that is, in the Scripture, I have opened
in its due place, 2. Part, Sect. 8. but that it follows, it may therefore be
bought and sold, is a weak and poor exception. R. F. his mind goes along with
his Pamphlet, and his spirit is in his book, yet it is not his person, but the
ink and paper that is bought and sold: so the ink and paper of the Scriptures
(as other creatures of God) are bought and sold; not so the Spirit, though he
be more in them, then R. F. is in his book; for this poor man cannot change my
mind, nor many thousands more (if they read his Pamphlet with me) into his
erroneous judgment; when as the Spirit, in the Scripture, changes my mind,
and all that are made to own the light and authority of it, into the same truth
that is there delivered.

Again he taunteth, Thou would have a Letter-Savior, if the Letter could give
the Spirit and eternal life.

Rep. 1. I never said the Letter could, or did give the Spirit, but the Spirit
is given by it; or, as I even now expressed it, the Spirit gives out himself by
it; and he gives out Christ, or the knowledge of Christ and eternal life by it
also; who shall hinder him, if he will begin and further our salvation by it?

2. It is R. F. his disdainful expression, (not mine) [ a Letter-Savior] Christ
a Savior according to Scripture.
but this I say, from the Lord, He that slights the Savior which the Scripture
witnesses, and makes known, is not like to find any Spirit-Savior of him, or
a Savior in vigor, life and Spirit, to his soul; and if he be not such a
Savior, he is not at all a Savior to him. Did ever any of the Apostles, or such
as had indeed immediate teachings from the Spirit, vilify and reproach Christ,
or the Scripture, with such inkhorn terms?

Yet again, With a Letter-fulness, thou would have no witness of God, without
the Letter.

Rep. 1. That follows not, for his providential works are witnesses of him,
Acts 14. 17. to the very Heathens, and much more to Christians; But,

2. He shall be no Christian to me, or in my account, who brings any testimony,
as from God, without the Scriptureattestation.

But says R. F. If the Scripture be lost, the fullness and the witness would be
lost, and his people be without supply and strength, according to thy account.

Rep. 1. Should they be lost, that one way whereby God gives out his fullness,
and by which he witnesses and works for his peoples supply and strength,
would be lost, yet God loses none of his fullness in himself; and Christ has
other witnesses of him, John 5. His Father, his Works, John Baptist: But,

2. Seeing there are Scriptures, as they cannot be broken, John 10. 35. they
cannot be lost; God has, and will ever preserve them, for his peoples supply
and strength.

3. What vain jangling is here from R. F. his pen, tending to no edification at
all of the Reader, but to the alienation of peoples minds from the Scriptures,
and from those that teach according to them; to seduce and draw poor souls
after their pretended immediate teachings, while yet they will be quoting of
Scripture, as if it were written and penned to destroy it self:

For thus R. F. gathers up the Rere of his forces, Page 28.
He (to wit, Christ) is before all things, and by him all things consist, and
he is the Head of the body the Chruch, who is the beginning and firstborn from
the dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence, for in him the
fullness dwells.

Rep. 1. Are not these words written by the Spirits secretary, Col. 1. 17, 18,
19. And is not R. F. beholden to the Scripture for that literal knowledge?

2. If ever he feels the power of these, as other Scriptures, The Scripture
magnifies Christ above it self.
God will teach him, to honor the Scripture so much the more, as it magnifies
Christ above it self; and to speak more wisely of it, then to conclude as he
does: In him the fullness dwells, then not in the Letter, yet the Letter
declares of it.

Rep. 1. If the Letter declares of Christ's fullness, then we shall need to know
no more of Christ, then what for substance is in the Scripture; there is no
necessity then of immediate teachings, (setting Scripture aside) nor ought we
to receive any, against the Scripture.

2. Why may not fullness be in Christ, and in the Letter How fullness is in
Christ, how in the Scripture.
(conjoined still with the sense) of Scripture also. The fuller the fountain
is, the more full is the conduit and its pipes: The more full the heart is, the
fuller the mouth; out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and the
pen writes, what is good or bad, truth or error. In Christ is the fullness of
the fountain, in the Scriptures is the fullness of the stream, flowing from, and
carrying to the fountain, and and abiding inexhausted as a well, fed by a
continual spring. Sect. 21, 22, 23.
Christ having all fullness superabundantly in himself, he does abundantly and
sufficiently fill the Scriptures, with the savor and sweetness of his good
ointments, which make the virgins, and the upright love him, and seek after
him, in these footsteps of the flocks, the good and old ways of
Scripture-teaching.

8. Head of Self-contradiction. Concerning Perfection.
Sections 21, 22.
IN the former of these Sections, I noted their profession of Perfection, and
of Quaking after Moses example, at the foot of mount Sinai, to cross-shins one
with the other. R. F. returns me nothing in answer; as if convinced, it is no
better then I judged it, a Self-contradiction, and one of his own. In the
latter, the contradiction to themselves is as gross; they speak of perfection
in holiness here attained, before death, and yet acknowledge sin dwells in
them, though not in act. R. F. has nothing to say to this also, and so it must
stand as a testimony against them, with the rest; when he and all his
fraternity have said what they can, their self-justifications will end in
self-confusion.

9. Head of Self-contradiction. Concerning Quaking and Trembling.
Section 23.
HEre I had noted the Contradiction between their profession of Quaking and
trembling, and prosessed boldness; never having observed more daring creatures,
to open their lips, or put pen to paper. It fell out that R. F. his Reply to
the Priests about Beverley, was quoted for an instance, he is therefore the
more concerned in vindication; but how does he take off the self-contradiction?
even, as along the Book, by persisting in his evil cause. Page 28.
The same power that made Moses, etc. to quake, shake, and tremble, the same
power we witness.

Rep. But Moses was under a Legal administration, and at Legal, what?
that time, when he said, I exceedingly fear and quake, he was under a type of
that Legal bondage, which believers are freed from. The false Apostles, indeed,
by their corrupting the Doctrine of Justification, carried Christians (as much
as laid in their power) under the Law again; for which the true Apostle Paul
blames the Galatians, Chap. 4. 21. Tell me ye that desire to be under the Law,
etc. So these pretenders to a new Apostleship, are discovered by their Doctrine
of a Righteousness within them, that is their Justification; to lead people the
same way, as the ringleaders among the Jews and Galatians did; and would make
them children of the bondwoman, whom Christ has made children of the
freewoman: yet boldly they will profess they are come from mount Sinai, to
mount Zion, while their Doctrine of Justification has no other tendency, then
to carry back to bondage.

R. F. yet seems to bleat more like a sheep, then bark like a wolf, in this
passage: We witness working out our salvation with fear and trembling.

Rep. 1. The fear and trembling, which Paul speaks of, Phil 2* 12. vindicated.
Phil. 2. 12. as proper to believers, is not that which Moses did typically
represent, at the foot of mount Sinai; for the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap.
12. 18. to 21, denies that believers are under that state, or that Legal
administration, with the effects of it.

2. The fear and trembling, wherewith believers are to Evangelical trembling,
what?
work out their salvation, issues from faith, and love, and Gospel-humility,
and is not the fruit of Legal humiliation.

3. The Gospel-fear and trembling is not to be found visible, or legibly to be
discerned in all R. F. his vindication, hitherto.

But he rounds me in the ear with this, Thou speaks against the power of God,
that works effectually in his people, as it did in Moses, Habakkuk, David,
Paul and other, witnessed in Scripture, thou there in contradicts the Scripture.

Rep. 1. To contradict the Scripture is worse then to contradict a man's self;
and therefore I desire the first part of this Reply may be minded by R. F.
before the latter: Yet there is scarce a Self-contradiction, which I have
mentioned and charged upon these men, but the Reader will find in it one
contradiction or other to the Scripture. If I should deny that Moses quaked, or
that Habakkuk, or Paul trembled, I should deny the Scripture, and the Power of
God: but I deny that such a quaking as Moses, Habakkuk, or Paul (when fallen to
the earth, Act. 9. 5, 6.) were taken with, is the fear and trembling believers
are to work out their salvation withal; as for David's, it coming from the power
of piety, I desire we all had his measure of love to the word of God, then
should we tremble as he did, Psalm. 119. 120. at the footstool of the Lord, at
the threatenings and judgments written, and executed even upon Nations, and the
wicked ones, and at the fatherly righteous chastenings upon our selves, or his
own people.

2. When Gods power of majesty, in visible manifestations to the eye of the
body, discovers it self to any, as to Moses, or to Paul, or in visions, as to
Habakkuks spirit; such a bodily trembling becomes them, and they will not be
able to avoid it; but the power of Gods Majesty in visible manifestations to
body or mind, is not that power which works effectually to salvation in his
people; take it alone (for Balaam had such a work) but the Power of his love
and grace in Christ which in the majesty of the Gospel, is made known to us
(from the efficacy of our high Priest sat down Heb. 8. 1.
at the right hand of the Majesty of God in the heavens) is that power whereby
he works in us; and whereon he commands us humbly to rest and depend, for the
finishing of our salvation the same way, as it was begun, according to Gods
good pleasure.

3. How contradictious these men are to the profession of trembling, I
instanced, for demonstration, in their standing, in an evil cause, before
magistrates without Quaking* or fear. R. F. Page 29.
in answer hereunto makes good the former branch of demonstration, which I
mentioned, the boldness of his pen; This is a fallacy of thine, where thou have
shot out thy sting in thy tail; herein thou art taught thy gradations
methodically in old Antichrists school, to lie, slander, accuse falsely, and
jeer, and cannot prove what thou have said.

Rep. 1. Neither do my words sound as if I jeered, nor was it my sense, nor do
I mis-report their practice.

2. The proofs I shall give, will evidence the truth of the charge. They stand
in an evil cause who being convented before magistrates deny the Scriptures to
be the word of God, disturb the Churches in their public worship, and that
sometimes on a solemn day of humiliation; All this did J. P. last summer in
Essex at Cogs-hall; yea, and that without quaking and fear; witness his
challenge of him that had preached, witness his question to the magistrate when
he was bidden pull off his Hat, why he did not bid him in the Pulpit pull off
his Cap? witness his skipping up the Table, before four Justices of the Peace
placed at it, with his back toward them (in the room where they examined him
after the public work was ended) pretending he should be heard the better;
witness his denial of the Scriptures to be, what they are, the word of God,
neither regarding what was held forth to him from Hosea 8. 12. what God has
written, is his written word etc. nor from Prove. 30. 5, 6. Every word of God is
pure etc. Add thou not unto his words etc. Again, that is standing in an evil
cause, not to own and confess the Scripture to be a Rule to walk by, when
called to such an acknowledgement before the magistrate: this, William
Dewsbery, and Hen: Williamson would not directly afford to Judge Windham when
he asked the question, but put it off another way (as their manner is) and that
Discovery of persecution in Northamp. page 12.
without fear or due respect of the Power ordained by God; for they would not
stand uncovered, till their Hats were taken off R. F. may shoot out his arrow
against me, Stop thy mouth deceiver, and take in thy slander again, but it will
light upon his own pate; or he thinks to answer all with what follows: The Lord
makes the righteous as bold as Lions, but it cannot be applied here when men
will be silent in a good cause, and bold in a bad one. There is a bad Lion as
well as a good, the roaring Lion that goes about seeking whom he may devour,
and that first by seducing the mind to error, and then come forth the effects
of bodily shaking, falling to the ground, and roaring, as lately at Witham in
Essex has been visible and audible enough. The late Teachers. hereabouts (some
of them) have been so bold, as they will not give over, till they knock down
people as Butchers do their calves, although one of the last that came (by name
Will: Dewsbery) was against such violent dealing. The boldness of J. P. lately
in Colchester Castle is legible enough in Print, Fruits of a Fast. p. 5. and 6.
etc.
What a bold falsehood is that to say, our Intent was to ensnare him, and bring
his body into bonds: or that we were gathered against the truth, a bold
calumny! That the four Teachers (as he names them) of Independent companies,
are all Parish Priests, a bold lie! as is that which follows, that I spoke to
the Rulers in the public place, thereby to stir up their spirits to
persecute. The chiefest passage which I had in my Sermon (none of which he
heard) reflecting upon this Sect, was occasionally taken up (by reason of his
interrupting our work) viz. that in stead of the term Quakers, henceforth they
may be styled Church-disturbers. That, this was plotted among the Priests and
gathered Churches to appoint meetings to ensnare the innocent, is still more
impudent, our meeting on a solemn day of seeking God was designed to bear
witness against their errors, to strengthen the hands of one another in the
truth, and to preserve the innocent in the way of truth; but for insnaring, it
was far from our intendment, the Lord knows; nor did we know that J. P. would
be there till we met. But all these passages with his bold Letters to the
Justices (after his Commitment) and to the Judge (after the Assizes) and his
bold entituling his Book, The Fruits of a Fast, the Lord has rebuked, after
his bold undertaking a Fast, of his own for many days together (in the
aforesaid Castle) and therefore I say no more but the Lord rebuke all those of
his way, by this warning piece, though (if it be his will) I desire not one of
them should perish either by death, or by imprisonment.

Section 24. Section 24. 25.

THey deny (as I noted from their Books) all them that deny Quaking, and one
says Moses was a Quaker, and yet they think it scorn to be called Quakers. R.
F. who was concerned in this (seeing, of all that I have read, it is he that
expressly affirms A return to the Priests about *Beverly, page 14.
Moses was a Quaker) has not a word for reconcilement; what I noted therefore
must stand with the rest of their Self-contradictions, as a Testimony against
them.

10. Head of Self-contradiction. Concerning growth in Grace.
Section 25.
HEre I observed their witnessing (as they say) of the Saints growth, and the
time of their pressing after perfection, and weighed it with their exclamations
against those who deny perfection of degrees, and affirm sin to dwell in the
Saints all their life time. R. F. cunningly asks me, Page 29.
Art thou offended, that we witness the Saints growth, and the time of pressing
on to perfection? but hides from the Reader the contradiction that follows The
time of prossing after perfection is not the time of perfect attainment.
by their condemning those that deny perfection of gradual holiness in this
life: For they that are yet to grow further, are not at their full and perfect
growth; and if the time of this life be but a time to press after perfection,
it is not the time of the Saints attainment to those degrees, which at death,
their souls are filled withal. And if they that witness a time of pressing on,
do not therein cross nor contradict the Scripture, as R. F. acknowledges, and
I acknowledge that their witness does not cross us, why then will they by their
acclamations, of some here already perfect, and without sin, both cross us and
contradict themselves?

11. Head of Self-contradiction. Concerning Forms of Religion.
Section 26.
WHereas they pretend against all men's Forms, and are against Gods Forms of
administering Water Baptism, and a Bread and Wine-Supper; yet they take up a
Form of keeping on the Hat, a Form of words, Thou and Thee, etc. All this R. F.
passes over, as having said enough (to the latter at least) in a Pamphlet of a
sheet that he entituleth, The pure language of the Spirit of truth; where also
he defends nakedness, or some men's going naked in these times, as a figure
and sign of their nakedness who are naked from God, and clothed with filthy
garments; all this upon supposition, if the Lord bid them go naked: But does
not his fellow W. Dewsbery Discovery of persecution in Northamptonshire. p. 8.
tell him, the Scripture says, Let your adorning be with modest apparel: and
till R. F. can prove that God sends any in these days, as he did Isaiah to go
barefoot, and naked, he must contradict Scripture and his Fellow, and give us
leave to challenge them of affected forms, and habits, placing Religion where
there is none, besides their mistake of the Lords meaning in Isaiah 20. 2.
about the Prophets going naked and barefoot (at Gods command) Isai. 20. 2.
vindicated.
which was not stark naked, for then it would not have been added barefoot,
but only his upper garment was to be put off, with his shoes, and he was to
go in some disguised manner, as Acts 19. 16. the word naked is used.

As for the forms of Thou and Thee;

1. Where they not spoken out of affectation, and in contempt of Magistracy and
Order, and from a Levelling spirit, the expressions are proper enough: but if
they stick to these terms as proper, they are as loose at other times in their
Solecisms, incongruities, and improprieties; And R. F. in this is
Self-contradictious; for while he would have Thou and Thee to be the proper and
pure language of the Spirit, he denies the Scripture properly to be called the
word of God: whereas if Thee and Thou in Scripture be the The language of the
Spirit, and the word of God all one.
pure language of the Spirit, all the Scripture (to which Thou and Thee is
joined) is so, whether spoken in proper or figurative expressions; And if all
the Scripture be the pure language of the Spirit, it is all the pure word of
the Spirit; and consequently the pure word of God; why then does he and others
deny to call the Scripture the word of God? but that they are given up both to
contradict the Scripture and themselves.

2. This language of Thou and Thee when it is given to God, it is given
reverently (except from Satan, Job 1. 10. or wicked men, as Cain, Genesis 4. 14.
etc.) not as a term of equality with God, but in adoration of his Majesty, and
with respect to his greatness: and when it is used in addresses to Kings and
great Persons, it is joined with some note of honor, as Dan. 3. 10. Thou O
King, ver. 18. Be it known unto thee O King; in like manner as when Abigail
tendered her Petition to David, 1 Samuel 25. 25. Let not my Lord, I pray thee, etc.

3. If the Scripture be a Rule for Thou and Thee, it is a Rule for respect to
Superiors, and that in words and gestures; and therefore Thou and Thee, and
putting off the Hat may stand together when used in humility, but keeping on
the Hat before them, with Thou and Thee in the mouth, speaks impure pride in
the heart, when they think they have pure language in their lips.

4. George Fox, in his late News out of the North, Page 25.
brings in Christ thus speaking to his Father, [Father you in me and I in you]
here is Thou and Thee, the expressions in Joh. 17. 21. either denied, or
forgotten, and strangely varied, that they who are captious at others varying
from Scripture Language, may be seen in their own inconsistencies.

12. Head of Self-contradiction. Concerning the Fruits of the Spirit.
Section 27.
I Had observed how they seem to own the fruits of the Spirit, and yet walk in
the manifest fruits of the Flesh. R. F. Page 29.
queries cunningly at the first branch (as he did before) Art thou offended
also at that?

Rep. My offense is not at real owning of the fruits of the Spirit, wheresoever
it is found; but at their contradiction in words and practice to that which
they profess they own. Then he querieth at the second branch; Does the old
Serpent teach thee to lie against the Spirit with the fruits of it, and them
that are guided by it? and falsely accuse them, saying, they walk in the
manifest fruits, and works of the flesh; in that all that fear God, and knows
their godly conversation may witness against thee; and herein thou have
manifested thy Spirit of error and deceit, and to be one that regards not what
thou says.

Rep. 1. The godly conversation of the persons, called Quakers, is in a new
form, not known by the most that fear God, except a few misled people, who
were captivated to some errors before they heard of Quakerism, and now they
(meeting with some Abettors to their opinions concerning ordinances of Christ
who were got above them, and turned Seekers) think they have found, in the
doctrine and carriage of the Quakers, but will be at a loss, and to seek again,
I am confident, (if they be godly in the main) within a short time.

2 That it may appear I regarded what I wrote, when I Fruits of the flesh in
man called Qukers.
gave intimation of their works of the flesh, let the Reader take some
instances;

1. Of their strife and debate, a work of the flesh, from their many jangling
Pamphlets, and wrangling at the Scripture, as a dead Letter, and none of the
word of God: and from the manner as matter of their Answers unto Questions put
to them.

2. Of their Emulation, from their high-towring thoughts of their Apostleship,
and of their immediate Callings and Teachings.

3. Of Hatred, from their spirit of Contradiction to the Scriptures, to the
external parts of Gods worship; and from their bitter Words and Execrations,
Thou art of Cain, and of the Devil; and Imprecations, Let him be Anathema,
Maran-atha, etc.

4. As to their turbulent contestations, with Ministers in public, and others
in private, the whole Island of Britain swarms with instances. I shall not need
to mention that of J. P. at Coggeshall, nor that at Terling, when he came
riding up to the Ministers door (after he had talked to the people for an hour
or more in a private house) with two or three more on horseback, and above
twenty on foot at his horse heels, etc.

5. Of Scoffs, although R. F. dis-owns them Page 29.
in these words; [ As for scoffing at Scottish Priests, or others, that we
deny; but your raising Motives, Trials, Points, Reasons, and Uses out of other
men's words, and speaking a divination of your own brain, for your own ends, by
plain Scripture you cannot it justify.]

Rep. 1. The very use of the terms, Scottish Priest, and Priests, so often (in
this his Pamphlet that I deal with) is enough to render R. F. a Scoffer, or a
Railer.

2. Let the Reader that peruseth the place (where I first found the exception
against our taking a Verse, and raising Motives, Trials, Uses, Reasons, and
Points from it) judge whether it be not full of scoffing and reviling; I shall
give his words out at large R^turn, or Reply to the Priests about Beverley by R
Farnworth, page 8.
"Who are they that are got up into the chiefest places in the assemblies? and
act as in a stage play? and have a glass to act their hour? and make a trade of
Christ's words, the Prophets words, and the Apostles words? and act in the
chiefest places of the Assembly, taking a Verse, and raising Motives, Trials,
Uses, Reasons, and Points from it? and then say the people, He has handled his
Text well, and made good matter of it. Is not this a Sarcasm, a bittter scoff?

3. To collect a truth, any such way, for our own ends, (which was not
mentioned before, nor objected till now) if we did so, we could not justify;
but such a collection of truth, by Points, Reasons, Uses, etc. we can justify
from Scripture, and Scripture-precedents (only let the Reader Teaching by
doctrine, Reason, use, motive, trials, justified by plain Scripture.
first take notice how slightly again he speaks of the Scripture with Francis
Howgil, (where first I noted it, Part 1. Section 2.) calling it, Other men's
words) and thus I argue: First, That which the whole Scripture was given for,
and serves for, that improvement, the man of God is to make of it, 2 Timothy 3.
17. 1. Demon strations.
But the whole Scripture was given for Doctrine, in Points and Reasons, and
serves for Use of reproof, correction, instruction in righteousness (in which
is comprehended, Motives, Trials, etc.) Therefore, the man and minister of God,
is to make this improvement of the Scripture.
Secondly, That which the Scripture tells us, Christ, the Apostles, and
Prophets have practiced in their ministerial teachings, that we may act, and
justify when we have done: But the Scripture shows us how Christ, the
Apostles, and Prophets have taken Texts, and raised Motives, Trials, Points,
Reasons and Uses, out of, and according to the Scripture; And therefore, we may
do so, and justify the practice against gainsaying R. F. and ten thousand
such as he is.


The major, or first of the premised propositions, I may strengthen from Mat.
7. 29. Christ taught as one having authority: From 1 Cor. 11. 1. Paul followed
Christ: From Titus 1. 9. Holding fast the faithful word, as he has been
taught, ('it is spoken of the Bishop or preaching Elder) that he may be able by
sound Doctrine, both to exhort, and to convince gainsayers, Chap. 2. 15. These
things speak and exhort, (says Paul to Titus, an Evangelist) and rebuke with
all authority. So as if Christ taught with Scriptureauthority, in a way of
Reason, Use, etc. and the Apostles after him, both practiced and enjoined this
way to them, that succeeded them in after ages, we are to do the like. The
minor, or second premised proposition, might be abundantly cleared; and for
conviction of gainsayers, I shall give a few instances. Christ himself took a
Text from Isaiah 2. Instances.
61. 1. and 2. verses, as we have it recorded, Luke 4. 18. and applying it to
the people at Nazareth; he gave them so much searching Doctrine and Use from
it, that (as many of our hearers) some wondered, others were filled with wrath,
none scoffed at his handling the Text so well, or that he had made so good
matter of it, but they bare him witness, etc. Let R. F. or his Reader for him,
peruse Mark 12. 26. and see if he dare condemn our Lord for raising the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, from the words to Moses, I am the God of Abraham,
and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; let him read the Reason to
demonstrate these words, as a proof of the Resurrection, ver. 27. He is not the
God of the dead, but the God of the living; let him mind the Use of
confutation, Ye therefore do greatly err: Or, let him read Christ's Sermon upon
the mount, Mat. 5. etc. and see if he gives not Reasons for the Beatitudes, or
blessed state of the poor in spirit, the mourners, the meek, etc. and the Uses
of all, ver. 12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad; with the Motives, For great is
your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets, etc. Let him read
Chap. 7. ver. 1. The Point, Judge not; the Reasons, 1. That ye be not judged.
2. With what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; The Trial, ver. 3, 4, 5.
which amounts to thus much, That he passes not right judgment abroad, who
begins not first at home, but lets the beam continue in his brothers eye. Let
him read the book of Ecclesiastes, and observe how Solomon first takes it up as
his Text, Chap. 1. 2. Vanity of vanities, all is vanity; agreeable to that in
Job 15. 31. and thence collects his main Point, Happiness is not to be obtained
by any thing under the Sun, which he proves all along the Book; and then winds
up with the general Use of all, Chap. 12. 13, 14. Fear God, and keep his
commandments; with the Motive, For God shall bring every work into judgment,
etc. even R. F. his censuring, and disparaging of this kind of teaching,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil. Let him read Acts 8. 35. and he
shall find Philip beginning at the Scripture out of Isa. 53. 7, 8. (which the
Eunuch was a reading) and preached unto him, Jesus, not without Reason, and
Uses; nor Motive, that the Eunuch might believe Christ exhibited in the flesh;
and Trial, whether he did believe or no, as appears by the sequel of the story.
Let him read Acts 10. 34. and there he may find the Apostle Peter taking a
Verse, or part of it, out of Deuteronomy. 10. 17. God is no respecter of persons;
there is his Point already raised to his hand; the instance and proof at hand
also, Cornelius and his company, (of the Gentiles) himself at least, with his
house, already believers, and fearing God; The Reason of Gods irrespective
dispensation, ver. 36. The Gospel of grace, and grace of the Gospel, is free to
all, Jew or Gentile, by Jesus Christ; The Use, ver. 43. Whosoever believes on
him shall receive remission of sins. Or let him read Paul's Epistles a little
better, and he shall meet with plenty of Motives, Trials, Points, Reasons and
Uses, as paterns for our Sermons: In every Epistle we have the Doctrinal part,
and the Applicatory part; instance we but in that to the Romans, Chap. 1. ver.
2. Paul writes (as he preached) no other Gospel of God, but what he had
promised before by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures. The great Point of the
Gospel, which the Apostle holds forth eminently in that Epistle, is the
Doctrine of Justification.

1. Negatively, not by the works of the Law, (written in the heart, or in the
Book) for all are sinners against it, Gentiles, Chap. 1. and Jews as Gentiles,
Chap. 2. and part of the third; and thence he concludes, Chap. 3. 20. That by
the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified: But,

2. Affirmatively, By faith in Jesus Christ, and his righteousness, the price
of a sinners redemption, Chap. 4, and 5. The great Use of this is, Chap. 6. 1.
Therefore we are not to continue in sin, etc. Another Point flows from the
former, viz. of the necessity of Sanctification; and the inseparable connection
of it, with a justified state, though it is no ingredient to constitute a
justified person. Chap. 6. and 7. are full of spiritual Reason, in the
asserting of the necessary presence of holiness, in every believer, although
sin be present in the same heart, warring and fighting, the believer must abide
the conflict. Of both the Points, viz. of Justification and Sanctification, the
Apostle makes singular Use, Chap. 8. for consolation of believers, both against
sin, and sufferings: Against sin, in respect of the guilt, that is condemned
and abolished; in respect of in-dwelling corruption, that reigns not, though it
remains; against sufferings and afflictions, they shall all work to good, shall
not separate from the love of Christ, etc. A third main Point is touching
Election and Rejection, (in Chapters 9, 10, 11.) of whom the Lord pleased
(before good or evil was in them) to choose, or pass by, as a Potter, who has
power over his clay, etc. leaving it as a depth not to be far waded into, but
swim over it we may, with the arms of faith and admiration. And of all this
Gospel-doctrine (and what depends thereupon) he makes the Uses from Chap. 12.
to the end of the Epistle; exhorting unto Holiness toward God, Righteousness
toward men, Chap. 13. Love to the Saints, and to all men, Chap. 14. and 15.
calling, etc. for the practice of all the duties of the Moral Law* and that by
way of Motive, Chap. 12. 1. By the mercies of God (justifying, sanctifying
mercy, the mercy of God, in calling and glorifying, according to eternal
predestination) I beseech you, etc. And by way of Trial, Chap. 15. 14. I am
persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye also are full of goodness, etc. Chap.
16. 17. I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions, and offenses,
contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. If this suffice
not, let R. F. (who must be tried and judged by the Scripture) read any of
Paul's Sermons mentioned in the Acts, or pitch upon that, Chap. 13. ver. 15. The
Apostle (he will find) after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, was
desired to say on; The Scripture- Text was laid as the foundation, the Jews
expect (as all their true Prophets and Teachers, since God gave his written
word, were wont) he should build upon that foundation, and say on; neither do
his work beside it, nor without it, but say on; as if they had thus expressed
themselves, We have the whole Scripture, and every part of it as the Doctrine,
improve it now, give us a word of Exhortation for our use and improvement. Paul
does both, he preaches upon the Point of Gods dispensation to his people
Israel of old; and of the promise made to David of a seed; and of Christ's death
and resurrection (the accomplishment of that promise;) he proves Christ's
resurrection by Reason, as by Scripture, because Christ saw no corruption in
the grave, ver. 37. and was seen many days of them which came up with him from
Galilee to Jerusalem, etc. ver. 31. He preaches the Doctrine of Justification,
by remission of sins, to all that believe, ver. 38. and from all, makes Use, to
call them to faith in Christ; and ver. 40. to caution, and warn them (who did
not believe) lest that come upon them, which is written in the Prophets; (a
Motive from the Scripture) Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, etc. Such an Use I
wish R. F. and his followers, and leaders, may make of all this discovery of
Scripture-warrant, (which himself called for) for raising Points, Reasons,
Uses, etc. Let him beware of despising such a way of teaching, by which God
has wrought wonders upon the minds and consciences of men, to their
conviction, conversion, consolation, etc. If R. F. had ever known
experimentally, and savingly, the power of Sermons, by Doctrines, Reasons, and
Uses from Scripture, or had felt the force of Gospel as Legal Motives, and
soul-searching Trials, would he have put me or any man upon justifying this
practice? surely his own heart and conscience might have been a witness for the
truth, and not his pen a scoffer against it. I pity such men in the North, as
South, who either have not heard, or regard not to hear some Boanerges, or
other; some plain, powerful Perkins, Rogers, Hooker, Price, Preston, Bolton, or
other, to pronounce the word Damnation in their ears, that it may echo in their
consciences. Let R. F. and his brethren, attend to what I say, He that
believes not our Points soundly raised from Scripture, I must tell him from
Christ, he shall be damned. He that stands not convinced by our Reasons from
Scripture, will lose his reasonable soul and perish. He that despises our Uses
deduced from Scripture- doctrine and Scripture- reason, will inevitably be
ruined. He that is not moved by Scripture- motives, is a man of a cauterized
conscience, and will be shut up in the lowest prison. He that declineth
Scripture- trials, shall (will he, nill he) be judged and condemned according
to the Scripture. What will become then of R. F. his bold daring words that
follow? Therefore against you, and such deceivers as profess Scriptures to be
your rule, and act contrary to them, we declare, and against you testify, but
as words of wind, that vanish like smoke out of the bottomless pit: no fruits
of the Spirit can I find in all this their Self-justification, with their
Scripture and Self-contradiction.

Section 28.
HVmility and Love are precious fruits of the Spirit, which they pretend to
own, (as I noted) but this I desired might be observed withal; they deny common
courtesy to equals, and due outward respect to superiors; and I may add,
while they call for it to be given to inferiors, (such as themselves most of
them are) And if they say they honor all in their hearts, who will believe
them, till it has power to express it self outwardly in words, and gestures of
honor and of love* which, doing nothing unseemly, will do what is comely and
honorable? With an Exhortation to love, the Apostle stirs up to humility and
common courtesy, 1 Pet. 5. 5. and Chap. 3. 8. Be subject one to another; be
clothed with humility, i. e. in mind and conversation, as in apparel: Love as
brethren, etc. be courteous. Peter learnt this of his Master, who was loving,
and lowly in spirit and carriage; bowed to the feet of his servants, even to
wash them, John 13. and spoke with words of entreaty, where he might have
commanded; Luke 5. 3. entering into Simons ship, he prayed him that he would
thrust out a little from the land.

R. F. has nothing to salve their Contradiction, unless it be this Page 29.
, (for a flourish, to skin it over, not to cure the wound) As for your forms of
deceit, we deny, but a form of sound words the Scripture does justify, being
spoken by the Spirit of truth, which we own: and now the time is come, that
deceivers, and such as you are, cannot endure sound Doctrine, but utters your
folly, to make your selves manifest; and what generation you are of, even of
him, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish, 2 These. 2. 2 Pet. 2.

Rep. I leave all this, with the former, to the judgment of the intelligent
Reader, and of the righteous Lord; only I advertise, that he may refer (in
these words) to Section 26. as to this in hand, and then by our forms of
deceit, he means our putting off the Hat; and against that, we must set their
putting off the Hat-band; and by their form of sound words, he must be
construed of Thou and Thee; and I still leave it to the Lords judgment, where
deceit is harbored and acted; where Humility and Love is lodged, and at what
Sign it dwells, good men may, in time, understand by Scripture-marks; this for
one, 1 Cor. 11. 16. If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God.

13. Head of Contradiction to themselves. Concerning Ordinances.
Section 29.
I Noted here what they pretend to own, viz. Praying in families, with reading
and instructing of Children, and teaching according to the Apostles Doctrine*
but contradict it, in their giving over the course of Familyprayer, ordinarily,
Morning, and Evening, and at Meals: nor do I hear they teach Children, but what
leads them to an imitation of their new forms. R. F. Page 30.
as before, asks me, touching that which they say they own; And art thou
offended at this?

Rep. 1. I am not offended at the practice pretended, but at the bare pretense
of the practice, viz. at saying and not doing, and at backslidings from the
old and good ways of the Lord.

2. I am offended at R. F. his denying (as before) our raising Points, Reasons,
Uses, Motives and Trials from the words of Scripture, and yet justifying their
teaching according to the Apostles Doctrine: for sure, if all they reach be
according thereunto, it will go near to fall under some of those heads, viz. of
Motives, Trials, Points, Reasons or Uses; and if they so teach one another in
their families, why do they condemn us for teaching after that manner in the
public assemblies?

3. I am offended at R. F. his subtilty, or ignorant simplicity (all along)
that he puts off his Reader with answer to one part of the Contradiction, but
not to the other; as in what follows: I observed, they pretend to own all
that is Gods, Baptism, the Lords Supper, Church Fellowship, Sabbaths, etc. but
(as I said) it is in a sense contradictious to the light that ever they had,
have, or can have truly from Scripture. This man speaks not to the latter part
of the charge, but only to the former: We do own that which is Gods free love
and mercy to us, and all that is Gods; as Baptism, the Lords Supper,
Church Fellowship, Sabbath.

Rep. Here are fair words, but what the sense and meaning of them is, and how
contradictious to Scripture, and the ordinary use of the terms and phrases, we
may gather from what has passed before. See Part 1. Sect. 3. 8.


1. All Water Baptism is dis-owned by them, and he that says he owneth
Scripture-Baptism (which comprehends the sign and the thing signified) and does
dis-own all Water Baptism, he does wittingly, or unwittingly contradict himself.

2. The Lords instituted Bread and Wine Supper they deny, (as was showed Part
1. Sect. 39.) contrary to the Scripture; And he that says he owneth all that
is Gods and dis-owneth Bread and Wine, as instituted by Jesus Christ, (to be
used by the Churches, as the outward visible sign and memorial of the Lords
death to his second coming) is beside himself, as well as without his Book.

3. All forms of Church Fellowship (but their own) they deny; and that can be
no true Church Fellowship of theirs, which dis-own the Scriptures from being
the word of God, and rule of their fellowship, and of their Church.

4. As for a day of Rest, one day in seven, it was a mercy The Sabbath a mercy,
and a duty.
of God to Israel of old, that he made known unto them his holy Sabbath, Nehem.
9. 14. and I think it is a mercy still, and a pledge of love, that Gods holy
Sabbath (exchanged since Christ's resurrection from the seventh to the first day
of the week) has not ceased in any Age; for the standing Rule and Law of the
fourth Commandment, obliges to one day in seven (whether the last or the first
of the seven, it is a mercy we have either) but does R. F. and his fellows own
the outward part or rest of the Sabbath, according to Gods command? not, that I
find in any of their writings, hear one for all, Several papers, page 19.
The worlds Sabbath is without them, and they have no rest but in a form
without: The Saints Sabbath is within, where Christ is come to give them rest,
and they are ceased from their own works.

5. It is the mercy and love of God to give a heart to look more into the
inside of Ordinances, then upon the outside; but he that is unfaithful in the
least, is unjust also in much; and he that breaks the least of God Commandments
(as to the outward part of an Ordinance) and teach men so, shall be called or
reckoned the least in the kingdom of heaven.

14. Head of their Self-contradiction. Concerning Speech and Silence.
Section 30.
THey sit silent for an hour, or half, or quarter, and when others in (though
not of) their company speak freely, they check it (as I observed) with this, or
the like saying, In the multitude of words there cannot want sin; and yet they
are in their Letters, and Pamphlets, full of tautologies, etc. R. F. passes
this Section over with deep silence, but in this Pamphlet he has verified the
charge,

1. Of multiloquious needless repetitions, where he thinks Sect. 31, 32.
to vindicate the Scriptures, by frequent and impertinent quotation of them:
And,

2. Of Silence in many passages, where it was necessary he should have
vindicated himself, and his Brethren, from their own Contradictions.

15. Head of their Self-contradiction. Concerning Elders.
Section 31.
THis Section also he lets pass, (as having nothing to say) where I noted J.
Naylers interfering, viz. The ordaining of Elders was not by man, and yet it
was by the Spirit of God in the Apostles; the Spirit made use of them then, as
he did of the Brethrens and Churches suffrages and prayers: To grant an use was
made of men in the call of Elders, and yet to deny the Call was given of God by
man, is to speak Daggers and Contradictions, as all along I have cleared it in
forementioned instances.

16. Head of their Self-contradiction. Concerning Conscience and Laws.
Section 32.
HEre I noted what they determine; There must be no Law concerning Religion,
and yet thus admonish Rulers; See that your Laws be according to the Conscience
of every man. By this, I said, it seems there is no Religion in the Conscience;
or else, why should there not be Laws concerning Religion? according to
Religion, as well as according to the conscience. At this R. F. opens his
mouth, gives liberty to his Pen, as follows, Page 30.
Thou deceitful spirit, how have thou wrested the words set down about the Law
of God which answers his Justice, and the light in the conscience which answers
the Law of God, which is perfect according to that in the conscience? And then
he desires the wise-hearted may read the Book which I have wrested, The glory
of the Lord, arising, shaking terribly the earth etc. and the simple-hearted
may take notice of my deceits, herein made manifest, etc.

Rep. That the wise-hearted may not believe every thing, as the simple-hearted
will, if not helped with true information, First, I shall clear my self of a
deceitful spirit in this allegation, as in all that past before; Secondly, I
shall discover the deceit of R. F. his words and answer, as it is jumbled here
together. First, that I wrested not their words deceitfully, will appear if I
give them forth, as they are in that Pamphlet, The glory of the Lord, etc. p.
14.
more fully. Therefore be awarned how you make Laws, for all must be cut down
with the sword of the Lord which is contrary to that in the conscience: And
that no Law be laid upon Religion; for the Law is for sinners, and
transgressors, etc. Now, if no Law be laid upon Religion, because the Law is
for sinners, etc. then, either sinners have no conscience at all, and then they
contradict themselves who speak of a conscience in every man, and that Laws
must be according to that in the conscience, (as it follows in that page) or
else sinners have no Religion, i. e. of no kind, and nothing to bind them
from within; which if they say, they contradict the light of every man's
conscience (and consequently their own) which teaches something of a God, and
of a Religion also, that that God, which they own, is to be worshipped etc. Let
us hear them again with patience, See that your Laws be according to that in
every man's conscience; for the light in every man's conscience is of God, That
that in every man's conscience may witness your Laws, else that in every man's
conscience will witness against your Laws not to be of God.

Rep. 1. It is a truth, the light (which is light indeed, and not thought only
to be light) in every man's conscience is of God; but you shall have many men
tell you, my light gives me to judge thus, and I think thus, when it is not
light but darkness; for which end (to avoid this deceit) Christ gives the
caution, Luke 11. 35. Take heed therefore, that the light which is in thee, i.
e. which thou think is light, be not darkness.

2. Granting that every man has some light in the conscience which is of God,
so far as Magistrates Laws are according to that light, that light will accord
with the Laws, and witness for them (at one time or other) But what if the
Magistrates Law be above the light that every man has (as is the Law of true
Religion, Christian and saving Religion?) suppose every such man (who has but
an inferior common light, beneath and below, the light of the Magistrates Law)
does witness against it not to be of God, is it not therefore of God? because a
blind erring conscience who cannot see above his candle-natural light does so
judge of it, not to be of God, is it, I say, therefore not of God? or must the
Magistrate repeal those laws, which accord with Gods supernatural light given
him, because the natural man cannot reach the understanding of them? Such laws
indeed as have persecuted, prisoned, crucified them who have suffered for the
testimony of a good conscience (if Rulers repealed them not) God has hewed
down in all ages, because contrary to the Law of God, and to that which was,
and is in a sanctified conscience; but the conscience of every man is not a
sanctified conscience; and therefore it may sooner oppose what is good in the
Magistrates Laws, then the Magistrates good Laws shall oppose any thing good in
the conscience: And hereupon it follows, that the Magistrate is not to level
his Laws with every man's conscience, and light, but he is to provide and
encourage able Teachers, who may by Gods blessing on their labors, be
instrumental to elevate the minds and consciences of people to the
understanding of that which is supernatural in the Law of God, and of man
consonant to that of God. But what say these men further? Glory of the Lord
etc. page 15.
Because there have been persecuting Laws, Therefore be awarned of making Laws,
and that you have no Law concerning Religion, but let Religion defend it self;
for whatsoever is not of God, will not stand, but will wither away* but see
that your Law be according to that in the conscience, and then it will be
against strikers etc.

Rep. Here is that which is wreathed and cross-shakled; no law must be
concerning Religion, yet all according to that in the conscience; I ask these
men again, Is Religion within, as well as without? if they say without, then
why condemn they us who are for the outward part of worship instituted by God?
if they say within, then where is it seated? every where but in the conscience?
if it be seated in the conscience as in other faculties, then the Laws cannot
reach the conscience, but they will reach Religion also; And again if Religion
be seated in the conscience, why should not laws be concerning Religion, and
according thereunto, as according to the conscience? seeing the conscience
binds us to the observation of Gods Law; and if the Magistrates Law,
concerning Religion, be according to Gods Law, the Law of the Magistrate and
the Law of the Conscience will agree very well together; for he is not a terror
to them that do well, but to evil doers; yet his Law is for the defense of
them that do well, as for the offense of them that do ill; and it is the evil
doer only that is afraid of a good, a righteous, and a religious Law.
Secondly, for the discovery of R. F. his deceitful answer consisting of truth
and error jumbled together; The Law of God (says he) answers his justice, and
the light in the conscience, which answers the Law of God, which is perfect,
according to that in the conscience.

Rep. Here are two truths, The Law of God answers his Justice, and the Law of
God is perfect; but here are two errors couched withal.

1. As if the Law of God had no more perfection of light and holiness then is
in every man's conscience; And,

2. As if the perfection of the Law was regulated by that in the conscience;
whereas the Law of God is above the conscience Gods Law above the Conscience.
of man both in its light, and holiness, and in its authority; it being a Rule
to the conscience, from its superiority of light and perfection of holiness;
and hence I conclude,

1. That if the Magistrates Law be according to the Law of God, although it be
above the present light of conscience, it is neither against the holiness, nor
true liberty of conscience.

2. It is one thing for the Magistrate to declare, and ratify (by his civil
sanction) Laws made, by God and Christ, concerning Religion, which are above
the consciences of natural men, and above the actual present light of some true
Magistrates Laws not to be against, yet may ^e above the light of every man.
Saints; And another thing to enact Laws against the true light and principle
of the lowest Saint, or the meanest son of Adam; this latter is unlawful, the
former, warrantable; and that which stands with Religion and a good conscience
also, their own and others. But,

3. What if his Laws concerning Religion be above the present actual, or
habitual degree of light that is in the Saints? This may be supposed; because
sometimes the Light of the Magistrate may be elevated higher then the light of
some real Saints; discerning further into the mind of Christ, and
understanding his Laws better then many of Christ's subjects, in as much as he
may be more eminently subject to Christ's Laws then inferior persons; does the
Magistrate sin in holding forth light, so agreeable to the Laws of Christ? I
trow not. What then? may he compel all within the Nation or Commonwealth to
come up in practice to his own light? no, neither: Here the Rule of Equity must
take place to forbear, as he would and ought to be forborne in the like case;
forbear, whom? such as tenderly and Magistrates forbearance of whom, and how.
peaceably dissent for want of higher light; forbear, how?

First, in love to the Saints, and to all men: to the Saints, thereby to draw
them up to higher seize and actings, who are to make that use of such
forbearance; to all men, thereby to gain them in, who are of the Lords number,
to Jesus Christ, and to maintain a lawful civil peace with all.

Secondly, not without restrictions over those who deny the common principles
of humane society, disturb the outward peace of the Saints societies, and would
have Magistrates make Laws only to bind and manacle themselves from striking
at offenders, Blasphemers, Gospel and Church-disturbers; that so the strong man
armed, still keeping possession, and holding men asleep in a carnal and sinful
security, may have his liberty, by naughty and pernicious instruments, to vent
what he can against the Truth, without the least outward check and controlment;
but however, our hope and assurance is, that his kingdom divided against it
self cannot, shall not stand.

Glory to the most Wise and Holy God. Amen.
AN APPENDIX OF A Handful of ANIMADVERSIONS upon the Pamphlets and Practices of
the QUAKERS.
(1.)
ALl their Doctrines are raised upon the ruins of the Scriptures Excellency
and Authority.

Witness Thomas Lawson's challenge, Lip of truth opened, page 7.
That light is in the Scriptures, prove that; or tell me what one Scripture
has light in it? He might answer himself from Prove. 6. 23. (alleged in part
by him, page 45.) The Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light. Yet will he
dare to ask again, Ib. page 10.
How does the Letter or Scripture shine? and, what is the dark place it shines
in? St. Peter will tell him, 2 Pet. 2. 19.
That more sure word of Prophecy (the Declaration of Gods mind in Scripture)
is as a Light (suppose the light of the Sun darting its beams into a dark
cellar, so shines that Prophecy of Scripture) in a dark place, our hearts and
minds; the darkest place in the world till enlightened by the Law, and pure
Commandment of God. Psalm. 19* 8.
Yet more bold is he in another Querie, Page 54.
What Scripture has God in it? A man might without breach of charity conclude,
Light is not in Tho: Lawson's heart, God is not in all his thoughts, viz. to
fear and reverence him, who vents himself in such a gibing and upbraiding way,
against the Holy Scripture of God.

Another Instance of Scripture-disparagement we have from Samuel Fisher, in his
Account of the Scorned Quakers, The scorned Quakers account, page 20.
Christ by his Light within, shows you as in a glass your own faces, etc. as
the Scriptures cannot do. But cannot, and does not Christ as much by the
Scriptures? It seems not, For in the Scripture (says he) you may read the
Right of things, and what you should, and should not be, and do, but the Light
within is larger then that, and of further extent; showing not only the Right
and the Law, and what we should be and do, but also the fact, even what we do
and are. And does not the Scripture the same? Genesis 6. 5. Romans 3. 9, 10. etc. to
verse 19. James 1. 23, 24. Well may these men be scorned if (while they pretend
to own and honor) they thus scorn the Scriptures, Prove. 3. 34.

(2.)
Their corrupt Tenants are built upon false and novel-Interpretations.

Witness Tho: Lawson his doctrine of Perfection, which he bottoms upon his
Gloss The Lip of truth opened. page 41.
on 1 Pet. 4. 7. The end of all things is at hand. What is this but Christ? If
he be the end of all things, then of sin. Taking it upon trust He is there
meant by the Apostle, when as he speaks of the Judaical state and worship, more
strictly; and if it be understood more largely, it is but as much as if he had
said, All things are coming to their end, in a short time.

Another instance, is Richard Farnworths endeavor Truth cleared of Scandals. p.
29, 30
to avoid the dint of that place, 2 Cor. 12. 7. and 10. (where Paul after his
Revelations and Rapture was in danger of being self-exalted, and was sensible
of his infirmities) by feigning the man caught up into the third heaven, to
have been some intimate friend of Paul: when as to the most ordinary
understanding it appears, the blessed Apostle in modesty speaks in the third
person, Ironically, as of another, yet really of himself. The after-part of the
story concerns Paul; it was He that had the prick in the flesh; it was He
that had the messenger of Satan to buffet him, lest he should be exalted; it
was He that prayed thrice unto the Lord, that it might be removed, and to whom
the Lord answered, My Grace is sufficient for thee, etc. And therefore the
forepart of the chapter and story is to be understood of him also; even of
strong Paul, and of weak Paul; strong in the Lord, weak yet in and of himself,
and willing to glory in this, that he knew himself to be weak and nothing; As
he M. Nicholas Price, of Lyn-Regis.
that said, when he had attained to no small measure of mortification, in the
eyes of others, I thank God I know my self to be a sinner; while these proud
up-starts think many of them have reached to the highest pitch of Perfection.

(3.)
It is Pride that has bred, and does feed and nourish their opinions and
practices.

What makes them level Legal and Gospel Light, but Pride? The light which every
man has (says William Deusbery Christ exalted* page 26
) is not common to man by nature, it is the great gift of God, the Grace that
has appeared, etc. The truth is, Every man's light where the Gospel comes not,
is neither for degree, nor kind the same with Gospel Light: it is but a
shimmering of the Laws light; a gift of God indeed, but no such great Gift, as
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, or, as the doctrine of that Grace.

Every man (writes E. B. True faith of the Gospel of peace. p. 18.
) has that which is one in Union, and like the Spirit of Christ; even as good
as the Spirit of Christ, according to its measure. A proud elevation of the
fallen posterity of Adam, either exalting the gifts of the Spirit as high as
the person of the Spirit, or levelling the high and peculiar Grace of the
Spirit in true Saints, with the low and common work, in every man.

Weigh but what J. Nayler has in his Answer to Math. Cuffin Light of Christ,
and word of life* page 19.
, and see if there be not wicked Pride. God is at liberty to speak to his
people by them, viz. the Scriptures, if he please, and where they are given by
inspiration he does so. And so he is at liberty to speak by any other created
thing, as to Balaam by his Ass. As if God did not speak constantly by the
Scriptures, the voices of the Prophets Acts 13. 27
and Apostles (though his people are not always alike affected with and by
them, nor does the Lord give the same impression from the same Text at one time
as at another) or, as if all the Scripture, at all times, were not of divine
Inspiration; and as if he would have his disciples, with himself, ascribe no
more authority to the Scriptures, then to Balaams Ass.

(4.)
Unbelief begets and procreates all their Errors, and their love of Error, with
their derisions of the Truth.

How come they to slight the Scriptures, and the Ordinances of Christ? They
have lost that first faith, or never 1 Timothy 5.
had any, concerning their Institution and Authority; or the efficacy of the
Spirit put forth by them. Would they else judge it Blasphemy To all that would
know the way, p. 4.
for any to say, the Letter, or Scripture, is the Word of God; when as it is
that which the Spirit dictated, and has ever blessed and prospered to his own
purposes? Would they else scribble and quibble as they do? Ibid page 8.
Thou that say thou had not come to repentance, if thou had not known the
Letter, thou deniest Christ. The Scripture is, say they, A Declaration of the
Spirit, but the Spirit is not in it; A Declaration of Power, but the Power is
not in it. And why is not the Spirit and Power in it? this is nothing but the
voice and spirit of unbelief which makes them so to judge.

How like a Pelagi-Arminian does J. Nayler speak? Answer to Quakers Catechism,
p. 24.
Who has the Spirit, has an infallible guide, in matter and manner, if he keep
to it. And, I know that so far as any are led by the Spirit, it guides into all
truth, if it be not erred from. Whence come these [ifs] but from unbelief? What
Luther said of his Popish Devotions, is true here. We always prayed in Colloq.
men's.
Popedom, conditionaliter, with condition, uncertainly and at hap-hazard: And
upon such a hazard do these [ifs] run men's salvation; beside the pride of such
[ifs] determining all Grace, the Spirits infallible guidance, and what not,
upon the will of man and his improvements.

Whence is it that they speak with such disparagement of Christ dying at
Jerusalem, but from unbelief? Had Ed. Borough a Faith working by love when he
sounded his Trumpet, A Trumpet of the Lord sounded out of Sion, by E. B. page
17.
and upbraided all that are called Presbyterians and Independents, with their
feeding upon the report of a thing done many hundred years ago? They that
believe not that word, John 6. 53. will not tremble at it. Did those called
Presbyterians and Independents more heartily feed upon Christ (who dyed, and as
he dyed above sixteen hundred years ago) by faith every day, and meet ofter at
the Lords Table in faith and love, they would be more strengthened in one,
against their common enemies.

(5.)
They do subtly couch many Errors under specious words of Truth, or terms
that are ambiguous, and of a doubtful sense.

The inheritance of Jacob, page 24.
The Righteousness (says Francis Howgil) whereby the Saints of old pleased
God, and was accepted, was wrought in them, the same that is now wrought in the
Saints by Christ; As if God were not pleased with them, as clothed with the
imputed righteousness of Christ, or they would have that which is within the
Saints, to be that which is imputed to their pardon, and acceptance: whereas
God is more pleased with that which Christ wrought for them, then with what he
works in them: Yea, that which Christ wrought in his own person, and in that
flesh which he assumed, is that alone which the Father accepts and imputes
to their Justification. Not but he is pleased with his own work in us, in a way
of Sanctification and Service.

That seems very fair which Alexander Parker has, Testimony of God p. 4.
It is an inward work that every one must know and witness, if ever they know
true peace and rest: But let all know that the work within, is not the ground
and purchase of their peace (but the blood of Christ alone, and his obedience)
although it is a witness and an evidence* and yet every inward work is not an
evidence, or witness of peace with God, but that alone which is the New Birth,
or true Sanctification, and the parts of it, flowing from, and inseparably
attending and accompanying the Believers union with the Lord Jesus.

Light (says Tho: Lawson Lip of truth, etc. page 45* and 47.
) is the same in him that hates it, and in him that loves it. And again, Grace
is the same in him that turns it into lasciviousness, as in him that is taught
by it. The same seed as fell on the good ground, fell on the high way, stony
and thorny ground. The Talent hid in the earth (quoth Alexander Parker
Testimony of God, p. 12.
) is the same with those improved. Now true it is, the same Doctrine of Grace,
called sometime Light, sometime Grace, sometime Seed, and that which is a piece
of that one Talent, is the same in them that love it, and in them that hate it;
But, as hating and loving cannot be the same; so the cause why one loves the
Light, entertains the Seed, improves the Talent, is from a higher Light, and
from a new Eye to see and affect it, and from a second Talent given with, or
after the first; and from the goodness of the heart, made good by Grace (or
Gods free favor) and turned into the nature of the seed that falls into it: The
outward doctrine (written in the book of God, and preached according to it)
becoming an ingraffed word in the soul of a meek Believer. James Nayler in show
of words confesses thus much, Light of Christ, and word of life. page 13.
While man is in darkness, the best of Gods gifts are perverted to a wrong end,
but being enlightened from the word, the gift is seen and sanctified to its
right end, without which it cannot, for God has placed the blessing and right
use of all his Mercies in his Son. One Talent then with all the pieces and
ingredients that a man out of Christ is endowed withal, is not sufficient for
any man to make a good and sanctified improvement of what he has; he must have
two, Christ must be given him for special enlightening, for sanctification,
blessing and right use of outward mercies, and of spiritual gifts, given in
common where the Gospel comes, as the doctrine of Grace, Ordinances, and such
like: yea, Christ must be his Surety, and Satisfaction, his Wisdom,
Righteousness, and his All and in all; for all benefits, without interest in
Christ a Mediator, amount but to one Talent. Let every soul beg for two
Talents, for that one Talent (which he, that has no more, hides in the earth)
is not the same with the Grace improving, though it be the lump of common gifts
outward, or inward, to be improved.

A fine quirk has Alexander Parker, Testimony of God. p. 13.
Paul was sent to open the blind eyes (not to bring them eyes) but to open the
eye which the god of this world has blinded. It is true, as sin destroyed not
the substance of the soul, and mind, so grace brings not a new substance; but
by his leave, though Paul could not bring, i. e. give a new eye, yet by the
ministry of Paul God gave it, with a new light; A light that every man has
not, and an eye, i. e. a spiritual discerning power and principle, which none
have but such as are new born, whereby they not only see new things, but after
a new manner

The Church of God (says E. B. The true faith of the Gospel of peace, p. 26.
) is redeemed by Christ Jesus, which is revealed within all that believe. So,
we may say the Church of God is redeemed by Christ Jesus, who made the heavens
and the earth; yet, as it follows not, because Christ Jesus made the heavens
and the earth, therefore that Creation is our Redemption; so neither does it
follow, because Christ Jesus is revealed within all that believe, that such a
Revelation is all our Redemption, or that Christ redeemeth his Church by that
only which is revealed within all that believe. The person that redeemeth is
but one, and the same Christ Jesus, but the way of his redeeming of them admits
of distinction. The Church is redeemed by a price without them, as well as by a
power within them: the former purchases the latter. None have Christ revealed
within them, in the Apostles sense, Gal. 1. 16. Col. 1. 27. for whom Christ
gave not himself a Ransom upon the cross: It is a small matter that E. B.
yields, The man Christ Jesus hanged upon the Cross, because they wickedly
judged him to be a Blasphemer, etc. This (says he) is one ground at least, but
this (say I from Scripture) is not the chief, but that which the Apostle has
given forth, Gal. 3. 13, 14. A curse he was made to purchase our Redemption
from the curse; that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles,
through him, and that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.

James Nayler puts the lie upon them that say, they deny imputed Righteousness
of Christ. I do not find it in the very terms, but in what is equivalent I do;
and that in the same Scripturient, for he Love to the lost, page 4.
upbraids us with our Covering, wherein consists our Blessedness, Psalm. 32. 1.
and he makes imputing of Christ's righteousness, and putting of it into the
creature, all one; yea, Ib. page 51.
he states it, That the Just are justified, as they are sanctified and
mortified, and no further. From one error, viz. that righteousness wrought
within us, justifies, follows the other, that it is more or less imputed, as
they are more or less holy: But what is this all the while, but to deny Gods
imputing, reckoning, or accounting of Christ's sole, and most perfect obedience
and sufferings, to the believing sinner for his justification?

(6.)
Some passages savor of mere ignorance, or of wilful blindness, about the
Covenant of Grace, the state of Grace, and the Mysteries of Salvation.

As that of James Nayler, Public discoveries of open blindness by James
Nayler, page 2
Where sin is acted, it must needs have dominion. Does not the Scripture
expressly exempt them that are under Grace, or a Covenant of Grace, from Sins
dominion? Romans 6. 14. And yet, does not Paul describe the present state of the
Saints to be in the warfare and combat, and sin present when they would do
good, even to pull them back from it, and to put them on to outward acting of
what is evil, in a warring captivating way? Romans 7. 14. to the end of the
chapter. And is not this the inward act of sins hostility? even where Grace
reigns in the habit, and by a contrary act of the renewed will (while flesh is
haling another way) does oppose the rebellion and tyranny of sin. If some could
shake off the actings of in-dwelling sin, in practice, as they attempt it in
their doctrine, they had been raised to a higher form of perfection then yet
they have attained: But the ignorance of a contrariety of willing, and of
acting in the same subject, and faculty, shows rather their un-experiencedness
in the Fencers school; and that they cry out of victory (not believed, hoped
for, that we grant, but completed) before they have engaged in the main
battle. Fresh Water soldiers think the war is at an end, when they are past the
first skirmish of a forlorn hope.

That of E. B. True faith, etc. page 19.
By what is the new birth wrought, if not by following the Light of Christ in
the conscience? To inform the ignorant we teach out of Scripture, that the
new birth is not wrought by our following work, but by Gods preventing Grace,
casting the promise into the heart, and quickening that seed, by the in-coming
of the Spirit, James 1. 18. with John 3. 5. Regeneration is not acquired by our
acts, but infused of God by his will and power, John 1. 13.

That, Again Ib. page 21.
Show if ever any natural man did get power over sin, and abstain from things
forbidden throughout the Scripture: When before, he had asked By what is the
newbirth wrought, if not by following, etc. If a natural man may get the
new birth by following the Light of Christ in his conscience, then he may by
such an act of obedience, get some kind of power over sin, and far sooner
abstain from many things forbidden, then ever get the new birth thereby. There
is a twofold power over sin; the one by the restraining power of God, called
Restraining Grace; the other by the special influence of Christ and his Spirit,
uniting himself to the soul, and taking up his habitation in a Believer, as in
his Temple. The natural man has the former, more or less, and yet remains a
natural man, and in his natural state, because he wants the latter. Was not
Herod a natural man, Mark 6. 20.
and so remained, even while he heard John gladly, and did many things? Did not
Paul, while in his natural state (following the light in his conscience)
abstain from things forbidden? Phil. 3. 6.
was he not, touching the righteousness of the Law, blameless? Were not those
Peter speaks of, escaped from 2 Pet. 2. 18, 20
the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of Christ? yea, clean, or
really escaped, as by a common or inferior (...).
work of the Spirit, and yet were in their natural state, first and last.

What wilful ignorance is in that Querie? Ishmael and his mother cast out, p.
1^.
Where is such a Scripture, that the most eminent believer sins in any things?
This is subscribed by three or four of them; as if they had never read, or
having read, not regarded, James 3. 2. or will not understand Romans 7. 21. that
not only in all the good they do, or would do, evil (by a tyrannizing law of
the old man) is present with them, but in many things they all offend, or sin.

And what affected blindness in that demand? The skirts of the whore discovered
by Dennis Hollister, page 19.
Where does the Scripture call it self the Word of God, and to whom was it the
Rule of Life? Who please may read over the 119 Psalm, once more, and view the
40 page; and then consult Gal. 6. 14. and view the explanation, page 44. of
this Reply, and the Scriptures will stand right in his thoughts (by Gods
blessing) and he be affected to them.

(7.)
Much of Mystical Babylon and Confusion is in their writings and ways.

They confound common and saving gifts, we not only distinguish them, but
divide them. Common are in many persons where saving are not: saving are in all
the Saints, but on some of the Saints many common gifts are not conferred*

They confound Justification and Sanctification. We distinguish them, but
divide them not so but they are present to the same subject, or person, the
believer, although they are not the same Grace.

They confound the Price of our Redemption, and the application of it by power.
We distinguish them, and divide them not so, but where one goes before, the
other follows after; according to the riches of Gods grace, and the
unchangeableness of his Covenant in Christ.

There is enough in the foregoing Reply, and in the third and fifth of these
Animadversions, for a plain demonstration hereof. It may be hoped, upon no weak
grounds, this Sect is acting one of the last parts, upon the tottering Stage of
the Romish Antichrist. Never, I conceive, did any, as these so masked and
disguised, servire scenae, suit the present occasion and times for Romes
advantage; but it began, and will end in their confusion.

(8.)
Their Doctrines and Practices end in Apostasy of the deepest stain, and
Blasphemy against Christ of the highest strain.

The experience of James Nayler and his Comrades give sad and dreadful proof
hereof. When the humane Nature of Christ is not adored for its self, but as it
subsists in the person of the only begotten Son of God; they give and take (by
their doctrine of God and Christ manifested in their individual flesh) the same
divine Honor which is peculiar to the person of Christ alone, God blessed for
ever.

(9.)
There needs no farther proof of their Scripture and Selfcontradictions.

Their Blasphemies evidence the former: and their Grandees giving one another
the lie, demonstrates the latter. We had a notorious evidence hereof the last
Summer at Witham in Essex. After that a blustering fellow (said to be one
Hubberthorn) had driven diverse to quaking, falling down, and roaring out (that
the flesh might be cast forth, by the Spirit, as he said) there followed him
William Deusbery in his circuit and course, and tells the poor people, they
were fools and beasts if they minded any such quaking postures; and much more
to that purpose. And the Narrative of their Letters and Examinations thereupon
at Bristol (put forth by Mr. Farmer) sets a broad seal to this as the former
Animadversion.

(10.)
Their Sufferings in defense of corrupt and false doctrines, are no part of the
sufferings of Christ in his mystical body.

That their doctrines are false, which they attempt and labor to defend, has
sufficiently been evinced, and cleared: The other follows by undeniable
consequence. It is not the punishment, but the Cause that makes the Martyr: as
he Martyrem facit Causa, non supplicium. Aug.
said of old, who was a famous Assertor of the Truth, in his time. The
Philistines died by the fall of the house as well as Samson, sed diver so fine,
ac fato, but with a differing scope, and that through a wise-ordering
Providence. They suffered for their Riot, Idolatry, Cruelty and Impenitency, he
died in Faith, and with zealous calling upon the name of the Lord, for a
public Revenge upon his, and the Church its enemies. Who sees not a vast
difference between James Naylers Pillory, and Mr. Burtons? between the
Imprisonment of many disturbing Quakers in our times, and of the peaceable
Confessors and Sufferers in Queen Mary's days? Who so blind as they that will
not see? Lord open the eyes and hearts of deluded Quakers and Papists; Being
thy people quite out of the Babylonish wilderness; Forgive them that know not
what they do, write they know not what, suffer out of devout ignorant
intentions, which will not justify their unwarrantable actions or passions.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
Acting IN a man's own strength or Christ's. 110
Adam In innocence under a Covenant of works. page 100

B.
Baptism With water proved. 176. 183 Of Infants vindicated. 178 Sprinkling
lawful. 180 One Baptism, consisting of two parts. 178, 182
Bible To be read and preached upon. 20 See Scriptures.

C.
Call To the Ministry, how lawful. 211 Inward to be tried by the outward
fruits. 214 The Churches call spiritual. 215 Some may counterfeit an Immediate
call. 211 Some mediate calls good. 213, 214 Some bad. ibid.
Christ Exalted by the Scriptures, and the Scriptures by Christ. 43 44 Christ
above his gifts. 59 His Godhead asserted, and cleared. 54 How he leads out of
the fall. 86 How he was made sin, or a sinner. 132 As Mediator, not in natural
men. 262, 276 When and how in the soul: 264 His condemning sin in the flesh,
beyond conscience-condemnation. 266 A Savior according to Scripture. 283
Commandment. How the general includes particular persons. 106 What is a
command in the Spirit. 109 Saints experiences about a command. 110 What is a
Gospel-command. 111
Communion Of Saints on earth with Saints in heaven. 146
Conviction By the Spirit, beyond that of a natural conscience. 266
Conscience If but natural, and not renewed, gives no saving testimony. 269
Covenant Of works, and of grace what. 90 Of works, in Adam. 97 Differences of
the Covenant of works, and of grace. 90 Covenant of grace one, for the
substance. 91 Two, for manner of administration. 93 Old and new, what. 8 The
reason of the change. 94

E.
Elders. Their Ordination by man, though not of man. 207

F.
Forms. Of Religion. 291 Of Speech. 292
Fruits. Of the Spirit. 293 Of the flesh. ibid.

G.
God. How God is Light. 68 His Essence not mixed with created Beings. 236
Gospel. Gospel Light above natural reach. 75
Grace Given by means. 173

H.
Hearing Of the word. 173
Holy Ghost. A person, one of the Three in the Godhead. See Spirit. 49, etc.
207
Honor Civil, due to Superiors, and to all men. 231 ibid. Gestures of honor,
some bad and idolatrous. 233 Some civil, and but good manners. ibid. The denial
hereof what it argues. 292

I.
Imputation. Gods imputation of righteousness, his covering of our sin. 130 A
constant act of Gods free favor. 131 The doctrine of it, no pleading for sin.
123, etc.
Justification. The material cause not the new birth. 119 Not sanctification.
132 Its difference from sanctification. 126 God justifies sinful persons,
believing. 120, 121 How justified by faith. ibid. Defilements of sin remain in
a pardoned soul. 125 Peter in his falls, not out of a state of justification.
128 Perfect, at first believing. 135

L.
Law How set up in stead of Gospel. 12 Levitical Law way Typical Gospel. 89
Law-Levitical no Covenant of works. 95 Law-moral, positions concerning it. 97
How subservient to the Covenant of grace. 98 How inservient to the Covenant of
works. ibid. Gods Law above the conscience 307
Letter What in a large, or in a strict sense. 4, 5 The Spirits Letter is Gods
written word. 9 How denied. 244
Light Of the Godhead in every man, not redemption-light. 52 Strange notions of
the Light in every man. 53 How light without Scripture is no light. 64 The
Light-giver not to be confounded with the light-given. 59, 84 Light in every
man no Teacher of saving truths. 60 Not Gospel Light. 75 Not the light of
Saints, as such. 61, 261 Much less equal with Christ's person. 59 Not
supernatural. 61 Not above, but beneath the Scripture Light. 66 Not a part of
the New Creature. 77 Not the Cornerstone. 80 Nor the first principle of
Christian Religion. 82 Leads not out of the fall. 83 Obeyed, gives no saving
excuse, or testimony in the conscience. 269 Creature and Scripture Light
compared. 76 Not to be confounded. 275 Mysterious absurdities. 263 How the
least degree of light is perfect. 274 How counterfeit. ibid. True conclusions
about light. 69
Lords Supper The visible outward part no carnal invention. 185 Bread and wine
the outward matter. 186 The Institution spiritual. 188 The benefit great. 190 A
strange trans-mutation by 192
James Nayler His reasons broken. 193 Antidotes against the dissolution of the
Lords Supper. 200

M.
Magistrates Their forbearance. 308 Means of grace, attended with a promise of
blessing. 174

N.
Nakedness No Commission for going naked in these times. 291

O.
Oaths, see Swearing. Ordinances How owned or disowned. 302

P.
Perfection Of holiness, but comparative. 162, 164 Not absolute in all degrees
till death. 143, 144 How denied, how not. 141, 158, 161 This life a time only
of pressing after it. 290
Person What it is. 48 What a person in the Godhead is. ibid. How
distinguished. 49
Prayer Public not forbidden. 201 Gods Spirit is there. 204
Preaching By Doctrine, Reason and Use, etc. justified. 72, 293 How free, and
consistent with taking Wages 209
Printing When invented. 21 The benefit of printed Bibles. ibid.
Promise Of grace, and leading out of the fall, none annexed to the good use of
natural light. 87 Yet the light of a promise helps to lead out of the fall. 86
Prophets Some immediately inspired, some mediately taught. 217 They studied
the Scriptures. 218 Some distinguished from men in office. 217
Psalms Not sung without some kind of meeter. 205

Q.
Quaking From visible manifestations of Gods majesty, how and by whom imitable.
287 See Trembling.
Questions Their fit place. 223 Which are of the devil. 224

R.
Reconciliation Of the person perfect, before the heart is perfectly
sanctified, and how. 134, 135
Regeneration By the Scripture-promise. 132, 257
Remorse What. 171
Repentance How decryed. 171
Righteousness What our own. 145, 329 What the Quaking Papists mean by Christ's
righteousness. 278

S.
Sabbath A mercy, as a duty 303
Saints Their light beneath Scripturelight for the degree. 271 Their highest
degree of light, and grace not here attained. 272 Experimentally imperfect. 148
Scriptures The word of truth. 1 To all. 2 The word of God, and truly so
called. 3, 40 In what sense. 25 The witness of God. 4 The Letter of God, and
the Scripture of God all one. Ib. A standing Rule. 7 A more standing Rule then
visions and revelations. 13, 15, 37, 38. Not man's word, or other men's words. 18
The Touchstone of Doctrine. 23, 253 And Judge of controversies. 258 Not
carnal. 24 The Spirits sword. 26 Powerful. 153 The ground of the Saints acting.
26, 31 And how. 27 Interpretation by Scripture. 37 A Voice, a Light, a Rule, a
Guide. 43, 44 Scripture Light above the light of nature. 66, 74, 76 Its further
preeminence. 271, 281 Scripture Light, Salvationlight. 73 Its fullness. 284 It
magnifies Christ above it self. ibid A more excellent Teacher then the
creatures. 70 To be studied. 218, 220 Who deny them. 244 Gods mouth is in the
Letter. 247, 252
Sin Visible in, and to the Saint. 112 Groaned under, all the life time by true
Saints. ibid in what respect. 113 Sin and purity dwell in one soul, not as one.
118 Sin confessed, is not pleaded for. 125 It dwells and acts in the
Saints. 138 It continues in them, they continue not in it. 151 No heart
perfectly pure form it. 158, 159, 160
Singing See Psalms. Spirit of God How in the Scripture-Letter. 4, 254 How
proceeding from the Letter, how not. 5 How given by it. 6, 10, 255 Leads to the
Scripture-Rule and and by it. 9, 10 His Prerogative above the Scripture. 31
Swearing By creatures forbidden. 235 By God, commanded. ibid. Not in ordinary
speech. 237 Oaths lawful. 238 Unlawful 239 By a book, unlawful. ibid. Upon a
book, superstitious. 240

T.
Teaching All Believers not immediately taught. 216 Who were, or were not
immediately taught in the Apostles days. 217, 220 They that pretend to
immediate Teaching, have had it by men and means. 279, 280
Transubstantiation A blind dotage. 189
Trembling True, at and by the word, or Scripture rightly understood. 6, 286
Trinity A Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, proved. 46

W.
Warfare Saints not out of it, till out of their bodies. 167
Woman A woman not to speak in the Church. 33
Word of God Essential, or spiritual. 22, 25 Language of the Spirit and Word of
the Scripture, all one.: 292

Scriptures vindicated and explained.
Psalm page Ps. 119. 105 40 Proverbs Cap. Verse 20 9 158 22 20, 21 32 Eccles. 7
20 166 Isaiah 8 20 23, 24 64, 65 20 2 291 30 20 42 48 16, 17 30 Jeremiah 5 31
42 20 9 41 23 29 Ibid. Daniel 9 1 219 Matthew. 5 8 158 34 to 36 235 37 237 48
228 6 5 201 6 202 11 27 14 23 8 and 10 245 28 19 47 19 and 20 177 Luke 16 29 7
17 21 Ep. to Chapter 22 32 129 John 1 1 25 1 1 to 14 54 to 58 1 9 53, 55, 261 5 44
232 6 45 216 8 12 53, 260 15 5 42 16 13 10 Acts 2 17, 18 34 38, 39 179 42 46
195 13 2, 46 208 39 122 20 28 160, 207 34 209 35 210 Romans 1 18, 19 274 2 4
170 12 63 15, 16 269 29 268 3 3 2 21 92 5 12 63 13 99 6 14 11 7 9, 10 110 14 to
the end 113 17 138 23, 25 139 25 12 and 115 8 1 115 2 168 8 3 266 3, 4 144 4
145 10 139 and 140 14 9 26 149 37 169 10 8 41 18 82 12 3 62 14 17 190 16 1 and
2 6 and 12 35 1 Cor. 1 15, 16 108 21 72 2 6 162, 164 9 10 17 6 11 156 9 14 209
11 1 11 26 191, 198 29 197 12 7 30 12, 13 178 14 14, 15 202 26 29 217 31 34 34,
35 33 16 19 35 2 Cor. 3 2 71 6 5 16 with 14 13 17 9 4 6 23 24, 263 5 21 132 11
7 209 9 208 12 7, etc. App. 2 13 11 164 Gal. 1 1 211 16 263 2 17, 18, 19 123
20, 21 124 3 19 104 20 89 21 99 27 178 5 17 138 6 17 44 Ephesians. 1 17 15 2 17, 18
20 81 3 17 4 4, 5 5 1 9 26 179 6 2 106 17 25 Phil. 2 5 226 2 12 286 3 12 161
15, 16 162 4 3 35 13 42 Col. 1 23 82 27 264 27, 28 62 2 17 89 1 Timothy 2 11 33 5
18 35 24 267 Titus 2 11 75 Heb. 4 12 41 152 12, 13 154 15 153 5 7 Ep. to R. 11
6 1 162 16 238 7 16 24 8 7 94 10 14 135 12 1 116 23 146 to 150 13 8 277 1 9, 10
234 5 12 237, 240 1 Pet. 1 13 16 15 156 22 160 23 with 25 28 4 7 App. 2 2 Pet.
1 16, 19 15 19 36 20, 21 37, 219 21 248 1 John 1 5 68 77 8 78 2 27 41 29 142 3
3 117 5 156 6 78 79, 165 10 142 4 4 169 17 164 5 7 45 46 10 245 12 73 18 Rev.
19 10 39 20 12 45

FINIS.
ERRATA sic emendanda in the Book.
PAge 4. Line 8. read, the two witnesses: p. 9. l. 35, r. is to make: p. 21. l.
15, r. Blockhouses: p. 33. l. 26. r. he may: p. 39. l. 31. for, immediately, r.
mediately: p. 41. Marg. r. Jer 23. 29. p. 55. l. 21. r. re-assumeth: p. 58. l.
2. r. arbitrament: p. 60. l. 21. r. Romans 1. 18. p. 91. l. 2. dele, is the old:
p. 100. l. 24. dele, to be: p. 103. Marg. r. Genesis 3. last. p. 106. l. 8. r. the
word of: p. 117. f. 28. for, now, r. know: p. 120. l. 11. for, form, r. from.
p. 124. l. 34. for, that, r. but. p. 134. l. 4. the parenthesis to end at
(Book) p. 137. l. ult. dele* his. p. 138. Marg. r. Gal. 5. 17. p. 209. l. 26.
r. Acts 20. 34. p. 215. l. 23. for to, r. till. p. 221. l. 2. for, we are, r.
were. p. 238. l. 13. dele, to them. p. 245. l. 11. r. we should. p. 256. l. 1.
r. be not. p. 258. l. 32. for, that, r. the.

In the Epistles: Epist. Ded. for debate, r. debase. Epist. to the Reader, for.
Bellarmine, r. Bellarmine. p. 9. l. 9. for professed, r. possessed.

Julii, 18. 1656.
Imprimatur

JOSEPH CARYL.


