A LEARNED SPEECH SPOKEN TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE EARL OF ESSEX, UPON His
departure from Northampton to Worcester, concerning the present expedition.

By that learned and religious Divine, and Minister of GODS Word, M. Thomas
Springham.

ALSO A true Relation of the present proceedings of his Excellency and his Army
in their march from Northampton to Worcester, to meet with the KINGS Majesty.

Printed for Tho. Cook. September. 27. 1642.

A SPEECH Spoken to the EARL OF ESSEX, upon his departure from Northampton: BY
M. Thomas Springham, Minister of GODS Word.
GREAT SIR,
I Do not come about with my small taper to set forth the glory of our midday
Sun: It were high folly in me, if I did strive to add more luster to you our
Star new risen from the East. I come, and I may boldly say, all good people
come, to power forth their glad hearts at your approaching. You cannot but
know, and I cannot but speak, the dark mists of misery we a long time have been
wrapped in: night spread her wings over us, and would have soon suffocated the
life we enjoyed, had not your Name, before your Presence, like the daybreak,
shined in our hearts, and expelled those mists that dwelt upon us. Our past
sorrows do not a little contribute to the activity of our joys, that our
Lord shines here: grief and sorrow have not lasted for an age; and though
Nocte pluit tota (yet) redeunt spectacula mane: sorrow lasts for a night, but
joy comes in the morning. I need not speak the hearts of Israel, my Lord sees
and reads them in their faces: they dare boldly adventure to pass over Scylla,
or Charibdis, or enter into the Cyclops cave, having you, their Joshua, to
march on before them: and not only the mighty men of valor love and admire
you, but also as my Lord sees, the great affection of the whole people is bent
on you, as well here, as in that great City, the Phoenix of the world, from
whence you came, now burning in the flames of her affection toward you. From
you all jointly look for safety, well-being, nay being it self. You are the
Planet that must give life unto us by your sweet influence. Suffer not those
Comets to reign over us that threaten to power forth their malignity into all
our quarters, from whom save us, or we perish. Pardon what danger our fears
make, it is not in any distrust to our Lord. But least I seem to others to
forget what most ought to be intended here, and they say to me,

2 Samuel 19.10. Why speak you not a word of bringing the King back? Then let not
my Lord be angry if I add one word:

2 Samuel 19.41. Go with the men of Israel to the King, and say unto the King,
Why have our brethren, the men of Judah, stolen thee away? and have brought
the King and his household, and all David's men with him? 2 Samuel 19.43. Go, for
ye have ten parts in the King, and ye have more right in David then they, And
I, though the meanest and worst of all the Prophets (yet no false one) do bid
my Lord go forth and prosper.

The Copy of a Letter which was sent with the foregoing speech, showing the
truth of it, directed to M. William Piggot dwelling in Crutched Friars in
London.
SIR,
I thought, the last letter I sent you would be the last I should send from
Northhamton; for, we expected daily when we should march forwards: I should
not have troubled you at this time if I had not this token to send you, a thing
of much value in the judgment of all the auditors; it is a Spech this morning
spoken by that learned and religious Teacher M. Thomas Springam before his
Excellency on a mistake, he thinking (and we all thought no less) my Lord
would have departed at that time, because he commanded his whole Army to be
drawn up in a body, which he did only to see the full streugth thereof. By
much entreaty I procured this Speech from M. Springam; it is his own hand
writing, and I shall entreat you to reserve a copye of it (if you part with it)
for me, if it please God to send me a safe return: for none has a copy of
it, because the Gentleman (this bearer) was in such haste, that he could not
stay tiil it could be copied out: As soon as he had ended his Speech, the
people gave a great shoute and my Lord gave him (and all) thanks for there
courteous entertainment, and said, their courtesy was such unto him as that he
would not leave them as yet, this is all worth the writing at this present,
when I have any thing else worth the writing, you shall not fail to hear from
me, till which I rest,

Your true friend and Cosen, Nathanael Warters.


There were Letters read in the House of Commons upon the 22. of September,
declaring that the Queen is coming for England, and intends to be here within
fifteen days, for which purpose three or four ships are providing to come
with her, and it is supposed that she will bring over some store of Ammunition,
with many Cavaliers. It is reported that the Kings Majesty is coming away from
Shrewsbury toward Worcester, and on Thursday a Post came to the House with
Letters from the Earl of Essex, intimating that his Excellency had received
intelligence by a Letter from M. Fines, that Prince Robert was near unto
Worcester with about five hundred horse, with whom M. Fines had had a skirmish,
at which skirmish four of M. Fines his men were slain, and eight of Prince
Roberts; and withal, that Prince Robert had burned and fired diverse houses
thereabouts, whereupon his Excellency on Thursday about twelve of the clock
marched with his Forces from Warwick toward Worcester, consisting of four and
twenty thousand Horse and Foot, it being reported that His Majesty was gone
thither, and that Prince Robert and his Forces were marched thither: in which
Letter also his Excellency shows the reasons which moved him to march toward
Worcester, which was well approved of by the Parliament, some Eortifications
being making, and diverse Pieces of Ordnance already brought into the said
City. Upon Thursday also the Petition to His Majesty, together with the
Instructions to his Excellency the Earl of Essex for the ordering of his Army,
and how far he should hive commission to encounter with the enemy, and the
Proclamation for pardon to all such as within ten days should come in and lay
down their arms, excepting some persons therein by them named: all which were
fully agreed upon (and dispatched to be sent to his Excellency) by both Houses
of Parliament.

FINIS.

