VVonderfull PREDICTIONS DECLARED In a MESSAGE, as from the LORD, To his
Excellency SR. THOMAS FAIRFAX and the Council of His Army.

By JOHN SALTMARSH Preacher of the Gospel.

His several speeches, and the manner of his Death.

December 29. 1647.

THis Narrative concerning Mr. Saltmarsh has been sent to the Army; and there
perused, corrected, and made perfect, to be printed and published for the
Kingdoms: satisfaction. Imprimatur, Gilbert Mabbot.



Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head
Tavern, 164^.

The Printer to the Reader.
HAving Papers come to my hand to be Printed, concerning these wonderful
passages about Mr. Saltmarsh; and advising with the Licenser concerning the
same; It was thought fit that the Papers should be first communicated to the
Army, before they were Printed: And accordingly were sent to an eminent person
at the Headquarters, who (after perusal and conections) returned them
enclosed in a Letter, as follows,

SIR,
I Have (at last) procured the perusal of your Relation concerning Mr.
Saltmarsh, and sent it you corrected, together with the enclosed Preamble. And
I think the Relation may be fit (for matter of truth) for public view; and
being the very plain Narrative of the business, it may be for much
satisfaction to the Kingdom therein.

Windsor 27 December. 1647.

A Preamble to the Reader.
IT is decent to speak honorably of the dead, yet not to be partial. Whilst
Mr. Saltmarsh was in the Army, he walked unblameable, kept himself to his
Text, in laboring to beat down sin: and exalt Christ. He meddled not with the
present times; else at Northamton and other places he had not found such
esteem: He still preached the bonds of love and peace, praying that that
might be the cord to unite Christians in amity. He meddled not in the Pulpit
with Presbytery or Independency. He soly labored to draw the soul from sin to
Christ. Thus he lived amongst Soldiers in time of health, and how his
departure was near his death, you will perceive by what insueth, as to so much
of it which is said to be done at the Head-quarter; most of it may claim
belief, and the rest probably is true. The circumstance of passages oftentimes
adds light to dark actions. He appeared at the Head-quaters as one risen
from the grave, his eyes almost fixed in his head, or rather as if he had come
out of a Trance with fear and trembling to express his dream. This latter
may admit a probable conjecture for without doubt he had trouble upon his
spirit, till he vented what he apprehended he had in commission, he did not
come with bitter revileings and reproaches, but rather with wholesome
admonitions to fly that danger which as he apprehended was hanging over the
Army, have we not more cause to suspect our selves of failings then him of
Melancholy in what he said: And may not this be a good Memento to better
things, though he perhaps mistake in the matter he delivered, yet however let
not the words of a dying man pass unregarded, for it is the heart and not the
mouth of such a man that speaks: his carriage was as if he were of another
world, often expressing he should see us no more, and his heart was eased when
he delivered his Message, and finishing his course so immediately after, it is
remarkable.

Wonderful Predictions, declared in a Message, as from the Lord, to His
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Counsel of his Army, by Mr. John
Saltmarsh, Preacher of the Gospel.
Mr. John Saltmarsh (a very holy and reverend Divine, of great learning and
parts) one of the Chaplines to the Army; being at his house near Gilford, in
the County of Essex, told his wife Saturday December 4. 1647. that he had
been in a Trance, seen a Vision, and received a command from God, to go
presently to the Army, to make known to them, what the Lord had revealed to
him, which would be the last work that he had to do for them, and taking his
leave of his wife, he hasted to London that night.

He declared to Sir H. M. a worthy Knight (a Member of the House of Commons)
his dear friend (and diverse others) that he was sent by the Lord with a
Message to the Army, to make known some things unto them, which God had
revealed unto him, he spoke many glorious things concerning God and the Saints.

That night he lay in London, but restless to finish the business he went
about.

The next morning (it being the Lords day) he found it some difficulty to
procure an Horse, which put him into a resolution to walk on foot to Winsor,
rather then stay till Monday, but after dinner he was furnished, and mounted
about three a clock in the afternoon, and although ignorant of the way, yet
(to avoid craftinating) he rid himself alone, with a resolution of speed to
the Headquarters, where he intended the Officers a salute the next morning,
before they sat in Council.

But the dark clouds soon surprised him, and (having no guide) he by inquiry
found that he had digre^^ed a little from the road, but was comforted in his
confidence that God was with him.

About eleven a clock (that night) he fell into a Town, about seven miles on
this side Winsor where he (finding the people up at an Inn) alighted, to bait
himself and Horse.

Whilst he stayed there, he spoke (as it is said) of many wonderful things,
which the Lord had revealed to him. But the man and woman of the house (at
first) gave no credit to what he said.

But Mr. Saltmarsh proceeded in a continued discourse (as if he had been
preaching in a Pulpit) declaring unto them many things from God; That the great
and dreadful day of the Lord is near, when all men shall be judged by Jesus
Christ, And then shall the ways, and actions of all men appear, Believers
stand on a glorious Gospel, spiritual bottom, supported by their Savior:
And Infidels, clasping about the stones and Pillars of the World, and fleshly
fancy, be thrown down to hell for ever. The Lord has great things (which he
intends) to do shortly. God will burn up, and consume the earthly matter of
his Saints; to translate them out of worldly darkness into his heavenly
light, through Jesus Christ; and then will God draw up all the sparkles of
glory in one confluence to himself, and cause every thing to return to its
first original end.

By that time he had (a little) enlarged himself upon these things, the people
of the house began to be serious and lay them to their consciences (amazed at
the things they heard,) were smitten in their hearts, seemed very penitent. And
persuading some further doctrinall points from him, occasioned his longer stay,
then was before intended.

But (whilst it was yet dark,) early on Monday December 6. in the morning Mr.
Saltmarsh departed from his Inn, intending toward Winsor, but (by mistake of
his way) fell into the Forest, where having view of an house, he approached
it: and called the good man (then up) who upon his desire gave him directions
of his way; and Mr. Saltmarsh gave him instructions in the way to heaven, and
told him many things, concerning God, and his purpose to destroy the wicked,
and draw the saints to himself, declaring (also the vanity of corrupt hart^,
the purity of called saints, and the like.

The man being much taken here with, accompanied him in his way through the
Forest, conversing with him till he came near Windsor, and then returned.

About nine in the morning Mr. Saltmarsh came to the Headquarters, and saw
diverse of his acquaintance.

He met with Mr. A. (one of the Adjutators) who saluting him, he said, Mr. A.
depart from these Tents, lest you perish with them, for the Lord has revealed
to me, that he is very angry with this Army, because they have forsaken Him.

Captain -- (an Officer of the Army asked him how he did. To whom he said, that
he had nothing (from God) to say to him, for he had always been a seeker of
himself, under spetious pretenses.

Seeing of C. D. (another Officer) he saluted him (with good morrow) He said,
he could not own him, for he was for destruction: who seeing his countenance
and carriage, and hearing his words (for he had strange expressions, both to
him, and others) was startled.

Mr. Saltmarsh then went to the General Coun^ell, where some of the Officers
were met in expectation of the General and the rest, to sit in Council, And
he spoke before them, (both the^, and also afterward) much to this purpose.
That he was come thither to reveal to them, what he had received from God.
That though the Lord (...) much for them, and by them, yet he had of late left
them, and was not in their (...), because they had forsaken him. That God would
not prosper their consultations, but destroy them by divisions amongst
themselves. That he had formerly come to them like a Lamb, but that God had now
raised in him the spirit of a Lion, because they had fought to destroy the
people of God. That the controversy now before them, calls for the tenderest
judgment, because it concerns their faithful ones, those imprisoned of their
own members, having always stood by them through the greatest difficulties.
That he would advise all the faithful to depart from them, lest they be
destroyed with them. And many more such like expressions.

Some Officers asked him how he came to know these things; to whom he
answered, That God (who had heretofore enabled him to tell them what they know
came since to pass) had revealed those things to him. And he told some of the
Officers, that what he sp^ke he was sure, that they knew in their Consciences
it was true.

He told them that he wished their own arguments might find (...) to their
spirits, that the some sounding of bowels might be heard in them to (...) that
they once wished to ^ear in others, that would have inslaved them, that they
would in the flowings of an heavenly spirit, with a fountain of tears, let the
world see that men are not infallible, but may mistake their brethren for
enemies.

Some said that Mr. Saltmarsh stared like one distracted, And one told him that
he had been sick and was not yet well recovered: To whom he answered, That he
had ( indeed) been sick not long since: But that now he was (be thanked God)
very well in health, and sensible what he spoke: And said, it was the last time
that ever he should speak to them.

Afterward, he went to the General, (but did not move his hat,) saying, That
he had not command from God to honor him now at all: That he had honored him
so much, that he offended in doting upon his person. That God had revealed unto
him, that he was highly displeased with his com^ting of Saints, and would not
now prosper him, nor could he honor him.

When he had parted with his Excellency he went to L. G. whom he met in the
Hall, who asked him how he did, Mr. Saltmarsh put not off his hat to him
neither: But told him that the Lord was very angry with him, for causing those
godly men to be imprisoned, slighted, and abused, for those Engagements which
he had formerly owned, and the persons such as he knew faithful in the Cause
of God: That the Armies falling off from their former principles, it would be
their ruin, and destruction: and would raise such fractions among themselves,
as would undo them. And much other discourse to that purpose.

L. G. told him, that some things were not so well as he could wish: but that
he wondered at those passages that fell from him. But Mr. Saltmarsh proceeded
on, declaring to him, as he had done to the General Council of the Army. And
at last L. G. took a paper out of his pocket, (which he said was sent to him
from Mr. S.) which he read: Some of the matter being not much different from
what was then said.

Another Officer (then present) spoke of something that had lately fallen from
an other Member of the Army relating to that purpose.

Hereupon Mr. Saltmarsh replied (saying) Look ye here now, out of the mouths
of two or three witnesses, the truth of God is confirmed and I am glad says he
to L. G. that there is some tenderness of heart in you: And (after some
further discourse) they parted.

Then Mr. Saltmarsh went to C. I. and spoke to that effect to him, which he
had done to the rest, and told him that God had left him and would not prosper
his council.

He met with C. R. and told him the message that he was come to declare to the
Army from God.

To Mr. P. he said, That he had many good things in him, but he was (of late)
overcome by others, who have mis led him: but that there is (...) a ^dernesse
in his spirit. And bad him take heed that his heart be not hardened.

To Mr. C. ( who was to receive a sum of moneys for him) he declared that he
would not receive it. And being demanded how he could be without it, he said,
God would provide, but to take a penny of it to himself he durst not: And
appointed Mr. C. ( upon the receipt of the moneys) to distribute it to poor
prisoners in London, to the soldiers secured in Windsor, about the late
disorder, and to other distressed Christians.

On Tuesday morning December 7. Mr. Saltmarsh went (again) to L. G. telling
him that he had one thing yet to deliver to him; which God required of him
(which was this) That he would (immediately) take effectual course for the
enlargement of the members of the Army, that were committed for not complying
with the General Council: And that he do not prosecute against those who have
been so faithful. ( And some other expressions to that purpose).

Mr. Saltmarsh further declared, that he was sorry to see such obstinacy. And
that although some tenderness was upon his spirit (the day before) yet now he
saw that his heart was hardened. But wished him to be mindful of what God
required of him.

That morning Mr. Saltmarsh declared to C. B. and others, the same things
again, which he had done the day before, at the General Council.

C. B. asked him, whether he would advise all the honest faithful members to
leave the Army, and lay down Arms, and quite leave off the Military practice,
To whom he answered, No; For, says he, God has yet a great work to be done:
In which he will make use of Members of this Army, to do great things for the
glory of his Name.

After that he had taken his leave of the Officers, telling them, That he had
then done his errand, and must leave them, never to see the Army more: he came
that night to London.

On Wednesday December. 8. he acquainted diverse of his Friends (about the City,
what he had done, and took his leave of them) saying to some that his work was
now done, his Message delivered: And desired them to be careful of his wife.

On Thursday December. 9. he went from London very cheerful and well, and came
that night to his house near Gilford, not sick at all, and told his wife what
he had done.

On Friday December. 10. he told his wife, that he had now finished his course;
and must go to his Father: And in the afternoon he complained that his head did
ache, desiring to lie down upon his bed, where his wife took all possible care
she could of him. But whatsoever he received for sustenance, he could not
retain it: yet he rested well, all that night.

On Saturday December. 11. In the morning, he was taken speechless. And in the
afternoon, about four or five a clock, he dyed very peaceably and quietly. And
his soul is, no doubt, at rest with the Lord.

Windsor, Examinat. December. 27. 1647.
FINIS.

