THE REASON OF THE WAR, WITH The Progress and Accidents thereof.

Written by an English Subject.

Wherein also the most material Passages of the Two Books printed at Oxford
(in which His MAJESTY'S party do undertake to justify their Proceedings) are
briefly examined;

VIZ.

The Declaration, entitled, Tending to Peace; The Relation of The Passages at
the meeting at UXBRIDGE.

Imprimatur

July 1. 1646. NA: BRENT.

LONDON: Printed for John Field, and are to be sold by Stationers. 1646.

READER,
THere were some parts of this Book published the last year, but passing from
the Author in much imperfection and some baste, it is revised and augmented
according to the Progress and Occurrences of the War: Many of the Passages
therein are his own Collections observed at single hand, the rest produced
through the Arguing and Discourse betwixt some opposite in opinion to him, and
himself a lover of Learning, although of ordinary and too mean parts to
Discourse it as an able Scholar; for he cannot but acknowledge that the
subject of this Treatise might have been managed by a more learned and
elaborate hand: The greater part thereof was begun about a twelvemoneth since
in the turbulent and divided times, by way of an Animadversary of the War, of
the Occasions and Accidents thereof, and had been printed a good while since,
had not an unexpected chance crossed in the very instant of putting it to the
Press. Now if in these more quiet and composed times, the Beams of Peace
seeming to shine out again, it should give offense, or in the least way
interrupt the happy and hoped for Reconcilement, which it does not in the
Authors sense, and to his best understanding, his heart is against the
publishing, the Discourse relating rather to what is past, and may serve for
future times. It is probable that in these times of Conflict, this Discourse,
as mild and plain as it is, may meet with rough harsh answers and unkind
censurings, as that the Author is an Ambidexter, Neutral, that he cunningly
carries himself betwixt both parts, sometimes and in some things for the King,
at other times and in other things for the Parliament: Whereunto he replies,
and ingenuously declares himself both for whom and against whom he is, For
whom? For the King and Parliament: Against whom? Against the Disturbers of the
happy Peace, having long since been the authors, and now the promoters
consequently of this horrid War: and that there are and have been such, a woeful
and sad Experience does manifest.

A favorable and upright interpretation is all the Reward the Author either
looks or wishes for, next unto, That His Majesty and His Subjects may
reciprocally enjoy and hold firmly and entirely their several Rights.

The Reason of the War, with the Progress and Accidents thereof.
TO describe the Power and Dignity of a King, the quality and several forms of
a Parliament, is not the purpose of this discourse: Or what Esteem a Parliament
in other Kingdoms carries, That is left unto the curious Pen of a more learned
Antiquary: In this Kingdom, briefly, In the ancient and usual acception, it is
an Assembly of the Nobility and Gentry, chosen by their Country, and solemnly
called together by the King his writ to such a place, at such a time; to debate
the affairs of the King and Kingdom.

The manner of being called is by See the form of the Writ in the Crown Office.
Writ, directed to the high Sheriff of every County, as to the chief Magistrate
of Borough Towns, to return Knights and Burgesses for that service, so
Habited, viz. with swords girt on their sides, etc.

Which habit, a Note and Emblem of the valor in them, required the Object to
do and go on with Courage and Magnanimity in discharging their trust, which
their Country has repo^ed in them against all Forces opposing; And no Question
if former Kings have deputed none to place of Justice, but menltz valianntz as
King Edw. 3. expresses them, none but such are to defend and serve their
Country in the high Court of Parliament, which controules, and is to give Laws
to Justice.

The end of their Assembling, is to determine, Ordain, and provide for the
peace, Justice, and safety (the supreamest Law) of the Kingdom; called
thereunto by his Majesty, Entrusted by their Country: Whose Councels and
Ordinances become Laws, Or in case of variance in Judgment, that so many as
are there met cannot all agree in the same opinion, that passes for a Law
which the major part concludes on; so it fares in every body Politic and
Aggregative: And those the Parliament Orders and Ordinances are binding to the
Subject, as Orders in Inferior Courts of Chancery, Common Pleas, etc. until
decrees and Judgments pass to confirm the same, which decrees and Judgments
in those lower Courts hold Analogy with Acts and Laws in the higher Court of
Parliament.

The work and end of the Parliament being consummate, the Laws enacted, the
Parliament then determining, the King governes only and supreme, binding
himself to observe those Laws by a double Oath, Tacitly, as being a King, and
so bound to Rule and govern according to the Laws; Expressly, by his Oath taken
at his Coronation.

To speak in a plain grammatical and obvious way, the Latin Etimon directs the
duty of a King: Rex, is so called a Regendo: Government is dispensed in wisdom
and justice, From which text the Kings Party do contend, that Kings are
immediately from God: no more then as follows in the subsequent verse, Nobles do
Rule, and judges of, etc.
By me Kings rule, says the wisest of Kings; and Justice exalts a Nation,
insomuch as when commands shall prove irregular, either wanting the one, or
exceeding the Limits of either of these, they provoke the people (free borne
Subjects) to a loose obedience, and the consequence commonly becomes dangerous.

The Peers and Gentry thus assembled, and the Parliament now in being, the
Kings power is not so complete and total, having imparted it self to that
Assembly; if it be, what then is the Parliaments power? If they have no power,
they are assembled to no purpose; if a minced and diminished power, in whom
does it ly to lessen or to greaten it? if in the King, He then may by the same
reason rule Arbitrarily, and by his own will as well as overruled a Parliament:
so whilst the King imparts the power which he has, by communicating it to that
His Court of Council, He lesseneth it in Himself, or retracts His Grace in
assembling them, which were a blemish to His Princely wisdom, unsuitable also
to that common presumption [The King cannot do amiss.]

The King as the Head of His People and Father of His Country, is by the common
opinion of all dutiful and sober Subjects to be obeyed simply in all things
Lawful and Honest, when there is no Court of Parliament in Being; when there is
a Parliament, the Heart of that Body whereof the King is the Head, betwixt whom
an unity of Coalition is presumed, the power of both is indivisible, and so
intermixed, that when the Court of Parliament (the end of whose Councels is to
establish Justice, Peace) industriously intends the same; when we desert our
duty unto them, we are wanting to our selves, unthankful unto them.

The Government of England, as in these latter times it stands, since Laws and
a settled Form established, since Religion and Laws have met together and
flourished (like couples in a building, each supporting other) and God honored
in both, is not simply a Subordinative, but a Co-ordinative and mixed Monarchy:
yea the highest supremacy it self is compounded of three estates, Coordinate,
King, Lords and Commons; now it is true, Subordinata non pugnant, but
Co-ordinata invicem supplent: Fundamentals are equal, and all Principals alike,
Rex est universis minor; Bracton the great Lawyer says, Rex habet superiorem
sc. Deum Legem per quam factus est Rex, Curiam sc. Comites Barons.

The agitating this and the like Questions incident hereunto, has disturbed
the minds of men and cost much blood, as which has the Pre-eminence, which
ought to bear the greater sway, the King or the whole number of the people in
their collective Body (which the Court of Parliament does represent?) Another
Question is, which is the certain and proper Parliament as the case now stands,
that summoned by his Majesty's Writ to Westminster, or that by a latter command
to Oxford? whither the Principles of the Subjects Peace, Religion, justice,
have been of late and before this Quarrel in danger of being born down? And
whither the conflict in the Quarrel undertaken by those who have endeavored to
provide against that danger, be Rebellion? The King and His Party (whither in
their own defense See His Majesty's Declarations and Messages since January,
1641. The Oxford Mercury moves the jealousy, making the Kings sincerity
questionable; for whilst the Mercury knowing the Diet and full digest of the
Kings party there, calls the Parliament whenever he names them, The Rebels at
Westminster, notwithstanding the King calls them The Parliament, and words of
professing Friendship and Complacency being more uncertain then words of Hatred
and Defiance; although His Majesty terms them now a Parliament, a Phrase of
Truth and Credit, he may reserve unto himself more bitter thoughts of Anger and
future Accusation, according to what the Mercury expresses toward them.
or not, hereafter) have sought against them as being Rebels; The King not
always and constantly calling them so as his Party does, for sometimes he
calls them the Parliament, sometimes Rebels, whether in sincerity or
reservednesse of heart He varieth the phrase, His own heart can witness.

It is the note of the wisest of Kings on Earth, that the Heavens for height,
the Earth in depth, and the Kings heart no man can find out; not that a King
is therefore more transcendently wise or perfect above and beyond all other
men, nor that his heart is more Divinely inspired, or illuminated from above,
more incomprehensible, or His ways like Gods past finding out, the Text bears
no such construction, the frailty and uncertainty of all Kings Actions do
evidence the contrary; although their Flatterers may peradventure vainly infuse
such Doctrine into their ears, and from this place of Scripture instruct a King
with the necessity and excellency of dissembling the meanest and worst part of
wisdom, although resembling it.

Amidst the many Doubts and Jealousies, the Suggestions and Machinations at
home and abroad against the Peace and well-being of the Kingdom, it concerns
the Court of Parliament to look unto and prevent in as much as in them lies,
the growth of approaching Danger, which are then Dangers only when near and in
sight, when they are instant and befallen, they and the opportunity of
preventing them is past, and become above the name of Dangers, Calamity.

Seeing therefore the Parliament are by Gods special providence met together,
and entrusted in their Countries welfare, their courage and unanimity is
requisite in perfecting that work for which they were assembled, viz. the
Maintenance of Gods worship, the Kings honor, the Subjects Liberty; these two,
the Kings Honor and the Subjects Liberty propagating each other, when as it is
a larger access of dignity to be a King of a free people then of Slaves,
unless He shall in the pursuit of this War reckon to purge the Kingdom of the
worst and most enslaved of His people, which, as the case now stands, will
otherwise fall out, and prove, as in letting blood the natural body, the best,
the most free and spirituous to be wasted and spilt as well as that which His
Majesty does in His own sense call the worst.

Where by the way, Gods immediate hand of Providence manifested to his people
in the preservation of his glory, is especially to be taken notice of; that
whereas his chiefest End in the creation of Mankind, has been his own true
Worship, and the salvation of his people, of which he has a peculiar care,
seen even in the disposing and ordering of humane affairs, as a second and
subservient means to his own Decrees, That at the same time the Subjects
Liberty should be invaded, when the Protestant Religion, the subversion of
which was probably first and principally aimed at, howbeit in the managery
thereof the Enemies to Both (Religion, Liberty) were ill advised, in that the
Power and Privilege of Parliament (the Fabric of all Laws) the Subjects Right
should be overthrown and fall together with the Protestant Religion: Arist:
Polit: cited in the like case by Sir Walter Raughleigh in his Dialogue between
a Counselor of state and a Justice of Peace.
The Philosopher observes, that Homines minus timent injustum pati a Principe,
quem cultorem Dei putant, had they singled out either Religion, the Subjects
Liberty, or the Privilege of Parliament to be destroyed apart, many it is
like, especially among the common sort of men, might have failed in their zeal
to the one, yet have endeavored the preservation of the other, so the Enemies
Design might have better thrived in the success, if Religion singly, or the
Subjects Liberty alone had been left unshaken without a complication of both to
fall together at the same time and by the same power.

The Parliaments next endeavor is to maintain entire and against all
opposition the Power, Privilege and Dignity of their Court, no so sure a way,
as by their constant accord and unity, which if overthrown by an advers Power,
all Parliaments are in danger of languishing in their esteem, and must either
comply, or submit to the Arbitrary will of the Prince who conventeth them at
His pleasure, and so lose their Freedom. What then follows? a discontinuance of
enacting Laws, a dull, careless and obsolete use for want of due execution of
such Laws as are in Being, thence an Arbitrary and unlimitted way of
Government, that Force or the Sword must be the Umpire, besides a certain,
although a remoter consequence, a failer of that well-breeding, the Birthright
of the English Gentry, a supine and careless Ignorance let in, in stead of the
virtuous Emulation which they have always studied.

Seeing then Peace and Justice are the Blessings which the Subject lives by,
both Issues of Religion, when to expect a blessing on a Kingdom, The Kingdom of
Heaven must first be sought, Gods Worship especially provided for to be built
on firm unshaken Pillars, when the care thereof principally resides in those
chosen men set apart for Gods and their Countries service; Their endeavor is to
be fully ascertained of their Princes inclination thereunto, that by His
Countenance and Authority the love of Gods Honor may, like the precious
Ointment on his head, run down to the skirts of his lower garments, and so
seated in his heart, as all Jealousies to be abandoned, all Evil and appearance
thereof to be abstained from, and the Parliament not to leave that in suspense
or doubt, which they would have provided to make more sure; for it is not a
transitory matter of Arbitrary Event or Chance, to be or not to be performed,
but most weighty, of great concernment, and whereon the prosperity and welfare
of the Commonwealth depends, whether the Laws shall be kept entire, and God
certainly and constantly honored, or whether the Laws shall be in danger to be
broken, his Name to be profaned.

The main Jealousy grows by reason of an Army under the Conduct of Papists,
which no man will imagine is raised for the defense of the Protestant Religion;
for howbeit that there may be peradventure Papists in the Parliaments Army,
when as the number of them has been great, their Presumption increasing more
and more, the chief and eminent Commanders Papists are in the King's: And
(which is to be observed) few of them miscarry in the Quarrel, as not exposing
themselves to the danger and hardship of the War, as if they did hope through
the effusion of Protestant blood, and lessening their number, under the name of
Rebels, to make unto themselves a Province; yet both parties, the Kings, the
Parliaments do profess the maintenance of the Protestant Religion: And the
Kings recriminatorily charge the Parliament with a Design to subvert the
same. The reason given, is because Schismatics or other the preciser sort,
(relishing not the book of Common Prayer) are adhering to the Parliament. Answ.
That Prayer is but a Form and humane Constitution, although anciently received
and of use, directing us to pray, bless, give Thanks, etc. And alterable by
Authority, upon devising a better Form; But the difference betwixt Protestant
and Papist is in Fundamentals, as in Doctrine and Points of Faith, so opposite,
as no man will judge that the parties on the one side will fight to maintain
the others Cause.

Popery and Schism opposite in themselves, agree in this, that they both do
undermine and seek the rooting out of the true Protestant Religion; This,
participatively, and by secret wiles; That, privatively, and by open Enmity;
the one may be an aberration from, the other is Idolatry and opposition to the
true Protestant Religion.

What upon an upright discussion, that is, whether we take it in point of
Manners, or of Doctrine, the one enjoined by, and comprehended in the
Decalogue, the other set down and fenced in by a modern and learned Mr. Rogers
his 39. Articles.
Writer against the force and wiles of Popery and Schism, both parties (the
King and Parliament) do contest for, and protest to maintain the Protestant
Religion; so whilst there is no equivocation in the word [Protestant Religion]
a diverse acception may be in the extended sense, the aforenamed Writer has by
his industry composed the difference in determining what it is, and that agreed
upon, the contention as to that particular may cease. Truth and Uniformity in
Religion, (which cannot be without Accord, without a distinct and certain
knowledge what it is) is the foundation and corner stone of Peace.

If in this Contention the Kings Army shall prevail, many Papists engaged and
Commanders in it, what is like to be the sequel? Those Papists and their
followers will hope and challenge it as a condign Reward, to have an especial
interest in His favor, because they say it was their Sword, their Arm, that
got the victory; so the King must tread a slippery and narrow path, either to
desert His friends who have assisted Him in this War, or disabling Himself to
make good His often Protestations for the maintenance of the Protestant
Religion.

And if in this Quarrel Popery shall be let in, when Justice and Law shall
fail, when every one given up to his own heart's Lust, the Papists and other
the Parliaments Enemies will in an exprobratory way, thank the Parliament as
the cause thereof.

It is true, it may be said so accidentally and very remotely, but neither the
Impulsive, Formal, or Efficient cause, rather (if Logic will bear such a
member in the division of causes) a deficient cause, as the absence or rather
the Eclipse of the Sun, the cause of Darkness, their endeavors having failed
of success, being interrupted by a strong and countermanding Power opposing
them. In a more fit resemblance, if a Band of Soldiers should be sent out to
guard a Town, and a stronger Power then theirs to be employed to oppose and
master them, in whom lies the fault, in case the Town be lost? in the watchmens
deficiency, or in the stronger Power opposing them? so Popery and Treason the
Parliament are guilty of alike, and what other contumelies the wit and
restless malice of their Enemies accuse them of.

And unless to every objection this opposite observation be applied, that in
the whole course of this Quarrel there be a distinguishing between what has
been Intentionally and Principally aimed at, and what has accidentally and
through necessity fallen out, there can no clear judgment be given in deciding
the Question [How the War began, who have been the Cause and Authors of these
Miseries.] It may be as well objected by malicious and cruel Enemies, that His
Majesty's Clemency and goodness have been the cause of so much blood already
spilt, for that he has not put those whom His party call Rebels to the sword,
or hanged them, to teach others their duty of Submission; such Doctrines are
spread abroad to foment the War, when the Doctors themselves are the incendiary
and impulsive means, together with those Soldiers now in Arms, which incites
the surviving suffering people to make resistance, least if they submit also
(as in many places they have done) they are undone by it.

No marvel if Subjects be called Traitors and Rebels, if resistance against
opposition and violence be Rebellion, the often Robbing and Spoiling used in
the Kings name, and for the King, which were wont to be conservative and saving
terms, tending to peace and security, but now grown destructive (as the
Soldiers use them) to the Subject, are able to turn him out of his natural and
accustomed Frame: Oppression, says the wise man, makes wise men mad: violence
and oppression practiced in the Kings name, and by His party, and by degrees
wrought to the destruction of the Subject, diverts and alters His wonted
course, and may make him Rebel as it were against His will, when as He is
frightened, driven from, and threatened out of His obedience.

If on the other side the Parliament shall prevail, those Enemies to
Common Prayer, advers also to what Government the Church shall appoint, may be
easily overruled by a Parliamentary Authority.

The Authors and Fautours of those Before this time of War there were no such
Schisms or Heresies: Tautum res nobis (says learned Jewel) cum quibusdam
satellitibus Pontificiis, etc. and it is requisite that Unity and Peace be
settled in the Church as well as in the State, for suppression of these Schisms
and Heresies; God delighting, yea and requiring it, to have Order and Truth in
his presence chamber [the Church] as in his larger courts [the Common-wealth].
The Authors of the War have been the Authors of these Heresies: [which side?]
Schisms being few and inconsiderable, their Tenants newly sprung up, and apt
to vanish both through the insufficiency of their grounds, and multiformity of
their Sects, wounding and weakening one another, and in the main, the Common
cause: For it is the firm and Orthodox Protestants, which are the Parliaments
firm friends whereon to trust, yea and their constant friends also, whilst the
Parliament goes on, in an entire, solid, and joint way, and are as the Exigency
of their Affairs shall suffer them, constant to themselves, whereby, and by
which way alone, they are enabled to defend themselves, to protect their
Friends.

Which side will prevail, God only knows, who can dispose of Victories at his
will: If the Parliament shall, the King nevertheless could not but assure
Himself, that He should be entirely King; howsoever part of His Estate be by
reason of these Wars diminished, and the Parliaments Protestation taken 1641.
together with their late Covenant two years after, for the maintenance of His
just Power and greatness, were good security, until themselves were reputed
Traitors, Rebels, their worth in like manner undervalued, and scorned by His
party; for so the Protestation and Covenant both may lose their efficacy and
intent, if He for whom they do Protest and Vow, shall by opposing, disable them
in the prosecution of their Vow.

To that Objection, That the Parliament have contrary to such Covenant, Usurped
and Entrenched upon His Regal Dignity, and by seeking to hinder His Power, have
lessened His Honor, in passing an Ordinance against His Majesty's creating of
Lords, etc. in seeking to have their Friends Invested with Honors and Titles
answerable to their demerits. To the first it is confessed, an Ordinance is past
against all such Acts as may inure by virtue of the Great Seal, and Barons
being made by Patent under the same Seal, which being a necessary Instrument of
State, which the Parliament represents, being surreptitiously taken from them
contrary to a Trust; they have consequently passed an Ordinance against the
Creating of Lords, ut Supra: For the Contention betwixt Him and them being
grown extreme, the King striving by all means to lessen their Power and Credit,
using all ways to advance His own [their Enemies;] they knowing likewise the
Seal to be made use of to their Detriment, as if that the Kings conferring
those Honors, were not so much an augmentation of His Dignity, in granting, or
in the created Lords, in receiving those Honors, as an intended diminution to
the Parliaments Dignity, had reason to provide for the time against all
contingent Acts, tending to the lessening their Power. Admit it to be as the
Objectors give out, which neither the Kings party do prove, nor the Parliaments
do grant, as in other Acts done by the Parliament, An Usurping in them;
Usurpation may in the strength of policy prove a benefit to the Subject, in
that Usurpers do commonly Establish the best Laws to redeem their Credit, lost
by the Injury done in their Usurping.

If the Kings party shall prevail, the War being between Him and His People,
the Parliament rather an Umpire in the Quarrel, to do right to the wronged
part, there will be two things considerable; The means whereby He does prevail;
The end of His prevailing. The first means, not primarily as in the strength or
greatness of His party, yet consequently in that His party do undividedly
retain and keep up the Ancient and settled Form of Government, without
contesting or dissenting in opinion about the Establishing any new: As on the
other side, the Parliament has thrown down the old, without (for a long time)
setting up any other Form or Constitution; It was a learned Fathers
Observation, Augustine.
Ipsa mutatio quae utilitate adjuvat etiam novitate perturbat: And it will
require a most exact deliberate Wisdom to suppress all Inconveniences which
may arise on Novity: Hence it has been, that the Parliaments Friends have
grown less zealous to their side, more troublesome to the Court it self, by
requiring and seeking a new and certain Form.

Which may admit a twofold Answer, that the Parliament interrupted by a
powerful Enemy, has not a full measure of Efficacy to conform and compose
every collateral difference, happing either in Church or Commonwealth; when as
their Task is hard enough to maintain and keep a work more necessary, [Their
own Power.]

Secondly, In that they have for a time abolished those ancient Forms, and
constitutions, finding happily some present reason for so doing: whether they
will forthwith establish some other Form, as it is probable they will, having
long since promised it, or reassume the Ancient, when time shall serve? (there
being no substantial difference betwixt what is now abrogated, and what is to
be Ordained) is left to their wisdom; besides, it is presumed in point of
Judgment and of Policy, that they will have such respect unto their
Predecessors Acts, as not altogether to raze out, to abrogate for ever their
ancient Constitutions, least succeeding Parliaments should do the like by
theirs, and so the Courts of Parliament, which have been instituted for
redress of Mischiefs and Grievances, etc. should become See Statute Edw. 3.
the Scene and Seminary of inconvenience and disturbance; by introducing still
Novelties, and alterations in the Commonwealth.

The third is, in that His Majesty keeping His residence in a less Town of
Garrison [Oxford] can more easily conform and subdue a few unto His will, then
the Parliament can in a more greater place [London*] The multitude in that
City, the supplies and Aid, afforded by the City to the Parliament, can
counterpoise such odds.

The event of His Majesty's prevailing is alike considerable and twofold also:
first, in that the Parliament Members, already proscribed and charged with
Rebellion, are exposed to contempt and ruin, in them a great part of the
Subjects of both Kingdoms, when as the cause, wherein the Public good is so
much concerned, is by idle and abject Fellows called already in derision [The
Cause.]

Secondly, In that a foreign Enemy upon a total devastation of this Realm
(without which the King cannot probably prevail) will be induced to believe,
and accordingly make use of it, that it has happened, through the soft and
tender breeding of the English, their unfitness to endure the hardship of a
War, and so invade and by degrees implant this Kingdom; And what a Forraigner
implanted here, his Demeanor may prove toward our King, not naturally their
liege Lord, every good English Subject will fear the worst: when as especially
this Kingdom must be kept as NAPLES, by a Sir Walter Raughleigh in his
Dialogue betwixt a Councellor of state and a Justice of peace.
Garrison of another Nation, so that the King shall be enforced, as former Kings
have been, to compound with Rogues and Rebels, yea to pardon them; thereby
Himself, the whole Nobility, yea the State of Monarchy to fall together.

To state the differences of Forces on either part, when the quarrel first
began, the Parliament had far the greater The number of the Friends and
Adversaries unto either part are calculated, and their several Forts discerned
about the middle of this Book, and which part was in probability like to find
the greater opposition, the King or the Parliament as matters were then in
being, in which it will appear that the Parliament had the more Enemies, or
their Enemies the more Friends.
number, the King having but few yet more then the Parliament had Towns of Fort
(as his party have Calculated and hyperbolically reported otherwise) most men's
hearts being bent to defend their Rights and Liberties, which they thought were
of late encroached upon, and indeed the Offspring of this Quarrel, and the
Parliaments Friends believing the Justice of that Court, and of their Cause, in
a careless way of affording Aid, threw all upon the chance of War, without
using the ordinary means concurrent to their defense, not foreseeing what would
be the end and mischief of their backwardness and neglect to be repented of,
not remedied.

They were willing enough to have redress for their late-past grievances, to
have the work done, and the Parliament speed well at their Neighbors charge,
so themselves be saved harmless, but to lay out money and purchase the name of
a Rebel, in case the Kings party should prevail, was both a chargeable and
double Crime.

Then their unwillingnesse to be exposed to the hardship of a War, to which
they were altogether unaccustomed, believing in the goodness and sufficiency
of their Cause, to have it made good in an extraordinary way by Miracles,
without laying to their assisting hand; so casting the whole burden upon God
and his Omnipotency, did wish well, and pray peradventure for the Parliaments
Success.

For now every short enjoyment of their quiet, every small respite from the
Enemies cruelty, although the next bordering Counties unto them be infested
round about with their cruelty, makes these men apprehend that the War is
ended, because their Coast is for the present clear, and they feel no instant
smart.

It is true, Gods Providence is in all things to be observed; it is as his
Omnipotency, Infinite, and Superintendent to every Creature, No one hair falls
from a man's head, nor a Sparrow from the house top without his Providence. The
same Almighty power which could rescue his three Servants out of the fiery
Furnace, and provide strength of the mouths of Infant Babes, is able, but
whether he will or not (his works being unsearchable, and his ways past finding
out) give success according to the peoples wishing, without the ordinary means
to be used by Instruments, that is left to his secret and determinate Council.

There is a time for War, and a time for Peace; the Lord is a man of War, his
Name is JEHOVAH; and Fighting in a qualified sense, as Praying, is a duty.
DAVID blessed God for teaching his hands to War, etc. And Prayer is a
Christians, a contrite and good man's Arms. Had we in Unity and Humbleness of
Spirit, in the Power, without the Form of Godliness, besought Almighty God to
be delivered from Famine, Battle, Murder, and from Sudden death, as the Church
directs; These Calamities had not in likelihood come nigh, which threaten now
to come upon us like an Armed man.

Beseeching God by Prayer might peradventure be the Peoples sacrifice alone,
neglecting otherwise their own endeavors, and carelessly trusting (if at all)
upon God; his Providence they think sufficient, which is confessed: In which they
may alike consider, That if the Kings party shall prevail, or the whole Land be
consumed and reduced even to a handful; It is all within the compass of Gods
power; The Lot is cast, but the disposing is of the Lord; And certainly that
side which uses the best and most concurrent means to his dispose (the Justice
of the Cause is challenged by either party) is likely to have the upper hand.

Praying and relying on the Almighty goodness, seldom fails the Petitioner, God
ever giving what he prays for, what suffices, or what is better then he asks;
but the means must be added to the prayer, Qui ordinat finem ordinat etiam
media tendentia ad finem. Moses at the coming of the Amalakites, besought the
Lord by prayer, yet commanded Joshua to choose out men to fight with Amalck.
God is in all things the first Mover, by whom we move and have our being; he
the Super-eminent and first cause, yet working by subservient and second means;
we are his People, and Members of his Church Militant, against which the Gates
of Hell shall not prevail. In the Creation his own glory was the effect of his
chief care, manifested unto us his Creatures; his next affording us all
necessaries for our support and good; he looks to be sought unto, and trusted
upon in that course of obedience which he has ordained, in conveying that unto
us which we look for at his hands, otherwise he is rather slighted then trusted
on.

Had the people been so liberal in Contributing to to their own Defense; so
provident to have foreseen, that within one year after their improvidence they
should have been thus oppressed; in the progress of one year more undone, they
would questionless have been more liberal, and concurred more cheerfully in
Contributing to their own Assistance.

For within a few Months after the War began, many in the Kingdom fell off
from the Parliament, and under fear, and the notion of being reputed Rebels,
thought it made against their present safety to wish well to the Parliament (a
Court scarce known in the Country, and discontinued in the Kingdom) much more
to fight for it: And hearing of diverse invective Threats and Menaces to that
purpose, as if their Endeavors for the Parliament did make against the King,
and so resemble a Rebellion, thought it altogether unsafe to adhere to the
Parliament: So the Kings strength increasing through the fear and revolt of
many formerly engaged to the other part, he gained diverse Towns in several
parts of the Kingdom.

On which his Friends and Party fix a Miracle, reckoning it an extraordinary
Act of Gods Favor showed to him in the sudden increase of his Party, that from
an handful as it were, he has raised Forces to such numbers, when as the
Miracle may be retorted, and rather turned the other way, That his Majesty
being so Pious, Just and Protestant a Prince (as his party contends, and an See
the Oath tendered at Oxford, 1643.
Oath to that purpose has been tendered to diverse of late within his Quarters)
there should be notwithstanding such a defection from him in his Subjects, so
many thousand also not engaged nor seduced, men of sufficiency and worth
mistaken in what is Loyalty.

Neither is Victory in a Civil War any evident note of the Almighty's favor,
when as it is obtained on such hard terms, as the Ruin and Destruction of a
flourishing Land; rather in the Event it will prove an angry Judgment of Gods
punishing the Authors of this Ruin, in suffering See the Message of both
Houses, March 9. 1643.
above and beyond all others, a Civil War, consuming and overthrowing the Body
Politic, as a pestilent Fever does the Natural with its distempered heat.

As for the Towns the Kings party gained, whether by His Commanders wit and
Stratagem, (allowable in War) or by falsehood in point of parley and of trust
(odious and scorned even in Foreign Wars) is hereafter examinable, and to be
tried by the Sword alone; yet one word, what that falsehood is, when a Commander
or Officer in chief, shall Swear by Solemn Oath and Vow, to perform what he
never means, and after a trust committed and an agreement made, break and
falsify the same.

And whether it be Treachery and falsehood, or Stratagem and Policy, does rest
upon this Question [Whether the Parliaments Proceedings be Rebellious,
unbecoming Subjects, or just and Loyal.] If Rebellious, then it may seem
Stratagem and duty to the King, in such Commanders entrusted by the Parliament,
to renounce their trust and serve the Enemy. If the Parliament be good and
faithful Subjects, as they will rather sacrifice their lives to the Justice of
their Cause, then fail to Vindicate their Credit from the stain of Rebellion,
then it is Treachery in those Commanders to undertake afterward to desert such
Trust.

That such foul dealing has been practiced, occasioning the protraction of
this War is manifest, on which side most, future Ages or the Sword will
manifest.

If it be answered by way of excuse, as no crimes whatsoever shall want a
patron in these divided times, That such dealing is a virtue, practisable in
relation to a Kings Safety, in danger to be destroyed, and that breach of
Faith, of Trust, never so Solemnly made, or any other the like means may be
used in Order to His preservation.

Answer. This Argument may be Fallacy, a petitione Principii, or a non
concessis, which manner of disputing can enlarge ad infinitum, and as the
Logicians speak, The reply thereto may be unto such an Argument, that there is
no such detestable, and desperate design in being, or known or granted.

Where by the way, and to prevent the mistake
of our duty, and Allegiance which we should owe to our Sovereign; if any
exquisite wits of a more nimble discerning reach then their fellow Subjects,
pretending a greater care to His Majesty's welfare, have heretofore found out
by privy and dark passages, by any secrecy of contrivance, any such wicked and
execrable intendments against the Kings Person or Honor, or deeming all others
not partaking in their sagacity, Ignorant in State affairs, dull and vulgar
spirited; Let them make known unto their fellow Subjects, the time, the means,
and manner of that intendment, before the whole Land be totally destroyed, or a
full Conquest be obtained, for afterward all writers will report one way, in
favor of the Victors side; then also the victory, not the Cause, will point
out, and set forth the Rebel.

That two or three Gentlemen (since Members of the House of Commons) together
with a Noble Peer in the House of Lords, dwelling in neighboring Counties each
to other, and sojourning about seven or eight years since, with a Gentleman, a
neighbor and friend of theirs; did, during the time of their sojourning there,
therefore agree to overthrow Monarchial Government, or intend any thing against
the Honor or Person of the King: if neither of these appeared by their
discourse, Letters, or other Acts in writing, the Arguer shows more his spleen
against those Gentlemen, then his Reason in deducing any good Connection between
the Antecedent and Conclusion.

Observe on the other side, one among many other presumptions of some Design in
hand from the advers party, then let the Reader judge on which side is the more
weighty and vehement presumption of Acting mischief, of complotting alterations
in matter of Government: which the more rational Consequence, that instance
which went before, even now recited, or this which follows? namely, the
building strong and high walls by a great Peer of this Realm, to his house (no
other notice taken until now, save of beautifying and adorning the house for
his private use and splendor) the diverse Pieces of Ammunition, credibly
informed to be carried thither by little and little for these many years last
past; and now one of the strongest Holds the Kings party has in all
South Wales, to infest and oppose the Parliaments party.

Whilst the truth of such Plot, of overthrowing Monarchial Government, of some
mischievous intendment against the Kings Majesty (if any such there be
suggested) is no more manifested to the World; it may be an Imposture framed
and obtruded on the Parliament by some offenders, who to save themselves have
contrived this Calumny and Falsehood, on purpose to engage the King to rescue
them.

The Parliament, when this report was first given consisted of above Five
hundred Members in both Houses; And whether they having all Protested for the
Kings Honor, Person and Estate, would against the dictate of their own
Conscience, against their natural and sworn Allegiance, infringe this Vow, to
commit wilful Perjury and Treason.

Or that if it be objected, That the Design was the drift only of some few
(accused and styled factious persons) soliciting and awing others; then to
assign who those few persons were, and rather to blame the Counties and
Corporations choosing such: Questionless when first chosen, their chusers
suspected no such Crime in them, and whether men known and chosen for their
virtue would accumulate such Villainies as those.

Such a Design must be given out, at least to save the credit of some
revolting, who having undertaken the charge and care of their several Counties
to them deputed, were at first active in their Musterings and Military
practices: Soon after, whether wrought by Friends, Allies, or for some other
respect, did desist, charging the Parliament or some of them in general terms,
with some strange intended Plot against the King, but without declaring what
Plot, or the Authors, which had they particularly and manifestly done, and so
sufficiently proved the reason of their revolt, it might have spared the
effusion of much blood, and more availed the Kings Cause then their revolting
did.

They did not doubtless originally and from the first dissemble, as to sit in
a joint and unanimous way with the Parliament, and reserve their heart for an
advers party to the Parliament; few or none of any sorts of men were good at
that close and subtle posture; nor was dissembling then in that mature growth,
as these false and desperate seasons will bring in, even amongst all sorts,
improving it to that obstruse and exquisite form, as the virtue of wisdom. And
the subtilty of dissembling growing to be near the same, most men's carriage
will seem inconstant, if not false. Upon deliberation and advice, those men
undertook their charge, and what wrought the change in them; such men's
instability is made much of, their persons little.

Now that the Parliament should at this time have the upper hand, the Kings
party losing more in some places then they gain in other; and that he having
gathered Forces these three years or more, and set forth Proclamations to
subdue and awe those whom he calls his Enemies, and not to over-match them:
It Is probable, that howbeit Fear and Inconstancy have brought many to his
party, a mightier hand over-awing all, has provided strength and courage to
have his purpose brought to pass beyond the ordinary power of man, and by his
mighty Hand, and outstretched Arm, to make his own Glory the more manifest
through the infirmity of weak men.

As to the Proclamations set forth in the Kings Name, of small advantage to his
Cause; it is a question whether his or not, or published only in his Name,
without his assent: The ordinary matter of a Proclamation, arises on some
emergent Accident of State; binding for the present, anon alterable, of little
or no use: These kinds of Proclamations of Condemning, are surviving Acts, and
conclude the Subject Proclaimed against.

Again, Proclamations have been heretofore set forth only as Arbitrary and
Temporary Declarations of a Prince's pleasure to grant Indulgence, to prevent
or cure some Inconveniences in State-matters, serving for a light and present
remedy, until some judicial Act of Law shall apyly a more weighty and certain
one.

If they were to no other end, then that the persons Proclaimed against might
by the terror of such an Imperial Act, be brought into obedience, and then to
be received to mercy; yet they and most men else held it the safer course,
being not guilty, to keep out of their Accusers reach, and not to put it to
Arbitriment, whether they should be Condemned or Pardoned, when as also their
personal sufferings, in loss of life as Traitors, had not satisfied the thirst
of their Accusers: It is the Enthralling, and as it were the Disfranchizing and
Embasing a free born Subject, to stand to the Expectance of mercy, when he
knows his heart to be free from guilt.

A Traitor in his Araignment is admitted to his lawful Trial, demanded what he
can say for himself, etc. A Proclamation ties him up from his Answer: Crimes of
a lower rank are not construed so [as Fellonies] unless the mind concurreth
with the Fact (for the * intent does make the Felony) Treason, See the Form of
Indictm Felonice.
a Crime of a deeper Dye, staining the blood, ruining the Posterity with the
Estate, ought to be tried in a more upright and sober course, by Judges of an
entire and impartial virtue: Contention and the Sword are no fit Umpires in the
Question of [Who be Traitors.]

It is a harsh and severe proceeding, for a man to be be charged with Crimes by
Proclamation, to which no Answer can be given, and to be debarred from what he
can reasonably say for himself: It is as strange, that seeing we are Subjects
under the same King and Government, his Proclamations should find such
contrary entertainment, so weighty on the one side, as to proscribe and awe,
yet so slight unto the other, as not to be obeyed or credited.

For Example sake, the frequent Proclamations against Papists resorting to his
Majesty's Court; others straightly charging in his Majesty's Declararation, as
to this present War, In answer to a Declaration of the Lords and Commons for
the raising of all Power and Force, as well Trained-Bands as others, in all
Counties: printed at Oxford, 1642.
That no Papist should presume to List himself either as an Officer or a
Soldier in his Army, having directed how he should be discocovered, if he did
presume, and suffer if he were discovered.

If necessity be pleaded, for the King to make use of them his Subjects for his
own defense against those whom he calls Rebels: Or if the like Plea be made in
excuse of those his Majesty's Designs of late discovered, as that he has been
necessitated and driven by his Subjects to try all means whatsoever for his
reducing them, for the reparation of his own Honor, which he complains they
seek to trample on. The examining of the original of this War, directs who
the Authors of it have been, as also how this necessity, so called, has
happened, and whether the King should have had need to have made use of any of
his Subjects for his own Defense, or to have expressed his displeasure against
other of his People.

For his own parties not obeying his Proclamations and Edicts, as is observed,
Those published in March and June, 1643. the one against Robbing, Spoiling,
etc. The other Pardoning all Members of Parliament, some few by name excepted;
many of them so pardoned have had their Lands seized on by his Soldiers, their
Houses held from them by strong hand: So the Proclamations slighted, the Laws
protested to be kept, broken, the Subject and his Right trampled on.

Many the like Edicts and Declarations of Favor and Liberty granted to his
People (to some upon their humble * Petition presented to his Majesty; unto See
the Petition of the Clothiers in the West, and his Majesty's Answer. 1643.
others from a compassion and sense in his Majesty of their sufferings) seem
neither his own Acts, nor scarce seen by him, not able to make good what he
commands, or not real, in not intending to make good what he had promised.

The figurative Dialect, and strong expressions wherein those Declarations and
Messages are penned, besides the matter of them, are probably none of his,
neither is it possible that any ones heart should have so large a capacity; the
King's not leisure enough amongst the oppositions of cross Councels, amidst
the variety of such accidents as hourly happen, to examine, digest, command and
declare all matters, subject and suitable to such accidents, the demeanor of
his party also quite contrary to his Declarations and Commands.

The Proclamations in July the same year, forbidding Trade and Traffic unto
his chiefest and Imperial City, should not in likelihood be his own, to starve
up that place where some of his Royal Issue are: when as the detriment befalls
not the City only, it is more extensive to all parts of this Kingdom with which
the City tradeth: For they being denied an intercourse, cannot vent their
wares: So in case the City were guilty of what the Proclamation does accuse it,
the Justice and proceeding is not adequate, where many suffer besides the
offenders.

There be diverse other Messages and Declarations printed in his Name, which
were want of duty in his Subjects to think them his, or with his assent.

As to those subordinate Edicts set forth heretofore, when his party had gained
some Western Towns, published under some of his chief Commanders hands, and
read in Parish Churches, restraining his Soldiers from Robbing, Spoiling, and
the like violence; and as in case of Felony, the Country to rise and pursue
them, according to the Law in that case provided, as Thieves and Murderers:
Such Messages and Edicts might carry a fair flourish of Justice, and be
plausible to the Subject; but when as he is disarmed and disabled every way,
and has no weapon to defend himself, what courage or strength has he to
repulse such violence? A few armed Soldiers dare to Rob on the High ways, yea,
and to venture into Towns, and do what they list without resistance: How many
have lost their lives of late, striving to rescue and defend their goods?

When Commanders shall promise to secure the Subject, he notwithstanding
robbed, when in the Kings Name, and under his Authority (as the Subject is made
believe) things shall be promised improbable in the act of promising, untrue in
the Event, a Subjects duty may make him facile; but if his understanding of
what he sees, gives him not sufficient light, but that he will submit against
his Reason, and thereby miscarry in being over-credulous, he may thank himself.

It is not speculation, or matter of doubt or jealousy which disturbs and
divides the thoughts of man, making some of one, some of another mind; or any
man's affections to the one or the other side, which governs in the apprehension
of matters, as now they are, it is matter of Fact; the eyes are more faithful
witnesses then the ears, what has been done, what has been attempted, what
has been promised not performed, which does clear the doubt.

To believe, is required from Subjects, to obey, their Duty; but when to
believe and obey against Fact and Reason, on whom lies the fault, if they
miscarry in their obedience and belief? which is not therefore written to
absolve or release a Subject from his immediate duty to his Prince, who is to
be obeyed in all things Lawful and Honest, as before expressed; but the Pests and
Vipers about him, as King * James terms them, are to be oppugned as the His
Speech in Parliament, 1609.
exactors and commanders of that unlimited and undefined tribute of obedience.

Whose course and practices have much ecclipsed his Majesty's just Power and
Greatness, and have embroyled two Kingdoms at the least in an unnatural and
destructive War, the Third in danger with the rest; all so wasted, or in an
imminent danger to be so wasted, as to become a prey to a Foreign Enemy, the
greater part of the Subjects of this Kingdom being fought against as See the
Letter from the Assembly at Oxford, implying this to the Earl of Essex, dated
January 1643.
Rebels, the King himself several ways disadvantaged and weakened amongst his
people, which he may perceive in feeling Gods hand of anger against his People,
poured upon them in this War, in failing to assist him without being Impressed,
and violently forced to serve him, which if it were truly Rebellion, they would
cheerfully have assisted him their King, wherein now they fail, as knowing the
state of the Quarrel betwixt his party and his Subjects, and that their fellow
Subjects, under the name of his Soldiers, committing Murders and Rapines, do
render his Name terrible.

Next in what God is displeased withal, and will certainly avenge in his just
jealousy; the presumptious Impiety of some his Flatterers, ascribing In a Book
Entitled, The Loyal Subjects belief: penned by one Mr. Simmons, p. 16.
more unto the King, then any man without blasphemy can avow, or the King
himself shall like, in making it all one to offend him, as to offend God
himself.

The King of Sweden was angry with the Author who writing the History of his
Success against his Enemies, flatters, and attributes that to the King, which
was mystically spoken of Christ, Psalm. 45. Gird thee with thy Sword upon thy
thigh, O thou most mighty, according to thy Honor and Renown. Such flattery in
his Subjects was displeasing to his Majesty.

The Parliament are by their Adversaries, among other Crimes, accused of
endeavoring to bring in a Parity into the Church and State: This Preacher has
actually and already framed and set forth the like betwixt the Creator and the
Creature: He no way proves his flattering Blasphemy, which had it deserved to
have been seen by his Majesty, and should have passed from his Eyes into his
Heart, it might have proved Mortal.

The Doctrine, besides the Blasphemy, is of dangerous consequence, and
immencely criminal, if we remember what God says of himself, that he is a
jealous God, not suffering any Peer or Rival in his Imensitude of glory.

This Author is too prodigal of his Conscience and Wit, to any man's Judgment
who shall read his Works, if there be no more of his to restore him to the
good name of a Minister of Gods Word (In whose Lips no Iniquity should be
found, as being the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts) Then this here cited, and
one of his Sermons preached before the Kings party at SHREWSBURY in Lent was
two years, where, to delight his Auditory, he breaks a Jest in the Pulpit, and
widely misapplies it to a Gentleman of the Parliaments party; which, but that
the emptiness and petulancy of the Jest redounds to the Honor of him at whom
he Jested; or were his words worth reciting, might have been here omitted. To
pass it by only with this note, That there is a more severe censure (in the
opinion of the Ierem.
Prophet, due to whomsoever shall by such wanton floutings Pollute Gods
Sanctuary, or put no difference betwixt the Holy and Profane) then the Martial.
Poet does allow unto Ludit qui stolida procacitate non est Sextius ille sed
Caballus.

To leave this Author, and to return to the present subject, the sense and
imminence of these miseries, occasioned by this War, has reached even to most
Foreign parts, wherein our Neighboring and fellow The Scots*
Nation understand themselves so much concerned, as with a seasonable prudence
to foresee, have accordingly framed their purposes to provide for their own
Peace, involved now in ours; two ways engaged thereto:

First, through a necessity of timely endeavoring to prevent their own Thraldom
and Subjection, in part already mentioned, which the Privy Seals sent April
1644.
not long since in the Kings Name do point at, inviting and complying with his
Subjects of this Kingdom, to intercept and keep off that Nation from invading
this, for so it is termed: Their prudent valor needs no prompter to tell them,
Tua res agitur Virgil.
paries cum proximus ardet Ucaligon. They have cognizance of two remedies alone
in danger [Prevention, Recovery,] Prevention, the right hand, rather the heart
of Policy; Recovery the left and after game: They know withal, as solid and
expert Soldiers, an Enemy any where to be better met with then at their own
doors; he who only looks on the present, is no wise man; he who discerning an
Evil afar off, and provides against it, is.

Secondly, by a mutual and Solemn Covenant and Articles entered into of late,
wherein both Nations stand engaged.

As for them our Brethren, whether invited to assist the English, their fellow
Subjects, for which some of the Sea the Articles of Treason exhibited against
the six Members of Parliament, Ian. 1641.
English were charged of Treason, as bringing over a Foreign Nation to invade
their own; or whether the Scots willing of themselves, as knowing what has
been attempted against their National Laws and Rights: Let the case be rightly
stated, if to bring over a Forraigner to invade the Natives of theirs who bring
them over, be an offense of so high a nature, the Kings party questionless are
the greater offenders, having labored, no ways left unassayed to bring Forces
from beyond Sea, to oppose and fight against their own Contrymen under the
Name of REBELS.

What relation the Nations have each to other, is known, the one not Foreign
or Stranger unto the other, unless the malice of this War, and a party
opposing both, shall make them strangers, and divide them both within
themselves: Their mutual Aid and Concurrence, is the end of the mutual Union,
to repulse a Forraigner from invading either; and then the one or both may be
of use to return courtesies, when received (neither having been ever branded
with Ingratitude) or to resent Affronts or Injuries when offered.

There has been long since much War, many bloody Battles fought between the
two Nations, since which time an Union has been offered, has been withstood:
There has been also anciently a League between another The French.
Nation and the Scots, how useful to each others safety, both are sensible.

Within these latter years an Union and Solemn League has been had between us
and them, no way crossing or impeding any former League between them and any
other Nation; neither matters it which Nation ours or theirs did heretofore
withstand our Union with the Scots; nor whether we have their first or second
Affections, as whether they wish better unto us, under the same Dominion with
themselves, or unto the French, their more ancient Colleagues, whilst all
three are at Amity within themselves, which by Gods blessing as yet they are,
and either Nation wise enough to discern and cast out the Bone, likely to be
cast in to dissolve the League.

The Jealousies for that purpose raised, have been many of late, as if the two
Nations should deal unjustly, ungratefully, and remissely each with other, and
against their Covenant, instancing as against the Scots, for not taking the
Town of HEREFORD the last Summer, Which business seems to depend upon the
Question, whether the county of HEREFORD were not at that time an Enemy's
country, and the city situate in the midst thereof, bordering not far from a
strong and well manned Garrison WORCESTER, had not all means, whereof they made
use, to resist and repulse strangers besieging them.
(to which their General has given account, writing the Reason of their
desisting from the Siege) A second, which peradventure may be framed by some of
the English, demanding what Service the Scots have done by their coming to
assist? Which Question is easily satisfied, when as the very Conjunction and
League between the two Nations, did at first strike terror into their Enemy,
and has been since one Temporal means of their many successes. A third of a
more large concernment, and might seem to carry a more plausible objection
against the Scots, of their thirst and aim, to implant themselves in this, as
the more rich and fruitful Kingdom: On the other side, there may be Jealousies
insinuated to the Scots against the English, of their dealing unjustly and
ungratefully with the Scots, by promising, without gratifying them for their
Assistance, when as both are able to justify their Wisdom and Integrity of
being free from these and the like suggestions insinuated by the Enemy, under
color of being Friends.

It cannot be imagined, that it is the purpose of the English to neglect or
discard, now they have served their turn on their Friends the Scots, without
making satisfaction for their Assistance (as the Boote-feaues and Incendiaries,
the common Enemies to both Nations, do give out) nor the purpose of the Scots
to demand more, or to expect a present payment of so much as has been
promised, the vast unexpected Sums which the continuation of this War has
cost, being taken into consideration, the Articles and Covenant entered into by
both Nations, are security for their reciprocal and more just Affections: Who
knows whether these finely contrived Accusations spring not from a Malignant
heart, driving the common Enemies Interest ( In animis hominum multe sunt
latebre and recessus. Cicer.
the hearts of men are full of wiles and bypath, desperately evil, who can
know them?) to set the Nation at a variance, by depraving and accusing each to
other, on purpose to dissolve and loosen the League and Union, that as by
disagreement they may scatter and decrease, so that the Common Enemy may
prevail at last.

If there be any such unjust dealing, such endeavoring in either Nation to
out-vy the other in Art and Subtilty; as for the one to demand above what is
promised, or the other to deny what is justly due, on purpose to beget a
Quarrel contrary to the Articles and Covenant, had and made betwixt both
Nations, Cursed be they in the Town, cursed in the Field, See the Articles and
Treaties, dated 1641. 1645.
cursed in the fruit of their Body, and of their Land; Cursed be they in their
coming in, cursed in their going out, cursed in their Store, who shall
willingly and wilfully violate the same, being made and entered into on so
necessary and important grounds, as the sure foundation of Securiry and
Prosperity to both Nations: And as the Articles were accurately and punctually
made by the Commissioners entrusted on either part, in like manner for their
Honor, for the blessings sake expected on their success, to be inviolably
observed free from mistake, forced construction, or false meaning.

The mischief and misery indeed which inevitably must befall, in case they
shall unhappily disagree, will prove more fatal to the Subjects of both
Kingdoms, then the present War betwixt the King and Parliament. The League
betwixt them, the more strict and Solemn, the more irreconcilable the discord
when it happens, and nothing to compose the Quarrel when once began, besides
the Sword: Nothing to prevent the beginning of the Quarrel, save only the
forbearing and bearing each with other: The self-denying quality, so much
assumed and protested, is then exercised, and best proved in so prudent a
patience, as is practiced by a continued entire Union betwixt them both, and
neither of them to arrogate wholly unto themselves, the success of so much
Conquest as has been obtained: But if the The English.
one shall think that their opulency and wealth shall wear and drive out the
other, notwithstanding their approved valor; or that the The Scots.
other shall hope that their valor shall suppress and conquer the English men's
(not inferior to theirs) These unhappy thoughts and attempts, if any such upon
destructive hopes must turn into misery unto their Friends, Reproach and
Obloquy to themselves, a pleasure and fulfilling their Enemies expected hopes,
who will be ready to upbraid them with the common and old Proverb (as in the
like case the contesting between the Presbyterial and Independent, to let in
Episcopal again) [When Robbers fall out, true men come by their goods] meaning
that a party of English and Scots having complotted to divest the King of his
Sovereignty, and to take away his Regal Dignities, and now by variance within
themselves, his Majesty has regained his former Being.

If any infinuate means of dividing the two Nations privily, and with
excellency of Art, carried on by their seeming Friends, shall unhappily inure
closely and insensibly to work this Mischief, as for one Nation to upbraid and
cast Aspersions on the other, of Inconstancy, Ingratitude, Falsehood, and the
like: What a new intestine War may happen hence, when either Nation shall have
partakers at home, and abroad in Foreign parts? The English shall have Friends
to credit what they say against the Scots, and they reciprocally against the
English, and no time or season amidst these Commotions (the Enemy being
vigilant and active to foment the Quarrel) to Examine or Dispute the Truth, to
set right the Misapprehensions of the particulars of such Aspersions, when the
very fear entertained of late of a disagreeing between the two Nations, has
appalled the hearts of their common Friends, and more set back and retarded the
hopes of Success and Peace, then the News of Victories can forward them.

As for other Differences which might arise betwixt the Nations, touching some
Punctilio's of Pre-eminence, or the like; King James therefore, of happy
Memory, in his Star Chamber Speech in See the speech.
the sixteenth year of his Reign, has wisely and peaceably composed and
settled, deducing his Reasons from the Policy of his most wise Henry 7.
Ancestor.

But to the Known Objections now in being, and published by the Common
Incendiaries and Fomentors of this War.
Enemy, as of an Invasion made of the Scots, as of Rebellion in the English,
when both Nations have been sufferers, the Rights and Liberties of both
violated, are strange Objections in the judgment of standers by; and to
determine the truth of those Objections, or on which side the Offensive, on
which the Defensive is; there is not like to be any Umpire in the Question.

To expect a Forraigner to interecede or moderate (most of whom admit a
sensible and compassionate affection in them toward these our Nations) their
own and their nearer Friends Engagements, are enough to take up their own
thoughts; besides a wise, considerate and Politic State does evidence their
wisdom, in not intermedling with the Affairs of others; rather when Troubles
and Commotions are abroad, to look the more closely to their own, especially in
a Case of so nice a difference, as betwixt a King and a Parliament (the
Representative Body of the whole Kingdom) and each of them contending to make
good the Justice of their Quarrel. Nor is it probable, that any Prince of
another Kingdom, will, in relation to himself (as making this difference
betwixt the King and his Subjects here his own case) send over his Forces
hither to assist a Vanquished party: All Kingdoms have their several Forms of
Government peculiar to every Nation, some of a more absolute and free, some of
a more mixed kind: The People know their Boundaries of Obedience, the Princes
theirs of Power; and because Rebellion is charged on the Subjects here, those
Princes of other Countries, some think, will take part with the King of this,
least it should prove a leading case to animate their Subjects also to Rebel.
It Is two ways answered, The several Forms of Government in this and other
Countries, do diversifie the case. Secondly, This is denied, and no ways proved
to be Rebellion.

An exact and serene Judgment is hardly to be given by strangers, not Natives,
who dive not into the depth and state of this present Quarrel, withal, the
Conflict is seldom so equally carried, but that one side has the better of it;
then it is against the Rule of common Policy, to Noli in Caducum parietem
inclinare. Lip. Polit.
incline to the falling and weaker part, least the stronger by their inclining
be provoked to become their Enemies.

Briefly, then the extreme terms, and contesting parties in this War, are a
Delinquent party on the one, and a Parliament (a Court of Judicature) on the
other side; the first being conscious to themselves of several offenses against
the Commonwealth, and welfare of the Subject, contrive a course how to evade
the hand of Justice, as by sheltring themselves under a strong and supreme
Power [The King] suggesting ill offices betwixt him and that Court of
Judicature, gaining thereby the better credit with the Adversaries thereof:
then by advising him the most likely ways of encountering it, namely, in
betaking himself to some remoter place of strength, which Advice was
accordingly followed, and thereby his Majesty better enabled to command the
parts next adjacent to his residence, as at YORK the Northern: Then to require
and Summon in such other Countries near unto him, as complied not at the
present with him in such design as he purposed, as also to be displeased with
other of his Subjects who took any averse course to his proceedings, next to
set up his Royal Standard at NOTTINGHAM, that whosoever dwelled near, and came
not in to his party, were in danger of his displeasure.

By this means his Forces might soon increase, whether Love or Fear the Motive;
for when a Prince shall tell his Subjects near him of a Rebellion (nothing then
more noised by his party then Rebellion, Disloyalty) and preparations by him
made to subdue the Rebels, if he shall then require their Aid, who dare refuse?
These were the first parties in the Quarrel; by these means the Kings strength
might increase, the Parliaments abate: Hence grows the name of a Rebel, of a
Traitor, the Kings party calling him a Rebel, who disobeying the Kings
Commands, resists: The Parliament calling them Traitors, Vipers and Pests to
their King and Country, who persuade and assist him in exceeding the limits of
the Laws; It is King James' In the same Speech in Parliament, 1609.
definition; and who these be, Peace only and a settled time for Judicature can
try.

The Kings party accuse the Parliament of Dissembling and Hypocrisy, and with
that earnest Calumny, as if they did exceed all others in that sin: How easy a
thing it is for either part to rail or scoff, to call the advers part Rebel,
Hypocrite? How easy also to stain the best and most honest Intentions with the
nickname of Dissembler, Hypocrite? Envy and ill will can revile and accuse the
best purposes; and Goodness when it is quarrelled with must be mistermed,
otherwise the quarreller would blush to oppose or wrong it: Nay, a bare
censuring serves not, it must be aggravated to higher terms, as never so
notable and artificial a piece of Dissembling, to contrive and compose Treason,
to palliate a Rebellion; which is granted, and as much confessed, if a
Rebellion, if a Treason: Malice and Contumely are of an ambient and large
Circumference and Interpretation; it is within the compass of their liberty to
give out in Speeches, That the Parliament is the certain and only cause of
these Distempers; that every one wellwishing to that Court, is a Rebel to the
King; that he who fights not in a present and impetuous way for the King, is a
Neutral; that he who soberly discoursing what he knows or has observed
concerning these Distractions, if it has not made altogether for the King,
against the Parliament, is a Malignant, an Incendiary, or has any way assisted
the Parliament, or his Country to defend it, is liable to the censure of a
Traitor: In which Crime there being no Accessaries, he is a Principal.

Doubtless very few have demeaned themselves so warily, but shall find an
Enemy to accuse him, were it but for hopes to purchase redemption to himself,
the Accuser as guilty as the Accused.

Some neighboring Counties fearing that the like Calamity might fall on them as
on other parts of the Kingdom, agreed like firm Friends and Servants to their
Country, in a joint and mutual League to defend it against all formidable
Force which might infest them: To this mutual defense diverse Gentlemen and
Freeholders subscribed their Hands, in nature of Associating, the better to
maintain their strength: Others refused to subscribe, as being discouraged from
subscribing by the more able sort of Gentlemen of the Neighborhood, engaged for
the King, at which time the King had an Army abroad; wherefore, whosoever
offered to resist and repulse that Army, might come within the compass of the
Statute of the 25. Edw. 3. An ordinary and competent foresight might have
prevented many and imminent Mischiefs, when as if other adjoining Counties had
in like manner mutually agreed, as it was proposed unto them, they had not been
so harrassed and spoiled as now they are.

But as the case now stands, what is to be done? The Associations are entered
into, the hands of the Subscribers to be seen, or inquisition to be made for
all who did Subscribe, whether hopes of Pardon to be procured by Price or
Friends, or to stand to the innocence of their own hearts? If by Price, who
then the gainer? Informers, Promooters: Witnesses shall get more by Pardons,
Fines and Forfeitures then the Exchequer, or other his Majesty's Courts of
Revenue can: If by Friendship, the extremity of these false and desperate times
will break through such Obligations of Friendship, Truth, or Consanguinity,
that few either can or will assist each other (the Enmity having been for the
most part between those of the same blood) and every kindness prove
mercenary, if not counterfeit: when as to Truth the manners of most will,
through the Falsehood and Licentiousness occasioned by this War, grow so
corrupt, as every man will be apt to learn the close and subtle posture,
thence be indeed thought politic of carrying, as the Proverb is, Two faces
under one Hood, that is, of complying outwardly with that side unto which he is
most advers.

As to Friendship, each man's carriage to his friends, like Caius Cotta's, whom
the Orator describing a cunning Craftsman in Ambition, observes him polliceri
omnibus praestare ijs tantum apud quos optime Cicer. Orat.
poni arbitraretur beneficia, that he gave good words to all men (translated
rather into all men's humble Servant) good turns only to those from whom he
might expect the most profitable return of such his Benefits.

But to look back to the present subject of this Quarrel, and the several
charges wherewith the contesting parties stand accused: The substance of the
charge wherein the Parliament are called Traitors by the Kings party, is their
opposing his Crown and Dignity; yea some go farther, their purpose to destroy
his Person, wherefore, as guilty of such Treason, to be opposed and fought
against.

The Argument, it is hoped and prayed for, is from flalsly suggested premises,
unknown, ungranted; which Arguings are Fallacies, and may be invented to divide
the King and the Parliament, for the Reasons before expressed, so to engage the
People to take part with the Accusers; yet no question the Quarrel is grown so
full of bitterness and Malice, as if the PARLIAMENT be born down, there will
not want Witnesses to prove such Treason.

The OXFORD Mercury indeed makes himself and his Readers merry with this
Calumny; he Jests and says, They discharged and levelled their greatest Canon
at the King to preserve his Honor and Person; The PARLIAMENTS sad thoughts take
no notice of his scoffing humor, they leave him to make himself and his Friends
merry by his Jesting.

It Is true, the King has in his Person showed himself in several Battles much
against the supplication and importunity of his Subjects: If two Armies do
pitch a field, the one earnestly dissuading the approach of some eminent person
in the other for fear of danger to that person, if notwithstanding he shall
unnecessarily expose himself to hazard, and look that the advers Army shall
forbear to defend themselves in respect to that persons safety, so to lie
themselves at the mercy of the Enemy, or not to fight at all, no man in this
case will think they intend to fight against that person.

From such reproachful Observations as that Mercury suggests, and the Enemies
to the Parliament may invent, the Court must deeply suffer censure, if born
down under some ignominious attribute even to posterity, as that Parliament in
Henry the fourth's time, branded with Indoctum, another with Insanum, as an In
a Book of an unknown Author, printed at Oxford, 16. 4. called The true
Informer, who by a Prosopopeia makes himself a Traveller, and not to return
until the King shall have recovered His Scepter, and the People their Senses.
Author already styles the People, and will no question that Power (the
Parliament) which governs them: This will suffer some such like infamy by their
accusers, either of Hypocriticum, Indoctum, Sacrilegum, or Unjustum (and their
Enemies are framing Indictments to all four) Hypocriticum, as pretending good,
but intending ill to the King and State (an ordinary charge cast on them by his
party) yea of Counterfeiting also, in that they do connive at Truths
suppressed, and Falsehoods printed in their quarters, of the several Chances of
the War, etc. The permitting which, were indeed blameworthy, were it a matter
of much moment, or competent to their leisure from weightier Affairs, to cure
forth with all Faults in matter of Fact; the rather, whereas they are sure that
no ill success either of losing Forts, of having the worst of it sometimes in
skirmishes, or the like accidents incident to War, can deter their firm and
constant Friends, resolving to resemble the Soldiers of Paul. Emil. in vitam
Car. 7
Charles the seventh, so far from shrinking at the terror of an ill Omen, that
they resolved to encounter all hard chances in Battle with increase of Courage.

Indoctum, as for opposing the Bishops (the highest Order in the Clergy,) and
other Scholars; The Parliament seems invective in their Accusers eye against
all learning.

Sacrilegum, as some of their Enemies have from a far fetched Metaphor termed
them, because of taking away the plurality of Church Livings.

Injustum, in that they have condemned Malefactors, whereof their Enemies have
given a pledge already, See their Declaration printed 1643.
in that the Assembly at OXFORD, in their writings of offering Peace, has
charged the Parliaments friends with imprisoning two Earl of Chesterfield and
Lord Montague
Lords Northward, for their loyalty to the King.

Such, and the like calumnies are like to be their fate in case they are
vanquished. But to return and view the charge whereof the King and his party
are suspected, which before it be treated on; The duty required from the
people, by the two contesting parts (the King, the Parliament) is examinable;
seeing a War is waged, and such a one as dissolves all laws, and the quarrel so
bitterly pursued betwixt the King and the Parliament, both requiring Subjection
and obedience: which is to be obeyed, the King a supreme but single person, or
the Parliament the representative body of the Kingdom, in number many? which to
be obeyed in point of safety and conscience?

But first to make the Question the more clear, take these The peoples Plea.
collections, from a learned Divine, That the King has His Power from the
Kingdom, therefore His Authority; which Terms, though commonly confounded if
distinguished, makes clear the matter: For Authority is a Right and Lawfulness
to command Obedience, such as all Governors and Magistrates have more or less;
But Power is a lawful Ability to force obedience, where upon command it is
denied; one may have a just and lawful right to command, that wants compulsive
means for Coertion; others may have strength to force (commonly called Power)
that wants Authority to command; and Power is that which in all Government
bears the sway: Wherefore in the Scripture Romans 13. and elsewhere, it is taken
concretively for the Governors and Magistrates themselves, which have power at
command, to force Obedience to their Commands.

Now there is no doubt but the King has full Authority to command according
unto Law, all such as are subject to Him by Law; but if upon His command
obedience be denied, whence has he lawful power to enforce obedience, whence
has He His Power to make good His Authority but from the people? He cannot
have it from Himself being but one man: To keep a strong guard of some of His
people, to impugn and force the rest, must needs produce Commotions,
Insurrections, and a Civil-War; If of strangers, the Philosopher and others who
write of Policy, Aristot.
will tell you it is Tyranny: nor is such ability Potestas, but vis, violence,
not power, because unlawful: when vis and Potestas, or vis and jus do clash and
skirmish, the consequence is dangerous: To keep an Army on foot continually,
under other pretenses, thereby to affright and force the Subjects, is little
better; therefore the Kings power must needs come from His own peoples hands
and strength, and from the same people must come His Authority. If any other
should give him Authority, that were not able to make it good by power, it were
given Him in vain, nor were the people bound to make that good which themselves
gave not: whence He has His power then, from thence He must needs receive His
Authority, even from the Kingdom.

To Safety, a Commonwealth is best provided for by Council, Council confists
of number, in which is safety; That foresees, contrives, concludes, not that
they are void of Error, King and Parliament both may err, whilst humane,
jointly and dividedly; but which most prone to Error, the Head without the
consent of the Heart being one, or the faculties of the Heart without the help
of the Head (if possibly to be severed) being many?

It Is resolved, Securius expediuntur negotia commissa pluribus, and oculi plus
vident quam oculus, which is not construed of the quantity of degree, as which
is highest, which greatest? but of the quantity of number, which most probable
to provide for the common good, one or many?

If it be objected, That the King has a Council, viz. his Privy Council to
assist and consult with. Ans. This is by the King in his Person chosen, always
or for the most part attending on his Court and Person; That of Parliament by
the free suffrages of the whole Kingdom, and how fitly, when the condition and
affairs thereof are subject only to the capacity and knowledge of the
Parliament, the Members thereof dwelling in all or most parts of the Kingdom,
whereby to have cognizance of what concerns the whole.

Yea, let this be taken for granted, as advantage to his Majesty's party,
whether so or not, That the Major part of the Peers and Gentry are now with the
King, in some other place then where he first Summoned them: Admit it be true,
yet that they were called by his Writ to attend the service at a certain place
and time, and both place and time named in that Writ, where the Attendance is
according to that Summons, and they having all there met accordingly, the place
and time do define and limit the Action, denominating those the Parliament
which there reside: For howbeit a great number be come away from the place
whereto they were first Summoned, whether solicited, awed, or otherwise
engaged, the residing part to that number which now sit there make a full
Parliament.

It Is no marvel if their number shall decrease, their courage fail them, when
so proclaimed against and threatened, as might terrify men of much resolution
and constancy, when their Posterities and Estates are exposed to Ruin, all
possible means of Art and might, nothing left unattempted to awe and conquer
them; and which they judge most hard, that Proclamations forbidding all
Traffic unto the place of their sitting; that other Messages, some requiring
Obedience, others threatening, and sent them where they sit, to be debarred the
publishing their Reason and Answer of not obeying, which they cannot
communicate, thereby to satisfy the Kingdom, in that all commerce and
intercourse betwixt the King and them is inhibited by those his Proclamations.

Fear of a Prince's displeasure is a note of a Peoples subjection, no lessening
their just courage, the Parliament have manifested both Submission, Courage:
Courage, in not yielding when they were weakest; Submission, in not refusing to
Treat when strongest: Former Princes have been best pleased to own such
Subjects, men of Valor and Constancy, not terming those virtues Rebellion,
Treason, when as Rebellion rightly understood, may be against a State as
against a King (it may want a proper appellation) otherwise, King James, as
wise and discerning a Prince as the latter times have afforded throughout the
Christian Empire, erred much in delivering his judgment: How he sets forth the
Enemies to a State, and the unhappiness of that King who admits such; his
above recited Speech in Parliament 1609. has mentioned in several passages
thereof.

Misdemeanors intended and committed against a State are done with an high and
insolent hand, and deserve an answerable punishment as well as against a King;
the State being a firm and well built frame of Government, wherein the King and
Kingdom is conerned. [The King, although a Supreme Person, yet a Subject to
Infirmity.]

The several threatenings published, and violence offered, the Houses of
Parliament may well grow thin, when those of the Kings party contend to make
his Power absolute and unlimited, thence in him to Punish, Pardon and Reward at
pleasure: In him also, or in themselves, to Judge alone, the consideration
whereof might invite many to his party, who at first deliberatively, upon
advice and best judgment, promised their duty and affections to the
Parliament, since finding their strength decreased by the departure of many
their fellow Members, might think it unsafe to stay themselves.

They could not but foresee that the King offering to remove the Houses of
Parliament to some other place, the City of LONDON would be quarreled with as
harboring those whom his Majesty calls his Enemies, and from whence he was
driven away (as he and his party do complain) by seditious Tumults: Whether
those Tumults were the true or suggested cause of his removing thence, or the
Letter written to dissuade him from any compliant way with the Parliament, but
rather to betake himself to some remoter place elsewhere, etc.

It Is true, there was at that time which his Majesty speaks of, a great
concourse of people about Westminster and White Hall, and the Londoners
languishing long, as many Subjects elsewhere did, under the heavy pressures of
Injustice, implored his Majesty and the Houses of Parliament for redress,
every one being earnest to have Justice done with the first opportunity of the
Parliaments sitting.

They might peradventure press too near and rudely to his presence; but whether
his Actions after such removing suited with the Instructions of that Letter
then sent when the Jealousies did first begin, let all men judge.

The Orators opinion was, Nothing so elegant or Cicer. Offie.
good but words may stain, yea and wrest it too to an ill sense: The peoples
numerous and importunate desire of Justice, their pressing near to his Majesty,
is by the power of Oratory, Seditious Tumults: On the other side, some taking
part with the Parliament give out, That the Book of Common Prayer is altogether
Idolatrous, the Church Government by Bishops Antichristian.

There may be an Error and corruptive use in this or any Form, yet not to be
marked by such Attributes, Nothing also (as the same Orator observes) so harsh
or horrid, but the eloquence of words can mitigate and excuse: The impetuous
coming of great numbers of Armed men with Swords and Pistols following the King
when he came to the House of Parliament, to demand the six Impeached Members,
is by virtue of mild language the In the Kings Answer to the Declaration from
the Lords and Commons 1642.
single casual mistake of the King, the indiscretion of some few rash Gentlemen.

Which by the way, the disaffection born by his Majesty to the City, the place
of the Parliaments sitting, presaged all possible means to be devised of
dividing the place and the Parliament met there, which could not be better
managed, then by excepting against that, and adjourning to some other place.

To speak it plainly, it was the Cities Assistance and Affection to the
Parliament which caused the Anger (for, be it spoken to their perpetual Glory)
the happy correspondence betwixt the City (the place of security for that
Court) and that Courts consulting for the Cities and the Public good, has
hitherto, next under Gods Protection, delivered Both, the City and the
Parliament.

It follows next in point of Conscience, which is to be obeyed, the King
divided from the Parliament, or the Parliament? as the King is the Head and
eminent part of the Parliament, the Parliament the Heart of the King; although
the Head may be forceably or otherwise turned then the Heart directs, the Heart
is nevertheless the same, nor to be thought divided from the Head; Wherefore
the Parliament residing there where it was first Summoned, and the King there
vertually, The Commissions cannot otherwise work then to a Parliament;
wherefore if his Maj^sties personal presence be a necessary part of Parliament,
without which there can be no Parliament, the Commissions can be of no force,
his absence making it no Parliament. The granting which lets in other
inconveniences upon dispute, touching the locality of his presence, as where,
whether in his Throne within the walls of the House, or in his Court adjoining.
The King and his Majesty are as it were inseparable; Majesty is proper to him
alone, and only his Attribute, sometimes we say the [King] sometimes [His
Majesty] neither is any man's person any more then a corporeal substance. It is
the Mind, the Soul, the Dignity and qualifications thereof, which do (as the
Philosopher speaks) inform and give being unto man: Neither can it be thought,
that a personal contiguity is to be required of the King to be within the
Parliament walls, no more then the Body of the Sun to descend and touch the
Earth, when as it suffices that by its power and influence it gives heat and
nourishes.
a Commission for passing Bills in his absence, and a Law in force for
transacting matters when he is absent by Commission to convey his Royal Assent,
33. Hen. 8.

Obedience is due to the Parliament, so considered, viz. his Majesty in his
luster, power and virtue, being there incorporate with those his Faculties, and
whosoever resists that Court resists the King as Head.

Herewith suits the Romans 13.
Apostles exhortatory command of subjection to the higher Powers: Powers they
are (without doubt) high also and eminent, otherwise the Countries made an ill
choice out of eminent persons to elect inferior and mean men to enact Laws.

The Apostles text forecited, intends not a King simply in His person only,
but all powers of governing, nor them, as governors in whatsoever they do, but
for the reason there subjoyned; Their just demeanors, as being the Ministers of
God for the Subjects good, to take vengeance of evil doers; otherwise Saint
Peter his peremptory text [It is better to obey God then man] were of less
value, and might seem to contradict Saint Paul's exhortatory [Let every soul be
subject to the higher Powers.]

But to the difference in the object of obedience, obedience is (in common
judgment) most due to that power which is freest from the possibility of
Error: A King may sooner err then a Parliament may; no man can simply accuse
that Court of permanent Actions of injustice; for whatsoever they do Establish
or Ordain, is made just and lawful unto us, in that they do it, whilst we live
and are born under laws: They may by some latter Act repeal or moderate the
rigor of an ancient or former Law without Error, or injustice doing.

The managing their course of enforcing, of imposing upon the Subjects Liberty
and Right, of requiring him to contribute to the maintenance of this War, may
not altogether unfitly be resembled to the course of a skilful Surgeon, who
when a Patient's leg being broke is ill set, he breaks the leg anew, although
with torture to the Patient; his reason of breaking the same again, is to set
that right, which by ill setting was displaced: The Parliament finds the Laws
broken, justice turned out of it is propper channel, they in the prosecution of
a War necessarily to be maintained for the recovery and restoration of the
Laws to their former state, break those Laws again: they enforce the subjects
to pay the charge of Soldiers raised therefore, not with an intent to continue
such exactions, but only during this time of War, which by the peoples free
submitting to the Parliaments impositions will the sooner end, the one not
laying heavier loads then the Subjects can bear, nor the Subjects repining at
what the Parliament shall impose; and all upon a serious and just debate of what
may fall out but necessary for a War being to be waged in defense of the Laws,
Government and Protestant Religion, which by subtle and secret practices has
been long since oppugned: who is to bear the charges of the War, but they for
whose sake and safety it is raised? Qui sentit commodum, sentire etiam debet
and onus, money is the sinews of War; War the end of Peace, Peace the Subjects
Blessing: if he voluntarily contribute not, and be enforced, it is no
impeachment of his Liberty; and whither a War be to be waged, is the result of
this Discourse.

If the Subject, by reason of such Tax and Impositions, be lessened in or
brought beneath his ordinary port of living, his hope of enjoying his former
Peace and Safety is his relief: a little enjoyed with quiet better contenteth
the Subject, then a great deal with travel and contention of Spirit; whereupon
the wise man's saying does reflect, in the comparison, betwixt a dinner of
herbs with Peace, then a stalled Ox with contention; better to live on a
morsel for the present with Peace and Right to what a man lives on, then to
fare plenteously in fear of strife without the Justice of the Law measuring out
each man's portion.

Again, in that some of the To endure for a time only
transient actions of the Parliament may seem harsh and rigid, yea intrenching
deeply on the private Estates of men (as matters now are in these loose and
confused times, when Law and Justice fail in most parts of the Kingdom) yet
relating to the public good and common end of Peace, not altogether unjust in
the determinate acts of Justice, no more then when houses in a street on fire,
the contiguous house pulled down to save the whole street can be thought a
determinate wrong, or any wrong at all, except to the private person whose
house it is: The distinction between Injusta facere and Injuste facere is old,
this commonly and purposely to do unjustly; that sparingly and accidentally to
do things unjust: wherefore the condemning of the Kentish men to dye for the
late insurrection 1645.
in that County (instanced in as an act of cruelty) might seem unjust and
beyond the letter of the law, in that all Rowts and unlawful Assemblies are by
the Statute in that case provided, construed as Misdeameanors only, and
punishable by Fine and Imprisonment. Ans. The Insurrection there was of a
different nature, in a more seditious and turbulent time; the unlawful
Assemblies at the time of enacting that Statute were, as of a lighter kind, so
to be punished by a lighter penalty: This, when the Subjects Liberty invaded,
the supreamest Court of Indicature oppugned, and a Kingdom hereby divided
within it self; when for the mutual defense of each other, some Counties
thereof shall associate, without any farther aim then by their joint strength
to repulse an Enemy in case he shall invade: Such an Insurrection as was then
made to disturb the Unity of such Association, is more then an ordinary Rout
intended by that Statute, and to be tried and punished by the Justice of a
Parliament.

To examine His Majesty's demeanor, suits not not with the tenor of this
discourse, whither He be considered in His Absolute quality of Wise, Valiant,
Temperate; or in his Relative toward his people, as what His manner of
Government has been since His first coming to the Crown, God and the Kings
own heart can best judge and determine: To repeat invectives here, neither
becomes the Author, nor avails the Cause; preventives of future evils are a
better Antidote then Accusations are a cure for what is past: Many passages now
extant and in print from LONDON and OXFORD being fully set forth by the one,
excused and answered by the other side, have made known His Government.

But to what happened since this War was waged, which party the less unjust,
which more to be obeyed? That which actually did offer wrong, or that which
being necessitated to raise Arms for their own defense, and consequently prove
the passive Authors of a Civil War, might offer injury: The Declarations and
Remonstrances published of late, with the Answers and Replications thereunto
have set forth the matters of Fact, and both parties challenging now, yea
enforcing obedience from the people; the Reader is to Judge unto whom it is
most due.

If in His Majesty's demanding ship money He has lost any of His Subjects
affections, He may thank them who persuaded Him to the Justice and Legality
thereof, which whether it were lawful or not, is learnedly argued by His In the
case of Ship Money.
Solicitor General.

The affections of the people are for the most part measured by the deportment
of the Prince, so reciprocal is the obligation, so natural the relation betwixt
a King and His Subjects; and how desirous His Majesty's Predecessors have been
of their Subjects love, is fresh in Memory: They knew, and were protected by
it, that Fides magis tuetur, quam satellitium, their Subjects affections to be
a surer Bulwark then their own Guard. King James protested In the same Speech.
the enjoyment of His Subjects love, and His possession of their hearts, to be
His greatest earthly security, next the favor of God, and so to be accounted of
by any wise or just King.

Queen Elizabeth's tender affections and care toward Camdens Annals
Her people was expressed, in that she took it ill, that any man should think a
Father loved his Children better then she her People: Affections are not to be
enforced, when they are, they turn into fear and are not durable: Love has a
univocal generation begetting Issue like it self; as the face in water
answers the face, so the heart of man to man: If Kings love not their
Subjects, whom God has therefore made them Lords of, their Reign is dangerous;
and where Subjects return not the like duty, the Obligations being mutual,
their guilt of unthankfulness and disloyalty in infamous: where the fault now
is, Peace only, and such Laws as follow on it, can resolve the Question.

But sure it is, that the peoples free and unconstrained affections run, for
the most part, all one way, their May 1641.
Protestation lately taken binds them to an unity of concurrence, they are
sensible of the several parts thereof, tending all to the maintenance of Gods
Honor, the Kings welfare, the Subjects Right and Liberty (no one part crossing
or contradicting the other, if it should, it could not be safely taken) and it
is strange, that in this great and Civil Discord, the people being free to
choose which part to side with, there should be such an averseness and
disaffection in them, unless on most vehement causes of suspicion, above
ordinary Fears and Jealousies, descending even to whole Families and Countries;
for few or no one Country (let men frame and flatter what they please) more
Malignant, more Loyal then another, excepting where the Kings power has its
residence, the Authority and strength whereof subjugating the peoples hearts,
the Factors for that power pressing and protesting the Justice of their own
party; so seasoning and possessing the Subjects hearts with Calumny and
prejudice against the other party; together with some Gentlemen of note deeply
engaged, and stickling in their Countries where they have power, to make good
that part which they take for their own sake and safety; and those few have
some Followers, Tenants, Servants or Mercenaries. Nor one Town more Loyal then
another, or more Malignant (taking the Malignancy against which side you will)
saving where some obnoxious persons of Eminency or Power has Pre-eminence
above the rest, or where a chief Town in a County since this War began, has a
more stout and expert Commander in it, to Govern and keep the same against all
Force opposing it: wherefore what a mistake it is to call this Country or
Town, more or less Malignant, more or less Loyal, when as all men in a
natural duty do and desire to serve the Country wherein they are born and live.

The Orator excepting against the ease and quiet Cicer.
of many men, did long since direct them in the gratitude which they owe unto
their Birth and Breeding, distributing their Duty and Endeavors into several
portions, Partem Parents, Partem Amici, Partem Patria vendicat, what their
Country is, what the Representative Body, is already declared. The King as
Head thereof, whilst joined to the Heart and Members, is implicitly meaned.
Partem Patria.
One part (the Country) is explicitly set down.

Which terms of Malignant, Loyal, unquestioned before this War began, has much
distempered the Commonwealth, and set a difference even between the nearest
Friends: where Nature and Desert has put an Unity, Malice and Mistakings has
made Dissension, that it falls out in these Kingdoms as in Israel and Judah,
two parts of a Nation, we are no longer a Tribe and a Tribe, but we are divided
Kindred against Kindred, Family against Family, Son against his Father, a
Daughter against her Mother, and a man's Foes to be those of his own House: Nay,
it is a more intestine Discord, betwixt a man, as it were, and himself, the
Body and the Mind, between the outward Estate and inward Conscience: When a
man to save his Estate shall expose his Conscience, having premeditately and on
judgment resolved to betake himself to one side; soon after for fear of losing
his Estate, or upon the turn of Victory, has submitted to the other, against
the consent of his own heart and conscience.

The prosecution of which War has had several rises and beginnings, many
passages to increase and add fuel to the Contention; the Kings party always
crossing and altering, even in matters Arbitrary and Indifferent, what the King
and Parliament did on good reason institute.

Others of more moment, as namely, His See the Articles of the large Treaty,
page 16. Demand 4. granted by His Majesty, August, 1641.
Majesty's gracing and preferring to His nearest secrecy and trust, a person
whom His Majesty and Parliament did accuse and Proclaim guilty of High Treason.

Diverse other matters of debate might happen to inflame the Discord, one more
particularly and remarkably concerning the Earl of Strafford, who in the
Dispute whether he should suffer or not, had gained the most powerful and
eminent Members, as he thought, of both Houses of Parliament on his side, and
the King to intercede as far as he might with Justice to acquit the Earl. A
sixth part at the most of the Members against the Sentence of his suffering,
might be peradventure troubled that their power and suffrages were
over-matched, and thinking much that they could not prevail to acquit the Earl,
have probably nourished thence an emulous spirit toward their Fellow Members;
the Debate whereof could not but add unto the fuel of these Dissentions, and
so prove a prosecution of this War.

Thus the fire of War being kindled, two principal parties have appeared in a
martial posture: And which first began, unto whom was violence first offered,
in robbing and spoiling and the like, is reported severally according to the
affections of the Reporters; a just estimate without varying in matters of
considerablenesse is hardly to be had: The King and His party say he intended
no War, the Parliament says, Their's is defensive only, the Proverb is [The
second blow makes the affray] the first it is sure gives the offense: The Kings
coming in a Warlike manner, attended with so many armed men to demand the six
impeached Members, resembled as much as for that present might be a Warlike
act: But a Warlike act and a War differ, not much more then a disposition to a
habit and a habit to it self; It Is true, there wanted time and preparations to
make it a perfect War, and neither WESTMINSTER nor LONDON were a fit scene for
War, the preparations were elsewhere made in many parts of the Kingdom, by men
who have been active for His party; and large contributors to this War against
the Parliament, have evidenced the symptoms of a War, and their assistance
whenever it should be waged.

To prove the Kings assertion, that He in His Person intended no War; diverse of
His Nobility then attending Him have See their Attestation at York, June 1642.
attested it under their hand writing: which the Court of Parliament urges as
too light a proof to discharge their Trust, or to secure three Kingdoms by; a
Civil War being then in agitation, the seed already sown.

Who (may they say) can witness or be security for another man's intentions?
for what another man does purpose in his heart? or who being present with the
King dare call in question His sincerity: it is all one to tell Him He is false
or wicked; a Kings anger is as the roaring of a Lion: If two or three begin,
what third, fourth or more will refuse to join in the attesting it being
present there? His Majesty's heart may be peaceable and sincere, but a
Certificate from those Lords is no Medium to prove it so: Those Lords it is like
had a cheap esteem of their fellow-Lords and Commons, and might well think fit
rather to be quarrelled then joined with: if the Parliament the supreamest
Court of Judicature and Trust, shall so slighly discharge their Trust, as to
place the Peace and security of three Kingdoms on so easy a proof, as a few,
though very Honorable Gentlemen, to deliver what their opinion barely was
concerning the Kings intentions, a discord arising and a Civil War in view, His
Majesty exasperated, as it was feared, a party ready to join with Him, some
whereof having taken part with Him in His first assault, others of the like
condition to assist Him on pretense of Loyalty, the Parliament Members, many of
them being accused of high misdemeanors, and few scarce free from the incursion
of His Majesty's displeasure, the debate concerning the Earl of Straffords
trial being scarce wiped out, were necessitated as well in their own defense,
as in the peoples involved in theirs, to take up Arms to keep off those storms
already acted and attempted; which if they had not done and timously provided
(a face of War appearing) against the like assaults, it would have been thought
a weakness of spirit, or want of prudence if they had desisted; besides the
happiness, as to us, which probably might have accrewed by the assembling a
Parliament, must have turned unto much unhappiness by the affronting and
overthrowing this; as to the Parliament, how incompetent it had been to their
judgment, in case the Trust reposed in them, and the important Affairs of the
Kingdom (the end of their Assembling) should have miscarried through their
credulity; to have made no better return of their wisdom, the peoples trust,
then for them to have excused the same by saying, [We had not thought it would
have so fallen out.]

As to the Acts of Violence and Injustice, practiced by the partakers in this
War, as of Robbing, Spoiling, and the like, who first began, the Kings party or
the Parliaments? They accuse each other of the first breach of Justice; The
Kings party aver, The Lady Savage's House in ESSEX to be the first which was
assaulted and spoiled of much of her Goods and Household Stuff, to an exceeding
value: Whether so or not, or the Earl of Stamfords House in Leicestershire, as
the Parliament party urges, the case is of a differing quality: For howbeit
there may be Injustice in the one, as in the other act of Pillaging; The Lady
Savage being a known and convict Recusant, a Law in force for disarming
Papists, and His Majesty's Proclamation of Displea^ure, published the year
before against Recusants, etc. the people suspecting their strength and
opportunity to increase, and supposing her preparations might be therefore
made, the better to enable her self against the Law, remembering also His
Majesty's Proclamation, did in pursuance of such Law and Proclamation, without
any Superior Warrant, assault and Pillage her, as is urged.

These particular acts could not but foreshew a war, which since has happened;
and setting those aside, the Question is, on which side the offensive is: The
extreme terms and parties in this Quarrel, are a Delinquent party on the one,
and a Parliament (a Court of Judicature) on the other side; or (if the King
will against His Subjects will, and their humble importuning Him, make himself
a party) betwixt a King, and the greater part of His Kingdom; the Parliament
only the Umpire to judge and moderate the Quarrel.

A War thus happening, and parties thus engaged, it is not now who first
intended an Offensive, who a Defensive War; but who first executed a Warlike
act, or appeared modo guerrino (which the Laws do forbid to Subjects, and the
King the Defender of those Laws) to make the offended party provide for
themselves; the King against the Parliament, or the Parliament against the
King? The Parliament to bring offenders unto Trial (the end and reason of their
Assembling) to sit as a speculative and ignavous Court, or to dissolve, as
having nothing within their Power to do, could not in an ordinary and usual
course summon and reach offenders: Themselves proscribed and proclaimed against
as Traitors, were enforced to take up Arms, as well for their own as the
peoples safety, which if they did not, and in time provide against their Ruin,
they had had no other Reward for the present, but pity from their Friends, and
scorn from their Enemies. The future inconveniences might have been as fatal,
like a Consumption leisurely to spend the body; or as a Civil War, like a
burning Fever, suddenly to kill it.

They then upon foresight of what they could not avoid, but either to pursue
the Justice of their Cause by Arms, or to desist and submit to the mercy of
their Enemies, provide and send forth an able, faithful General, proved by his
Prowess in rescuing and relieving a besieged GLOUCESTER, stoutly and like an
expert Commander relieved without; as vigilantly and valiantly defended by the
Governor within.
Town or Fort when the Enemy had well nigh prevailed: Next after him they send
forth another, Puissant and Dexterous in his Achievements, with other Officers
and Commanders belonging to an Army, hazarding their own persons and Estates,
to try whether the Countries which have chosen and sent them on their work,
would now defend and assist them in imminence of danger in the Cause of
maintaining the Laws, the Subjects Liberty, the Power and Privilege of
Parliament.

In the Interruption of whose Endeavors, a War is waged, a Conflict entered
into, two parties opposite engaged, and the Victory has been therefore
doubtful, by reason of the equal strength in the one for the King and
Parliament, with the other for the King against the Parliament; both sides
equal in degree and worth.

The odds only, in that those for the King and Parliament contend not
peradventure in so temporary, seeming, and immediate a way of Service, as those
for the King against the Parliament, in their impetuous and inconsiderate heat,
amongst their own party best accepted, as having at first sight a more seeming
test of Loyalty, more dreadful to the advers part, as being the more full of
cruelty.

Those for the King would not be thought Adversaries to a Parliament, in a
direct and immediate opposition to that Court (for all seem to reverence the
Law and the Law makers) but consequently and forseeingly what course the
Parliament did take to suppress Abuses and Exorbitances in the Commonwealth,
which happily those advers persons might be guilty of.

The Adversaries to which Court are branched into several sorts; the Verses
found at their first fitting, declaring what Members were competent alone for
employment in the Parliament, glanced at many of those who were likely to prove
advers thereunto: No Church-Papist; no Court Atheist.
No Fen Dreyner; nor Lords Reteiner.
No man commended from the Lawn Sleeve;
Nor Ship Money collecting Sheriff.
out of which some chosen, have approved themselves firm Friends and Patriots
to their Country.

Besides, these recited in these Rimes, are,

First, Obnoxious and guilty persons, corrupt in place and Office, therefore
troubled to be overlooked by a Superior power who might examine their
Demeanors: Amongst which numbers, some not from the first, or habitually
offending, but for some later and particular act of Inconstancy, having erred,
persist therein, in forsaking the trust in them reposed.

2. Others of ambitious and aspiring thoughts, or of a proud conciet or envy,
scorning to partake with others their Equals in opinion, thinking withal that
it smells too much of the Yeoman, of a Peasant and vulgar quality, to take part
with or serve their Country.

3. Some through Levity and Humor, of a cross and advers condition, affecting
Paradoxes, venting thence the strength of their own wit, and boldly descanting
on the Court of Parliament and their actions, as if the more Honorable that
Court is, the more fit a Combitant for their great wits to foyn and fence with.

4. Others from an ill will and disaffection to some person of the Parliaments
side, which the disaffected hope may prove Rebellion in such person, have
therefore adhered to the King against the Parliament.

5. Others not much differing from these, who seeing their immediate Ancestor
(Father, Brother, or some other unto whom they are next in Remainder, or near
in Blood) to have assisted the King and Parliament, therefore in danger to be
questioned, and knowing it to be in the King to Punish and Reward, hoping for
Reversion of such Estate upon their Ancestors Attainder, have therefore
assisted the King against the Parliament.

6. Others of the like mould, dividing as it were by contract, and suiting
their affections, as the father to the one, the son to the other side, so the
one is to be a saver by the bargain, let the victory fall out which way it
will: This is the easiest and uncertainest way of Policy, if there be any who
practice it; if I had said the worst way to, it had been no wrong done to the
Contractors, because the War has been by no means so much protracted as by the
Collateral interests; Conscience and Judgment being excluded.

7. Others who having lived in Foreign Countries of a more free and absolute
Government then this mixed Monarchy is, deeming all manner of obedience due in
whatsoever a King commands, because it has been paid to the King where these
persons have lived, and seeing That universal obedience denied to our King as
matters now stand, have therefore settled their affections to His party, and
having so settled, think it now an undervaluing their Judgment to alter their
opinion.

8. Others of an easier Temper, yet as obstinate as any of the rest, from
somelight courtesy from the one, or discourtesie from the other side, have
taken parts; and taking it on trust, that all manner of obedience is Loyalty,
all disobedience Rebellion; have been through such opinion drawn unto His
Majesty's party; and reteining still the impression wherewith they were first
seasoned, think it now shame to quit the same, unto whom notwithstanding, the
terms on which this division grows have been so doubtful, that the very first
impression has alone weighed in guiding their Affections; for the peevish
pride and folly of making good their first impression, on no others grounds,
then because the first, which they think scorn to alter, has strongly wrought
upon many in this contention.

If any the Inhabitants in or about LONDON, doubtful at first which side to
take, and since the time of the Proclamation set forth against that City, be
advers to the Parliament, some through pretext of Duty to the King, many upon
the hopes of gaining pardon when He shall have prevailed: others upon other
grounds, as having debtors in His Army and Quarters, wish well unto His party
in hope to receive their debts: others not so much out of Loyalty to the King,
as discontented and displeased with the Parliament for imposing payments
toward this War, finding withal a discontinuance of their usual trading, to
defray this new and unexpected charge; and ready to believe that His Majesty's
distance from White Hall, and His other adjoining Palaces, together with the
peoples absence from the Courts of Judicature, are a detriment to their present
trading, and that the Parliament is the cause of all. These men are sensible
only of a present pressure at the instant, not looking to what is past or
future; like impatient and peevish patients, who think no pain comparable to
what they at the present feel.

But how to avoid the charge of the above recited Proclamations, leaving none
unpardoned of the city; these men may imagine that they play their game most
cunningly, and trusting on pardons underhand, may prove Enemies to their
fellow-Citizens, who jointly acting for the Cities good, these men, it is to be
feared, do countermine and work against the same.

For admit in a corporation or society opposed by a powerful Enemy, some few of
the society shall, upon suspicion had that some of the same fellowship do
covertly serve the Enemies turn, by givnig intelligence, or otherwise assisting
him* and in so doing provide for their own safety in case the enemy shall
prevail; wherefore those upon such suspicion shall conclude to be as wise in
providing alike for their own safety also: By such divisions and sinister
suspicions, the Unity being disturbed, a way is consequently prepared to the
ruin of the whole at last. Others there be more danrous then these, who having
some special Friends in the Quarters or Army of the Enemy, are Factors where
they live for such their friends, who preferring their private and ambitious
ends before the common good of the place wherein they live, do negotiate and
privily drive the Enemies interest, like a viperous brood eating out the bowels
of their parent, by whom and under whose protection they live and have their
being: The mercy shown to these is Cruelty to the rest, and these men's mercies,
in case their party shall prevail, will exceed what is called Cruelty.

The Concord should be as the Obligation is, general and reciprocal, for the
mutual safety of the whole Body Politic: the City has a long time been as
famous as any in EUROPE for their More remarkably manifested in this instant
happy and well framed Union and Agreement prudently preventing the mischiefs
which might have befallen in case they had not agreed as an entire society,
notwithstanding the many and several sorts of divisions occasioned by these
Commotions.
wisdom in all things expedient for their state and dignity, in their mutual
traffic with all parts of Christendom: and they are unworthy of their
protection, or to be entertained within their Limits, who wishes not their
continual flourishing: To divide, thereby to lose so great a stake as the
Public good, were a blemish to their Prudence: Wisdom is more prone then
folly to Dissension, having in it a particle of Pride, and self-conceit, and
naturally busy and curious in projecting, in suspecting; when as folly rests
and contents it self with its own privations, it faring commonly amongst the
wiser sort of men, as with the learneder of Physicians meeting to consult a
Patients sickness, Nomine eorum idem consent ne videatur Pliny.
accessio alterius, until their dissenting in opinion disturbs and overthrows
the Patients recovering hopes: The City may differ in opinion about the means,
without disagreeing in their affections to the end, the Common good, and their
own security involved therein, least by crossing each others Acts and Councels,
they gain that to their Enemy, which he thirsting for beyond and above half the
Kingdom else, cannot by his own wit and power.

As to their latter reason of these men's displeasure against the Parliament,
viz. their feeling of heavy payments, or of one man's peradventure more heavy
then his Neighbors: It is a blessing, and so it is termed, that they, and other
parts of the Kingdom within the Jurisdiction of the Parliament, do enjoy Peace
within their Walls, and Plenteousness within their Precincts, as a Reward due
for their Association and Accord, although they pay for it; whereas many Towns
and Countries elsewhere pay for dearly, even to their undoings, yet want that
happiness.

If amongst the rest of the partakers in this Quarrel, Scholars, the Clergy,
or a great part of them seem more Loyal, more Affectionate to the King,
consequently the opposition being grown to the height, more invective, more
advers to the Parliament, upon a mistake had of the reason and end of the
Parliaments proceedings concerning the Clergy, the mistake is soon set right.
The Parliament in their just Estimate of what concerns the Clergy, might have
promoted the encouragement of Learning in a more equal distribution of
Church Livings then now it is, without taking away the right of presentation
from the true Patron; yet by providing against the Lyon-like fellowship, as the
Proverb is, Some all, some never a whit, or which is as bad, that the more lazy
and unlearned may not abound with what the more painful and learned want: No
indifferent man will think that there can be such an envy and disproportionate
dealing in a prudent Laity, endeavoring to Reform, toward a learned Clergy,
the instrumental means of Reformation, as that the one should check, or
discourage the growth and study of the other.

The wise and pious judgment of King James is yet fresh in memory, which He
left as a Legacy to Posterity, of the esteem and reverence due and not to be
denied to the Clergy of this Land, speaking in His discourse of the Laws of
this Kingdom, of Gods own Laws, which His Majesty did then complain were too
much neglected, and Churchmen had too His speech in Star Chamber in the 16.
year of his Reign.
much in contempt; for, says he, great men, Lords, Judges and People of all
sorts, from the highest to the lowest, have too much contemned them: And God
will not bless us in our own Laws, if we do not reverence his Law, which
cannot be, except the Interpreters of it be respected; and it is a sign of the
later days drawing on, even the contempt of the Church, and of the Governors
and Teachers thereof now in the Church of ENGLAND.

But of these kind of advers persons last mentioned, there be two sorts, the
one an ignorant and proud, which commonly go together, the more ignorant the
more proud; The Gale of their empty Tumor were retarded in their aspiring
Course, if their Bottoms were Ballassed with the solid part of man, Humility.

The other a learned and judicious sort, some of whom also may be Enemies,
making it a common Cause of engaging all Scholars against that Court, on this
surmise even now cleared [That by the Parliaments endeavoring to restrain the
Plurality of Church Livings, and the personal corruptions of Bishops, all
learning and the Seminaries thereof, the Universities, are discountenanced.]

If the Universities partake of this adversnesse and disaffection, as
conceiving the Parliament would have made a more strict Inquisition into their
Demeanor, then the Visitors of Colleges their remiss Indulgency has of
latter times afforded: The corruptions of those Seminaries is not so much of it
self, as of the negligent and discontinued oversight in those whose proper
charge it is to super-intend their course and manners.

Their Founders Munificent and Pious care from the first Institution of their
benign intendments, did purpose nothing more then an industrious and profitable
course of life in the educating youth, and fitting Scholars for the Church and
Commonwealth: which if the Founders purposes be through neglect and corruption
of times perverted, and that many the Fellows of Colleges there, degenerating
into a lazy and unprofitable life, contrary to the Founders intent; it were a
blemish to the Government of a prudent and wise State, finding out the Malady,
to pass it by without enquiring into the Cure.

Amongst the number of the parties in this Quarrel, all men's Actions or
Affections being engaged, there be others advers enough, although warily
carrying it, and disaffecting the one side to the height, yet lying at a more
subtle and close lock (the Priscilianists, Tu omnes Te nemo) they know all
men, no man them, and in their own eye play their game most cunningly,
contented to temper and tune their Tongues suitable to the persons with whom
they do converse, and to comply for the present with that side which they
disaffect, yet reserve an advers heart when opportunity shall serve: These men
should not take it ill, if that side, when prevailing, shall deal with them in
the like kind, to give them good words, yet know them for their Enemies.

Diverse also of a lukewarm temper, not Moderate, but Neutral, rather Issachar
like, couching down betwixt two Burdens, reserving the tribute of their
affections for the stronger side (their condition not unlike to Watermen in a
rough Tide, Rowing for safety from one Shore to another) yet discerning the
difference of the Cause in question, and in their judgments satisfied which is
the more just, do weigh withal, whose Actions, the Kings parties or the
Parliaments are the more Cruel, and for fear of that which is the more cruel,
betake themselves to that, presuming upon the Lenity of the more mild and
merciful, as not likely to exceed the Limits of Justice in their punishings.

Others of mixed affections adhering to the King in some of His Tenants, to the
Court of Parliament in some of theirs, and none so sure a lover to the
Parliament, or Adversary to the King, but will think that the Parliament in
some of their transient Acts may deviate and go astray: The Kings party may in
other things maintain a probable right; yet that does not distinguish these
men's affections, or make them less vehement to the party they affect: For the
extreme and adequate terms in this Division, are an actual invading the
Subjects Right, settled by an Ancient and Fundamental Law on the one, and an
endeavoring to maintain and preserve the same on the other part.

The other Disputes between the King and Parliament, concerning
Church Government and the manner of Divine Worship, are collateral only, and
incident to this contention, and might have been left unquestioned and entire,
had not this War touching a more principal object happened, and may soon yet
be reconciled, when as little different in themselves.

And these men mistermed lukewarm or neutral, will approve themselves as
affectionate and constant to the Parliament, as any of those who misterm and
censure them.

And of this sort many there are who have wisely and warily carried themselves,
with fervor and constancy to that part, although commended in a malevolent
envious way, and taken notice of by their enviers, repining at their
well-doing, for playing their game so wisely.

Diverse also of the other side (to comprehend them all in a few words)
ignorant, peevish and currupt in manners as in judgment, as Schismatiques and
Sectaries, snarling at and despising all Government, are seeming to adhere to
the Parliament against the King, it is sure against His Government; no friends
to the Parliament, but instruments, and glad at these Distempers, whereout they
suck no small advantage, and certain Enemies, when time shall discover them, to
the peace of the Church and State.

The Quarrel would end the sooner, if all men who partake therein would
deliberately and seriously examine within themselves, on what grounds, and for
what respects they have wished best to the one or to the other side, and if
they have in a hasty and precipitate way erred in point of judgment, to
retract their Errors: the two known premises of [ Secunde cogitationes sunt
sapicutores.
the second thoughts are commonly the wisest] and [no In sapientem non potest
cadere injuria. Senec.
injury can befall a wise and resolved spirit] afford one safe conclusion, that
it is no injury to the Credit of any man, to change his opinion upon better
grounds, and if it were, his wisdom can keep off the injury.

If Reason, Conscience, Duty, were the rule alone whereby to guide the affairs
and minds of men (collateral and sinister ends, as is elsewhere set down,
excluded) or the distinction well observed betwenn Time and Eternity, and the
difference between the dimension of these and the reward due after the fruition
of either, there had been much less blood spilt, and the account lain more
lightly on the blood shedders.

The Series of the War declared, the partakers known, who have been the
Authors, what the Cause of this Contention; the Parliament by the event of what
has happened have been traduced and censured, the Authors the occasion.

The proper cause is Injustice and Oppression, by whom committed follows, if
Justice exalts a Nation, by the rule of Contraries, Injustice must overthrow
it: It Is true, this calamity, these pressures, these divisions and Schisms have
happened in the time of the Parliaments sitting, yet that Court no more the
Cause thereof, then Augustus Caesar's Reign the cause of Christ's birth; He was
born in the time of Augustus Reign; This Calamity befell in the time of the
Parliaments sitting: If the Parliament any cause at all, it is a very remote
and least principal, not to be reckoned positively a cause.

No man can reasonably think them to be the cause, that when as Discord does
waste and rend the strength which they have gained by Policy and friends, they
will endanger the loss thereof by the weakness of Dissension.

In a serious and Christian apprehension of these Calamities, the supreme and
original cause is our National Iniquities, Pride, Falsehood, Luxury, contempt of
Gods Word and His Laws, and the like, drawing down the Anger of a just God; but
that His other attributes of mercy, which is over all His works, His
long-suffering, and plenteousnesse in Goodness, can cancel and supersede that
of His justice, if the fault be not supinely ours, when as (if the
commemorating of His readiness to forgive be no Doctrine of presumption to
embolden sinners) He often spares for His elect, for a few righteous Men's sake,
the rest.

In the rank of natural and lower causes, Injustice, as even now spoken of in
the subordinate Ministers of justice, which grindes the face, and adds to the
number of the poor, has been the proper and certain cause, although the Mr.
Jo: Heywood, on the life of Hen. 4.
Historian stateth it plainly against a King Himself; to private men, says he,
it is sufficient that they do no wrong, but a Prince must provide that none
under Him do wrong, for by the winking at the vices of His Officers, He makes
them His own.

One other sin of a latter date may be added to the number of the causes of the
continuance of this War, for which God is justly angry and has severely
threatened; the faint and perfunctory keeping of the Protestation and Covenant
entered into; rather of not keeping it at all in many of this Kingdom: for
whilst in the close of the Protestation we shall vow to endeavor by all
honorable and just ways, etc. In which words some measure of Activity at least
is requisite.

When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord, thou shall not be slack to pay it:
and wherein many have not Deuteron. 23.
only deserted this their vow, but endeavored against the same: Others
contemplative only and remiss, as not endeavoring at all, but with cautious
reservations and forbearances keep off their endeavourings, believing as the
Lazy Soldiers whom the Livie.
Historian notes to have dreamed their Enemies votis and sedendo debellari
posse: Wishings and sitting still are no sufficient discharge of the protestors
Vow, when as he Voweth he will endeavor, etc.

The next amongst external causes, is the importunate and restless power of
Flatterers, making a Prince believe in the vastness of His Power over and
above all Laws, excusing and making less His faults then indeed they are,
rendering withal His actions exempt from Sin or Error.

The seasonable Accident which befell Antigonus King of SYRIA, setting forth the
falsehood of His Parasites, made him repent His Error; in the Event, Himself and
His Kingdom happy; who Hunting in a Forest, and earnestly pursuing His Chase,
being benighted, lost His Followers, and happening into a poor man's house to
take His lodging, demanded of His Host, What that Country, who and what manner
of Governor the King of that Country was? The poor man answered at large, not
knowing Him, nor sparing to tell Him or any of His faults; for which round
dealing, the King discovering Himself at His fellow-Hunters ^oming, rewarded
well His Host, and afterward better knew Himself and His flattering Courtiers,
using these words in their hearing, Verum de me, nisi hae Nocte audivi nunquam.

There are two causes of Pride, an Inward Ignorance, Outward Flattery.


That no whit appliable, This the more dangerous, as being inevitable, because
by surprise it seizes and annoys the person flattered, and by persuading him to
what he is not, robs him of the possibility of being what he should.

Other occasions and incentives have been of this War, the angry manner of
Impeaching, the Hostile of demanding the six Members of both Houses, together
with the Proclamations since accusing other Members of High See what the
Assembly at OXFORD acknowledges, The Privilege of Parliament to be so
substantial and entire a Right, that the Invasion, of the Liberties of either
House is an injury to the other, and to the whole Kingdom, in their Declaration
printed there, p. 12.
Treason, has added to the fuel of this War; On what the Impeachment was first
grounded, otherwise then as general Articles, is known to few, unless it were
for some supposed ill committed in their activenesse to perform what they
thought their duty did enjoin.

In every design and purpose, there will be some more Activity in one, two, or
more, then in the rest, otherwise the purpose in hand is likely to stand still:
Every completed Act is first the conception of some one individual person,
then the consent of the rest: If the first beginners shall for their
forwardness (of no advantage to themselves) be therefore accused of Crimes,
and in a violent way pursued, it could not but strike at the Root of the
Subjects Liberty invaded lately, then in agitation to be maintained, and the
sequel prove dangerous, the infringing the Power and Privilege of Parliament,
which so many Thousands have protested to maintain.

The Quarrel was as the Division, great, and it is probable there would not have
wanted witnesses on the one party, as to prove the Articles, so to have
aggravated the guilt of them to the highest against the other.

The examination of which Articles, whether the six Members were guilty in
matter of Fact of what they were accused; or whether the Articles were Treason
in case they were guilty, is not proper to this Discourse: The beginning and
manner of the first entering into this War being set down, the Reader is left to
judge, on which the Offensive, on which the Defensive is.

If it were as certain that the Parliament did before this War intend any thing
against the Honor of the King, as it is certain the Subjects Right and Liberty
were encroached upon (to say no more of what is vehemently presumed against the
Protestant Religion) no question then but the War must be thought Defensive on
the Kings part: But when these three endangered, the Incendiaries contriving
the subversion of the same, consequently the promoters of this War are
judicially required to answer their Misdemeanors, when as they shall by a
strong hand be rescued from the hand of Justice, and in stead thereof,
Misdemeanors of as high a nature retorted on their Judges (the Court of
Parliament) Nothing but a War could decide the Controversy, an impartial
understanding discern between the Offensive and Defensive part.

The Contention grew at first in point of Trust, who should be rather believed
for what is promised, the King, rather those about Him whom the Parliament
suspected, or the Parliament it self.

The several Reasons for requiring Trust, are obvious to every man's view who
has observed their several Actions: The Parliament may plead their
undertakings cannot be made good, nor the Trust committed to them discharged in
that free and just way as they would, because themselves opposed: A Court of
Judicature confronted, and by an advers and equal power interrupted in their
course of Justice, must needs abate in their power and efficacy: They have
enough to do to detect and defeat the Fraud and Circumventions hourly practiced
against their place and person; their condition like to the closely besieged in
a Town of Garrison, who to subsist and maintain themselves, do many things
against their natural, just and wonted course.

Friends may be sometimes oppressed and injured, Enemies favored; Justice
cannot in perplexed times of danger be dealt with an exact and even poised
hand, the Sword hanging ready to fall (like that of Damocles) on each man's
head: A cunning Craftsman in dissembling, and secret Enemy to that Court,
privily engaged to supplant the same, may in his very demanding Justice, and
expecting by reason of the greatness of his place to be hearkened unto,
pressing withal their sedulous listening to his Complaints, do it on purpose to
divert their thoughts from their care of safety; a small matter in equality of
strength, and in a doubtful Conflict, helps to some Advantage.

Many are the exceptions against their Actions; This a certain one, the
greatest and most inevitable inconvenience in their proceedings Martial and
Civil, that some injury must be done, the very Act of War presumes as much; and
it is not their fault, it may be their unhappiness to be served by ill
Instruments.

Those Instruments will expect also to be winked at, in that they run the
hazard of being censured to be Rebels for their sakes who do employ them; if
not a little winked at, there is danger in these dividing and doubtful times of
turning to the advers part, so the Subject is destined as it were to be
oppressed; And marvel not, says the wise man, if thou see oppression of the
poor, or a violent perverting of Justice in a Province, and it must be that
offenses come.

The Miscarriages, Violence and Insolences done by a few or many particular
men, are not to be imputed to that Power which Governs them, unless done by
the Authority and Commission of that Power.

One other unfitness may appear in the proceedings of the Parliament, as
inevitable as the rest, namely, in that they have in a subordinate way deputed
men of a lower rank to execute their Commissions and other Acts in several
Counties for raising money, etc. or otherwise for discharging some Trust to
them committed; when as themselves the more eminent, the more aimed at by the
Enemy, and the nearer to danger, cannot appear with safety to execute the same:
Let any man suppose it to be his own case, then he will not blame them for
absenting themselves, and substituting others in their room.

Many are the objections in this kind which beget Disputes, many accusations
had against either part: What the Parliament finds and complains to be
practiced in opposition to them by their Enemies, they observe most sensible
presumptions for, no one thing in bar to such presumptions, to make up one
tittle of compensation in lieu of the dangers which might happen, or to give
any the least satisfaction for removing the imminency of the same.

The vulgar and common salve used by His Majesty's party, of His passing bills
since the Parliament began, for the relief and ease of His Subjects, as a
pledge of His Princely goodness, and care of His peoples welfare: His often
and deep Protestations for the maintenance of the Protestant Religion, and the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; yet as matters now are, these Acts of His not
compensatory to those hostile Acts practiced by His party against His
Parliament and people: Besides, those Acts of Parliament passed by His Majesty,
are in His and a new Parliaments power to retract or repeal them at pleasure:
For let it be granted that they were Acts of Parliament which His Majesty has
thus passed, in that the Members of both Houses at WESTMINSTER are by His party
denied to be a Parliament, yet sometimes called [a Parliament] sometimes
[Rebels] there is like to be little stability in what they have enacted,
neither is that which is contingent and possible to be altered, to be adjudged
compensatory to what is certain and actual.

The difference of times, that they were reputed a Parliament when those Acts
passed, but since reputed Rebels; or the distinction into persons, that some
are reserved to be a [Parliament] others [Rebels] will breed a greater
confusion, then help to frame an Answer by those of His Majesty's party, who
object this favor of His Majesty's passing diverse Bills for the welfare of His
Subjects, etc. That they may be repealed, altered in part or all, dissolved, or
want their vigor in execution, it is probable when the persons who have and
are the chief assistants in this War, are the greatest Losers by those Acts
recited.

Next, as touching His Protestations, His frequent Declarations of manifesting
His intentions, His late actions of Clemency and Pardon showed to those whom he
calls [Rebels] when they were taken prisoners at a late Seige by His Majesty,
His releasing and setting them free, when He might have detained and proceeded
against them as Traitors and Rebels in the judgment of His party.

These are to be acknowledged indulgent and merciful Acts becoming a just and
Christian Prince; yet they may be two ways understood, First, in relation to
the good of His own party, prisoners in the Parliaments power, and in danger to
have suffered the like, in case the King should have punished theirs. Secondly,
those His Acts of releasing, of His mild using of those His prisoners, it is
possible might be construed as present Acts of Clemency, to endure only for a
time, and that He may be persuaded afterward to punish them as Rebels: These
are times of wit and jealousy, and the same Reasons which have occsioned this
War, even His peoples Jealousies, may continue them without abatement; there is
no less cause of fears and dangers, His party having tried every way, by
traducing the Parliament at home, by attempting to set them at varience with
Forraigners abroad, having moved every stone (as the Proverb is) to subdue
those whom they term Rebels, no way left untried to take away their power and
shadow of power, no means left unassayed, either mild of Inviting, or violent
in Affrighting, and those plausible and gracious Acts used, possibly to
increase yet the number of his party, may cease from a total pardoning, only
remitting for a time, until a full Conquest be obtained: And when the Crown is
repossest, the Conquest fully had, the French Proverb tells us, Que la Coronne
unifois prinse oste toute sort de defaults, i. e. that when the King shall be
reinvested to His former full Power and Regal Dignity, the Parliament and the
power thereof then laid aside and become void; the possessing of the Crown does
as well quit all quarrels and acceptions, and cancels all disputes, as it
clears and purifies all manner of defaults, imperfections or exceptions to be
made concerning the means, whether fair or foul of gaining the Conquest.

As Jealousies have been the cause of this Contention, so what the cause of
Jealousies? The principal and most certain one has been in matter of fact,
namely, the infringing the Subjects Liberty, soon after the Petition of Right
was granted in full Parliament, to be omitted here, because set forth in
several Declarations and Remonstrances. One, and more universal, was that in
the case of Ship Money, which had it not been withstood by a Gentleman of
repute (let his Ghost be railed at) and a Parliament soon after summoned, what
had become of the Subjects Liberty? If a Writ comes down directed to a Sheriff
of a County, he bound by Oath, or fearful of incurring displeasure, in case he
refuse to execute the Kings Writ, and having the Posse Comitatus within his
Office, what remedy shall the poor Country man have, dwelling one hundred, or
two hundred miles from the Court, if he refuse, or has it not to pay, against
Imprisonment, or his Goods taken from him by Distress: Justice has its
boundary, and is circumscribed by Law: Injury and Injustice, like the violent
Torrent of an Inundation overflowing the Banks and Metes, overwhelms and
drowns; as Decency and Order when bound up by good and wholesome Laws, if
disturbed and broken down, falls into Uncertainty, Indiscretion, and becomes
Confused: Let men talk of fears and jealousies, and in an Ironical way smile at
those whose peculiar care is to prevent and remove the same; no man knows what
the Progress of that wrong had been, had it not been withstood.

The mention whereof seeing so often inculcated in other Writings, can be no
pleasing Theme to any Subject; And whereas His Majesty has confessed and
retracted that His Error, being now condemned to an utter abolition, ought to
be buried in Oblivion; neither does it become every ordinary Subject to traduce
and accuse His Sovereign of Injustice doing; it comes too near (to what the
wise man expressly forbids) of Cursing the King in their thoughts, as of what
the Statute Law provides against.

Only to satisfy one Objection used by some of His Majesty's party in His
behalf touching the same, Better (say they) the payment thereof should have
continued, then so much blood spilt, such vast Sums of Money spent in the
maintenance of this War, and the Subject thus impoverished.

The Parliament grants as much, that of two evils the lesser is to be chosen,
where of necessity one must happen, as in case of inevitable necessity, that
Wisdom and Industry cannot prevent; if otherwise Necessitas non excusat quae
potuit esse non necessitas, says a learned Tertullian.
Father of the Church acutely: When the Princes Treasure and Revenue suffice
not for the Common good, as when the Realm is invaded, or any notable Rebellion
of the Subjects happens, such an Invasion or Rebellion as is not procurata
not simulata, but vera gravis and manens, He may then by the common opinion of
the Civilians impose new Taxes in requiring Aid, although out of a
Parliamentary and common way.

The like Objection is made by others of His party, Better it were that those
six Gentlemen Impeached of High Treason should have suffered, their Estates and
Posteries overthrown and ruined, then to have a Kingdom wasted, other of His
Majesty's Dominions destroyed, and so many thousands worryed in one another
blood.

This is surely the rich man's Argument, who by reason of the superfluity and
plenty of his Estate, can easily bear the Charge, and is scarce sensible of the
Burden, or that he having a Power and Interest in his Neighbors Assessing him,
is under-rated, and therefore content to pay the Tax, not sticking at the
Illegality of the same, he thinks his Hill so sure that he shall never be
removed, or his Power so great, that the Laws enacted for the relief of the
poor, the number of which must needs multiply by reason of such oppressions,
will scarce concern the rich according to the Proverb of Neque accipitri, nec
milvo tenditur rete.

One and the same Answer serves both Objections: It were better that a man
should receive a wound from a stronger then himself, and afterward to be
maimed by him a third or fourth time, after to endure the like or greater
Injury; better all this befall him, then to be killed (for so it happens to him,
resisting in his own defense) it had been better for him to have endured all
those Affronts and wounds, then by repulsing them to lose his life, as the
less of the two Evils; but where the one might have been avoided, no necessity
of the other to have happened, the Objection is invalid.

But to the subject of this Contention, multiplying it self into several forms
of Difference, the question has for the most part been about matter of Fact.

1. What has been done, what has been attempted in offense to the Subjects
Liberty.

2. Touching the Object and Latitude of Obedience, what Obedience, and whether
all manner of Obedience is due unto the Kings Personal Commands, for the Subject
to perform whatsoever He requires.

To the object of Obedience it is a commonly received Position, That the King
is to be obeyed in all things Lawful and Honest, as before.

The Proposition is proved by the duty of Subjection to the higher Powers, in
the first Verse of the Chapter, the limitation shadoweth forth by the duty also
of those Powers to take vengeance on the Evildoers; for as Tremelius notes on
that place, if unlawful See the Gloss.
things be commanded us, we must Answer as Saint Peter does, It is better to
obey God then man.

Unto which, the question touching the Latitude of Obedience has a reference;
for as for those who exact and contend for a greater degree of Obedience, as to
have all manner of Obeying, both Active and Passive due unto the Kings personal
Commands; doubtless all of them have not always thought it so, but enforce
such Doctrine now in these Disputative times, on purpose to make the Kings
party the stronger by their strength of Arguing: If the King has power of Life
and Death, as to take His Subjects life in case he obeys Him not in whatsoever
he Commands; then Nature, Necessity and Law (which allow, yea enjoin
provisionary Acts for safety, and have endued Mankind with several habiliments
for its own defense) seem all to have lost their strength: Besides, whether in
such a case as this here recited of the Kings power of Life and Death, if he
take away a Subjects life, whether he be not guilty of the breach of the sixth
Commandment, I leave to an humble and moderate Divine to judge.

To free the question touching the extent of Universal Obedience, and close it
up with this conclusion, The Exactors of this unbounded and immence obedience
seem to allow unto Kings a greater Latitude and Privilege of Power, thence, a
greater of Obedience from their Subjects unto them, then unto God; Hence is the
Inference proved by this Enthymeme.

That power is greatest which requires the greater extent of Duty; wherefore if
God neither can nor will command any thing unjust, and Kings may both (that is,
they both can and have commanded unjust things) If notwithstanding they be to
be obeyed both Actively and Passively in whatsoever they do or will command,
whether just or unjust, there is by consequence a more Universal Obedience due
unto them then unto God.

3. The third question seems to be, whether the Court of Parliament being a
Fundamental power, and all Fundamentals equal, all principals alike, having
protested the maintenance of the Kings Honor, Person and Estate, may in defense
of the King, Laws and Government, when imminently endangered, especially when
actually invaded, justify to take up Arms, without and against the Kings
Personal command, if He refuse.

Whether dangers are imminent, is briefly answered.

The Kings party deny the imminency of danger, they say they are but Phantasms
and unnecessary fears etc.

When mischief is near and threatens, opportunity and power serving withal, it
may be termed danger, when it is already fallen, it is part the name of danger,
and becomes Calamity.

4. The final and casting result of the States judgment, what those Laws,
dangers, and means of preservation are, reside in the two Houses of Parliament.

5. The two Houses of Parliament, are always a part in the supremacy of power,
and in case of the others abserce or refusal, as matters now stand, Both
virtually the whole.

6. In the final resolution of the judgment of the State, the people are to
rest, and in obedience thereunto, may in defense of the Laws and Government use
and bear Arms.

Not that the Parliaments Votes and Ordinances are in themselves infallible,
but to us inevitable; nor do we Idolize them, or Doctor Fern infers, nor think
them omnipotent, as His Majesty or some of His party do hyperbolically and
smilingly object: Not to possess the Reader with the Dignity and Privilege of
that Court, by transcribing here any ancient or particular passages of contest,
which are not valuable to justify the Authority thereof, when as particulars
prove not generality in Arguings, such particulars especially as are easily
answered; yet whether the Historian notes it as an evidence of the Earls
courage, or of the Parliaments power, the passage is short, and not unfitly
quoted of the Earl of Warwick his contest with King Hen. 6. who directing his
Privy Seal for discharging the Earl of his Captain-ship of CALLIS, the Earl
refusing continued his office, his reason was, that it was granted him by a
Parliament.

Whereto it may be objected, that might be a personal contumacy in the Earl,
which proves not the Authority of that Court, therefore not binding other
Subjects; yet this objection may be replied unto, that the Earl knew on what
ground, and by what judgment his refusing it was granted.

The Court of Parliament is not hereby so adored or prized, nor are they so
fond of their own Acts and Ordinances, as to think them absolutely pure and
unchangeably perfect, or to derive the blessing of success on their designs,
for the merit of their actions, inuring for the present, either in abrogating
ancient or constituting new Acts and Ordinances, which they may retract as
occasion shall serve, but to the Justice of their endeavourings, which were
they able to make good their proper and total power, they would ere this have
terminated and reduced their Acts into established Laws: It is probable that
many of those ancient usuages and Constitutions, which they for reasons best
known to themselves have for the present altered, will revert and turn them to
their former being, without utterly abrogating the same.

To conclude and settle the doubtful and wavering Judgments had, touching the
power and Authority of this Court, the aforecited Sir Ed. Cook.
Oracle of Law, has delivered at large in his fourth Book of Institutes, who
wrote it in a calm and quiet time, when there was no need to defend the
Authority thereof.

Besides the preamble to the Statute concerning Parliaments, sets forth and
confirms the Power, See the statute.
Authority, and by necessary consequence the Privilege of that Court, as the
only and proper cure of Grievances, and remedy of Mischiefs in a Commonwealth.

The three first Conclusions are evident by what has been observed before; the
latter of the three is Discoursed at large by a learned Author in his Book
Entitled, A more full Answer to Doctor Fern.

But to answer one objection, concerning the taking up of Arms, and that the
People take up Arms against their King, which the objectors say, is unlawful
under what pretense soever.

If the Question be rightly weighed and stated, it will evidently appear, that
this is no taking up Arms against the King, no more then a Chyrurgion does
offend or wrong his Patient, when to recover and preserve the whole body, he
cuts and takes away the proud and putrified flesh, encircling and infecting the
more eminent and sounder part: And if in this Quarrel the King shall
unnecessarily and with hazard to himself against the advice, supplication and
importunity of His Subjects, expose Himself to danger, Gods protection (being
more immediately seen over his Anointed) is herein crossed, if not tempted; and
if it happen otherwise to Him then His Subjects would, His miscarrying is of
Himself, or rather from those who persuade Him to it.

The Question which has cost this blood, is not now betwixt a King governing
according to the strict and precise Rules of Law (the measure of each man's
Right) and Subjects rebelliously rising up in arms against their King and those
Laws, as some men in their gall of bitterness have given out; but betwixt a King
transgressing the known Laws (as Himself confesses and retracts His Fault) and
a Court of Parliament, the Supreme Council of the Kingdom, endeavoring in a
just and legal way to punish and repress Offenders as former Parliaments have
done, no other power or force to dispute or emulate a King's; and the matter
whereon they quarrel, an actual invasion made on the Fundamental Laws, and a
party engaged to embrace and abet the same, whither under the notion of
Loyalty, or from Humor, Ambition and Levity on the one side, and the Parliament
with a party adhering unto them, contending to preserve those Laws, with the
Subjects Right and Liberty on the other side: For, the controversy is not
immediately and principally in the new-sprung Differences about Church or
State-Government, as which the more perfect Form in State, Monarchical,
Oligarchical, or Aristocratical; which in Church Government, an Independent,
Presbyterial or Episcopal; which latter two are not much differing in
themselves in their Primitive Institution, as anon will be showed in its proper
place: (All these Controversies are emergent only, and resulting out of the
occasion of this War, which gives occasion and liberty to all dissentions, and
makes every one a fierce combatant in maintenance of his own opinion:) But the
principal parties are, as before observed, a party who has actually violated
the Laws by which we are governed, and have their partakers; and a party who
contend and would preserve the same: The first abetted under the style of being
good Subjects, the latter traduced and inveighed against as Rebels.

What the Laws of this Kingdom, conveyed unto us in these latter times are,
under which we are born and governed, is by an ordinary light of study so
figured in all men's knowledge, as no man can but consent unto and confess,
That to be the Law which the Court of Parliament does Enact, (which Court has
power also to Repeal, Dissolve, Alter, or make Perpetual as they please) and
that to be a Parliament certainly and definitively, which is the assembling
together of the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, lawfully summoned by the
King in the prudent and deliberate Counsel of his heart, at such a Time, to
such a Place, for Reasons expressed in that His Writ.

What the Power and Privilege of that Court in general is, is learnedly and
industriously set down by the forenamed Author; of what power and stability
this is, whither to continue until their work for which they were assembled be
finished, or Arbitrarily to be dissolved, the King has by His own Act defined,
in binding Himself not to dissolve without their consent.

Wherefore if He shall alter such Act made and consented unto by Himself during
the Session of that Court, in His Ira inimica Concilio. Cicer.
anger (an Enemy to Counsel, because He may not conform and rule them) call and
divide any part of them from the place where they were first summoned, whither
those which stay behind in the first named place, or those which come away to
the last, without respect had to which is the major part, shall be reputed the
true Parliament.

Object.And whither that dividing be a dissolving without consent or not, it is
no dissolving, but a local removing, in nature of Adjournment, which is
peculiar to a Kings power both to Summon and Adjourn.

Answ. The King, it is confessed, has power to Summon, and to Adjourn, as
former Kings have done, to other places of the Kingdom, as NORTHAMPTON, OXFORD,
WINCHESTER, etc. but such Adjournments have been on special and extraordinary
occasions of Plague, some other contagious Disease, or such like Reason, those
towns otherwise incompetent for such conflux of people as probably may have
recourse to the Parliament for their dispatch and redress in their Desires:
And whither that Adjournment amounts not to a Dissolving against the Law so
consented unto by the King, hereafter.

Besides, observe the difference of Times and Persons, which satisfies the
Question: Former Kings have been willing to call often Parliaments, that the
Usage and Necessity of often Summoning grew 36. Ed. 3.
into a Law, and yet in force, to call one every year; when in this of His
Majesty's Reign, how seldom and sparingly He has called any.

And when He has, as He did in the first year of His Reign to begin in June,
it continued unto July, and Adjourned until August following, and but few Acts
passed before it ended: In these last years, the Parliament, at the importunity
and humble Request See their Petition, 1639.
of diverse the Nobility, and a valuable number of the Gentry, the King summoned
in April 1640. how soon He dissolved the same, the beginning of May following.

Then he called another in November after, in which for their more firm and
constant proceedings in their Affairs, and to the end that being come and met
together from the several parts of the Kingdom, they should not upon every
light matter of Debate be dissolved and remitted home, His Majesty was pleased
to pass an Act against Dissolving without their own consent; how soon after
their sitting and that Act passed, their Privileges were seized, by charging
several Members of either House of High Treason.

Which when that could not take effect, nor their persons seized, the King
withdraws Himself (advised thereto) from the Parliament and their place of
sitting, thereby to make void their Court, whereof His Majesty one part, yet
His personal presence in this case not so requisite, as that His absence should
make void the Parliament.

The Parliament consisting of three Estates, King, Lords and Commons, if the
King be a necessary and constitutive part, without which there can be no
Parliament, as those of His party contend to have it so, His removing from the
other parts amounts to a dissolving, contrary to a Law consented unto by His
Majesty; wherefore it were a greater degree of undutifulnesse in any Subject to
think that the King would violate that Law, then that His Power and Virtue
being there, His Person should be so requisite, as that the absence of His
Person should adnul and make it no Parliament: The person it self being severed
from its Office and Virtue is a thing inanimate: The distinction into a
voluntary and necessitated absence, or that the Kings presence shall make it
complete, His absence an incomplete Parliament, abates not the force of that
Law, nor serves to make whole the difference, unless there be such a condition
or limitation in the Sea the Act passed in full Parliament.
Act.

Which the proper and true Parliament is, that summoned and resident at
WESTMINSTER, or that removed by a latter summons, as before expressed, to
OXFORD; which Question, together with the perverse and proud obstinacy of an
engaged and desperate party, though thoroughly convinced of the truth thereof,
has cost much blood.

The King and His party at OXFORD do resolve it truly; Again, He or His parties
instability of Actions, do seem to renew the doubt, certainly do wound their
own Cause: For whilst His Majesty often and of late calls the Assembly at
WESTMINSTER [The Parliament] and the Assembly at OXFORD by one and the The
Assembly at OXFORD acknowledge in their Declaration printed there, March 1643.
The Parliament at WESTMINSTER not to be Dissolved, page 25.
same style, and that two Parliaments are inconsistent at one and the same time
in this Kingdom, the people unless wilfully and perversely ignorant, are not to
seek which is the proper Parliament.

Here by the way, the OXFORD Mercury seeming to subjoyn, in some ways, to the
Declaration printed there, with a plausible Frontispiece of A Declaration
tending to Peace, rather Refutes that Book, and deals more plainly and
ingenuously, upon the matter of a Peace offering from His party there, and
moving a strong cause of Jealousy against a truly intended Peace, as is before
expressed.

Now to examine the several Passages and Tracts of that Book, Entitled, A
Declaration tending to Peace; whither or no it ministereth matter of Peace, as
the title does insinuate, or further Quarrel: For first, they can say little
for themselves to justify their assembling, as to a Parliament, for the
enacting and constituting Laws, but what is ordinary and easy to be answered:
They lay aspersions on some misfezance and Errors in their fellow Members: So
great a body could not well be free from failings; they accuse the whole body
of Parliament of High Misdemeanors, of High Treason, of disturbing the public
Peace of the Kingdom, of promoting and fomenting an horrid War, and who to be
judge thereof but themselves, the Accusers?

The Parliament by an ancient Law in force, is the sole Interpreter in matters
of this doubt and consequence: 36. Ed. 3.
and themselves at OXFORD, do not assume the Title and Power of a Parliament,
when as they acknowledge in the same Declaration, there fellow Page 16.
Members sitting now at WESTMINSTER, to be so material a part of Parliament,
that if they themselves at OXFORD might have enjoyed their freedom without
being forced, their sitting at WESTMINSTER to have been a full and free
Convention and a Parliament.

The formal part of a Parliament in the Kings summoning them by Writ, at such a
time, to such a place, to debate the Affairs of the King and Kingdom: This
being granted, and the Parliament at WESTMINSTER thus met, what is wanting then
to make it a full and free Parliament?

As to their want of freedom due to the Members of a Parliament, and forced, as
they urge, from those assembled now at OXFORD, when they sat at WESTMINSTER:
Forced they could not be, force is a fruit of power, and deparibus in pares non
datur potestas, solicited and strongly wrought upon they might be according to
their several tempers: They accuse themselves, and abate much of that courage
required in Parliament Members, when they complain they were forced: fellow
Peers cannot enforce each other, without a previous disposition and compliance
in those who are forced, to be forced.

If any force, and the same not offered by an higher power, it might be in a
close and clancular way by Proxies and Solicitors, they know where the power
rests of Punishing and Pardoning: Proscriptions and Proclamations are Acts of
Power, no strength in equals to work a force.

Besides, how comes to pass that those at OXFORD Page 23.
contending by the enumeration of those lately dead at WESTMINSTER, or else
departed from their Fellow Members; thence to make them a few and
inconsiderable part, themselves the greater and more valuable number, should be
forced by those at WESTMINSTER being the less.

One other kind of force is urged, of sitting at un-Parliamentory Page 7.
hours, or else to lose their Vote.

There must be (to answer the other Member of of this distinction) some
Parliamentory hours appointed, which no Laws has yet assigned, sitting still,
or going away relates, commonly to the necessity and exigent of the matter in
hand, which happily will not admit delay or a second meeting, but may require
their sitting up till ten, eleven, or twelve a clock in the night, and may
again their meeting at six, five, or four, or sooner in the morning; If they
please to abate so much of their own repose and rest, by their pains and
Industry, their Country is so much the more beholding to them; many of the
Countries have in their See the Petitions of the several Counties.
Petitions taken notice of, and thanked them for their indefatigable pains.

The reason of the small number at WESTMINSTER, wherewith the Assembly at
OXFORD charge them, is obvious to each man's understanding; They make them
thin, and then upbraid them with their thinness: It Is as if Friends and
Companions in a Journey shall see their fellow Travelers in danger to be
robbed, and ride away without assisting them in danger, whose fault is it in
case they are robbed, the failing of those who might have helped, or the
paucity of those who are robbed? this in respect of the other is a remote,
least principal and accidental cause.

It Is easy for a Prince to confer Honors upon men, so to fill the House of
Peers, diverse ways also to increase the number in the House of Commons to His
party; but for the one party to make the other thin, and then to undervalue the
power of them becoming so, is like one impoverishing another by forsaking him
in those duties of friendship which he owes, and then contemning him.

The next odds observed by the Assembly at OXFORD, between the Parliament at
WESTMINSTER and themselves, is the Kings presence with them at OXFORD, and a
major part of the Lords, therefore out-weighing the Dignity of those at
WESTMINSTER.

Which exception, as to the Kings being there, is answered by the Law of not
Dissolving, or by His Majesty's being Virtually, although not Personally
present.

In that the greater part of the Nobility are with the King, His party
therefore the more Honored, it is answered without Disputing the Dignity or
Preeminence of either part, as which the more valuable in Birth or Breeding,
those which went away, or those which staid behind; Comparisons are unseemly,
and forbid what this Discourse does aim at [Reconcilement, Union.]

It was not so at the first entrance into this Quarrel, the King withdrawing
Himself from the Parliament, many of the Peers thought themselves by duty of
their place obliged to attend on His Majesty, and might have power (it is like)
to prevail with some other of their fellow-Peers: Besides, the Nobility are to
be considered as in the next Class and Attendant on His Majesty, some by their
place, others more remotely Interested; wherefore seeing Safety and Preferment
are the Stake which most men of all sorts contend for (let the World be made
believe it is Conscience, Loyalty) the King the Fountain of Honor, in whom to
Reward and Pardon; they who are nearest Him hope first to gain by applying
themselves to serve and please Him.

All men know the Proverb, No fishing to the Sea, nor service to the Court,
which was only in those days true, when a just and uninterrupted Peace did
flourish, no man but could perceive through the Prospect of this Discord, that
Peace, Plenty, and Liberality in Rewarding would all be lost in a Civil
Destructive War.

The Question was at the first much controverted, which the more just or
rightful Cause, the Kings, or the Parliaments divided from the King? Many of
the Grandees adhering to the Court, and more Loyal in an implicit faith,
adhered to the Kings; no more marvel, then that Servants immediately attendant
on their Master, should venture their obedience and assent unto him because
their Master, without examining the Reason of so assenting, and then engaged,
pursue their undertakings, or be meanly thought of in case they shall renounce
the same, the credit whereof is discerned in the quality of the Cause
undertaken, not in the resolvednesse of the Servant undertaking it.

Princes can and often do reward their Friends and Favorites; the Parliament
cannot or seldom does, it is besides their usual course to give, besides their
Friends expectance to receive other Salary then the redemption of their just
Liberties, for which they fight, the maintenance of their ancient Birthright,
conveyed unto them by the known Laws, saving in some few particular cases,
where the Parliament shall meet with a desperately engaged and restless Enemy
of great Power and Estate to fight and foment the Quarrel against; on the other
side, some Friends Eminent in Desert, of smaller Fortunes to fight for them; In
such a case, to disseize their Enemy, to diminish his power, to invest and
gratify their Friend to augment his Fortune, seems not unjust, nor
unreasonable. But to return.

The distinction of Virtual and Personal seems offensive, yea the Declaration
calls it Traiterous, which no indifferent man will judge, until Victory (by
nature insolent) makes every thing displeasing to the Conqueror, Criminal: As
when those on the Kings side hoped to have overrun and conquered all, no man
wishing well to the Parliament, durst name them jointly; whereas simply and
univocally to hold for King and Parliament is the surest and most Loyal tenure:
Howbeit nothing can be with more anger and displeasingly received by the more
perverse and insolent amongst His Majesty's party, then for them to hear those
on the Parliaments side say that [They are for the King and Parliament] So the
Quarrel has several overtures of increasing, the Parliament party taking it
indignly at the Kings party's hands to be thought Disloyal, False, Dissemblers,
as the King's express their anger with the Parliaments, for saying [They are
for King and Parliament.]

To believe or say that the King is seduced by evil Council, is in their heat
and anger a wounding His Majesty through His Councels sides, which exception of
theirs must render Him infallible in judgment, or so singular in wisdom, as to
be above, or to stand in no need of Council (for if he makes use of Council,
and erres by their Advice, the Error is His Councels) or must presume in Him
such transcendency of Goodness, in not inclining to any evil motion, as is not
competent to a Creature: An impartial looker on will rather judge the words of
His Majesty's being seduced by Evil Council, to be a degree rather of
Dutifulness then Disloyalty, as freeing Him from Misdoings, and laying the
Charge on His Evil Counselors, His Majesty is happier if free from these,
styled by another King James in His speech in Parliament 1609. calls them
Traitors, vipers, etc*
name then His Predecessors were: Neither can any man reasonably think that
there is so strict an Unity, so near a co-incidency betwixt His Majesty and
those His Council whom the Parliament suspects, betwixt His thoughts and
inclinations to a Peace to be concluded on fit and just terms, and that His
Councels Desires and Resolutions for such a Peace as may best serve their own
and their parties turn; but that His Subjects may most truly, with much
Loyalty, and without wounding Him through His Councels sides, believe and say
[The King having been seduced by Evil Council, has done that which otherwise
he would not.]

2. To assist the Parliament, to resist in a man's own defense, and to adhere to
such a power as can protect him, is Rebellion.

For Neighboring Towns or Countries to join in a mutual Defense and League
against any Force which may infest; howbeit Nature and Necessity do allow
defensive and provisionary Acts for safety, it is wrested otherwise now, and
termed [Disaffectionate, Disloyal, and adjudged offensive.]

3. To distinguish betwixt the King, His Kingly Office, and His person,
Traiterous: A man in Office is distinguished from what he is in person, yet no
fault or misterming in the distinguisher: If A. B. High Constable of an Hundred
set an Affrayer by the heels, he does it as High Constable, not as he is A. B.
If the Lord Chief Justice E. F. being Judge of Assize and Condemn a Fellon, he
does it not in his personal capacity as he is E. F. but as he is Judge of
Assize: And although there may seem to be a nearer Unity between a King (who is
Natus Rex) His Office and His person, then there is betwixt a Judge (who is
Datus, or factus Judex) his Office and his person; yet the distinction may be
admitted to the King without being Treason.

4. Amongst other Misdemeanors to be exhibited against the Subject, the very
See the Articles to be presented to the high Constables in the Western
Circuit. 1643.
abode in, or repairing to any Town or City, after His Majesty had made known
His Displeasure against the same, is reckoned Disaffection; howbeit, many being
threatened from their Duty, and driven from their homes by the rudeness and
violence of Soldiers, had no other place of succor for their Protection, then
in those places excepted against by His Majesty's Proclamations; So the place,
and persons resorting to the place, lie under the penalty of Displeasure: In
which the chief City of the Kingdom seems in the accusers eye to be most
disloyal; Enjoying yet by Gods mercy (to his Glory and their happiness be it
spoken) notwithstanding the place populous, the times contagious and miserable
elsewhere; a deliverance from the ficknesse, besides the Blessing of Peace
vouchsafed thereto for their Humanity in harboring the stranger and oppressed,
in that amidst the Calamities of Plague and War, they are free from the
Pestilence that walks in darkness, and from the sickness that destroys in the
noon day, that a thousand fall beside them, and ten thousand at their right
hand, but it comes not nigh them.

Summarily, if all matters else of Jealousy and Debate were fitted for a
Treaty, the very Argument concerning what is Treason, what Disloyalty, were
enough to renew the Contention, some so pretendingly fond of the Kings Honor,
as to make his power swell immencely above the Laws and beyond all other Kings,
some amongst the people so advers to the King, as to deny Him the just power
and Sovereignty of a Prince.

There are no question zealous and good desires in many of either party, for
the maintenance of Justice and the Laws: Howbeit, the execution of their
desires be respited, until the prevailing part have gained power to make good
the same, so there may be also a mistaking and a fault in either part.

In some well wishing to the Parliament, who frame and find out causeless
Jealousies, on purpose to divide the King from His friends, as that common and
slightest among the rest, of Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice aiming at the
Crown of England; When His Majesty has a numerous Issue of His own, in
possibility of more, the two Princes, an elder an Illustrious Brother.

Others wishing well to the Kings party, of the like dividing spirit,
contending to have the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom think, that the
Yeomanry and Commonalty frame hopes to themselves of mateing the Gentry in an
equal rank; These sinister contemplations (of some disaffected and
discontented persons) are invented on purpose to sever and divide the mutual
concurrency of the Gentry with the Commonalty in a proportionable aiding one
another; How frivolous it is, all men may guess, when as the Parliament
Members of both Houses are Lords and Gentlemen themselves, a Bulwark strong
enough to retard and provide against any such incroaching thoughts of Parity:
If any such there be (believing these Inventions) there needs no other Argument
to evince such sinister suppositions.

Many the like Jealousies and obstacles to Peace on foot, which the Court of
Parliament do seasonably apprehend.

The Assembly at OXFORD seem the first offerers of an Accommodation for Peace.

But when they set forth Declarations with the fair frontispiece of
Declarations tending to Peace, and in those writings accuse their
Fellow Members (with whom they endeavor to possess the world they contend for
Peace) of refusing and disturbing Page 23.
Peace, of being Traitors and Promoters of this horrid War, and charge them in
those writings, or in some of His Majesty's Declarations, with scoffing the
King in their Messages sent unto Him, (a Crime, if they be guilty of, most
heinous and undutiful) these Accusations of upbraiding their Fellow Members,
may be an outward offering, but no inward or real promoteing of a Peace.

They have deserted their Fellow Members in Parliament, and in that a chief
Trust reposed in them, their very departure without License from the Parliament
was heretofore adjudged 5. Hen. 8. Which Statute they would not all have broken
(it is presumed through the worth and Ingenuity of many of them) had they
either timely considered of the Statute, or not in a passionate and hasty way
departed, or could have foreseen the ill effects of their departure.
penal; to depart, to contrive and wage War against their Fellow Members in
Parliament, heightens the offense, as it credits the mercy of their For
notwithstanding the unhappy consequences of their deserting, the Parliament
refuses not to receive them to compound, upon their undertaking not to do any
thing prejudicial to the State.
Forgivers, in not taking a severe and strict account of Inflicting a condign
censure on the offenders.

To correct and sweeten the Malady thereof, something must be published,
nothing more acceptable then the name of Peace, but on what terms more then the
name of peace in a general word, they do not declare: A condiscending must be
had as well as a meeting for peace, and those ought to condescend who are the
most certain and first Transgressors.

In the Act of offering a Treaty for Peace, to invent new charges of high
Treason, of capital Misdemeanors, of Injustice, is no right way to Peace,
unless the persons charged are guilty of the same, as namely, they charge the
Parliament or their Committees, to have imprisoned two Lords for their Loyalty
to the King, as if their Loyalty were the unquestionable and certain cause of
their Imprisonment.

These Lords might happily show themselves active against and disobedient to
the Parliaments Authority (for in these unsettled and distracted times, few men
do, others will not know their proper duty) and so come within the compass of
some fault to deserve Imprisonment.

The High Treason whereof they accuse their Fellow Members, is their
counterfeiting the Great Seal Page 22.
against the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. which whether in this case be to be
understood High Treason, the Sword must decide the Question.

The Parliament think themselves not guilty of that Crime by the Verdict of
most men, nor every thing made to the Mould by which it is made, is not simply
Counterfeiting; the quality of the offense is much discerned in the manner of
the offending, and every Law-making commonly relates to some preterite fraud
and wickedness: Now whether a King and a Parliament since the first
constitution of either, have heretofore made use of the Great Seal to cross
one another Acts, be to be found in any Record whereon to ground a Law, the
Reader is to seek.

Amongst all the capital Misdemeanors amounting to High Treason recited in that
Statute, the Parliament making a new Seal, being not done against the knowledge
of the King and State, seems not within the compass of that Law, which in that
clause does questionless intend the privy and surreptitious counterfeiting to
the private Use and Benefit of the Counterfeiter: And whereas in that Statute
there may be diverse doubtful cases of Treason determinable, it is then and
there accorded, That if any other case supposed Treason, which is not specified
in See the Statute
that Statute, shall come before any Justices, they shall tarry without giving
Judgment of the Treason, until the cause shall be showed and declared before
the King and Parliament, whether it ought to be so adjudged or not.

In which determination the King and Parliament are presumed jointly to Act; if
dividedly, then who to judge, the King seclusively without the Parliament, or
the Parliament without the King? which, if divided, most likely to give a clear
and dexterous judgment, the King or the Parliament? Those words [The King and
Parliament] cannot be understood of the Kings Council and the Parliament, it
must be of the King himself; in which, as Treason is here objected to the
Parliament, the Parliament is excluded from any decisive power of being Judge
what is Treason, and pronounced guilty themselves of Treason.

The marginal Note, if in that as in other places of See the marginal Note.
the Statute it sums up the sense of the Statute, disputes many Questions
touching Treason to be first decided in Parliament, leaving out the word [King]
or presuming, as is before observed, that He is always there in person or in
virtue.

Take the Accusers (the Assembly at OXFORD) Page 24, 25.
their own acknowledgement, That the Parliament is His Majesty's Answer to a
Declaration from both Houses, May 19. 1642.
not Dissolved, that they are far from Dissolving, or attempting to Dissolve
it: Take His Majesty's own confessing and allowing to the Parliament a power in
a particular doubtful case regularly brought before them, to declare what Law,
consequently what Treason is; and the making a new Great Seal, the old being
contrary to Trust vafrously carried away from them (the Representative Body of
the State, which the Seal is always to attend) will not be adjudged a case of
High Treason.

In the controverting this particular case, as of the other Crimes charged on
the Parliament, and the Subjects of this Kingdom adhering thereunto, the people
may well be to seek, when as the learned Sages and other Students of the The
Innes of Court.
Phrontisteries of Law and Justice seem to be divided in opinion, some very
active, as being peradventure engaged for the King against the Parliament,
contending with all their might to make good the charge of Treason laid upon
that Court, and the Friends assisting them: Others (in the Parliaments account,
and questionless their Friends) as earnest, although more moderatly expressing
it, for the King and Parliament, believe it to be no way Treason.

Which are greater numbers of them on the one side or the other, or which the
more able Lawyers is not here determined: But to the Objection (if any such)
That a greater number of them are within the Jurisdiction of the Parliament, in
LONDON and other places elsewhere, wherefore they may seem rather to side with
that power. The Answer is easily had, That their hopes and possibility of being
preferred by His Majesty, were not Conscience and Judgment valued by them above
Reward or Honor, were a more weighty motive then fear can be of displeasing
that side in whose Quarters they are, which cannot always protect, much less
gratify them, save only with the testimony of what they deserve, answerable to
their Breeding, Knowledge, and liberal Faculty.

One of the learned of that Tribe in those days wherein he lived, and much
Honored for his parts and industry, wrote a whole Tractate for the Dignity and
Privilege of that Court in general: How this in particular has demeaned
themselves to forfeit their Credit any other way then in maintenance of their
power against oppression, violence, offered to themselves and the Subjects for
whom they are entrusted, future Ages can Record. But to proceed.

In the same Declaration full of suspicion, and fraught with quarrelling, the
Assembly at OXFORD except against the words of a Message sent from the Lords
and Commons to His Majesty, Dated in the same year, March 1643. viz. That His
Majesty would not be the least or last Sufferer; These words they thoroughly
scanned, and presented them to the world as terms of an See the Message of the
Lords and Commons sent unto His Majesty, upon occasion of a Letter sent from
the Earl of Forth to the Earl of Essex.
high Affront, as that Subjects, or Rebels ('it is all one in their Dialect) in
arms against their King should dare to send unto Him such a daring and
presumptuous Message.

The words admit a twofold sense, the one, of the Parliaments meaning (as the
Assembly at OXFORD seem to construe it) the other more probably of their
lamenting and foreseeing in their sadness and grief of heart, the inevitable
and universal ruin which must attend this War.

For that, His Majesty cannot be the least Sufferer, it is too probable; whose
sufferings can be compared to His? in the destruction of many thousands of His
people, as well in the greatest and dearest to Him, as in the meaner sort, in
all whom consists His Safety.

This exception, above the rest, was in these sad and suspicious times,
unseasonably moved by His party; for they having conplained of late of
extraordinary wrongs and losses befaln His Majesty, His Treasure and Revenues
denied unto Him, His Houses and Castles spoiled, His Woods cut down and wasted,
etc. It will now be feared, That to repair and make whole those losses, His
Subjects Estates and Lands must satisfy, and most men's demeanor questioned
when He shall have totally Conquered, His peoples faults and negligences set
out to the full, to render the owners culpable, or else His Majesty cannot but
be the greatest Sufferer.

Nor to be the last, no man can think His Majesty will survive the loss of all
His people; a good Subjects Prayer ought to be, with a small insertion in the
Poets address to his Maecenas, Serus in caelum redeat, etc. serus e terra,
then in caelum redeat diuque laeto fruatur nomine; And if it were possible,
without insolency to wish that many days may be yet added to those of His which
God has numbered, to the end, that He may live to see a new Generation spring
up of stout and constant English Hearts to succeed in the room of those whom
this unnatural War has wasted.

But these exceptions moved by the Assembly at OXFORD, of too curious and
suspicious spirit, are proposterous to the pursuit of Peace, their Imputations
of Treason and the like Crimes, to render their Fellow Members sitting at
WESTMINSTER odious to their fellow Subjects, are no fit preparatives to Peace,
nor their calling the Parliaments Intentions, so deeply protested to be real,
[Counterfeit.]

Neither is this Contention by the Sword alone, but by the Pen, on which side,
whither on the Kings or the Parliaments, the Arguers in print touching the
subject of this War since it first began, have wrote the more solidly and
rationally concerning it, which have more heartily and succinctly without
railing or expatiating terms set down the Arguments, the Reader is to compare
the difference and judge.

For Rhetorique and strength of Wit, or for a sublimate and fine style of
Expression, the Assembly at OXFORD, as having the more youthful, facere and
nimble Wits in their party and Quarters, the help and influence of the pregnant
conceits, and nimble Fancies in the University there, may seem to have the
start: But let the Writings on both sides be examined according to Reason and
Judgment, and the Reader will judge the difference: Let it be instanced in
three or four the most remarkable Messages in Writing, and the Answers
thereunto, no other being so opposite to each other as these here mentioned.

First, The Letter to the Governor and Counsel of See the Letter and the answer
War at BRISTOL from the Lord General of His Majesty's Forces, demanding a
forbearing of putting to death the two Citizens there, with the Governors
Answer thereunto.

The Answer is for-judged already, and the Reader saved his pains of judging
it, by being termed by the Kings party [The Governors In a Book of an unknown
Author, called The States Martyr.
insolent Answer] when as it is adjudged by other more impartial Readers, to be
a well weighed, apposite and sober Answer.

Secondly, That for the Marquis of Argyle and Sir William Armyne, (the
Commissioners from both Kingdoms) fully and in few words delivering their See
their Message and Sir Thomas his answer.
Intentions and Reasons thereof to Sir Thomas Glenham a Commander in chief in
His Majesty's Army, with His Answer unto them, full also of words and of
suspicion.

Which in a Treaty sincerely meant should be left out, and the Objections
answered with Reason and Judgment; no perverting or wresting of the sense
against the Authors meaning, no total and universal dislike had by His
Majesty's party to every thing which the Parliament shall declare or do: And it
is requisite withal, that the matter of a Treaty to be disputed to and fro
should have an equal and free passage and reciprocal intercourse, which the
Parliament judges to be denied to them sitting at WESTMINSTER, that when
Declarations have been published and set forth against them, they are by His
Majesty's Proclamation, inhibiting all Trade and Traffic thither, denied
their reasonable Answer to be likewise published, so they cannot be heard, nor
set forth to the world what they can say in defense of themselves; so the
Accusations from the one side (His Majesty's party) are bitter, concluding and
offensive, whatsoever the War is, and their Challenges in print not to be
answered by their Fellow Members for the reason above recited.

One other intercourse of Messages between both parties of a latter time, this
April, the Summons sent by the Committee of both Kingdoms to the Lord Bellasis
Governor of NEWARK, for surrendering that Town and Fort, the Summons expressing
persuasive and important Motives to surrender.

See His Majesty's Letter, dated Mar. 23. and the Secretaries Answer to the
Committees summons, Apr 1. 1646.
The Governor his Secretary's Answer full of good Language, Courage, and
strength of Wit, wherein mentioning His Majesty's Letter sent the 23 of March
last past unto both Houses of Parliament, he urges the Kings most gracious
conditions, in that He will disband His Forces; dismantle His Garrisons; The
Secretary recites not all the Kings proposals, of having His Friends pardoned,
the Sequestrations taken from their Estates: Either the Secretary saw not the
Kings whole Letter, whereof he recites one part only, or else he smiles in his
sleeve, thinking by his short Comment on the Letter to satisfy the Committee
there, and the whole Kingdom besides.

His Majesty's Letter is full and genuine in its meaning, to be taken
collectively, not apart, as of disbanding, dismantling, etc. without pardoning,
etc. and such collective manner of speaking is always conditional, the one to
be done on the one, if the rest be performed on the other side; The Secretaries
reciting them is short of His Majesty's meaning, and mentions it as the Tempter
in the Gospel tells our Savior, All these will I give thee, which was as much
as his eye could behold, but on what condition? If Christ would fall down and
worship him: The condition which he annexes to his promise, annihilates the
gift; The conditions which the Secretary calls [Gracious] in His Majesty's
Letter of disbanding His Forces, etc. if nothing else were to be expected, are
in every man's judgment as in the Secretaries, most gracious: But to have His
Friends, His party pardoned, the Sequestrations wholly taken off from their
Estates, were to put them whom the Parliament accounts offenders and their
Enemies, into a better condition then their own Friends: The Secretary, if
knowing His Majesty's whole Letter, and would contract it into parts, reciting
that only which serves his turn, the Committee being presumed to be solid and
able men will follow their own Judgment without replying to that Answer.

This sophisticate and defective manner of Arguings abates the merit of their
cause, and might make them unless better armed with Reasons, incapable of a
solid and sincere Treating with their opposites.

But in that a not entertaining of a Treaty has been charged on the
Parliament, and therefore they are named The Refusers and Disturbers of Peace,
a Reason may be given if they be justly charged, that if they do not at every
beck send and employ their Fellow Members, the reason of their forbearing may
relate to their small number, whereby the Assembly at OXFORD upbraideth them;
For in that there be but a few Peers left to assist their fellow-Peers, they
cannot spare a competent number out of a few, those few also it may be feared
in danger of being by degrees tempted, either secretly to comply with the party
tempting them, if not to be wrought off, yet to make them less zealous and
constant to their own party.

The various ways of tempting are not unknown, and it is much, that neither
the fair promisings, nor angry threatenings have more generally wrought.

In this continued course of their Accusings, which they print at OXFORD and
set forth to the public view, to possess the world with the Justice of their
Cause, the Injustice of their Adversaries, a Treaty notwithstanding is proposed
for the composure of these differences, for the settling a firm and happy Peace,
Commissioners appointed on either part, and a place named for the dispatch
thereof.

How the Treaty was carried, an OXFORD See the Book called A Relation of the
Treaty at Vxbridge, printed at Oxford.
Writer has undertaken to state it truly, which he might more easily, then the
Commissioners deputed to the business could carve out even terms whereon to
ground a Peace, when as there must be in every Quarrel one offending part, one
suffering more or less, yet both seem willing by their meeting to conclude a
Peace, each party, the Kings, the Parliaments, could not but discern the War
would prove chargeable to the Subject, the payments for maintaining it prove
irksome unto all, that many of their Friends would grow weary and fall off upon
every light occasion or surmise of their being grieved and taxed with payments,
in case the War should last long, they having no other reward of their
Assistance, but the uncertain event of a hoped for Peace.

That other of their Friends, to avoid the miseries of a Civil War in this
Kingdom, would transplant themselves, transport their Estates beyond Sea.

That there may be many Motives to desist from farther contending for the
requiring an Accord and Peace, many revolutions and vicissitudes of success in
War: Prosperous begets Security, keeps off a farther pursuit of Concurrency and
Assistance, as if the victory were already had and the War ended; Advers breeds
Discouragement in the common Soldier, especially in a Civil War, where they
are inconstant to their own party, and many of them ignorant of what they fight
for.

Besides, in the managing of an Army there be many Contingencies and cross
Accidents to impair their strength, Commanders may want Fidelity, common
Soldiers pay or victual, few or none an excuse to leave off the Service; the
War, the longer it continues, the more implacable and fierce the Enmity, and
that Friends do fall by the Sword as well as Enemies.

Each party might be unwilling to put it to the hazard of a total Conquest by
the Sword, the contests about which could not but bring forth a total ruin,
and in the pursuit thereof, the more the Conquering party shall prevail, the
more subject they are to divide and contend within themselves, Victory being by
nature Victoria natura insolens and superba. Cicer.
proud, and by pride Contention comes, and the more potent and stout the
Conquered party has been, the more prone to pride the Conquering will be.

That the War would not be always doubtfully carried, but that one side would
sometimes have the upper hand, and which side should begin to have the
prevailing power, must to continue and maintain that power do many things
harsh, Irksome, and detrimental to the Subject, as levying and imposing Taxes,
forcing the people even to the provoking and displeasing of those who were not
their Enemies, withal that the weaker and more conquered party having lost
their strength, whether through Gods Judgment upon the injustice of their
Cause, or for some humane and more visible reasons, would notwithstanding try
all ways, and leave none unassayed to reinforce their strength (the thirsting
after Conquest being so extreme and vehement) either in plotting wicked, or
contriving fained and false pretexts, that what honest and good means could
not, false and hellish must, according to that desperate resolve of the Wretch
in the Poet, Flectere si nequeant superos Acheronta movebunt, not caring though
their wicked Machinations and attempts add yet to the filling up the vials of
Gods Wrath upon this Nation wherein they live.

These and the like considerations necessarily to have been foreseen, might
have moved against the wageing of a War at first, much more against the
continuing this War; these and the Arguments above recited might after the
effusion of much blood move to treat to prevent the shedding more.

A Treaty has been agreed upon, and PROPOSITIONS suited whereon to Treat, the
one side real and sincere to conclude a Peace, exposed to the Public view,
nothing to be objected against the reality of their meaning: If on the other
side there were reservations of fraud, and a pretense only of Peace, set forth
to gain advantage by (as there be presumptions to prove the same) the
pretenders can answer for themselves: All ways are honest, and fraud and
falsehood are virtues in Adversaries to Rebellion, contending to subdue and
scatter Rebels: Peace is a pledge of Friendship, and Friendship has no other
terms of intercourse then goodness, as that there cannot be just Amicitia est
tantum inter bonos. Arist. Ethic.
friendship had betwixt a good Subject and a Rebel, no more then between an
honest and a lewd man.

These Arguments of excusing this fraud may please and satisfy the party
framing them, and whether the Parliament and their Assistants in this War be
Rebels, needs no farther Treatise.

But to the PROPOSITIONS whereon the Treaty was to work, and the Difference
between those sent by the King, and those sent by the Parliament.

Those that His Majesty insists upon are three;

1. Church Government by Episcopacy. 2. Lyturgy and Common Prayer Book. 3. The
Clergy to enjoy for a time their several Livings.
All which are matters of Form, accidental and private concernment in respect
of what the Parliament demands, necessary for the Public good: namely,

The Protestant Religion.

The Business concerning IRELAND.

The Militia, the security of the whole.

So the Contention, rather the mistake grows about granting or refusing these,
betwixt the subject of which two demands, there cannot be so great a difference
as betwixt natural humanity to spare from killing, and unnatural cruelty to
persist in killing, or so important, as that Peace and War should depend
thereupon, which if the demands on either side were granted by the other, might
happily have determined into Peace.

The reason for demanding on the one side, as for refusing on the other are too
tedious for this Discourse.

The OXFORD Relator has by a large Discourse, taken pains to satisfy the
world, of the justice of their own demands, the Parliaments experience and
wisdom in the transaction of matters incident to this Quarrel, declares the
reason for their demands here to be insisted on.

To the first, that is to say the Protestant Religion, exercised rather in
Manners and Doctrine then in Church discipline, comprehends and secures the
second [the business concerning IRELAND] for unless a discreet and saving
hand be had in reducing, as of Governing that Kingdom, and managed by a most
choice wisdom, the increase of the Papists and Rebels there, will endanger the
subversion of the first [the Protestant Religion] so these two first
PROPOSITONS demanded on the Parliaments part, having a mutual connection and
depency, seem to attract each other in the maintenance of justice and the
Subjects Right, Religion being the ground of justice as justice is of Peace.

In matter of Church Discipline or in the forms of Hierom. Zanch. in quartum
Mandatum quod multiplex genus est Christi Ministrorum, page 950. probat
Presbyter and Episcop. idem esse Edw. Leigh. Armig. in libro titul. Sacrar.
Critic. novi Testam. in nomine Episcop. ubi recenset Plutarch in Numa vocat
custodem Sacrarum Virgin. Episcop. and citat Septuaginta vertere Episcop. in
Ezekiel. and Hosea legit a Watchman, and Paulo post dicit Episcop. esse qui verbo
and gubernat pr^erat, puta Doctior. Pastor. Presbyter. page 158. Neither is
there so great and material a Difference betwixt the two subdivided parts of
the Parliament side [The Presbyterian and Independent] as for a quarrel to
continue and depend upon: The wisdom of that Court has taken away the
virulency of any quarrel which might happen betwixt them two, by constituting
the one, yet with respect had to the tenderness of Conscience in the other;
Although the one be fully declared for by the Lords and Commons in the
Parliament in their solid and satisfactory Declaration this present April, yet
with a due regard had to Tender consciences not differing in Fundamentals of
Religion, that they also may be provided for, etc. wherefore it is rather
Luxury, Pride of Wit, and contempt of Authority, then any object of a real
difference which animates and maintains these quarrels.
Divine Worship, that which His Majesty demands of Episcopal Government,
differs little from what the Parliament does intend of Presbyterial, Bishops
and Presbyters in their primitive Institution being all one.

In the Forms of Divine Worship, the Directory enjoined by the Parliament not
really differing in the material parts thereof from the Common Prayer Book
required by the King, only the one expugning for the present, what the other
does contain; That being more painful to the Minister, not more declaring his
Abilities; This the more easy as being dictated unto him: either may be of
use, either behoofful to the Auditory, as meeting with all the necessities, and
deprecating the contingency of all afflictions incident to mankind, the
Common Prayer Book compiled by sound and learned Divines, and accordingly
ordained by an ancient Law, the Directory framed by the like learned men, and
Ordained by a Modern Authority to be made use of for the present season, or so
long as Authority shall think good; But that which abates the value of this, is
the weakness of the Argument in the defender thereof, preferring it therefore
before the Common Prayer, because the use of the Directory sets forth the gifts
and Abilities of the Preacher beyond his reading or exercise of Common Prayer,
which is digested already into a Form, when as that rather denotes the best
Abilities and parts of Schollership in point of Science, Study, Judgment,
which is able to perform the hardest work, to dispense Gods Mysteries aright,
to set them forth in a hansome and polite style, the power of the spirit is no
whit checked or blemished by an eloquent expression, to raise and apply sound
Doctrine, winning the Attention and edifying the hearer, is harder then to
conceive and utter Prayer.

One other reason for using the Directory is, that seeing we and the Scots are
United by a Solemn League and Brotherhood, and they not using the Lyturgy of
our Church, we should therefore abstain from using the same.

Answ. They and we are born and Governed under different and distinct Laws,
their Manners and Customs differ much from ours; The Union betwixt the Nations
will serve for support and aid of both, being under one and the same Dominion
in case of either infested by an enemy, but for the same numerical Form of
Divine Worship, to be performed after the self same kind, this Arguing seems
rather an Illustration then a proof.

God is an uncircumscribed and incomprehensible Spirit, to be Worshipped in
truth and spirit, he cares not whether by heart without book, or in a book
opened, so he be Worshipped with the heart.

This only by the way to show as there is no identity of Form betwixt the
Directory and Common Prayer Book, so no such Discrepancy unless in the persons
using them, as to heighten or continue these unnatural differences.

The reasons given by His Majesty's Commissioners for making a Cessation
betwixt Him and the Irish Rebels, and the Parliaments Commissioners contending
to have such Cessation void, are of greater moment; the Kings urging it
dishonorable on His part to vacate the Cessation, wishing also that it were in
See the Relation, page 131.
His power to do it: But why dishonorable, or how comes it to pass that it is
out of His Majesty's Power to suppress the Rebellion there, as his
Commissioners urge? unless by employing and making use of his strength against
this, he abates and lessens it as against that Kingdom; His Commissioners their
reasons given for both are answered in what follows, and the judgment in
deciding the Question, to be given according to the late past occurrences which
the Declarations and Remonstrances within these few years published have set
forth.

If His Majesty did make the Cessation to the end to save the Remainder of His
Protestant Subjects there, it was an Honorable and Pious care in him toward
those his Subjects, but if from a more principal and ultimate end of making
such Cessation to make use of the contending parties in that Kingdom against
his Subjects called Rebels in this, the Parliaments Commissioners had reason to
press the vacating of such Cessation; They farther insisting thereon, that if
the Cessation had not been made in the time of the Rebels their greatest wants,
and the Forces employed then and there against them not drawn off, they might
in probability have been subdued, and this War even finished.

They also urge that if the Clothes going into IRELAND for the supply of the
Protestants and Army there, had not been taken away by the Kings Soldiers near
COVENTRY and within His Quarters, the English and Protestants there had been
relieved, etc.

That the goods and Clothes so taken away, was not without His Majesty's
knowledge and direction, unto which the Kings Commissioners reply, That those
Clothes had not been taken away, if they had had a Conduct to have more safely
passed through the Country; and further urge, That those Forces and other
Provisions intended for the Relief of His Majesty's Subjects in that Kingdom,
were diverted and employed against Him, namely in the Battle at EDGEHILL.

For proof whereof they mention three or four witnesses, some of whom engaged
for the service of the Parliament, and deserting now the same engagement are
advers, and none more extreme Enemies to the Parliament, whither they be
competent witnesses in so extreme a Conflict to prove the Accusations.

If witnesses may be admitted, known to be
maliciously opposite to that party against which they are witnesses, the
inconvenience may prove in these loose and desperate times as generally noxious
as the War it self has been.

The Answer to such Accusation as the Kings Commissioners therein urge, is no
where more fully to be had then to the Enquiry into the Original of this War;
whereunto all Treaties had to compose this vast difference must have recourse,
otherwise a meeting to conclude a Peace, will vanish into Contention and
Disputes, for want of a certain Rule or constant Principle to guide the
Treaters by.

The well weighing of the Protestation lately taken, might have confined and
settled the doubtful and various thoughts of man, in what the end and aim of
the Protestation was, a promise to fulfill in as much as in us lies, the
Commandments of the first and second Table of the Law, directing our duty
toward God and man, the several parts in the Protestation tending in the sum
to the maintenance of Gods Honor, the Kings, the Subjects Right and Liberty (no
one part thereof if rightly understood and applied crossing another) and
therefore how it comes to pass that the Protestation being one and the same,
the course of men's affections should be thus divided into partakings, or that
some should be of opinion, that to maintain the Kings Honor, Person and Estate,
is to adhere unto Him in this present War in what He shall command: They should
withal consider the other parts of the Protestation viz. The Defense of the
Protestant Religion, the Power and Privileges of Parliament, the Subjects
Right and Liberty; for by the Protesters observing all, the King is best
observed and trullest, His Honor and promises being engaged to maintain the
latter three* when as every one who takes the Protestation, does thereby
endeavor to make Him a Sovereign Lord of a free and flourishing people; The
Kings Protestations concurring with and tending to that end, so the
Protestation taken altogether is best observed and kept.

To the Protestation for the defense of the Protestant Religion, every one who
takes it, is not immediately bound by virtue of his Vow, to extirpate or remove
all Papists (that is above the power and liberty of every common person) but if
he sees the Protestant Religion in danger of declining, and that the Papist is
connived at and countenanced by higher powers (for the question is not about
the certain and actual bringing in of Popery, but touching the causes of
suspicion) if the Protester adhereth to that party which promises to defend
the Protestant, and opposes that which countenanceth the Popish, his
Protestation is the truliest kept, a Promise or Vow the more pursued the more
fulfilled.

In like manner to the other part of the same Protestation, viz. The maintenance
of the Kings Honor, every one who takes the same is not thereby bound to
comply, assent unto and obey the King in whatsoever He may command, whether
unlawful or unjust, or to think all His attempts and actions Justifiable
throughout: This were indeed in the highest degree to Honor Him; but in a more
serious and as truly a loyal way of His being honored by His Subjects, is when
they or those who are put in place and authority over them, shall enquire into
and provide against all things incident to His Dishonor, when they shall
endeavor to chastise and suppress all Affronts and insolences which may be
offered to His Honor; This although a more remote and less flattering, yet a
more stable and certain discharge of Duty in Honoring Him.

But to proceed and examine wherefore His Majesty's Page 119.
Commissioners press the want of a Conduct for the guard of those Forces and
other provisions intended for the relief of His Majesty's Subjects in the
Kingdom of IRELAND, etc. it seems strange, when as His giving way to many
subscribers and adventurers into that Kingdom, His often and tender expressions
of the deplorable and sad Estate of His Subjects there, His offering to go in
Person for the better reducing the Rebels there (all or most of these being
known to all His Subjects) was safety enough in all likelihood, and above the
strength of many Regiments of Soldiers, or above the validity of any
Commanders pass, to have secured the transporting of such Clothes and other
Provisions intended thither from the violence of His own party.

The Parliament Commissioners urge farther, That it was Declared from His
Majesty, That he did disapprove the subscriptions of the Officers of the Army,
by means whereof that course was diverted: That the Commissioners sent by the
two Houses of Parliament for the better supplying and encouraging the Army in
that Kingdom, were discountenanced and commanded from the Council there, where
the prosecution of the War was to be managed, unto which no Answer or Excuse is
set down by the Author of the Relation.

His Majesty's Commissioners derive the good and Justice of the Cessation from
the Lords Justices, and Council of that Kingdom, intimating the same by Letters
sent from those Lords to His Majesty and the Speaker of the House of Commons,
and that had it not been for such Cessation, the Protestants there could not
have subsisted.

The Parliament Commissioners answer, That Page 135.
those Letters sent do no way intend the inducing a Cessation, nor that the
Copies showed to them do contain any thing tending to, or any the least
intention of a Cessation, and that those Letters sent were therefore written to
quicken a supply from the Kingdom of ENGLAND.

They farther averring, That notwithstanding such Cessation, which many and
considerable persons of that Kingdom do still oppose, many English and Scottish
there do yet subsist.

The Arguing and Debating which, hindering the Supplies and Assistance which
otherwise might have been afforded, has added much to the Affliction and
Calamity of His Protestant Subjects there, and to be imputed wholly to the
Authors and Persisters in this War: For whilst both parties in the War do
contend to maintain and increase their power in opposition each to other, and
consequently forbear to send Aid to the Protestants there, the small number yet
remaining of the English and Scottish cannot possibly subsist.

Who such Authors and Causers of this War have been, is long since manifested
and resolved by the joint advice and provision made against them in the
Articles of the large Treaty betwixt the Kingdom of ENGLAND and SCOTLAND
August, Page 16.
1641. in their fourth Demand granted by His Majesty, the Kingdoms then and
there agreeing to make such liable to the censure and sentence of the
Parliaments respectively, etc. But to proceed.

If it be dishonorable to His Majesty, as His Commissioners urge, to make void
that Cessation out of gratitude and favor to the Papists there affisting Him in
this War, His Commissioners, His Friends and His party might have spared to
object those Acts passed by His Majesty this Parliament, in favor and case to
His Subjects, when as if this Parliament be born down or dissolved, the Acts
passed by His Majesty this Parliament are Repealable, Alterable in part or in
all by a succeeding Parliament, by which Acts already passed, many of His
Friends and party adhering to Him against this Parliament, have suffered in
their Estates, as is before expressed.

For neither the suppressing of Star Chamber or High Commission Court, the
granting of a Triennial Parliament (which are instanced in as Acts of Grace,
and the Subjects charged with Ingratitude for not valuing such gracious Acts)
are no infallible and constant notes of such His Goodness and Favor to His
people, when as those Acts are Repealable at pleasure; nor that of the
Triennial Parliament, unless a Parliament be of force to maintain their Power
and Privileges, which this has sought to defend for their own, and for
succeeding Parliaments.

As for His Majesty's Commissioners to urge, excusing in their way the King and
His party from violating the ancient and Fundamental Laws.

That the Parliament and their Committees are guilty of breaking the same, and
they alone, as if no such thing were done by His Majesty's party, Soldiers and
Commissioners employed for raising Arms and Money to prosecute this War.

Such charge against the Parliament must either be understood of their
abolishing for the present some ancient Constitutions, or of their compulsory
ways in raising Moneys for the maintenance of this War, the reason, the means
of the one and the other is examined.

If his Commissioners understood it of the particular and late Robberies
committed by the Soldiers on poor Countrymen and Travelers on the road, that
cannot be charged on the Parliament, because it is done against their will, and
to prevent the like, they have according to the Law brought the offenders to
condign punishment, wherein also the Kings Soldiers are the most offenders,
when as the Parliament Soldiers are required for their Assistance to rescue
from the Robbery and Spoylings committed by the Kings, besides it has been
observed that many wishing well to the Parliament, Travelers on the ways having
met with Soldiers, and doubtful on which side they were, being demanded for
whom they were, have counterfeited their tone, and answered For the King, as
being assured that if those Soldiers were fort he Parliament, they should
find less cruel usage then by the Soldiers for the King.

This, Experience has thoroughly taught, and these and the like actions
committed by His party, has made His Majesty's name the more terrible.

In that the like hostile and cruel Acts are practiced on either part, and that
the fear of cruelty working more strongly on the common sort, has brought many
of them to yield and comply with the more cruel part, the inequality of the
cruelty has been observed to be great between the one side, who to gain or
save a Town, or for the like advantage sake have burned or pulled down some
houses, in a sudden and revengeful heat have killed and Enemy; and the other
side, which in cool blood have killed and massacred many hundred of inoffensive
Subjects, burned whole Towns, and laid waste the dwelling places of the Poor
and Fatherless.

For if the one side had wasted and spoiled as the other does, the Countries
had been far more miserable then now they are, and the spoyler left destitute
of where withal to maintain himself and his Soldiers.

The Kings party give a reason for such a difference had betwixt the Soldiers
on either side, alleging that the Countries being Rebellious and Disaffected,
deny unto their Soldiers upon their march and in their quarterings a fit
provision and supply for horse and man, wherefore the Soldiers of His
Majesty's party are enforced to rob and spoil, etc.

The Answer to this Objection is had from a recourse to what is here delivered,
and the Reader to be satisfied in the Question, what Rebellion, Treason truly
is, what the ground and original of the Countries Disaffection is?

If His Majesty's Commissioners understand their charge against the Parliaments
violating the Fundamental, because of their abolishing old Laws; It Is answered,
They have power to Abrogate and Repeal what they find offensive and exorbitant
in a Commonwealth.

The modern and positive Laws were by Parliament established, and quicquid
constituitur, eodem modo etiam dissolvitur.

No one Fundamental Law is by them dissolved, or by their Acts yet violated,
unless the Constitution of Bishops be held a Fundamental one; It was their
Quarrel, and questionless their Exception, to be found both in their words, and
by their or their Friends Writings, That the Parliament have transgressed the
Ancient Laws, because they have abolished Bishops; they make the Law which
constitutes them to be of equal time and value (belike) with that of Magna
Charta, when as most men know who have looked into the Records, that many
Session of Parliament have bin held, many Acts passed Excluso Clero.

It was a cunning Argument and Artifice in the Bishops to incense the people
against the Parliament, if it were they which give out the Parliament to have
violated the Ancient Laws which the people were ready to defend, when as upon a
through examination of the matter complained of, there was no other Law
violated but what concerned the Bishops partial in the Cause.

To conclude the Question touching the transgressing of the Laws, which both
sides may seem to be guilty of; the matter is not whether the Ancient or New
Laws be kept, whether those long since made, or those of a latter time be
broken; a War lets all Laws loose; but had the Law of not Dissolving without
the Parliaments consent, been kept entirely and strictly, the other Laws had
not in the judgment of most men been broken.

The Parliament may plead, Their undertakings and course of Justice cannot be
made good, by reason of their power opposed, themselves confronted.

The great Law and Charter of the Subjects Freedom, is enlarged into Statute
Laws, all conducing to make up one Suprema Lex salus Populi.
Supreme Law [The Subjects Safety.]

The dividing of the Parliament Members, if amounting to a Dissolving of the
Court contrary to a Law consented unto by His Majesty, has added much to the
shaking of the Ancient Laws; and this War occasioned, as is before expressed,
has opened a way to the violating all other Laws.

The Contention has since the first beginning thereof devolved to matter of
Trust (the third of the PROPOSITIONS in Demand) how the Soldiery and Arms of
the Kingdom should be settled, and who to be trusted in the managing thereof;
The King, rather those about Him whom the Parliament suspects, or the
Parliament and those whom they depute: So the Militia, the Fortress and Author
of the Subjects Safety, when well settled, binds up, and as it were does keep
the Peace; it has the turning power, and casting voice upon all emergent
differences which may happen.

The Kings Commissioners propose to have the Power thereof divided into an
equal number of Commissioners on both sides, which the Parliament Commissioners
judge not reasonable, for that they being named dividedly, will act dividedly
on every Debate which happens according to their several Interests, and the
Commissioners on either part will have partakers in the Quarrel; so the Militia
thus settled, and to keep the Peace, may prove the overture of a renewed
Contention.

Besides, if the Distribution thereof be assigned to forty, whereof twenty to
be named by the King, the other half by the Parliament; the King re-invested to
His former Dignity, can easily gain upon some one of those which the Parliament
shall make choice of; so the Kings part being the major, will carry against the
Vote and Judgment of the lesser part: Thus, the Account cast up, it would be
all one for the King to name the whole number of those for the Militia.

And whereas His Commissioners take it for granted That the Commissioners for
the Parliament do admit the Jealousies on either part to be mutual, therefore
the Militia to be mutually and equally managed.

Their Argument seems reasonable, if true; for if the Causes of Jealousy were
mutual or equal in degree or time, the Reason for so dividing the Commissioners
were more important.

But admit the Jealousies to be mutual, Jealousies may be as Injuries, mutual,
yet diversified in degree, as some more vehement, more certain then others,
some of a longer, some of a shorter date.

If it were as certain (as is before observed) that the Parliament did intend
or attempt any thing against the King, as it is certain the Subjects Right and
Liberty were incroached upon, no question then but the fault rests in the
Parliament, and the whole War to be judged Defensive on the Kings part.

To the matter of Jealousy; the Parliament suspects the King to be carried
away by evil Council, persuading Him and assisting Him against His Supreme
Council of the Kingdom.

The King and His party charge them with being Rebels.

The substance of which Charge is (as already expressed) Their taking up Arms
against Him, their purpose to destroy Him, wherefore as guilty of such Treason
to be opposed and fought against.

The Argument is, as before examined, hoped and prayed for, from falsely
suggested premises, unknown, ungranted.

That whereof the Kings party is suspected, there is pregnant presumption for,
yea, matter of Fact.

So the Jealousies seem to be presented mutual, although differing in degree of
certainty.

Here then the odds between the Accusations on either side, the Kings and
Parliaments; that whereof the Parliament stands Accused, is uncertain, unknown;
that whereof the King's party is accused, there is vehement presumption for.

Now whether we shall weigh in the same Balance the supposititious and
unknown, with that which is certain and evident, and Jealousies unequal in
themselves whereon to pass a censure, let all men judge.

The Kings Commissioners and His party seem in nothing more to get the start of
the Parliaments, then by their often speaking and offering of terms of Peace,
as of proposing and accepting Treaties: But it is not who are the first and
most frequent offerers, but who the most reasonable and equal in the terms of
Treating for a Peace.

The settling a firm and well-grounded Peace by Treaty, should be upon a
surenesse and equality of terms, which if it cannot be had, a compliance and
condiscending must, which is no loss of credit in the offending part.

To retract an Error, argues two prime virtues, Wisdom and Humility, and all
offenders have not erred as of themselves, or of their want of Judgment, but
by the participation of another Error and Opinion which they have prized too
much.

What in the Narrative and Circumstance of this War, is to be understood of the
contrary thereto, Peace, and how to be obtained is to be enquired.

There is a Diversity and Latitude in the word [Peace] If for one part utterly
to cease from Arms, and quietly to sit down (which indeed were one step to
Peace) and to expect what then might befall on such a ceasing, were in the
pursuit of Peace required; Or whether a Peace in its more proper definition of
a Just and Safe Accord, a reciprocal Amity and Tranquillity established in Truth
and Equity, not See the matter, means and definition of a Peace, and the
contrary thereto, quoted out of several Authors by Mr. Lambard in his
Eyrenarch, lib. 1. cap. 2. page 9.
Union of the minds, that is not for the present to be had, but a restraining
of the hands: So Just and Safe are as it were the specifical differences in the
definition of Peace: True and Plain might be added too, least whilst they
speak of Que nihil habet in sidiarum Cicer.
Peace in their mouths, they have War in their hearts.

The latter [Safe] employed by what peace it self is sometime taken in a great
Lawyers sense, calling the Kings Writs Brevia de pace, so that Safety being
Bracton lib. 4.
one, Justice ought to be another part of Peace, which the Orator does mean,
where he sets vis and Cicer. pro Sestio.
jus one against the other.

To which also agrees the same Lawyers description of vis in these words, vis
est quoties quis, quod sibi deberi putat, non per judicem reposcit, etc.

According whereunto the two old Statutes say, Westminst, 1. cap. 1. Rich. 2.
Let the Peace of the Land be maintained in all points, and common Right done
to all. In the other, Let Peace be well and surely kept, that the Kings
Subjects may safely go and come, and abide according to the Law of the Realm,
and that Justice and Right be indifferently administered to every Subject.

In the Texts of Scripture, Grace and Peace, Peace and Truth do go together,
Peace and Righteousness like individual friends kiss each other: So safety,
to perpetuate and strengthen it, is requisite to Peace, and a restraint might
be had of the hands if an Union of the minds, and so on the other side, an
Union of minds, if a restraint of hands: The difficulty then rests only how
either or both, Unity of the one, or Restraint of the other may be had, whether
by a meeting for a Treaty, or by pursuit of Victory by the sword.

A Treaty has been had, Commissioners of eminent quality met, and PROPOSITIONS
inter-changeably sent.

What the carriage and event thereof has been, the Author of the Relation of
the passages there has expressed, but whither impartially set down, the
Commissioners are the only witnesses, whither his relation makes for or
against his own party, the Reader is to judge.

The Parliament whither in their proposing or accepting of the Treaty, showed
their Inclination to a Peace, gaining nothing by the meeting (for no one
PROPOSITION demanded was granted them) save only the credit of their sincerity
in really meaning to acecomplish that, for which the end of their meeting was.

The seeking and ensuing Peace is to be presumed to be the fervor and end of
their desires; Neither they nor their friends shall gain by the protraction of
the War; It is likewise to be so presumed on His Majesty's party, save some
Officers and Commanders in chief in either Army; Forraigners and Outlandish,
who empty ours to fill their own purses; And other Instruments appendent on the
War, and employed for raising money to defray the charge, may happily be thrivers
by the War.

But for the means of obtaining Peace, standers by may be able to discern, wise
to observe and contemplate on the means: Howbeit none are called, none sent,
none on whom the power and authority of managing the Peace is devolved, save
the Court of Parliament alone, in whom we have entrusted all expedients to our
Safety.

If they shall judge the PROPOSITIONS formerly tendered to His Majecty, to be
the only and effectual means; The Subjects are to abide by their Judgment,
which PROPOSITIONS may seem in number many, in their strict quality extreme and
harsh; especially in the Kings friends eye, as seeming to abate His accustomed
Regal Dignity.

Extreme diseases require extreme remedies for their cure, and when Jealousies
are a long time breeding, the task will be as difficult in the means of
dispelling them: Evils when grown strong, multiplied and closely wrought, need
a proportionate instrument to lance and remove to stop the new springing up of
the same or the like.

The PROPOSITIONS are of two sorts, the The PROPOSITIONS to be sent suitable to
the present exigent in hand, viz. the Preservation of the Honor and just Power
of a King displeased, the Parliament and people threatened are not of a
tumultuary and easy dispatch, not to be concluded in haste, nor quarrelled
with for the delay in sending them, when as many interveening accidents may
give occasion for altering them: Nor can every looker on be a fit Dictator or
judge in this most weighty Cause and Controversy touching the quality and
fitness of what is to be insisted on; the Parliaments most choice, elaborate
and well weighed Councels are no more then needs to deliberate, compute, and a
long time to be advising what is once and for ever to be established, that His
Majesty may be no more a loser, nor the welfare of His Subjects (which is the
foundation of His happiness) endangered for the future: If the PROPOSITIONS be
too high. His Majesty may think the Parliament to be His King, and Himself may
seem to stoop too low and beneath His Sovereignty to grant and sign them; If
they be of too low and short assurance to secure the Subjects peace; The
Parliaments forepast Acts and Councels are wholly frustrate, the labor of
their endeavors lost: And what is like to be the sequel, any man may guess.
one a calling Delinquents to account, demanding Justice according to the
degree of their offendings.

The other, of their tendering to the King the Counsels and result of their own
experience and maturity of Wisdom, for the Government of His Kingdom, wherein
they only prompt and dictate to His Majesty, what they desire Him to assist and
join with them in the completing and establishing the same.

The first, of calling offenders to account, expressly named in the
PROPOSITIONS, whither they all shall suffer in their livelihoods accordingly as
they are challenged; Or only some few known to be the Principal and long since
contrivers of these mischiefs, the subversion of the Protestant Religion and
the Laws, is left to the Judgment of the Parliament, which being a Court of
mercy (mercy no negative of Justice) can, in case they are able to maintain
their own proper Power, make use of what the Heathens Judgment with a
Christians spirit has advised, ut pena ad pa^cos metus ad omnes perveniat, Bis
vicit qui pepercit, and honestum ac nobile genus vindictae est ignoscere, to
have Cicer. Senec.
forgiven, or given a longer time for offenders to come in, shows their
Clemency, whether or no the deep lodged envy, and discontented anger of many
the offenders thoroughly convinced of their own offending shall apprehend and
make use of the Clemency of their forgivers.

The quality of the PROPOSITIONS thus examined, and His Majesty altogether
refusing to sign any of the same, as judging them unequal and incompetent to
His Regal dignity; He propounds His return to LONDON, there to Treat in Person,
as an expedient means of Peace; But on what terms to Treat is not proposed.

For His Majesty with His party, and the Parliament there to meet to
recapitulate and argue the Reason, Authors and Accidents of this War, were to
revive the heat thereof: His See His Letter, March 1646.
Majesty laying the guilt of shedding all this Christian blood at the
Parliaments doors, His professing not to desert His friends, which the
Parliament account their Enemies; when the persons with whom He is to Treat,
against whom He has waged War near four years, the place whereunto He is to
come, against which he has denounced His displeasure, are all considered
without any retractation of His former anger, without Repealing His bitter
Messages expressed against those persons, that place, and the people assisting
them, a meeting once had for a Peace made frustrate; When those are any way
salved, any Act passed by His Majesty to remove these doubts and dangers, when
he shall have changed His inclination to severity denounced against His
Subjects, when He shall in His serious and sad regard had to His people and
their sufferings have His heart turned within Him, when his repentings shall be
rolled together, as God himself by his Prophet disdains not to his people,
their hearts will fill with Hosea 11.
Acclamation and joy to receive and welcome him, a tender and nursing Father to
his Church and people; and the common and easy objection wiped away, that
whereas the Parliament and people have petitioned and prayed for His return,
they now show their Inconstancy, in refusing that which they have so earnestly
desired.

The motion of Petitionings does cease when the end whereunto they move (the
hopes of a Peace to be had by His Majesty's return) seems frustrated.

Whosoever shall invite the company, or desire the access of any person,
whither it be of a King as supreme, or of any other person of a lower rank, it
is to be presumed to be for the mutual and amicable society of those who are
desired; if before the time of entertaining, there be a strangeness or
averseness of friendship in the invited friends, the desire of the inviter
cease, and he abateth his welcome: The Comparison, although it seems here
betwixt two equal parties (friends of the like degree) therefore not fit to
hold, is the more effectual betwixt two parties, the one superior of Power to
wrong, the other inferior Subject to be wronged.

The reason wherefore the Members in the House of Parliament were preferred in
their Countries suffrages to be their Judges, was for the opinion of their
Wisdom and Integrity above, at least equal to others of the Country: Wisdom
consists of Circumspection, Diffidence, foresight; (...). Euripid. The French
call Mistrust the Mother of Wisdom.
Diffidence especially, as Integrity does, of distributing and doing all men
right.

In the Parliaments refusing or admitting His Majesty's access, they have a
narrow path to tread to please all men (which no man or Counsel yet could do)
for if by denying him they prolong the War, impoverish and exhaust the Kingdom
(as some men and their adversaries give out) if by admitting they lose and
frustrate their preparations and past endeavorings for the Subjects welfare
(for it will rest in the King and in His parties Power to annihilate their
Acts) their prudence and councels will be exposed to obloquy and scorn.

For howbeit His Majesty as a Christian, as a King, may and cannot choose but
have a deep sense and compassionate heart against the farther shedding of his
Subjects blood, His party which He professes under the name of friends not to
desert, will expect a large interest in His Power; their interest which when
they have gained, any man may judge for what use it shall serve.

In War the prevailing and stronger side relieth upon their Forces, the weaker
and more vanquished on their stratagem and cunning: for the Parliament to be
over-wrought by the cunning Practices of their adversaries, were a lessening of
their wisdom.

The people of CVMA were branded for their too late wisdom, their imprudence
was turned into a Proverb, The fisherman once struck always takes heed.

A parley once betwixt two parties found false, makes the more innocent part
the wiser afterward.

If neither Peace nor Conquest can be the sooner had, the War continued is like
to have a most sad and fatal upshot (the fault of the continuing resting only
on some few men's account) betwixt these two extremes, viz. the Dissolute,
licentious and Armed man on the one side, and the harmless poor Subject on the
other; The oppressor on the one, and the oppressed on the other side; or where
it first began, betwixt the Papists stiling themselves the Kings friends, in
His name, and under color of defending Him on the one side, and the Protestant
on the other side, in whose blood the Papists do think to imbrue their hands,
naming them Rebels, Traitors to His Majesty: The Prophet sums up the diffeence
in a few words, betwixt the ungodly and wicked who have drawn out their sword
and bent their bow to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of a
right Conversation; But that there is a superintendent Almighty Power, the Lord
of Hoasts who will be a defense to the oppressed, even a refuge in time of
trouble, whereof he has already given a pledge, and manifested his Power and
loving kindness unto His in the more remote parts of Christendom, by giving
several successes in signal victories to the Protestant party in those parts,
against the more Popish Although in those vast Armies there are Papists on
either side, yet take them either in degree or number, the Spaniard, Emperor
and their confederates, consist only or for the most part of Papists.
accomplices in a confederate League, by open enmity, as by secret and subtle
practices to extirpate the Protestant religion.

The persons on whom the Account of the continuance of this War will lie, are
those alone who thoroughly convinced of the injustice thereof waged by the Kings
party against his people, knowing withal who have been the first actual
Authors and promoters of this War, who since the counterfeiters and pretenders
to a Peace, remain yet obstinate, adhering to that party in that desperate and
resolute way, as preferring rather the ruin of their own native Country
before the failing of that their party.

The sober, relenting and wise demeanors of these engaged, might have put a
period to this War, if they steering their affections all one way to the light
of Sense, Conscience, Reason, shall set aside the punctilio of reputation
(which no wise man did ever lose) of being thought inconstant; their actions
will alike unite and join together against the refusers of Peace, as against a
common Enemy, and every good Subject will according to the habiliments
whereunto he has been used and bred, act and wish best only to that side which
wishes best undividedly, unreservedly to the King and Kingdom.

In the dividing which, every one takes it ill to be suspected to be partial,
or that his wishes should seem rather to incline to the King then to the
Parliament, to the Parliament rather then to the King, they thinking that their
wishing well to the King, is to wish well to the King and Kingdom, because the
King protests the welfare of the Kingdom.

The perusing this Treaty does clear the question, and does settle and confine
the doubtful Judgment of whosoever may be mistaken in this conflict.

The Unity and joint accord in the House of Parliament, may be a leading case
to induce a general Unity among all the Subjects of the Kingdom: That as by the
singular policy presented in the Harmony betwixt the House of Lords and
Commons, and as between the Commons themselves strengthening and crediting
their proceedings, the like Unity may descend entirely to the inferior Members
throughout the Kingdom.

For howbeit there may be different ways, several disputes by cause of various
judgments, all tending to one and the self same end, yet no Argument to divide
them from their chief principle, The Subjects Peace; And although emulation
always attends great and eminent spirits, keeping off for the most part an
accord of minds, Gods Power is so much the more visible in their actings and
endeavorings for Peace (Himself being the Author of Peace and lover of Concord,
in making men to be of one mind in an House.)

Briefly, to comprise the whole in a few words by way of question, and for the
sooner restoring these unhappy Kingdoms to an happy Peace and general Unity,
the matter of this Civil and unnatural War betwixt the Prince and people,
betwixt the Subjects of three Kingdoms contending each with other, as it had
it is rise from mistakes and jealousy, does now, as the possibility and
enjoyment of a firm and lasting Peace, rest and determine upon the clearing of
these few questions; Whither His Majesty has had evil Counselors and
Instruments about Him, who have diverted Him from the course of justice (some
of whom styled now His friends?) Whither His declining and forsaking them be
ingratitude in Him, or to be accounted a deserting His Friends? Whither there
be a lawfully summoned Parliament, and where? Whither the peoples taking up of
Arms in maintenance of this War, ut supra, be either in the beginning, or in
the continued course thereof, Rebellion and Treason.

FINIS.

