A Protestant Soldier's CONGRATULATION To the PRINCE of ORANGE, IN A NEW
LETANY, OR, PRAYERS AGAINST POPERY.

Being thought necessary to be added to the DAILY DEVOTIONS of PRIVATE FAMILIES
At all TIMES, But more especially in this present juncture of AFFAIRS in
ENGLAND.

By Captain ANTHONY STAMP, Sometimes Chief Engineer and Adjutant General to an
Active Protestant ARMY against the Rebels in IRELAND.

Printed for A. S. in the Year MDCLXXXVIII. 17. Dec.

TO THE READER.
READER,
IT is strange to see a Soldier in these days at his Prayers without Beads,
whereas most part of our Profession are Irreligious, which how should it
otherwise be, being addicted as they are (especially in these loose times too
much tolerated to Blaspheme their Maker with God Damme's; and he is accounted
the Bravest Soldier amongst them that can thunder forth the most Oaths with an
Audacious Brazen Face, and be of greatest Repute, who commits the Foulest
Ennormities; and for Murder it Self, flies to the Court Sanctuary and gets his
Pardon; which Irregular Practices are unsufferable in a Christian Country, to
the great dishonor of our Noble Profession; for a Right Valiant Soldier
Fights only in a Good Cause, for the Honor of his Prince and Country, as
truly Religious, carrying his Life momentary in his hands: For Devotion is more
requisite in him than in other Callings, which are less hazardous; such a
Soldier will cheerfully be ready at all times to Fight against the Common
Enemy (and no Other) with Resolution and Courage undauntable for Victory;
having beforehand his Peace made with God: Should he Die thus in the Bed of
Honor, he will be Safe in the other World; when the Profane Soldier
wallowing in his Blood, breathing out his Ghost died deep in Sin, will be
denied his entrance into Eternal Bliss.

The Chief Cause of our Soldiers Debauchery in England, is by the ill Example
of their Officers, who glories in their wicked doings, being not at first Right
Disciplined Soldiers, made by Favor, without Merit, having little or no
Religion in them; the King's Army, for the greatest part of his Officers, are
composed with Such and Papists: I hope shortly to see a Parliament Sit, to Free
us of these evil Pests, and to Redress all other Grievances of this Nation,
whereby the Protestant Religion may for ever Prosper and Flourish, to the Glory
of God, with the utter Downfall of Popery. I bid you heartily Adue, and
Recommend you to my Prayers made by a Soldier, yet judged useful for Private
Families, as well as for the Occasion of these Times.

Yours A. STAMP.

A Protestant Soldier's CONGRATULATION To the PRINCE of ORANGE, etc.
A Prayer in Remembrance of the Seven Bishops Imprisonment.
LOok down O Lord from thy Eternal Habitation, upon this Sinful Land, that has
transgressed against Thee, and have not regarded the Words of thy Divine
Messengers, whom Thou have Ordained to Convince them of their Sins; who instead
of Obeying thy Precepts taught by them, have been Disobedient Children, by
Committing those Holy Men to Prison, and Persecuting them with Severity for
Delivering thy Truth, and for Opposing what was Proposed to be hurtful unto thy
People Committed to their Charge: Quiet and settle Right the Minds of Men from
falling into Confusion and Ruin, so much threatened by our Mortal Adversaries
the Pope and Devil: Good Lord Deliver us from them.

A Prayer whereby the Bishops, and other Holy Divines, may prevail with God for
the Sins of this Nation.
WE beseech Thee, Dear Father of Heaven, to permit those Godly Men, which have
thus been Religious Sufferers for thy Gospel, to Prevail with Thee now at the
brink of Danger (as Thou have done to Thy Servants of Old) to pacify Thy Heavy
Wrath gone out against this Sinful Land, for their backslidings from Thee; Oh!
Heal these Infirmities which are fallen upon us, and Unite all Protestants to
accord together in Brotherly love, whereby we may Live in Holiness and
Righteousness, all the Days of our Lives; and after Us our Childrens Children,
from One Generation to another, may entirely so continue, whilst the Sun and
Moon endures: Amen.

A Prayer for rooting out of Popery.
WE Beseech Thee, the Creator and Maker of all Things, to Blast, Banish and
Root up by the Roots Popery, from all Protestant Countries; especially where we
now Live; and in Thy own Good Time, hasten it (for the Elect Sake) out of the
World: Calling in thy Ancient People the Jews, and likewise the Gentiles, to
bring them into our Protestant Faith, agreeable to the Primitive Institution of
our Blessed Savior and his Apostles, who left it unto us to follow, because
our Salvation depends thereon; so that nothing is to be added or taken away
from the Written Word of God, upon Condemnation: Yet the Papists (as it is well
known) have left out amongst them what was Essential, and introduced in the
room thereof, many False Ridiculous Ways of Worshipping of Thee, with Profane,
Superstitious Idolatry, being against Thy Express Commandments, in defiance of
Thee: They have lately Sowed in this Land, as they have done in other Parts of
the World, their fast growing Seeds of Iniquity, to choke thy Good Word of the
Gospel, long since Planted amongst us, which they have attempted to do by their
Jesuitical Plots of the Devil and Pope, to eradicate Protestantism, whereby
they might the betrer Accomplish their Infernal Intentions and Wicked Designs
to turn all Christian Kingdoms into Popedoms; and to that end their Hellish
Works may be forwarded, they have Erected innumerable Numbers of Popish
Schools, Mass-Houses, Convents, Nunneries, etc. contrary to thy Will and the
Established Laws of these Protestant Nations, and by them they have allured and
enticed away from us, unstable and wandering Souls, for Novelty, Lucre and Gain.
Besides, They have publicly denied the Holy Bible to be the Written Word of
God; their Emissaries the Priests, are furthermore so nimble and busy to Attend
Sick Dying Persons and Malefactors (that are to suffer by Law) that they give
them no rest till they have Subverted them from the Protestant Faith they
should Die in, and so cheat them of their Everlasting Happiness, they else
might Enjoy to all Eternity: We pray Thee O Lord to Deliver us from such
Hellish Guides that would thus dazzle our Eyes with False Delusions to entrap
our Souls by: Amen.

A Prayer for calling back those which are gone astray.
WE beseech Thee O Lord, who art the Great Physician of our Souls, that Thou will be pleased to Heal all the Breaches Popery has made in Great Britain and
Ireland, and all other Protestant Countries; bring them in with True Repentance
back again, who have fallen away from our Faith; and likewise Reconcile and
Unite all Protestants, who otherwise have been Disjoynted thereby, to Live
together in Love and Amity one with another, without further Jarring; and from
henceforth to be all contented to Sing severally or jointly, their Sweet
Hallelujah's to Thee, for this Harmonious and Religious Agreement, without
having any more Differences by their Controversies to arise amongst them, but
that they may abide together in Sobriety and Charity to the End of the World,
shall be our Daily Prayers Amen.

A Prayer for delivery from Famine.
WE Beseech Thee, O Lord, who is the Alone Disposer of all Things; That Thou
would be pleased to Preserve these Three Nations, from the Dreadfulness of
Famine, and to Bestow the Kindly Fruits of the Earth in their Seasons; with
Plenty of Wholesome Food for the People therein, to Feed thereon: which we most
earnestly desire for Thy Son Christ Jesus Sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Delivery from the Plague, Pestilence and Sword.
WE beseech thee, O Lord, who is the giver and preserver of Life, to defend and
keep these Nations from the most dangerous Diseases of Plague, Pestilence and
devouring Sword, to come into these Lands any more amongst us, to sweep away
the people therein. From sudden Death and intestine Wars, Good Lord deliver us.

A Prayer for the City of London against Fire.
WE beseech thee, O Lord, who never sleeps nor slumbreth, to watch over the
City of London and Suburbs, be thou at all times the Protector thereof, and
defend it from the Malice, Craft, and Subtilty of our Adversaries the Papists,
our common Enemies, that study the Destruction of our Renowned City, by their
Diabolical Practices to bring it again by Fire into Ashes. We return thy
Almightiness our grateful Thanks in causing their Treacherous Intentions, which
were for a second Conflagration, and to be discovered, has Alarmed our
Inhabitants to be upon their Guards for prevention: The Papists since finding
their Swords blunted, their Gunpowder damped, and the rest of their Arms made
useless, and thereby disappointed from doing our Protestant Friends any harm,
that is come over to our Succor, which thou have miraculously performed beyond
the expectation of Man: Yet still the Papists are further mischievously bent,
to act by Achitophel's Counsels, contrived at Rome and hatched in Hell: We
therefore humbly desire thee likewise, to bring all their Deeds of Darkness to
Light, so that they may never take effect, but be always addled and frustrated
to naught, stinking, as they do, in the Nostrils of all good Men. We again pray
thee, that thou would be pleased in favor of some Righteous Souls, to be
found among'st us to stand up before thee, to pacify thy displeasure for the
Sins here committed against thee; whereby this City may be saved and sheltered
under thy Wings from the Papists inf^rnal Fury, with Fire to reduce her to
another Rubbish. Amen.

A Prayer for the Relief of the Poor.
WE beseech, O Lord, the giver and lender of all things, out of thy free and
wonted bounty unto those which have acquired it by thy providence and their
Industry, to enjoy a plentiful Estate, to no other purpose, then that they
should do good therewith, proportionably as they are enabled in the Generation
they live in, by cheerfully relieving the crying Necessities of the Poor; for
those that are negligent in feeding the Hungry and clothing the Naked, thou will certainly call them to an account of their Stewardship, who have no right
to what they have but by thee. We heartily pray thee to open their Eyes and
Hands that are shut with lukewarm Charity, whereby they may freely give their
supply to the wants of the Needy, that the Poor might not murmur against thee,
but receive their charitable Benovelence from the well Minded, which will cause
them to return thy Divine Majesty Prayers of Thanks for their daily Bread,
which we entreat thee, the God of Compassion to grant them. Amen.

A Prayer for the Two Armies in England.
WE beseech thee, most wonderful Jehovah, for thy dear Sons sake, the Captain
General of our Salvation (if it be thy blessed Will) to turn the Minds and
Hearts of the Protestant Soldiers of both Armies, now in England, from
engaging one against the other, and from shedding any more Blood in a
Protestant Cause, but that they may be united together into one entire Army,
under the Conduct of a Protestant Prince, for to vanquish and overcome the
Tyrants of the Earth, and to pull down Antichrist, the Whore of Babylon,
whereby thy Gospel may be preached in Purity and soundness of Doctrine, through
out the whole World. We entreat thee again to bring in all that are without our
Pale, into the Protestant Faith, whereby thy Name may be called upon by all,
and Worshipped in True Holiness; to these our devour desires, we pray thee that
thou would hear us, and answer us herein, to whom all Honor and Glory be
for ever given. Amen.

A Prayer against Oppression and Slavery.
O Almighty Lord, thou did open our Lips, that our Tongues should express
the Miseries we were fallen into, for thou art a Compassionate God, and has
promised unto those which truly rely on thee, that thou will not leave them nor
forsake them, who shall call upon thy holy Name in time of need, and thy Ears
shall not be stopped from hearing the complaints of the oppressed, and when
thou see it fit, thou will then relieve them. We do with humble Thankfulness
confess thou have heard us, and answered us too out of thy loving Kindness,
when we were even in our greatest Extremities, gasping as it were, expecting
every moment to have our Throats cut by the bloody Conspiracy of the Papists,
who are professed Enemies to thy Church, which was not only threatened upon us,
but preparations were visibly making to effect their detestable designs upon
us; at a time we were helpless in our selves, lying under the cruel Bondage of
Slavery: had we resisted them in our restraint, they had made it Rebellion in
us, and our Remedy had been worse to us than our Disease, but we patiently
submitted under our heavy Yoke, to thy determinate Will, though our Afflictions
were grievous unto us, to wait upon thy good time for our deliverance from our
Mortal Adversaries, the Papists in the mean while drove Jehu like, on their
pre-meditated murdering Resolutions not to leave one Protestant alive in
England, which thou have prevented them in, whereby we might live to Glorify
thy Name for ever. Amen.

A Thanksgiving for our happy Deliverance from the slaughter of our
Blood-thirsty Butchers; from whom we daily expected when we should be brought
forth to their Shambles for Slaughter, they having dexterously provided Irish
Forces to be our fatal Executioners, and also a French Army, hasting over to be
Actors in this ho^rid, bloody Tragedy; these Irish Butchers were the Sons and
Grand sons to those notorious barbarous Rebels, who in the Year 1641, in
Ireland, Massacred of English and Scots Protestants, to the number of 200000
Men, Women, and Children, in cold blood, by diverse inhumane new Inventions, to
torture them into lingering Deaths, which those poor precious souls under-went
for professing the Faith of the Protestant Religion, as it is truly recorded by
the late Sir John Temple, then Master of the Roles in that Kingdom, as may more
at large appear; these Fry and Spawns of the Old Rebels, are foaming at the
Mouths, with their tainted blood running hot in their veins, itching to be at
work to mangle our Bodies, they being naturally fleshed and hardened by the
Devil to Murder, encouraged by their Priests, who tells them, The more
Heretics they kill of us, the more they Merit, and shall inherit for their
great Service therein, our Possessions, by making of Rivers of Blood to flow
from Protestant Bodies, for them to triumph and wade in.

O Most blessed Lord, we have great reason on our side highly to praise and
magnify thee, that thou have by thy extraordinary care over us, preserved us
from the rage and fury of these our implacable Adversaries, that would have
destroyed us; therefore we return unto thy Divine Majesty with our H^nds and
Hearts lifted up to thee, our most humble and ^rateful Thanks in chaining and
tying up these rave^ous Wolves, Whelps of Tigers, from being let loose to worry
us to Death, as it was designed by the Papists. Most wonderful Deliverer, thou
have miraculously freed us from the Tyranny we were under, out of the paws and
jaws of these Cannibal Men-eaters, by seasonably sending over to us a
Protestant Prince, which is most nearly and dearly related to these Nations,
with a puissant Army and a magnificent Fleet, to our Aid, Succor and Relief,
purposely for to redeem us out of our Slavery we were enthralled in, and to
maintain unto us our Religion, Laws, Liberties, Properties, and Birthrights,
being justly belonging to all the Protestants in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, which otherwise would have been for ever lost; and for these thy
Blessings to our Deliverances, all Honor and Glory to thee be for ever given.
Amen

A Prayer for the Prince of Oranges's Success.
THou, O Lord, have strongly assisted this Great Prince, beyond the expectation
of our Enemies, who were Fortifying and Making vast Preparations against him
both by Sea and Land, for to prevent him in his Religious Resolutions: Thou
have heard our Prayers for his Coming over to us, and for his Success; and Thou
did hear him for us and has prospered him in all these his high Undertakings:
We further pray Thee for a Blessing from Above, to Crown his Glorious
Achievements here below, that he may perfect these his Victories here over his
and our Enemies, for Thy Glory, His Honor, and these Nations Welfare: Amen.

A Prayer for the Prince of Oranges Person.
WE humbly beseech Thee, O Lord, to Preserve and Defend from all Perils and
Dangers whatsoever, Thy Dear Servant, next and immediate under Thee, Supreme
Deliverer of Great Britain and Ireland, out of Popish Slavery, by the Grace of
God, the most Potent, most Mighty, and most Illustrious, William Henry Prince
of Orange, together with his Royal Consort our Gracious Princess. We heartily
pray thee to grant them Issue to inherit their Virtues and Renowns, that their
Days may be long and comforta^^e unto them. We beseech thee likewise for thy
great Go^pel sake, that thou would be pleased to lead this great Captain on
further to the Conquest of France, Rome, and other Popish Countries, and that
his Highness Head may be adorned with Diadems here, and after this Life in
Heaven with a Crown of Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

