A Solemn DISCOURSE Upon the Grand COVENANT, Opening The DIVINITY And POLICY of
it: BY John Saltmarsh, Master of Arts, and not long since, Pastor of Heslerton
in Yorkshire.

London, Printed for Laurence Blaiklock* 1643.

The Printer to the Reader.
Courteous Reader, The Effigies of this Emblem should have been cut, but that
time could not permit.

An Angel reaching forth an hand out of a cloud, holding a chain, which is
let down to three women, each one having her arm linkt in it, over each a
Title Anglia, Scotia, Hibernia, with Harpes in their hands, at the distance of
a stream betwixt another woman with the title of Roma in a sad posture, her
Tripple Crown seeming to decline with her face toward the three; with this
Inscription, Revel. 17. 1. And there came one of the seven Angels which had the
seven vials and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither, and I will show
unto thee the judgment of the great Whore that sits upon the waters.

To the Worthy Covenanter.
I Could have given more, and more easy and common observations; but these
times call for discourses that work higher, and more quaintly; I say not this
to force any reputation upon these notions.

This Covenant is the most glorious rise of a Reformation in any age; mighty
and powerful are the principles of it: and though this season of our solemnity
be cloudy and our evening bloody, yet it is our Saviors interpretation,

When it is evening, you say it will be fair weather, for the sky is red.

Covenant. Holy Obligatory Principles.
In Praeamb.Having before our eyes the glory of God,

In Praeamb.And each one of us for himself with our hands lifted up to the
most high God.

Artic. 6.And this Covenant we do make in the presence of Almighty God, the
searcher of all hearts.

As we shall answer at that great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be
disclosed.

The Discourse. The Power and Excellency of this Covenant.
A Covenant is the last resort of the godly and wise Christian; and with this,
he draws himself nearer Heaven, and closer to that glorious Essence, and the
immediate flowings and emanation of an Almighty power: A Covenant is such an
Obligation, as lays an engagement upon the soul; and as in tossings and
storms at sea, the Mariners find out no safer course then by casting out Coards
and Anchors, to hold them at some Period; so in civil waves and spiritual
fluctuations, there cannot be a more secure experiment, then this of
Covenanting, which is like the casting out our Coard and Anchors as they did in
S. Paul's storm, Vndergirding the Ship, and casting out four Anchors.
Covenants, they are Divine Engines, which the godly have found out to wind up
their souls from irregular wanderings and strayings, into heavenly heights and
stations, the only remedy, and preventive against Relapses, and Apostasies;
and those virtues and operations the Saints have ever found in Covenants: for
such resolutions of soul are but the finer cordage, which the Spirit spins out
and twists from the substance of its own essence; and now God and his Angels
have something to hold our souls by, even the operations and effluxes of our
own spirits: and though God need none of those, but is able to keep us up by
the immediate and indistant workings of his holy Spirit, yet he is a God that
is pleased to take us at our own rebound, and to admit us into that holy
consotiation, We as workers together with him.

He that covenants with God, by that very act does carry up himself unto Gods
throne, and cites his soul to his Tribunal, and then the majesty of God looks
on him with a fuller gleame; and so long as that glorious interview continues,
or any sparkling or raying of it, man is awed from sinning, and stands
trembling like the people of Israel, while God appeard upon the Mount.

And thus Divine Covenants, as they exalt and situate a soul in more glory then
before, even in the glorious face of God, so they are the spiritual stays,
and supports, and strengthnings of a soul.

God him self first drew forth his own essence into this course of Covenants
to Abraham and Moses, and Joshua, and his people, and from that Covenant he
went higher, to one of grace, besides the particular obligations of his, to
Noah and other Saints, not as if he received any consolidation or confortation
by it, or any such act of covenanting that he had not before; not as if he
begun to re-act upon himself in any new operation (far be it from his
immutable essence) he was as firm and unchangeable in the eternal immanency
of his own, before ever he passed himself abroad into any such act of paction:
and therefore he could not show himself to man in the likeness of any other
notion, than, I am.

Only he was pleased to light us by a beam of his own nature, into this duty
of holy confederation, and to show us a new way of spiritual advancement and
establishment: how sacred then? and how inviolable* ought these to be? which
are made with a most high God; when even pactions and promises and Covenants in
friendships and lower confederations, are reputed holy.

Thus far of the power of the Covenant upon the soul in that grand and heavenly
engagement; now there is a power reflexive, and that is a return it makes from
Heaven, and in that return it brings with it something of God; for the soul
going up thither by a spiritual might and holy violence, brings away from
thence graces and blessings, and the resort of many temporal mercies, as when
Moses had been looking God in the face, he brought a divine luster upon his
own, home with him.

We see Nehemiahs Covenant had excellent concomitances, the dedication was kept
with gladness, and singing and Psalteries, and the people offered themselves
willingly, and the business at Jerusalem, and all the affairs of Gods house
went better on in all the particulars. Nehem. 11. 3. 12. 27.

The Covenant of Judah drew along with it the like blessings; the Lord was
found of them and gave them rest; and one more superlative blessing not
inconsistent with our calamity* Maachah was removed from being Queen, because
she had made an Idol in a grove, 2 Chronicles. 5. 25, 26.

And for this Covenant of ours I am bold to say, it has been in heaven
already; it came not only from thence in its first inspiration, but it has had
a return back, and by the power of that reflexive act, it has brought down
with it cheerful concurrencies and contributions in both kingdoms, and there
are divine stirrings, and movings, and aspirations in the people of late: and
as in the Poole of Bethesda the stirrings and troubles in the waters were the
only sign of the Angels coming down: So these waters in both kingdoms,
which in the holy Spirits language are people, do stir and move more of
late, not only in their highest and supreme representative, but in their own
places, which is an indication of some Divine virtue, descended and
cooperating.

Covenant. The Reformation Principles.
In Praeamb.1 To endeavor the advancement of the kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Artic. 1.The Reformation of Religion in Doctrine, worship, and Discipline,
according to the word of God and the example of the best Churches.

Art. 6.The unfeigned desire to be humbled for our sins, and the sins of these
kingdoms.

Discourse.
THese are such maxims as will make a kingdom holy and happy; for holiness is
the foundation and basis to all other blessings, and has a perpetuating
quality, and it is such a condition as God takes in at the felicitating of a
person or people: Seek first the kingdom of God, and all things shall be
added unto you.

The advancement of Gods kingdom, was always the advancement of the kingdom
of Israel; and the glory of the one declined and set in the declination of the
other: for the Arc and the glory departed together, and both expired at once
in a doleful Ichabod.

The advancement of Christ's Kingdom has been the design of God from all
eternity, and it is the design of the godly too: God reveals his secrets to
his servants, and we have the mind of Christ. Now knowing so much of the
counsels, and designs, and secrets, and mind of God, we are carried on by the
same Spirit to be aiding to that design: now though the kingdom of Christ be
such a name as imports glory and dominion, yet it is not a glory of this world,
but a spiritual glory seated in bare and simple administrations; such as are
foolishness to the Greek, and to the Jews a Rock of offense: and this
kingdom of Christ like other Monarchies, has its rise and growth, its ages
and improvements, according to the prophetical latitude, being at no fullness
nor perfection till the rest of the Monarchies be consumed before it: this is
that small excrescency advancing out of the Mountain, and by a power
insensible exalting it self through all oppositions, working through Atheisms,
Paganisms, Idolatries, Superstitions, Persecutions, and all the carnal
machinations, into a luster glorious, in the judgment of those only, who can
spiritually discern: the advancement of this kingdom is only attainable by a
Reformation to the word of God; and here we shall take occasion to part with
all the Models and Idea's which are not to be found in holy Scriptures; it is
marked there as a grand transgression to walk after the imagination of our own
hearts: and that was laid to Jeroboam's charge, That his Priests, and Sabbaths,
and worship, were such as he devised in his own heart: God will endure no such
rivallity nor conjunctures with himself: it is an incompleating the work of
God to build his house with our own timber: and as he made this world at first
only after the pattern of his own counsels, so in this second work of the
setting up a spiritualll structure for his glory: God thinks none worthy of
coordination, in those things wherein his glory shall be sure to suffer in a
distribution with his creatures, and his own Image has ever pleased him best,
and therefore he made the best piece of his creation according to it.

And where this kingdom of Christ is, there is holiness of Doctrine,
holiness of Government, holiness of Ordinances, holiness of Life; GOD has
had a people at first whom he made his own, by special adoption, by eminent
privileges, by rare providence, by laws and institutions, by worship and
administrations.

And now because darkness in part is happened to Israel, God will still have a
people that shall be his, and have their laws and usages and forms from him;
their guidance and providence from him.

This kingdom of Christ is a company of godly gathered by his own Spirit,
having their Lord and Savior in the midst, confederated by an holy and
sacramental paction, ruled by the law of his will and Spirit; obeying his
commands, whither in silent inspirations or louder exhortations, either by a
word behind us, and a saying, Seek ye my face; or by outward intimations and
interpretations of his will, from such ways of distribution and administration
as he has ordained; studying what will adorn the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
and those that walk in the light and glory of it, Being transformed from glory
to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord.

Now these principles, viz. The advancement of Christ's kingdom, and
humiliation for sins, are such as will bring God into this kingdom, and seat
him and determine his presence, as the Tabernacle and Arc and Temple were the
engagements and enthronizations of, and mysterious fixations of Gods divinity.

They are likewise an advancement of the nation too, setting it higher then
other nations, that was the preferment of the Jews, That to them the Oracles
of God were committed. Therefore they were said to dwell in the light, when
other nations sat in the Region and shadow of death.

And that principle of reformation according to the Word of God and the best
reformed Churches, brings us closer to God, and consociates us with heaven, and
makes us arrive at the highest mystery, even the denial of our selves, our
own inventions, will worship, and superstitions; pulling down at once all our
relations to Rome and Popery, and working to the pattern, so That things which
shall be seen shall not be made of things which do appear: we shall likewise be
associated to the Church of Christ, and so incorporated more clearly and purely
and mystically, into the body of Christ, we shall be now in a capacity with them
to partake equally of graces and privileges: and thus the kingdom of Christ
gathers power and latitude, and stretches to the breadth of that Prophecy, Of
the fullness of the Gentiles, and gathers strength too against the present
antichristian Monarchy; and by that other principle of humiliation, we obtain
the qualification and condition for mercy and peace, we approach into terms
of reconciliation with God; if the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous
man his thoughts, God will forgive and abundantly pardon. What is it that
thickens the cloud over us, but the evaporation and exhalation of our sins and
iniquities, For your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins
have withheld good things from you.

Covenant. The Princip. of Extirpation.
In Preamb. Calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots, conspiracies,
attempts, and practices of the enemies of God.

Arttic. 2. That we shall in like manner endeavor without respect of persons
the extirpation of Popery and Prelacy.

Discourse.
HEre lies the prophetical power of it against the Church of Rome, or
Antichristian Monarchy, and the bloody plots and conspiracies are such fresh
remembrances, as seal us to strong and perpetual endeavors; we can read in
the leafs of our former ages their conspiracies still in red Letters, and at
this day we have a succession of their bloody Designs, and I conceive the rise
we take from their own foundations in blood, is but in holy parallel to him,
into whose remembrance great Babylon came to give unto her the cup of the wine
of the fierceness of wrath; and to his own peoples resolution, Happy shall he
be that rewards thee as thou have served us; and the treacheries and
tyrannies of Gods enemies have ever drawn along with them this resolution in
Gods people; Amalek* and Ashur, and Egypt, are standing examples of Divine
revenge.

And for Extirpation, it is but a retaliation to their own just cruelty, who
would raze out the name of Israel, that it should be no more in remembrance.

And what has their endeavor in our kingdom of Ireland been, but an
eradication of our memories.

And our confederations now, cannot but be powerful in the very notion;
National Leagues have brought forth great effects in States and Kingdoms, in
the mutual aydings and assistings; and therefore Israel sent to Syria, and
Judah to Assyria, and Judah to Israel, and other Kingdoms have sought to one
another for such combinations, in any grand Enterprise; That famous Design of
Christendom, which was such a universal confederatio^ against the Turk, only
it was a Design in a wrong channel; Therefore the more spiritual that
Leagues are, the more powerful; that which made Israel so famous in their
conquests to Canaan, was the Association of the Tribes, and the Ark of God
amongst them, therefore the Philistims cried out, Woe unto us, the Ark of God
is in the camp of the Hebrews; and when they marched with the Ark amongst the^,
Jordan was driven back, and the mountains and little hills were removed, the
walls of Jericho fell; And certainly this grand and blessed Association of the
three Kingdoms, is a glorious portent to the destruction of Rome it self,
carrying amongst them such an Ark and Gospel; this is the first time that ever
the Sun saw such a Triple Confederation* against the Triple Crown, so many
States, so solemnly combined against the Popish Hierarchy; this is the time the
spirit of God has set up a Standard; this is a fair rise, and improvement to
the prophecy, When the Princes of the earth shall gather themselves together,
and shall agree to make her desolate.

I know there has been many confederations, but they were narrower then this,
and so, opposings, and strong ones too, and by confederacies too; yet those
were but single to this, when our Princes in their eyes appeared in their
graduall Extirpations, our Henry, and Edward, and Elizabeth, when in Scotland,
they against the French power and Idolatry, aided by a power from this kingdom*
yet these were not from such strong resolutions, such able Principles, such a
sacred Covenant; they were but ordinary and civil contributions, and weak
strivings, and so had shorter expirations, and relapses, and had little more of
Religion, then brought them into the fields, and enabled them to break down
Images: The Confederations and Covenants in Germany, so many Princes and States
entering into a solemn Protestation upon Luthers discoveries; The Conferations
of those in Holland, and those States in the Netherlands; The Confederation of
those Princes in France; But these had their ebbings and flowings. But now, as
if this were the Antichristian crisis, and as if the Reformation had recovered
the Period of declination, three kingdoms strike into a sacred League; And now
methinks I hear the Angel saying to us, The Prince of the kingdom of Persia
withstood me one and twenty days, but lo Michael one of your chief Princes
came in to help me, and now I am come to make you understand what shall befall
in the latter days; now methinks the set time to favor Sion is come, her
servants take pleasure in her stones.

And for the Extirpation of Prelacie, though it be a government rivetted into
our Laws and usages; and into the judgments, and Consciences of some, through a
mistasten and colluding Divinity, yet let us not like the Jews, lose our
Gospel, with holding our Laws too fast; I know this kingdom has ever been a
retentive nation of Customs, and old Constitutions, and it parted but sadly
with its old Prganisme, and with its latter Antichristianisme; in the es^lation
of Abbeys and Priories; And hence it is that Reformations in this Nation, has
been with such little power and duration, for we have ever easily gone back
with a new successor, never taking in so much of the power of godliness, as
should be able to make us live Protestants to another succession; and
especially the Superstitions and Idolatries of late, were woven with such
strange and plausible Insinuations; Episcopacy was got upon the bottom of
mis-interpreted Scriptures; and the whole Government upon a pretended
Antiquity; and the Innovations upon a spiritual Decency and Order; upon an
Ecclesiastical Magistrality, and Reverend Infallibility, and prodigeous
Policy; as if their were no way to bring a Papist to Church, but by going with
him to Rome first; if we considr well we shall find cause enough to remove
these as not consistent with the holy simplicity of the Gospel of Jesus Christ;
nor the spiritmall purity; we were then trading with Popery, when we ignorantly
thought, we had not enough to serve us from the Scriptures of God, now we see
they are perfect, and co^plete in Jesus Xt; let us cast away those weak and
beggarly rudime^ts, of the which we are now ashamed; and they do not savor the
things of God, who would now (like Saul at Endor) raise up Aron, and the whole
Hierarchy, and bring us back again to the Law, forcing us under that cool
shadow, of Types and Ceremonies, drawing the curtains of the Law before the
light of the Gospel; we serve now in the newness of the spirit, not in the
deadnes of the letter.

THe next thing I observe, is the Political excellency, those sound maxims for
the kingdoms duration, as the preservation of Parliamentary rights, and
National rights, and Royal rights, that they exceed not, nor exorbitate; and
this is no more then to reduce the kingdom into its primitive contemperation,
and to keep the mixture even: for we see that whilst the power of Monarchy
would needs take in such poisoned principles, as the Divines and Privadoes did
instill, carrying up the notion of a King into an higher firmament the^ its
own, the whole State was in a posture of ruin: for nothing has more betrayed
kingdoms into destructive alterations then exorbitancy of government; and
States must respect their fundamentals and originals in their present
constitution; for those infuse secret dispositions into all the Orders and
subordinations, and that engagement inables to incline to their own interests;
and then in their inclinations and pursuit thither, tumults and stirs are
wakened, and there is a noise of some new and treasonable endeavor; when it is
but the natural workings of each degree for its own preservation; and hence
have these late aspersions been borne and received, the Princes and people
being carried on by the strength and violence of a late predominancy, almost
out of sight of their true fundamentals, till they have forgot their interests,
and malign those that would bring the^ back: and for the temper of our English
Monarchy, I will not say more to the praise of the constitution, (so many
having spoken before me) than its own duration, breathing to this day, under
the succession of so many ages, and never distempered, but when the fiduciary
power would needs be severer and taller then the rest, and entertain designs
of trying strengths and interests, to see If the fire out of the bramble would
at length come forth, and consume the trees of the Forest. And whereas there
are some other subordinate principles in order to these; as the discovery of
Incendiaries and Malignants; certainly they that shall suffer any relations to
corrupt them to secrecy, are men of too narrow affections for the latitude of a
kingdom; they are only in the reputation of Patriots and Fidelio's to their
country, who have such a command of spirit, as they can open and close as the
occasion of the State requires.

And I do further observe, that we are obliged to a mutual preservation of the
peace of the kingdoms, and in special of the Reformation of the Church in
Scotland.

For the first, it is bottomed upon the foundation of our government, which is
a concentration of the three estates in one; and there is such a samenesse
almost in the fundamentals of the three, and there is such a Monarchical
oneness which influences into all, that if any alteration begin in any one of
them, it will soon like an infection (where there is consanguinity of nature)
spread and make over to the rest; so that there is as much policy in suffering
our care and faithfulness to enlarge and acquaint it self with the interest
of the other Estates, which are in no other sense foreigne, than only in the
distance of place.

And for the particular preservation of the Church of Scotland, it is as
concerning an interest as any of the rest; what godly soul will repine to take
up the care of another Church; he was (we know) a sanguinary man that replied,
Am I my brothers keeper? And we may take notice there how God calls for an
account of every relation at our hands. It was an holy principle that persuaded
the Apostle To take care of all the Churches: and the more near we approach to
such endeavors, the more near we are to the designs and activity of God and
Angels, whose business and administration is universal; and especially should
our care be for that Church and State, which has been the conservatory of the
Gospel, and kept alive that holy spark, which we in this kingdom do warm our
souls by at this day; she was that Philadelphia who kept the Word of his
patience.

Nor let any complain of restraints in this our Covenant, as if we multiplied
unnecessary oaths, as if like Saul's oath it had troubled the land, there is no
such true Liberty, as in these holy restraints; nor is it any diminutio^ to our
christian Latitude, that we cannot transgress nor exceed in this or that; it
is rather the sublimation of our Liberty, and a deliverance into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God; and as it is the highest perfection, non posse
peccare, not to be able to transgress; so our estate and condition in this our
Covenant, is a degree to that, for God, Angels, and Saints, are not less
perfect, nor less free, because they cannot sin, but is a firmation of soul
in the height of holiness, for as it is the highest aggravation of sin, not to
be able to do good, so it is the highest perfection of goodness not to be able
to do ill; so that I know none that has a spiritual and discerning soul,
that will complain for want of liberty to transgress; or that he is in heaven
before his time; such chains are but chains of gold, nay, but the bracelets
of the spouse, and as ir is the devils and reprobates torment and misery to be
held in chains of darkness, so it is the glory of the blessed Saints and
Angels to be held in such chains of light and holiness; and none but
Libertines will complain, that they are walled in, and that their lusts have
not liberty to anger God, and undo their Country.

I observe another transcendency in it, there have been many Coven^nts taken by
the people of God, Iosiahs, Iehoshaphats, and Nehemiahs, the Foreign
Protestations and those of our own, yet none that has such a Spiritual and
Political breadth in it, reaching not only to Nationalls, but all particulars;
and taking in the furthest, and most foreign necessary, and circumstance
either in state, or Church.

I might take in other particulars, but they are such as clear up to your
first discovery, only my thoughts have rouled up themselves into this
conclusion.

Since the Covenant is of this transcendency and excellency, so solemn and
sacred, it were fit there were some holy design, to work it more close to the
souls of those that take it, all our happiness spiritual and civil is now
in the success of our confederation with our God, and therefore there would be
as much holy art used in preserving the spirits of people in that height of
Covenanting, as there was used in the raising them up; God himself makes
conservation as much his business as the creation of the world, and therefore
some make it the same act repeated again.

I should think it not unnecessary, that those parts in it which have most of
the attestations, and invocation, and imprecation, and most of the Political
and civil advantages, be set on by the ministry in frequent inculcations,
even to a Catechizing, and by a civil ordinance, or law to that purpose to
reminde the ministry, for we complain of looseness and neglect in former
Covenants, and we take no care to enquire into the reasons, and remedies; and
certainly the sudden laying aside such national and obligatory doctrins, and
making them but the music and solemnity of one day, is the only reason of our
relaxations, and apostacies, when as having got the Souls of men into a
Covenanting station, we should apply our strengths and honest designs to keep
them there.

A Divine Rapture upon the COVENANT.
CHildren of Sion, rise, and sit not on
Those flowery banks of Babylon*
Her streams are muddy and impure, and know
Her channel's bloody where they flow.
Oh! let us to a Region, where we may
Bathe in pure waters every day,
Waters of Life, and happiness, which have
A Crystal Grate in every wave*
We all make ready to be gone, and mean
Never to see those banks again*
Oh stay not, till heaven scourge you with a rod
Unto the city of your God.
See here a chain of Pearl, and watery dew
Wept from the side of God for you;
See here a chain of Rubies from each wound,
Let down in Purple to the ground:
Come tie your hearts with ours, to make one Ring,
And thread them on our golden string:
Great God, let down some glorious beam of thine,
To wind about his soul and mine*
And every ones; then we shall joyful be,
Made sure to heaven and Thee.
FINIS.

