AN ANSWER To a printed Paper ENTITLED ARTICLES EXHIBITED IN PARLIAMENT.
Against Mr. JOHN SQVIER, Viccar of Saint Leonard Shoreditch. August 7. 1641.

2 Samuel 16.11, and 12. Let him curse, it may be the Lord will look upon my
affliction, and requite me good for his Cursing this Day.

Printed in the year, 1641.

The Apology.
THE said John Squier says, that since He does humbly submit himself to the
Censure of the high Court of Parliament, he supposes that this is enough for
Him, becoming the Obedience of an Englishman, and the patience of a Christian
man. And He does believe, that God and good men will accept it. But since
ignorant Pamphletters, who know nothing, but believe any thing, which they
would publish, to brand Him, who already lies under a public disgrace, have
printed this Paper; He thinks that a Necessity is laid upon him, to vindicate
his innoceucy against this scandalous and slanderous Paper. 1. He does call God
a witness, to this his Apology; that there shall not fall one falsehood from
his pen; for he loves Truth and his Conscience, better then his Reputation. Of
which, if others had done either for themselves: this untrue, and uncharitable
Relation, durst never have looked upon the light. But this is the Method of
malice against that calling, those who are faulty, to report them faultier,:
and those that are faultlesse, to report them faulty: thereby to make all
odious, as I shall make it more then manifest by this particular.

Article 1.
THat this Squier did arrogantly introduce many Popish Ceremonies into their
Parish Church, Tyrannically insulting over the consciences, and liberties of
the Parishioners, commanding them to subscribe thereunto without any
interdiction.

Answer.
To the first he answers, that he did never use any Popish Ceremonies, mush
less introduce, or impose the use of them upon his Parishioners, by commanding
them to subscribe. He does deny this, by two undeniable witness. 1. By che
testimonial of the most and best of his Parish hereto annexed. Then by the
testimony of his adversaries themselves; for he does entreat this Pamphletter,
those that informed him, and those that do believe him; that they themselves
will come to Shoreditch church upon any sunday, and be Eyewitnesses; Whether
he does use any offensive ceremonies not established by Law: Or whither he does
omit any ceremonies now, which he has used heretofore.

Article 2.
That he affirmed publicly in the Pulpit, that the Papists were the best
subjects in three regards. 1. In regard of their liberality, who were always
ready to extend their charity, and did present themselves with their purses in
their hands, always before his. Majesty. 2. In regard of their loyalty, who
did not only seem hospitable in their purses, but were always in their own
persons ready to do his Majesty service. 3. In regard of their patience, who
(notwithstanding the many affronts and persecutions offered them by Englishmen)
have patiently submitted to their cruelty, and buried all in oblivion:
wherefore upon the consideration of these three regards he was confident (as he
related) that they were the Kings best subjects.

Answer.
The 2. he did say, and more also: viz. That the Papist were the Kings best
subjects: But, as they did boast of themselves, to leave out part of what was
said, you learned this of an evil Master. Mat. 4.6. Psalm. 91.11, 12. His case
is, what David's was; They lay to my charge, things that I knew not. Psalm. 35.11.

Article 3.
That He called all those Schismatics, who would not bow at the name of Jesus;
but being afterward privately examined upon that point, he could not lawfully
call those Schismatics which did not, unless those Idolaters which did.

Answer.
He never was examined in private concerning that point: nor did he call them
Schismatics, who did not bow at the name of Jesus; for he keeps a charitable
correspondence with diverse, who do not bow. It may be, he did call such
Schismatics who did not bow, who did call him and them Idolaters, who did bow
at the name of Jesus, who is God, our Savior, to be blessed for evermore.

Article 4.
That he writes himself commonly Priest, and approves of it to be an
Honorable Name, and despises the nomination of Minister, or Pastor, etc.
although we have had sufficient testimony, that this Name was abrogated after
Christ's coming, and more decent names given them in the holy Gospel.

Answer.
He does acknowledge that he writes himself Priest, and that he approves of
it to be an Honorable name, and to make it more Honorable; he says it is
approved by the most honorable Court of Parliament, in the book of common
Prayers, and in the book of Ordination. But that (as you say) he despises the
Nomination of Minister and Pastor, and that there is testimony that the Name of
Priest is abrogated (but you show not that testimony) He answers to the first
no, to the second nothing.

Article 5.
That our King was like unto the wounded man that fell among thieves (the Scots
by his imaginary supposition) robbing His Majesty of his Castles, Holds, and
withal the hearts of His subjects: and that the formal Confessors was like
unto the Levits, that passed by; the Protestant like unto the Priest; but the
Papists like unto the good Samaritan, who lifted up His Majesty from those
wicked enemies to our Nation, and by their Hospitable benignity were very
indulgent to His Majesty.

Answer.
Concerning the application of that Parable of the Samaritan, he says; for the
words you have bin misinformed, and you do mis-informe the world. But for the
substance, that He delivered (as he thinks) only what he was warranted unto
by His Majesty's Proclamation: and that since the time of Pacification, He
never mentioned a syllable concerning that business. Wherefore He hops, that
He does stand upright in the judgment of all charitable and knowing men: and of
yours too; if you be such a man: I add, it was spoken not absolutely, but by
way of supposition; as it is testified by the voluntary subscription of above
forty of my constant Hearers: who gave that testimony without my knowledge.

Article 6.
That it was a sin of Damnation for any man to hear voluntarily any other
Minister than his own, only three Causes excepted.

1. Either going to the Christning of a Child. 2. Or to an Offering. 3. Or
unless invited forth to Dinner.
Although St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine, St. Hierome, and all the Fathers in
next Antiquity to Apostolical men, do with one assent affirm, that the Church
in the Gospel is taken Catholikely, and is universal.

Answer.
If this accusation be true; He yields himself to be delivered into the Hands
of This, and his other Accusers, and punishment enough He expects, if they
might have him in their power.

Article 7,
That any man which passed Excommunication from the Priest publicly in the
church, unless reconciled before His death, went directly to Hell in His
judgment, although we have sufficient prohibitions in the Gospel that no man
(much less a Minister) should judge any man before the time.

Answer.
His words were these, I use not to pass my judgment of Damnation upon any.
But for my self I say, I would not for the price of my soul, dye under an
Excommunication, passed against me, clave non errante.

Article 8.
That it was lawful for any man to play and take any recreation on the Sabbath
Day, if so be it were not service time.

Answer.
He says he does conceive it a greater fault to tell an untruth, than to
approve of lawful Recreation on the Sabbath, out of Service time. What, His
practice has bin concerning the Lords Day, these 30. years almost: His Parish
does testify by their Testimonial here annexed. But you have boldly printed a
gross untruth; for He was never questioned in the Parliament concerning this
Article.

Article 9.
That He did alter the ancient structure of the said Parish church, and withal
did insolently induce many Pictures therein, against the will, intent, and
subscription of any of the people, and such Images, as He pleased without
prohibition.

Answer.
All the clauses of this Article, and more, are untruths. He did never alter
the structure of the church. He did never induce Pictures or Images. He did
never any thing in the church, against the will, intent, or subscriptions of
his Parishioners. Moreover, he was never questioned in the Parliament for this
Article.

Article 10.
That He allowed the Pictures of the Virgin Mary, of Christ, and his 12.
Apostles at his last Supper in Glass, and the Parishioners desired rather that
in their stead a Crucifixe might be erected, but he would not condescend
thereunto.

Answer.
The Picture of the Virgin Mary is not in his church, the Picture of Christ and
his 12. Apostles are there: and if any of his Parishioners desired rather that
in their stead a Crucifixe might be erected, but He would not condescend
thereunto; because the Crucifixe had bin adored in the time of Popery: what
offense was committed by Him?

Article 11.
That He was persuaded those had not safe consciences, who would not bow with
all humility, and great reverence to the Communion table, both at their
entrance into the church, and at their departure thereout.

Answer.
He never did bow himself; nor did He persuade any other to bow to the
Communion table: neither was He questioned by the Parliament for this Article.

Article 12.
That He would not administer the Holy Sacrament to those which would not come
up unto the Rayles, and bow thereunto with humble adoration; whereupon most of
the Parishioners for conscience sake have (not presuming to submit to this
Ceremony) omitted the receiving of the said Sacrament.

Answer.
He did never refuse to administer the Holy sacrament to any who would not come
up to the Rayles: nor did any ever refuse to come up to the Rayles. Neither was
he ever questioned by the Parliament for this Article.

Article 13.
That He did oftentimes exasperate, and foment strife and enmity betwixt
Neighbor and Neighbor; and those who would not subscribe to his Ceremonial
Innovations, He was their perfect Enemy, until many of them have bin
compelled to leave that Parish, to the great detriment of their Trade.

Answer.
He did never foment strife (but compose it) betwixt Neighbor and Neighbor: nor
did he use or persuade Ceremonial Innovation: Nor did he compel any to leave
the Parish, but used such as were obstinate against the Ceremonies established
by Law, with all Lenity (as his Neighbors shall testify.) Neither was he ever
questioned by the Parliament for this Article.

Artic. 14.
That He affirmed publicly in his Pulpit, that it was a damnable fin for any
man to deprave or speak against any of those Canons which were published by
superior authority.

Answer.
He did never speak any thing in his Pulpit concerning the Canons. Nor was he
questioned by the Parliament concerning this Article.

Article. 15.
That if the King should demand either the Lands, Houses, Possessions, and
whole Estate; Nay, the very life it self of any subject, without any offense by
him committed, unless he did voluntarily attribute, and surrender it unto him,
that he committed a most abominable sin of damnation.

Answer.
This is an abominable untruth, He did never say it. He did never think it.
Neither is this Article in the Petition to the Parliament against him.

Article 16.
That he has brought many of his Parishioners into the Court, and thereby great
troubles have bin incident to many, and to some Excommunication, only because
they would not subscribe to these Ceremonies, and withal, that he has caused
great sedition, and discord in the said Parish.

Answer.
He never brought any of his Parishioners into the Court, but enforced
thereunto by their own obstinacy, and by the Oath of the Church-warders, Nay,
he has kept many of those obstinate persons out of the Court for a long time
and helped them) yea some of these very persons that now pursue him in the
Parliament) out of the Court. Nor did he cause discord in His Parish, but
compose it as the most and best of His parish are ready to testify. Neither
was he ever questioned by the Parliament for this Article.

Article 17.
That in all these Popish Observations, and Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, he has
bin no less offensive then Canterbury himself, in some respect, a man prompted
for exalting that Roman Religion. And to incur the favor of many Bishops, He
has bin extreme diligent to execute all their Canons and Ceremonies, to the
full extent.

Answer.
He never had Relation to nor favor from any Bishop. Nor did He every any
thing to incur their favor; but out of His Canonical obedience Neither was
He ever questioned by the Parliament for this Article. And finally He faith
Anathema to His soul, if He be prompt to exalt the Ronian Religion.

Finally to clear all scruples; if it shall please this Reverend Pamphletter,
or any of His Confidents to travel into Shoreditch, beginning at which end of
the Parish he will. Let Him inquire of every Housekeeper, from House to House,
what Testimony they will give to this Relation, and what thanks they will con
Him for His labor.

But for the Reader! To save Him this pains; He need not go to the
Parishioners, the Parishioners do come to Him, in this testimony, which I have
annexed, and they subscribed. Besides, for His further and full satisfaction,
as occasion shall offer them to His acquaintance, he may inquire of any of
these Subscribers, the truth of these imputations. And accordingly let John
Squier, Vicar of Shoreditch, stand or fall, in the charitable and understanding
judgment of the Christian Reader.

NOW! O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears to weep --
not for my self! I bless my God these groundless Calumnies cannot clime so
high as mine heart, like the prompter of them, they bruise but my heel -- and
there I leave them. But for mine uncharitable and unplacable Calumniators, that
any Christians should be so transported, either with affected ignorance, or
blinded zeal, or Avarice or malice, or (which God forbid) with invidence and
hatred of the truth; to vent such shameful and shameless Untruths. For them,
O that I could weep sufficiently!

Notwithstanding, to show that I am a true conformable Minister of the Church
of England, I conclude with a part of our Common Prayer, and with that part
which is most commonly cavellid at, the Letany.

That it may please thee to forgive our Enemies, Persecutors, and slanderers:
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear Us good Lord.
Matthew. 5.11.
These are to testify, that Master Squier of the Parish of Shoreditch, has
about Thirty years bin very painful in discharging his Cure, by his constant
preaching twice every Sunday; As also in His Catechizing of the Youths of the
Parish, and in His Sermons continually beating down Popery: And in His
Catechizing, instructing the Youths with Arguments against the papists. As
also, has in the grear sicknesses not forsaken his Flock. But has procured
the charity of many, for the relief of the poor in that time of Extremity,
and has lived blameless, and done much good in His Parish.
ALexander St. John, Richard Gips* William Cholmeley, Edmond Muschamp,
William Bolton, Richard Gips, Jasper Cholmeley, Thomas Mainwairing, William
Burton, Samuel Speigzt, Hugh Edmondes, William Permer, Richard Wichaels,
Thomas Preswicke, Richard Allen, Thomas Pont, John Joanes, James Cresson,
Francis Hutchison, Andrew Fresell, William Ellwortzie, Richard Marrington, John
Perriman, John Benbrick, William Curtis, John Hunt, John Adams. Daniel
Carpenter, Henry Empson, Thomas Wright, T. Crowder and Churchwardens. John
Hill, George Argent, Richard Robinson, William Burbage, John Bride, Richard
Sanderson, William Badger, Robert Bratzawit, Robert Moore, Thomas Chip, Thomas
Snow; Rowland Dod, John Tailor, John Preston, John Bird, Sawnell Catarill,
Robert Cock, John Noble. William Mouse, William Tison, William Bearstow,
Edward Pares, Nath. Fox, John Vicaris, Robert Borne, Edward Eales, Anthony
Watson, John Horner, Godfery Fox, Robert Asplin, Thomas Skingle, Thomas Hinton,
Edward Pit, William Morris, John Riley, Robert Foster, Richard Blagrave,
Alexander Lillington. Joh. Hodges, Thomas paddon, Thomas Williams, Edward Only,
William Smith, George Catterill, Henry Joanes, Joh. Rolfe, Henry Spenser,
Thomas Robinson, John Stains, Ralph Ashby, Henry Cock, John Hall, William
Rawlings Kichard Hill, John Harding, William Parkor, Henry Eaton, William
Tison, William Sowgate, James Ekersley, Christopher Ioyles, Salat haell Purser
William Porter, Edward Aires, John Coleman, Rowland Davis, Edward Travers, Mark
Croxon, John Porter, Daniel Waltham, George Johnson, Thomas Higby, Thomas Prat,
Giles Hill, Barnet Heyward, James Brathwit. Henry Waybut, William Hurles,
Steven Leonard, Nicholas Wakefield, John VVix, Thomas Love, Richard Handsmore
John Bradley, John Holding, Edmond Harding, Edmond Cage Thomas Green, John
Hand, Peter Woodhouse, Water Lo, I. Savill, William Cock, Edward Dunckle, John
Nicks, Richard Crowder, William Lanslet, William Blakeley, Richard Harington,
Ioh. Gothridge, Edward Edgerton, Joh. Bidle, Thomas Miles, Francis Chandler,
John Warner, Henry Pilthford. William Addison, Edw. Iackson, Joseph Atkinson,
Robert Tise, Griffith Joanes, John Bold, Matthew Morris, Thomas Simpson,
William Mountfort, Henry Robert, John Smith, I. Smith Isaac Smith, Peter
Atkinson, John Willson, Will. English, George Smith, Edward Ewen, William Ward,
John Badger, Hen. Smithson, John Turner, Rich. Holden, William Banister Will:
Lancaster, Hen. Starmore, William Dawly, Rich. Mason, Thomas Lamb. Thomas
Coals, T. Braklebancke Joh. Okeman, Joh. Herbert. Joh. Barber, Edmon. Bearstow
Joh. Martin, Roland Dodd. Robert Lee, George Aperley, Thomas Bullock, Roger
Woodard, Mark Blower, Philip Boys, Andrew Tedham John Bullock, Rob. quinne,
William King, W. Cunningham, George Lawson, William White, Rob. Johnson, W.
Hawkins, Walter Ekin, Rich. Thomas, Geo: Fremlen Isaac. Herbert, Tho. Morris
Paul Hudson, Francis Hall, Rob. Nash, William Wyar Isaac Summers, Abra.
Summers; Will: Smalebroke James Monnex, John Exon, William Pigitt, Abra. qui
Thomas Iackson, Edw. Dearing, Robert Wright, Anthony Bowyer Anthony Brown, John
Williams Vmphry Rowse, George Adenly, Rich. Young, Roger Coats, George Franck.
Rob. Batisford, Thomas Cotterel, Rob. Cheesman, William Waters, Edw. Joanes,
Samuel Honey, Fran. Bourne, John Wellman, John Castle: Vrius Lacy, Ralfe Searle,
William Austin
FINIS.

