The Magistrates DIGNITY AND DUTY.

Being a SERMON preached on October. 30. 1653. at Paul's Church before the Right
Honorable, THOMAS VINER, Lord Major, And the Aldermen of the City of London.

Being the first Sermon after his entrance into his Majoralty.

BY WILLIAM SPURSTOWE, D. D. Minister of Gods Word at Hackney near London.

Pium nomen impii reatus. Salv.

Job 29. 14, 15. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: my judgment was
as a Robe and a Diadem. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame.
LONDON, Printed by T. C. for J. Rothwell, at the Fountain and Bear in
Goldsmiths-row in Cheapside, 1654

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS VINER, Lord Major of the City of London.
Right Honorable,
INstead of an Epistle, I am so far necessitated, as to present You with an
Apology; to do my self so much right as to remove any suspicion of
backwardness to fulfill Your commands, which the slownesse of this Sermon in
its motion toward You might justly beget. It has some time since been called
for by your Honors order; and has stuck longer in the birth then was meet it
should, by reason of some intervening occasions which have bin an hindrance
unto the more early publishing of it: Else my willingness to perform Your
pleasure might have been sooner visible, but not more real then now it is. But
I hope it is neither too late to tender this small piece as an acknowledgment
of my obligations to Your Honor for Your many favors: Nor yet to revive any
affections which by the blessing of God upon it might be stirring in the
preaching of it; so as to make them not to be abortive, or as untimely births
that never come to a perfection. My desires are that You, and that honorable
Bench, in which Your self at present have the Chair, may all be as Trees laden
with diversity of Graces: Such as a certain Historian styles Marcianus the
Emperor, whom he calls (...); Trees not having only the leaves of Honor, but
the fruits of Righteousness. And because that in most of You the Almond-tree
does flourish, and that Age has made You more then gray; and that Death may
and will ere long make You pale; that You may be like the trees planted in the
house of God, which bring forth fruit in their old age, and are both fat and
flourishing: that so serving Your Generation in holiness and righteousness,
You may be rewarded with the rich blessings of life and glory. And this is the
prayer of him, who is

Your honors in all Christian service, WILLIAM SPURSTOWE.

THE MAGISTRATES DIGNITY and DUTY.
Being a SERMON preached on October. 30. 1653. at Paul's Church before the Right
Honorable, the Lord Major and Aldermen of the City of London.
PSALM. 82. 2. God stands in the Congregation of the mighty; (Or in the
assembly of the gods.) He judges among the gods; (Or, in the midst he will
judge the gods.)
AS Medalls do receive their worth, and esteem from the impression and
Character which is put upon them, so do assemblies derive their honor and
luster from the persons which do constitute and make them up.

The Scripture speaks of two kinds of Assemblies; the one of which it brands
with infamy, and the other it dignifies with titles of praise. There is Coetus
malignantium, an Assembly of wicked and violent persons, Psalm. 22. 16. whose
designs do breath forth nothing but cruelty; and in their counsels David
makes it a mark of the blessed man not to stand. There is Coetus
praevaricatorum an Assembly of corrupt, and treacherous persons; and above this
the Prophet prefers a barren and solitary desert; O that I had in the
wilderness the lodging place of wayfairing men, that I might leave my people,
and go from them, for they be all adulterers, an Assembly of treacherous men.
Jer. 9, 2. There is Coetus illicitus, An unlawful and tumultuous Assembly Acts
19. 40. We are in danger to be called in question for this days uprore, there
being no cause whereby we may give an account of this concourse, and unto this
no sober and prudent man will join himself. There is an Assembly which though
it be solemn, is yet so profane, that God will not smell in it. Amos. 5. 21.

But there are also assemblies that are as glorious, as these are inglorious;
that bear upon them the stamp of Majesty, as these do of ignominy. There is
the general assembly of the firstborn, Hebr. 12, 23, in which all the heirs of
glory shall be gathered together, and put into the full possession of that
inheritance which is immortal, and undefiled, and that fades not away, 1 Pet.
1. 4. There are the assemblies of the Saints on earth, in which the order and
beauty is such, as that it draws an awful respect from the beholders of them;
God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints: and to be had in
reverence of all those that are about him, Psalm. 89. 7. There is an assembly in
which the beams of Diety do shine so bright, as that it appears to be rather
a convention of Gods then of men, of which we may truly say, what they of
Lystra did concerning Paul and Barnabas, that the gods are come down to us in
the likeness of men, Acts 14. 11. And such is the assembly, which is in the
Text, in which as in a well ordered assembly you have two parts.

First, the persons that do constitute and make it up: and they are such, as
that the name of God is bestowed upon them; but without any addition of his
attributes, and divine perfections. They are gods, but not immortal, not only
wise, not unlimited in their Sovereignty, and Will. Things are not just because
they will them; but because things are just, therefore they ought to will, and
to enjoin them; Justice is the rule of their will, and not their will the rule
of Justice,

Secondly, the President who is over, and above the assembly of gods. And he is
such a person, who though he stand among them, is yet altogether distinct from
them both in his nature, and in his power. They are Elohim, gods by office, and
by patent. He is Jehovah, god by his essence and being. They are his Vice-royes
to rule and govern the affairs of men on earth, which is his footstool, and
he is their absolute Sovereign, to whom they must give a just account in
heaven. He is described, and set forth by two of his divine properties and
perfections.

First, by the property of his omnipresence and his omniscience. God stands
in the congregation of the mighty. There is no assembly, or meeting of the
earthly Dieties, but God is present at it, and stands among them. And he stands
not like an Idol or Dagon, which neither hears nor observes any thing that is
done; but he stands marking and weighing all their transactions from the
beginning to the end. His eye beholds what they do, his ear hears what they
speak, his hand writes down the sentence which they pronounce. Oh then how
circumspect had they need to be, who have such a strict and severe observer of
their actions always present among them!

Secondly, by the property of his Justice, and power. He judges among the
gods. When they judge, and decree righteous things, then he judges with them,
and ratifies the edicts, and sanctions which they make; but when they turn
judgment to wormwood, and leave off righteousness in the earth, Amos. 5. 7.
then he judges the gods themselves, then in the midst or openly in the sight
of others, he breaks in pieces mighty men without number, and sets others in
their stead, Job. 34. 24. 26.

I shall begin with the first part, viz. the persons which do make up and
constitute the solemn meeting, and convention which the Text speaks of. And
I shall make it the principal drift of my present task to speak of them, and
to them. The second part I shall only touch upon by way of application, and
enforcement to move those who are called gods, to behave and carry themselves
like gods, doing nothing unworthy of so great a name. Monstrosa res est gradus
summus and animus infimus, seeds prima and vita ima. A high seat and a base
mind, a principal place, and a common behavior, is a thing not only unsightly
but deformed and monstrous, as Bernard tells his Eugenius.

In the handling of the first part, I shall propound for the explication of it
three particulars,

First, who they be that are called gods. It is a title that is not vulgar, and
will not fit every person, no more then a Crown will suit with every head, or a
Scepter with every hand. Select and choice persons they must needs be, and such
as bear a more lively resemblance of God then others, who have his own name
conferred upon them.

Secondly, I shall show how they neither are, nor may be called gods.

Thirdly, what those respects are, in which they may be justly styled gods, for
it is not a title without reality. He that has imposed upon them his name,
has also imparted unto them his power.

First, who they be that are called gods. They to whom this high appellation is
given have also many other names of eminency bestowed upon them in the
Scripture. They are called Vertices populi, the Heads of the people, Numb. 10.
4. Such as are as far above the common rank of men in their worth, as Saul was
above the people in stature, who when he stood among the people, was higher
then any of the people from the shoulders and upwards. 1 Samuel 8. 23. They are
Scuta terrae, shields of the earth; Psalm. 47. 9. which among all military
instruments were the most honorable, and were wont to be preserved with the
greater care, and adorned with the greatest cost. They are Saviors or
deliverers, Judge. 3. 9. which is a word of that Emphasis, as that Tully says,
Ita magnum est, ut unto verbo exprimi non possit. It is so great, as no one
word can express the force of it. They are called Surgeons, or Binders,
Job. 34. 17. Shall he that hates right, govern? or as it is in the Hebrew,
bind. It is their office justissimas facere luxationum compositiones, to heal
Ruptures; in a State, and to set every bone in its just place. They are
foundations, Psalm. 82. 6. upon the strength of which the weight of the whole
building stands, and is preserved from ruin and sinking. If the foundations be
destroyed, what can the righteous do? Psalm. 11. 2. They are Fathers, Isa. 49.
23. which is a name, as Tertullian observes, that includes both power and
goodness; Who has more power over his child then a father, to do with him as
he pleases? and who has more bowels, to do every thing for him which he
desires? All these and many other more titles of honor does the Scripture
heap upon those persons, who in the Text are called Gods, which is of all the
greatest, and the highest. And they who are here dignified with the name of
gods, are no other, then the bench and seat of lawful Magistracy; to whom he
has given power and authority by a charter from Heaven, to order and regulate
the affairs of the sons of men on earth; and to prevent all that confusion
and ruin, which would inevitably fall out, if every man should be left to do
what ever is right in his own eyes. Now the end that God has set so many
sacred signatures, and marks of honor upon their persons, is;

First, that they may the better read their duty, and know how to carry
themselves in the discharge of that great trust which is reposed in them. It is
not that Haman like they should swel with pride, and make no other use of their
power, then to execute their lustful passions of wrath, and revenge upon every
one that Mordecai like cannot stoop and bow, to break Gods laws, to fulfill
their imperious wills, that are vitiated with corrupt and morbid humors. Such
a temper is more fit for those that are Nimrods, hunters of men, Genesis 10. 9.
then for them that are nursing-fathers, Isa. 49. 23. For such as are Flagella
dei, the scourges of God, (as Attila was wont to be called) that are permitted
by him to chastise and afflict a people for their sins; then for such that are
ordained Ministri dei, Ministers of God for the good and benefit of them over
whom they rule, Romans 13. 4.

Secondly, the end is, that thereby God might implant in the minds of men an
awful reverence toward their persons, and a willingness to yield obedience
to their just commands. If we consider how like unto the Sea the multitude is
in its motions, which every blast of wind does disturb, and makes to become
tempestuous; and how like they are in their passions unto tinder, which every
spark that falls does kindle and set on fire; Is it not a wonder that
oftentimes the presence of one, or a few Magistrates should not only bridle
their fury, but also calm it, and allay it? that one word from their mouths
should extinguish the fire of sedition, that is ready to break forth into a
flame? as Caesar did the mutiny of his whole army, only by saying, Quirites.
How can all this be, but that God himself has imprinted his own name upon
Magistracy, and by their several titles, as by so many golden letters has made
it to be read and seen by every eye, that there is a divine constitution under
an humane person?

The second particular propounded is, to show in what respects Magistrates are
not to be esteemed gods. For as there are sundry respects in which they truly
may, and ought to be reputed gods; yet there are diverse others also, in which
they ought not to be called gods. Four I shall touch upon, though more may
easily be added to them.

First, they are Nuncupative gods, by their titles and appellations; but they
are not gods in their being and essence. They are neither (...) nor (...) gods
in their substance or nature, or in the least manner like un to God in their
being. The divinity is not stamp't upon their persons; but upon their office.
Their divine constitution does not change their native condition: there is a
wide difference between the lofty Cedar that grows in the mountains, and the
low Myrtle that is in the valley; but yet they are both but vegetative beings,
and have the earth as their common parent: So between the greatest Monarch and
the meanest peasant there is a vast disproportion, but yet the original and
principles of their being are the same. What the oppressed Jews spoke, that
were in bondage to their brethren, Our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren,
our children as their children, Nehem. 5. 5. may be truly said of all earthly
gods, their offspring is as the offspring of other men, and their own flesh,
as the flesh of others; their diseases are as many, their pains as bitter,
their life as uncertain, their death as certain. Pares nascuntur, pares
moriuntur; in the womb, and in the tomb they are all alike. All their
excellency arises from their office, and that communicates to their persons
such an honor and reverence, as that men may not despise them, as the sons
of Belial did Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 27. or reproach them, as Shemei did David, 2 Samuel 16. 7, God himself has strictly forbidden it, Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall
not revile the Gods of thy people. They are to have osculum oris, the kiss of
the mouth, to testify the reverence of the outward man; thus Samuel kissed
Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 1. they are to have vota cordis, the prayers of the heart, to
evidence the affection of the inward man; and this the Apostle enjoynes, 1 Timothy
2. 2.

Secondly, they are not Gods by way of Ironie, and derision, as the Idols of
the Heathen in Scripture are called gods, or as the Gluttons belly is called
his god, or as the covetous man's money is said to be his god. This honorable
title God does not give to Magistracy, as the Soldiers did the name of a King
unto our Savior, Matthew. 27. 29. Arraying him, Crowning him, bowing the knee
unto him, not to worship him, but to scorn him. God is more jealous of his
name, then to give it for any such purposes. And yet in thief licentious times,
wherein the worst of men take a liberty both of speaking, and doing what they
please, how is the Sacred Ordinance of Magistracy trampled upon with the foot
of Pride, and Scorn? How is it with loud clamours cried down, as if it were a
thing altogether useless, and unprofitable; like to some old heartless and
useless drug, that has lost all its virtue and efficacy? Yea, how is it looked
upon by many, as a powerful obstacle, and hindrance unto the growth of Christ's
Kingdom, and the enjoyment of those glorious liberties, which best suit Gospel
times, and therefore they think it fit that it be wholly removed, and dealt
with, as Ezekiah did with the brazen serpent, which being no more an ordinance,
but an Idol, he brake it in pieces, and called it, Nehushtan, 2 Kings 18. 4.
But if there were not very strange suffusions upon the eye of these men's
reason, Magistracy which is in it self a straight and right object, could
never appear to be so crooked, as to be deemed rather a stone of stumbling,
then a cornerstone to support the building; to be an Idol to be broken, rather
then an institution to be preserved. For who can be, either to story common,
or sacred, so great a stranger, as not to know with what innumerable evils that
Monster of Anarchie has always been attended? If we look into the Book of
Judges, we shall find that when there was no King in Israel, or Ruler that
might put them unto shame, there was gross Idolatry set up in the seventeenth
Chapter; there was Violence, Rapine, together with shedding of blood exercised
in the eighteenth Chapter, there was Uncleanness, and Ravishings unto death in
the ninteenth Chapter. If you look into the late Annals of Germany, we may
find that it was the scene where these and such like evils were acted over
again with greater rage and fury, when those who were professed enemies to
Government and Authority had got power into their hands. And can we at home
ever expect to gather Grapes of these Thorns, or Figs of these Thistles? The
Persians had anciently a custom, that when their chief Ruler dyed, there
should be (...), a lawlesnesse, and liberty for five days after, that every
one might do without controlle what he pleased: Now in this short intervall of
government, there were such robberies, murders, violences of all kinds
committed by the headless multitude; as that they were exceeding glad that
government should take place again. And should there be but such a liberty
amongst us but for the space of so many hours (which God forbid) many that are
not now sensible of the benefit of Magistracy, would if they had not put off
humanity, quickly change their opinion, and as strongly desire it, and wish for
it, as before they loathed and despised it.

Thirdly, Magistrates are not gods (...), according to equality of power and
dignity. The blessed and glorious persons in the Trinity, though they have an
order among them; yet they have no priority or posteriority; though they be
distinct subsistences, yet they have an unity of essence: they are all equally
God, and alike infinite in their power, wisdom, and goodness. But so it is
not with the earthly gods; their power, their honor, their wisdom, are not
equal or alike in all; though they be as so many lines that derive their being
from one common center; yet they do not equally stretch themselves toward the
same circumference. Some are like Stars of the first magnitude, that move in an
higher orb; others are as Stars of a less magnitude, that have their motions
in a narrower and lower sphere. Some have potestatem vitae and necis, the power
of life and death; others have only the power of custody, and of inflicting
lesser punishments and censures. Some are as the fountains of authority, and
others are as the rivulets that flow from them. This distinction the Scripture
it self makes, 1 Pet. 2. 13. when it exhorts believers to yield submission to
every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King, as
supreme, or unto other Governors that are sent by him. But as Gold has the
name of Gold when it is in the thin leaf, as well as when it is in the massy
wedge: so are the lowest Judicatories an assembly of gods, as well as the
highest. Nazianzen speaking of Magistrates, resembles those that are of the
first rank, unto pictures that are drawn from head to feet; the middle sort,
unto such pictures as are drawn no further then the girdle; and the lowest, to
such as go no further then to the neck or shoulders. But all have the name of
gods; as the smallest penny bears upon it the image of the Prince, as well as
the greatest piece, though in a less character and compass.

Fourthly, they are not gods in regard of the ultimate end of their office, or
of their actings in it. God, as he is the fountain of all being; so is he the
end of all being. As all things are of him, and from him; so must all things be
for him, and to him, Romans 11. 33. He can have no other center of his actions,
then his hononr and glory, no more then he can have any causes of his being
besides himself. As he is Alpha, so he must be Omega. In this respect no
Magistrate, or Assembly of gods can be like unto God; because they are his
Ministers, whom he has ordained for the good of others, Romans 13. 4. They are
as lamps that spend and waste themselves to enlighten others. They are as the
eyes in the body, which look not upon themselves; but are exercised in watching
for the safety of the least member. And when any Magistrate cease thus to
act, he is then both most unlike God, and most unworthy of the high Name and
Title of a god. A self-seeking Magistrate is one of the worst of plagues and
judgments that can befall a people; he is as a gangreene in the head, which
brings both a more speedy and a more certain ruin, then if it were in some
inferior and less Noble part of the body. He is not then a Shepherd to
defend the innocent sheep, that run unto him for protection; but a wolf, to
worry and devour them. He is not then an Olive Tree, that drops fatness, but
a Bramble, from which fire comes that burns up and consumes the Cedars of
Lebanon. He is not a Sun, that is the public servant of light unto the
world, and shines not for it self, but others; but a Comet that scatters
abroad malignant vapors, and by its blazing bodes nothing but ruin. He is not
in the politic body as a sanguifying Liver in the body natural, that sends
forth nourishment to every member, and fills every vein with blood; but as an
ill and distempered Spleen, that robs the whole of its due nutriment, to make
it self great, above what is convenient for its own welfare, and the good of
every other part. And oh! that we had no better evidences then jealousies, and
presumptions, that many among us, who are called by the name of gods, might be
said to be self-seeking gods; that many who sit in public places were not
biased with private respects; having it more in their designs, and in their
thoughts, how to make themselves great, then how to make the Public
prosperous, by causing judgment to roll down as waters, and righteousness as
a mighty stream. Amos. 5. 24. The learned Tully who was a zealous Patriot, and
lover of his country, did wish two wishes, though he never saw either of them
affected: the one was, that he might see Rome settled in its just Liberties: the
other was, that he might see every man's estate proportionable to his affection
and love unto the public. And surely if this wish might take place in our
times, I believe the purses of many would be more empty, and the coffers of the
State would be more full.

The third particular propounded is, to show how lawful Magistrates are called
gods. For it is not a naked title, which conveyeth nothing of substance and
reality with it. They are not gods, as an Herald is a King at Arms, who has
only the name of a King, but nothing of the dignity or Revenues of a King. He
who has given this name of excellency unto them, has derived an answerable
power and authority, in regard of which they may be justly called gods, and
that in a threefold respect.

First, they are gods by way of Representation as they stand in his stead, and
have the managing of all affairs which concern his sovereignty and glory. The
Earth is the Lords, Psalm. 24. 1. and to him whose the earth is, does all power
and dominion belong, Psalm. 62. 11. Now because men cannot bear the immediate
dispensations of God, no more then the Israelites could his giving of the Law
from the Mount, but cried out unto Moses, speak thou with us, and we will
hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we dye, Exodus 20. 19. Therefore has
God been pleased to convey his power, justice, and wisdom by the ordinance and
institution of Magistracy; but yet after such a manner and way, as that all the
transactions of justice, and all the ensigns of power and authority are truly
his, and not theirs. The Laws which they rule by are his, and not theirs; The
legislative power is not theirs, but only the executive power. There is one
lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy, James 4. 12. The Throne on which
they sit is Gods Throne, 1 Chronicles. 29. 23. Solomon sat on the throne os the
Lord. The Scepter which they bear in their hand it is Gods Scepter, Exodus 4.
20. Moses had the rod of God in his hand. The judgment which they give is Gods
judgment, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. You shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the
judgment is Gods.

Secondly, they are gods in respect of that peculiar honor and dignity which
is put upon them above others. They are all sons of the most high, Psalm. 82. 6.
But how? Not by Generation; so Christ is the only Beloved, and the only
Begotten Son of God. Not by Adoption; so Believers only are called the sons of
God, being by a spiritual conformity unto him made like unto him, and bearing
the Image of God upon them as a child does of his Father. But they are sons of
God by way of Eminency: their office and power being above and over all others,
as being his Deputies, and Vicegerents: their persons being more sacred, as
being his Anointed ones: their relation to him being more singular and
special; as being in a more immediate subordination unto God then others are.
Now this title of sons, God gives unto Magistrates, that he might the better
draw and win men to yield a just subjection and obedience unto them. The sons
of great Personages have respects and observances given to them, which are
denied unto their servants; when the one are slighted, the other usually are
regarded. The Lord of the Vineyard, when his servants were beaten and killed by
the husbandmen to whom he sent them: did yet expect, that their behavior and
carriage to his Son would have been far otherwise, and upon that ground he sent
him, saying, they will reverence my son, Mat. 21. 37. But when violence was
done unto him, then messengers to offer peace are no more sent, but an Army to
destroy. And so when men despise dignities, and lightly esteem the sons of
the most high, whom God would have to be honored, A cruel messenger shall be
sent against them, Prove. 17. 11.

Thirdly, they are gods in respect of their Call and mission. He called them
gods unto whom the word came, John 10. 35. They are not only suffered by him,
but sent of him, 1 Pet. 2. 18. When men become Rulers only by Gods permission;
then the worst of men do get into the Throne of Sovereignty and power, being
suffered by God to break Nations in pieces with a Rod of Iron, and not to
govern them with a golden Scepter. Cedrenus tells a story, that when Phocas the
Paracide had made his way to the Empire, by the blood of Mauritius his
predecessor, there was a religious man that did in an expostulatory manner
complain to God, saying, Lord wherefore have thou made this man Emperor? And
an answer was returned by God unto him, quoniam non inveni pejorem. Because I
have not found a worse. It seems the sins of the Roman State were grown to
such an height, that if God could have found out a worse instrument then Phocas
to afflict them, they should have had him to sit at the helm of government.
But when God does by his Warrant and Commission call men unto the office of
Magistracy, he chooses men that are fit and meet to sit in that Assembly of
gods, over which he is President. It was Hirams expression to Solomon, Because
the Lord loved his people, therefore has he made thee to be King over them; 2 Chronicles. 2. 11. Now this Call of God, whereby any have Authority and power given
unto them, is either extraordinary, or ordinary: the one is immediate from God,
and thus Saul, David, Solomon, were all set upon the Throne of Israel; but this
Call is not now to be expected. The other is mediate; which is by the
designation and appointment of man. Thus Moses did by the advice of Jethro,
select and choose out of the people such persons as were endued with
qualifications fit for Magistracy, to be Rulers over the people, Exodus 18. 15.
And this is the Call which is usual and constant, which being after a regular
and due manner performed, becomes the Call of God. But a Call there must be, to
give a title to Magistracy: or else it is not an Authority, but an usurpation;
not a mission, by Gods ordinance, but a permission by his providence. As to the
weighty Office of the Ministry, no man may presume to entitle himself; or to
run unless he be sent, without being an intruder: No more may any man take
the liberty to cloth himself with the robes of Magistracy, and to sit in the
assembly of the gods, without a just and lawful Call thereunto.

I have now finished the several particulars that were propounded for the
explication of the first branch of the Text; by showing who they are, that are
styled an Assembly of Gods: And in what respect Negatively, they are not Gods:
Positively, how they are, and justly may be honored with the name and title of
Gods. The few sands of time that are not yet run, I shall allot for the
application.

And are Magistrates Gods? Oh! then how many are there, that in the Assembly of
gods, are not Stars, but Spots: who are as unworthy to be reputed gods, as
the dust and dark earth to be a shining Planet. They are honored with the
name; but they do nothing that may honor the Office to which they are called.
Some there be that are Idol-gods, which have eyes and see not, ears and hear
not, hands and handle not; that are as useless in their places, as Images are
in Churches. Others there be, to whom this name can no otherwise agree, then by
an Antiphrasis, or contrariety, like Diogenes his servant; Manes, a manendo,
because he was every other while running away; so they (...) quasi (...), gods
because without God, Atheists both in opinion and practice; of the same stamp
with the unjust Judge, who neither feared God, nor regarded man, Luke 18. 2.
Some there be that are Gluttons and Bellygods, who eat of the fat, and drink
of the sweet, which great and high places afford; but altogether neglect the
weighty things of judgment, mercy, and truth; that waste not only the
morning, but the day in the sensual pleasures of the palate; and thereby
bring a woe upon the Land where they are Rulers, Eccles. 10. 16. And are there
not others that are haughty and proud gods, that delight to imitate God in his
lightning and thunder: in making men to tremble at their threanings, and to
dread every frown that sits upon their brow; but love not to be like him in the
darting out the amiable beams of goodness, and gentleness? Are not others
Avaritious gods, who set their hearts upon nothing but the increase of riches;
making themselves great not only by the sweat, but by the blood of many, whom
they by oppression have squeezed and drained, as grapes that are trodden in the
Wine Press! O what irreconcilable contradictions are these! to be a God, and
yet an Idol; a God, and yet an Atheist, a Glutton: a God, but yet proud,
covetous. Who ever heard of such gods, unless it were among the Heathen, where
the matchless impiety of many persons was the chief ground of their being
made and reputed gods; as may appear by the impure stories which themselves
do report of them? But, O let it never be told in Gath, or published in
Askelon, that amongst Christians, that profess not only Religion, but a
Reformation, those are honored with the sacred title of gods, who have by
their impure lives made a forfeiture of the name of men. The loose walking of
many Christians was (as Salvian complains) made by the Pagans the reproach of
Christ himself, saying, Si Christus sancta docuisset, Christiani sancte
vixissent. If Christ had taught holy doctrine, surely his followers had lead
better lives. But, O let there not be an occasion and advantage given for any
to take up unworthy thoughts of God, who wills no wickedness, so as to judge
him to allow and favor profaneness, injustice oppression, because that they
who are called gods do abound in the practice of those and such like sins.
And to this end it concerns those who have a power either to elect, or to
confirm any person in the office of Magistracy, to be circumspect whom they
take into the Assembly of the Gods, that so no dishonor reflect upon God,
whose name they bear; or contempt be poured forth upon the office, by making
it vile, by the foul enormities of those that are betrusted with it. The
irreligious behavior of Eli his sons, made the offering of the Lord to be
abhorred, 1 Samuel 2. 17. And so does the impiety of Magistrates make Magistracy
it self to become despicable in the eyes of the people.

A second Application directs it self to you, Right Honorable, and to those
that are Assessors with you on the bench of Judicature; that you would do
worthily in this our Israel, and show your selves no other then an Assembly of
Gods, by executing judgment, and working righteousness, which are the great
works by which God is known, Psalm. 9. 16. Without you, what are the Laws, but
leges cadaverosoe, livelesse and unactive carcasses, as instruments without the
touch of a skillful hand, that make no melody, as Vines that creep along upon
the ground, and become unfruitful for want of support? What are they, but as
the Letter without the Spirit, which profits not? It is you alone that must
make them to live, to bear fruit, and to be useful for the good of this great
City, and those over whom you rule. I confess indeed, that the times into
which you are cast, are full of difficulty; and such of which we may say, as
Livie sometime did of the Roman State, Nec remedia possumus far, nec vitia;
that we can neither bear our medicines, nor yet our maladies: we groan under
the one; and yet are impatient of the other. But yet, however let me beseech
you, to do what in you lies, to keep Laws, Liberties, Religion it self, from
an irrecoverable shipwreck; and if you perish in your work, yet will you live
in your name. In naufragio laudandus est Rector, quem mare obruit clavum
tenentem. That Pilot dies nobly, who (says Seneca) perishes in the storm with
the Helm in his hand. Endeavor to make good those titles of eminency with
which God has honored you above others; and to be as much above them in
goodness, as you are above them in greatness. You are Mountains, Micah 6. 2.
O then be like the mountains of Myrrh and Frankincense, which send forth a
sweet smell, Cant. 4. 6. and not like those of Mizpah and Tabor, upon which
snares and nets are spread, Hosea 5. 1. You are Healers, Isai. 3. 7. be then as
compassionate Surgeons, that mind more the welfare of their Patient, then
their profit. You are Leaders, Isai. 9. 16. be then neither blind Guides, nor
false Guides, to seduce into the paths of error, or to lead into the pit of
destruction. You are Nursing-fathers, Isai. 49. 23. be not then Egyptian
taskmasters, that made Israel to sigh bitterly under their cruel bondage. In
one word, you are Gods, which is a title paramount, a name that excels every
other name; O therefore let not this pious name be joined to a godless life.
As ye are gods, so be like God, and that in these particulars.

First, be like him in holiness. Aristotle in ranking the moral virtues,
gives the precedence unto Magnanimity; but the Scripture, in setting forth the
Charasters of a Magistrate, puts holiness as the first, Exodus 18. 21. as being
a Robe both of the greatest beauty and necessity. Without holiness you may be
Judges on Earth, but you can never be without it Judges in Heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 2.
And what comfort can this be to any, to sit here upon the bench of Judicature,
and hereafter to stand trembling at Gods bar? to be here a Judge for a few
days, and afterward to be an eternal prisoner? to wear here a Chain of gold
as an ornament, and hereafter to be bound with the chains of darkness for
ever? O therefore, if you would not have your glory and honor to expire in so
shameful a period, let holiness shine forth both in your persons and office.

First, be holy in your persons and families. Let not your dwellings be stained
with open profaneness in those that are your followers, and filled many times
with more disorder then Tavernes themselves, having more oaths sworn in them
in one day, then there are prayers made in a whole year: having plenty of
healths drunk in bowls of Wine, but no sweet odours offered to God in Golden
vials, which are Sacrifices more meet for Christians, Rev. 5. 8. These, and
such like things, they are a reproach to any family where they be found; but
much more to the family of a Magistrate, and make their sins to be of a
deeper die then their Scarlet with which they are clothed.

Secondly, exercise holiness in your office, by preferring the dignity and
esteem of those things upon which God has set an eminent mark and character of
sanctity, that they may have that observance and reverence which is due unto
them. And here give me leave to instance in three particulars.

First, be careful that the holy name of God be not polluted by wicked
miscreants, and Atheistical Russians that scorn to use it in prayer, and yet
spare not to rend and tear it by hellish and fiery execrations, and to set it
as a seal to ratify the worst of lies and falsehoods. Late Statutes have
raised the penalty of swearing; but yet oaths are as cheap as ever. And from
whence comes all this, but from the negligence and lukewarmnesse of Magistrates
that have no zeal to stop the growth of so foul and spreading a sin?

Secondly, do you that are called Gods, improve your power and Authority for
the solemn sanctification of Gods day: the beauty and luster of which has of
late been more impaired then ever, both by corrupt opinions and practices. It
was wont to be Englands glory that it did excel other Nations in a religious
observance of the Lords day; but now it is to be feared that the open contempt
and neglect of this day will become both its shame and ruin, being for
Apostasy from what it has professed branded by the world, and severely
punished by God himself.

Thirdly, show forth a holy zeal in defending and preserving the life of
Religion, and the light of the Gospel; both which are in greater jeopardy to be
destroyed then ever they were since their first plantation amongst us. For when
had Antichrist greater hopes of bringing us back again into Babylon, then at
present? Are not all laws laid asleep, which were as so many bridles in the
jaws of Popish Emissaries, who now like the wicked walk up and down on every
side? Have we now any Shibboleth that may distinguish a Gileadite from an
Ephramite, a Protestant from a Recusant? Are not all divisions and differences
both spread and fomented by their artifices, that they may thereby scandalize
our Religion, and ensnare such as are weak in the faith, by pleading the unity
of their Church, though it has more rents and patches in it then a beggars
coat? Is not the vigilance of the Locusts that are amongst us greater then
ever? and the spirit of slumber which is fallen upon us, deeper then ever? Who
is it that observes how many of our green and pleasant things are eaten up by
them, and how few are left? Surely unless by your wisdom and courage some
means be thought upon, and set on foot, that may like a strong West wind take
away these vermin, and cast them into their Tyber from whence they came: I may
truly say, there is but a step between Ruin and this ancient City.

Secondly, be ye who are Gods, like God in the exercise of Justice without
partiality, and respect of persons: so as not to weigh the poor man's cause by
the balance of the law, and the rich man's cause by the balance of favor and
affection: to be a hateful tyrant to the one, and a shameful flatterer to the
other. The Silkworm in the Fable, boasted to the Spider, that the threads which
she spun, did captivate Nobles and great ones; but the web which the Spider
made, did serve only to catch Flies. And such should be the laws, and the
execution of them by Magistrates, which have strength and power in them to take
hold of great men, when offenders, as well as of the poor, who usually most
feel the smart of them. What honor is it for a Judge, to stock, to whip, to
mulct a malefactor that is poor and friendlesse, and to court with civilities
a Right worshipful swearer or drunkard? to be full of Invectives against the
one, and to be mute before the other? Is this to fulfill the office of a
Magistrate, who by his oath is bound to do justice without fear, and without
favor? I have read, that in Justinians time the Oath of the Judges had
dreadful imprecations annexed unto it, whereby they did wish unto themselves,
that if they did not do right unto every one, the trembling of Cain, the
leprosy of Gehazi, the lot of Judas might befall them. Though there be no such
bitter ingredients put into your Oath, that might make it to be like the water
of jealousy; yet let me tell you, that God can inflict upon corrupt
Magistrates judgments that may be parallel to these. He can by letting his
dread fall upon them, make the joints of their loins to be loosed, and their
knees to smite one against another: He can cause a leprosy to cleave to their
estate, which shall make it unclean both to them; and their posterity. He can,
by filling their consciences with horror and despair, make them to say as Job
did, My soul chooses strangling and death, rather then life. And therefore be
wise, O ye Rulers, and consider often what comfortable answer your consciences
can make to that question of David, Do ye indeed speak righteousness, O
congregation? do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of men? Psalm. 58. verse. 1.

Thirdly, be like unto God in wisdom and mature deliberation, that so rashness
and precipitancy may not blemish the sentence and decree which you pass, nor
make others to cry out, that their cause is judged, but not examined. Justice
in the Emblem is represented with a balance in the one hand, and a sword in
the other; and first, matters must be weighed by it, that so it may be seen on
which side truth lies, before an equal sentence and judgment can be passed.
He that uses only the sword, and not the balance, may smite an innocent
Naboth, and acquit a guilty Ahab. A Judge, though he is to be Coecus in
exequendo, blind in the impartial execution of the law; yet is he to be
Oculatus in dijudicando, eagle-ey'd in the scrutiny and disquisition of all
matters that come before him, whether judicial or criminal. Though he is not
to know any persons, yet he is to know and understand every cause; and to be
more circumspect, in regard that truth ofttimes stands like a little mark in a
wide field, which cannot be easily discerned; especially when it is hid by the
false accusations of a malicious informer. Thus David was slandered by wicked
Doeg, unto Saul, 1 Samuel 22. 10. Or when it is disguised by the arts and
insinuations of the Advocate; and thus Paul was misrepresented to Foelix by
Tertullus the Orator, Acts 24. 5. Or when it is darkened by the want of evidence
and testimony to give light unto it: and thus it was in that eager contention
between the two mothers for the living child, 1 Kings 3. 22. Now in these
difficulties, if the eye of wisdom in a Magistrate should not be awake to
discern; if prudence should not be more then ordinary to direct, how quickly
might judgment be turned into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into
hemlock? how soon might the sword of justice be stained with the blood of
innocence, by having the edge of it turned upon the righteous, and the back of
it toward the wicked? Do you therefore who are in Authority, and sit in the
high places of Judicature, make the prayer of Solomon's, when he was called to
the Throne of his father, to be frequently yours, in asking of God an
understanding heart to judge his people, that you may discern between good and
bad, 1 King. 3. 9. And make the practice of Job your constant pattern, to
search out the cause which you know not, Job 29. 16.

Fourthly, be like God in mercy, who is by the Apostle represented unto us both
as a Father, and as a Judge, in one and the same verse, 1 Pet. 1. 17. All whose
ways are by the Prophet said to be mercy and truth, Psalm. 25. 10. He has not
one path of truth, and another of mercy; but they are both enterchangeably
woven and twisted one within another, and thereby are made a mutual foil to
set off each others beauty. In the highest manifestation of Gods justice upon
sin, in which it and mercy did seem to be at an irreconcilable distance, his
wisdom found out a way for righteousness and peace to meet and kiss each
other; by making his Son a Suerty to suffer punishment for man's sin, and an
Head to sanctify his nature, and to restore to him his image. It should
therefore be the greatest care of those who are called Gods on earth, to
preserve the unity and concord of justice and mercy in the exercise of their
office, as the two fairest Jewels that do most adorn Authority; as the two
strongest pillars that do best support it, and establish it upon the surest
Basis. The Throne is established by righteousness. Prove. 16. 12. The Throne is
upholden by mercy. Prove. 20. 28. Justice without mercy turns into rigor, and
so becomes hateful; mercy without justice turns into fond pity, and so
becomes contemptible. As then the Rod of Aaron and the Pot of Manna were by
Gods command laid up in the same Ark: so let Mercy and Justice be both
preserved entire in the bosom of the same Magistrate; And the one will render
his Authority awful; and the other will make it amiable and full of
complacency.

And now to move you to demean and carry your felves as so many living
pictures of the great God, and to make his excellencies to shine in the
righteous administration of your Office, I shall briefly propound two arguments
which the Text in two words does suggest.

First, God stands in the congregation. The Ethiopians were anciently wont to
set an empty chair in the midst of the judgment place, to put them in mind that
God was present among them, as Lorinus reports. Others say twelve, to signithat
the Angels were spectators of them. But you need no such significant Ceremony
to quicken you to the doing of righteous things. The memento in the Text, that
God stands in the congregation of Gods, duly thought upon, and believed,
cannot but be more prevalent then all other Remembrances whatever. What
soldier is there that will be a Coward in the presence of his General? What
servant is there that will be a loiterer under the eye of his master? And what
Magistrate is there that will or can be corrupt, that believes God to stand at
his right hand? Will he not say with Joseph, how can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39. 9. will he not say with Job, what
then shall I do when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I answer
him? Job 31. 13.

Secondly, God judges the Gods themselves. Though you here sit upon Thrones,
yet you must ere long stand at his Tribunal, and be openly judged in the sight
of Angels and men. Though now you weigh and scan the actions of others by your
beam, yet you must be weighed by the balance of heaven, and woe unto you if
you be found too light. God weighed Belshazzar in the midst of his cups, Dan.
5. 27. And so he may do you in the midst of your oppression and tyranny. And
the greater your sins be, the lighter you will be in the scale of divine
justice; but the heavier will be your condemnation. God weighed the rich man in
the midst of his security, and while he promised himself the rest of many
years, that night he required his soul of him, Luke 12. 20. And so he may
deal with you while you bless your selves in your heart, saying, I shall have
peace, though I walk in the imaginations of my heart, and add one iniquity to
another. Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. If therefore there be any whose consciences tell
them, that though they sit in the Assembly of the Gods, they yet do things
most unworthy of their name and office, Let them consider, that he who judges
without respect of persons must be their Judge, whose sentence they cannot fly,
whose wrath they cannot bear. And this amazing thought (if any thing) will
make Daniels counsel to Nebuchadnezzar, to be most acceptable to them, To break
off their sins by righteousness, and their iniquities by showing mercy to
the poor; if it may be a lengthning of their tranquillity. Dan. 4. 27.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 22. line 7. for affected, read effected. p. 29. l. 8. for dust, r. dull.


