Certain weighty CONSIDERATIONS Humbly tendered and submitted TO THE
Consideration of such of the Members of the High COURT of JUSTICE For Trial of
the KING, As they shall be Presented unto.

There being only One hundred of the Copies appointed to be Printed for that
purpose

By JOSUAH SPRIGGE.

He has showed thee, o Man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee; but to do justly, to LOVE MERCY, and to walk humbly with thy God.

Imprinted at London, 1648.

Certain weighty Considerations humbly tendered and submitted to the
Consideration of such of the Members of the High Court of Justice for Trial of
the KING, As they shall be presented (...).
FOrasmuch as I have appeared. In an Exhomation to tenderness of Blood (...)
the Clause (...) before you; I think it my duty to give on what further grounds
and authority I have for the same, which for modesty's sake I did the forbear
in the audience, of Others that might make a wrong use of it, and that I might
have the better accep^^^ce with you in what I have to say, by presenting it to
your selves alone, who have peculiar Interest in it. For though you have hear
what I have said, yet you have not heard all I have to say which therefore I
here bring forth to you, desiring that the Father of Lights would so shine unto
you, that what is of God here presented ye may own it, may be (...) and made
One with it, and may (...) principle, and may not be prevened in it by the
Peoples assuming it but that in this you may (go before the People and may
derive the light of it to the people, (...) ^^^thy of your place to do.

First then, (not to meddle with your qualification as to an authority given
you by man;) I do (Hypothetically) (and only so) acknowledge you to have the
Cognizance of this Cause, and to have the right of deciding it; if that the
Lord do set up himself in you, and bring forth himself in and by your judgment,
that i^, If you be able to search into, and ^^y open the Root of all our Evil,
the Root of those Calamities brought upon this Nation by the Evil Instruments
therein

This Root I have laid forth to you; and it is Babylon, the King of Babylon.
Babylon is the strange Land in which the Israel of God is Detained Captive from
the Lord and his presence: and this Land is Our flesh, (...) the dark state of
things wherein the Lord is hid, under which he is vayl'd and lies buried. For
He is the breath of our nostrils, and the blood in our Veins; By him Kings
reign, and Princes decree Justice, etc. and all forms of Government, and
persons o^ Governors not in Union with Him (with the Spirit of Justice and
righteousness as it is in him) are vain Idols, having Eyes but see not, and
Hands, but can do nothing that is truly excellent and glorious.

The King of (...) Babylon, Is the glory of our flesh, the goodliness of it,
Isa. 40. Which makes us put Confidence in it, we trim and dress up our own
way, our own flesh, and fleshly forms, and cloth them with names of God, and
Judges, but these being destitute of the Spirit and power of God, and
righteousness, become to us as broken pitchers.

Now Babylon is a mystery, Rev. 17 5. the Mother of Harlots and abominations of
the Earth. I find in Scripture two descriptions or names of Antichrist: He is
called, The Man of Sin; All other wickedness is but the weakness, and may be
easier Convinced and dealt withal. But Antichrist is the Man of Sin, and has
gotten into the Temple of God, into lawful powers and administrations; and
thence is the rise of our present miseries. It has not been as the Murder
Committed by a Thief on the highway, for Lucre-sake, or of an Enemy upon a
private grudge, that has none other but such base pretenses of Covetousness or
Revenge for it self; but here has been power against power. One lawful power
exercising it self against another lawful power, through the deceit of this
Man of Sin, that has broken off the power and authority of the King from the
End of it, which is the good of his people in truth, which is the Law and
Compass that should regulate it, and this has been through that darkness
whereby Satan has blinded his eyes that he could not see his own glory and
greatness to ly in, and to be upheld by the flourishing and happy Condition of
his People.

And secondly, Antichrist is called, The Mother of Harlots; all Other
wickednesses are but the Daughters, Babylon is the Mother, and this Mother is a
Mystery, its hard lighting on her; Indeed, none Can search her out, and deal
with her but the Lord; and therefore it is said, He shall Consume Antichrist
with the Spirit of his Mouth, and the brightness of his Coming.

Now if the Lord be Come in this brightness to destroy Antichrist by you, I am
sure He will first destroy it in you; and if so, then: believe we shall see you
(I am sure I must) judge your selve: first of those things for which ye Condemn
your Prisoner: and that indeed might lay the foundation of a sweet and holy
proceeding, and a happy Conclusion of this Trial. This, if any thing would
melt the King, and both He and you would as Jacobs sons fall on the neck of
Joseph the Lord Jesus whom ye have sold; nay whom ye have crucified One as well
as the other, though your crimes may admit of graduall difference: For have not
we through that poor dark selfish spirit, divided our selves and our good,
from the good and greatness of the King; Have not we been that to him, that he
has been to us? Have we not borne him and his greatness as a burden that we
would be glad of an occasion to cast off? I do not say but we have liberties,
and we may stand for out liberties. Babylon were not a mystery, if it did not
get into interests and ways that are righteous in themselves, but whether were
not these rights and interests of the people pleaded and managed in the dark,
as well as was the prerogative of the King through which darkness the
Consistency of the Kings greatness with the peoples freedom and the amiable
reflection that these mutually Cast one upon the other, and the joy they take
one in another was not seen, and so ye opposed your selves one to another in
the dark (...) seeking to swallow up the other into it self, which were made
not to thrive, but in union together.

And the Root of all this disowning and incomplyance with one another, is for
that we have not held the head, from whom the whole body being knit together by
joins and bands, has nourishment ministered, and increases with the
increasings of God; which head is the Lord: But our union has not been in him
but in weak compacts of our own: we have not seen our selves, King and People
springing up from one root, and issuing from one fountain, even the Lord; that
we are his image and glory in all this variety and subordination of States; and
that all these are not so in themselves; but that they are in each other as
they are all in unity in their Original.

For certainly, whatever unlikelihood and disappearance of this there is in
what we have known of these subordinations, as they have subsisted and acted in
this dark, corrupt and fleshly state; yet I have so much faith to believe; yea
in the light of the thing I see it in God, That King and People do subsist and
have a glorious interest in each other: and that it shall appear when the
Creation that is now in pain is delivered, that all the Majesty that dwells in
the person of a King, it is indeed the Peoples; and all the peace and
flourishing of a People, it is the Kings, and they shall possess, and be
possessed each of other. The King shall not have an envious eye against his
people nor the people against the King; each shall be satisfied with their own,
and each shall rejoice in the others wealth. The people shall cast glory upon
their King, and Kings shall throw love and riches upon their People, and each
shall think, while the other has it, himself has it, and that they have not
the less for the others having much. Thus it is between the Lord and his
Christ, thus it is between Christ and his Church; and thus shall it be between
Kings and their People. We have seen and conversed with these Relations only in
their weakness, and so cannot believe this of them: But the Lord has a portion
in these things, He made them not in vain, they shall be restored. The Creature
(yea, this Creature Magistracy or Polity) shall be delivered into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God; and sure the day of its Redemption draws nigh.

For the Lord has thrown it into the Furnace, and the flames are hot about it.
Fire has come out of Abimelech, to consume the men of Sechem; and fire is
(...) out of Sechem to destroy Abimelech. And under this notion, I confess, do
I look upon this Trial of the King: and so I can freely acknowledge as the
righteous Award and Judgment of the Lord, under whose mighty hand we have
suffered all these Wars. For who gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the
robbers? did not the Lord, against whom they had sinned?

But the end of the Lords judging is purifying. not destroying, and if the Lord
have pleasure in you; He may make you not only Tormentors, but Judges; he may
bring you forth to act in the light, and to be Instruments in the hand of God,
of that judgment upon the King that shall be saving even to pull him as a
firebrand out of the fire of Tyranny over his people, which has thrown him
into this fire of the wrath of his people. For a Judge is not sufficiently
accomplished and instructed for his Office if he have not a power to release as
well as to condemn, to save as well as to destroy, as Pilate could say to our
Savior, Have not I power to Crucify thee; and power to release thee?
Otherwise ye answer not your Original pattern the Lord who where there are
two parts, as flesh and spirit proceeds with that distinction, as that while
his left hand brings destruction to the flesh, his right hand carries salvation
to the spirit. And if the day of the Lord be risen upon you and he have made
you able to judge and discern the hidden principles of things, ye will
exercise this discret^on between the lawful Authority invested in the Person
of the King and his unlawful usurpation; ye will damn this and save the other
bringing it forth from all its dross and flesh (that has made it not only
unprofitable but hurtful) as a vessel for the finer, So shall ye be Repairers
of our breaches indeed and Restorers of paths to dwell in: And if ye do this,
the Sword whereby ye must do it is the Sword of Christ's mouth; The Spirit of
the Lord: If this Spirit have brought forth the Person of our Lord Jesus in
you, who is the true pattern of Government, and of all things do ye bring
forth this pattern in your judgment; Arraigne the King not at the bar of man,
but at the tribunal of Jesus Christ; show (for who but a King can judge a
King?) what the Spirit and the Government of Christ in union with Man is, and
compare the King and his government by this pattern in the mount, and show him
his failings his narrowness of Spirit and principle not comprehending his
people in himself as Christ does, not living in their wealth and prosperity as
his own as Christ does, not bearing wi^h their weaknesses as Christ does, not
emptying himself to make them rich and happy as Christ does, and save the King
a labor of recriminating you; confess to him you have been in the dark too,
and not seeing the person and majesty of the Lord in him, ye have not been in
such a natural and affectionate compliance with his honor and grea^nesse as
the Memb^rs are with the Head: But if ye are not able so to deal wi^h him.
Th^n turn him over to those that can and to ^he justice and mercy of the
Nation and hear what that will speak for him. And in behalf of the life of
the King we allege.

That this war that h^th been upon us was by the judgment of the Lord, the
Lord did bid the Sword devour and Eat flesh: A Kingdom is not so easily, nor
ordinarily set on flame by Civil Waris without the special hand of God, the
Causes are long a working, and the matter was long a gathering: If the Lord had
not sent an evil Spirit universally among us, it was not the Exorbitancy of
the will of one man, as ye say the King is that could have thrown us into
these fl^mes; The Lord used the King as an Instrument of his wrath toward us,
and us as Instruments to power wrath upon him.

2 That in the procuring this wrath, had our share with the King, we was
overcome of this evil; He could have brought no evil upon us, had not we had
it in us. Under the weight of our flesh as well as his own, did his Government
groan and bow down: the Kingdom and its policy (neither King nor People) stood
in the Lord, in that Union and glory in Spirit, and so fell and withered was
gathered and burnt.

Therefore now it concerns both him and us to humble our selves under the
mighty hand of God, till he exalt us in his due time, and not to seek
satisfaction on one another, other then by being examples to each other of a
better carriage grounded on a better principle and union for the future: If we
will do justice (as indeed we must) and take revenge, it must be on that King
of Babylon, that dark deviding principle that is in both sides, that divided us
first from God our root, and then from one another in subordination to the
Lord. And we ought not to do any other justice upon him then we shall submit to
be done by him upon us: (which is only the just and equal settling of our
distinct Interests) we being both in the transgression that caused the war
meritoriously, for as for the immediate acting of it; I look upon it rather as
the judgment of God upon our sin, then the sin it self which went long before.

3 That the King being supposed in the Law, to be an Infant, and to act always
by his Instruments and Officers of State, both in judging what is right and
wrong, and in executing, if inquisition be made for the acting this war upon
the People, it seems much more equal to be made among those his evil
Counselors and Instruments, without whom he could have decreed nothing as
Right or Law, nor have executed any purpose of war in his heart, for his
supposed rights. And if by the liberty of Conferring honor and greatness on
Subjects, he has been enabled to have such powerful influence on them, as to
create evil Instruments for any purpose, that power may be considered and
deposited in safer custody till the kingdom shall find their Princes worthy of
it.

4 Not only did his Judges and Privy Counselors, and evil Instruments about
him, that were not of either House Parliament, but also diverse Lords and
Members of both Houses of Parliament concur to the betraying of the Kings
Conscience, to the leavying and prosecuting the war; and if it was not the
mercy of God to him to enable him to distinguish between these evil
Counselors, and th^se that dissented, He is the object of pity in himself,
as he was th^reby the Actor of our misery.

5. To execute the King for what he did in prosecuion of the War, so
undertaken, wherein he h^zarded his Person, and put his Cause to the decision
of bat^ell, and especially in a Treaty, and after so many invitations to a
composure, is to shed the blood of War in Peace (which is condemned by an
authen^ick pen in the like case, though the manner of the execution vary) and
seems no way consistent with the honor of the Faith of the Nation, that was
g^ven him in several Treaties.

9 That he being a Prisoner of war, and wholly in our power to regulate the
exercise of his prerogative as may make it wholesome to the Nation: we are upon
all the advantage that may be desired, to show generosity, and it seems both
unsouldierly and unmanly not to be able to give him h^s life at least, and a
distrusting of God, (who if he shall despise this goodness of the Lord toward
him) can go beyond him again wherein he shall deal proudly.

7 All the power of Arms being now in the hands of that party in the Kingdom,
that are commonly reputed more famous for their Religion and tenderness: O let
him not be cried down by you! who should be able to bring forth the mercy of
the great God to sinners, if not you that have found mercy? Let not your way
wherein you walk in a difference from the more careless sort of professor be
written to generations in this bloody Letter. To this I shall add that if God
have appeared yet, and come forth to you, no otherwise then as upon Mount Sina;
there are some standing and walking amongst you daily, that have seen him upon
Mount Sion, and have found such mercy, that they are able to show as great
mercy as this, that is now asked for the King: and if you have it not; you must
give them leave to say, That might their Votes be heard, No man should fall in
Israel this day; for do we not now know that the Lord Jesus has obtained the
Kingdom this day in their hearts, and is bringing forth his new Heavens and
his new Earth, wherein righteousness shall dwell; yea, they see his footsteps
taking hold of the world, to set up a new Administration of Justice and every
thing, for with the sword of his mouth ^ill he slay the wicked: he is so
coming in his People, as shall cloth them with terror to their enemies, that
they shall not need the Sword of man to defend them, but the majesty and
brightness of the Lord cloa^hing their Persons, shall judge and reprove the
world either into love and union with them, or in^o subjection under them. To
this administration that is holy, pure, and gracious, and not in letter, but in
spirit, not in form but in power; have all former dark and earthly
administrations hitherto served, and till th^s we groan and are afflicted under
the manifold and woeful miscarriages of all Administrators in the dark, and in
the letter only. And in the in^erest of ^he glory of this Image and appearance
of God to be made forth among men in this first hands^ll of saving the King (as
well) as out of tend^rnesse to ^he justice of the thing do I plead thus:

I have not spoken all this as forgetting or unsensible of the great and high
provocations of the King, in the late horrid War, as well as his former
miscarriages in Government, if the Lord intend mercy to his soul, He will
accuse and judge himself more then I can or is meet to detain you by: and the
world shall hear of his unfaigned sorrow and repentance, as it has been filled
with the story of his sins; but this I know through the Lords mercy, and
confess I am one with him (that is my flesh is) in all the wickedness he has
done: and out of my own heart must I copy forth my accusation against him, and
so let every one think that judges another.

1 If it be objected this plea may be against all Execution of justice though
for the horridst facts as murder etc.

I answer no, the Case is far different between the Exercise of an unlawful
act by no authority, as in the case of Thieves and murderers by the high way,
and the abuse of a lawful authority as the King did in his misdeeds. This
latter Crime is aggravated toward God, but not so liable to the stroke of
man. Or if a divorse may be made between that person and the exercise of that
authority he has so abused (which I leave to others to judge) its not so clear
that it should be expiated with the loss of life, because the person offended
not, but the King, and not the King, but his instruments. I speak not as to the
Lord.

2 If it be objected, that blood is required by the law of God for blood; I
answer, first, for blood shed in war we find no account exacted in the case of
Abner, 2 Samuel 3. but Abners blood avenged on Joah by David's appointment after
Solomon had the Kingdom.

2 Nor for bloodshed in Peace is there an indispensable necessity of making
expiation by blood: for though I am not of their mind, that think it not
lawful or Christian like, to shed blood in any Case, for any Crime; yet I
think it not to be indispensably charged upon the maigstrate, to shed blood for
blood, but there may be diverse causes to over rule it: The execution of Justice
being for the Comonwealth, and not the Commonwealth for the execution of
Justice, and therefore the Magistrate has power to save and remit capital
Crimes as well as to punish them, when it is for the Commonwealth.

Nay thirdly, I conceive that whenever blood may be spared, that is, those
evils may be avoided, and those advantages obtained without shedding of blood,
it ought to be spared: And that the Kingdom cannot be settled, and the like
mischiefs prevented (so far as in man) for the future without shedding of
the Kings blood does not appear to me, nor I dare say to many more, as the
probability of as great evils to ensue from home, from abroad (which God
prevent) by taking away the Kings life, able to balance the security we
promise our selves thereby is evident to all men: Therefore policy calls not
for this piece of Justice. And for that conceit of a Sacrifice to God it is
legal and Jewish, having nothing in it of the light and grace of the Gospel,
much less suitable to the elevation of these times, its to deny the sacrifice
of Christ; then which there is no other but the sacrifice of praise and of a
broken and contrite Spirit, which is also his.

May we beg the life of the King, we may be thought to run a great hazard,
should he come again to be a scourge to the Kingdom, but the love of God that
comes forth in us to save him will provide better things in him. We have
travaild of him once already by our Prayers, it may be we must travail of him
a second time, We are content.

He that is without sin, let him throw the first stone.

Finis.

