Clero-laicum Condimentum. OR, A SERMON PREACHED At a Visitation in Saint
Nicholas Church in BRISTOLL, April 16. An. D. 1644.

By Richard Standfast Master of Arts, Rector of Christ-Church, and one of His
Majesty's Chaplains.

BRISTOLL, Printed for Thomas Thomas, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Broad-street, 1644.

PErlegi hanc Conelone^^, in qua nihil nisi quod sanum and orthodoxum sit,
invenio, quo minus ad publicam utilitatem Imprimatur

Eduardus Tubbes Rdo. in Christo P.D. Episcopo Bristol. A Sacris.
June 1. 1644.
To the Right Reverend Father in God, Thomas by Divine providence Lord Bishop
of Bristoll.
Right Reverend Father,
THis Sermon is of right your due, for it was your order that first prepared it
for the Pulpit; and it is your request (as you were pleased to make it,) that
has now commanded it to the Press. My humble desire therefore is, that it may
pass abroad under your protection, being confident that (as unworthy as it is)
it will speed the better for your approbation. The world dares give credit to
your Lordships Testimony, whose only practice is enough to confute the many
and malicious slanders that have of late been cast upon your holy function, by
those that have been the Enemies of our Peace. God in mercy send us Bishops and
Pastors after his own heart, and not after theirs; and increase the number of
such Ministers, as are required by our Savior in my present Text; that so by
well doing, we may put to silence the Ignorance of foolish men. And the great
Shepherd of souls continue your Lordship long among us, for a Pattern, both
of preaching, and piety unto us, that are under you in the Lord; And, if it be
his blessed will, vouchsafe unto us once more the blessing of Peace, that so we
may the better see, what an happiness we have in enjoying you. This (I dare
say) is the hearty desire of all your Clergy, I am sure it is his, that is

Your Lordships to be Commanded in the Lord. Ri: STANDFAST.

Mark 9.50. Have Salt in your selves, and have Peace one with another.


IN the former Verses Saint Mark does relate a certain conference, which our
Savior had with his Disciples in a house at Capern^um; In the beginning
whereof he teaches them humility, taking the occasion of his discourse from a
dispute, that fell out among the Disciples in the way, for there was a kind of
contention amongst them which of them should be the greatest, v. 34. From
thence our Blessed Savior proceeds to show, how necessary it is to cut off all
Scandal, and occasions of offense, yea, though they be as near and dear unto
us, as the right Hand, Eye, or Foot, v. 43 which work of Mortification, being a
work so unpleasing to Flesh and Blood, our Blessed Savior declares the
necessity thereof in the verse before my Text. Saying, Every man must be salted
with Fire, and every sacrifice must be salted with Salt, which is, as if he had
said, Whosoever will escape that Fire that never goes out, must be salted with
the Spirit of God, by whose holy fire he may be purified from his dross, and
cleansed from his corruption; And whosoever will offer up himself unto God, a
living sacrifice holy and acceptable unto him, must be powdered with the word
of God, which is of the nature of Salt in efficacy and operation, for it will
eat out the corrupt humors of our sinful lusts, it will preserve us from
noysomnesse and putrefaction, and render us a sacrifice of a sweet smelling
savor unto God. Now from this metaphor of Salt, our Savor takes occasion to
magnify the Ministry of the word of God, and to show the extreme
unworthiness of worthless Ministers, who are (indeed) no better then
unsavory Salt, which is good for nothing; and hereupon follow the words of my
Text, wherein Christ makes both ends of his discourse to meet, summing up both
the beginning and the end of it in a double precept; saying, Have Salt in your
selves, and have Peace one with another.

The words divide themselves into two Commandments; the one concerning Salt,
the other Peace, the one is for the seasoning of the inward man, the other is
for the sweetning of the outward carriage; and though they were both uttered by
our Blessed Savior to his Disciples, yet being now to speak to a mixed Assembly
of Clergy and Laity. I shall crave leave to direct my speech to both, neither
is this any more then the words will hear. For Christ had Disciples of two
sorts; some were only learners, some were instructed by him for the teaching
of others; and unto both may it be said well enough; have Salt in your selves,
and have Peace one with another.

This therefore shall be the method by which I will guide my present discourse;
first, I will speak of these precepts apart, directing the first precept, first
to the Clergy, have Salt in your selves; and then to the Laity, have Salt in
your selves. From hence I shall proceed to the second, and in the same order,
first to the Clergy, have you Peace one with another: then to the Laity, have
you Peace one with another; and thirdly to bath Clergy and Lasty; have you
Peace one with another. And having handled these precepts severally, I shall
then proceed briefly to their conjunction. For it is not Salt alone without
Peace, nor Peace alone without Salt, that is here required; it is not barely an
inward Salt, or simply an outward Peace that we must labor for, but both Salt
and Peace are our duty, an inward seasoning and an outward sweetning must go
both together, for so says the Text, have Salt in your selves, and have Peace
one with another.

I begin with the first precept, have Salt in your selves.

Salt is a creature of common use, and has in it two special properties,
scil. savor, and sharpness Sali inest sapor and acor, sapor cibos insipidos
reddit gratos, acor carnes a corruptione and putredine conservat. Parae. in
Matt. 5.
the one tends to dry up superfluous moisture, and so to preserve from stink
and rottenness, the other gives a good relish to what we eat, and makes it
savoury to the taste, and in regard of this double quality diforetion and
wisdom is compared to Sals, Col. 4.6. which words carry this sense, let your
speech be seasoned with grace as with Salt, for this grace of Christian wisdom
is of the nature of Salt, preserving our communication from corruption and
making our discourse to tend to edification, and to Minister grace to them that
hear it, according to that of the Apostle Ephesians. 4.29.

In this respect also the Ministry of the word is compared to Salt, because it
mortifies and works out our corruptions, which make us noisome in Gods
Nostrills, and because it renders us and our actions savoury and pleasing unto
God. And for this cause it is that the Ministers of the Gospel are called the
Sals of the earth, son. in regard of their Doctrine, for to them is committed
the Ministry of reconciliation 2 Cor. 5.18
and the dispensing of the mysteries of God 1 Cor. 4.1.
and by Preaching of the word they do besprinkle their Auditors, and season
them, as with Sall whereby to destroy their lusts, and to make them pleasing
unto God, who without this seasoning would be but as unsavory theat, yea, like
stinking Carrions.

In this place Salt does not fignifie the Ministry of the word, but that
inward seasoning which is wrought in our hearts by the power of that Ministry,
and if these words be spoken to the Clergy, then they require, that they whose
office it is to season others by their Doctrine should have their own hearts
(...) by the power thereof: if they be applied to the Laity, then they require,
that men do not content themselves with a form of godinesse, (...)
but that they labor also for the power thereof, that so their hearts may be
thoroughly seasoned,and their corruptions mortified. The words may fitly be
applied to both, and therefore I shall proceed accordingly to speak to both of
these in order, and first to the Clergy, You that are to powder others, have
Salt in your selves.

We whose work it is to season others should be seasoned our selves, the power
of that word which we preach unto others, must work upon our own hearts, that
so there may be an harmonious agreement between our Doctrine and our
Conversation.

Pastor. p 3. c. 6.
Saint Gregory says that a Minister should be like a Cock, who first claps his
wings to rouse up himself, and the^^ owes to awaken ^hers. Instruction as well
as Charity must begin at home, and there is a great deal of reason for it too,
for otherwise we can neither reprove with that boldness, nor speak with that
life which we ought to do, nor e^pect that benefit upon our labors which we
might enjoy; we cannot repro^e with that boldness that we should, if our life
be not answerable to our Doctrine; he is not easily induced to strike, that
must hit himself, and if he be, the blows will be gentle; he is not easily
wonn to pass censure, that must judge himself, or if the sentence must be
pronounced, we cannot expect that it should be heavy; and how can we with
boldness reprove that in others, whereof we ourselves are guilty? for in so
doing we Romans 2.1.
condemn our selves.

Nor can we speak with that life, that we ought to do. They are fittest to be
sonns of thunder that tremble at the word of God themselves; and they to be
sons of consolation, who have themselves been in distress, 2 Cor. 1.4
Saint Paul having found comfort himself knew the better how to comfort others,
and having himself obtained mercy, he knew the better how to preach it unto
others; he that speaks of points of Divinity without experience of his own, is
like to do it but in a superficial way. And how can he expect that his
Doctrine should be effectual to work upon others, if it have no power at all
upon himself? he is not like to persuade others to the Oath of Allegiance that
does himself refuse it; or to reclaim others from profane swearing, that is
himself guilty of it; or to win others to believe those truths, of which his
own actions argue his own unbelief. Blurrs will never be well cleansed with
blotted fingers, and men are hardly drawn to be virtuous by those, whose lives
are vicious; or persuaded by their good words, whose deeds are evil.
Efficacius vitae quam linguae testimonium Cypr. de dup. mar.
he whose life confutes his Doctrine, Nonnulli quod verbis praedicant moribus
impugnant. Greg. past. p. 1. c. 2.
pulls down more with one hand then he builds up with the other, and is more
like with Elie's Sons 1 Samuel 2.17.
to cause men to abhor the offering of the Lord, then to win them to regard it.

It is indeed, the duty of a Christian to give heed to the truth, wherever he
find it, and to regard the word of God, whatsoever he be that brings it; we
ought not to say with the Donatists, Factor legis tantum debet audiri Aug.
contra. Gandent. lib. 2. cap. 9.
our Blessed Savior has taught us otherwise, Math. 23.2, 3. Showing, that the
Scribes and Pharisees, who said and did not, yet sitting in the Chair of Moses,
i. e. secundum Mosen docentes, as long as they taught according to the words of
Moses, their Doctrine was to be observed and followed. And thus ought we to do;
and if the Vine grow so near the hedge Nullo modo legitur uva de spinis, quia
nunquam despinarum radicibus oritur. Sed cumse spinosis sepibus pelmes vitis
implicuit, non ideo fructus, qui illic pendet, horretur; sed spina cavetur, uva
decerpitur. Aug. contra. lit. petil. lib. 3. cap. 8.
that a bunch of Grapes hang upon a bush of Thorns, we may not refuse the
Grapes, but take heed to our fingers. This is our duty, but yet, unless our
hearts be seasoned with the more grace, the unworthiness of the Messenger,
will much impair the credit of the Message, and abate much of that due respect,
which it ought to have. And therefore (brethren) let us lay this to heart, that
so, as we speak we may do, as we preach we may practice, lest having opened
the door unto others, we our selves be shut out. It is a shameful thing for us
to be justly reproved with the ancient Proverb, Physician heal thy self, Luc.
4.23.
It is enough to stop our mouths, and to make us speechless to be deservedly
questioned in the words of the Apostle Romans 2. Thou that teach another,
teach not thou thy self? etc. v. 21, 22. It cannot but prick us at the very
heart, to be examined by our Master in the words of the Psalmist, what have
thou to do to declare my Statutes, and to take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing
thou hate instruction, and have cast my words behind thee? Psalm. 50.16, 17.
These are all working passages, if duly thought upon: And the truth is, such
courses can deserve no less then a most sharp reproof, because they contract
more then a single guiltiness.

In the fourth Chapter of Leviticus, we find mention of the sin, There needs
no other teaching or commanding of sin, then the sins of teachers and
commanders.
and the offering of the Priest, and therein there are three circumstances,
that are very observable; first, in the sin of the Priest, there is no mention
made of ignorance, as there is in the sin of the People, for it is to be
supposed that if the Priest sin, he sins out of knowledge rather then
ignorance; secondly, the sin of the Priest becomes an occasion of the peoples
sin, for where it is said v. 3. If the Priest sin according to the sin of the
People, the sense is thus rendered by some, If the Priest sin in reatum populi
(that is) so that the people sin, for many times it comes to pass, that the
people are encouraged to sin by the example of the Priest; And thirdly the
offering of the Priest, was the very same with the offering of the whole
Congregation, as if it were, to show that the sin of the Priest is as great as
the sin of the whole Congregation, at least it argues that the sins of the
Priest, are more heinous then the sins of other men.

And therefore let us think seriously of these things, that so we may be
mindful of our duty. It is for Pharisees and Hypocrites Matthew. 23.4.
to bind heavy burdens on other men's shoulders, without so much as touching of
them with one of their own fingers, but let us be Patterns to the flock. 1 Pet.
5.


It is said of John the Baptist, 3. Ardens inse, lucens aliis.

Ardens ibi zelus, lucens ibi scientia.

Ardens vita, lucens doctrina.


that he was a burning and a shining light John 5.35. burning in himself,
shining unto others; burning in zeal, shining in knowledge; burning in life,
shining in Doctrine; shining as a light in the world, holding forth the word of
life, and burning in being blameless, and harmless, and without rebuke in the
midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, according to that of Saint Paul Philip.
2.15. And such should we be, having our light so shining amongst men; that they
may see our good works, according to that of our Savior, Matthew. 5.16.

A Minister that is neither burning nor shining, what is he better then a
stinking snuff in the bottom of the Candle-stick? He that is a shining, and
not a burning light, is but like a Glowworm, or as rotten wood: He that burns
without shining is but a Candle under a Bushel: but burning and shining argues
that our lights are kindled with a Coal from the Altar.

A diseased Physician and a ragged Alchymist are the scorn of men, and the
shame of their profession; and a dissolute Divine is a Member of the same
society, one of the worst of men, the very fagge end, the tail of the People.
The Ministers of the Gospel are the Salt of the earth, but when their life and
Doctrine are at variance Sal in Dei ministris evanescit, cum vita doctrinae non
respondeat, qui ita insulsi and deo and hominibus ingrati. Luc. Brugens.
then the Salt becomes unsavory, and unsavory Salt is good for nothing, but
to be cast out and to be trod under Foot Matthew. 5.13.

It is a tart passage which a Dr. Boys fest. 1. Ep. on Saint Thom. Day.
Modern has, but very pertinent to this purpose, and the words are to this
effect, scil. If thou art a president of Goldinesse to thy People, pray that
thou may so continue; if thou sometime wast, and art now fallen, return; if
thou never wast, repent; if thou never wilt be, perish. And yet as tart as it
is, it is founded on the truth, for Levit. 10.3.
God will be sanctified in those that come nigh him, either by their holy
carriage, or in their just confusion.

I will conclude this point, with that of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed
to thy self, Oh thou man of God, as well as to thy Doctrine, continue in them,
for in so doing, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee; Ille
praedicat viva voce qui praedicat vita and voce, he preaches best that lives
his own Sermons, and that holds forth the word of life, as well with his hand
as with his tongue, and therefore as we desire to season others, let us have
Salt in our selves.

I proceed now to speak of this first precept with relation to the People, Have
you Salt in your selves; and I desire you to hear with as much willingness, what
belongs to your selves, as you have done that that concerns others, of you it
is required, as well as of us, not to rest only in an outward profession, but
that your hearts also be seasoned with the word of God.

There is a show, and there is a truth of holiness; there is a seeming, and
there is a being religious; there is a form, and there is a power of
Godliness; now though it be true, that wheresoever the power is, there will be
a form, yet the form may be, and too often is without the power. But this ought
not so to be, a bare form is not enough, there must be the power also, and
therefore have Salt in your selves.

A form of Godliness is common both to the sincere and the Hypocrite, and
therefore can be no characteristicall note of a true Christian; it may suffice
to gain admission into the visible Church, but that alone cannot prove us to be
true Members of that Church that is invisible, the congregation of the first
Heb. 12.23.
born whose names are written in heaven.

Let us take a brief survey of those several parts which go to the making up
of a form of Godliness, and see how little profit they can afford us if the
power be wanting; and here we may begin with that, which gives entrance into
the Church, scil. Baptism. To be Baptized is a very great privilege, for
Baptism in it is proper nature is the Seal of the Covenant between God and us;
it is the Acts 22.16.
washing away of sin, Tit. 3.5.
the laver of regeneration, our matriculation into the Kingdom of heaven, and
yet if when we come to years, we want the 1 Pet. 3.21.
restipulation of a good conscience, it affoords us no benefit. And who can
boast of being Baptized, that has nothing to boast of but being Baptized?
Simon Magus by virtue of his outward profession, had admission unto Baptism,
as well as Simon Peter, and yet he was in the gall of bitterness, and in the
bond of iniquity, Acts 8.23.

Again, to frequent the house of God, it is our duty, and indeed an happiness
to enjoy the liberty of praising God in the great Congregation: And where this
liberty is enjoyed, it is suspicious at the best to forsake the Heb. 10 25.
assembling of our selves together as the manner of some is. And yet who can
boast of keeping his Church, that can boast of no more? the proud Pharise
frequents the Temple as well as the penitent Publican, and wicked Cain offers
sacrifice, as well as righteous Abel; and yet the one was taken, and the other
left, the one Genesis 4.4, 5.
found favor, and the other was rejected.

Again, That we enter into the house of God humiliata corpare, and inclinata
cervice; with due reverence it is no more then is requisite; and what Religion
can that be, that shall teach men to be slovenly and unmannerly about the
service of God? had we only souls, God would never require the reverence of
our bodies, or had we only bodies, he would never require the fear of our
souls; but having given us both, he looks for the service of both; and seeing
he is as well the God of our bodies, as the Father of our Spirits, he requires
to be glorified both in 1 Cor. 6 20.
Body and Spirit, and expects to be served as well with Heb. 12.28.
reverence, as with Godly fear. And yet who can brag of the external homage
performed to the Son of God; when in the History of the Gospel, he may find
that the Mark 5, 7. cum Luke 8.28.
Devil himself did once fall down and worship him?

Once more, That we hear the word of God, it is our bounden duty, and there is a
great deal of reason, why we should afford it our best attention, for it is
the 1 Pet. v. 23.
seed of our regeneration; 1 Pet. 2.2.
Milk to suckle us in our infancy, strong meat to nourish us in our riper
years; it is for the ingrafting of faith in our hearts; for that comes by Romans
10.17.
hearing; it is for the seasoning, and sanctifying of our souls, for so prays
our Savior, John 17.17. Sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is truth; it
is able to Acts 20.32.
build us up; and to give us an inheritance among them that be Sanctified: Romans
1.16. James 1.22.
It is the power of God to our Salvation. And yet in vain do we boast of
hearing the Word, if we be hearers only; * for then we shall deceive our own
selves; neither is the blessing annexed to bare hearing, but Blessed are they
that hear the word of God and keep it, Luke 11.28.

What should I speak of knowing of the Scriptures? a bare speculation can
nothing avail us, in the cases of Divinity. The Devils know much, and yet to
no case, to no comfort; and all that we shall get by an idle knowledge, will be
only to know, who he is, that shall condemn us.

Or what should I speak of Godly conference? true it is, that if the heart be a
treasury of good things, the mouth will discover it, for out of the Matthew.
12.34.
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And yet it is true also, that
nothing hinders, but that the veriest Miscreant on earth, the veriest Devil in
Hell may speak holily; the voice may be Jacobs voice, when the hands be the
hands of Esaw, and if the heart and the hands be not suitable to the tongue, it
profits nothing.

The Father of ^^es can, when he pleases, speak true and Orthodox. Divinity,
and call Christ the holy one of God; and therefore what can it profit us, even
to preach in Matthew 7.22, 23.
the name of Christ, if we be workers of iniquity?

Yea, the frequenting of the Lords Table, which carries with it so great a show
of devotion, and where, if it be not our own fault, we may be partakers of that
Heavenly Banquet, which will nourish us up unto eternal life; yet if this be
not done with due preparation, it will be so far from profiting of us, that it
will occasion an 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29.
increase of condemnation, There were some (you know) that said, We have Luk
13.26, 27.
eat and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets; and yet
because they could say no more, God owned them not, but sent them away with a
nescio vas. The outward performance of all these things, is but a form of
Godliness, and if the power be wanting, we shall lose our reward.

Away therefore with that Machivilian maxim, That virtue it self is not to be
sought after, but only the appearance, because the credit is an help, the use
a cumber: For if it be good to seem, it must needs be better to be Religious,
without which indeed it is not good to seem so to be; for simulata fanctitas
est daplex iniquitas, counterfeit holiness is double iniquity.

And rest not only in the bare outward performance of Religions actions; but
let the heart be incorrupt, which in the sight of God is much set by. Hieronim:
in Ep. ad Paulinum.
Esse Christianum grande est, non videri, says Saint Hierome, it is no great
matter to seem Religious; the black Prince of darkness can 2 Cor. 11.14.
transform himself into an Angel of light, but to be religious, that is a
matter both of difficulty and consequence, and hereunto there is more required
then a form of Godliness. If the outward performance of religious duties were
enough to make a man a sincere Christian, it were an easy matter to be
religious; Publicans and Harlots, notorious sinners, even so continuing, might
then enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; for therein the grossest Hipacrite may
go as far as the devoutest Saint. But this we know, that if the heart be not
sound, and perfect toward God; all outward performances, are but bodily
exercise, and that profits not. And therefore labor also for the power of
godliness, and if you would not lose what you do, if you would have your
service accepted of God, James 4.8.
cleanse your hands, and purge your hearts; let your corruptions be thoroughly
mortified, and let your hearts be thoroughly seasoned with the power of the word
of God, and Have Salt in your selves. And yet think not that a Christian has
discharged all his duty, when he has had some care of the inward tempar of his
heart and soul, there must be also a due regard of the outward carriage; the
same mouth that said, Have Salt in your selves; requires Peace also one with
another, as appears by the Text. And so I pass on to the second part of my
Text, Have Peace one with another.

And this I direct in the first place, to my brethren of the Clergy, Have you
Peace one with another.

Chemnitius, and Lucas Brugensis refer this passage to that contention for
Primacy Verse. 34.
formerly mentioned, and well they may. For ambitious Contention among the
Clergy about temporal greatness, is but a bad friend to the Peace of the
Church, pacem habete inter vos mutuo, nec sit inter vos contentio de Primatu;
so Brugensis, not as if there should be no superiority at all among the Clergy,
but that there should be no ambitious striving for superiority among the
Clergy, superiority is the Mother of Peace, but striving for it brings forth
division.

To bring the Clergy down to a Parity is the ready way to set up Confusion; for
where there is no superiority, there can be no Order; and no Order, no Peacs.
Superiority among the Clergy is not only lawful, but also requisite; and it
is not the having, but the loving of pre-eminence, that is blameworthy, as
being always contentious and troublesome. And therefore if we desire Peace, we
must beware of ambition.

But this is not all, The words require a mutual correspondency, and an
harmonious agreement one with another, and that even in all things so far as it
is possible, and there is a great deal of reason, to persuade us to our duty in
this behalf.

For first we are Acts 7.26.
brethren, and therefore should not fall out by the way. And again, Secondly,
our master is one, and our work is one, and if the servants be at variance, the
Masters work is not like to prosper. Saint Paul says, there are diversities of
gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are differences of administrations, but
the same Lord; and there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God
which works all in all, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. They all come from one, and they
tend all to one, for the ministration of the Spirit, it given to every man to
profit withal, v. 7. And for this cause are there such diversities and
differences, that having every man need of another we should agree the better,
that so there might be no 1 Cor. 12.25.
schism in the body; far therefore be it from us to make that an occasion of
division and strife, which our Master intended for unity and Peace.

And thirdly, hereby we may be known to be John. 13 35.
Christ's Disciples, if we love one another. Our Doctrine also may be known to
be of God, if it tend to Peace.

The true 1 Kings 3.26.
Mother would by no means give way to the dividing of the Child. And therefore
such Doctrines as savor of strife, and tend to work unnecessary divisions
among brethren, can favor but little of the Spirit of God.

Sometimes it may so fall out, that Saint Paul may Gal. 2.11.
withstand Saint Peter to his face, but it was, because he was to be blamed.
Contentions will arise, and sometimes they are necessary, but then the ground
must be good, or else the contention is evil. Peace and Truth must hiss each
other. And we must take this with us too; Non sic ratio veritatis est habenda
ut paci^ ^ura prorsus negligatur; nec unitas talis ambit^da, qua vera fides
deseratur: We must neither underpretence of piety broach quarrels; nor under
pretense of Peace, betray the truth.

The Scripture has as well an Ephesians. 4.15.
ale^h^v^t^ as an eirenevete follow the truth, as well as follow peace, and yet
it is alethevete en agape; fallow the truth in love. Every slight error,
cannot justify separation from a brother, much less from a Church. Est pr^
^exit ar^ cer^^^^^ strenn^, we must Jude v. 3.
contend for the faith, which was once given to the faints; but it must be with
a contention of love, not of force and violence, nec pacis causa erroribus
manifestis est connivend^m; so Par^^s in 1 Cor. 14.33. We may not for Peace
sake wink at gross errors. But yet as he sweetly adds, Soda^^ est cavendum,
ne veritati^ regula^^ ^pin^^es and affect^^ sa^^ fa^^rent, quod nist pridem
multife^ issent, minus ^tique conf^sionum Ecclesia nunc haberes; men must take
heed, that they do not make their own conceits and fancies the rule of truth,
which if some men had not done, without doubt there had not been so much
confusion in the Church.

We must love Peace well, but fundamental truths better, and though we must
love all truths well, yet for every petty truth, we may not disturb the
Public Peace. And if this course had been followed amongst us, in these
latter times, neither had the Church been so rent, nor the Kingdom so divided,
as now they are; neither had there been so much schism in the one, nor
sedition in the other, as now there is. For what essential fundamental truth
has our Church wanted? and if none, there is no reason we should keep so much
ado about truths of an inferior nature, as to sin against Charity and Peace.

And at whose door (think you) will all these breaches be laid? too many of
them, I fear, will be brought home to some of the Clergy, but surely they have
chosen but an ill Master, that have been active in sowing unnecessary divisions
among brethren, and it is to be doubted, that it will be bitterness in the
latter end.

It is storyed of one Milo a mighty man for strength of body; that on a time
finding a forked Tree he would needs in a vain glorious way attempt to rend the
Tree asunder, but his strength failed him, and the Tree closing again, caught
him fast, and there held him, till the Wolves devoured him.

And what dreadful vengeance befell Korah and his accomplices, we may read at
large, Numb. 16. The earth opened her mouth and swallowed up some of them, v.
32. And Fire came out from the Lord, and devoured others, v. 35. I will not
wish the Incendiaries of our times, that have made use of their strength, to
the rending asunder both of Church and State; I will not (I say) wish them
either Milo's lot, or Korah's confusion, but their own conversion rather (and
yet Saint Paul wishes that they that troubled the Galatians, were even cut
off, Gal. 5.12.) But I must needs say, that they, whom God hates with more then
a common hatred, have but little reason to expect Peace at the last without
repentance; and such are they, that sow discord among brethren, as appears by
that of Solomon. Prove. 6.16. and 19.

It were to be wished that we could be all of one mind; but this is never like
to be, as long as there is corruption in nature, variety in ^i^^^, imperfection
in our condition, hard places in the Scripture, and an envious man to sow
tares; nevertheless, we must be all of one heart, and love as brethren.

In fundamentalls, we must be all of (...) wind, in other things, if our
judgments differ, yet we must differ in a way of le^^, we must retain charity
still, and give to each other the right hand of fellowship; and the chiefest
contention, that ought to be amongst the Ministers of Christ, should be, how to
keep Ephesians. 4.3.
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.

The Devil and his instruments know well enough, that their best fishing is in
troubled waters; and therefore, that we give them no advantage by our
divisions, let us have Peace one with another.

Nor do these words of our Savior concern the Clergy only: but to you also of
the L^ity it belongs to live in Peace. And therefore in the next place, I apply
my self to you in the words of my Text, have you Peace one with another.

Let there be no grudge, nor hatred; nor malice in your hearts, no bitterness,
or railing in your mouths, no vexatious provocations in your carriage, or
molestations in your actions; but as it becomes neghbours, as it becomes
brethren, as fellow Subjects, as fellow Christians, as Fellow Members, as
fellow-heirs of the grace of life, be ye peaceable. (...) be ye all Peace, let
all your thoughts, words and actions tend to Peace; study for Peace, speak for
Peace, do for Peace, suffer for Peace, pray for Peace, pay for Peace, and if no
other means will serve the turn, strive for Peace, yea, fight for Peace, that
if it be Romans 12.18.
possible, as much is in you lies, you may live peaceably with all men.

And if you need motives to persuade you to this duty: Consider, first, how
pathetically the Apostle requires it of us, Philip. 2, 1, 2.3. If there be any
Consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any bewells and mercies fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having
the same love, being of one accord, of one mind, etc. ipsa Suada (credo) si
loqui posset, non patuisset emphaticateroes. Eloquence it self could not speak
with greater Emphasis, or to better purpose.

Secondly, consider how suitable a peaceable Carriage is to the Gospel of
Peace, and to the calling of a Christian. Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
That God whom we serve is one God, and he is the God of Peace; our Blessed
Savior is one, and he is the Prince of Peace: his birth was in a time of
Peace; the end of his coming was to make Peace; and being the corner stone, his
place in the building is the place of Peace. The Holy Spirit is but one, and it
is the Spirit of Peace. There is but one Gospel, and it is the Gospel of
Peace. There is but one Church, Jerusalem which is above, whose name by
interpretation, is, a vision of Peace. There is but one hope of our calling,
and that is to Col. 3.15.
Peace. There is but one way to heaven, and that is the way of Peace. There is
but one common inheritance, and that is the kingdom of Peace; there is but one
faith, and one Baptism, and where there is so much Unity and Peace, can it
stand either with religion, or reason, that they that profess themselves to be
Christians, should either cause, or countenance unnecessary divisions?

Thirdly, take notice of the miseries, that wait upon divisions and strife, and
then we shall easily be induced to say, That if any comfort live, it is in
Peace. Ecce quam bonum atque jucundum, so the Psalmist Psalm. 133.1.
behold how good and joyful a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity. And well he might: For there the Lord appointed the blessing, even life
for ever more. But Jac. 3.16
where envy and strife is; there is confusion, and every evil work. And our
Savior says, That an house divided cannot stand; and a Kingdom divided Matthew.
12.15.
eremoutai were it never so fruitful, it will quickly turn to a barren desert,
a very wilderness,

How justly therefore are they to be blamed, that are contentious, and
quarrelsome, that are of turbulent Spirits, that savor altogether of
Contradiction, that stir up strife all the day long? The very heathen could
say, Cicero. de off. l. 2.
Convenit a litibus quantum liceat, and nesci^ an paul plus quans liceat, esse
abhortentem, meaning, that sometimes we should yield; though to some loss of
our own, that so we might have Peace one with another. And if an heat ^en can
say so much, we may well account a contentioue Christian a very groffie
absurdi^y.

From hence also we may gather some light whereby to judge of the unhappy
differences of our present times. We blame the Papists, and that justly,
because they would never give way to have the differences between them and us
freely debated in a general Counc^^^; And can we herein condemn them, and at
the fametime approve of those, that had rather see a Church and State imbroyled
in blood, torn in pieces, and exposed to ruin, then submit to so small a
matter as a Treaty for Peace? If we look into the Scriptures, we shall always
find the Churh, and the Members there of, compared to such creatures as are
most peaceable; tither to a Cant. 2.2
spotless Rilly; that has no venoenous prickles: or to John 10.27.
a^harmlesse sheep, which ye do to binding, sheering, and slaughter without
opening the mouth: or to Cant. 6.9
an in^^cent ^eve, that has neither Columba est animal non fell amarum; non
morsibus soevum, non unguium laceratione violentum. Cyp^. do unitate Ecllesiae.
griping claws, nor wounding hea^, nor gall of bitterness.

And therefore if we judge by this rule, we may considently affirm, that they
cannot have any good assurance of being the friends of God, that are Enemier to
Peace. And when to love of Peace, what hopes of a Blessing*

It is observed by some, that there is no such approbation up on the second
days work, as there is upon the nest of the daye^. O^^ the first day God made
the light, and he saw it was good, Genesis 1.4. On the third day, he made the Sea,
and the dry land, and he saw it was good v. 10. and so for the rest of the
days; only the second days work, has no such particular approbation. And
hereupon a question is raised; why that day alone, should want the particular
approbation, which is bestowed upon all the rest? And Pet. Lomb. gives this
reason for it; Lomb. p. 2. Did. 14. D.
quia binarius principium alteritatis est, and signum divisionis, the number of
two is an odious number, and the first that makes division from one. I will not
say, that this was the reason; and he himself puts a Fortassis upon it; but
this I am sure of, where there are unnecessary divisions, and needless
contentions, there wants both Gods approbation and his blessing. And therefore
if you be indeed, what you would be accounted, the Children of God, so that ye
have Peace onewith another.

And having handled this second precept of the Text, with reference to the
Clergy and Laity a part, give me leave now in a word, to join you both
together. You that are of the Clergy have Peace with the Laity; you that are of
the Laity have Peace with the Clergy, let us all have Peace one with another.

We that are of the Clergy, should make it our cure, that we may have Peace
with the People, and live together, as Members of one body, and as heirs
together; of the same happiness.

The peaceable carriage of a Minister toward the People, may be a good
furtherance to the salvation of their souls. He deserves hatred, that would
but please, and yet he is never like to profit, that pleases not; not that we
should purchase their good will, with the neglect of our duty, Act 4.19.
for we know that it is better to please God then men; but that we should so
far as lawfully we may, become all things to all, that so by all means, we
may save some, according to that of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 9.22.

And for the People, their care also should be to live in Peace with their
Pastors, and not be as those that Hose 4.4.
strive with the Priest. It is but the Devils policy to stir up the People,
to pick quarrels with their Ministers, that so their Ministry may do the
less good upon their own souls.

So that it concerns us all, to have Peace one with another. And for the better
furtherance of this mutual Peace, give me leave to propose an help or two, for
either party.

First, for the Clergy, the way to preserve our credit with the People is,
first diligently to preach the word of God in truth, without respect to any
man's person, according to the practice of that great Shepherd, and Bishop of
souls the Lord Jesus, Matthew. 22.16. If our mouths be shut, it is no wonder if
theirs be open: Timothy was a Bishop, and a man of a weak stomach, and many
infirmities; and yet Saint Paul does conjure him in the highest way that can
be, to preach the word of God with diligence, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.

The Prophet says, That the Priests lips should keep knowledge, Mal. 2.7. and
there is somewhat in that phrase more then ordinary. The seat of knowledge is
the head, and unless there be knowledge in the head, there will be nothing but
ignorance in the lips: and yet be the head never so full of knowledge, it must
appear in the lips too, or else it profits not. David hid the word of God in
his heart, that so he might not sin against God, Psalm. 119.11. This was for his
own practice: And yet in another place he says, I have not hid thy
righteousness within my heart, I have declared thy faithfulness, and thy
salvation; I have not concealed thy loving kindness, and thy truth, from the
great Congregation, Psalm. 40.10. And this was for the peoples good.

Secondly, to press most, substantial truths. Truths of inferior
consequence, when overeagerly, or unseasonably pressed, tend rather unto strise,
then to edification.

Thirdly, Let our lives be holy, and blameless, and suitable to our Doctrine.
Saint Paul does require both of Timothy and Titus, that no man should despise
them, 1 Timothy 4.12. and Tit. 2.15. A man might wonder at the first view, what
the Apostle should mean by this; especially considering what follows; for
having said to Titus, Let ^^man despise thee, presently he adds; Put them in
mind to be subject to principalities, and powers, to obey Magistrates, to be
ready so every good work, to speak evil of no man, etc. c. 3. ^. 1, 2. Should
not Saint Paul rather have enjoined the people not to despise their Pastors?
or if that must be the Pastors care, should he not have enjoined the preaching
of some more pleasing Doctrine, then subjection and abedience? a man would
think, that this were the ready way to be despised, but Saint Paul's thoughts
(you see) are otherwise, of us it is required, to see that no man despise us,
and the way to preserve our persons from contempt, is not by any unworthy
complying with the peoples humors, but by being patterns to the flock,
according to that 1 Timothy: 4.12. By which it plainly appears, that holiness of
life, is the way to win respect to our persons, and authority to out Doctrine;
yea, though it be such Doctrine, as does most cross the corruptions of those
that hear us; and that the ready way for Ministers to be Masters of the peoples
love and affections, is for them to be holy rules and examples to their lives
and actions. It is we our selves, that either make our selves vile in the
peoples e^es by our vicious courses, or else keep our selves from being
despised by being virtuous.

For the people, if they desire to have Peace with their Ministers, there are
two things to be regarded; the first is that of Saint James 1.19. be swift to
hear slow to speak flow to wrath. Hastnesse in the people to censure the
Preachers Doctrine savours not of the Spirit of meekness, and is an Enemy to
Peace. The second is that of Saint Paul, 1 These. 5.12. Regard them that labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord; them that labor among you. To
magnify strangers, that come to us now and then, and to slight those that
labor among us, and are over us in the Lord, begets thoughts of heart, that
tend to division. And therefore let both these rules be duly regarded, for this
is the way to cut off occasions of offense, and to love as brethren, and to
have peace one with another.

Before I conclude this point, let me add, by way of direction, some general
helps, that concern us all to regard, as we do desire to live in Peace.

First, be not many Masters; morosity is no friend to Peace. when men will take
upon them so much Mastership, as to confine others to see with their eyes, and
to hear with their ears, and to condemn every man for wrong that is not right
of their stamp both in opinion and practice, it is no wonder if there be
divisions amongst us.

It is observed by men judiciously wise and deliberately moderate, See Dr.
Prideaux his Ser. on Acts, 23.5. p. 15.
that the virulency of the Papists, who account all Heretics, that do in any
sort protest against their Tyranny, and superstitions: the peovishnesse of the
Brownists and men of like temper, who cry down all for profane, that fort not
with their singularity; and the rashness of some Protestants, who censure all
those that in any point dissent from their tenets, and Masters have been the
greatest hinderers of the wished for union of all true Christians, And
therefore as you desire Peace, be not many Masters.

Secondly, 1 These. 4.11.
Study to be quiet, and to do your own business, study to be quit; there is an
Emphasis in the word philotimeisthai esuchazein. Let it be your ambition to be
quiet; E^sede itio is easily made seditio.
and how should this be done, but by doing of our own business? breach of
ranks disorders an Army; and to be meddling in things beyond our bounds,
disturbs Peace. This was that that bred such a division among the People, and
such confusion upon Korah, and the rest of that rebellious company; they took
too much upon them, Number. 16.7.

Lastly, Hooker Ser. of pride p. 531. of Eccles. pol.
labor for humility; I reverence a saying of that judicious Hooker, whose
words are these. What harm soever in private, families, there grows by
disobedience of Children, stubbornness in servants, untractablenesse in them,
who although they otherwise may rule, yet should in consideration of the
imparity of their Sex, be also Subject; whatsoever by strife amongst men
combined in greater societies, by Tyranny of potentates, ambition of Nobles,
Rebellion of Subjects in Civil States; by heresies, schisms, and divisions in
the Church; naming pride we name the Mother that brought them forth, and the
only Nurse that feeds them; give me the hearts of all men humbled, and what
is there, that can overthrow, or disturb the Peace of the world, wherein many
things are the cause of much evil, but Pride of all. Thus he, which passage I
reverence, and yet not so much because it is his, as because it is the truth,
for only by pride comes contention, so Solomon, Proverbs, 13.10. And
therefore if you would live in Peace, learn to be humble.

Thus have I showed you the way of Peace, let our care be to walk in it, and
let us 2 Cor. 13. 11.
live in Peace, and so shall the God of love and Peace be with us; and thus
much of each precept a part: A word of their union, and then I have done.

The first of these precepts concerns the inwardman, the second concerns our
outward carriage: the first looks unto God, the second to our neighbor, and
both these must go together; neither an unholy righteousness, nor an
unrighteous holiness will serve the turn; the one is but mere morality, the
other no better then Hypocrisy: And therefore let us 1 Cor. 8.21.
provide things honest, not only in the sight of God, but also in the sight of
men; not only in the sight of men, but also in the sight of God, exercising
Acts, 24.16.
our selves to keep a conscience void of offense both toward God and men.

Again, the first of these concerns Salt, and the second Peace; and neither
must our Salt be unpeaceable, nor our Peace unsavory: Peace and Salt must go
both together. For neither is complete without the other; and he that does not
regard both, ^oth of a truth, regard neither.

The Apossle requires a sweet conjunction, both of Peace and Holiness, Heb.
12.14. and what is that in effect but Salt and Peace? and they do as well
together, as ill asunder, for holiness alone is never like to see the God of
Peace, and Peace alone is never like to see the God of holiness, for without
it no man shall see the Lord.

The wisdom that is from above, is first peace, and then peaceable, Iac. 3.17.
That Peace is to be slighted, that is void of Purity; and that Purity to be
suspected, that is not peaceable: Purity without Peace is but factious
singularity, and Peace without Purity, is but profane conspiracy; and if Peace
and purity go not both together, it is to be doubted, that neither of them
belongs to the wisdom from above.

If therefore we expect to eat of the fruits of our labors with comfort, let
us not do the work of God by halves, what God has joined together, let no man
put asunder, but let us have Salt in our selves, and Peace one with another.

Now the God of 2 These. 3.16.
Peace himself, give us Peace always by all means; and 1 These. 5.23.
sanctify us also througout, that our whole Spirit, Soul and Body may be kept
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus; To whom be glory both now and for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

