THE EARL OF STAMFORDS RESOLVTION.

Expressed in his faithful execution of the trust imposed upon him concerning
the Militia of Leichestershire.

Who notwithstanding he was often opposed, yet did not desist, but did proceed
in the performance of his trust.

And also did certify his faith and fidelity to the HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT.

With a most remakable passage concerning the besieging of Hull, and how Sir
John Hotham has let out the waters three miles about the Town for the defense
thereof.

Joh. Brown Cler. Par. Hen. Elsyng Cler. Par. D. Com.
London, Printed for A. Coe, 1642.

THE EARL OF STAMFORDS RESOLVTION. Expressed in his faithful execution of the
trust imposed upon him concerning the Militia of Leichestershire.
HOw terrible a thing private dissension is, and of what great danger and
consequence, even to the ruin of whole Kingdoms; civil wars have been the
fearful and lamentable example of ancient times, may give us warning, for
fear lest we being led on by the same spirit, become as miserable as they
were, and are like them, made the subjects of future contempts and scorn.
Nothing does more enervate and weaken the strength and sinews of a
Commonwealth, then division; nothing does more assist them for opposition
against foreign invasions, then unity and concord within themselves, The
consideration of the former state of this land with what it now is, is most
lamentable: who can without tears consider that this Nation, which not many
years since was the pride and glory of all Europe, the admirations and terrors
of other Countries, should now become so despicable, that now even those who
durst not name this Nation without a trembling heart and reverence, now dare to
make of us a despicable proverb, and the contemptible object of their ordinary
discourse? And all this misery has taken possession of us only by the ill
counsels of the malignant party, who by their evil and wicked suggestions,
still animating his Majesty to believe what they only advise to the ruin of
his Majesty's Kingdom, have wrought this mischief which now hangs over our
heads threatening destruction, unless by the mercy of God there be some speedy
means taken for prevention thereof; and among all the difference wherewith
this Kingdom has been distracted none has more troubled the peace thereof,
then that concerning the Militia, it being of it self indeed a consideration
of most great weight and consequence. The Houses of Parliament have been very
careful, in these dangerous and pernicious times so to dispose of and settle
the Militia of this Kingdom, that the invasion of any foreign Nation which
may be attempted, being induced by the apprehension of an opportunity, by
reason of our own dissentions, and the defigns of the malignant party, which
daily wait an occasion to set on foot their hatched mischief, may be
prevented, the King and Country from both those assaults secured, and the
subjects remain in peace and tranquillity; yet notwithstanding all the
faithful care and industry of the House of Parliament to setle and secure the
Magazine of this Kingdom, they have found in all their resolutions many and
strong oppositions, for they whom they have thought worthy of so great a trust,
have in the execution of their trust found very strange and violent opposition,
and their best endeavors, which have labored for the public benefit, have
been very much misconstrued, whereby if it might be, they would have been
discouraged from the prosecution of so good a work, which did tend to and aim
at the benefit and security of the whole Kingdom.

The Earl of Stamford was by the House of Parliament elected and chose
Lieutenant for Leicester; and it was thought fit, by the wisdom of the same
House, that the Militia, and training up of the Train Bands, should be at his
power and command: he went down to take possession of the Magazine of that
County, and also to execute and perform that trust which the Parliament had
conferred on him; but his proceedings were oposed in their veryinfancy, and his
care was countermanded by a company of Cavaliers, who did endeavor by all
means possible to hinder the Earl in the performance of what the house of
Parliament did expect from him; yet notwithstanding these oppositions the Earl
does proceed, and does labor by his wisdom and gravity to suppress the
Actors and their insolency, to take away the causers of those insurrections,
and tumults. He is very constant and vigilant of the charge imposed upon him,
and as he thought it did befit him: He sent to the House the condition of the
Country as it then stood in, together with his own Resolution. That he went
on with the Militia, notwithstanding he had received some opposition by one
Master Henry H^stings, son to the Earl of Huntington, who brought the Kings
Proclamation, and Commission of Array, by virtue whereof he mustered up an
hundred horse, a hundred and twenty Musketeers, and fourscore Pikes, and said
that he had power by that Proclamation and Commission to muster up the Train
Bands.

A true Relation of the care and fidelity of Sir John Hotham concerning the
trust which he is put into in the Town of Hull by the honorable Court of
Parliament, how he has fortified it for the defense thereof.
THe care and fidelity of Sir John Hotham, exprel sed in the execution of his
trust imposed upon, concerning the Town of Hull, is manifest unto all; who
has now so fortified that Town that there is no force to be apprehended of
any taking of it. He has et in the water three miles round the said Town,
which water runs in a Current two foot deep at the least, so that without a
great hazard and dangers of the attempters, there is no approach to be made
near the Town: Yet notwithstanding this provided defense, there are daily
many aslaults made against the said Town, for by the assistance of some of the
Malignant party, there are now great forces drawing down to the said Town, and
three, field pieces, with which they do intend, for all the defense provided,
to batter down the said Town, and so to gain admittance. There are drums
daily beat thereabouts for the raising of Volunteers, by reason that the Train
Bands in most places refuse to come in, and so great the difference is
thereabouts, that there is a continual and daily expectation of war, so that
the whole Country is in a continual perplexity. These times, God knows, are
very dangerous, which God of his infinite mercy amend and settle; and grant
that the King and Parliament may be united in a most inseparable unity in
affe^^ions, that so both their Counsels being unanimously united, to the glory
of God, this Kingdom may flourish, and peace and prosperity be established
within the wall^ of this our Sion.

That if in case of necessity, if his Majesty shall deny his assent, the
Ordinance agreed on by both Houses of Parliament, does obliege the People, dnd
o^ght to be obeyed, being warranted by the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom.

Both Houses of Parliament has took into their serious considetation the
Occasion and Reason why the Members of the said Houses should absent themselves
upon their sommoning in, Whereupon they has drawn up a Charge against them, and
are resolvd that they shall pay 100 l a man, and to be examined by the
Committee before the next sitting.

John Brown Cler Parl. Hen Elsing Cler* Parl D Com.


FINIS.

