A HOLY LIFE HERE, The only Way to ETERNAL LIFE HEREAFTER.

OR, A Discourse grounded on these Words, The weapons of our Warfare, etc. 2.
Cor. 10.4.

Wherein [among other things set down in a following Index] this Truth is
especially asserted; namely, that

A holy Life, or the habitual observing of the Laws of CHRIST, is indispensably
necessary to Salvation.

Whereunto is added an Appendix, laying open the common neglect of the said
Laws among Christians, and vindicating such necessity of observing them from
those general Exceptions that are wont to be made against it.

By R.S. B. D.

LONDON, Printed for John Martin and James Allestrye, and are to be sold at the
Bell in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

An Advertisement to the READER.
CHristian Reader, be pleased to take notice that this discourse here presented
to thine eye, was (for some principal parts of it) only at first intended for,
and so delivered to the ears of a Country Auditory: and this I doubt not but
thou will easily (especially, if thine eye be any thing curious) discern by the
homeliness of its dress; here being no rhetorical flourishes, or studied
obscurities, to please thy fancy, or exercise thy Wit: Nobis non licet esse tam
disertis; neither the condition of the Hearers, nor my own ability, would
permit me to be thus eloquent. And indeed, though I am far either from
approving rudeness of speech in sacred matters, or envying those abilities of
expressions in others which I cannot attain unto my self: yet I am of opinion,
that wholesome meats may be too much sweetened, and thereby lose much of their
wholsomnesse or nourishing virtue: and in like manner, that solid and material
truths may be too artificially decked, so as such art or decking shall come to
be more regarded then the truths themselves: and consequently, the ears rather
be thereby tickled, then the understanding convinced, or the heart affected.

The truth that is here held forth in this Discourse (I mean, especially in the
popular parts of it) and more fully confirmed in the annexed Appendix, is (I
conceive) one of that rank, that is, such a plain and important truth as would
rather seem less serious, and be made to abate of its proper efficacy, then be
any thing advanced by an affected wisdom of words, or human eloquence. It is
not other but what the Apost long since affirmed; that without holiness no man
shall see God: or to deliver it in words more significant of my own sense, that
a holy life is the only way, and that which is simply necessary to make a man
blessed in and after death. A truth so clear, and withal of so good a sound,
that most (I doubt not) at the first view or hearing will readily grant it: and
indeed it is commended to us by so unquestionable and full a light, namely of
Scripture, that it may be a wonder how any should see cause to deny, or doubt
of it; and so, in both these respects, it may seem a task unnecessary, which I
have herein undertaken, to persuade men to a belief thereof.

And yet indeed the matter is far otherwise: for there is nothing I know, at
this day, pretending to be a divine truth, more generally discredited among
Christians of all sorts, then this is: though I think there is scarce any thing
(supposing it for a truth) wherein it concerns them so much to be firmly
persuaded, as in the belief of it; it being hardly probable, that any will act
according to it, but who are so persuaded of it; that is, that they will
universally compose their lives to those divine rules of holiness laid down in
the Gospel (which generally are so contrary to men's sensual desires, and their
worldly ease and interests) unless they be truly convinced of a necessity of
so doing. I will not deny, but that most who profess Christ, profess also a
kind of confused belief of this necessity: and I shall also grant, that it
seems to be the design of most preachers to keep up this belief in men, and
thereby to plant such holiness in them; there being hardly any of that
calling, who does not in one manner or other bend their discourses toward this
end.

But yet, as we say of the Papists, that what they grant directly and in words,
they do indirectly and really deny; as (not to mention other particular points)
when they profess to acknowledge Christ to be the head of the Church, and yet
hold the Pope also (though as they pretend, under Christ) to be head thereof,
ascribing such a power to him and his Chair in sacred matters as in effect
deprives Christ of his headship, and renders a great part of his laws invalid
and without any force: So I think it may without breach of charity be affirmed
of too many Protestants, both Ministers and people, that notwithstanding the
preaching of the former, and professed belief of both in this point; holiness
of life, described and extended so as it is in the Gospel, is held and reputed
by them a thing unnecessary to salvation.

What else does that general disuse and neglect of those many plain duties
confessedly required of us in the Gospel, imply? yea, what else do those common
doctrines and persuasions, publicly owned and settled in men's minds, declare?
as namely, touching the sufficiency of Christ's merits and righteousness being
merely apprehended and applied to a man's soul, which is (in the account of many)
the formality of that faith whereby we are justified in the sight of God: and
also touching the efficacy of late contrition, or mourning for sin, wherein as
many make repentance in a manner wholly to consist. Both which are things that
may be truly transacted (as the nature of the things themselves imply, and as
the patrons of them acknowledge) by such persons at their going out of the
world, as all the time of their living in it before, have constantly allowed
themselves in known breaches of some or more of the divine laws of Christ.

Do not these two doctrines or opinions truly contradict and overthrow that
other opinion generally professed, and seemingly held, of the necessity of a
holy life for coming to the kingdom of heaven? Can a thing in any sense be
reputed the necessary means for attaining some end, when the said end may be
ordinarily come at without these means by some other way? as by the force of
the foresaid opinions men are taught to believe, that eternal salvation may be
certainly attained by them, though they never lived holily, if so be that now
when they are a dying they do (as it is then possible for them) apply Christ's
righteousness to themselves, and truly mourn for their sins: or is not this
(at best) to hold forth two ways to the kingdom of heaven? one, that which is
seemingly believed, and which indeed the Scripture only allows and approves
of, namely, the strict and proportionable long way of a holy life; and the
other, that which is much easier and shorter, to wit, mourning for sin at the
last, and fiduciary application of Christ's righteousness to a man's self, as
that which will be fully effectual without the former preceding? And is there
any likelihood or reason to expect, but that (this being so) men should
generally (as we see they do) take this latter way, and suffer the former to
lie quite untrodden and disused? All (we know) are naturally lovers of ease,
and desirous (if possible) to reconcile the enjoyment of the pleasures of sin
with the hopes of those true pleasures hereafter to be enjoyed: and therefore
it is no marvel, if being taught (as, in effect, by the former opinion they
are) that there is no absolute necessity of living holily, and so that these
latter are possible to be come at by those who never truly and effectually
relinquished the former, the most every where securely allow themselves this
liberty.

This (I mean, this persuasion rooted in men's minds through the foresaid
opinions, that obedience to Christ's laws is not required in the former degree
of necessity, or indispensably for attaining salvation) is that which truly
enervates, for the most part the force of all preaching and divine exhortations
to holiness of life; that which makes such preaching and exhortation how
powerfully soever otherwise enforced, available only to beget in men flashes of
devotion, or a partial piety, or some vellieties, and faint ineffectual
endeavors of living holily: this is that which makes men willing (for better
excusing their own voluntary sloth) to interpret the habitual observing of the
laws of Christ, which yet they cannot but acknowledge the Scripture seems to
require, such a height of perfection as is not possible to be reached unto; and
therefore, they think, not necessary to be labored after: in brief, this is
that (I conceive) which of all things most deeply contributes to the upholding
of the dominion of sin in the world, both for the extent and degrees of it: I
mean, among the professors of Christ: and so by its influence helps forward
daily the perdition of thousands of souls. The apprehension of all which evils,
and especially of the last, which is the result of them all, has made me think
that I could not possibly do a more charitable work, then use that ability (how
weak or small soever) which God has given me, toward the discovering of that
which is the true root of them; which, I conceive, is no other, but that before
mentioned, namely, this common but corrupt persuasion, that there is some other
way of coming to the kingdom of heaven, then by a holy life, or the habitual
observing of the laws of Christ. And this, accordingly, I have endeavored in
this following tract: partly, in the discourse, as the words whereunto it is
limited cast me upon it, and the condition of the hearers required; but more
fully in the annexed Appendix: the design of both which is to show, that which
I conceive it infinitely concerns all men to be firmly persuaded of, namely,
that the former manner of observing the foresaid laws is an indispensable
condition for attaining of eternal life. A truth, which as I am fully convinced
of, for my own part; so I cannot but think there is a necessity lying upon me,
to do my utmost for the convincing of others into a like belief of it: being
firmly persuaded, that such a belief thereof once thoroughly settled in men's
minds, would be at once effectual for stopping those gaps of licentiousness,
and so of perdition, that now lie open; and also for enabling men to exhibit
actually in their performance a greater height of perfection, in reference to
Christ's laws, then yet they have ever had so much as a serious thought of
aiming after.

There are some other things of another nature insisted on in the following
discourse; such as I conceive were not so fit to offer to the ears of those who
were hearers of the other parts, as they may be to present to the eyes of some
who may now be willing to be readers: and these things perhaps, as they are
connexed with the other, may make the structure of the whole seem somewhat
uneven and disproportioned: but yet, being useful in their way, as I hope in
some degree they may prove, and having the same ground for their foundation
which the rest have, I am willing to presume of so much charity from the candid
and intelligent Reader, as that he will not be so far offended at such
disproportion as to censure it for a crime.

My main aim in the whole, (if my own heart deceive me not) is this that Christ
may have the honor of that obedience which is due to him, and which he
requires; and Christians the comfort of that reward which they hope for from
him, and which is limited only to such obedience: that these may not wretchedly
delude themselves in their most large hopes, nor wickedly defraud him of his
unquestioned right, by a formal and fruitless profession. This is that great
errand on which this little work is sent forth: and I beseech that God, who by
mean and contemptible instruments uses sometimes to effect great matters, to
prosper it therein, and to convert all to his own Glory.

R. S.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Following Discourse.
THis Discourse divided into three Sections, p. 3. SECT. I. The first Section
touching the Christian Warfare; Wherein is shown the reason why this name is
applied to signify our Christian duty, p. 4. The chief enemy in this warfare
is the Devil, whose design is to keep us from the kingdom of Heaaven, which
thing he attempts 1 By Cunning, namely upon the understanding or upon the
affections p. 7. 2. By Cruelty, p. 9.
Our main care before hand must be To settle the judgment aright in divine
matters, p. 11. To have a right apprehension of these worldly things, p. 15. To
get a firm belief of those future things promised, p. 16. To have an ill
opinion of the world, p. 17. To beware of the Counsel of carnal friends, p.
19. To inure our selves to hardness. p. 21.
In the time of our fighting, it is requisite that we have 1. A good eye, which
must be watchful, p. 25. piercing, p. 26.
2. A good heart, p. 28.
Touching which are shown 1. That hereby is meant the Spirit of God, or a
divine power imprinted in the heart, p. 30. 2. That we have particular grounds
whereon to expect the receiving of this Spirit. p. 31. And here to differences
assigned betwixt the giving of this Spirit as limited to the primitive, and as
extended to our times, p. 37. 3. What are the Conditions on our part to make us
actually capable of it, p. 38.
Three particular rules added as those which will be of great use in this
warfare: 1. To look upon the prize we fight for, p. 48. 2. To look upon the
Company that have fought before us, p. 55 3. To look upon the Captain that eyes
us, p. 58.

SECT. II. The second Section touching the weapons belonging to this Warfare.
p. 60. That these weapons are not carnal, that is, as the word carnal so
joined, notes 1. That which is destructive to the flesh. 2. That which carnal
wisdom invents or suggests, p. 60.
That they are not carnal in the first sense shown from three Reasons. p. 60,
That not carnal in the second sense shown from Paul's example. p. 67. That both
these sorts of carnal weapons are not mighty but weak, in respect 1. Not able
to refist the force of the other weapons here meant. p. 70. 2. Not able
properly to plaint or preserve Religion. p. 70.
That Religion which is so planted or preserved, is rather Policy then
Religion, p. 75. The folly and cruelty of those that make use of these carnal
weapons in this way. p. 76. The Weapons of this warfare considered First
limited to the first time, and so they were of two sorts as, p. 28. 1.
Respecting those within the Church, whereby is shown to be meant an
extraordinary power of inflicting corporal punishment, and particularly of
delivering unto Satan: the nature, and end of which punishment is described, p.
82. 2. Respecting those without the Church, whereby meant the working of
miracles, touching which is shown, p. 88. 1. That these weapons were 1.
Effectual, p. 89. 2. Necessary at that time,
2. That the continuance of them now is Needful, Convenient, 90.


Both these further manifested from that impresse of Divinity that is in both
the parts of the Gospel, p. 94. Hereupon the reason is assigned why miracles
longer continued under the Law then under the Gospel, namely the imperfection
of that Religion in both the parts of it, p. 96. And hence occasionally is
shown that eternal life was not expressly promised under the law, p. 98. That
the corruption of Religion, and defection under Antichrist does not make
miracles necessary now, as they were in the first planting of the Gospel, in
regard p. 104. 1. There are some common principles remaining, universally
received among all Christians, to wit, the Scriptures, p. 105. 2. These
Scriptures are clear, and so by all confessed to be in necessary matters, p.
107.
The differences of opinions among Christians does not contradict this, p. 107.
Whence the said differences do proceed, p. 111. The great uncertainty and
necessary inconveniency of going about to decide controversies in Religion by
Councels or Fathers, p. 113. Secondly these weapons considered as extended to
all times, whereby meant 1. That which in its use respects those within the
Church, viz. Excommunication, p. 115. The several ends whereof are set down p.
118. And hereupon the constitution of our Church is bewailed, as it is
destitute of this weapon, and of the true use of it, p. 119. How the servants
of God are to demean themselves under this defect, p. 123. 2. Such as are
requisite for subduing others without the Church unto Christ, by which are
meant those Christian virtues and exercises of them commended to us in the
Gospel: touching which are shown, p. 124. That without these, the former
weapons of miracles in the Apostles hands would have been uneffectual p. 125
That we can only persuade others effectually unto Christ by the use of these
weapons, p. 128.

SECT. III. The third Section touching the strong holds, whereby is shown to be
meant carnal reasonings against the profession, or power of Christian Religion
Which are considered, p. 138. 1. As common to all natural persons, p. 139. 2.
As peculiar to some certain sorts of persons, such as wordly wise, or learned,
or rich, which persons are considered, p. 144.
1. With reference to the Apostles times, as wholly unconverted to so much as a
profession of Christianity: the reasonings of whom contained under two heads,
p. 145. 1. such as tend to uphold the credit of those false Religions they had
before lived in, p. 146. 2. Such as tend to discredit the Religion of that they
were to be persuaded to, p. 148.
Both which sorts and particular ways of reasoning the Papists are shown to
make use of, for upholding their own and overthrowing our Religion, p. 154.
Hereupon the injustice of such Protestants is pointed at, who are not willing
to have any opinion admitted, or freely considered, that is contrary to
something long and generally received To which persons these following
considerations are tendered as means for convincing them, p. 158. 1. The
example of Luther, who opposed himself against the declared judgment and
practice of all the Christian Churches in the world, p. 148. 2. That it is very
reasonable to imagine, considering the acknowledged heap of corruptions that
was in the Chuch when Luther attempted first a Reformation, that there should
be some left remaining for others after to discover, and purge out, p. 159.
This showed to be reasonable to suppose from three grounds, p. 160. 3. That
this is probable also to suppose upon the consideration of common allowed
sinfulness of Christians, and of Gods way in giving men up to errors, p. 164.
That the former reasonings of both sorts were sufficiently invalidated by
those miracles which were acted by the Apostles, p. 166. These miracles of
another nature then those which have been acted by some impostors, p. 169. And
far more effectual then the using of carnal weapons could have been in this
kind, p. 172. The true reason why then not many wise men after the flesh, etc.
called? p. 157. 2: Secondly the former sort of persons considered with
reference to our times, as having a form of Religion, but wanting the power of
it, and so having need still to be subdued unto Christ, p. 180. Their
reasonings proportionable to the former. 1. Such as tend to uphold the credit
of that empty formality wherein they live, p. 183. 2. Such as tend to asperse
the power of godliness whereunto they are exhorted, p. 186.
To both which is added, as a main supporter of the said reasonings, an inward
persuasion of the unnecessarinesse of such a way of godliness, and the
sufficiency of the foresaid form, p. 189. This of all other holds the most
dangerous, and first to be attempted, p. 190. The way of demolishing it here
pointed at (after more fully shown and confirmed in the Appendix) p. 190. That
something is possible to be done by the servants of Christ toward working such
persons to the power of godliness, notwithstanding the former persuasion being
in them; upon two grounds, p. 194. Hence it may be made appear to them, 1. That
without obedience they are but hypocrites p. 196. 2. That the going on of such
numbers in that way wherein they live, is not a mark of the goodness, but of
the badnesse and danger of it. 3. That the meannesse of the persons who
ordinarily limit themselves to a strict course of Religion cannot with
Christians be any true prejudice against such strictness, p. 197. 4. That to
account the way of godliness harsh or uncomfortable, is to contradict our
profession, p. 199. 5. That to account any Christian duties, and particularly
that of meekness toward enemies dishonorable to practice is to think basely
of Christ's example and doctrine, p. 201.
That revenge argues baseness, and the contrary, meekness and goodness only,
true nobleness of disposition. p. 202. That those who use the former
reasonings against their submitting to the power of godliness are self
condemned in so doing, and therefore the easier to be wrought upon by the
former weapons. p. 204.

A HOLY LIFE HERE, The only Way TO ETERNAL LIFE HEREAFTER.
2. Cor. 10.4. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through God to the pulling down of strong holds.
PErsons of great luster and eminency for virtue have seldom had the hap to be
looked upon at their appearing, otherwise than with an ill eye from the world;
their very zeal to do it good by amending of it, ordinarily awakens the malice
thereof against them, which, as by other means, so more especially by lies and
slanders vented against such, it uses to manifest. Thus our Savior, a person
of the most absolute and unparalleld Innocence, Matthew. 11.19.
we find traduced for a glutton and a wine-bibber, and a friend of Publicans
and sinners; and thus (not to insist longer on an Introduction) He, who was
most like him for the dignity of his office, and zeal and sincerity in the
managing of it, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, is here reported to be, but
a kind of hypocritical Zelot; one that made more ostentation of power by his
words and Epistles, being absent, then he could give any real evidence of,
being present; one, that after the manner of some worldly Politicians made use
of terrifying threats, like bruta fulmina, making a crackling noise to fright
the simpler and weaker sort, when as he was destitute of any real ability to
inflict what he threatened. In brief, it appears from the second and third
verses going before, that some false teachers among these Corinthians, whom he
had before sharply threatened, 1. Cor. 4.21.
and shaken his Apostolical Rod over, represented him to them, as a person,
that (notwithstanding his pretense of the Spirit, and singular divine power he
had, for punishing the contumacious) walked according to the flesh, and so made
use of those weak artifices and weapons, which the wisdom of that part was able
to suggest and supply him with, for retaining them in their obedience to his
doctrine: In answer, and opposition to which, He first plainly denies what they
did boldly affirm, or insinuate, saying, though we walk in the flesh, yet we do
not war after the flesh. And then he more particularly sets down, what the
manner of his walking, or managing of his office was, in reference to them and
others, (how free from carnal artifices, and how much above all the force of
the flesh, for the efficacy of it) here saying, For the weapons of our warfare
are not carnal. etc.

In the handling of which words, we shall consider these three things.

1. The warfare belonging to Christians, by showing that there is such a
warfare, and withal the nature of it, and way of managing it.

2. The weapons belonging to this warfare, as they are described 1. Negatively,
that they are not carnal. 2. Affirmatively, that they are mighty through God,
etc.


3. The strong holds that these weapons are effectual for pulling down, what
these holds are, and how pulled down by the said weapons.

Sect. 1
Touching the first of these, namely, that there is a warfare, etc. it may
appear hence, Because our duty is expressed by such terms as are proper to war;
as Fighting, 1 Timothy 6.12. 2 Timothy 4.7. Luke 3.24. Ephesians. 6.12. Jude 3.
Fight the good fight, etc. and I have fought etc. And striving, Strive to
enter, etc. And wrestling, we wrestle not against flesh and blood, etc. And
contending, contend earnestly, etc. And it will further appear, and withal the
nature of this warfare, by considering the resemblance and agreement it has
with war properly so called, which is the ground of this Metaphor.

There are several things belonging to War;

1. Some as the ground or occasion of it, namely enemies, which oppose
themselves, so as either to deprive men of that whereof they are already
possessed, or hinder them from that which they have a right to, or desire to
attain.

2. Some as means, to manage it aright, so as the design of these enemies may
not take effect; but that by the use of these means they may overcome them, and
secure to themselves those things the said enemies labor to deprive and hinder
them of.

Now, for the enemies in war, they are usually many, but they may be all
ordinarily comprised under one Head or General; And for the means, they are
either such as are to be used before the fight, and they may be comprised under
that which is called the discipline of war, whereby Soldiers are wont to be
exercised and prepared before hand; or else such as are especially used, and of
whom there is need in time of fighting. And they are either such as a man is to
have in him, as namely a good eye, and a good heart; or upon him, and about
him, as weapons.

Now in all these our Christian course has a true agreement with war.

1. We have enemies, multitudes and millions of them, many infernal spirits,
many wicked men, many natural inbred lusts and desires; the joint design of
all whose enmity is, to deprive us of Heaven, (that great Good, which we all
defire, and profess to labor for) either by keeping, or turning us out of the
way that leads thither. And all these though so many and manifold in
themselves; yet they may be ranked under one General, the great adversary of
God and our Souls, the Devil; He is called the Prince of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. 2
Cor. 4.4.
and the God of this world, that works in the hearts of the children of
disobedience, acting not only in them, by getting his suggestions entertained,
to their own ruin; but also by them, by using them as his instruments, for
effecting or attempting the perdition of others. Hereupon Peter was reproved by
his Name, because he was (though unwittingly) his instrument, Matthew. 16.22, 23.
in that counsel given by him to our Savior.

Now that we may be the better able to resist, and overcome him, we have need
to be acquainted with his nature, and the course he takes to oppose us: his
nature (so far as is pertinent to this matter) is best set forth by the name of
Satan or adversary, whereby is signified, one that is wholly bent to overthrow
us: This is his design, this the end that he aims at, and that still while we
are here in this world he is going about.

Now the ways he takes to do this, are represented to us by two other names of
his.

1. That of a Serpent, or old Serpent, which you know is a subtle creature.

2. That of a Dragon, and a Lion, Revel. 12.9.20 2. 1 Pet. 5.8.
or roaring Lion, both which are very cruel and devouring creatures.

1. By the former is implied his cunning, or the manifold artifices he uses for
this end: and indeed they are so many, that they cannot easily be found out, or
numbered; only some of the most general I shall note.

1. Sometimes applying himself chiefly to the understanding. He comes under the
visour of Religion, in the habit, and it may be in the person of a preacher,
suggesting to men (from some places of Scripture, seemingly speaking that which
they desire should be true) some such opinions as are indeed most favorable to
the flesh, but most false in themselves, and destructive to their souls; such
as that is, the generality every where are possessed with, namely that to rely on
the merits of Christ is all that is required of them: that God will at last for
his sake accept and crown them, though now either they take no care at all of
doing his will, or content themselves with some faint purposes and ineffectual
endeavors about it: this is that artifice, wherewith he takes and holds fast
the multitude. But it is not from any true ground in Scripture, which every
where speaks of doing the will of God, and keeping his Commandments, and being
new Creatures, and that, as necessary conditions of obtaining salvation: it is
only the compliance it has to men's natural inclinations, the desire they have
it should be true, that makes them so readily believe it is so.

2. Sometimes applving himself to the will and affections: he deals with us, as
he dealt with our Savior, when he presented to him the Kingdoms of the world,
and the glory of them; that is, he suggest; to our minds, the pleasures, and
profits, and advantages that are here to be had, by giving the rains to our
desires and contrarily, the hardships, troubles, and difficulties that are
likely to befall us, by tying our selves to a religious course; that the former
are present, and certain; but the other, namely, the rewards of our Religion,
are yet to come, and uncertain, and it may be, not worth the parting with
those, and therefore it is good to enjoy them while they are to be had, and to
lay aside the care of these things, which (if there be any such) are yet far
off.

And to make these suggestions more effectual, he has not only multitudes of
examples always in readiness (that is, of such as truly walk after the flesh,
making it all, or their main care to fulfill the desires of it,) to present to
our eyes: but also many other artifices to work upon us, as namely by
presenting to our minds some easy way, as he did to our Savior, Only fall
down, etc. Matthew. 4.9.
or by possessing us with a persuasion, that Honor and Happiness consists in
those things; and that contempt, or danger, or poverty, or hatred, are like to
be the attendants of those that follow after heavenly things.

2. Besides this Serpentine cunning, he has also the cruelty of a dragon, or
lion: and this not only in respect of the end; for so this cruelty he always
exercises: (when he is most an angel, that is, in regard of the means by him
made use of, he is still a devil, aiming at our destruction, as his end) but
also in the means he uses: when by flattery, or the lure of profits, and
worldly pleasures he cannot prevail, then he stirs himself to raise up storms
of persecutions, terrors without, and terrors within: sometimes putting it
into the hearts of the wicked, his instruments, to reproach or molest, and
often persecute even to death, those that set themselves to obey God; and other
times raising terrifying perplexing thoughts within themselves, to make their
lives, and the way they are in, bitter to them, that so they may grow weary of
it. Many other things might be added, but this is enough to show the first
thing, which is the ground of all War, namely, that we have an enemy, a
cunning, cruel, powerful enemy, so that its necessary we should be warriors,
unless we will give up our selves as a prey to destruction.

2. The things required to war, as the means to manage it, are 1. That which
is required beforehand, as namely, the discipline of war. Soldiers, before
they engage with the enemy, have ordinarily their Trainings; and when they lie
near to him, use to be very watchful in keeping their Guards, and sending out
Scouts: so there is a certain discipline wherein we are to be employed, in the
managing of our Christian warfare, and it is chiefly to be proportioned to the
temper and condition of our adversary, that is, to the cunning and cruelty that
he is composed of.

1. First then; as one part of his cunning is, to corrupt our understandings,
to possess us with an erroneous judgment, especially in matters which most
nearly concern our salvation: so our care must be, to have our senses so
exercised as to be able to distinguish betwixt good and evil, betwixt that
which is sound and that which is unsound in such matters.

Now this we can only attain unto, by attending diligently unto the word, by
giving earnest heed unto those things which this Oracle of Truth commends to
us. For the right understanding of which, we must know, that though there be
some things hard to be understood, and which the ignorant and unstable wrest, 2
Pet. 3.16.
yet the greatest part, especially those which immediately concern our practice
and duty, whereupon our salvation chiefly and immediately depends, are plain
and easy to be discerned: so plain indeed, that it is not possible for men to
apprehend them in any other sense, then what of right belongs to them, unless
they will either be oscitant and careless readers, or wilfully shut their
eyes, and suffer themselves to be carried blindfold by others; or lastly, set
themselves to wrest things to such a sense, as their own sensual affections
most incline them to.

And therefore, that you neither abuse your selves, nor suffer your selves to
be abused by others in this kind, I shall commend to you these two rules to be
observed by you in this matter.

1. To take heed you suffer not your affections to corrupt your judgment: that
is, that this be not the ground of your believing this or that to be the sense
of Scripture, namely, your desires that it should be so; as that, which allows
you most liberty in your sins, and most comfort with them. There is a saying,
as the fool thinks, so the bell clinketh: and the meaning of it is verified
here: most men, according to their carnal wishes, and hopes they allow in
themselves, are willing to conceive the meaning of the Spirit of God in
Scripture: But as this Spirit is most contrary, in it self, to the temper of
that carnal part in us, so there cannot ordinarily be a better argument,
whereon to suspect or believe the unsoundnesse of any opinion, or supposed
sense of Scripture, then this, namely, a natural and general forwardness in
men to believe it: for the most (we know) are lovers of ease, and sensual
pleasures; and therefore desire, if it may be, to understand all the Scripture
in such a sense as may together with the hopes of Heaven, allow them the
enjoyment of these; though they are things, that are not posfible to be
reconciled with one another.

2. So firmly to believe, and rest persuaded of that which you find clearly
affirmed in Scripture, as not to suffer your selves to be made to suspect the
plain meaning of it, by the seeming opposition of some other places, whose
meaning is not so clear: but contrarily, to bring those that are more obscure
to be interpreted by the rule of these. As it is certain, there is no true
opposition betwixt places of Scripture; so it is as certain, that God in his
wisdom has thought fit to permit some appearing opposition: and that on
purpose (we may conceive) for exercising of our diligence, to make us more
intent in the reading of his word. Now, in reason, we must conceive, that the
fewer and darker places are to be understood by the more and clearer: as for
example; The Scripture, every where almost, abounds with such sayings as these,
that we are not to be only hearers of the word, but doers of it; Jam. 1.22.
Matthew. 7.26 Heb. 12.14. Gal. 6.15. 1 Cor. 7.19. Romans 2.7.
That He that hears and does not, is like a foolish builder; That without
holiness no man shall see God; That in Christ Jesus nothing avails but a new
creature; Nothing but keeping the Commandments of God; That Immortality and
eternal Life shall be conferred upon those that by patient continuance in well
doing look for it, etc. by all which, the absolute necessity of a constant and
continued obedience to the Laws of Christ, is either expressly, or at least
implicitly asserted. Again, there are some other Texts, that seem to make this
thing not so necessary, but that a man may be ordinarily saved without it: as
where it is said, only Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 16.31.
and thou shall be saved. Now who sees not, that there is a necessity of
bringing this last Text to a conformity with the former? that is, thus; Though
believing properly be only an act of the will, and together therewith of the
understanding, and signify here a reliance upon Christ, yet it must be such a
reliance as includes in the very nature of it a performance of the former
duties, that is, a doing of those things which he has expressly required of us
in his word; without which, any reliance upon him for salvation must needs be
presumptuous and unwarrantable?

2. In reference to that other part of cunning which the devil uses principally
toward our wills or affections, as

1. By suggesting to us the pleasures and profits of this world, in their
luster: and by persuading us to doubt of the future.

1. We must deliberately consider of the great vanity and transitorinesse of
these present pleasures and profits: what price soever he sets upon them,
Eccles. 1.2.
Solomon tells us, they are vanity of vanities: and our own experience may
confirm us in this belief: How many do we see and hear of daily, that are taken
away in the midst of their enjoyment of them? and how certain is it that all
must leave them? and what comfort can they afford a man when his soul is called
for? who can carry any of these things along with him? or what profit will then
accrue to a man of all these enjoyments? will they not all then be gone as a
shadow, and be as though they never had been? and will it not be a miserable
exchange, to enjoy for a few days the sweetness of these, and then for ever
afterward to lie down in hell, under eternal anguish and vexation? for such
indeed (if we may believe the word) is certain to be the condition of those
that so esteem and follow these worldly pleasures and profits, as for the
enjoyment of them willingly to neglect any of the Commandments of God.

2. We must answerably labor to settle our minds in a steady belief of those
future, though yet unseen, pleasures mentioned in the Gospel: by considering,
together with the greatness and lastingnesse of them, those infallible grounds
whereon we may certainly expect the performance of them. God, that cannot lie,
has promised them; the Son of God, that knew no sin, has been the publisher
of them, and by his miracles and death confirmed them; and is already, as our
forerunner, gone to take possession of them, and has now fully put into his
hands the power of dispensing them to us; the Apostles, and many others since,
have willingly laid down their lives, and so parted with all the comforts of
this world at once, out of a certain belief and expectation of them; And that,
which is (as it were) a continued standing miracle till our days, The Jews,
that were once Gods peculiar people, but became Christ's professed and implacable
enemies, for their rejecting of him, and so together with him, that doctrine
with he so taught and confirmed, remain still under the visible marks of Gods
displeasure; being banished out of that land wherein he by his own Hand had
miraculously placed them, and so continue a dispersed, ignominious, and hated
people.

2. The devil uses for making his suggestions more effectual, to make use of
the examples, and it may be the persuasions of worldly men. The way of
godliness he represents to us, as a forlorn, solitary way (so as they of Rome
have used to represent our Church) that has but a few travailers in it: the
other, he shows us to be a way much beaten; multitudes, droves of all sorts
going on in it: and why then should we affect to be singular? why should we not
rather go along with the crowd; venture, and fare as well as they do?

Against this artefice of his, we must get our minds possessed with an ill
opinion of the world, of the fashions and uses of it, in respect of religion:
and it is not uncharitableness, but wisdom for us so to do. S. John tells us,
that the whole world lies in wickedness, or (...), in the wicked one: 1 John
5.19
he is called the Prince of it; the greatest part whereof willingly do him
service: and that because his service is so easy and pleasing to the flesh for
the present; it is nothing for the substance of it, but to pamper the flesh, to
seek and set our minds and employ our care about those things that this world
affords, that are here to be had. What marvel then is it, considering the
inclinations of men to these things, if the greatest part every where are such
as he would have them; fulfilling his will, while they so satisfy their own
desires: and so be very unfit examples for any hereupon to conform unto? yea
those that would provide securely for their souls, must so far avoid this snare
of the devil, as not only to think it unsafe for them to go along with the
World, that is, the greatest part, in their fashions and courses, but even to
think themselves bound to go against the stream, to aim at such a singularity,
as is quite opposite to this general practice. Be not conformed to this world,
but be ye transformed in the renewing of your minds: Romans 12.2. Phil. 3.20.
Jam. 4.4.
and our conversation is in heaven, that is, the heart of a right Christian is
there set. Whereas the most, whom the Prophet calls the men of this world (as
having no other portion, that is, of good things, Psalm. 17.14.
to receive, but what they enjoy here) have their hearts set upon earthly
things.

2. The devil may perhaps make use of the persuasions of others, such as are in
appearance, and it may be in their intentions, friends; to draw those off, that
are entered into the way of godliness, and have broken his snare: thus he did
make use of Peter to Christ; and thus many times (no doubt) he does of those,
that in their carnal affections wish others well perhaps: putting into their
mouths such words as these, what needs all this ado? why should you trouble
your selves with so much reading, or praying, or meditating, or conferring
together, cannot you content your selves as others do, with what is done in
public? what necessity is there, that you should be so precise in your
carriage, so scrupulous and circumspect in your words? do not you think that
others as wise as you, that make no such matter of these things?

Thus, I doubt not but many times it falls out. But whosoever you are that are
thus assaulted, and thus set upon, to have you abate of your zeal and care
about the things of the kingdom of Heaven, (which has need of all helps, in
this cold and frozen world, for increasing it) you are to look upon the persons
employed in this work (though they be as near to you as Peter was to Christ,
yea though it should be one that lies in your bosom) as the instruments of
Satan, that is, such as (at least, unwittingly) are his instruments, doing that
which tends truly to your destruction: and therefore let it be your care, that
the love you have to the parties, or the apprehension of that which they bear
to you, corrupt you not so far (as easily it may) as to make you hearken to
such counsels, in abating of the performance of those duties, which are so
necessary. You are to remember that lesson of our Saviors in this case, If any
man hate not father and mother he cannot be my disciple. Luke 14.26


3. As the devil is cunning, so is he also cruel; one that not only makes use
of gentle and flattering means, but also of rough and harsh usage; and
therefore we must fit out preparation hereunto also.

We must inure our selves beforehand to hardness, 2 Tit. 2.3.
Thou therefore as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, endure hardness: Soldiers,
when they enter into the field, or come to be engaged, are forced to endure
much hardness; cold, and wet, and hard lodging, and to be content with course
and scant diet: and therefore, they that are desirous to approve themselves
good soldiers indeed in this kind, will be ordinarily so wise as to innure
themselves beforehand to some such hardship; at least, those that have the
command and government of them, will not suffer them to spend their time in
ease and idleness, or in the softning pleasures of feasting and delicate
feeding.

The like wisdom is required in us: we are sure through the opposition of this
great adversary, to meet with hardness, troubles within, or without or both;
and therefore we must prepare our selves beforehand for this hardness, by
willingly undergoing some hardness at present.

Now by this hardness, I mean nothing else, but the doing of those things
which are naturally hard and unpleasing to us, together with the crossing our
selves in those things which our sensual part carries us to.

1. That which I understand by the former, is the constant and continued uses
of these Christian exercises of prayer, meditation, exhortation, and sometimes
fasting: all which are commonly (especially at first) ungrateful to the flesh,
but very requisite for hardening it, and making it serviceable to the spirit,
and so for strengthening of us to hold out in this Warfare.

2. That which I understand by the latter, namely, by crossing our selves in
those things which our sensual part carries us to, it is not any Stoical
irrational opposing of our desires, in the use of things which the temper of
our bodily constitution requires, and which God has allowed us so far to
satisfy: but it is the inordinatenesse of these desires, which many times are
very pleasing, and therefore hard to be moderated: and such are the desires of
revenge, or of expressing anger, or hatred: which we are so far to oppose in
our selves, by the Law of Christ, as not only not to wish or take pleasure in
any evil that befalls him that has done us wrong, or is our professed enemy,
but even truly to wish and seek his good.

And in regard of this kind of hardness it is, that our Christian duties are
expressed by such names as imply a kind of violence to be used against our
selves; Col. 3.5. Gal. 5.24. Matthew. 5.29.30.
as mortifying our earthly members: crucifying the flesh: pulling out the right
eye, cutting off the right hand, etc.

And by this crossing our selves in this kind, by subduing that anger or
pride, or covetousness, or other the like sensual affection that is yet in us,
we shall take out the sting from all other crosses, that the devil by any of
his instruments can bring upon us.

Lastly, one thing not the least effectual to prepare thee for this hardness,
so as to make thee go thorough with thy Christian Warfare, will be, to settle
this persuasion in thy self, namely, that though thou may certainly by so
going on, promise thy self victory in the end, and also ordinarily much comfort
for the present, even in the exercises of religion, or keeping Gods
commandments, according to that of the Psalmist, in keeping of them there is
great reward: and a hundred fold now in this present time is promised by our
Savior: Psalm. 19.11 Mark 10.30
yet thou must expect through this adversaries means, several rubs and
discouragement; to be now and then cast in thy way; and that, not only by the
reproaches and persecutions of others, but (which is most bitter and dangerous
of all) some perplexing distracting thoughts within thy self, so that all thy
sense of pleasure shall be taken away; and that course which hitherto thou have
gone on in, shall appear in thy own apprehension, not only tedious, but an
unprofitable and uncomfortable course. This (I say) thou art to reckon of
aforehand, that thou may be the better prepared for it, and not think it
any strange thing, when thou find thy self in this case.

Only, when it is so with thee, thou must temember still, to hold fast the
conclusion, Psalm. 74.1.
that God is good to them that fear him: Romans 4.18.
to believe in hope against hope, and against sense of what thou feel, for
the present: though he hide his face for a a while, he will again show himself,
if thou continuest to look for him in well doing. And therefore, if he shall
stay, wait for him, for he will certainly come, and will not tarry; not tarry
beyond his own appointed time, Heb. 10.37.
yea not beyond that time when his coming may be truly most for thy advantage:
His withdrawing himself in this kind, is but to try whether thou will wait,
whether thy faith be of that temper which Abraham's was of, to believe beyond
sense; whether, with the Prophet, Isai. 30.18.
thou will say, I will seek the Lord that hides his face from me.

Now for the time of fighting, two things are required, 1. A good Eye. 2. A
good Heart.

1. A Christian soldier must have a good Eye; and the goodness of it consists
in these two qualities.

1. It is to be a waking, or a Watchful Eye: a soldier that is surpised with
sleep, when the enemy is near him, may be knocked in the head before he
awakens. Now our enemy is always near us, and ready at hand, to watch
advantages against us: 1 Pet. 5.8.
He walks up and down seeking whom he may devour. Are we alone? he is busy to
possess us with foolish and hurtful thoughts; are we in company? he is ready
to entangle us in vain and idle words, to make us partakers, or at least
countenancers of others in their sins: are we employed in good actions, as in
praying, or giving alms? he is at hand, if he cannot hinder us from them, to
make them so performed by us, as they may be unacceptable with God, and so
unprofitable to us; by putting into us wandering thoughts, and making us aim at
vain glory.

Therefore we can be no longer safe from his assaults, then we continue
watchful. Its that lesson which our Savior has commanded to all, Mar. 13.37
I say watch: our minds are still to be intent for the avoiding sin, or the
occasions of it: this only can make us secure. To be confident we shall hold
out, or be able to withstand the opposition of this great adversary, without
this watchfulness, its all one as if a soldier should shut his eyes, when he
is in conflict: whereby it is certain, that as he cannot see the danger he is
in, so neither can he use that means, that is otherwise in his power, for
preventing his being surpised with it.

2. A clear or piercing and discerning Eye, that is, that we be able to see the
things without us (which the devil uses to employ against us) in their true
nature, so as to see through those false glosses whereby he represents them to
us. Now the things he thus represents, are the pleasures and profits of the
World: the former he represents to us as he did the forbidden fruit to Eve,
Genesis 3.6.
as things pleasing to the eyes, such as have a great deal of present delight
in the use of them; in the mean time laboring to hide, as he did from her, the
following bitterness; the remorse of conscience, the griving the spirit of God,
the exposing our selves to the danger of his wrath, which all inordinate and
unlawful pleasures are necessarily accompanied with. The latter he sets forth
as things of high esteem in the world, and such as will make us live in credit
with men; such as will give us much comfort in the enjoyment, and secure us
from those reproaches and difficulties that men without them are ordinarily
exposed to: but here again, he labors to keep from our notice and
consideration the thorny cares that attend them, the inability that is in them
to give us any comfort, when we have most need of it; the certainty of leaving
them, and that (it may be) at such a time when we least think of it, and our
hearts are most set upon them; and especially, the danger that is in them of
depriving us of the kingdom of heaven, if either they be by any unjust means
attained, or our care in getting and keeping of them make us neglect (as easily
they may, and ordinarily they do) the things of the kingdom of Heaven, and the
righteousness thereof. Here then, I say, there is need of a piercing Eye in
the Christian soldier, Ephesians. 4.22 Matt. 13.22.
to see the deceitfulness of these pleasures, and the deceitfulness of these
riches (for such deceitfulness is ascribed to both) to apprehend and consider
in an even balance, together with the present appearing commodities and
advantages, the following evils, that is, the dangers and disadvantages that
attend both: which if we truly do, we will certainly see no cause, whatever
luster the devil presents them in, to dote or set our hearts so far upon them,
as to think them worthy the least sin, to purchase or enjoy them.

2. The second thing required in the time of fighting is a good heart. A
soldier that desires to approve himself, will not shrink back at the
appearance or approach of danger; not be appaled to see another bleed, or die
before him; those that should do so, will never bring credit to themselves, nor
any real advantage to that cause or party they serve.

Now this courage is especially here required: they must be no faint, or
softhearted persons, that will resolve to maintain war against the devil,
against so cruel an adversary: He will be sure to attempt the raising of
Storms; to present bonds, or poverty, or death before thine eyes, if he see
thee bent to go on: and though by Gods overruling power (who has him still in
his chain) he may be restrained from actually bringing any of these upon thee,
yet thou can be no longer fafe, then thou art prepared beforehand, with
courage and resolution to go on, notwithstanding all these. Revel. 21.8
The fearful are all excluded from having any part in that inheritance that we
all desire, and the devil labors to deprive us of: and our Savior expressly
requires in this case, that we hate our own lives, Luke 14.26. John 12.25.
and tell us, that by seeking to save our life, we shall lose it. Job 2.4.
Now this ('it is true) is no easy matter for flesh and blood: Skin for skin,
and all that a man has will he give for his life; such courage is not a thing
that grows naturally in us: we are all, of our selves, like the Apostles, when
yet they had not received that power from on high, and therefore forsook their
Master, and fled from him; yea, we are apt with Peter to seek some base
unworthy shift to save our selves, when such dangers threaten us, and therefore
have need of all the helps that may be, for strengthing our selves, and working
us up to this temper and resolution: and such certainly there are that will be
effectual for this end.

For the fuller manifestation of this, I shall show these three things.

1. What is more particularly to be meant by this good heart.

2. That as others heretofore have had it, so there is a possibility and
grounds for us still to expect it.

3. What particular means are required for obtaining it.

1. Touching the first, we are to take notice, that it is not that which dwells
naturally in any man, but that which is supernatural, and derived from God:
that is, a divine power elevating a man (as it were) above himself, whereby he
is enabled with strength and courage actually to perform and undergo such
things, as cannot be done with mere humane strength; namely, to persist in the
way of godliness, and obedience to God; notwithstanding all the difficulties
and discouragements that the devil or the world shall cast into it, as
extraordinary vexations, and reproaches, and loss of goods, or liberty, or
life it self.

This then which enables a man to this, is not any thing in Nature; this will
be still favorable to it self, and not willing to venture on those things
which are contrary to it, and tend to the destruction of it: it is only that
which is called the finger of God, Luke 11.20 24.49. Col. 1.11.
or power from on high, or the might of his glorious power; in brief, it is
only the Spirit of God, that is, a divine power stamped or imprinted in the
heart of man.

2. Now for the second, that there is truly such a power derivable to men, may
appear hence: namely, from the many several experiments, Acts 4.31.5.41.16.24
that the world has had in this kind, especially from the examples of the
Apostles, and others in the primitive times.

The Apostles we find, at first, while Christ was here on earth, very fearful
upon on the appearance of danger: Peter denied and forswore his Master, and
they all forsook him and fled; but immediately after they had received this
power from on high, they spoke the word withal boldness; being beaten, they
went away rejoicing etc; Acts 4.29. Acts 5.41.16.25.
being in the stocks, they sang praises; being encompassed with infirmities,
and reproaches, and persecutions, they took pleasure in them, 1 Cor. 12.10
Phil. 4.13.
and could do all things through Christ strengthening them, that is, by his
Spirit.

And thus we find, that not only they, but persons also of inferior quality
and condition, did in effect the same things: the Thessalonians suffered the
like things, 1 These. 2.14
of their own Contrymen, as the Churches of Judea did of the Jews, which
sure were many bitter troubles and reproaches: and yet they went on with that
undauntedness in the practice of godliness, 2 These. 1.4.
that the Apostle says, we our selves glory in you, in the Churches of God,
for your patience and faith in the tribulations and persecutions that you
endure.

And to both these may be added the testimonies which the Church-Records
afford, both concerning these, and other Christians immediately succeeding,
about their forwardness in most cheerfully undergoing most bitter and cruel
deaths for the profession of the Gospel.

But it may perhaps be imagined, that this courage and heart they had, was of
the same nature with those other things, that were miraculous, and peculiar to
those times, as miracles, tongues, prophecies, etc. and therefore not now to be
expected.

In answer to which, I shall show you, that this is not so, but that there may
be still from the goodness of God expected the same Divine Spirit, to carry
men through all difficulties with some measure of cheerfulnes, in the service
of God.

There are several reasons to prove this, 1. Some general promises of this
Spirit, considered with the grounds and reasons of them: as

1. Luke 11. from verse the fifth to verse the thirteenth, where it is said, If
you being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father, give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? 2. The
reason whereby our Savior here demonstrates, that God will give the holy
Spirit to them that ask him, is no other but this, constant and importunate
prayers, put up by such persons unto God, as because of their faith and
unfeigned study of piety, may be accounted his children: which sure agrees no
less to these, then to the primitive times.

2. Christ says, simply and indistinctly, He that believes in me, as the
Scripture says, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water, John 7.37.
John 7.37. which in the following verse is expounded of the Spirit: where it
is plain, that Christ promises to believers, and that as a reward of their
faith, the gift of the Spirit, and therefore sure upon this ground it may be
still sued for, and expected by those that are truly such, as well in these as
in former times.

3. Christ promises to them that love him, that is, that keep his words, (for
so he himself there expounds this love) to manifest himself unto them, John
14.21.
John 14.21. and afterward V. 23. that the Father will love them, and both He
and the Father will come, and make their abode with them, that is, by the
Spirit, for that is the thing there treated on.

Seeing then, that men in these times are capable of loving of Christ, and of
rendering obedience to his words, according as they are expressly obliged
thereunto, it appears hence, that the holy Spirit, which is promised by way of
reward to such persons, may be expected by those that are such also in these
times.

And to these testimonies may be added that opposition, which is made and
recorded by all the Evangelists, betwixt John's baptizing with water, and
Christ's baptizing with the Spirit: whence it may be collected, that as John did
dip with water all his disciples that came to him, and desired to be baptized
of him, so Christ does endue with the holy Spirit his disciples, desiring to be
baptized of him, and by ardent and incessant prayers begging so excellent a
gift from him.

2. It has been still usual with all Christians, both in their public and
private devotions to pray for the holy Spirit, that God would give it to them:
which sure, if it had been a gift peculiar to the first times, like as those
other of miracles, that are now ceased, all Christians since, even the most
godly, that have been, might be accused of great error and ignorance, in
asking that of God which they had no grounds to expect: like as if one should
now petition him, to give him the power of doing miracles, or speaking with
tongues.

3. The principal end for which the holy Spirit was given heretofore to men in
the primitive times, and the cause why it was given for that end, has place
still in these times: namely, that men to whom it was given, might assuredly
come to the salvation promised in the Gospel, by being fully confirmed in the
belief of it, and going on unweariedly in the way that leads to it: We had need
now, in reference to these ends, to have our minds illustrated or enlightened,
even after we have heard and received the word of Christ, no less then they
who heretofore had entertained the belief of it, Ephesians. 1.17, 18
and yet still needed the spirit of wisdom and revelation, that they might
clearly discern the mysteries of Christian religion; we have need still of
prudence in managing our actions, especially such as are very doubtful and
difficult; we have need of fortitude in dangers, strength and patience in
afflictions, joy in outward miseries and calamities, and fervor in prayers;
all which are immediate effects of the holy Spirit, not only conducing, but
also necessary for that great end, the salvation of our souls. And therefore
the holy Spirit which can only produce them in us, may be still from the wisdom
and goodness of God assuredly expected.

There was, it is true, a promise, and accordingly an exhibition of the holy
Spirit, that was peculiar to the Apostles times, betwixt which, and that which
is extended to these times, we are to conceive these differences:

1. The former was usually for the manner and manifestation of it visible and
conspicuous, so that the effects thereof, being wholly miraculous, might be
clearly discerned, and acknowledged by others for such; but this latter is
invisible, exercising its virtue upon the minds of those that are possessed with
it so as others cannot certainly, or ordinarily discern it.

2. The former was not so much for the particular good of the persons, upon
whom it was conferred, as for the public benefit of others, and the
confirmation of the doctrine of the Gospel, whilst it was yet new in the world,
but this latter is for the singular benefit of the persons themselves, upon
whom it is conferred, as namely for supplying them with courage under
persecution, joy in afflictions, and the like, as has been showed before;
things which will be always necessary to bring men unto Heaven, and therefore
that, without which they cannot be had, namely the holy Spirit, may still upon
the forementioned grounds be certainly expected.

3. Now touching the third thing prosed, namely, what are the means required
for gaining this holy Sprit, or, as we have formerly expressed it, that good
heart which is requisite in the Christian soldier, though it sufficiently
appear from what has been said, that it is derived from above, and so that
there is nothing in us to produce it in our selves, yet it has been also
intimated, that it uses not to be conferred at random and promiscuously, there
is something on our part required to make us capable of receiving it; as

1. It is requisite that we ask it, and that not seldom or superficially, but
frequently, and importunately, after the example of the importunate widow, or
of him that at midnight went to solicit his friend, Luke 11.6. by both which
parables our Savior would intimate to us, that we are to be earnest and
incessant in our prayers for this divine gift; that we are not to lay aside our
care, or give over our seeking in this kind, if we meet not presently with an
answerable return; God does in the granting of this, as of other inferior
blessings, seem and show himself, as if he heard not, as if he were one that
took no notice of our requests, and that on purpose to make us call louder, to
express more fervency and importunity: and therefore we are to see that our
prayers be thus qualified; that they be not faint desires, or the labor of the
lips, but strong and deep cries of the heart, and being so, we may and ought
with confidence support our selves, that in the end we shall obtain what we
thus desire; considering what our Savior has told us, that God will give to
them that ask him.

2. But then we must see also that we be such persons as the holy spirit is
promised to, and have grounds to expect upon this importunity the grant of
their requests.

All whosoever shall ask, and ask importunately, have not this promise made to
them. God tells us of some, Prove. 1.28. Isaiah 1.15.
that should seek him early and should not find him; and of others, that
though they make many prayers, and stretch forth their hands, and cry with a
loud voice, that is, very earnestly and importunately, yet he will not hear
them.

This promise is made only by our Savior (as has been shown before) to those
that believe, to such as love him and keep his Commandments: and hereupon S.
James tells us, that it is not only fervent prayer, Jam. 5.16.
but the fervent prayer of a righteous man that avails much.

We must then see that we be such persons, such believers, and lovers of Christ
and righteous ones, or else God will say, what have thou to do to make any such
request, to expect any such divine and glorious gift to be conferred on thee?

Yea indeed, so long as any sin, or the love of any unrighteousness is lodged
in thy soul; thou art not only unworthy, but incapable of so divine a guest:
The world (says Christ; whereby he there more especially means those that
refused to believe in him upon the hearing of his words, and beholding of his
actions) cannot receive the spirit of truth, John 14.17
because it sees him not, nor knows him; that is, though the H. Spirit did
clearly shine and manifest it self in Christ, both in his divine words, and
admirable works which he wrought, yet the world was not willing to see and take
notice of it, and therefore made it self incapable of receiving the Spirit:
whereas the Apostles, and some others not shutting their eyes against it, but
willingly discerning and acknowledging the manifestations thereof in him,
became subjects truly capable of it, and accordingly had it there promised,
that it should be in them. John 14.17. men do not use to pour some precious and
costly liquour into an unclean and filthy vessel, much less can it become the
goodness and wisdom of Almighty God, so to do, to pour this spirit, Esaias 61.3.
Acts 10.38.
which is called the oil of gladness, having in it a strengthening and
exhilarating faculty to carry on those with pleasure through the midst of
dangers and difficulties, that enjoy it; to pour it (I say) into their hearts
that have the filthiness of some sin or other still lodging in them.

No; thou must sweep diligently all the corners of thy soul, cleansing thy self
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, before thou can be a fit temple or
habitation for this pure and divine spirit to come into; the persons to whom it
was formerly given, were such as obeyed God, Acts 5.32. and the persons to whom
we find it is promised by our Savior, are such as love and keep his
commandments: keep them constantly and universally, not wittingly allowing
themselves in the breach of one, so that by reason of such keeping, they may be
called righteous persons, that is, such as make works of righteousness their
trade and employment; giving up or dedicating their members, Romans 6.13.
as weapons of righteousness unto God. Such, persons as are thus qualified,
attain (as the Apostle speaks in another case) a good degree and much boldness
in the faith: 1 Timothy 3.13
a good conscience, which is the inseparable attendant of such righteous
walking, being of that virtue in it self, as to carry on a man with courage
through many matters, in which others are often cast down with fears, and hence
Solomon says, Prove. 28.1.
the righteous is bold as a lion: but how much more must the boldness of such
persons be, when besides this testimony of their own hearts (for the
conscience is nothing else but that) there is added, as a reward thereof, and
of their prayers in seeking it, this mighty power from on high; this divine
virtue derived immediately from God, and stamped by his finger in the hearts of
such?

But it may be objected: if we may not expect this Spirit of God, before we
thus keep his commandments, what hopes can we have then, that we shall ever
enjoy it? seeing that without the assistance of this Spirit, we cannot at all
keep the commandments of God in that manner: and besides, if we may keep and do
those things which God requires of us, before the coming of this spirit, what
need will there be of his coming at all, or what cause can we have to desire it?

In answer to which I say there are two sorts of keeping the Commandments of
God:

1. More imperfect, when the flesh is not thoroughly brought into subjection to
the spirit, but the way of holiness even in the ordinary practices of it, as
praying, meditating, repressing of anger, and the like, is in some manner still
unpleasing and difficult to men, though these things be ordinarily performed by
them; in which state so long as a man is, it cannot be expected that he should
fully go through all difficulties, that in the managing of this warfare he is
liable unto.

2. There is a more perfect keeping of them, when a man does not only
ordinarily and constantly observe them, but does this with a kind of pleasure
and delight: the flesh, that is, the remainder of sensual affections which
formerly made them somewhat harsh, and unpleasing, being after a manner fully
mortified, and extinguished in him; so that he is perfectly enabled to overcome
all difficulties.

Now according to these two different degrees of keeping the Commandments of
God, there is answerably to be conceived a different dispensation of the Spirit
of God, or of the assistance of it, as the cause of either.

1. A general and more common and ordinary assistance, such as usually goes
along with the word, and is offered and obvious to all, that are not remiss
and careless, but diligent and attentive hearers of it; and this is that which
is sufficient to work that weaker temper of righteousness, before mentioned,
in all that do not wilfully oppose themselves against it.

2. A more special and extraordinary assistance, which is promised as a reward
of this obedience, whereby a man is enabled to do and undergo greater matters,
then that ordinary assistance could enable him unto; and this is that which is
here to be meant, being not to be expected (as not being promised to any
others) but of such righteous persons, as we have formerly spoke of. They only
that use that former talent well, so as to gain out of it, that stock of
righteousness, which thereby they are enabled unto, are the persons which may
expect, and are capable to be trusted with this great talent, which will truly
make them rich, and abounding in all good works.

Ye then, whose hearts are truly set to serve God; who sincerely desire and
labor, and struggle with your selves to do his will in all things that are
made known to you, but yet still find failings in your selves, and some
tediousness, and irksomness in the doing those good things you perform, so
that ye may perhaps hereupon think your selves utterly unable (if you should be
put to it) to go through with those greater hardnesses, of loss of goods,
liberty, life, etc. which you hear is required to come to the kingdom of God.

Let not this discourage or amate you, hold fast that whereunto you have
attained; stand still, that is, persist still in such well-doing, and assuredly
look for the salvation of God; continue your care, and give God no rest, but
cry mightily and incessantly to him for his holy Spirit, this power from on
high.

This is that which he has reserved within his own power, to bestow it only
upon those that thus seek for it in the way of righteousness; and this is that
which he has absolutely bound himself, sooner or later to give to such; and
this is that which where it is given, will make the rough, plain, and the hard,
easy, that is, so far change the nature of things, that both the sense of the
present difficulties thou yet feel, shall be taken away, and the terror of
those things which thou may apprehend as future, shall have no force at all
upon thee: Let not then the experience thou have had hitherto of thy own
frailties, either make thee look back, and give over striving; or despair in
time to attain to a greater perfection: this is that which thy great adversary,
the devil, desires to work thee to, either to make thee from what thou at
present feel, to forsake the way of godliness, or stand at a stay in it.

Rest assured of this; that God can, and will in time make such things not only
possible, but also easy to thee (if indeed thou persist in well-doing) as now
seem unpossible, and are uncomfortable perhaps to thee to think of; and for
sealing thee the more in this persuasion, consider, that as he has bound
himself by promise, so those infirmities that are yet in thee (if thy heart be
indeed sincere, and thou truly labourest against them) they give him the more
occasion for manifesting this his power in thee; 2 Cor. 12.9.
His strength is made perfect in weakness: those that are weak have most need
of this help, and in such the glory of this power, and so the goodness and
wisdom of God most manifestly appears, when by carrying them on through such
hardnesses, as are most troublesome and difficult to flesh and blood; he lays
open, as it were, this otherwise invisible virtue of his Almighty power; Esaias
52.10
He makes bare his arm (as the Prophet speaks) to the eyes of men, so that it
may clearly appear to be done by his strength, and so all the praise thereof
must necessarily redound to him; and hereupon the Apostle, We have this
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, 2
Cor. 4.7.
and not of us: The earthliness or frailty of our condition, whereby we are
naturally afraid to encounter with any difficulties and miseries, makes for the
magnifying of this power which helps us in these infirmities; and the greater
the difficulties are, and the more unproportioned to our weakness, the more
they serve to the honor of this power, and consequently God may be expected to
be the more ready at such times for our support.

Having thus far enlarged touching the courage that is required in our
Christian Warfare, and the means for attaining it: I shall yet further in
reference unto both, and to make us persist without fainting or declining in
the course of godliness, commend to you three particular rules to be observed,
as those which may be very serviceable and effectual hereunto.

First to look upon steddily with the eye of faith, that glorious prize for
which we fight, which God holds forth in his hands to encourage us; and which
the devil by all means labors to keep out of our sight, and deprive us of:

It is that, then which God has nothing greater to bestow, nor we to desire,
Matthew. 5.12. Luke 12.33. 1 Cor. 9.25. 1 Pet. 5.10. Heb. 12.28.
a great reward in Heaven, treasures that fail not, a rich and glorious
inheritance an incorruptible crown, an eternal kingdom that cannot be shaken,
in brief, a condition full of all good things, which our hearts can possibly
imagine, or rather which is not possible for them to imagine.

2. It is most certain in it self, confirmed to us (as the rest of his doctrine
was) by Christ's miracles, and blood, and his rising, and ascension into heaven,
and many visible missions of the holy Spirit thence, and further in a lesser
degree, by those things which the Apostles did and suffered, by the sufferings
of many others since, even unto our times, and by the present and long
continued condition of the Jews.

3. It is assured only to such as go through with this warfare, as not only
fight, but fight it out unto the last: such as endure unto the end, that are
faithful to the death, only to such, and to all such, it is unquestionably
assured.

Thus we are to represent this glorious prize to our selves, thus qualified and
limited: which if we do, the very beholding of it seriously and deliberately in
this manner, cannot but derive strength and courage to us: what hardness and
hazards will men willingly engage themselves in, when the hopes of wearing a
crown, or enjoying a kingdom, is the lure to draw them on; though possibly they
may perish in the venturing for it, or else not long enjoy it when they have
gained it? what tedious difficulties, and adventures will others readily imbark
themselves in, when the wealth of the Indies is looked upon by them, as things
by that means to be attained; though possibly (as the former) they may miscarry
in the voyage, or not enjoy those things long after their return? yea, what
pains will many take, and that in a manner constantly and continually, when
that which is far less then a kingdom, or such wealth, is all the motive they
have, namely some increase of their stock, or fruitful return of the ground?

All these things (it is plain) have virtue in them to engage men in very hard
and difficult matters; And what then? shall we not think there is the same, or
far greater virtue in this glorious prize to make men contend for it with
hazards, difficulties and labor?

What is the cause that men are so bent upon these things? Is it not because
they love them, and esteem them, and earnestly desire them, and see no other
ways of possibly coming to them? Do not those that fight and venture their
lives for a Crown, know, that it is not without such fighting and venturing to
be obtained? and do not those that engage themselves in such long and hazardous
voiages to the Indies, know that the riches that are there, are not otherwise
to be come at? and is not in either of these the high opinion and ardent desire
they have of these things, joined with such a persuasion, sufficient to engage
them (notwithstanding they cannot but know also the uncertainty of their
success) in such difficult undertakings? yea, do not you husbandmen know that
however the season falls out, you must plow and sow, and tend your cattle, or
else you cannot expect your desired increase? and will any of you then fold
your hands in your bosom, when there is some more then ordinary trouble to be
undergone about these things? will you content your selves with wishing that
these things may prosper? does not the knowledge you have of the necessity of
your labor herein, and the high account you make of these things, make you
willingly go through any sharpness of weather, or whatsoever other difficulty
in this kind?

Consider then (I besiech you) seriously with your selves, whether there is not
great reason to think, that this glorious reward held forth in the hands of
Almighty God, and looked upon as certain in it self, and only attainable in the
way of perseverance in well-doing; may not have the same course effectually to
engage you to go through all difficulties: But you (like as the most) are
willing to think, that though these perishing good things cannot be got without
toil and pains, and hazards; yet this rich and glorious inheritance may be
attained without any such trouble, or difficulty; some wishes, or purposes, or
languishing ineffectual fruitless endeavors; some formal outward heartlesse
devotion one day in the week shall be enough to secure you of it: But alas
(Beloved) do not abuse your selves, or rather do not suffer the devil to abuse
you, by possessing you with such undervaluing thoughts of this glorious rich
reward; such as are indeed most corrupt and groundless, and will prove in the
end certainly destructive to your souls: a soldiers life is made up of
hardness and danger, and so is the Christian soldiers, though in another
kind: there is a constant discipline to be exercised, consisting in praying,
and meditating, and exhorting, and watching, and mortifying the flesh; which is
to be done by abridging your selves in many things that the sensual part
inclines you to, though this abridging of your selves should be as harsh to
you, as the pulling out of an Eye, or cutting off a hand: and there is courage
required, not only to make you willing to fight, and encounter with dangers,
and difficulties in the practice of godliness; but to carry you through them,
and make you conquer them; without which, though you make never so good Essays
and beginnings, yet all will prove fruitless and in vain: it is not he that
begins, but that endures to the end shall be saved; yea, not he that
fights, but that conquereth, is promised to be crowned: to him that
overcomes, I will give to eat of the tree of life that is in the midst of the
paradise of my God: and he that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second
death: Revel. 2.7.11.
And he that overcomes and keeps my words to the end, Rev. 2.26.3.21.
I will give him power over the nations: and him that overcomes I will give to
sit on my throne, even as I have overcome, and have sit down on my Fathers
throne.

Thus it is plain; there must be an actual overcoming of all hardships and
difficulties that lie in our way to the crown of life, or else we cannot expect
it; and in this there is a difference betwixt the Christian soldier, and other
soldiers; these, though they are bound to fight, yet they are not bound to
overcome, because it may be impossible for them, though they use all possible
strength and courage; but we are bound to overcome, as well as to fight; and
this implies that both these are in a manner alike possible and certain; the
reason whereof is this, that so long as we fight in this warfare, we have an
almighty power assisting us, and backing us out, and carrying us on, so that it
is impossible that any thing should be too strong for us: but this, I say, is
only so long as we fight, or are willing and resolved to do so, that we have
this Almighty Power, the Lord of hosts thus strengthening us: He does not dowith
his soldiers, as some Generals or Captains sometimes use to do with theirs,
thrust them on against their wills: no; as he needs not, so he scorns to have
any such service done him, and much more to force any himself to do it. Those
that are fearful to go on, or willing to depart from this warfare, they must
not look to be compelled by him; He cares for none but a willing people, such
as are truly willing and resolved to use that strength they have in this
warfare; and such persons as are thus disposed, may assuredly reckon, not only
to find daily more strength, but also certainty to overcome in the end,
through his Almighty assistance: and to make us thus willing and resolved, and
so prepared for this assistance, the very beholding of this prize, cannot but
be an effectual means.

2. Look upon those that have gone before us in this warfare: what extremities,
and difficulties have many of the most eminent servants of God been cast upon,
and how cheerfully have they gone through them? some have had trial of cruel
mockings, and scourgings, and bonds, and imprisonment; others stoned, Heb.
11.36.
slain with the sword; Few, but (especially in the primitive times) were
persecuted for that, for which they chiefly ought to have been honored; and
yet they held fast their integrity, and none of those things moved them: they
supported themselves under all with the hopes of this kingdom, which they knew
could not be come at, without going through with these difficulties, and which
being once attained, would infinitely transcend, and make amends for all: and
what are we then, that we should fancy to our selves a way to this kingdom
made up of ease and softness, and delight? that God should allow us as it were
a paradise here, consisting in the pleasing of our selves, and walking in the
ways of our own heart, and doing what is right in our own eyes; and then
bestow on us another, that is, a true and far more glorious paradise hereafter?

It Is true, we are not through the mercies of God called to encounter with such
hardships, as they were put upon, but we know not what we may be, and we can be
no longer sure, nor safe, then we are in readiness, and still preparing our
selves for them, that is, martyrs in praeparatione animi: and this we are
always called unto, to be dying daily in our selves, to exercise a kind of
cruelty (but indeed a mercy to our souls) in killing all inordinate lusts; in
curbing and contradicting our selves in that which the bent of our hearts, and
stream of this world carry us to; in practicing the duties of godliness
commended to us in the word, how much soever against the hair, or what
disrepute, or disadvantage soever they draw upon us from the world.

This was that which these forementioned worthies were well exercised in,
before they came to these harsher encounters; and without this, they had never
been able to have suffered what they did, but the doing of these things upon
themselves, pulled out the sting from those evils, that were in the power of
others to inflict on them: and thus can we only prepare our selves for this
enduring of the like things which they did; thus only manifest our selves to
have a communion with them, to be members of that body, which they belong to,
and whereof Christ is the head: we must thus far at least suffer with them, or
else we shall not be glorified with them: Christ has no disp^oportioned
members in this body of his, not some that have the tumors of the flesh, bred
by the sensual desire that remain in them; and others that are spiritual
persons, being truly cleansed from all such carnal impostumes, as having that
killed in them, that bred these in them; not some that live after the flesh,
and others that live after the Spirit; Gal. 6.1. Romans 8.1.
but all such as are his, are truly spiritual persons, and walk accordingly,
that is, after the spirit.

3. Look upon the Captain of our salvation, our Lord Jesus Christ: look upon
him so, as not only to behold him, as gone before thee, but as one now that
eyes thee from Heaven; that sets himself to observe how thou demeanest thy
self: it is said, that Caesar's Eye made his soldiers valiant, and so its found
by experience, that the eye of the General, or some great Officer, carries on
some beyond that which otherwise of themselves they would not enterprise: how
much more may the Eye of this General encourage thee, seeing it is not only in
his power to reward thee, but even at this distance, to derive influence into
thee? yea, he looks upon thee for this end; and not only so, but he purposely
heretofore led that way himself, that is, he was made perfect through
sufferings, that he might be the more ready to succor them that suffer or are
tempted, having been in all things tempted as we are, Heb. 2.10.4. 15, 16.
and hereupon we are exhorted to come boldly to the throne of grace.

Oh then whatsoever conflict we shall be engaged in for gaining this crown, let
us remember, that this our glorious Captain looks down from heaven upon us, not
only to observe us, but to help us; though the help which we are to reckon of,
and ordinarily to expect from him, is to be of the same kind with that which he
found himself when he was here on earth, and that is, to be supported in our
sufferings, and not to be exempted from them; his strength being to be
manifested in our weakness, by enabling us to bear, and go through with the
evils and adversities of the world; and not simply to decline or avoid them:
let us then under the pressure of any such evils lift up our eyes toward
Heaven, as Saint Stephen did, we shall see, though not in the same manner with
him, Christ standing ready at the right hand of God, armed with power and
affection suitable, being a priest for ever, Heb. 7.21.
to succor, and support, and carry us on; and this sure being added to the
former, may well be a means to get courage in us, and make us valiant; to
consider (I say) that this our great Captain and Savior both looks upon us,
and is so able and ready to succor us.

And thus I have finished the first part of this Discourse touching the nature
of our Christian Warfare.
Sect. 2.
The second is to be concerning the Weapons belonging to this Warfare, as they
are here generally described.

First Negatively, that they are not carnal.

Secondly, Affirmatively, that they are mighty through God.

1. Touching the first, we are to take notice here, that there are several
sorts of weapons, which may be called carnal.

1. Such as tend directly to the destruction of the flesh, that is, of these
carnal bodies whereof we consist; such as are Swords, and Guns, and the like.

2. Such as as are in the power of the flesh to use, and ordinarily are made
use of by the wisdom and direction of the flesh, though not directly tending to
any such destructive effects, as the former.

That the weapons belonging to this Warfare, as they were managed by Saint
Paul, and other Christians in the primitive times, were not de facto carnal in
the first sense is well enough known, and acknowledged generally by all: that
it was de jure, that they were not so, and so that they ought still not to be
carnal in this manner, may appear from these following considerations.

1. From the condition of the place we fight for, it is no carnal paradise, no
earthly Canaan; such, as others may anticipate us in the possession of, and so
by violence keep us out; but it is the heavenly Jerusalem, the city of the
living God; a place sufficiently capacious of all that desire to come to it,
and alike impossible for any by the immediate or natural force of these carnal
weapons or violence to be kept from it, as it is to be gained by the use of any
such means: yea, the attempting of violence against the servants of God in this
kind, and even the killing of them because they are such, sends them but the
sooner and surer thither: sufferings and not actions of this nature, being the
condition of our future reigning in glory. Romans 8.17.
Romans 8.17.

2. From the nature of the enemies we fight against: they are (says the
Apostle Ephesians. 6.12.) not flesh and blood, but principalities and powers, and the
rulers of the darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6.12.
and spiritual wickednesses in high places. What shall material Swords or Guns
do toward the annoying or repelling such enemies? spirits (all know) are not
capable of being hurt or wounded; and these are the enemies (as we are here
told) that we have to deal with, such as are wholly invisible, and immaterial,
and therefore must accordingly be encountered with weapons and armor suitable,
that is, such as are truly spiritual, and are at large set down and commended
to us in the same place, from verse 13. to 19.

It Is true; men that consist of flesh and blood, are often the instruments of
these spiritual adversaries; and that, as by other means, as counselling, and
persuading and the like; so by applying these carnal destructive weapons to
batter our faith, and turn us by the force of them out of the way to Heaven;
but yet in so doing, they are but still the visible instruments of these
invisible and principal agents, whose efficacy therefore in this kind is not
to be repelled by any the like carnal weapons, for in doing, or rather
attempting to do this, that is, to repress one violence and carnal hostility
by another, we lay our selves more open to these grand enemies; yea, we thereby
plainly declare, that we have received those wounds, which by this means they
labor to inflict on us, namely, a violating of our faith, an extinction, or at
least a diminution of that Heroic Charity, and meekness, and patience, which
are absolutely required in us, and without which we cannot attain the end of
our warfare, the salvation of our Souls; which points me to the third reason.

3. And it is taken from the Laws, that are prescribed to be necessarily
observed by us in the managing of our warfare, and as parts of it; all which
may be reduced and epitomized into that royal one of Charity, which our great
Agonothetles, the Captain General of our warfare has at once exemplified in
his practice, and imposed on us by his doctrine; it is such a charity, as is to
be for the object of it, universal; Enemies, who of all men have the least
right to it, are to be partakers of it, and it is to be for the continuance and
exercises of it, constant and unwearied; such as no injuries must be able to
change or overcome; if our enemies be such as set upon us with curses, the
return we are to make, Matthew 5.44 Romans 12.14, 17, 19, 20, 21
is blessing of them; if they be such, as prosecute us with an inward hatred,
bearing altogether a hostile mind against us, we are to requite, and so labor
to overcome them, by doing them good; if lastly they be such as by their
actions are truly damageable and hurtful to us, using us despitefully, and
persecuting of us, then, though hereby they declare themselves to be the most
pestilent, and worst sort of enemies, we are to recompense them with one of the
best offices which we can possibly do for them, and that is, pray unto God for
them, in whose hands are all things, and who can, not only confer on them
innumerable benefits, which are not in our power, but is also able to change
their hearts, and to make them of evil become good.

These are to be the emanations of that divine love, which the Captain of our
Faith has commended unto all those, that will fight under him, or by his
example, and he has commended them by such a reason, as shows at once, the
equity and necessity of them, saying, that you may be the children of your
Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 5.41
for he makes the Sun to shine on, etc. whereby he in effect tells us, that we
can only by thus doing, become the Sons of God, that is, so as men are capable
of being his sons here, in this life, by imitation and similitude of goodness;
and as it is designed, they shall be hereafter his sons by partaking of
immortality, and his eternal inheritance; whereas if our love be of a lower
pitch, so as to love them only that love us, and do good to them of whom we
have already received, or hope to receive the like again, we are but like other
men, or even like Publicans, a sort of sinful and infamous persons, who did as
much, and therefore are to expect no greater reward, then they were to receive.

This then being the disposition, wherewith the Christian soldier is to look
upon his carnal enemy (against whom these carnal weapons can only be useful)
that is, with a heart full of love, so as to manifest it self in the most
genuine and profitable effects of it, as blessing, and doing good to, and
praying for him, and that even when his enmity is at the highest pitch,
expressing it self in despiteful usage and persecution; what warrant, or
occasion can he have for employing these carnal weapons, namely swords and
guns, and other such mortal instruments to the destruction of others? can the
employment of these in this way be possibly reconciled with the former love,
and expressions of it, that are so indispensably required of us? is there any
evidence or effect of enmity greater, which it is possible for man to execute,
then what is hereby acted, namely the killing of men's bodies, or depriving them
of their present lives and being.

Sure we may well think, what ever credit at present, the use of these weapons
are in, or whatever worldly advantages may be or are ordinarily gained by the
use of them, that it can neither be honorable, nor safe for the Christian
soldier that professes to fight under Christ, and for the kingdom of Heaven to
make use of them in this warfare; seeing in so doing he must needs act against
that royal law of Love, which this our great Captain has imposed on all his
soldiers inviolably to be observed; and consequently forfeit his hopes and
title to that place for which he pretends to fight, as having violated the
condition that is necessarily required for coming thereunto.

2. Now touching the second sort of carnal weapons before mentioned, namely
such as are in the power of the flesh to use, and are ordinarily made use of by
the direction of this part, that is, by the appointment of that carnal wisdom
which is in men; we mean hereby more particularly humane eloquence, Chrysostom.
i^ locum.
and reasoning, holding out worldly allurements, as some present rewards of
riches and honors, or some other way using of flattering persuasions, or
contrarily threatenings, or worldly penalties, as deprivation of liberty, or
goods, or the like: all which as weapons have power to pierce, and make
impression on men's minds, in one kind or other: and all these the Apostle here
disclaims, as things that he no way made use of, though it seems he had some
enemies amongst these Corinthians that traduced him for so doing.

He did not use the wisdom of words, 1 Cor. 1.17
that is, as he after explains himself, not the flattering words of man's
Wisdom, neither did he go about to persuade, 2.4.
with reasons suggested from his own invention, or experience, (as the
Philosophers were wont) but with such as consisted in the demonstration of the
spirit and of power; and for the other way of going about by worldly
allurements and terrors to work upon men; it was well enough known, that as he
cared not for growing rich, or receiving any thing from others by his
employment; so as little able was he to enrich others; and for inflicting
worldly penalties and punishments, his condition was such, as exposed him to
the suffering of them in all sorts, but utterly disinabled him (if he had had a
mind, as he was far enough from having any such) from imposing them upon
others in the least degree: so then we see the weapons of his warfare, that is,
which he used for the overcoming or subduing of others: for converting, or
convincing, or confirming them in the faith; were no sort of these carnal
weapons, and consequently these are not the weapons belonging to such, as will
fight after his example, and manage the same warfare with him, but they are
weapons of quite another nature, and that is, (as he here affirms mighty
through God, etc.

Where, in making this the opposite term to these carnal weapons, saying, they
are not carnal, but mighty, he tacitly implies, that all these carnal weapons
are not mighty, but infirm and weak; and this indeed may seem a Paradox, as
many other things do, that are affirmed in the word, namely, that those things
whereby we see such great matters daily effected in the world, as the
overturning of kingdoms, dispeopling of Countries, changing of the laws and
government of Commonwealths, and altering religions and the outward profession
of them: should yet be called (and so surely of right are to be accounted) but
weak things: for the conceiving therefore of this aright, we must take notice
what the Apostle here means by this weakness (implicitly here ascribed to
them) and that is, not a weakness to destroy, but a weakness to save; not a
weakness to do evil, but to do good; in brief, such a weakness, as implies
them unable both to withstand the force of those mighty weapons the Apostle
means, and to effect that which by the power of these has been, and is still
in some degree effected in the world.

1. These weapons are weak to withstand the force, etc. when the Apostle, and
other his fellow-champions in this Christian warfare, began to make use of
these weapons he here means, for propagating the faith of Christ, and to root
out all Paganish superstition and idolatry out of the world, the world was then
full of these carnal weapons of both sorts, and never raged more in the use of
them, against those that used these other weapons; on the one hand, fighting
against them with bonds, imprisonments, and disgraces, and many cruel and
ignominious deaths; on the other hand withstanding them, and laboring to
uphold the credit of their old superstitions by many eloquent and elaborate
discourses, framed by their Orators and Philosophers, who abounded in wit, and
learning of all sorts; yet notwithstanding all these things, those Christian
Champions by the alone use of these other weapons, that Christ had commended to
them, went on daily conquering and prevailing; that faith they thus fought for,
came in a little time to be extended to, and professed in most parts of the
world, and those corrupt and idolatrous practices in religion, that for many
ages the world generally had been accustomed to, and so could not be but in
love with, which they fought against, came in a short time to vanish out of the
world, and so remain extinct at this day, as if they had never had had any
footing in it.

This shows, as the strength of these Christian weapons, both for propagating
the faith, and overthrowing that which was contrary to it: so the weakness of
the other in both these respects: that they were neither able to hinder the
growth of that faith, they so much opposed, nor preserve the credit and
continuance of those ancient superstitions, they were so much employed for.

It Is true indeed, there are since other superstitions grown up, as namely that
of Mahomet: and the Christian faith has lost footing in many places, where it
once had, but this is not to be imputed either to the power of those carnal
weapons, or to the weakness of these spiritual ones, as if they were unable to
p^^^erve what once they had gained; but only to the neglect and disuse of them:
men began before this apostasy to lay aside those weapons of zeal, and
patience, and meekness, and contempt of the world, by the use of which, the
Apostles themselves had been so victorious, and like the men of this world,
employed their thoughts and set their minds upon the things of it; eagerly
contesting about them, and willingly using what strength it could afford
(though apparently inconsistent with these weapons) for securing to them the
enjoyment of the said worldly things, and so plainly thereby expressed a
greater zeal for this world, then for the next; and so long as it was so, what
marvel, if this alteration follow? seeing things are to be preserved by the
same means, by which they are at first got: so that (I say) it is plain; it
was not through the strength of these other carnal weapons, or weakness of
those spiritual ones, but merely through the disuse of the latter, that those
things have so come to pass.

2. The weakness of those appears in this, that they are utterly unable to
effect that which by these has been, and is still in part effected in the
world, namely to plant or preserve religion in men's hearts: and this the very
name that belongs to them implies, namely that they are called carnal: Religion
is in its nature a spiritual thing nothing else in the general, but a voluntary
unconstrained dedication of the soul and affections to God, and an answerable
outward worship and obedience of him proceeding thence; for the begetting and
guiding of both which, something must of necessity be originally derived from
God, who is a Spirit himself, and can only show us the way of his own worship.
Now all these forementioned weapons being carnal, it must needs be beyond their
power to work or produce such a spiritual thing, as religion is; that which is
of the flesh, is flesh; John. 3.6.
nothing can act beyond its own Sphere.

1. All those discourses which Orators and Philosophers have used, or which are
in the power of men, by the light of nature to continue, are but results of
flesh and blood, bare humane discoveries, which therefore must be held
ineffectual, either to show us perfectly how and wherein God is to be
worshipped, or to make that impression upon our spirits, as to confirm or
quicken us in his service.

2. Those other sort of carnal weapons are far more improper for this end;
namely, to make use of worldly terrors, as Bonds, imprisonments, and
confiscation of goods, for planting or preserving Religion in men: for this
very way of planting or preserving it, is that which directly overthrowes it,
and makes that which is so planted none at all; Religion being a voluntary
thing, a free offering and dedicating a man's self to God.

It Is true indeed, this way of planting and maintaining Religion, is and has
been much used in the world, and may seem to have been very prevalent, and
powerful in respect of those great, and numerous multitudes that are
professors of such religions: as among the Mahumetans and Papists, especially
in Spain and Italy, where a man is not suffered to profess any other manner of
worshipping Christ, then what the Pope professes and allows without the hazard
of his liberty, or life. But as it is certain, that such planting or preserving
of religion, has nothing to support it from the doctrine of the Gospel, or
examples of the Apostles; so is it no less certain, that such way of planting
(what ever show it makes) is altogether ineffectual for such ends: its true, it
must be acknowledged there are many great and numerous multitudes in those
places, which by means of those carnal weapons chiefly, are kept in the
profession of the outward form, and worship of God, which is there professed
and maintained; but their doing thus, is not properly to be called, nor
accounted Religion, that being (as I have already said) a voluntary thing, and
so far only to be accounted Religion, as it is so. Whosoever professing any
Religion, true, or false, out of fear, so as thereby to avoid those losses and
hazards which are threatened to the non-professors, that person by such a
profession is to be accounted to act rather a matter of policy, then of
religion to take care rather for providing for his outward tranquillity and
profits in this world, then for his inward peace of conscience, and salvation
in the next.

Indeed the doctrine or religion of the Papists; as it is for so much of it,
wherein it differs from ours, and which makes it Popery, to be accounted no
other, but the doctrine and traditions, or inventions of men, such as have no
foundation at all in the word of God; so the means which are taken by them for
preserving the credit and profession thereof with men, as penalties, and
imprisonments, etc. are to be esteemed no other, but dictates of carnal wisdom,
or worldly policy; the ends whereof are, not to provide for men's spiritual
interests, or the salvation of their souls, but only for their worldly
quietness and advantage, and some other things especially belonging to their
bodies: it being not possible that true Religion (which is a voluntary thing)
should be planted in men's minds by any worldly force or fears; nor
consequently that the good of men's souls, which wholly depends thereon, should
be any thing advanced by any such means as are made use of in that way; so as
either to begin, or preserve in men such a profession of it.

This then shows, partly the folly, and partly the cruelty of all such
Politicians, for so they account themselves, and there are many such in the
world, others as well as Papists, that make use of these weapons of worldly
terrors, or penalties, in case of Religion; so as thereby to engage men in
such, or such a profession, or in holding such opinions as they themselves
approve of: for the religion or opinion that is by this means attempted to be
persuaded on others, must be necessarily either true or false.

1. If the Religion or opinion be indeed true, which is thus attempted to be
fastened upon others; the party on whom this attempt is made must be supposed
hereupon, either to embrace it, or still notwithstanding these penalties that
are used, to stand out and oppose it.

If the former be supposed, then considering those means can have no force at
all to convince his judgment, or better his understanding, it must needs be
conceived, that his embracing such a religion, or opinion, hereupon is only an
act of carnal fear, making him to profess that as true, which though true in
it self, is false in his judgment and apprehension: and so such a professing,
though it be of the truth, is a doing of a thing against his conscience, and so
an act of hypocrisy, and consequently that, which instead of bringing him
nearer unto Heaven (which is the only end of all true religion and profession
of it) sets him further off the way to Hell, a place peculiarly designed
amongst others, for all hypocrites.

If the latter be supposed, Mtatt. 24.51
namely, that the party still, notwithstanding such penalties, stands out and
opposes; then considering the inclination that is in men to think well of that
cause, for which they see others willingly to suffer hardship, rather then
desert the profession of it; there will be probably hereby begot in men's
minds, especially those that are religiously disposed, (proportionable to
their sufferings) a better opinion of that, though false, which they see so
maintained, and so consequently a weaker affection to the truth which will
thereby appear to be so zealously opposed: For we are to conceive a great deal
of difference betwixt men's sufferings in this kind, and the sufferings of
those that are punished for murder or theft, etc. These latter, are clearly
things evil in themselves, and so accounted and condemned by the consciences of
those that suffer for them: and therefore, though some may be inclined to pity
the persons suffering, especially if their sufferings be extreme, yet none will
be hereby inclined to think the better of these things, or think these persons
examples imitable; but in matters of Religion, or opinions about Religion, it
is not so, that which is true, and seems true to one, may seem false to
another, and while it so seems, the person that suffers for opposing it, or for
denying to profess it, does not that which his conscience condemns him for,
neither gives others just cause to think so of him, but contrarily suffers for
that, which in the judgment of his own conscience is good and right, choosing
rather to do so, then offend his conscience.

Now whiles he does so, and gives others occasion to think so of him, there is
danger rather, that that for which he so suffers, though false in it self,
should gain credit hereby with others, then that truth which he thus opposes
should by this means any thing be advantaged. So true is that of Tertullian, In
Apolog.
Exquisitior quaeque crudelitas, illecebra magis est sectae.

2. But secondly if the truth which this person opposes, be a great fundamental
truth, such as the denying or opposing of it excludes a man from salvation; and
if (as in some places it is used) he shall have therefore the extremest that he
can suffer inflicted upon him, namely some violent death, which rather then he
will consent to the profession of, he willingly undergoes; will not the
inflicting of death in this case (when there is no other cause of it) be
extreme cruelty? can there be any thing more against Christian Charity, then to
destroy (as much as is in man) a man's body and soul at once? and is not this to
do so, to take away a man's life from him, for holding such an error, or
opinion in Religion, with which (it is believed) a man cannot be saved? does
not charity, and reason it self direct us, that in this case, we should use
prayers, and arguments, and persuasions, and if all these prove ineffectual,
yet since God has limited no time, wherein they should take effect, to leave
the person to Gods tribunal, rather then to inflict any such judgment upon him?

2. If the religion or opinion which a man is persuaded to by the force of
these worldly penalties be false, then likewise we are here to suppose that
hereupon, either he does embrace it, or (notwithstanding the said penalties)
still stand out, and deny his consent: if the former be supposed, then the
persons that do so, hereby are doubly the Children of Hell; as both professing
a Religion false in it self, and doing it against their consciences; and so
their condemnation must needs be the heavier: if the latter be supposed, then
they that so stand out, show themselves to be truly virtuous and godly: and
what thing can be more unjust, then to afflict and persecute such persons; to
punish men because they will not profess or believe that, which they are bound
not to do, namely, that which is false?

Thus you see every way the unreasonablenesse and injustice of using carnal
weapons in matters of Religion; how not only ineffectual they are, for planting
any Religion at all (truly and properly so called) in men's minds, but also,
how the using of them plainly manifests the folly and cruelty of all such
Politicians, as do so: their folly using that which is no way proper for the
end, for which they pretend to use it; and their cruelty in doing that, which
either tends to further men in the broad way to Hell, or to molest and disquiet
them, because they will not turn out of the right and narrow way which only
leads to Heaven.

Thus far touching the weakness of carnal weapons in matters of Religion: I am
now to speak of the mightiness of these other weapons the Apostle here means;
though something has already been by the way shown concerning this: but now I
shall more expressly treat hereof, and therefore declare (which I have not yet
done) what we are to understand by these weapons; touching this then we are to
conceive, that the Apostle may have a double reference or meaning.

1. So as to understand some weapons that were peculiar to himself, and the
other Apostles, and some extraordinary persons, and so limited to that time
they lived in.

2. So as to understand such as were common to him and them with us, and so
which are to be extended to all times.

The former were of two sorts.

1. Respecting those within the Church.

2. Respecting Those without.

By the former I mean that extraordinary power which the Apostles had of
inflicting some divine remarkable punishment, on such persons as were very
contumacious, or scandalous professors of the truth, which power, that S. Paul
particularly had, there are many passages to prove in these two Epistles to the
Corinthians, as, 1 Co. 4.21.
shall I come unto you with rod, or in love, and in the spirit of mecknesse? 1
Cor. 4.21. compared with the three verses immediately going before; and in 2
Cor. 10.6. having in readiness to revenge all disobedience: and verse 8th.
though I should boast somewhat of our authority which the Lord has given us
for edification, and not for your destruction, and after at the 13. Chapter and
second Verse, If I come again, I will not spare; and verse 10. I write these
things being absent, lest being present I should use sharpness according to
the power which the Lord has given me to edification, and not to destruction.

Now to this kind of punishment, that delivering unto Satan, which we read of
1 Cor. 5.5. 1. Tim. 1.20. rightly belongs, concerning which we are to conceive,
that the persons who were thus delivered up, were after a manner put into the
hands and power of the devil, to be vexed and molested by him, in such a sort,
as was limited by God, or Christ, or the Apostle himself; namely for this end,
for the destruction of the flesh, and that their spirits might be saved in the
day of the Lord, that is, that the devil might afflict the flesh of such a
person, and by little and little bring him near to death, and yet in the mean
time, leave him some space of repentance, and of praying and seeking unto God;
for though Satan greedily gape after man's destruction, yet there may be some
limits set him by God in afflicting one given into his power, which he shall
not have ability to exceed; as we find, God first permitted to Satan all
things belonging to Job, but so that he should not touch his body, and
afterward he permitted him his body too, but with exception of his life, that
he should not take that away: and the use we are to conceive, that this power,
and sort of punishing, (as it was managed by the hands of the Apostle) served
for, was at once to assert his authority, and consequently the credit and
importance of what he taught; and also to subdue such contumacious and
scandalous persons as it was exercised upon, from such their wickedness. Now
concerning this power of delivering unto Satan; it will be fit to observe these
two things.

1. That as the Apostle had the power of inflicting this punishment, so he had
no doubt also the power of removing it; yea, we are to think much rather, that
he had this, in as much as the Spirit of Christ inclines rather to acts of
goodness then of severity, and to save rather then to destroy: therefore we
are to conceive, that if any thus punished did seasonably repent, he might
through the Apostles prayers be freed from that punishment and healed; seeing
the Apostles also had power over evil spirits, and the gifts of healing,
whereupon many seem to be of opinion, that the incestuous person spoke of in
the 1 Cor. 5. had this punishment pardoned to him, and that those words 2 Cor.
2.5. belong to him.

2. It is credible, that this power was common then to very few with the
Apostle, and perhaps not to any, besides the other Apostles.

1. Because it is otherwise rather agreeable; to God and Christ, to confer the
power of doing good to men, then of doing them hurt, and rather by saving
miracles and such as contained in them real benefits, to commend the saving
doctrine of the Gospel to the world, then by such miracles as were hurtful to
man: for to inflict blindness, or lamenesse, or some other kind of disease,
is possible for Satan, and by his help for his servants to do so, as namely for
sorcerers and witches, but to restore sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf,
feet to the lame, health to the sick, and that by a word; that is the property
of divine virtue and goodness: whence also we find Christ to have healed
great numbers of men, and to have freed them from devils, diseases, and other
kind of afflictions, but hardly to have done any such miracle, which in any
manner was hurtful to men.

As for that which may be objected here of the Gadarens swine driven by the
dev^l into the sea upon Christ's allowance, Matthew. 8.30
we are to take notice, that it is not to be reckoned so much the act of
Christ, as his simple permission; and that not merely of his own accord, but
being thereunto entreated by the devils: besides, they to whom this loss did
accrue, were without doubt persons most worthy of it, and withal, that loss
might have brought them greater profit, if they would have made that use of
that occasion, which they might have done: it is true therefore, that almost
all Christ's miracles were truly wholesome to men, and as so many benefits
conferred on them, whereupon Peter says, that Christ went up and down, doing
good, Acts 10.38
and healing all that were possessed with the devil.

2. We are also for this reason to think, that this power was common but to a
few, namely, lest otherwise it might easily have been abused, and sometimes
been made the instrument of wrath and revenge, or at least of unseasonable
severity: All had not so great wisdom as Paul and the other Apostles, so as to
know on what persons, and in what nick of time, and with what measure to
inflict such punishments: all had not the like meekness and long animity with
him, or them: we may see by the fore-alleadged testimonies how hardly Paul
could be induced to make use of that severity which he had in his power: they
therefore who hold, that this power was then common to the Pastors of Churches,
have no true ground to support their opinion, yea it is evidently against
reason so to think: Paul sure had had but little need, when he was willing to
challenge that power to himself, so carefully to prevent the suspicion of
arrogance in so doing, if that his had bin also common to the elders of the
Corinthians, and every where else usual in the Church: and though in the 1 Cor.
5. he would have the consent of the Church to concur toward the delivering
of the incestuous person to Satan; 1 Cor. 5.3.4
yet he ascribes the decree of delivering that person to Satan, not to that
Church, but only to himself, and so attributes the effect it self of that thing
only to himself, and to the power of the Lord Jesus Christ; like as also he
does not prescribe, that Hymeneus and Alexander should be delivered by Timothy
to Satan, 2 Timothy 1.20
but says that he himself had delivered them.

Wherefore we are to think this power to have expired with the Apostles, and
with other extraordinary divine persons, like them: so far is it from belonging
to an ordinary power, and that which at present is remaining in the Church.

2. Now touching the second sort of weapons peculiarly limited to the Apostles
and their times, which respected those without the Church; we understand
thereby, the working of miracles, and speaking with tongues, and the like,
which were for a sign, 1 Cor. 14.22
not to them that believed, but to them that believed not.

By the power of these it was chiefly, that the world came so quickly to be
subdued, and brought in obedience to the Faith; when it saw those men who were
the preachers of this faith (though otherwise of like infirmities with others)
assisted with such a divine power, as to alter the course of nature, and do
those things which all the powers of the world combined together could not
effect: how must not they hereupon but be convinced to believe, that what these
men preached (unless they would be so unreasonable, as to imagine that God
whom all naturally acknowledge to be most true and good should lend that power,
which he affords to no others, to liars and deceivers) was no other but the
truth of God?

Now as by these miracles it chiefly was, that the world came to be convinced
into a belief of the Christian Faith; so they were necessarily then required
for procuring credit to the Gospel, and for working the world to a submission
to it.

The Gospel was then in respect of the most material parts of it, a thing quite
new, and unheard of before; and it is the fashion of men, to entertain new
things in this kind, with some prejudice, withal to express such a love and
reverence to things they have been long accustomed to, as not to suffer
themselves easily to be removed from them.

Besides, the world was then generally possessed with many false religions, and
corrupt idolatrous worships, which being as contrary to the Gospel as darkness
is to light, could not but make their minds more enraged, and opposite to the
entertainment of it: And further, besides all this, many such things are
affirmed therein, namely in the doctrine of the Gospel, as exceed humane reason
and understanding; and some things hereby are required to be taken away, which
were known before, either to have been appointed or at least allowed of by God,
and which to that time had remained without any change or alteration: so that
in all these respects, that power of miracles was then requisite; that it might
fully appear (against all these grounds of prejudice) that what the Apostles
preached to the world, had indeed (as they affirmed) God for the Author of it.

And upon the same grounds we are to ^onceive, that now there is no need of
^hese miracles, nor any just reason, why any should expect them, or imagine any
^ecessity to have had them continued ^ntil these times: for besides, that the
Gospel is no longer new,

1. There are extant still permanent ef^ects of the former miracles wherewith
^t was at first confirmed, as namely the ^ontinuance of the profession of it in
most ^arts of the world; notwithstanding the ^anifold persecutions that have
been ^uccessively used against those who pro^essed it: the readiness that has
been in many and still is and may be supposed in some, to seal such profession
with their blood. Besides, we see, the real accomplishment of such things, as
were divinely therein foretold, as the destruction and dispersion of the Jews,
and the spreading of Chri^an Religion into all parts; which we read not of any
other Religion that either at present is, or ever has been in the world: So
that the former miracles thus remaining in their effects, there can be no need
of, nor cause why, any should now desire other miracles, that is, still to have
new ones.

2. It could have been no way convenient, that the power of doing miracles
should have been perpetually continued in the Church of Christ; for such
continuance would rather have indeed thwarted with the nature of Religion, and
been a hinderance to the right exe^cises of it, then truly advanced either it,
or these; it would have detracted from the worth or merit (as some speak) of
faith, neither would there hereby have been left any difference betwixt those
that are inclineable to virtue, or that are by opposite considerations
seasonably suggested to them to be persuaded to it, and those that are
obstinately averse from it, and not by any such considerations to be wrought
upon (which difference of persons, that there naturally is, through the use or
neglect of those commons helps, which God affords universally to men, not only
experience testifies, but also our Savior himself implicitly confirms; and
that, as where he puts this difference betwixt persons that were not yet
seasoned with his doctrine, that there was one sort, that did evil, and
therefore hated the light, and was not willing to come to him; John 3.19, 20,
21.
and that there was another sort, that did the truth, and therefore came to the
light, that is, to partake and be guided by the light of his doctrine: so by
those other notes or titles wherewith he distinguishes the foresaid persons, in
affirming the one sort to be of God, and of his sheep, and therefore to hear
his words, John 8.47.10.27.28.
and follow him; and the other sort not to ^e of God, nor of his sheep, and
therefore not to hear or follow him; objecting not only their not so doing,
but also their not being of God, nor of his sheep, which was the true cause
thereof, as their own proper crime against them:) Now this being so (I say)
that there is, and always has ^een such a difference among men, in re^pect of
a kind of natural, yet voluntary ^robity, or improbity in them, which are ^o
be looked upon, as the immediate ^rounds of their admitting or rejecting ^he
doctrine of Christ, and so of their in^linablenesse, or obstinate averseness
to ^ertue, and the exercises of it, upon the ^pplication of seasonable and
sufficient ^otives made to them: this difference ^ould have been in effect by
the conti^uance of miracles quite disanull'd, and ^ken away; for who would have
been (...) perverse, (if Christ's doctrine or the reaching of it had had
perpetually these miracles joined to it, which would have been as a kind of
continued visible mani^festation of the arm and testimony o^ God) that at
length would not have received it, and set himself to practice the duties
required in it; yet not at all out (...) a love to them, or of the
righteousnes^ and holiness therein prescribed, but only out of a certain hope
of that incomp^rable great reward of immortality, an^ eternal blessedness
therein promised which all cannot but desire; and which should have been by
this means in a manner made as unquestionable and undoub^ed unto all, as the
shining of the Sun (...) when we behold it with our eyes at no^ day.

It became therefore the wisdom of (...) mighty God, so to order things; that
t^ preaching of the Gospel being as a thi^ new and unheard of before, and
exce^ing in many things humane reason, sho^^ have for some time these miracles
anne^ to it; that it might be thereby so fa^ confirmed, as might be altogether
su^cient, for working men that were in^nable to assent to the truth, to the
rec^ving of it, but that the said mirac^ should not be still continued, lest
other wise those that are wholly averse from the truth, and utterly unwilling
to forsake their sins by reason of the present pleasures, or profits of them,
should be by this means as it were forced thereunto. And we are further to
conceive this to be the more reasonable in this respect, namely, that the very
doctrine of Christ, for both the parts of it which are his promises and
precepts is of that perfection, as to contain a certain impresse of divinity in
it, which as a kind of standing miracle speaks God to be the Author thereof.

1. The promise of eternal life, and enjoying for ever unspeakable happiness
and comforts with God himself in Heaven, (to which all the other promises of
the Gospel are to be reduced) savours truly of the majesty and infinite goodness
of Almighty God, being a reward fully suitable to both these, and therefore it
cannot be but the more probable in this respect, that he will thus reward his
faithful servants: wise and liberal Princes being wont magnificently to reward
their diligent and trusty ministers, by giving those things to them which are
rather proportionable to their own greatness, then to the deserts or low
condition of these.

2. The precepts rightly understood require such singular divine expressions of
holiness and righteousness to be constantly in a manner exhibited by us, as
imply not only a full consonancy to that wisdom, and rectitude, and purity
that are in God, but also that no other but he could be the original Author
and requirer of them; so that there cannot be need that the belief of both, or
either of these to come from him, should be still wrought, or supported by
miracles.

And hence we may conceive the reason of that difference of Gods dispensation
in this kind, betwixt the time of the law, and this of the Gospel: then while
that worship or religion of the law was standing, and was of right to be in
force, there were in successions of time frequent and iterated apparitions of
Angels as divine messengers from God, and also now and then in several ages
downwards from Moses, some miracles were wrought for upholding the credit and
authority of that worship: the reason whereof we are to conceive this, that
there were in neither of the integral parts of that religion any such impresses
of divinity, as could of themselves prove God to be the original Author of
them; and therefore there was but need that this defect should be supplied by
the continuance of these extrinsick evidences, of miracles and apparitions of
Angels.

1. The things expressly promised in that religion were only temporal things,
and such as in the apprehension of many, have still seemed to depend on, and be
administered to men by chance; so that when God did really confer according to
his promise those profits on them, as rewards and encouragements of their
obedience, there could not but be danger of their not acknowledging or taking
notice of them, as such; especially when they could not but know, many not
only that were ignorant of God, but also who were notoriously refractory to
him, to abound in the same things. And

2. The very temporary and vanishing nature of these things (all which in
respect of any solid happiness are but as a smoke or shadow) especially being
joined with the former consideration might make them doubt, whether God did
indeed order and appoint them, as rewards of his servants; as being neither
suitable to his own spiritual nature, nor to that unlimited goodness, which
they could not but know to be in him; and so in both these respects, such as
might seem after a manner unworthy of him: and for both these reasons we may
conceive that that supply by the continuance of miracles was then needful to
convince them in this matter, so as to make them look upon these things
promised them, when they enjoyed them as gifts and rewards proceeding from God.

Now because in these two reasons taken from the promises of the law, there is
one thing taken for granted which many (I doubt) will confidently deny, namely,
that the blessings expressly promised under the law, were only temporal
things, and consequently, that eternal life was not then revealed, or in that
manner promised to men; I shall add something, briefly, by way of confirmation
hereof.

The truth of this then I conceive may sufficiently appear hence,

1. That the Old Testament, especially the five books of Moses, wherein the
body of the Jewish religion is contained, affords us no express promise of
eternal life. or of any other blessings then what belonged to this life, In
these places, Ex. 23. Lev. 26. Deuteronomy. 7.28. the promises which God thought fit to
make to that people, are purposely, and most fully, and particularly recited;
and yet there is not in any of them, the least mention of eternal life, which
sure, if it had been a thing then promised, ought more expressly to have been
there insisted on and inculcated, then all the things there named; as
infinitely exceeding them all, and consequently, that which would have been of
more force then all the rest, to have contained that people then in obedience
to God.

2. Because in the New Testament the revelation of eternal life is appropriated
unto Christ, as where it is said, 2 Samuel 1.10.
that he has brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel; and, 1 John 1.22.25.
that life which was with the Father (that is hid in his purpose and decree) he
is said to have manifested to us: and again, this is the promise that he has
promised us, even eternal life: and many other sayings to the like effect.
Besides, there was among the Jews a Sect of the Sadduces, and that somewhat
ancient in Christ's time, which Sect though it was not perhaps very numerous,
yet it had the most of the chief persons, or rulers adhering to it, lib. 15. to
2.
as Josephus testifies; and in the time of Christ and of the Apostles, the
chief of the priests were of this Sect, as may be collected from Act. 5.17. Now
this Sect (as it is well known) did deny the resurrection of the dead, and the
immortality of the soul; which sure, being such persons as they were, they
would never have done, if eternal life had been expressly promised in those
books which were of divine authority with them.

As for that which may be objected to the contrary, touching the opinion of the
Pharisees in our Saviors and the Apostles time about this matter; we may
conceive, that this acknowledgement of the resurrection of the dead and the
immortality of the soul did proceed hence, either 1. the desire of immortality,
wherewith we are all naturally possessed, made them fancy such a future
condition, and so apply some places of scripture (though not truly so
fign^ficant) to this sense; or else 2. being excited into a hope of this
immortality, by the ingrafted appetite and desire of it, they did thus far give
credit unto Christ, as upon his public preaching of it firmly to believe it?

For that they did not before Christ's preaching, believe such a resurrection of
of the righteous or of the dead, as Christ published: the same Josephus fully
testifies in the forecited place; where he tells us, that they did believe the
souls of wicked men to be shut up under the earth in a perpetual prison, and
the souls of the righteous after some time to remove thence, and go into other
bodies: he not adding any thing more touching their faith in this point.

Now notwithstanding all this, I do not deny, but that

1. Eternal Life was in some kind represented, yea and promised under the Old
Testament, but this was figuratively and mystically; that is, in such a dark,
and involved way, that none ordinarily could see such promise, or build any
firm hopes of the thing so promised thereupon: God had it ever (I grant) in his
purpose and decree to reward his faithful servants, even those before Christ's
time, as well as those after, with eternal life, and so the former shall
assuredly be admitted thereunto, for God has prepared for them a city, but
this decree God did not think fit to make known to them, God dealing with them
in this respect, as with Servants, to whom masters use not to make known all
their minds; and contrarily dealing with us, in this kind as with Sons; by
communicating to us the full knowledge of his will, and by particularly, and
plainly acquainting us with his gracious intention of bestowing his heavenly
inheritance upon us.

2. I do not deny neither, but that the servant; of God, under the Law, might
(notwithstanding they had no such promise as we have spoke of, made them) have
some hopes and expectation of a future blessedness, or eternal life; and that
not only excited in them by their earnest desires of it; but also, because they
could not but know, that there was truly such a thing, (it being not unknown to
them that God himself did live such a life, and that Enoch and Eliah were rapt
up into a possession of it) and for that, they could not but also apprehend
such a blessedness most suitable with Gods goodness to bestow; especially,
when they saw many of Gods servants fall short of those temporal blessings,
that were literally and plainly promised to them.

But yet, all this being granted; it remains firm which I have before asserted;
that there was no other, but only temporal things plainly and expreflely
promised to the Jews under the law, and so, that their promises then had that
imperfection in them, which those made to us in the Gospel are free from.

2. A great part of the Precepts which made up the other part of that Religion,
namely, the ceremonial part of it, seem so light and superstitious, and
outwardly foolish and ridiculous in themselves; and consequently so unbeseeming
the Wisdom and Majesty of God; that it could not but be necessary for making
men truly believe, God to be the Author of them, and of that form of worship
wherein they were commanded, that he should by this outward testimony be ever
and anon declaring himself so to own and approve them.

But it may be here (as it is by some) objected, that though the Doctrine of
Christ be truly divine above that of Moses; and so have the testimony as it
were in its self of its coming from God; yet seeing it was always so, even
when it was first published to the world; there cannot but be now, considering
the great and general corruption that has been made in it, through the
defection under Antichrist, and also the many different and repugnant opinions
that are held by the several Professors of it, a like necessity of having the
Authority and truth thereof declared, and ratified by miracles, as there was
formerly, when it came first new into the world.

In answer whereunto I say; that these things being granted touching the
corruption and contrary opinions in Christian Religion, yet the case is much
different in respect of the necessity of miracles, betwixt this and that first
time, when this Religion was first preached: for then, when this Religion was
first attempted to be planted as there were several other Religions in the
world, and that of a long continuance, with the profession and practice of
which, this could not possibly consist; so there were no certain principles
common to this and them, out of which the authority of this, and falsehood or
abrogation of those, might be manifestly demonstrated; yea this religion or
doctrine of Christ did plainly grant the principles of the Jewish Religion
(under which Christ was born, and which was yet in part to be abolisht by him,
and in a manner totally changed) to have proceeded from God; so that it could
not but be fully necessary that the doctrine of Christ should be then confirmed
in some admirable manner, and that God by evident and infallible arguguments
should be demonstrated to be the Author of it: but now, after the defection and
corruption wrought by Antichrist in Christian Religion, not only the principles
of this doctrine of Christ, but also the whole and entire doctrine it self
according to their opinion who acknowledge the foresaid defection, has remained
unviolated in the written Records of holy Scriptures, being so preserved by the
admirable providence and goodness of God during that defection; and to these
Scriptures all that profess themselves Christians, even those who are guilty
of that defection, and acknowledge assent to be due as to the infallible
oracles of God.

Now these Scriptures (we say) are so clear in those things which are simply
necessarily to be known, that the meaning of them cannot but be apprehended by
any who truly desire to know it, and have not their understandings blunted by
their own voluntary fault; and this may appear from hence, that the greatest
part of them were either from the beginning common to the vulgar people, or
sent to such persons to be read and understood by them, who were in a manner
rude, or novices in Christian Religion, and partly involved in many great
errors: such as diverse of those were to whom some Epistles of Paul were
directed, Epistles to the Corinth. and Galat.
and yet in which we find the greatest mysteries of this Religion communicated
by him to the said persons.

Indeed the Holy Scriptures had been written and published in vain, if so be
that every one by reading of them, and using that prayer and diligence which is
possible for him, could not of himself attain the sense thereof, so far as may
be necessary for him to know it, but that, it were necessary (as is ordinarily
by many pretended for maintaining idleness in some, and pride in others) to
seek and receive the menaing thereof from a certain sort of men, as Bishops and
Ecclesiastical Pastors, either severed or conveened in Synods: for it had been
much better (the case being so) that there were no such Scriptures vulgarly
extant, but only that it were commanded that universal credit should be given
to that sort of men, in the knowledge of divine matters, who also themselves by
this means should have had no need of these sacred volumes; but it had been
enough for them to have had the knowledge of divine things begot and preserved
in them by the immediate power of the Holy Ghost: and so we might suppose that
to have been done in all the doctrines of Religion, which the Papists contend
to have been done in many of them, namely, that from the Apostles times they
should be without writing preserved pure, and delivered by perpetual tradition
from one age to another.

But to return; as all generally so far acknowledge the authority of the Books
of Scripture, as to hold that there is nothing contained in them, which is not
certainly most true (when as there is not, nor can be any such certainty
pretended touching their interpretations, who are accounted the expositors of
it) so that perspicuity which we ascribe to them is implicitly and in effect
granted even by those who directly deny it, and still persist in the holding of
many corruptions that are repugnant to the said Scriptures, to wit the Papists:
For whence else is it, that they are not willing to have those controversies
that are agitated betwixt them and us, to be decided only by the Scriptures?
yea whence is it else, that they pretend the interpretation of these Scriptures
is to be setcht from their Church, but only that they know, or distrust, that
there is a plain and evident sense of the same Scriptures that makes against
them? and yet whether they will or no, they are at length forced themselves
also to have their recourse to the said Scriptures, to prove thence that
authority which they arrogate to their Church, without which pretended and thus
seemingly proved authority, they cannot find how they may so much as in show
or appearance, in any manner maintain their false opinions.

Since then it may appear from what has been said, that there are, and still
have been, some common and universally received principles among all
Christians, namely, the Holy-Scriptures, from which the falsehood of such
opinions as are contrary to faith, and hindrances of salvation may be
demonstrated; and since also that the said Scriptures are so clear in such
matters, and by all those that receive them, directly or indirectly, and in
effect confessed to be so; there cannot be any necessity imagined, why miracles
should be continued, or at present renewed for the declaring of what is divine
truth in this kind; notwithstanding the foresaid great defection from and
corruption of it. The Scriptures so remaining and acknowledged, being as a
standing rule, by the conformity or dissonance to which all opinions in matters
of says may for the soundness or unsoundnesse of them sufficiently be tried
and judged of; and therefore as to require or expect other rules or evidences
beyond this, namely, those extraordinary ones of miracles for discerning such
divine truth, would be a tempting of God on our part; so if God should in this
case when he has so sufficiently provided for us in reference to this end,
confer the power of working miracles on men; it would be in him a receding
from that way of wisdom which he has formerly observed, by doing that where no
necessity requires, which only in cases of necessity he has used to do.

But it may be here objected, that we see no such effect that the Scriptures
have, as to keep those who receive and entertain them in the enjoyment and
profession of all necessary saving truths: Christians are still divided by
contrary opinions, and many ensnared in destructive errors.

1. To which I answer, 1. that all points and matters of religion are not of
that importance, as to be reputed necessario credenda, or fundamentals: some
there are (as the Apostle implies in that discourse of his touching days and
meats, Romans 14. to which others of a like nature may be reduced) in which as
men may err without necessarily hazarding their salvation; so differences of
judgment about such matters, if there were that charity which anciently has
been and ought still by the laws of Christ to be among Christians) would not
produce any breach of peace or amity amongst them that should so differ from
one another; so long as upon this supposall so much of divine truth is jointly
received and professed by them, as is sufficient toward the making of them
that thus differ, the children of God here, and so bringing them to the
enjoyment of that inheritance which is designed only for such hereafter.

2. Those errors or differences in matters of religion which have been, and
are at this day either in fundamentals or in some lesser points among
Christians, are not truly to be imputed to any defect in Scripture, as if it
through its obscurity were the cause or occasion of them; for (as the Apostle
says) if the Gospel (which sure is contained in his and other Apostelical
writings now extant) be hid or obscure; it is so only to them that are lost, 2
Cor. 4.3.
that is to such, as by their own wilful impiety or carelessness in seeking,
make themselves incapable of finding and discerning the saving truths contained
in it: but these errors and differences are of right to be reckoned to have
their original hence, namely, from a contempt or slighting of the said
Scriptures, while many are not willing in matters of faith to adhere solely
unto them, or to fetch the whole doctrine of Christ thence; but with great
reverence, and almost equal to that which they pay to these, have recourse to
Councels, and Fathers, and Antiquity, and judgments or confessions of
Churches, counting it in a manner piacular to dissent from or contradict these
in sacred matters: whereas all these ought with wise and sober men to be of no
farther use or authority, but only to acquaint them what was the judgment of
the Church of those times, or of such persons and companies of men as then
lived, or that yet are remaining in such matters; and that we should not
lightly and without good reason recede from those opinions which have been
approved by them: but for any to extend the authority of any or of all these
farther, that is, obstinately to retain some opinions, because they are found
to be approved by the foresaid Fathers, etc. when as the Scripture in our
apprehension, and it may be really makes truly against them: this is to put out
our own eyes and only to see by theirs; yea, this is to put them in the place
of God and their judgment in stead of his word the Scripture, and so is that
which is not only a debasing of our selves into a degree of servility below
that wherein God has placed us, and which indeed he has forbidden us, by
making our selves thus the servants of men; 1 Cor. 7.23.
but is also a direct contempt and slighting of the Scripture, and consequently
that which may expect the falling into errors, both as the effect and
punishment of such contempt to attend upon it; as we see at this day it is
among Papists, and so proportionably with others, that love in this kind to
tread in their steps.

The truth is, as it would be a perplexed and endless way, to go about to trace
or find out divine truth by consulting the writings of Fathers, or written
Canons and Decrees of Councels of several Ages, some of which are certainly
lost, and the rest which are extant are not easy to be got, nor possible to be
read by all: and withal, as it would be a way liable to the same or rather far
greater uncertainty, then that which is pretended by some against Scripture,
for the seeming obscurity of it; in regard those Fathers and Councels do not
only abound in equally obscure expressions, as may appear to those that read
them, and from the use that contrary parties make of them; but also often
contradict one another, and indeed sometimes do also, or at least may be
thought as men to contradict themselves: whereas the Scripture has every
where, (and so is acknowledged generally by all to have) a full and perfect
consonancy with it self: so by so doing, that is, by setting them thus over us
to be guided by their judgment in our assent to divine matters, and as it were
tying our selves up to the rule of their standard in measuring sacred truths;
we should not only be forced to re-admit some things as truths in this kind,
which have been, and that deservedly rejected by the first Reformers; but also
to confess the Reformation or change in Religion made by them, to be in
respect of most of the points of it groundless and unwarrantable: seeing it is
plain, the Papists can, and ordinarily do allege abundant testimonies out of
the foresaid Councels and Fathers writings, and that without forgerie or
wresting for upholding those their opinions and practices in Religion, which
were then, and we think still of right ought to to be, notwithstanding the
credit of such authority condemned and relinquisht by us. They who will but
look into Bellarmines Controversies, or Durants Ritual will find, that there
is hardly any opinion so gross which they maintain, or ceremony so ridiculous
which in their worship they use and practice, which has not testimony brought
for the countenancing thereof from some or other of the Fathers writings.

Now to return from this seeming digression concerning the inconvenience, and
unnecessarinesse of miracles in these times; having before, and partly together
herein shown the usefulness and neces^ity of them in those times of the
Apostles, to which they were peculiarly limited; being then requisite weapons
for subduing the Heathen world to the obedience of Christ: I am now to show,
that there are other weapons something proportionable to those extraordinary
ones forementioned, which are common to our times, and partake truly of that
mightiness for pulling down strong holds which the Apostle speaks of; and
these we may conceive (as the former) to be of two sorts.

1. One, in the use of it respecting those within the Church.

2. The other respecting those that are without.

The former is answerable in some degree to that extraordinary power the
Apostles had of delivering up some sort of Persons to Satan, and it is that
which belongs to the church it self to make use of, namely Excommunication,
that is separating of persons that are scandalous, as Drunkards, Swearers,
Adulterers, or any that live in any sin contrary to the known laws of Christ
from the Company of the faithful; and this separation according to the quality
of the sin, and condition of the sinner is twofold.

1. Imperfect, when one is excluded from having any intimate familiarity, or
conversation with the faithful: yet so as he is suffered to remain a member
still in some manner of the Church, by partaking of hearing the word preached.
This separation is that which the Apostle means, when he requires us to withdraw
our selves from every brother that walks disorderly; and afterward, 2 Thessalonians.
3.6.14. 1 Cor. 5.11.
if any obey not the word, to note that man, and have no company with him, that
he may be ashamed; and with such an one not to eat: and the persons that are
thus to be separated from, are (as these alleged places imply) such, as are so
involved in the habit of one or more sins, that yet there are some hopes left of
their recovery out of it.

2. Perfect separation, when one is quite excluded from the Company and
Congregation of believers, so as he is not any longer admitted or reputed a
member of the Church: and the persons that are thus to be excluded, are such as
obstinately go on in their sins, and suffer all the admonitions, and
reprehensions that are bestowed on them to be in vain; whence it may plainly
appear, that they make no true account of the Commandments of Christ, and so
are not to be reckoned as his servants or Scholars, and therefore are fit to
be excluded out of the number of those that profess themselves such.

Now that there is such a power given and commended to the Church, appears
hence. 1. That the Apostle reprchends the Corinthians for not excluding the
incestuous person from amongst them. 1 Cor. 5.26.
2. That our Savior requires, that he, who being privately and publicly
admonisht and convinced of his sin, and yet obeyes not the Church, shall be
accounted as a Heathen and Publican; Matthew. 18.17.18.
and hereupon says, that he, who is so bound on earth, shall be bound in
Heaven.

And touching both these sorts and degrees of Excommunication, we are to
observe, that this is the alone weapon, which the Church of Christ is
authorized by his Commission in this case to make use of against any such as
walk contrary to the rule, or hold any opinion repugnant thereunto: as for
these other weapons, as namely bonds, fines, imprisonments, etc. which (as we
showed before) are altogether ineffectuall for the advancement of Religion;
they are all of a later date, being invented and brought into the world by the
Spirit of Antichrist, which as it has corrupted the pure and spiritual doctrine
of Christ in other things, with many corrupt and carnal inventions; so it has
instead of this weapon (which rightly used serves for reclaiming and healing
the persons against whom it is employed, that his spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord, and so implies a degree of the greatest charity toward him)
brought in the use of those other weapons which have no power at all to heal,
but only to destroy; and so manifest the greatest cruelty that can be used.

Now the special ends and uses for which this weapon was at first appointed,
and for which it is, or ought still to be continued in the Church, we may
conceive these.

1. To provide hereby for the credit of the Church, and the honor of religion,
and the professors of it; that the enemies of either, nor any other might have
occasion to think, or speak evil of the Church, as if it willingly connived at,
or harbored any unclean or sinful persons in it.

2. That the rest that are members of it might somewhat the better through the
fear of this censure or punishment which is ratified in Heaven, be contained
within the compass of their duty, or the sooner return again to themselves,
upon their beginning to decline from it.

3. That hereby the spreading of the contagion of sin might be prevented; for
as (according to the Apostle) a little leaven leavens the whole lump; 1 Cor.
5.6.
so one such sinner suffered without such censure inflicted on him makes others
liable to be infected by him.

4. That those that are thus wounded may so come to be healed; that is, that by
this means having just occasion given them to take notice of their own
corruptions, in that they are excluded as unwo thy of having any communion with
the people of God, or of partaking of any benefit from his word; they may come
to be ashamed, and so unfainedly reform their ways.

Now the consideration of all this gives us just cause to complain of, and
bewail the constitution of our Church, as it is at present, and has been of
late years: we have indeed, and have had the word of God long amongst us, and
in this respect are happy above many that want it, if we knew how to esteem and
make use of it; but this weapon belonging to the word, and so many ways useful
for upholding the credit of the word, and for the good of those that are
professors of it, is and has been long quite out of use, wholly laid aside
and neglected with us. It was (I know) heretofore, when the Government of
Bishops was standing, sometimes drawn out and employed, but for the most part
the edge of it was turned a wrong way, namely, against some contempt of those
that were then in Authority, for not paying fees, or disobeying the orders of
their Courts, or refusing to observe some petty Creremonies, etc. as for other
great matters immediately respecting God, and tending to the dishonor of
Religion and destruction of men's fouls; as drinking, swearing etc. these were
things, I do not remember, it was ever much employed against; persons that were
known transgressors in these, if not otherwise refractory to their orders,
might have free liberty to partake in the ordinances of Christ, and communion
in the Church, as well as they that were most upright and unblameable in their
lives.

And the matter in this respect is nothing at all mended with us; scandalous
and openly vicious persons of all sorts (if their crimes have not proceeded so
far as to make them be shut up in the Goal, and so thereby be hindered) have
free access into our assemblies, and to our most solemn and sacred meetings:
yea, such our assemblies and meetings are not spotted here and there with some
one or other such persons (as the Church of Corinth was with one incestuous
person) but quite in a manner overrun and overgrown with them: so that all
these evils, for the preventing and curing whereof that weapon of
Excommunication was appointed; are now through the want of it, not only to be
seen amongst us, but in a manner are become remediless: The credit of our
Church is hereby daily impaired, and the Religion we profess is exposed with
strangers and enemies, to scorn and reproach; those that are not yet tainted,
through such impunity are made less careful to avoid the like sins, yea, by
their promiscuous conversing with such scandalous persons, are made liable to
be, and so we see daily they are infected with the same corruptions; and
lastly, those persons themselves come by this means to go on (as we see they
do) all their days without any remorse or shame, which can only work
repentance to salvation; and so they live and die in a most desperate hopeless
condition.

These things are truly lamentable to consider, but alas it is not in my power,
neither is it in your power (yours I mean who are some ways sensible of these
evils, as all good Christians who either tender the glory of God, or salvation
of men's souls cannot but be) to help these things, further then by contributing
our prayers, that God would put it into the hearts of those who have the power
of reforming things in their hands, to employ some of their care effectually
upon this business; namely, that godliness and all things that truly make for
it may be encouraged, and countenanced, and so brought into credit: and
contrarily that all wickedness and impiety whatsoever, and in whomsoever may
be disgraced and discountenanced, and noted with some mark of infamy in the
wilful and obstinate actors of it; that so, they might be brought to shame (as
the word requires they should) for their amendment. In the mean time, it will
concern you who have these desires to do your utmost to counter-act this great
evil and corruption, that is, to make straight paths for your feet amidst this
crooked generation, to take care not only so as to avoid the evil of such
persons you live amongst; but as much as may be, of having any conversation or
familiarity with them; to place your delight in, and make choice of such for
your company and friends (if there be any such, Psalm. 16.3.
as I hope there are) as David calls the Saints that are in the earth: such as
love righteousness and hate iniquity; such as have escaped those pollutions
the greatest part everywhere live in, practizing acts of virtue and holiness;
and that they may the better know to practice these, willingly talk and
confer with others about these things that make for them, you that are such,
or desire to be such, let me exhort you in the bowels of Christ, more and more
to honor such, to desire and delight in their company; to delight in them so
far, as they that are not such, or declare themselves not to care for being
such, may fee, that even for this reason they are not at all delighted in, or
accounted of by you: Thus doing, you may do somewhat toward vindicating the
honor of religion, and credit of godliness; and perhaps toward working shame
in such persons; at least hereby you shall declare to those that are willing to
take notice of it, that though such persons be amongst you, yet they are not of
you; though you cannot avoid having an outward communion with them, yet you do
not own them for Brethren, that is for Christian Brethren, nor so account of
them.

2. There are other weapons proportionable to these miracles wrought by the
Apostles, requisite in all the members of the Church for subduing of others,
that is, for bringing them that are strangers or enemies to Christ in
submission to him, or those that are only titular and nominall Christians, to
become true converts: and they are no other (as we have before insinuated) but
those Christian graces or virtues commended to us in the Gospel, which are
principally required for our selves, to render us heirs of salvation; but have
also a certain secret force of working upon others, in which respect they may
truly be called weapons:

And these we are to conceive the Apostles had together with those miracles,
without which it was not possible that these miracles could have had that
success, which we before showed they had in conquering the world, that is, so
as to work such multitudes as they did, to relinquish all their old
superstitions which they were so long accustomed to, and together with them,
their many sinful and wicked practices which accompany the said superstitions;
and to live ever after not only in the profession of the doctrine of Christ,
but in an answerable practice of all these harsh and unpleasing duties to the
flesh, that is of all these heavenly virtues commended to them therein.

This I say had not been possible, if they that acted these miracles, and
talked as they did in their preaching of such great and glorious things to be
enjoyed hereafter, as a heavenly kingdom and eternal life, should have taken
any other course themselves for coming thither, then what they had so commended
to others in their preaching: If they should have taught men that they must by
patience and meekness, and contempt of the world, etc. expect only to be made
partakers of those things, and themselves in the mean time have expressed
impatience or pride, or worldliness, etc. for why might they not then thus
think and accordingly resolve within themselves? that however the miracles they
see the Apostles do, gave them cause to believe that there were such things to
be indeed enjoyed hereafter, as they mentioned; yet since they themselves did
not take that way for coming to the said things, which they pressed upon
others; it was no way necessary for that end; such person (they might well
think) surely could not but know, what was truly best for themselves, and so
long as their courses were agreeable to theirs, they might without doubt arrive
at the same port of happiness that they aimed at, and had acquainted the world
with.

This I say in all likelihood had been the fruit of the Apostles miracles and
preaching, if they had not had these weapons also: if their lives had been
disagreeing to the Majesty shining forth in the miraracles wrought by them,
that is, if they had been sordid, or worldly, or stained with any sinful
pollution. But we find, they were far of another temper; they did not only
magna loqui, but vivere, they did not only talk of great matters, but live like
men of great expectations; they did not as the Philosophers, speak and publish
exact discourses in commendation of temperance, and contentedness, etc. when
themselves were guilty of palpable intemperance, and covetousness; neither did
they, like as some now, who talk much of another world, and live so as if all
their hopes and happiness were in this; greedily hunting after the pleasures
and profits of it: but they truly acted what they taught; They taught, that
Heaven is worth all that here possibly is to be laid out for it, that this
world is nothing being compared to it; that nothing here is so hard to be
acted, or harsh to be suffered, that is not to be gone through with, out of
hopes of it: and they accordingly showed this in their own practice, leaving no
parts of godliness unpractised; spending their days incontinued and unwearied
exercises of all Christian virtues, notwithstanding the many outward
discouragements they met with; and at length, as occasion was offered, readily
giving up their lives, and parting with this world and all the comforts of it
at once, out of a certain expectation of that which they had so commended.

And by this means especially it was, that the Apostles brought others to have
the like esteem, and expectation of this future condition, and so to take the
same way for coming to it; making them by this means their converts, and
conquering them thus to be their followers in the same way to Heaven, who
before were their enemies and persecutors.

And by this means must we (if ever indeed we would effectually work upon
others) make our attempt upon them, not so much by our words, as by our
actions; not so much by telling them, that these and these things they must do,
if ever they hope to come to Heaven, as by showing them in our own practice,
that we our selves have truly no hopes of coming thither but by so doing, that
is, by expressing that temperance, and meekness, and humility, and heavenly
mindedness, which the Scripture every where commends to us: Si vis me flere,
dolendum est primum ipse tibi, if thou would have another tender of
committing sin, or mourn for it after it is committed, express such
tenderness and mourning first in thy self; if thou would have another
zealous, and careful, and constant in the practice of religious duties, then
first manifest the like zeal and care, and constancy, in thy own performance
of them: This is the only right way, and that which only can be expected to
prove effectual for pulling down of strong holds, that is, for silencing and
subduing all the opposite reasonings and arguments of the flesh or carnal
wisdom: words in themselves are but as wind and so we find it was acknowledged
by a certain learned and acute Philosopher, Rustiin. lib. i^Eccles. hist. 3.
after he became a convert, who being first attempted by some learned Bishops
to submit himself to the profession of the Gospel easily withstood by the help
of his wit and learning, the force of al their arguments; but after when he was
set upon for this purpose by a Christian that wanted much of their learning,
but had a great measure of that zeal and holiness, which it seems they wanted,
he quickly submitted himself, and gave this reason for his so doing, donec
verbis mecum res gesta est, verba verbis opposui, etc. so long as the matter
was only carried on with words against me, I found words enough to oppose and
make resistance; but when once in stead of words, there was virtue and the
power of God brought against me, (such as is truly manifested in the real
eloquence of zeal, and of a sanctified life and conversation) then all my words
and reasons were too weak to withstand the power of this force, I being a man
could not stand out against the divine power of God thus showing it self.

Our Savior plainly implies, Vide Chrysostom. in cap. 10. with Matthew. homil. 33.
Joh. 13.25.
that there is such a secret divine force in these things; as when he says, by
this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if you love one another, that
is, with such a love, as he commended and had expressed, carrying them on to the
doing of the meanest and hardest offices for others welfare, making them
neglect their own outward ease and worldly advantages to promote the true good,
especially the spiritual welfare of others: by this shall men know, that is,
know convincingly, so as hereupon they may come to be disciples themselves, and
admire and magnify him that is the teacher of such love: and so when he says,
Let your light so shine before men, Matt. 5.16.
that they may see your good works and glorify etc. he implies that this
seeing of our good works by others has a power in it to bring those persons
that are yet far off from this, to bear a part with us in glorifying God.

It Is true, all are not to be expected to be so wrought upon, neither indeed
ever were they: the Apostles notwithstanding their abounding in the use of
these weapons, and also the assistance of those other extraordinary ones of
miracles, had still many enemies, such as did stand out contradicting and
blaspheming; yea Christ himself that was the most pure and perfect copy in this
kind could not for all this prevail upon all those that were hearers of his
doctrine, and eyewitnesses of his miracles, and of the continued zeal and
goodness that shined forth in his life: Many have the love of the world so
settled in their hearts, carnal and sensual affections so deeply rooted in
them, that these weapons can make no impression upon them, all the
exhortations, or examples of the servants of God, how eminent soever can have
no power to prevail with them; yea, though one should come from the dead they
would not be converted by him: but yet we are not to conceive all who are yet
strangers, or for the present, enemies to godliness to be of this temper:
there is a difference to be conceived in unregenerate persons (as it is plain,
there was amongst the heathen, and still is amongst the like sort of men) some
of a more flexible, others of a more inflexible disposition to goodness; some
farther off, and others nearer to the kingdom of God, that is, to the admission
and entertainment of those means which can only render a man actually capable
of that place; though who they are that are so is only perfectly known to God.
Besides, there is ordinarily in all, even in the worst sort of men so much of
that divine light which God has made natural to the soul remaining, as serves
to make them own and even tacitly to admire virtue in others, when it clearly
and fully appears; though they are not willing (because of the difficulties and
unpleasingnesse in it to their sensual desires) to be practisers thereof
themselves: and for this reason also, for the most part they labor to obscure
the appearance thereof in others, so as they may not be thought to be what
indeed they are.

Now by this, it may appear that these spiritual weapons; notwithstanding the
great wickedness, and opposition of men against them, are still very useful so
as they can never want wholly of their effect: besides that, which they
immediately and directly serve for, namely the fencing or securing the persons
that have and use them from the wrath to come, there is a further good may be
expected from them, that is, a subduing of ungodliness in some or other; a
vanquishing of them in time to the practice of that piety which yet they are
enemies to; yea, and even in the most wicked, and such as hate to be reformed,
a blunting at least of their enmity and opposition to goodness.

This then lays the greater obligation upon all that truly fear God; such as
are to be conceived to have these weapons in their possession, to be the more
diligent and industrious in the using of them, to stir up (I mean) the grace of
God in themselves to practice vigorously and incessantly those virtues that
they hear daily commended to them out of the word, and which the Spirit of God
has in some measure already wrought in them; not to remit, not to abate of
their care in these things, but daily to abound and grow stronger, and more
resolute in the performance of them; you have heard that the subduing, that is,
the salvation of others depends much hereupon; these things are truly mighty
through God for demolishing the strong holds of sin, for silencing all the
carnal reasonings of the flesh against the practice of godliness, for working
those that yet go on in dishonouring God to join with you in glorifying of him;
in brief, to turn a sinner from the error of his ways, and so save that soul
from death which should otherwise eternally perish: Oh then, if there be in
you, any true zeal for, or care of these things (as sure there is, or else you
are not such persons, as I now speak to) if the glory of God be dear to you, if
your own or others souls be precious in your sights, then slacken not your pace
in the course of godliness; give all diligence to be every day more abounding
in the work of the Lord, more zealous and heavenly in spiritual exercises; more
fruitful in works of rrghteousnesse and holiness: in doing of these things, 1 Timothy 4.16
you shall both save your selves and others; that is, be instruments, effectual
instruments through the power of God for saving others; and so partake in that
honor (which belongs primarily and completely only to Christ) to be called
Saviors, or preservers of their souls. Oh, let this (I say) remember and
awaken you to be unwearied in well-doing; to go on without fainting; that not
only your own, but the good of other souls, even of those perhaps that think
least of it depends hereupon; who can tell, what may in time be effected by
this means? this is certain, you shall give others hereby occasion to come out
of their sins, and glorify God; and if they be so obstinate as to neglect it,
yet your charity herein is not the less, and your so doing shall redound to
the furtherance of your own account.

2. If this obligation lie upon you toward others, thus to contribute toward
their conversion, then you are to conceive your selves much more concerned and
obliged to take care, that you be not perverted, or your zeal any thing abated
by the wickedness of others: As there is a power in these former weapons of
God to effect the good of others and bring them in time in subjection unto God.

So there is an answerable power, or rather a greater (through the natural
inclination of most) in those things which may be called the weapons of the
devil, namely, wicked practices and examples to bring others in subjection unto
him, and even to blunt the edge of godliness in the servants of God: Though
your constitution (I hope) is stronger then to cast off your first Love, and to
be drawn away with them into the same excess of riot, to be partakers with
them in their sins: yet you may easily be wrought through the cunning of the
devil to abate of your zeal and care in the practice of godliness, even by
beholding the sinfulness and number of the ungodly you live among; to observe
so many about you that make no care at all of Religious duties, but practice in
a manner several sorts of iniquity securely and with greediness: This may
perhaps prompt you to think, that you are well enough so long as you are so
much beyond such persons, and so bring this dampe upon you, to make you rest
and content your selves with what you have already attained without ever
struggling to proceed further: But for the avoiding of this, I desire you to
take notice, that as you are hereupon concerned to be the more watchful; so are
you likewise to be the more zealous and fruitful; the more wickedness is acted
in the place where you live, the more is God dishonored, the more is his wrath
provoked against that place, the more souls are still thereby endangered;
therefore this should be so far from making you abate, that it should indeed by
an antiperistasis increase those graces and the exercises of them in you;
seeing hereby only you may help to make up the hedge, and contribute to the
securing of the place from the judgments of God, and their souls that are
hereby the more in danger, from that danger that they are otherwise likely to
be ensnared in.

Sect. 3. To the pulling down of strong holds.
Here is assigned the distinct effect of the power or mightnesse of the former
weapons, that they serve and are sufficient for the pulling down of strong
holds.

For the conceiving of which aright, we are to take notice, that the word
(...), expounded here strong holds; signifies bulwarks or fortresses, such as
are castles and Cittadels, that are made for fortification and defense, and to
withstand oppositions and attempts, and so to secure men that enjoy them from
being subdued by that opposite power that comes against them: and such the
Apostle implies there is to be conceived in this business; some great b^lwarks
or mountains of opposition that lie in the way of the Christian Soldier, to
hinder him from prevailing in his attempts upon others by the use of the former
weapons, that is, from bringing them thoroughly in submission to Christ, and
making them join themselves for the future to him in fighting under this
General; such as will be of great force to retain these persons that are thus
fortified by them, still in their old condition, namely, in love with their
sins, and in their enmity and averseness to godliness, what ever be said or
done for effecting the contrary.

Now what these strong holds or bulwarks are the Apostle seems to explain in
the following verse, which verse (though it be to be joined in sense, or
construing not with this, but with the third verse as the parenthesis wherein
this verse is included shows, and the Greek more fully manifests yet) in
regard, that power of casting down imaginations which he there speaks of is to
be conceived as agreeing to him, by reason of these weapons here mentioned; we
are to conceive to be added as an explication of what he means, by
strongholds, and that is imaginations, or reasonings of the flesh, high and
exalted thoughts, such as learning or worldly wisdom, or the enjoyment of
great estates and places in the world are apt to breed in men. Now that there
are such reasonings that the flesh or wisdom of the flesh supplies men with to
withstand the power of the word, and oppose the force of these spiritual
weapons, which are requisite to make the word effectual for their salvation;
the Apostle implies, saying, the natural man receives (or embraces) 1 Cor. 2.14
not the things of the spirit of God, he has no true love and affection to
these things, yea, he hates and denies them in his heart, and that because they
are foolishness to him, that is, because he looks upon and by his carnal
reason judges them as things altogether unfit and unproper, or rather contrary
to their ends wherein he has placed his happiness, and esteems it to consist.

The things werein such persons imagine the greatest comfort, and welfare to
consist, are to be great or rich or highly accounted of in the world; to pass
away their time with as much satisfaction to their sensual desires as may be;
to avoid the undergoing of any voluntary hardness, further then it is some
ways serviceable to these ends: to all which these things of the spirit of
God, (that is, these invisible future things to be enjoyed in another world,
and the way proposed of coming to them, which is, by not only slightly
accounting, but even contemning all those thing that are of so great and high
account here, by contradicting and extinguishing all sensual desires in our
selves, and by willingly engaging our selves in such duties as are harsh to
flesh and blood, and many ways disadvantagious to our worldly ease and
interests, are thought to bear, as indeed they do, a direct opposition: and by
this means it is, that all such generally are strengthened and hardened in their
opposition against the practice of godliness; they see what they must certainly
lose by betaking themselves to such a course, namely, a great deal of the
honor, and comforts, and ease, and pleasures of the world, but they cannot see
what they are likely to meet with in exchange which will be able to make them
any proportionable recompense for their parting with those things: and this (I
say) is a strong hold to fence the natural man, to make him dwell and stick
fast in his natural condition without ever effectually thinking of coming out
of it.

Now there is a power (as the Apostle implies) in the word, as it is edged and
enforced by these weapons (formerly spoken of) in the hands of the professors
of it, to demolish this hold, to bring in such a person as is thus fortified by
this his carnal reason against godliness, as a captive thereunto; and this is
by lively and really demonstating to him in our actions and practices, that
those things he so much esteems are not to be accounted of, being such as we
cannot enjoy long here, nor carry with us at our removal, that those things he
so little thinks of or perhaps believes not, are things in themselves most
glorious and certain and endless, and such, that as all this world has is
vile in comparison of; so we our selves count nothing which the word requires
of us for coming to them, either truly hard to be done, or harsh to be
suffered; that none of these things but are most just and honorable in
themselves, and infinitely sweetened by the hopes of such a glorious, and
inconceiveable reward: This thing (I say) thus demonstrated, cannot but be a
forcible engine to batter this hold in time in some or other: for we may not
expect (for the reasons before mentioned) that either these, or whatsoever else
can be used will be effectual with all or the most; there are some, that the
God of this world has so blinded their eyes with the mist of these present
carnal things, 2 Cor. 4.4.
that the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, thus held forth does not
shine, makes no appearance at all to them; declaring themselves hereby to be
lost persons; that is, such as are of a hopeless reprobate condition.

But yet (though we cannot hereby expect to subdue all) so long as there is a
possibility by this means of bringing in some; this implies that there is power
in these weapons for demolishing this hold, and that the reason why they are
not effectual upon all, is not truly the strength of this fortress to withstand
these weapons, but a deliberate and resolved standing out in those that are
possessed of it: there being this difference to be conceived betwixt those
attempts that are made in this kind upon others, for bringing them in
subjection unto Christ: and those that are made ordinarily in war, for
conquering them that stand out; the latter usually are successful wholly
against the wills of the attempted, it being the glory of this war to constrain
men by violence to submit themselves and become their captives; but the former
in respect of the nature of Religion ( Christ being King only of a willing
people) can be no further successful then the persons attempted yield
themselves in some kind to be wrought upon, or at least do not wilfully and
maliciously oppose themselves; if they show themselves toward these holy
things, these pearls laid before them, like dogs or swine, contemners or
deriders of them; if by their obstinate and resolute going on in evil, they
proclaim (as the Jews did once) that they judge themselves unworthy of eternal
Life; Acts 13.46.
then they are to be turned aside from, and not to expect any violence to force
them to this submission: this being that which would destroy the nature of it,
and make it no submission, that is, no voluntary unconstrained submission,
which is the only submission that Christ approves of.

But besides this general hold or reasoning of the flesh, which seems common to
all natural men; there are to be conceived some other more particular holds in
this kind intended by the Apostle; such as have a strength more then ordinary,
and are the peculiar fortresses of some certain sorts of persons of the highest
repute in the world, making their subduing, that is, their conversion unto
Christ, usually a harder work then ordinary; and these are nothing else but
those reasonings which worldly wisdom, and learning, and the enjoyment of great
places, or riches in the world suggest to men, to keep them off from a through
submission unto Christ, or obedience to the Gospel.

Now such persons may be considered.

1. Either as they were in the Apostles times, wholly unconverted to so much as
an outward profession of the doctrine of Christ.

2. Or as they are now in our times, being outward professors of it, but for
the most part denying the power thereof, without which they are to be conceived
in as bad an estate as the former: that is persons that have need still to be
subdued and brought into the way of salvation.

1. Touching the former, what their reasonings were in this kind, may be
collected, partly from what the Scripture either expressly testifies or
implies; and partly from what we find recorded in the Ecclesiastical stories of
the times immediately following; the sum of both which may be reduced to
these 2 heads.

1. Such as immediately tend to uphold the credit of their superstitions and
idolatrous worship and customs, that they were to be subdued from.

2. Such as tend to discredit or vilify this doctrine of Christ, that they
were to be persuaded to.

1. Touching the first head they allege Antiquity, that they were things that
they had been long accustomed to, of which the world had had a continued and
long possession; their fathers and forefathers for many generations before had
been professors of them; and why should not respect and credit be given to such
antiquity? why should not we tread in the steps of our fathers, as they have
happily done in the steps of them that went before them? it cannot but be an
arrogating to our selves more then is due, and a detracting from them that
which of right belongs to them, yea an exposing them to scorn and disgrace; to
disallow and cast off that religion, which they so long and close were addicted
to; and instead thereof entertain one so new, as was never so much as heard of,
or mentioned in their days: Lib. 10. ep 61.
Thus Symmachus, servanda est tot saeculis fides, and sequendi sunt nostri
parents qui secuti sunt feliciter suos, sera est and contumeliosa emendatio
senectutis.

2. These ways of worship were generally and universally used; they were not
the practice, and so grounded on the judgment and approbation only of some few
persons, or of one nation, but all persons and nations generally did concur in
the same judgment and practice: Act. 19.27.
This Diana (says Demetrius) that Paul preaches against, all Asia and the
world worshippeth; Thus they had both antiquity and universality to plead for
what they professed; and to this, add a third taken from authority.

3. They were not the professions of the vulgar, or unlearned only, who might
perhaps be mistaken and deceived, but of the greatest Statists; of persons most
learned and wise, and exact in their judgments; and such as were of most
eminent account, and place every where in the world.

Besides they had been so well, and things had so flourisht and thriven with
them under this worship, that great cause they had to have a reverent esteem of
it, and it would be no small folly in them to change it for that which the world
had little experience of, and might think from that it had, that it was more
likely to cast them upon new miseries and troubles, then any way better their
condition.

These or the like we may conceive were the reasonings (or strong holds)
whereby the Gentiles in the primitive times, especially the great ones of them
were confirmed in their love to, and practice of their old superstitions, and
so consequently made more opposite to the doctrine and religion of Christ.
There are yet some other reasonings that served more directly to fortify them
in their opposition to this doctrine; and they were nothing else but the
prejudices and exceptions that they had against it, as

1. That it was altogether a new worship, a thing that the world had not been
formerly acquainted with: may we know (said some at Athens to Paul) what this
new doctrine whereof thou speak, Act. 17.19, 20, 18.
is, for thou bring certain strange things to our ears? and in the former
verse, others said, he seems to be a setter forth of strange gods, because he
preached to them, Jesus and the resurrection: Is there any likelihood, that
that should be true, and worthy to be believed that the world generally for so
many ages together has had no knowledge? may not we well think that if it
were (as is pretended) a doctrine proceeding from God, he would have long
before this communicated it to others, as well as to those persons that are now
the first publishers of it?

2. That the persons, that were publishers and abettors of it, were but obscure
and ignoble persons, such as were no way eminent in the world, or equal for
learning and authority to those that opposed it, and so likewise those that
submitted to it, were generally only of the meaner sort, ignoble and simple
persons of the multitude, who could not consider what was truly for their
honor, and therefore were easy to be persuaded to any thing; but for them
that were wise and knowing persons, and knew how to value their credit in the
world: such as the rulers and the Pharisees, Joh. 7.48.
they every where sufficiently declared their dislike and enmity against it:
and this sure could not but be another great prejudice to fortify such in
their gentilism, and standing out against the doctrine of Christ; that it was
not only a thing new in it self, But that no others generally showed themselves
commenders or professors of it, but only contemptible and obscure persons.

3. That men's minds were every where possessed with hatred against it: as for
this sect (said the Jews to Paul) we know that every where it is spoken
against; Act. 28.22.
yea not only spoken against, but (so far seemed God from owning or blessing
it) those that were the most zealous professors and maintainers of it, met with
nothing but bonds and imprisonment, etc ue ty, or infamous deaths, as rewards
of their service; the world hereby declaring at once its enmity against this
doctrine and the professors of it; and also its judgment of both: that it held
the former as no small crime, and the latter for a sort of the most vile and
unworthy persons, such as were not fit to live in the world.

4. There was another not the least prejudice, which was common both to Jew and
Gentile, immediately respecting the first author of this doctrine himself,
namely, that he (whom his followers pretended) was now in heaven, and had power
(as they affirmed) to bestow a glorious and eternal life after this, upon his
servants, which was the only allective whereby they could hope to draw others
to them; that he when here on earth, should appear to be no other then a vile,
infirm and infamous person; that he should be made subject to mockings, and
whippings, and a wretched death, as his followers have been since, without
manifesting any power he had, either of executing any revenge upon the persons
that so used him, or rescuing himself out of their hands: can it be thought,
that the King of Israel, the glorious Messiah that was so long spoke of by the
Prophets before he came, and had such great and excellent things affirmed of
him; that he now when he was come, should be so far short of those ordinary
kings that went before him, as not only to have no retinue answerable in Pomp
and greatness to what they had: but also be exposed to such indignities, as
use not to befall any save the vilest sort of men? is it likely, but if he had
been indeed such a person, he would either have saved himself from the Cross,
or being upon it, he would (as he was desired) have come down thence, and so
have manifested his power, that his enemies might have believed in him.

This is that reasoning that the Jews heretofore and still to this day make
use of, for fortifying themselves in their infidelity and opposition against
the doctrine of Christ. And thus the great and wise ones of the Gentiles
strengthened themselves in the like opposition: they could not see, how he who
was so inglorious himself (as it sufficiently appeared to the world Christ was
by his messengers constantly preaching of his cross and sufferings) could ever
come to have such a power (as they affirmed he had) of conferring such
transcendent glory on others: neither could they with all their wisdom and
learning apprehend (indeed they rather hindered them in this matter) how outward
sufferings and afflictions, and death, which in themselves, as their reason
told them, was the way to or rather made up extreme misery and unhappiness;
how these things should be (as the Apostles affirmed they were) the certain
road to supreme glory and happiness: this was in their judgment an absurd and
foolish thing to imagine: and so, in this respect, Christ and the doctrine
published by him and his servants, became a stumbling block to the Jews, and to
the Gentiles foolishness, the very consideration and belief of somewhat which
was true of both (as namely that Christ was a person that suffered such great
evils on earth, and that he had taught, that others by the like sufferings must
expect to come to glory and happiness) was a ground whereon their wisdom
built such reasonings as became a strong hold or fortress to make them persist
in their enmity against both. And by all this we see, what several reasonings
or strong holds there were, wherewith men were generally fenced against the
doctrine of Christ; all which were of necessity to be battered down and
demolisht before it could have entrance into their minds, or they be brought
to yield submission unto him.

And to these may be added some other reasonings in the like kind, but more
immediately of the devils invention, that father of lies, having not that truth
in them which the former are to be conceived to have for the ground of them,
namely, those false calumnies raised against the professors of this doctrine;
Tertul. Apol. Minut. felix
as that they were " haters of mankind; that their meetings were for sedition,
or to enjoy a promiscuous satisfaction of their lusts; that they killed young
children, and used sorceries and enchantments, etc. by which means we must
conceive further, that men were still more estranged, and the strong holds
erected against Christ became more powerful and hard to be subdued.

Now I should show you, how these weapons formerly spoke of, in the Apostles
and others hands were effectual in great part for beating down these holds,
for silencing and confuting these several reasonings: but first it will be fit
for us to observe, by reflecting upon those reasons that we have named; who
they are to be compared to, or rather who they are true imitatours of, that
make use of the very same reasons in effect (that is, of the reasons of Pagans,
or unbelieving Jews) for their persisting in any old opinion or custom, or
opposing of that which is newly perhaps discovered; and that it may be, by men
of no great eminency in the world.

Thus the Papists, they plead antiquity of those corruptions of theirs which we
have rejected: that they and their fathers before them have thus believed and
practiced: They plead also universality, all the Christian world at that time
when Luther began to oppose them, and still the greatest part yet hold the same
opinions with them: they plead also authority; many learned Councels and
Fathers heretofore, and at present great Cardinals and Kings, and men that
excel in all kind of learning (as many of their Jesuits do) are not only
professors, but Patrons and maintainers of them; that these their corruptions,
as we call them, have had the blessing of God going along with them; their
Churches at present (as they have long) flourishing in splendor and riches and
high dignities which they enjoy. And to these may be added further, their
usual allegations against that truth we profess: as its novelty when Luther
first published it, where was it (say they) for so many ages before him? what
number of persons, or company of men can we name, that held those opinions
that we do now? and was all the world blind and ignorant in divine matters, til
he opened their eyes? and is it likely, that an obscure Monk, as he was, and
such others as were his Assistants should know better the mind of God, or
meaning of Scripture, then so many learned Bishops and Doctors, as opposed
them? and did not God show sufficiently his dislike, and the world generally
their contrary judgment and enmity against this religion, when the first
professors of it met every where with bonds and imprisonment, and racking and
burnings, etc. yea, as the Jews and Gentiles were the more hardened against the
belief of Christ's doctrine, because it taught such a mean way, so far from
worldly pomp and pleasure to come to eternal happiness and glory; as by
sufferings and afflictions: is not accordingly their prejudice against ours the
greater, because we have none of those pompous ceremonies and ornaments which
make so great a show to a carnal eye to set it off? and lastly, that they may
not come short in that which is worst of all; has it not been the practice of
many of their agents, to seek by lies and slanders to draw or deter men from
the profession of it, by telling them in their Books, that Luther confessed
himself to have received what he taught from the devil, and by casting many
foul and black aspersions upon him and others that were any way active
instruments in carrying on this work against them.

Now in all this, what do they truly do either for upholding their own, or
overthrowing our religion, but what the ancient enemies of Christ did toward
the retaining of their old superstition, and keeping out the admission of his
doctrine; and so by this means show plainly not only what spirit they are of,
even of the same Antichristian Spirit that then manifested it self; but also
what they would have done, if they had lived in those days, and that is, upon
the same grounds have rejected Christ, and condemned and persecuted the
Apostles and other primitive professors, and publishers of the Gospel.

2. There are others, who though they sufficiently see and condemn the vanity
and arrogance of the Papists in using these reasonings, yet still in part by
their own practice help to justify them in so doing; namely such as are not
willing to think well of, or indeed give themselves liberty so much as
seriously to consider any opinion that is against the general received
doctrine of the Church, or contradicts that which some ancient Fathers and
Councels have heretofore held; and therefore by the same course as the Papists
do labor to suppress them; as by stifling their books, or punishing and
imprisoning the persons that are the broachers or holders of such opinions; or
by using some such like worldly policy and power: to which persons I shall
offer these considerations seriously to be thought on.

1. Whether if it were just for Luther to oppose himself, as it is plain he
did, against the professed judgment of all the Churches of the world, upon
this ground, that he had discovered (as he verily believed) some truths of
great concernment to Gods glory and man's salvation; it may not be just in the
like case for other particular Christians as he was, to hold and publish some
opinions that are directly contrary to what is and has been generally believed?

But it may be said, that the Church now being reformed has attained that
perfection which before it wanted, and therefore it cannot be so fit now as it
might be then.

In answer to which, I willingly grant that the Church has attained a greater
perfection; but that this perfection is such, as either to exempt it wholly
from the power of erring, or that the whole Church, or some remarkable part of
it, such as is a Synod or Council representing it, should see more clearly
always in divine matters then some single Christian, I as readily deny; that
which has been done may be done, Joh. 3.8.
and the spirit ((...)) blows where it lists (as our Savior says) even
the Spirit of truth: sometimes, yea, many times we may justly think (if we
consider, besides the confidence in determining, the policies and worldly
interests that in Synods are often acted) discovering that to the world by the
means of one single person, which it conceals from these; and that doubtless,
as well to make it self the more obvious to be taken notice of in the
weakness of the instrument, as thereby to give a check to those affections
which in Synods often bearing sway, make them justly incapable of this honor.

2. Whether it be not very reasonable to imagine, considering that great heap
of corruptions and errors, which is acknowledged generally by all Protestants
to have been settled in the Church when Luther first attempted a reformation,
and which had been the work of the spirit of Antichrist (beginning to act in
the Apostles days) for many ages successively downwards, 1 John 4.3.
to bring up to that height and perfection they were then at; whether (I say)
this being considered, it be not reasonable to imagine, that notwithstanding
all that was discovered by him, or his assistants of that time, there may be
some gross errors (though not so directly and necessarily hindrances of
salvation as some of those by them detected) left still remaining behind, which
others by the assistance of the same spirit which they had, may help to
manifest to the world: the reasonableness of which supposall may be inferred
from these following grounds.

1. That it seems not probable, that the bottom of such a corruption which had
been so long a gathering and was so deeply rooted, should be all at once of a
sudden, or in one age fully discovered, so long as the persons that were
instruments of making this discovery though they are justly to be accounted men
of eminent ability and proportionable piety, yet are confessed to be such, as had
no immediate revelation, nor infallible assistance of the Spirit of God, as the
Apostles had.

2. As in bodily distempers when a disease has been long rooted, and has
diffused its malignity through all the parts and humors of the body, a through
cure is neither possible nor safe, on a sudden to be attempted, lest such a
remedy prove worse then the disease: so in this case, the Church of Christ
having been then so deeply and universally affected with corruptious in a
manner, through all parts of Religion, we may conceit that a through cure could
not without endangering of its vitals, on a sudden be attempted; to have gone
about to have purged out all at once and together, where so many things were
unsound, might have given some occasion to think, that there could be nothing
good or sound remaining, if this discovery had been then improved into such a
full light, it might (considering the gross darkness men had so long lived
in) rather have blinded then helped them in their spiritual eyesight; that is,
rather have made them Atheists, then Reformists.

3. God himself does ordinarily by degrees proceed in his works to perfection,
and even in discoveries of this nature; Thus at first he revealed himself, and
the manner of his worship, only somewhat generally and obscurely to the first
ages, and inhabitants of the world; after that, somewhat more distinctly, and
particularly to Abraham; and yet after this, far more fully and perfectly to
the Jews, his seed, by Moses: all which discoveries were yet (in respect of
that perfect model exhibited in the Gospel) but rudiments, Gal. 4.3.
or elements of the world, as they are called: and for the Gospel, which is the
only full and perfect light in this kind. There was first John Baptist as the
morning star, or dawning before the Sunrising sent to make way for it, by
preparing men's minds through his more imperfect doctrine instilled into them,
for the admission of this great and splendent light; the substance whereof
though it was fully delivered by Christ in his preaching, yet we find, even
those to whom the chief care of publishing it to others was committed by him,
namely the Apostles, through the prepossession that other opinions they had
been bred up in had taken of them, could not by Christ's so teaching it,
sufficiently in all things apprehend it: persisting in the belief and practice
of some things contrary to what they had received from him, till by some other
more particular means they were convinced to the contrary; and so we find the
Jews that at first became Christians, not only still in love with the practice
of many Mosaic ceremonies, all which were of right declared to be void by the
doctrine and death of Christ; but even still in a manner permitted by the
Apostles therein: who could not but well consider what power prepossession must
needs have in them, from that whereof they had had experience in themselves;
and therefore upon this ground, as they did not urge their authority so far, as
to require an absolute and universal conformity of others in all things, to
what they themselves taught and held: so they allowed those converted Jews in
these things to dissent from them, Phil. 3.15.
till God in time might by some other means convince them of the
unnecessarinesse and unprofitablenesse of the said ceremonies: which shortly
after he did most fully, in suffering the Jews Temple (the place appointed for
the celebrating that ceremonious worship in) to be destroyed, and the Jews
themselves to be excluded out of that Country that he had given them, and so
their government to be dissolved. Now this I say, having b^n Gods method
heretofore, thus by degrees and parcels to reveal his truth, and bring men into
a belief and submission to it; why should it not be reasonable to conceive that
he might do so at the time of the late Reformation? that is, communicate such a
proportion of truth to the world then, as was simply necessary, and which the
constitution of that time would admit: but leave still some more for others in
after times to find out? and therefore sure the going about to stifle or
hinder all such productions of others in this kind, as go beyond the latitude
of that discovery that was then made; though it may sometimes possibly keep out
errors, yet it may as certainly be a bar to truth, if ever God offer it (as I
know not but he may and has) by the pains of some single person to make it
appear to the world; and so such course is to be interpreted a resisting of his
Spirit, and so far, a fighting against God.

3. Whether it is not probable, considering the great and general sinfulness
of Christians, even of those that are called Reformists or Protestants, (the
far greater part whereof every where, palpably and resolvedly allow themselves
in the violation of many known laws of Christ, as vain talking, and jesting,
executing revenge, greedily seeking and projecting to lay up treasures on
earth, etc. John 7.17.14.21. 2 These. 2.11
And withal considering that ordinary dispensation, which the Scripture tells
us God is wont to use, either in reference to a clearer discovery of truth, or
giving men up to error; whether these things being considered it be not
probable, that some error, or errors, either are, or have been publicly and
authoritatively maintained, which are to be looked upon both as a root or
spring of such common, and epidemical sinfulness; and also in part as a
punishment of it? Who does not see, that for such opinions as are any way
favorable to the flesh, and men's sensual ease and enjoyments, if there be but
any little seeming pretense from Scripture to ground them on its authority?
how men are most generally ready and willing to believe them? and who may not
but know, that considering the great purity and declared severitie of God in
this kind, God often uses to deliver up such persons to the power of such
opinions, to believe them as divine Oracles of Truth, when indeed they are
nothing but lies and inventions of men? Upon all which grounds, I conceive it
altogether a thing unreasonable which has of late been much practiced, and
which some still approve of; namely the stopping such books, or opinions, from
coming abroad, or having the favor to be publicly known or considered, as are
presumed to to be against some things long and generally received.

Now to return to the consideration of that which we last spoke of; namely the
strength of these strong holds formerly mentioned: the reasonings I mean which
the learning and wisdom of great ones heretofore suggested to them, whereby to
maintain their standing out against Christ, and the profession of his doctrine;
I shall now briefly show you, how these forts were demolisht, how their reasons
were in great part silenced and confuted; and that was by no other way, but by
the use and power of those weapons formerly spoke of. The Apostles and others
then, that had the managing of the said weapons, did not deny what these
opposers affirmed, either as relating to the upholding the credit of their own
religions, or toward the abating the esteem of that which they were to be
persuaded to; that is, they did not deny, but that those Religions of the
Gentiles were ancient, and generally received, and that men of great dignity
and place were Patrons and professors of them; nor that they had had outward
prosperity joined with them: Neither did they deny, that this Religion of
Christ's was then new; not that it was published and professed by mean persons, and
accompanied with the rage and enmity of the world: That the Author of it did
indeed suffer those vile evils by them objected without avenging himself, which
made him seem so despicable a person in the eyes of the world, and that he has
taught such kind of sufferings (having the like meekness and humility to what
he expressed, joined to them) to be the only road that leads to eternal
happiness, and glory.

They did (I say) deny none of these things, neither did they go about by any
the like prudential considerations to commend the doctrine which they held
forth, and so to maintain the side that they were of: which would have been in
effect, only to make the matter alike disputable on either side, so that men
should not have known, where to have settled; but they did infallibly and
convincingly show that all those things being admitted for truths that were
objected, that which the alledgers of them labored to infer thence, namely the
worth and authority of those Religions of their own they stood for, and the
falsehood and unworthiness of that which hereupon they opposed could no way be
inferred; yea, they did most plainly and demonstratively prove, that
notwithstanding all the seeming advantages of the one side, and disadvantages
on the other; the one, that is, those Paganish religions were lies and
inventions of the Devil; and that the other, namely this of Christ's, was a
certain and infallible truth derived from God, and necessarily by all to be
assented and submitted unto.

Both these things (I say) they did most evidently prove and manifest by the
use of the former weapons; for who must not but grant, that that which God
himself disowns and condemns and sets himself against, what ever other
considerations there may seem to be for the commendation of it, is false and
impious, and deservedly to be rejected? as on the contrary, that which he owns
and approves and commends to men, what ever seeming prejud^ce there may be
otherwise against it, is most true and honorable and woe thy of all men to be
received? now God did sufficiently declare both these, when he made bare (as
the Prophet speaks) his otherwise invisible arm of power in the sight of all
the nations, in those stupendous miracles that were acted by the Apostles,
those signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds (as the Apostle speaks) by those he
did abundantly declare (otherwise then was possible by any humane strength or
eloquence) even as if he had immediately in some audible voice spoken from
heaven, that he was the true author and approver of that doctrine the
Apostles published; and contrarily the condemner of that which they opposed; by
those he declared that who ever should stand out, and resist the Apostles
message in this kind, thus by him born witness unto, they should therein not
so much oppose themselves against them, as against him himself, who thus
declared that he sent them.

It Is true; some impostors might through the assistance of the devil do
sometimes some such strange feats as might raise admiration in the beholders;
and work some especially of the weaker sort to give credit to them, in
believing such lies as they broacht; but besides that none of these were any
true miracles, they were ordinarily such as only served to beget admiration,
not to derive any true profit to those that were partakers of them: there was
no healing of the lame, or giving sight to the blind, or raising of the dead;
and further the persons that were actors of them were ordinarily infamous for
some kind of wickedness or other; and did these things for getting themselves
a name, and to gain thereby worldly profits and advantages to themselves. But
here in these miracles that were acted by the Apostles, it was far otherwise:
they were truly what they appeared to be: things beyond the Sphere of nature or
any created power; not only admirable in themselves, but the benefit thereof
was as evident: and for the persons the Actors of them, though therein they
manifested a greater majesty and power to be accompanying them, then that which
any, or all the Kings and Emperors of the world had; namely, such as was truly
divine and of Gods immediate impresse, yet so far were they from priding
themselves herein, or arrogating and seeking any honor or profit hereby to
themselves, that they neglected not the meanest employments whereby they might
be helpful to others how low soever in the world: yea, they did not forbear,
but still made use of these ordinary mean callings wherein they had formerly
lived; as fishing and tent-making, thereby to provide necessaries for
themselves; by which means, as they in part showed, those divine qualities
which they commended to others, of charity, and humility, and contempt of the
world, and withal the necessity and possibility of them; so they did further by
their zeal in propagating that truth which they had published (being
sufficiently conscious to themselves of the want of worldly assistance or
humane learning and eloquence) when they knew before hand, that bonds and
imprisonments abode them; that persecutions and miseries were all the rewards
they were like to expect from the world; by these (I say) they did sufficiently
declare that it was not the power of flesh, but a power mightier then any the
world had, even the immediate power of God and his Spirit that thus carried
them on.

And so we see, they were every way mighty for the pulling down of these strong
holds: mighty through God; it was not an earthly worldly mightines, that
appeared in them, such as it must needs have been, if either they had gone
about with eloquence and learned discourses, or with the concurrent assistance
of some great and powerful persons in the world to persuade men to what they
taught: but a mightines far above these; such as was immediately derived to
them from Heaven, and could not but appear to be such to all that were willing
to observe the workings of it, or would not wilfully shut their eyes against
it. This was that might or power of God, which going along with them in their
preaching made the Gospel they preached (though still it was with some, namely,
such as wilfully hardened and opposed themselves, as foolishness) to appear to
those that were willing to know the truth (as indeed it was) the wisdom of God
and the power of God.

And the effects of this mightiness on others was quickly seen in the world;
those ancient religions, or rather superstitions that so long had had
possession in it, and so many friends and supporters; having in a manner all
the great wits and princes of the world contributing their care and strength
for the upholding of them, and contrarily for extinguishing that doctrine which
by the power of that might was to be brought in: they all in a little time
vanished and came to nothing; and that which was thus opposed daily grew into
more credit and strength in the world, notwithstanding all the adversities, and
discouragements that still threatened the known professors of it.

Tertull. tells us that in his time, In his Apol.
when the Church was yet still under persecution, and the professors of the
doctrine of Christ, in regard of the enmity the Princes and Governors of the
world still bare unto it, had hardly any other expectation, but to be exposed
to disgraces and persecution for the profession of it; yet that even then, the
number of such professors was so great, that they had filled in a manner all
places in the Empire, so that if they had had a mind, or had held it lawful to
make use of their strength in that way, they could easily have overturned that
frame of government that was so opposite to them, by possessing themselves of
the supreme power, and so putting themselves out of the danger and fear of
persecution, and bringing their enemies and persecuters themselves into that
condition; but says, he Absit, ut au^ igni humano vindicetur aut dolent pati
inquo probatur divina secta, the use o^ such weapons in that way they well
enough knew to be contrary to that doctrine they professed, and no way
serviceable for upholding the power and credit of it; which had been at first
and still in part was labored to be maintained and propagated by weapons of
far another nature: such as were less pompous in show but more powerful in
truth, being mighty through God for this end. But the thing I now urge this
testimony for, is only to show the effect that these weapons had for the
actual casting down of all the forementioned strong holds, or reasonings of
the great men in the world; in as much as in so little a time as was betwixt
the Apostles first preaching, and this wherein Tertullian lived (which by
ordinary computation was within a little of 200 years after Christ) there was,
as appears by this testimony of his, such multitudes of all sorts,
notwithstanding the great oppositions and discouragements appearing from the
world, brought in to become subjects unto Christ.

It Is true; the Apostle says of his time and so we may conceive it was in the
times immediately following, and will be proportionably true of all times: 1
Cor. 1.26.
not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called,
that is, effectually called, so as to relinquish, or come out (being wrought
thereunto by the force of the Apostles preaching and weapons that accompanied
it) of their holds, and bring all their high reasonings and thoughts in
subjection unto Christ. But the reason of this is not to be conceived either
any antecedent decree of Gods hindering them, or denying them that power of
giving obedience to the preaching of the Gospel which he had afforded to
others; for as the salvation offered in the Gospel is called a common
salvation; Jud. 3.
so all without distinction, of high, or low, rich or poor, were at first and
still are indifferently invited to come in, and partake of it: the promise runs
in the general, whosoever believes shall be saved, Romans 2.9, 10.
and God is no respecter of persons; but as tribulatioe and anguish shall be
upon every soul of man that does evil; so glory, honor and peace, shall be
upon every one that works good: which being so, we cannot without fixing the
black aspersions of insincerity and hypocrisy upon the most pure and righteous
God, conceive that those whom he so generally thus invites and declares himself
ready to admit, he has before by his unalterable decree, irrevocably excluded
and made incapable of reaping any benefit of this offer.

This then is not (I say) to be conceived the reason, why not many of these
ranks are called, that is, effectually brought in, in obedience unto Christ.

Neither is the reason hereof simply to be conceived the strength of these
strong holds or reasonings, wherewith such persons above others are wont to
fortify themselves; as if indeed they were too strong to be battered and
demolished by the force of those weapons that were used against them; for some
such persons, though not proportionable to the great number of others, were
daily brought in, and submitted themselves as captives unto Christ; such in the
Apostles times were Joseph of Arimathea a great Counselor, and Nicodemus a
Centurion, and Dionysius a Philosopher, and the great Chamberlain of the Queen
of Ethiopia, and Zenas learned in Law, and Luke learned in Physic, and Publius
the Governor of an Island: And so hereby it sufficiently appears, that there
was a vigor in those weapons, for truly pulling down of these Holds, that is,
silencing and vanquishing all such reasonings of the flesh, as the condition of
such persons, namely their learning, or worldly wisdom, or high dignities were
apt to suggest to them. So that neither of these, neither any antecedent decree
of Gods, nor any impregnable strength of the forementioned Holds is to be
conceived the true cause of the standing out of such persons, and why not many
mighty, etc. were called.

But the true reason hereof is this, that doctrine they were persuaded unto,
though it promised many excellent things hereafter, yet it required much
severity and exactness of living at present for coming to the enjoyment of
them: A submission, after the pattern of the first Author of it, to the
causeless reproaches and injuries of the world, and a constant continued
practice of the exercise of godliness, righteousness, and sobriety, and so a
slight care and esteem of those things which are of so high an account in the
world: And besides, they could not but see that the very outward profession and
owning of this doctrine, that then so every where was spoke against, and
persecuted would expose them to the loss, not only of that honor and repute
which they had above others, but also of that safety and outward prosperity
they enjoyed in the world.

Upon these considerations it was, that the most of these persons being willing
admirers, and lovers of the world, because of that dignity, and privileges,
and esteem they enjoyed in it, were not willing to submit to the power and
authority of him that called them: they would not be persuaded, though they
were persuaded, that is, though they had that which was sufficient enough to
persuade and convince them that the Apostles doctrine was from heaven, and that
the certain way to come thither would be for them to profess and submit to it;
yet in regard this could not be done without parting with those great
advantages and ease and privileges they enjoyed in the world, and making
themselves subject to the contrary evils, and hazards from it; they resolved
out of their settled love to these, still to remain in the condition they were
in, rather then make any such exchange.

If they might have had hopes allowed them of enjoying the happiness of heaven
hereafter together with those privileges and emoluments they were at present
possessed of; or if the doctrine commended to them might have been professed by
them without incurring any hazards or inconveniences in this respect, they
would readily have come in and submitted: but seeing that great good that was
promised in it could not be come at but upon such harsh and unpleasant terms;
farewell all; they will put all to a venture rather then so entertain it.

Thus (I say) it may appear; that the true cause why not many noble, not many
wise according to the flesh, etc. are called, that is, wrought to a submission
to the Gospel by the preaching and power of it, is only a voluntary and
obstinate resolution in them, not to be persuaded; not to admit or submit unto
that as truth (how ever proved, and enforced) which is like to be so
prejudicial to them in their worldly interests: and this obstinacy is to be
looked upon, as occasioned by their carnal reasonings before named, and the
grounds of them, namely their outward worldly dignities and high places, etc.
But not as certainly caused thereby: for then this effect would have been
wrought in all others of the like condition; whereas diverse (as has been
observed before) were notwithstanding the strength of them brought into a
willing submission to the Gospel, and so thereby at once manifested the power
of those weapons for the subduing of all such reasonings, and tacitly accused
or upbraided others to have in them an inordinate love of the world, which was
to be looked upon as the sole cause of their standing out and opposition in
this kind.

Thus far we have spoke of those persons that had these strong holds, that is,
some more then ordinary carnal reasonings, which they used for strengthening
themselves in their standing out and opposition against Christ, as they had
relation to the Apostles and their times, when yet wholly they were unconverted
to so much as an outward profession of Christian religion.

It remains now, that I speak of such persons, with relation to our times, as
they are amongst us outward professors; or such as have a form of religion,
but for the most part deny the power of it, living in many known violations of
the laws of Christ; as many great, and rich and learned men do: which so long
as they do, as they are to be conceived to do it by occasion of these strong
holds: so they are likewise to be reckoned as persons that are yet in the
broad way, that is, in a way quite contrary to that which leads to heaven, and
therefore have need as well as the others to be attempted by those weapons that
may subdue them to Christ, that is, make them converts and become Christians
indeed. But yet I would not have this so apprehended, as if I conceived, either
that all such persons were only formal professors and strangers to the power
of godliness; or that their learning, or riches or dignities, and great places
in the world were necessary hindrances to religion, and the things which
certainly do cause them to be such as for the most part they are: there are (I
doubt not, and so I hope still will be) some such as we before menntioned in
the Apostles times, learned men and Governors, and Counselors that are of
Christ's true retinue; and being so, their learning, wisdom, etc. are so far
from hindering them, that thereby they are enabled to be more fruitful in
good works; to do God more honor and men amongst whom they live more good then
others that want them. The thing that we intend, is, that the greatest part of
such persons is ordinarily averse to the life of religion or power of
godliness, and that is those reasonings chiefly which such learning or
greatness suggests to them, that are the cause, or rather occasion of such
averseness.

The former part has been in effect already proved from that of the Apostle,
Not many noble, etc. These words I conceive, being to have a proportionable
extent to all times, though they were immediately spoke of that time of the
Apostles.

The second part is that which is proper now to be spoke of; namely concerning
the reasonings wherewith such persons for tifie themselves against submission to
the power of godliness: and we may conceive them some way proportionable and
like to those reasonings before mentioned of the Heathen Gentiles, that is:

1. Such as they use to uphold the credit of that empty formality, or livelesse
profession of religion wherein they at present live, and which they are not
willing to relinquish.

2. Such as serve to asperse that way of strict and universal holiness and
obedience, they are exhorted, and labored to be brought unto.

1. Touching the former; by the empty formality, and liveless profession of
such, I mean nothing else but their living in the constant and allowed
violation of the known laws of Christ, promulgated in the Gospel, such (as to
omit other more scandalous sins) are those courses of vanity and prodigality,
that many great ones are tainted with; spending their large estates in gorgeous
apparel, sumptuous feasting and entertainment, and a great part of their time
and means in dicing and carding, and other ways of voluptuousness; as if they
were placed here in the world, as the Leviathan in the Sea, only to take their
pastime therein: and such are those ways of vain and curious speculations, and
disputes and exercises of wit, about curious perplexing and unprofitable
questions, such as no way serve, but are rather hindrances unto Godliness; in
which many learned persons wholly in a manner employ themselves, without
bending their studies, as they may and ought, to advance the power of Religion
in themselves and others: and lastly, such are those courses of worldliness,
of heaping and hoarding up treasures for themselves, and their heirs, without
any proportionable laying them out in private, or public good works for the
glory of God, and benefit of others; which is the disease of many rich ones in
the world.

Now the Holds or reasonings, wherewith such persons fortify themselves
herein, are somewhat of a like nature with those before alleged: as

1. A kind of Antiquity and prescription of time for the practicing of them:
they are things that have been always used; this has still been the fashion
of the Gentry and Gallantry of the time, think they that are, or desire to be
accounted for such: and Scholars have always thus exercised their wits and
expressed their learning, and thereby attained honor above the vulgar; think
those that are, or affect to be eminent in this way: and this skill has been
the practice of men enjoying or attaining great estates in the world; thus to
preserve them to themselves and theirs, think they that are willing to take the
same course.

2. A kind of universality: these are fashions that are every where and
generally used, and so have the concurring approbation of all such as so
conform to them for the warranting of them.

3. A kind also of authority: the persons that do thus are not mean and simple
or vulgar persons, but as their condition speaks them, of the greatest note and
eminency in the world, and ordinarily most reputed of for wisdom and
understanding.

And to all these, it may be, they may add the experience they have had of
Gods blessing them in these courses, enjoying, it may be, an uninterrupted
prosperity, and not conflicting with those difficulties that other persons of
a stricter conversation in this kind often meet with.

2. For that way of punctual and exact holiness commended in the word; such as
is to be reputed contrary to the forementioned and many other corruptions:
consisting in walking after the spirit, Romans 8.1.8.15. Col. 3.2. Phil. 3.20. 1
Cor. 10.31 1 Timothy 6.18.
and mortifying the deeds of the flesh, and having our minds and meditations
in Heaven, and doing all to the glory of God, and being rich in good works, in
brief, such as consists in a deliberate and exact doing the will of God in
every thing; and for that purpose, a daily consulting with his word, and making
use of those helps of prayer, meditation, and Christian conferences, commended
to us therein, as necessary for that end. This way (I say) is that which such
persons will be ready to asperse and calumniate, at least in those who seem to
be frequenters of it, or to draw others thereunto, in the like manner as the
unconverted Heathen did heretofore the outward profession of Christian
religion, that is,

First, as some new device, invented by some melancholy or pragmaticall and
over-busie or precise persons; such as trouble themselves with more then
becomes them, and affect to be noted for singularity, having not the modesty to
be content with, and conform themselves to that which is the common and
ordinary practice of the most in this kind.

Secondly, as a way if at all observed yet only in a manner by simple and
obscure persons, such as do not or cannot well understand the extent of their
privileges and Christian liberty in this kind; and therefore it cannot but be
very unfit for persons of such quality as they are, to take them herein for
their examples: If either be to conform to other, it were fit that these
latter that are so far below them come up to them, and not they descend to
these.

Thirdly, as a way most unpleasing and uncomfortable, for men wholly to limit
themselves to the law of God; to speak or think or do nothing but what it
requires or allows; to spend a great part of their time in prayers, and
meditations, and Christian discourses out of the word for edifying themselves
in godliness; to lay out their means which should make them and their Heirs
live in honor and esteem in the world, upon strangers or such as they have no
particular obligation to: these are things wherein as a great part of Religion
consists; So they are ordinarily looked upon by such persons as very harsh and
unpleasant courses, and such as are very unsuitable with those ends of enjoying
worldly repute and profit and pleasures which they have proposed to themselves,
and therefore are so far the more opposite to them.

Fourthly, there are some of the laws of Christ, and which these persons
sufficiently know to be such; yet if we may judge (as I know not but we may) by
their avowed and deliberate practice in this kind, are looked upon by them, as
things below them, that is, as disgraceful and unworthy for them to observe;
namely, those published touching the abstaining from al revenge and contesting
with others, instead where of is commended to us praying and blessing, Matthew.
9.44.
and doing good to those that hate or hurt us, and turning the other cheek to
him that has smitten us; rather then by our opposition to add fuel to his
enmi^y, and thereby increase the contention: who are there almost especially of
these that are, or would be accounted the Gallants of the time, that do not
take a quite contrary course? that are not apt to steem these things rather as
acts of base^esse and pusillanimity then of any ho^our? though in so doing they
charge ^he most gallant and honorable person that ever was on earth, with
being guilty of such baseness both in his doctrine and ^xample, namely, our
blessed Savior: These are those strong holds whereby such persons come to be
fortified in their sins, making them resolutely go on al their days in a
wilful breach of some or more of the known laws of Christ.

And to all these may be added that which is indeed the main strength and
supporter of all these reasonings in them, and of that carelessness or
remissness in observing the laws of Christ which flows from thence, that is,
a secret inward persuasion derived to them, from some common but unsound
doctrine, namely, touching the unnecessarinesse of such precise and universal
exact walking and conforming our selves to the word: that men may be saved and
come to Heaven ordinarily without it; that to rely on the merits of Christ; to
apprehend and apply his righteousness to our selves, (which is that formality
of justifying faith which some teach, and which surely for the nature of the
thing may be exhibited in the last sickness, and that by those that for all
the time before have constantly neglected the doing of the forementioned
duties) that this is sufficient for securing a man of salvation.

This is that common great Engine or Fortress whereby such persons and all
others in a manner that are possessed of it, become impregnable in their holds;
their subduing being in a sort impossible, and so they themselves in this
respect in a more desperate condition then those of the ancient Gentiles the
Apostles had to deal with; so long as it remains un-demolisht in them. And
therefore in the first place, for pulling down all the Strong holds before
mentioned, the attempt must be made here against this which pretends to be
built upon, and have for its ground the word it self: and that must be by
showing that which the Scripture will easily enable us unto, as every where in
a manner affirming it; Heb. 12.14.
Namely that without holiness which is expressed else where by keeping the
Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7.19.
and being new creatures, Gal. 6.15.
there is no seeing of God to be expected: that hearing of Christ's words
without doing of them, makes a man like to a foolish builder, and is a
deceiving of himself: Matt. 7.26. Jam. 1.22. Romans 2.7.
that life and immortality is only assured by the Apostle, to those that by
patient continuance in welldoing wait for it: 2 Pet. 1.9.
That he that wants the divine Graces of Godliness, 2 Pet. 1.9.
temperance, charity, and the rest reckoned up by S. Peter, (what ever
knowledge he otherwise have) is blind, Rev. 2.7.11. and 17.26.
and cannot see afar off. And lastly, that the crown of life is promised not
unto all that fight, but only to those that overcome, that is, their inward
affections and all outward temptations which may be hindrances of doing Gods
will.

Now then; If these things can be reasonably thought to be included in that
reliance or faith, which men are taught and are generally so willing to build
their main hopes upon; or if they be indeed such things as can be transacted
by men in their last sickness: if it can with any truth or reason be said,
that he who during his life and health, has conformed himself more to the
courses of the world, then to the righteous and heavenly Laws of Christ,
having lived in one, or mo such ways as are directly contrary thereunto; is
one that has kept the commandments of God, and lived as a new creature, and
has not been a hearer only but doer of the word, and by patient continuance
in well doing has looked for the glorious reward of immortality; and one that
has had and exercised those divine graces of godliness, temperance, etc. and
lastly; that he is one that has been a conqueror of his affections, and all
worldly intanglements in the course of godliness: If these things, I say, can
be truly affirmed of the forementioned person, only upon his mourning for sin
in his last sicknefle, or strongly and steddily applying Christ's merits and
righteousness to himself: then there will be good reason for men to comfort
themselves, and keep up their confidence at the last what ever course of sin
they havelived in, or what ever voluntary negligence and remisn^sse they have
been guilty of in their life time about their doing the will of God: but if
these things be (as sure they are, if men will not wilfully shut their eyes) to
be reputed (...), things altogether absurd and inconsistent to imagine; namely,
that he that has constantly neglected the laws of God in his life time, is
one that has lived as a new creature and done the will of God, etc. because he
mournes for his sins at last, and applies Christ's righteousness to himself;
then certainly we may conclude that fort to be of the devils and not of Gods
setting up: and so (as indeed it proves) that which is rather intended for the
hardening of men to their destruction, then any way for the furthering of their
comfort and salvation.

Consider therefore I beseech you aright of this matter, and let no practice or
opinion how common or generally received soever draw you away to think or
persuade your selves of that which is so opposite to the plain and express
words of Scripture; especially in a matter of this moment, wherein the
salvation of your souls is so nearly and certainly concerned. Thus this outward
common fort being demolisht, there will be an easier access to those other
more inward and particular forts before mentioned.

Indeed a through demolishing of this out of men's minds (which is only
possible to be done by soundly demonstrating out of the word the groundlesnesse
of it, and so planting the contrary persuasion in men; namely, that there is no
hopes of coming to Heaven, but by constant and universal doing the will of
God) would be if it were accompanied with answerable, that is, an exemplary
carriage of those who set about it; effectual also for the pulling down
together therewith all these other particular and indeed weaker holds which we
have before mentioned: But so long as this is upheld, and secretly supported
(as indeed it is) with the props of some unsound, and corrupt opinions
generally believed and maintained; and so long as we want the use of that
weapon amongst us of excommunication, which Christ formerly bequeathed to his
Church, and which we have before shown to be so many ways useful and
necessary for it: we can have no great hopes by any other means or weapons that
can be made use of so far to prevail as to bring in any proportionable number
of those great multitudes that make profession of, and have given their names
to Christ, to become his real subjects and servants; by giving him their
hearts, and subjecting all their thoughts and ways in obedience to him.

But yet still there is somewhat that is possible for us to do; I mean for
those that are right Christian soldiers indeed toward the pulling down of the
former holds; the silencing and confuting all the reasonings of these great
ones of the world against their submitting themselves thoroughly to the laws of
Christ and so bringing in one or other, as a captive to him.

God has planted so much light in the minds of these persons (as he has
indeed in the minds of all others as they are men) as cannot but enable them to
approve, and even tacitly admire virtue in others, especially when it is
singular and eminent; and besides,

Such persons, like as all others, that make but an outward profession of
Christ and his religion, yet hereby at least implicitly acknowledge themselves
to be under his government, and so bound to pay subjection and obedience to his
righteous laws, which being so

First it may easily be represented to them hence, that all such pleas as are
made from antiquity or universality or authority of men, for going on in, or
practicing such courses as are not consonant to those righteous laws of his
published in the Gospel, are all vain and groundless; for

Can any man profess himself a servant of Christ (as all professing Christian
religion do) and in the mean time not bind himself punctually to what he
requires of him; but conform to what the great men or generality of the world
practice; and not hereupon plainly see, that in so doing, he is not indeed what
he professes, that is, a true but only a mock servant, especially since we are
told, what reason it self cannot but confirm; Romans 6.16.
that his servants we are, whom we obey. Can any man be so unreasonable as to
think that the calling himself a servant to another, or him master, will be
sufficient to make that person own him for such; if so be he do not that which
he appoints, and requires of him, but what others that are indeed his enemies
rather draw him unto?

Secondly, does not this very doctrine of Christ (which such profess) tell
them and all others, that God hides from the wise and prudent that which he
reveals to babes: Matt. 11.25. Luke 16.15. 1 John 5.16. Matt. 7.14. Luke
12.32.
that that which is of high account with men, is abominable in the sight of
God: that the whole world lies in wickedness: that the way is narrow, and the
gate strait, and the flock little that belongs to Heaven. And may they not
hence then rather suspect and conclude themselves to be out of that way, and
none of that flock, because their courses are so generally owned, and
practiced, and countenanced by the most and greatest: then upon these grounds
presume that they are in the one, or belonging to the other, and so draw thence
any comfort, or confidence to themselves?

3. Upon the former grounds it may be further made appear to such persons, that
all those other exceptions of theirs made either against the persons of those
that limit themselves (or are thought to do so) to a strict and universal
walking with God; as being mean many times and inconsiderable in other
respects; or against the way of thus walking it self, as being melancholy, and
unpleasing to the flesh, and which in some of the tracks of it seems
dishonorable for men of gallantry to limit themselves unto, that all such are
not only vain, but in great part wicked and blasphemous against Christ, whose
servants such pretend themselves to be, and therefore the practice grounded
thereon cannot but be certainly destructive and damnable: for what can, or
ought the meannesse of the persons, especially amongst Christians detract from
the credit of the way they go on in; if it be indeed, that which Christ has
prescribed? does not their thus doing, rather justly upbraid the folly and
madness of such great and wise persons, as being so great and wise in other
things, and having the means that they want, to be so in these, suffer
themselves to be outdone in this kind, and so outwitted by such mean persons,
then lay any blemish upon that way it self? Was not Christ himself in his
outward appearance and conversation very mean, and despicable, one that (as the
Prophet says) had no beauty in him? and were not his prime retinue such in
their outward condition, Esaias 52.2. 1 Cor. 9.13.
being as the filth and offscouring of the world? And can it then with those
that know and believe these things, be thought any reasonable ground of
exception against the strict and precise way of serving God (which certainly is
required of us in the Gospel) that those who do so, that is, Christ's ordinary
and common followers, are only mean and inconsiderable persons; especially
when we have so many Items in the word, to mind us of the ordinary
backwardness and scarcity of great persons in this kind, and contrarily of the
comparative forwardness and multitudes of the meaner sort?

Further, touching that which is objected by such persons concerning the
unpleasantnesse and harshness of this way, and the dishonor of practicing some
things commended to us therein: How can such things be objected or imagined by
any who professes himself a Christian, without so far in effectmaking himself
guilty of contradicting his profession; that is, disowning and denying him in
his heart and practice whom by his words and outward carriage he pretends to
submit unto as his Supreme Lord and Ruler? Do not we by our very professing of
the doctrine of Christ declare to the world, (though we say nothing) that he
is the person whom we have made choice of to serve; and that we account no way
so likely or certain, that men are acquainted with or accustomed to, to bring
men to happiness and salvation as that which he has commended to us? and will
not then the objecting against this way, that it is unpleasant and difficult,
and so a relinquishing of it, or refusing to conform to it upon such
considerations, be not only a disproving and gainsaying of that which we make
show of professing; but also a preferring of those other ways, which flesh and
blood, and the course of the world enclines us to, above that?

Besides, can any way, or course of living, howsoever otherwise easy, or
advantageous to us it may seem to be; be truly thought fitter or more
profitable for us to conform unto then that which he whom we believe (according
to the Scripture) to be the wisdom of God, and in this respect the image of him
that is invisible has commended and prescribed unto us? Is it possible that
there should be any greater wisdom, and consequently any wiser course, then to
limit our selves wholly and precisely thereunto? And further, are not all those
imaginations of the unpleasantness and difficulty of the way sufficiently
shown to be vain, both by the greatness of the glory and end it leads to,
and also by the cheerful and unconstrained walking in it, of men and women of
all sorts, and in all ages successively that have been subject to the same
natural passions and infirmities as we are?

Lastly, Touching that which is fancied of the shame, or discredit that may
seem to be in observing some of the laws of Christ: As to put up wrongs when
it is in our power to revenge them, yea in stead thereof to pray for, and
bless, and do good to such a person as so wrongs us: Who can give
entertainment to any such thought, but he must necessarily in his heart
believe, that Christ has been guilty of prescribing us something that is base
and unworthy, and dishonorable for us to observe? Who can have any such esteem
of these things, but he must withal think, 1 Pet. 2.2^
that Christ who was certainly the most truly noble and gallant person, and
whose example is particularly commended to us to imitate in this kind; that he
was guilty of such mean and low deportment of himself; that it will not be for
the honor of them who profess themselves his servants and followers, to
conform to him therein? Could it be honorable for him, whom we call our Lord
and Master to do so as he did, that is, when he was reviled not to revile
again, etc. And shall this be thought dishonorable for his servants? Is it
not sufficient for the servant that he be as his Master, but that he must
affect to be above him? to partake of such an honor as he never had, and
which indeed he is not willing to allow us to have, as being truly not an
honor, but a disgraceful and unworthy thing?

For so indeed is all revenge, however speciously cloakt with the name of
valor, Ephesians. 4.2.
or greatness of Spirit: It is a giving place to the Devil, a submitting ones
self to that person who is made up of malice and wickedness, by doing of that
which is most agreeable to his desires and disposition; who delights in nothing
more then in destroying and doing of hurt. Whereas contrarily the doing of good
freely, and undeservedly; yea when the contrary is merited and many ways
provoked, is that, which renders us most like unto GOD, who makes his Sun to
shine, Matt. 5.49.
both on the evil, and the good, and rain to fall both upon the just and
unjust: Laboring by the riches of his goodness, exhibited in his temporal
blessings, and patience, and forbearance, and long suffering of his enemies to
work them to repentance; when it is in his power, and he might justly without
any such waiting instantly destroy them: And hereupon our Savior uses this as
an argument not only to persuade us to express the like benignity, but also to
convince us, that without so doing, we cannot be indeed, what ever we may
think our selves, the sons or children of God. This is that, which only can
manifest us to partake of the Divine Nature; of a godlike disposition; and so
to do that which is truly noble and honorable; when as the contrary carriage
as plainly manifests those that practice it, to be herein children, and
followers of the Devil; and so consequently, that that revenge which is so
commonly and generally practiced, especially by gallants, is not only against
the commandment of Christ, but also (what ever opinion men have entertained of
the nobleness and gallantry of it) is that which proves them to be guilty of
true baseness and unworthiness that makes use of it. And this might be
further manifested to the greater shame and conviction of such persons, from
the doctrine and practice of some of the wisest Heathen in this matter; who
have shown by both these, that they held it more noble and honorable for a
man to pardon his enemies, yea to desire and do him good; then to take or seek
revenge of him, when as otherwise he might lawfully do it: which opinion and
practice of theirs, being they were men that had neither received any positive
command thereof, nor had any future reward proposed to encourage them
thereunto; does at once fully justify the equitablenesse of this thing in it
self, and also upbraid the sensuality and sinful corruption of such
Christians, who having both received an express command for so doing, and
withal being encouraged thereunto by the hopes of such a glorious reward
proposed, as none greater can be imagined; yet still allow themselves in the
contrary practice.

And thus we see at length, how vain and groundless all these excuses or
carnal reasonings are wherewith many labor to fortify themselves against the
power of godliness, that is, against a through unreserved and universal
submission to the laws of Christ; so vain indeed we have showed them to be
that the persons who make profession of Christ, cannot but by virtue of that
profession, and of that natural light which is remaining in them, be in a
manner (...) self-condemned, so long as upon these grounds, or by virtue of
these holds they stand out as most do, from giving themselves up wholly in
obedience unto Christ.

Hence then we may see, what grounds there are whereon to hope that by the use
of the forementioned weapons, that is, a real and continued practice of the
duties of holiness commended to us in the Gospel; the servants of God may in
time prevail upon some or other such persons living among them to bring them in
captivity unto Christ, their strength is but weak, their holds infirm and
rotten: there needs no such engine as miracles to throw them down: there is
somewhat within these persons themselves, namely, a natural light or knowledge
of good and evil, together with a conscience of an outward professing of
Christ that will be ready to take part with that that shall be outwardly
applied for subduing them, that is, with those weapons of heavenly graces
shining forth in the lives of Christ's servants.

These truly and incessantly practiced, cannot but be mighty through God for
the pulling down of all those holds and silencing those reasonings before
mentioned for them, to see men of the like passions and infirmities with
themselves, and it may be inferior in many outward respects to take pleasure
in those things which to them are so harsh and difficult; to contemn and
slight those things which they so highly love and admire; to prefer the doing
of the will of God before the satisfying of their sensual desires or worldly
interests; these things I say, cannot but have some effect upon them; if not
fully to convert them, yet to abate the growth of wickedness in them, and to
make them justify God in this respect; that no more is required by him of them
then what others perform, and they themselves might but for their own wilful
obstinacy and averseness.

An Appendix to the former discourse.
ALL are generally so wise who engage themselves in a carnal warfar (the use
and exercises whereof are now to the reproach of Christianity so common among
Christians) as to know that a profession of fighting never actuated, or
grieving and condemning themselves after the season of fighting is let slip for
so omitting it, can be nothing available toward attaining the end of this
warfar; and therefore ordinarily so bestir themselves when the time serves,
through all difficulties lying in their way, as may most conduce to the said
end, or to the gaining those worldly advantages they herein aim at: though they
know they may probably perish in their venturing for these, and so not only
fall short of what they thus earnestly contend for, but also hereby that which
is truly of more value, and for the bettering of which they are to be
presumed to fight, namely their lives; and though they may know also that the
utmost proposed herein to themselves, or possible to be by this means acquired,
being attained, is but as a bubble which depends upon a little breath, and is
certainly let out and lost with it; and yet in our Christian warfare where the
prize professed to be fought for is (and so commonly is acknowledged) most
certain in it self, and infinitely glorious for the excellency and lastingnesse
of it; men are generally so opinionated, as if the formentioned profession of
fighting never really acted, or some late sorrow for neglecting, it when now
there wants time to perform it, would be abundantly sufficient for gaining the
said prize: whence else may we think is it that the most ordinarily content
themselves with such faint and slight velitations in this kind? or to speak
more plainly and without a figure, whence is it else, that the generality of
Christians allow themselves in a supine neglect of some one or more of the
laws of Christ promulgated in the gospel, in the uniform and continued
observing of which, this kind of fighting truly consists.

I have no pleasure to accuse others in this kind; but yet it is no less easy,
than truly lamentable to observe what small conformity there is betwixt those
laws of Christ, and the lives of Christians: and, because the opening of a
soar is to be a preparative to the healing of it, I shall (intending now
chiefly to contribute my pains and kill for bringing those two nearer
together) first endeavor to lay open what a distance they are at, that is, how
great the corruption is of the latter, namely of the lives of Christians, by
setting forth how much the former, to wit, the laws of Christ are disused, if
not contemned by those who profess themselves for such persons, that is
Christians.

By the laws of Christ, I mean nothing else, but those divine precepts of
holiness either clearly deliverd by him, or by those that were certainly acted
by his Spirit (having had him speaking in them) the sacred penmen of holy writ:
2 Cor. 13.2.
which precepts, though they are very numerous in themselves, and lie much
dispersed, yet they may I conceive appositely be reduced to that one
gospell-rule, set down Tit: 2.12. being all to be comprised unto those three
heads there mentioned, of godliness, righteousness and sobriety; and in this
way I shall briefly reflect upon them by summarily representing the express
duties that are prescribed under each of these heads, and withal the evident
and common violations of the said duties.

First then for godliness, which is that part (as here it is to be taken) of
religion which immediately and directly respects God himself: Lu. 18.1. 1 Thessalonians.
5.17.
it consists (as we may conceive from scripture) in a kind of constant and
unwearie calling upon God by prayer; and in other exercises relating immediately
to the things of the kingdom of heaven, Math. 6.33.
the place where God inhabits; as in seeking first that place, and the things
belonging thereunto; so as not to be truly sollicitous for any other things
here below, and in setting our minds and affections on these things; Col. 3.1.2
which thing what it imports we may easily know by that care and longing and
intention of mind that the setting of men's affections on other things is
ordinarily accompanied with; and lastly in exhorting, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Jude. 20.
and edifying one another by frequent mutual and deliberate conferences on
such matters; all which are required either as parts to make up, or as
testimonies to express the foresaid godliness or devotion required in us.

Now where shall we find amongst the numerous multitudes of professors any
considerable numbers exemplifying such godliness in their practice? do not most
men's words, and actions (though we cannot otherwise see into their minds and
closets) sufficiently tell us that their minds are not set upon heaven or the
things above, and consequently that they are strangers to such incessant
communion with God, as our Savior, and the Apostle requires we should have
with him by prayer? how little are matters of Religion (especially for the
practick parts of it) made the subject of men's discourse? how few are there,
that do commonly and deliberatly talk of the things of the kingdom of heaven?
is not such talk in respect of the temper of most companies as unseasonable as
snow in Summer? yea is it not ordinarily reputed melancholy ^alk, and therefore
seldom willingly entered unto, but at melancholy times, as of sickness or of
some present or imminent judgment, when the comforts of the world begin to hide
themselves or threaten quite to forsake us?

2. Touching righteousness, which is that part of Religion, which in the
exercises of it respects men, we are to conceive it to consist not only in the
doing of those things which by the laws of men are accounted righteous; but
also in those higher strains of perfection which by the divine laws of Christ
are made righteous, or rather necessary for us to observe; as namely (to omit
others which we shall have occasion under the next head to touch upon)
requiting the evil wishes, and words, and deeds of others toward us, Mat.
5.44.
with a quite contrary carriage, that is, praying for, and blessing, and doing
good to them: this being that divine revenge which the Gospel only allows us,
Romans 12.19.20.21.
calling it a heaping of coals of fire upon their heads, and commending it as
the most effectual way for overcomming their evil in this kind.

Now where shall we find any patterns almost, representing such righteousness
in their practice? who sees not and is not also ready to cry out of that
palpable cozening and deceit, and overreaching that the most in all trades and
professions ordinarily make use of, whereby the common dictates of justice
approved of and authorized with Heathen Nations are directly violated? and
therefore for those higher doctrines of loving and blessing, and doing good to
and praying for enemies; what likelihood can there be of any answerable
performance of them? yea, it is plain, that these doctrines being literally
understood (as they ought to be) and in their true extent, they are as Utopian
Chymaeraes; such as have no existence in a manner, save in the Scriptures and
men's imaginations; the practice of Christians whether considered in greater or
lesser society, being quite contrary thereunto: nor only so, but which is yet
much worse, that forementioned deportment of our selves toward our enemies, so
plainly required of us by Christ, is in the account of many, who profess
themselves Christians, held as a mean and dishonorable thing, though the
person requiring it whom we call our Lord, and who was truly the most noble
person that was ever on earth, has not only gone before us in the practice
thereof himself; but also practiced it to this end, to leave us an example, 1
Pet. 2.22.
and that we might follow his steps.

3. Concerning the last head, sobriety; which is that part of Religion which
directly respects our selves, we are to conceive it, (as here it is to be
taken) to consist for the general, in such a moderating of our desires, and
regulating of our carriage, as may fit us for performing the offices of both
the former; that is

1. In this, that we love not the world, nor the things of it: all which things
St. John comprizeth under these three heads, 1 John. 2.15.16.
namely, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life: by
the first whereof is meant an excessive thirsting after sensual and carnal
pleasures; by the second, a covetous desire of riches, which are often sought
and so possessed by many for no other use in effect, but for the eye, or fancy
(as it were) to feed upon; and by the third, ambition or desire of vain glory
manifesting it self in such effects as these; boasting of ones self, despising
or slighting others, affectation of making a pompous show in apparel or other
outward things: the contraries to all which are those three virtues which
moderate all these excesses; namely temperance, contentedness, and humility,
being as branches of the foresaid Sobriety, and hereby St. John implicitly
prescribed us in these two words, love not, and that not only as things most
righteous in themselves, and to preserve in us a regular temper of mind, free
from such disturbances, as the contrary excesses are ordinarily accompanied
with; but also as things requisite to dispose us toward the performing of
those acts of piety and righteousness which we owe toward God and men: it
being not possible that where the former law and earthly affections take place,
these should ever be truly performed.

2. As another part of the former sobriety it is required, that our outward
carriage be answerably tempered with wisdom and gravity; Phil. 4.8.
that whatsoever things are honest, or rather (as the Greek imports) venerable,
we should think upon those and do them: and therefore that our speech be
always with grace, Col. 4.6.
seasond with salt, namely of wisdom, Ephesians. 4.29.
that it may be good for the use of edifying, and such as may Minister grace to
the hearers.

And where now shall we find any visible copies almost, that is, any living
examples holding forth such sobriety in their practice? may it not be said of
one sort of Christians, that they are lovers of pleasures more than lovers of
God; when as all their time in a manner (save what their worldly entanglements
and occasions require of them) is taken up in eating and drinking, dicing and
carding, or some such ways of voluptuousness; as if they had been placed here
in the world, as the Leviathan in the Sea, only to take their pas^ time
therein? and may it not be said of another sort, that the God of this world
has blinded their eyes, namely with the dazeling splendor of riches, and
worldly profits, presented in their full (but false) glory to them? when as
notwithstanding the danger our Savior has forewarned us there is in these
things; and the charge the Apostle has laid upon those that have them to be
rich in good works; not only their thoughts appear to be taken up with a
continued successive series of cares about them, whereby they are often cast
upon unjust or scandalous courses for getting or increasing them: but also
their enjoying of them is wholly in a manner engrossed to themselves; to feed
their eyes with the pleasure of beholding them, or their other Iusts of
ambition and sensuality, by laying them out so as these incite them: and may we
not think that there is a third sort of whom it may be said, that that which
St. John calls the pride of life has taken up the chief room in their hearts?
when as so many signs or rather effects thereof are open to the notice of all;
such as high looks, painted faces, gorgeous apparel, boasting (at least
obliquely) of their own worth or parts, or of that which is not truly their
own, genus and proaves, the virtue or it may be only the wealth and greatness
of their Ancestors: things all utterly inconsistent with that humility which
our Savior has placed as the first round in that ladder whereby we are to
climb to heaven; and do not these three sorts (to say nothing of those other
breaches of this sobriety, consisting in vain talking and foolish jeasting, so
common with most persons, as drunkards, swearers, etc. not so distinctly
comprised under these heads) make up every where with us as well as Papists,
the far greatest number of Christians, even of those which are the knowing and
civil part of them?

By all which it may appear, that those laws of Christ, (or rules of life)
prescribed us in the gospel, however known and acknowledged for such, are not
indeed (hardly by any that so acknowledge them) looked upon and accounted as
binding laws, that is, so binding as that heaven the glorious prize held forth
to us therein cannot possibly be come at but by a constant and impartial
observing of them: Men hereby (I conceive) declare and that more really than
they could well otherwise by their words, that they think a bare knowledge or
profession of these laws never actuated into such an observance, nor indeed
ever truly intended to be so is all that is indispensably required of them in
reference to that place, and so that heaven may be won by those that only
profess to fight for it, without really doing so.

Now one principal aim of the former discourse is to work men off this
pleasing but pernicious persuasion; to show, that which I shall now more
largely insist on and confirm, namely, that these laws of Christ were given to
another end than only to be known or talked of; that the glorious reward of
eternal life, revealed and proposed to the world by him (though it infinitely
exceed for the true worth of it, the utmost imaginable extent of our obedience;
so that we could not be said upon a supposall of our absolute freedom from sin
and continued walking in gods commandments all our days, properly to merit
it; yet) cannot be come at but in that narrow way which he has limited: that
we must come up to Christ's own terms if we will indeed purchase this rich
pearl, and these terms are no other but the observing of the foresaid laws,
Math. 11.29.
or as our Savior himself speaks, the taking of his yoke upon us (his easy
yoke, as he calls it, as being by him lightened of those numerous and servile
ceremonies which made it formerly lie so heavy on the necks of Gods people) of
which metaphorical expression St. Act. 15.10.
John renders us the sense in plain words; by telling us, 1 John 5.3.
that this is the love of God that we keep his commandments, namely those
delivered to us by his son Christ, whom he had commanded all to hear; and which
commandments (especially as sweetened with the hopes of the former reward) are
not grievous as he there affirms: Math. 17.5.
yea in the keeping of these it is that the same Apostle makes the knowledge of
Christ to consist, telling us that he that says, 1 John 2.4.
he knows him and keeps not his commandments is a liar and the trut his
not in him. The Antinomians.
There are some (I know) that have found out shorter and easier ways (as they
imagine) to the kingdom of heaven; who not only think the former course
unnecessary for any to engage themselves in, but ordinarily decry the pressing
and persuading thereof, as that which tends to the setting up (as they call it)
of self-righteousnesse; and to detract from Christ that honor which they
conceive can only by a confident reliance on him separated from all such
qualifications in our selves truly redound to him.

Now though we may well admire how this opinion should ever come to attain so
much credit as to gain any proselytes among Christians, or how the patrons of
it should come to have such boldness to vent it with that confidence as they
have done when we consider what a flat and direct opposition it bears to the
main current of the gospel; and particularly to those 3 chapters in Math. Math.
5.6.7.
wherein our Saviors sermon is contained, and to the first epistle of John;
yet I cannot but acknowledge this cause of wondering to be much abated, when I
consider withal the answerable opposition that there is betwixt those laws of
Christ, and the sensual desires that are naturally in men; which being always
ready at hand to put men on such ways as are most pleasing, or least
distasteful to the flesh, it is no marvel if the said desires so far prevail
some time on the judgment, as to persuade it to pass sentence on their side;
that is, to judge such ways most safe and warrantable, which are most
pernicious, and damnable in themselves.

This is to be reckond the true original cause I conceive of the foresaid
opinion, and of men's resoluteness in holding it: Most are desirous to come to
heaven, by as short and easy a course as may be; and they very well know that
it is longum iter per praecepta, a very tedious and difficult voyage thither by
the way of Christ's commandes, that is, only by the constant and continued
expressions of the former Godliness, righteousness, and sobriety to look for
(as the Apostle requires we should) the blessed hope promised; what marvel
then is it if this desire and this knowledge joined together in them, make them
willing to find out and entertain such opinions, as promise heaven upon easier
terms than such harsh conditions? what marvel is it if upon this ground among
the many figurative, and some of them obscure forms of speech, wherewith the
scripture abounds, some be understood in such a sense, as makes our proper, and
personal obedience to the laws of Christ, a thing unnecessary in this kind?
especially when (as in this case through the cunning of the false angel of
light it is pretended) by such a sense and inference from it, the honor of
Christ may be thought to be better provided for, he having hereby that glory at
least implicity ascribed to him, of saving us so perfectly by his own merits
and righteousness, as not to stand upon any thing to be performed by us.

But as (I suppose) all will grant, there are some things so clearly affirmed
in Scripture, that if an angel from heaven should teach us the contrary, we
were not to assent thereunto, nor to suffer our selves to be drawn off the
belief of the said things (such as in this present matter are these positions:
without holiness no man shall see God; Heb. 12. Joh. 3. Math. 7.
except a man be regenerate he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven; he
that hears Christ's words, and does them not, is like unto a foolish man etc.)
so I answerably conceive, if there be any opinion which either expressly, or
by it is natural force and consequence shall contradict such things so
affirmed, or the plain meaning of the said positions, making heaven truly
possible to be come at without holiness, or being regenerate, or doing of
Christ's words, it is without scruple to be rejected, what ever numbers of
adherents, or prescription of time, or seeming color of some other parts of
Scripture, it may have for commending and upholding the credit of it: It is
most certain, and so generally also acknowledged, that the gospel, the oracle
of truth, admits no real contradictions betwixt any of the parts of it; and it
is (I conceive) or ought to be not much less certain, that the true sense of
the foresaid positions, together with those other forms of speech to the same
effect, wherewith the Scripture plentifully abounds, is no other but this which
the words plainly and in their literal sense hold forth; namely that our
personal, and actual observing of the words, or commands of Christ, is
precisely requisite to constitute us heirs of salvation; or (which comes all to
one) that, without holiness and our being regenerate persons, which implies a
real, and universal change of of our courses and affections, the kingdom of
heaven is not to be attained.

Now who sees not that if there be any other expressions of the said Scripture
(as some few I acknowledge there are) that may in themselves seem capable of a
contrary sense, that is, so as to afford and allow men hopes of salvation upon
easier terms than doing of Christ's words, or having such an effectual change
wrought in themselves; who may not see hence (I say) that there is a necessity
of understanding the said expressions in another sense, than that which shall
evidently contradict the plain meaning of the foresaid plain, and plentiful
assertions? should not the fewer places (as in this matter they certainly are)
be rather brought to a conformity with the more, than the more be bended to the
fewer, especially when (as in this case it will be found) the sense of the more
considered singly, and with reference to one another, is plain, and rational,
and easy to be apprehended; but being reduced to that which is the seeming or
supposed sense of the fewer becomes irrational or intricate? should not the
plain, and frequent expressions of Scripture on this subject, rather make us
considently hold, that our own personal performance of those things commanded
us by Christ, is indispensably necessary for attaining of salvation; than some
dark and figurative forms of speech incline us to hold the contrary, and make
us promise our selves heaven without such performance, upon I know not what
groundless reliance on Christ's merits? surely in reason it should be so, and
so it would be (I doubt not) in this case but for the forementiond cause,
namely that men being willing to come to heaven with as much ease as may be,
are easily tempted to believe the easiest way thither to be the best, and
therefore through the devils cunning are soon persuaded to take more notice,
and more stiffly insist on one text seemingly making that way, than on twenty
other implying the contrary.

As for that which is pretended, that this way of pressing obedience to Christ's
laws, or requiring our own personal performances, as necessary to salvation,
is that which tends to dishonor Christ, and makes for the exalting of our
selves, and setting up that which some call self-righteousnesse.

This (I say) is a very groundless pretense, and if thoroughly looked into, will
appear to be but a plausible artifice of the great impostour, not of strength
sufficient to deceive any, but those that are in effect willing to be deluded
by it: for does not our Savior himself plainly enough tell us, that this
indeed only is the way whereby we can truly honor him, and that all verbal
professions, and magnifyings of him with high titles, separated from the former
performances, are but empty formalities, which he regards not? as where he
says not they that say unto me, Math. 7.21.
Lord, Lord (that is, as if he had said, not those that give him specious and
honorable titles, by telling him, or it may be, telling it to others, that
they will account him their perfect Savior; that his merits and righteousness
they will wholly look and rely upon, and not have any respect to what is in or
done by themselves) shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but they that do
the will of my father that is in heaven: and so likewise, where he tells his
disciples, and in them us, Joh. 15.8.
that herein is his Father glorified, if we bring forth much fruit: Ver. 9.
and that, by keeping his commandments we can only abide in his love: the
keeping of those, being that wherein St. 1 John 5.3.
John makes the love of God (from whence only our honoring of him can proceed)
truly to consist.

By thus doing, we give Christ that honor which belongs to him as our Lord,
and King, in regarding and submitting our selves to his laws; we give him also
hereby that honor, which belongs to him as our purchaser, and redeemer, in
limiting our selves to his service, he having for this purpose by the expense
of his blood bought us (or done that which is sufficient for so buying us) out
of our former servitude to sin; and lastly we give him hereby that honor which
is due to him as the Apostle of our profession, Heb. 3.1.
or as that great prophet and ambassador immediately sent from God, to reveal
and promise us that eternal life, 1 John 1.2.
which was before with the Father (that is, hid in his decree) by showing our
selves hereupon so undoubtedly to believe this, as to prefer the expectation of
it, before all our present interests and worldly concernments; which thing, by
our keeping of his words, we must needs, and can only so show.

Neither is there any danger hereby of setting up (as is pretended)
self-righteousness; this term being rightly understood: If we had indeed,
unallured by those vast and divine promises which Christ has made and
confirmed to us from God, and unsollicited by those admirable persuasive
arguments, exhibited in his life, death, rising, and exaltation, rendered (as
we were bound) an exact and uniform obedience to the righteous laws of God, we
should so have had that which might be properly called self-righteousness, as
being (on this supposall) wrought out and from our selves; though this
righteousness so wrought being no more but out duty and homage, for what we had
already received, could only of it self, and separated from Gods free promise
of rewarding it, have given us this matter of glorying; namely, to challenge as
of right thereby belonging to us, an exemption from punishment: but now that
that obedience which we perform to the commands of God, is of right to be
reckond to owe its original to the fore-alleged causes, that is, to those
things, said and done and transacted in and by Christ; we having also lived
(and perhaps very long) in many great and continued violations of the said
commands before the divine force of the said things could have its effect upon
us, as that righteousness, which we thus exhibit by our performance of those
commands, is in regard of our former unrighteousness going before, far from
such a righteousness as may afford us occasion of the former glorying, that is,
to exempt us from all punishment, by the virtue of it; so it is to be
acknowledged for whatsoever perfection it, has to be derived to, and wrought
in us, by Christ; he being by the foresaid means, the author and procurer
thereof in us: and therefore it is not to be called our own, or
self-righteousness, Phil. 3.
but (as the Scripture styles it) the righteousness of Christ, (or rather,
which is through the faith of Christ) springing in us from him, as the fountain
and cause of it.

And hereupon the Apostle says, that Christ is made unto us righteousness,
namely, 1 Cor. 1.30.
in the same manner as he is made to us wisdom, and sanctification, and
redemption (for all these are together affirmed of him) that is, so as to be
the author of that, like as he is of these in us; we having thoroughly digested
Christ's doctrine in our selves become hereby truly righteous, as we are thereby
also truly or really (and not only in esteem or imagination) wise, and
sanctified, and redeemed persons; but in regard it is from Christ, that we are
so, who in the former admirable manner, and to himself chargeable way, has
made us such persons; all the glory of our being so is of right to be ascribed
not to our selves, but to him.

If any yet shall be so over-criticall, as to call this righteousness
(notwithstanding its thus proceeding from Christ) because truly and personally
in us and acted by us, our own or self-righteousness; though I may tell such a
person, that the Scripture (with which sure it cannot but be fittest, and
safest to speak in divine matters) owns not the word in this notion, nor truly
affords any ground for so understanding it: yet being not willing to contest
with any about words, I shall consent that for the alleged causes it may
logically enough be called so; but then I must add withal, that as such a
self-righteousness for the fore-mentiond reasons yields no true ground of
glorying to us, or of challenging any thing of God, by the merit of it, so it
is an indispensable condition on our part, without which heaven cannot be
attained: and this (not to insist on former proofs) our Savior has in effect
expressly told us, by saying, Mat. 5.20
except your righteousness (by which sure is meant, a personal and inherent,
and so far a self-righteousness) exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: and to this, I shall
only add one proof more, taken from the epithet or concrete appellation,
righteous. The servants of God in Scripture are often called by this name, 1
Pet. 4.18.
and all that are designed for salvation are comprised under this title or
denomination of righteous; which term that it implies not any imaginary
righteousness without us, nor that which is only intentionally, and so
ineffectually within us, but a ^call and solid righteousness, truly existent
in, and acted by us, St. John sufficiently informs us, when he gives this
description of it (prefixing a caution that none draw us to think otherwise) he
that does righteousness is righteous: 1 John 3.7.
by all which it may appear, that as it is requisite for our attaining the
kingdom of heaven, that we be righteous; so it is a like requisite, that we
actually do righteousness, that we may be truly styled with this title; and
so that a self-righteousness in this sense is necessarily required of us.

There are yet some other impressions (I conceive) to be supposed in the minds
of many; which so long as they remain, cannot but proportionably hinder the
digesting of that persuasion, which it is my design to commend: and they are
such, as we may imagine have been wrought especially by the force of two
instances:

1. The first is that passage in the beginning of the late Common Prayer Book.
At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin, from the bottom of his
heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance says the Lord.

2. The example of the penitent thief.

To either of which, being of common influence, I shall endeavor to say
somewhat, which may be at once serviceable for stopping the ill use that is
made of both, and for further clearing and confirming the matter in hand.

1. Touching the former; though that book in respect of public use be now
disauthorized, yet it is probable not only that some retain still a reverend
esteem of it, and of most things contained in it, but also that that sentence
is fresh still in the memories of most, and so apt (with some at least) to keep
them in this persuasion (which seems to be the direct and natural meaning of
it) that repentance or unfeigned grieving for sins past, and a like intention
of avoiding them for the future (for this is that which most have been wont to
understand by repentance) at what time soever, even though so late, as there is
not possibility of putting such intention into act, will be acceptable with
God, for obtaining full remission of sins, and so for salvation.

But I shall desire those, who upon this ground are willing to be possessed
with this perswassion, for a sufficient consutation of it, only to look into
and seriously consider that place in Ezekiel, from whence that sentence is
pretended to be taken; where the words are these; Ezekiel. 18.21.22.
If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all
my Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he
shall not dye, all his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be
mentioned to him, in his righteousness that he has done, he shall live: who
may not easily see what a vast distance there is betwixt these words and those
of the Common prayer book; which yet are pretended to be either a formal
recital of these, or at least such a rendering of them, as is in sense fully
equivalent? Is it not plain hence, that besides, and after the turning from all
our sins (which seems all that is intended to be signified by that phrase of
repenting of them from the bottom of our heart) there is expressly required a
keeping of all Gods statutes, and doing that which is lawful and right, (of
which there is no mention at all in that saying in the Common prayer book) as a
necessary condition for attaining that remission of sins and life there
promised?

I am willing to suppose that those who were authors of that liturgy, and so of
this saying in it, knew how by the various acception of the word, repent, to
reconcile in sense this saying, and the next together; and so were able thereby
to vindicate themselves from that, which might seem otherwise to be justly
charged upon them herein, namely, wilful falsifying or perverting the words of
Scripture; yet as I can see no true reason, why pretending (as they did) to
deliver the unquestionable sense of the Spirit of God, they should so far
neglect the words certainly dictated from this Spirit, as in stead thereof to
use in this matter, expressions wholly of their own framing: so I cannot but
think that their thus doing, and rendering or reciting that text as they have
done, was and is still (especially considering the former corrupt notion of
repentance, that many have been, and yet are ordinarity possessed with) a most
dangerous rock; at once to harden and continue men in their sins, and to make
them (but most deceitfully) promise themselves heaven, upon some late
ineffectuall mourning for them at the last, notwithstanding their continuance
in them, till that time.

2. Touching that other instance, taken from the example of the penitent thief,
I think it may be in some manner said of him, that since he was crucified and
dead, he has killed far more souls, than being alive he hurt or destroyed
bodies; but it is and has been through the fault of men themselves, with whom
this one example (how ever not possible to be paralleld, as we shall presently
show) is of more force, than the whole gospel, or doctrine of Christ. Those
who are ready to flatter themselves upon this ground, by thinking that a
blessed and happy death may be the sequel of a dissolute life, as it was in
him; if they will but heedfully consider the circumstances (so far as the
Scripture lays them open) of this persons repentance, which was indeed as late
as could be; will easily find that it is not possible for them, though they
would never so gladly, to be truly like unto him herein, and so that the
promise made to him can derive no comfort at all to them; for

1. This thief did not (for any thing that appears in Scripture) know, or
acknowledge Christ before this time, that he was now hanging on the cross, and
so, ready to dye with him; then it was that he began to make profession of him,
and was first ingrasted into him by faith; but those Chrislians who are wont to
allege this example for the acceptance of their late sorrow, are to be supposed
to have acknowledged Christ long before the time of their dying; even in a
manner all their life time, having been so long constant professors of him.

2. This thief, after his faith or declared profession of Christ, had no space
left him for correcting, or changing his course of life; whatsoever good he
could do then on the cross, he did it, as in rebuking of his fellow thief;
acknowledging the justice of his own and his sufferings; asserting Christ's
innocence; and by his praying to him giving him divine worship, and expressing
his faith in him; but the fore-mentiond persons are such, as after their
profession of Christ, have large spaces, or proportions of time afforded them
(their profession ordinarily beginning with their first use of reason, and so
running on in an eeven line with their lives) and yet they could never find any
season for setting effectually about the work of reforming their lives, that
is, for thoroughly observing Christ's laws in rendering that obedience thereunto,
which was both possible for them, and they made profession of: their practice
hitherto (namely, till the approaching time of their death) has been a
contradiction of such their profession; and so their religion for so long is to
be reckoned nothing but a formal hypocrisy or dissembling.

3. This thief had, and manifested then, so great a faith as was not in the
Apostles themselves; he then firmly believed in Christ, when their faith in him
(it is plain by their forsaking of, and flying from him, and those words of
distrust they used, as, we trusted that it had been he, Lu. 24.21.
etc.) began to fail: he acknowledged Christ hanging on the cross, to be about
entering into a kingdom; and neither being deterred with Christ's nor his own
death, he trusted that Christ would be mindful of him, and could again reduce
him to life: who can possibly now have such a faith? have not all that profess
Christ an opinion of his being (like as he truly is) in supreme power, and
glory? and is it not much easier to believe in such a person, namely, in him
that is risen from the dead, and is invested with all power in heaven, and in
earth, than in him who being now a dying, is forsaken and scornd, and derided
in a manner by all men, as Christ truly was? yet such was the faith of this
thief, that is, indeed a most singular and admirable faith (suitable to those
other prodigies, that accompanied Christ's death, as conducing to the solemnity
of it;) and therefore most worthy through the divine bounty to justify this
person with our most gracious God: but till Christ come to suffer again (which
will never be) no more examples of this faith, or of such believers are to be
expected: and consequently this persons example, and the happy issue he had of
his late repentance, can be no ground of comfort for the fore-mentiond persons;
it being not possible, that his case should be theirs, or that their repentance
should be answerable to his in any thing, save in that which was truly of least
moment in it, the lateness of it.

Now touching that corrupt notion of repentance before spoken of, which seems
to be nourished and upheld in many, chiefly by the influence derived from the
two former instances; though what has been said in answer to these, may in
great part serve to show the corruption and unsoundness of it; yet for the
fuller manifesting of this, and together therewith, that which is truly
imported by the word repentance; I shall directly set down what I conceive we
are by the light of Scripture to apprehend in this matter.

The repentance then (I say) which the Scripture so much commends, and
promises such blessings to, as for giveness of sins, and eternal life, does
not consist only in a grief of mind for sins past; yea it does not at all
properly consist in this (this being rather to be accounted a preparation and
disposition to, than a part of it) but it is (as the word (...) imports) a
change of the mind formerly in love with sin and unrighteousness, into a better
state and temper, that is, such a change, whereby not only it unfeignedly
condemns and detests the former course of living; but also has a reformation
of the whole life, and manners accompanying it; and this (I conceive) the
Apostle sufficiently implys, when he tells the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7.9.10.
that they sorrowed to repentance: and further says, that godly sorrow works
repentance: by which expressions, he at once shows, that sorrowing or godly
sorrow is a forerunner, and cause of repentance; and also that repentance is a
thing truly distinct from such sorrow: and that can be no other thing than such
a change, as we have named; which he further also confirms at the 11. ver. by
distinctly setting down the effects of that sorrowing in the said Corinthians.

There is an usual saying, that true repentance is never too late, or (which
comes all to one) that it is and will be always profitable: and this I shall
readily grant, taking true repentance in that sense, wherein I have expressed
it, which I conceive is only truly so: but then, I must add withal, that it
may be sometimes too late for having this repentance, or that this repentance
is not always during this life possible; and the not possibility of it is
caused either

1. Naturally, through defect of time; as in men ready to dye, when it is
impossible for them, what ever good purposes, or intentions they have, to
exhibit such a change in themselves, as repentance consists in, that is, when
they cannot any longer (nor truly be said to) walk after the spirit, and live
as new creatures in doing the commandments of Christ; which necessarily
requires time, and that some considerable part of a maus life, for the doing of
them.

Or else it is caused judicially, that is, by way of divine punishment, and
obduration; as in those of whom St. John speaks, who being slight or malicious
regarders of Christ's miracles done among them, could not (as he says) believe,
and so consequently nor repent, John 12.37, etc.
and that because God had blinded their eyes, and heardned their heart: which
obduration we are yet to conceive does not effect an absolute impossibility of
repenting, but only a very great difficulty of it, and such as hardly any of
them that are so hardened do actually overcome; as may be collected from Romans
10. v. 1. and 21. and chapter 11 v. 14. It is always hard for men to obey God
(that is, before they be thoroughly inured, and habituated to such obedience) but
this hardness must sure be needs much augmented, when there is added thereunto
a custom of disobeying, and resisting Gods will; this being as another nature,
and therefore the relinquishing of such a custom, and entertaining the
contrary, that is, for such persons thus truly to repent, is such a degree of
hardness, as may well be expressed by the term, Jer. 13.23
impossible, as the Prophet Jerem. in effect does express it.

As for that repentance whereby is signified only, a true mourning or sorrow of
mind for sins past, and answerable desire of the pardon of them: it is not to
be denied, but that is always (while life lasts) possible; but yet it is to be
denied that it is or will be always profitable: the Jsraelites after they had
provoked God in the wilderness thus repented, that is, they mourned greatly
upon the report made by Moses to them of Gods intention for cutting them short
of that land of Canaan formerly promised to them; Number. 14.39.
yet could they not for all this be admitted into the said land, or rest so
promised them; and this example of theirs is purposely alleged by the Author
of the Epistle to the Hebr. to this end, Heb. 3. and 4. chapter
namely, to instruct us, that if we be like them in our sins, hardening our
selves against the calls of God, and refusing in this our day to obey his
voice, sounding in the Gospel, we shall be also like them in our punishment,
that is, deprived of the true rest, the kingdom of heaven, promised us by
Christ; notwithstanding all our mourning and begging of God at last for it: so
Esau (as the same Author tells us) did thus repent, that is, he grieved and
afflicted himself with sorrow, for that neglect, whereby he saw he had brought
himself in danger of losing his Fathers blessing; Heb. ^2.17.
and yet he found no place for repentance, that is, for his Father Isaaks
repentance, so as to move him to change his mind toward him, by recalling the
blessing conferred on Jacob, though he sought it carefully with tears: and this
example likewise is alleged to the same purpose, namely, to inform us, that if
we remain in our sins, and prefer these present pleasures belonging to the
flesh before that future spiritual felicity, to which we are called, (as they
all do, that do not so highly value it, as for its sake truly and effectually
to break off their sins) we shall be rejected of God; neither shall we be able
by any cries and tears to move him to bestow on us that heavenly inheritance or
blessing otherwise intended us; having by such our carriage rendered our selves
at once unworthy and incapable of it.

If any be yet unsatisfied with these proofs, and willing still to promise
themselves or others, upon their unfeigned mourning for their sins, and praying
for the pardon of them (when as yet they have not effectually left the said
sins, nor exhibited the contrary obedience required of them) a happy issue;
that is, so as to be accepted with God, and have eternal life conferred on
them: I shall desire them to consult, and seriously consider these places, John
9.31. Es. 1.15. Jer. 11.11, 14.14.11, 12. Mic. 3.4. Zech. 7.13. Prove. 1.24, to
the end. Deuteronomy. 28.63. by which I conceive, if they will not wilfully shut their
eyes, they may be at once convinced to acknowledge this for a gross, as well
as dangerous error; and withal discern, that is is not always, and for all,
a time of grace, or mercy, during this life; but that there is also a time of
severity, and punishment here, namely, when God will be so far from taking pity
on some (that is, on all those, who refused to hear his calls, and would none
of his counsel, not choosing the fear of the Lord, but the ways of their own
heart, and of the world to walk in) as even to take pleasure in their
distress, and answer them with scorn, and derision when they shall most
sadly, and seriously call upon him.

But this perhaps will be interpreted a way to drive men to despair, thus to
deny to the mourning penitent who has not now time to change his course of
life, all hopes of pardon and acceptance with God; and that because he has not
hitherto made such change, though now he truly intends to do it, if time would
serve him: why may we not think that such intention will be accepted with God
for the act it self?

In answer whereunto I say, I. by granting that there is a despair, which may
very easily be the result of this doctrine, and that is, when men knowing
themselves not to be such persons, as they are hereby taught it is necessary
for them to be to come to the kingdom of heaven, namely new creatures, and
such as walk in the commandments of God; they shall hereupon conceive, that
there is no hopes for them, remaining thus unqualified, of coming to that
place: but such despair makes nothing at all for the discredit, but rather for
the honor of the said doctrine; it being that which the gospel every where in
a manner tends to produce, by telling us, that without holiness no man shall
see God and many other sayings to the like effect: this kind of despair is most
deservedly incurred; neither do such persons offend God because they fall into
it; but rather they fall into it, because they have offended him; it being
properly not a sin, but a punishment of sin.

2 Though for such persons, whose former ways have not been known to us, we
are I conceive, upon their serious mourning for their sins at the last, in
charity to hope, and believe well of them; yet for such whose evil lives were
have been sufficiently acquainted with, as having been misspent in the works
of the flesh, that are ordinarily manifest, Gal. 5.19.
upon such their mourning to go about to comfort them with smooth words,
holding forth Gods mercy and forgiveness to them; as this would be a certain
occasion of hardening others in their sins to their own destruction; so it
would be but a prophesying of deceit, Es. 30.10.
to these persons themselves; whereby perhaps they might be better pleased, but
their condition could be no way bettered.

I grant indeed that we are in this case, by all fit and lawful means to
quicken and encourage such mourning or contrition in these persons; and that
because I. God may beyond hopes lengthen and add to their days, and so it may
work in them in time true repentance; and 2 because, if it should not fall out
so yet it may probably conduce to the abatement of their future misery, and
that they shall be hereafter beaten with fewer stripes.

I shall grant also, that though God has tied us in this case to rules to
judge, as well as to walk by; yet he has not so absolutely bound up himself,
but that it is still lawful for him, and that he may (if he will use his
Sovereign power in dispensing with his own laws) give eternal life to such
persons, upon such their mourning, notwithstanding their want of that otherwise
necessary condition of new obedience or being new creatures: but as it would be
certainly high presumption for any to expect or desire of God, the actual
exercise of this his Sovereign power, by affording them the benefit of such a
dispensation; so it would be no less an exceeding our commission (and so a
like presumption too) to tell others, that he will use this power toward them,
or for their good: and this they in effect do, that so far comply to please
others, whom they know, or may know to have lived as unregenerate persons, that
is, in some course of disobedience contrary to Christ's commands, as to promise
or tell them, upon their mourning for their sins, at the last, and praying for
the pardon of them, that God will certainly accept them to salvation, and
bestow eternal life upon them.

3 I say, that the intention, namely of doing good, may be and is sometimes
accepted with God, for the act it self; but then this intention must be

1 Real; that is so real, as it would certainly, if there were possibility of
actuating it, prove effectual, which in this case there is but small reason to
suppose: for the heart of man (as the prophet tells us) is very deceitful:
Jer. 17.9.
men of crazy bodies and that are sensible of their need of physic may
seriously enough resolve within themselves, to take such a potion for their
health, as the Physician shall prescribe them; and yet they may have such
queazy stomachs, that beginning to taste it, and finding it very bitter and
nauseous, they will by no means be persuaded to drink it up: in like manner,
many in this kind may (as Peter once did) at a distance, promise and intend the
doing of great matters; as that they will constantly for the future walk in the
commandments of Christ, or the like: but coming to have some near sight, or
feeling of the difficulty or danger of the said things, which before they saw
only as a far off, and in contemplation; they will ('it is likely) prove no
stouter champions than he did, that is, choose rather to live at their former
case, than voluntarily persist in such new, and harsh obedience: and hereupon,
we find God then using these words to Abraham; Genesis 22.12.
Now I know that thou fear me; when Abraham had actuated his intention of
offering his son, so far as was possible and lawful for him, by which words,
though God does not imply any ignorance in himself before, of what could be
truly known; yet sure he more than intimates, that neither Abraham himself, nor
others could certainly know of him, that he had such a fear of God as to be
effectually willing to offer his son in obedience to Gods command, till he was
thus put home to the doing of it: and so consequently we may collect, that we
can neither for our selves, nor others, from any promises, or expressed
intentions in sickness, of walking as new creatures for the future, if God
should restore us, or them, conclude, that either would certainly, and truly do
so: this being that which can only be known to us by the doing of it.

And indeed besides all this, this one consideratton may serve to convince us,
what little credit is to be given to, or certainty can be grounded on such
promises and intentions in this kind; namely, the rare performance we find of
them: of ten that are usually restored from such sickness after these
professions, it is to be feared, we shall hardly meet with one that returns to
give God thanks in this way, that is, according to his vow, to dedicate himself
as one alive from the dead, to spend the remainder of his days by a cheerful
and unreserved obedience in Gods service.

2. That such intention of doing good may be accepted with God for the act; it
is requisite, that the said intention be so circumstantionated in the person,
as there may be nothing justly imputed to him or his neglect, why the act is
not really performed; the person being to be supposed for this end, to have
done all in this case, that was morally possible for him: like as we find in
the forementioned business of Abraham's offering his son; whose intention
carrying him on to the doing of what was in his power for the accomplishing of
this work, made that it was accepted for, Heb. 11.17.
and called an offering of him, though it was not ever at all actually
performed.

Now in this present case the matter is far otherwise: the person who (as we
suppose) is now in extremis, or a dying, has indeed nothing possible for him
to perform toward the amending, and reforming of his life, beyond vows and
promises; but this is a thing that ought to have been done of him before; God
requiring it, and having afforded him sufficient time and means for the doing
of it: it is a thing also, that all the time he made profession of Christ, or
of his word, he is to be supposed virtually to have professed and made show of
doing: it is therefore, not only his own fault, that it is not done, that is,
that such intention has not hitherto been acted; but it is also such a fault,
as is made up of a continued belying of his profession; and therefore sure,
there can be but small cause, for any to flatter themselves, or others in this
case, that such intention shall ever be accepted with God for the act: Gal.
6.7.
no, God will not be mocked, that which a man sows that shall he reap; that
is, according to our works in our life time, not our intentions, at or near our
death, our future doom is to be expected.

If any now shall question hereupon, what proportion of our time or lives is
absolutely necessary to be spent in the service, and obedience of Christ for
this end, to render us actually capable, and heirs of Salvation? I shall
endeavor thus far to satisfy him.

1. By telling him negatively, that such proportion (I conceive) cannot be
certainly determined; so as definitely to set down, that a man must necessarily
such a certain number of months, or years, exhibit such obedience, or else he
cannot be saved: as in the parable of the hired Servants, Math. 20. some were
hired, and went into the vineyard, at the ninth, and some at the eleventh hour;
and yet received equal wages with them, who begun to work in the morning, and
had born the burden and heat of the day: so I grant (though not through the
force of that parable, Chrysostom. Muscul.
whereof I find several interpretations given, and which good expositours
apply to quite another sense, as more suitable to our Saviors scope, than that
which is vulgarly apprehended to be the intent of it) that some in the evening
of their days, or in their declining age, may become converts, and begin then
to render that real obedience to Christ's laws, which he requires, and they
formerly neglected; and yet be as surely rewarded with the glorious reward of
eternal life, as those who set out as it were, and have been engaged from
their childhood in this employment may expect to be: though I think not only
that such examples are rare; but also where they are, they must, and will
(being such real converts as I suppose them) out of the sense of their former
neglect, be more than ordinarily zealous, and industrious in this kind.

2. I say pisitively to the former question; that so much of our time is
necessarily to be employed in the foresaid obedience, as we may be truly said
at the end of our course, to have been new creatures, and to have crucified the
flesh with the affections and lusts; and to have done the commandments of
Christ, or to have walked according to the Spirit, and in so walking to have
finished our race: all which being things that imply not only a change of our
natural condition; but also such a change as consists, and manifests it self
(not in words, or intentions, or single acts, but) in a solid and habitual
course of piety and the expressions of it: as the presence of them is simply
requisite to this end, that our judgment, namely unto life, Math. 16.27. Romans
2.7. 2 Cor. 5.10. Revel. 20.13, and 22.12.
may be said to be according to our works, (as the Scripture frequently says it
shall be:) So it is plain that there cannot but be some considerable part of
our time and lives necessarily required (though we cannot definitely set down
how much) for attaining and exhibiting the same things in our selves. It is
very hard, or rather absurd, and unreasonable to imagine, that God in awarding
eternal life to men should only have respect in a manner to some transient
vanishing disposition of a dying person, as his serious mourning for sin at
that time; when as hitherto he is to be supposed to have voluntarily persisted
in the ways of it; and yet withal, that God should be said in making that
award, to render to such a person according to his works: what ground can there
be to think, either that such mourning (which men may well in this case be
supposed to be in a great part in a manner forced to, by the immediate approach
and fear of death) should be so highly considerable with God, above all the
voluntary and long continued courses in sin of the same person; or that being
so, and God therefore, that is, for that sorrow, or for some confident reliance
on Christ's merits at that time, accepting the said person to salvation; God
should be said herein to reward him according to his works? when as indeed in
this case, no other work of his, but one or both these at most, is to be
thought of any moment or consideration with God. As this therefore is
unreasonable to conceive; so it is all one to suppose, that the forementioned
change into a new creature can be made, or those other things signified; by
crucifying the flesh, and doing the words of Christ, and walking after the
spirit, can be transacted by a dying person, or in so little a time, as
ordinarily each sickness, as is the forerunner and fore-warner of death is
circumscribed with. No; these things are of greater import, than thus at once,
and on a sudden to be dispatched: it must be more than the work of a day or a
week, or a month ordinarily (and that when we are in our best disposition to
set about it, which sure in sickness we are not) to put off those old habits of
sin, which custom has made pleasing, and after a sort natural to us: and
instead thereof, to contract the contrary habits of righteousness and
delighting to do the will of God: to wash away those stains of the soul which
through the force of carnal lusts there inhabiting have been deeply inprinted
in it; and in their place to superinduce that divine beauty which is made up of
the proportionable mixture of spiritual graces, and is requisite to make us
truly amiable to God: and sure as he who considers the nature of our life how
unfaithful and uncertain it is (being such as may be terminated every moment,
and is often, suddenly, and when we least think of it) can think no time too
soon to set about and begin this work; so he who considers the greatness, and
multiplicity of the work in it self, or 'its importance in the infinite
consequence of it (the eternal salvation, or perdition of our souls, depending
on the performance or neglect thereof,) will think no wariness or diligence,
and consequently no time too much which it is possible for him to exhibit
toward the managing and accomplishing of it.

Now if any shall, notwithstanding all that has hitherto been said on this
subject, (as some I conceive will) be ready to object that this pressing of
works and obedience as necessary to salvation tends (1) to confound the Gospel
and the Law (2) to detract from and diminish the privilege of faith, and (3) to
require of men such a perfection as is not possible or very hardly attainable
by any man in this life. I shall in answer reply these things thereunto.

1. That there is, and so ought, carefully to be maintained a great difference
betwixt the Law and the Gospel: but the difference is not in this; that the Law
requires works and obedience as necessary in this case, and the Gospel requires
none, (for this to any one that reads the Gospel, and especially our Saviors
Sermon, on the mount will appear) to be false; but that the Law thus opposed to
the Gospel requires perfect works and obedience, undiminished with any
antecedent sins, and unstained with any present defects, in the doers of the
said works; that is such works as being performed would give a man cause of
glorying, and make that the reward should be reckoned to him not of grace, Romans
4.4.
but of debt: but the Gospel requires only, or rather allows as sufficient in
this case such works as in those respects are imperfect that is, such as for
the most part have many and great sins going before, and proportionable
failings accompanying the doing of them; and so can give a man no title but
only through Gods mercy in Christ to the glorious reward of eternal life,
held forth and sealed by him in his blood to the doers of such works, that is,
to all truly penitent persons. And from this difference betwixt the works
required in the law and the Gospel, there is another arises and that is this;
that those works of the law, if performed, would constitute the performers of
them equally righteous (they being all in this case to be supposed to have
lived without sin, and to have constantly and perfectly obeyed all the
commandments of God) but these of the Gospel admit an inequality in this
respect, and that not only in regard of time, some beginning sooner, and some
later to practice them; but also of degrees, some by reason of some natural
infirmities, or the want of outward helps, not attaining that exactness, or
expressing that fruitfulness, and abounding in the doing of them which others
do: and yet so long as they have put off all the habits of sin, and perform
proportionally to their strength and assistance the works of righteousness
required of them in the Gospel (which notwithstanding their former hindrances
they may,) they shall be as surely hereafter rewarded as those who have outdone
them herein by performing the said things in a higher measure.

2 I say touching faith, as the Apostle touching the law, by a little altering
and inverting his words; we do not abrogate but establish faith, by requiring
works and obedience to Christ's laws in that manner as we have done. There is
indeed a way of urging works with which faith is inconsistant; and that is, to
require them to be absolute and every way commensurate to the law of God,
without admitting or having need of repentance; in which sense the Apostle
disputes against them, or rather the possibility of being justified by them, in
the five first chapters of the Epistle to the Romans: and to such works faith
is opposed, yet not as one contrary to another; but as that which is imperfect,
to that which is perfect Faith, therefore (I say) being taken in that sense,
wherein it has those privileges of Justification, and so of salvatiou astribed
to it, does truly include works and obedience (that is such as we have
hitherto pressed as necesssary) in it: for the clearer manifesting of which, I
desire it may be observed that this word faith (like as many other words and
phrases in scripture) is of various acception, being sometimes used in a
stricter, sometimes in a larger sense.

1. Strictly and properly taken it signifies nothing else but, a firm assent
given to the doctrine, of Christ, and that which flows from such assent,
namely, an answerable confidence and reliance on God and Christ: and it is so
taken, when other things pertinent to the obtaining of salvation are added to
it; which things so added, the more they are, the more is the word faith
restrained in it is signification.

2. Largely and more improperly taken, it may either have some one or other
thing added to it, or else be placed singly by it self, and yet have salvation,
or that which is equivalent in sense ascribed to it: which notion of it, is
simply the largest; as for example when the Apostle says, there remains faith,
hope, and charity, he takes faith strictly so as not to compriz in it the other
two virtues; but when he says, 1. Cor. 13.
that in Christ Jesus nothing avails but faith working by love, Gal. 5.6.
he takes it a little more largely, so as to contain hope in it; and that not
without cause, for he that cordially believes Christ promising heavenly and
eternal glory to them that obey him, cannot but most earnestly desire the same
glory, and thereupon hope for it, and trust in Christ; but when he says, and
proves out of the prophet, Heb. 2.5. Rom 1.17. Act. 16.31.
that the just shall live by faith, and assures the Jaylour of salvation, by
his believing only on the Lord Jesus Christ; he takes faith in 'its largest
extent, comprizing both the former virtues in it, and what ever exercises of it
or them the Gospel which is the doctrine of faith commends to or requires of
us. So that that faith (we say) which through Gods mercy, has the privilege
of justifying and saving us annexed to it, comprizes besides that which is
properly and strictly signified by it, that obedience or piety of life, which
excludes all customs and habits of sin, and all grievous and voluntary acts of
it, though otherwise (as we have before said) this piety be not in all equal:
the truth of which, namely of this large comprehension of the notion of faith,
when it is thus dignified, may appear from these following considerations.

1. That disobedience or impiety is that which is opposed to this faith, as the
contrary to it, in those words of St. John, he that believes in the son has
everlasting life; (...), that is he that (as Beza and others render it) obeys
not the son shall not see life, etc. John. 3.36.

2. Because that which is one where ascribed to faith thus singly named, as
obtaining eternal life through the means of it, is elsewere in plain terms
ascribed to obedience, or such piety of life, as we have mentioned: thus
Christ is said to be the author of eternal salvation to them that obey him.
Heb. 5.9 and, Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the
keeping of the Commandments of God (that is all in all) 1. Cor. 7.19. and
again, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
Creature. Gal. 6.15.

3 Because it is fully evident from abundant, and that most clear Testimonies
of scripture, that for obtaining remission of sins, and so eternal life,
repentance, that is a change of the mind and life also to the better (as before
has been shown) is simply necessary; and St. James expressly testifies that a
man is not justified by faith only but by works also joined with it; James.
2.14.
and demonstrates this thing by the example of Abraham whom St. Romans 4.3.
Paul proves to have been simply justified by faith by that very same place of
Genesis 15.6. which St. James also sites in this business: and lastly because the
Apostle in the Epistle to the Romans, and also in that to the Galathians
largely teaches; that for escaping the severity and curse of the law, and to
become partakers of Gods heavenly kingdom, it is altogether necessary that we
walk not after the flesh, Gal. 5.
but after the spirit which phraise, what kind of exactness and piety it
emplyes, may be seen in the said places.

By all which (I say) it is plain; that faith cannot otherwise privilege us
from the wrath to come, or entitle us to heavenly happiness than as it has
obedience, or true piety joined with it; and consequently that whenever the
scripture ascribes these or the like privileges unto this term of faith or
believing singly and by it self; it means not faith barely in it is strict, and
proper sense; but includes also and comprizes under this notion the same
obedience or piety so necessarily required of us: so that this faith may be
said to be (as indeed it is) a certain agregate thing made up of faith strictly
and properly taken, and of its effects, that is, such piety and obedience.

Neither is it without great and important reasons, that the Scripture thus
speaks in this matter; that is, that not only, it rather uses (especially when
it speaks of our justification) the word faith, then other words more plainly
signifying piety of life; but also that it understands by, and usually
comprizes in this word faith, all that holiness of life, and obedience to Gods
commands which is now requisite under the Gospel for attaining salvation; for

1. Hereby is intimated, that the said holiness, or obedience proceeds from
faith, properly and strictly taken as the root or cause of it; and
consequently, that it is not of our selves, or from the sense of our own duty
(as we were bound, and as the Law truly required, that we are such holy and
obedient persons; but that, that which is to be reckoned the object, and cause
of such faith (namely the divine promises of the Gospel, promulgated by
Christ, and confirmed in his blood) is that which has originally wrought and
produced the said holiness in us: and so, that it is to be imputed to the free
grace, and bounty of God, thus graciously making and confirming the said
promises to us, and thereby exciting us hereunto, that we become such holy
persons.

2. Hereby is also signified, that which has been before observed, namely the
impersection of our obedience; that it is such, as ordinarily presupposes many
and great transgressions, and courses of unrighteousness going before, and also
implies, some proportionable failings still accompanying it: so that it is not
from any worth of its own, but from Gods infinite goodness, that it comes not
only to be accepted, but rewarded, (as God has promised and declared he will)
with eternal happiness and glory.

3. By this word faith, thus used, is intimated, that this very thing adds a
great price, or value (as I may so say) to our works and obedience, though
otherwise imperfect; and makes that we please God, namely in this, that we
trust in him, though we have never seen him; that we firmly believe his
promises, especially those, which by the course of nature seem impossible,
neither suffer our selves by any oppositions, or any difficulty of
performances, to be drawn from this hope; so, by this means giving God
constantly the praise of his infinite power, goodness, and truth.

For these reasons, we are to conceive it is, that the word faith is so often
singly used in Scripture, when it is intended, (and indeed cannot be otherwise)
that that obedience, which the Gospel elsewhere plainly requires of us, should
be conceived to be signified by, and included in it.

3. Touching the last particular of the foresaid supposed objection, wherein
the exception is against that obedience, or habitual observance, of the most
righteous Laws of Christ, (which we have labored to show and enforce as
indispensably necessary) for the seeming impossibility or extraordinary
hardness of it: though what has been already said on this subject, may in
great part serve to manifest the groundlesness of this exception; yet for the
fuller clearing of this important truth, I shall add somewhat also directly by
way of answer to it.

1. First then I say by this obedience or observing Christ's laws, I mean truly
a greater light of persecution in the doing of them, than I see most Christians
attain unto, or (as I have cause to think) ever intend or aim at; and that is
an habitual, and customary keeping of the said Laws; which cannot be done,
without an answeruble care, of knowing, and remembering them: and which being
done, necessarily excludes the habit and dominion of any sin, in the said
person. I am not willing to think them Christians indeed who have an intention
and desire, to obey these laws, and precepts of Christ, but do not really obey
them; neither can I think them, regenerate persons, and so, in a salvable
condition as yet, that do not that good which they would, but the evil which
they would not, as being in Captivity to the Law of Sin. Romans 7. chapter
The Apostle I know, uses these and other the like words, in his own person,
and as of himself; but they that will heedfully observe, either the occasion of
the Apostles entering into that discourse, together with the scope of it, or the
testimonies, which are elsewhere extant of him, Romans 9.2. 2 Cor. 11. 1 These.
2.10.
concerning his zeal, and exemplary integrity, and unweariedness in the service
of Christ; or lastly those quite contrary characters, whereby especially in
that Epistle to the Romans he describes a truly regenerate person; will I think
be enforced to grant that, which good expositors, Origines Chrysosto: Theodor.
Oecumenius, Ambrosius, Erasmus, Bucerus, Musculus.
both ancient and modern, declare to be their opinion herein, namely, that the
Apostle in that Chapter does, as (is not unusual with him elsewhere ( viz.
Romans 3.7. 1 Cor. 6.12.10.23.27.30. 131.2. Gal. 20.18.) personate another in
himself, that is speaks of a person, that is supposed to be yet under the Law,
and to whom the grace of Christ shining forth in the promises of the Gospel is
not known, nor has had any influence upon him; showing by instancing in
himself the miserable condition of such a person; and consequently must grant,
that those notes or affections, which he there ascribes to the said person
cannot belong to the Apostle, as he was then being a regenerate person, nor to
any other, that truly are so. And this thing, (and so that perfection we here
intend as necessary to salvation) will better appear, by observing the direct
contrary notes to those set down in that Chapter (as belonging to the person
there described) whereby a person truly regenerate is by the same Apostle
elsewhere set forth to us: Such are these, that this person is one, that has
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. Gal. 5.24. whereas the
former is one, in whom sin works all manner of concupiscence. Romans 7.8. This
person is one in whom the body of sin (that is sin it self) is destroyed, so
that he is dead to sin, and sin does no longer live or reign in him. Romans
6.2.6.11.12.14. but the former is one, in whom sin so lives, that it kills him
and subjects him to death. Romans 7.9.10.11 Lastly this person is one, that is no
longer in the flesh. Romans 7.5. that is freed from sin. Romans 6.18.22. that walks
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Romans 8.1.4. that by the Spirit
mortifies the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8.13. and that is free from the Law of
sin and also of death. Romans 8.2. but the former is one that is carnal, sold
under sin. Romans 7.14. that does not that good that he would, but the evil that
he would not. v. 19. that is in captivity to the Law of sin. v. 23. and that is
detained by the body of death (that is by death it self) from which as one in
misery he desires to be freed. v. 24.

All which being either formal or vertuall contradiction cannot agree to the
same person at the same time; and consequently imply, that the temper of that
person described in that chapter; and made up of those qualities and conditions
there assigned, is not possibly reconcilable to that other constitution of a
regenerate person, marked by those properties elsewhere extant, which we have
expressed: no, those do truly manifest the state of this person to be such as
we conceive to be necessary to bring any to the kingdom of heaven; and that
is, a state of freedom, from all habits, and courses of sin, 1. Joh. 4.3.9. c.
5.18.
and an answerable habitual walking in the commandment of God, and this St.
John further confirms, when he ascribes this great privilege, and perfection to
such a person, saying, that he is such a one, that sins not, nor can sin.

2. Though I think this perfection, as I have expressed it to be both a
possible, and necessary condition in this case; yet I am not so far a
Chatherist as to think that he cannot be a Christian that is not every way
perfect, or that commits the least offense against the precepts of Christ;
neither do I conceive, either the former notes of a regenerate person, or that
which has been last alleged out of St. John, to imply, that the said person is
so righteous as never in the least thing to sin, or offend, but only, that he
has not, (as I have before expressed) the habit of any sin, and that he does
not live in a course of sin, but ordinarily, and for the greatest part,
abstains from and avoids the committing of it: and this, I conceive, may
sufficiently appear by these following considerations.

1. That men's actions are esteemed, and so men themselves denominated, from the
greater part of them: thus we call him a sober person, and temperate in the
use of meat and drink, who ordinarily, or for the most part, avoids all excess
in in this kind; though sometimes it may happen, that contrary to his constant
wont and purpose, he transgress a just measure therein; and thus also we call
him a liberal man, who usually proportionably to his ability, and as prudence
shall direct, gives of his own though sometimes it may fall out, that in some
thing he may not be liberal, but may omit there to give where it is fit, and
there is truly need of it: and so answeably, he is to be esteemed, and so is
called in scripture, a righteous person, who does righteousness (as St. John
says) that is who ordinarily, practices and is really addicted, to works of
righteousness, prescribed in the word; though sometimes through common
frailty, or inadvertency, he may do something that is not truly righteous, or
agreeable to the said rule.

2. Because the word sin in the new testament is ordinarily wont, and used to
signify not any one single act of sinning, but either some grievous offense,
namely such as may argue the person guilty thereof, to be involved in others,
not light crimes, and which cannot consist with the fear of God in the same
person; or more and iterated acts of sinning as may appear from these places.
Luke. 15.18. Ioh. 9.2.3. Romans 6.15.2. Cor. 12.21.13.2. Heb. 3.17.

3. Because those places of scripture, which are used to set forth the state of
unregenerate and regenerate persons, are such as denote an habit or custom:
thus the former are said to walk and live after the flesh. Romans 8.1.13, and to
live in sin. Romans 6.2. and to commit sin. 1. Jo. 3.8. and the latter to walk
and live after the Spirit. Romans 8.1, and to live godlily. 2. Tim. 3.12. and to
live according to God. 1. Pet. 4. v. 6. as the word live, notes our manner or
course of living; so the word walk, answerably notes the accustomed actions of
our life, for as a way is often trod in, so that which we often and usually do
is called our way: and accordingly the Apostle exhorts us, that we should not
suffer sin to reign in us, nor yield our members to it as weapons of
unrighteousness. Romans 6.12.13. by which forms of speech he requires that we
should be exempted from the reign and dominion of sin, but not simply from
every act of it. It is true, according to the sense of Moses his law, the
single act of any one sin subjects a man to the curse, but according to the law
of liberty, that is, the Gospel of Christ, not every act, but every habit of
sin, submits us to the said curse, or eternal death: for if every such act
should now do this, the state we are now in under the Gospel, were to be
reckoned a great servitude, not a liberty: but if the habit of sin should not
do it, the same state might be justly reputed a state not of liberty, but of
licentiousness.

When the scripture faith, the just shall live (not by the merit of works, but)
by faith Romans 1.17 it does summarily, and most briefly describe the whole
manner of obtaining salvation, for in it that says none other but the just
shall live, it shows that there is need of Justice or righteousness to
salvation, and that, so much as by reason of it, we may be deservedly called
just or righteous; but in saying that he shall live, not by the force or merit
of his righteousness, but by faith, it thereby declares, that so great, and
absolute righteousness is not simply required, as must be altogether void of
any blemish, or defect; but if there be any thing wanting to its perfection, it
is (through the infinite goodness and mercy of God) supplied, and reckoned as
made up by faith.

3. I say, it may appear from hence, that that perfection which we hitherto
have pressed and conceive necessary to salvation, is neither impossible, nor
indeed so hard, but that men, if they be truly willing to set about it, may
by the assistance which herein they may expect from God, ordinarily and
assuredly attain unto it: It is no more in effect but to take upon us Christ's
yoke which he himself tells us is easy, or, Math. 11.30. 1. Joh. 5.3.
to keep the commandments of God, which St. John tells us are not, (that is the
keeping of them being so understood as we have before expressed) grievous, it
is true, both these are hard, and harsh enough, in themselves, that is, taken
as separated from that which is held forth in the Gospel, as the glorious
reward and recompense of them: but if we look upon them, as sweetened with this
allective, and so taste it, and them together, we shall have no cause to
complain of any such harshness as men naturally imagine in them, yea this will
make us, if we truly taste it by firmly believing of it, not only take delight
in the doing, and limiting of our selves, to the said commandments; but also
digest all difficulties, by vigorously going thorough any dangers, that shall
oppose our doing of them. The men of this world, (as the Psalmist calls them)
having hopes given them, of some vanishing, and with all uncertain profit, and
apprehending, no other way of coming thereunto, are temperate in all things, 1
Cor. 9.25.
even so as to abridge themselves, in many otherwise beloved delights, and
expose themselves, to many tedious hardships, and hazards: and may we not then
well think, that that certain, eternal and unmeasurable good, namely, the
glory hereafter to be revealed, if it were truly eyed, and hoped for by us,
would have the like, or rather far greater influence upon us, that is, to
derive strength and courage into us, so as to make us both insist in the ways
of Gods commandments, and to overcome all hindrances that we shall meet with
in that way.

I doubt not, but if (as in the former case) there were no grounds left in men's
minds, (as the scripture rightly understood affordes none) whereon to exspect,
any possibility of coming, to the said glory, but by the aforesaid means, that
is, the habitual observing of the Laws of God, delivered to us by Christ; many
that now content themselves with very remiss and faint endeavors in this kind
(as thinking such, through the force of some corrupt opinions they have
entertained sufficient to this purpose) would so vigorously bestir themselves
about this work, as actually to manifest a greater measure of perfection in
performing the said commands, than yet they have had a serious thought of ever
aiming at.

This is that which by this discourse I have labored to awaken men unto, as
conceiving I could not possibly do, a greater act of charity for others than to
rouse them out of that sleep (how sweet soever) which is certain to end in
death, and such I cannot but think that persuasion to be, whereby men believe
some faint desires to do well, or late contrition for not doing so, or
performing some one, or other good duty now and then, or indeed any thing else
but such habitual observance of the laws of Christ, and change into a new
creature, as we have spoke of, to be available for their eternal welfare. Some
perhaps, will account this, and so distaste it, as too sharp or sour a
doctrine; but yet if it be sound and wholesome (as notwithstanding such
sharpness it may be, and being rightly examined, I doubt not but it will appear
so) there will be no cause, I hope, for them, to reject it. Most things that
are physical either for restoring, or confirming health, are commonly
unpleasing; having nothing to commend, or induce to the taking of them, but
only the hope of the following good: and I had rather be like such a Physician
that fits his prescription to the disease, and necessity of his patient, than
him that shall temper it to the patients humor, or palate: when (as in this
case) both cannot be provided for; but the disease must either remain uncur'd,
or else the Palate be displeased.

If any will, by the light of the word, (the only oracle of truth in this kind)
undertake to show me, or others, a shorter and easier way to the kingdom of
heaven, than that which I have described; I am not such a stranger to my own
inclination, as to think I should be backward (such a way being so manifested)
to embrace and think well of it. I have cause rather to fear, that the
apprehension of such shortness and ease in the way pretended to be demonstrated
in this manner (though it should not be really, but only seemingly so done)
might tempt me to incline to much too, and in my judgment approve of it.

In the mean time, my judgment standing at present as it does, that is,
convinced into a belief of that which I have written on this subject, and
thereby labored to persuade others unto: I hope those that are of a contrary
persuasion in this matter, will be so charitable, as to impute what I have so
writ not to any affectation of novelty, or of seeming stricter than others; but
rather to a sense of that obligation and duty, which in this case must be
supposed to lie upon me, namely, to do all that is in my power to convince
others, into a belief of that, which I conceive so important a truth: it being
not possible, in my apprehension of things, for any to be saved, but who acts
according to it, which without such a belief of it, it is not probable many
will do.

It is, and always shall be my prayer, that God would open the eyes of those
who make profession of the name of Christ, to see such errors in Religion as
are most probable to make the same profession altogether ineffectuall for their
future comfort; that Christians may be Orthodox in that, (whatever mistakes
they otherwise live in) whereon the salvation of their most precious souls most
nearly depends; and if this work of mine prove serviceable (as I hope in some
degree it may) to this end, I have that which I aim at, and I desire, that God
(to whom it of right belongs) may have all the glory hereof.

To him be praise both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Appendix.
What is meant here by the Laws of Christ. Page. 3 All these Laws comprised
under three heads of Godliness. Page. 4 All these Laws comprised under three
heads of Righteousness. Page. 4 All these Laws comprised under three heads of
Sobriety. Page. 4 Touching which are briefly shown 1. The express duties of
each. 2. The common violations of the said duties among Christians.
Wherein the duties of godliness consist, and how much the said duties are
disused. Page. 5 Wherein the duties of righteousness consist. Page. 6 And how
much they are violated, especially the duty of loving enemies. Wherein the
duties of sobriety consist. Page. 8 And how much the said duties are neglected.
Page. 9 That these Laws of Christ, are not by Christians looked upon, as
binding Laws Page. 11 That the aim of the discourse, and of this Appendix, is
to have them accounted binding, and to show that an habitual observing o^ them
is indispensably necessary to salvation. Page. 1^ Whence the opinion of those,
who hold the observation of these Laws unnecessary, o^ not fit to be pressed,
proceeds. Page. 1^ The places of Scripture requiring the actua^ observing of
the said Laws so plain, as no^ possible to be reconciled to the contrary sense.
Page. 1^ Other places seemingly making to the contrary, fewer and darker than
the former and therefore to be expounded conformably to them. Page. 1^ That the
observing of Christ's Laws, and the pressing hereof, makes truly for his honor.
Page. 19 That no danger hereby of setting up self-righteousness, this term
being rightly understood? Page. 22 How our observing of Christ's Laws may be
called self-righteousness. Page. 24 Touching that passage in the late Common
Prayer Book. At what time soever, etc. the ill consequence of it, and how
disagreeing with the Text. Page. 26 Touching the example of the penitent Thief;
the ill use that is made thereof, and that not possible now to be paralleld,
shown by three reasons. Page. 29 What the Scripture understands by that
repentance to which forgiveness of sins is promised. Page. 34 That this
repentance is not always truly possible, during this life. Page. 35 That that
repentance which is here always possible, will not be always profitable.
Page. 36 How despair may be the effect of this doctrine, and that such despair
is not a sin. Page. 40 That mourning for sins, is to be encouraged in dying
persons who have hitherto lived wickedly, though it cannot be effectual in
this case to salvation. Page. 41 That it is in the power of God so to accept
such mourning, but presumption in us to say or expect that he will. Page. 42
(...) Conditions required that the intention of doing good may be accepted for
the act, neither of which to be supposed in a dying person that has hitherto
neglected to reform his life. Page. 43 This question answered, What proportion
of our time is absolutely necessary to be spent in the obedience of Christ?
Page. 47 The true difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel in requiring works
or obedience, and betwixt the works required in the one, and in the other.
Page. 52 That the requiring of works to salvation in that manner as is herein
expressed, is no way contrary to the doctrine of faith. Page. 54 The word Faith
in the Gospel of various acception. Page. 55 And that when it has
justification, or salvation ascribed to it, it includes in it obedience, or
piety of life; this shown by three reasons. Page. 56 Why the Scripture rather
uses the word Faith when it means thereby piety of life, than other words more
plainly signifying the said piety. Page. 59 That the habitual observing of
Christ's Laws here urged imports a greater height of perfection, than most
Christians attain or aim after. Page. 61 By occasion whereof is shown, that
that which St. Paul speaks as of himself. Romans 7. Is not to be meant of
himself, as he was then, nor o^ other regenerate persons. Page. 62 That the
perfection here urged, and which the Gospel requires as simply necessary to
salvation, excludes only the custom and dominion of sin, not the being of it;
shown by three reasons. Page. 65 That though this perfection or obedience be
harsh and difficult in it self, yet it is sweetened and made easy by the reward
held forth to it. Page. 69 The Conclusion by way of Apology for the seeming
harshness of this doctrine, together with the Authors reason for thus publicly
asserting it. Page. 71
FINIS.

