A Copy of a Letter sent to the Hague, about the latter end of May, 1691. with
a Book enclosed, (hereafter mentioned) and sealed up, and superscribed after
the following Manner.
These for Him that is commonly styled, William King of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, wheresoever he now inhabits in Holland, or in the other parts
beyond the Sea, to be opened by himself only; with all carefulness and speed.
This is desired and required in the Name of the Great and Almighty God, whese
Truth it is.
To the present King William, Richard Stafford, a Scribe of Jesus Christ,
desires Temporal Preservation, and Eternal Salvation.
IN Order to that, You are desired and required (by the Duty which you owe unto
God, and by that concern thou have for the welfare of thine Immortal Soul, in
the succeeding and eternal state) to read these Words of his Law, and these
Statutes of the Lord thy God, which are here gathered together in this short
enclosed printed testimony of Truth, entitled, Things plain and weighty, etc.
Which I have published forth unto the World, and have taken this method to send
it unto thy self, that thou may know the things which so greatly and
immediately belong unto thee. Thou may in less than half a minute cast thine
Eye upon the lowermost Paragraph of Page 6. and then turn over to Page 12,
wherein if it did so happen unto thee, as was expressed in the Public Gazett,
when thou wentest forth in the Ireland Expedition, that sign may in like manner
signify, as the renting of the Skirt of a Mantle to one of old, 1 Samuel 15.27,
28. That the Kingdom shall be removed from thee, (but thy Body shall not be
hurt nor injured) and restored back to a Neighbor of thine, who had both the
^ight and Possession, before thou tookest the last away from him by false
Accusation. It was an effect of God's infinite Mercy, that when thou had
taken Possession, and afterward did go forth to kill, 1 Kings 21.19. and
thou did appear in an Open and Hostile manner against thy Uncle and Father in
Law, that thou also did not fall at Ramoth-Gilead, 1 Kings 22.20, by a like
Judgment which came upon Ahab, as is there recorded. Thou did not thoroughly
consider, that whosoever hates his Brother, is a Murderer: and ye know that no
Murderer has eternal life abiding in him, 1 John 3.15. and thou may for
this be Judged by God, as one of those Murderers of Fathers, and Manslayers, 1 Timothy 1.9. (against which the Law of God is made, and will take hold of thee,
notwithstanding thou art now above any Law of Man) although he fled for his
Life, and escaped thine Hands; for God knows the Heart, and whither it was in
thy mind to kill and slay, and deal with him as an Enemy. As also his Subjects
will be pronounced Perjured Porsons, verse 10. and are therefore liable to the
future Vengeance of God, though now by reason of their multitude, they escape
all present Punishment. Except ye repent, ye shall all suffer for these things.
And if thou will go on in thy Disobedience and Transgression and Contempt of
the Law of thy God; If thou will hold fast that Kingdom thou have gotten by
Violence and Wrong, Behold herein the height and depth of sin, that a Worm of
five or six foot long should all against and contrary to the Will and
Commandment of the great God who fills Heaven and Earth with his Presence; and
consequently it involves the Creatures in a proportionableness and eternity of
Punishment and Misery.
any Law or Ordinance of God to the contrary notwithstanding: If thou will
still try and endeavor to keep that which God has determined to take from
thee, he will nevertheless be too strong for thee. For, as the Lord lives, the
Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend into
Battle and perish, 1 Samuel 26.10. Yet thou shall be brought down to hell (which
there signifies the Grave) to the sides of the Pit, Isa. 14.15. And then the
Kingdom will be removed from thee to thine eternal loss. Then thou shall
remember, that Richard Stafford was the best Friend which thou had in this
World; for he did long ago counsel and admonish K. William, seeing he is so
desirous of a Kingdom, that he take heed, least by endeavoring to keep a
tottering moveable Kingdom here on Earth, he lose that Eternal Kingdom above,
which cannot be shaken; which counsel at that time, viz. January 4. 1689. was
not taken and received; but then there will be worse and longer Indignation and
Anguish, that thou did not in the days of thy Trial, comply therewith. (Mark
this) God can turn the Hearts of our Lords, and Counselors, and wise Men, that
they may perceive their sin and error: And they may undo that by the words of
Truth and Righteousness, which was transacted by a little more than the greater
number of those who were misled by Ignorance, sinful and Ungodly Principles, or
Thoughts of Iniquity. So that if thou will not do it of thy own accord, and
free mind, God will do it either by way of Judgment or Mercy. It is by way of
Mercy, as long as there shall not be the least harm done to thy outward Person;
but only thou art to be Gently, Isa. 40.11. (for so is God's method) put down
one step lower into that station thou were in before. Herein no wrong will be
done unto thee; For, Cannot Princes be contented; except they be altogether
Kings? What a Confusion and Disturbance would this make throughout the whole
Creation, if every Man, wherein God has placed him, would not therein abide;
but he would step out or above his Rank, whither by Right or Wrong, Violence or
Cunning? Thou sensibly, and by experience, know that Ambition is restless
and uneasy, and thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way: So that if thou
do come down from what thou art now climbed up, and to what thou were before,
thou will live more happy and contented here on Earth, and be in the true and
ready way to Heaven, which is, in keeping tha Commandments of God, and not
going aside; but to remain in that calling or condition, in that rank and
Degree, wherein the Creator of Mankind did place and appoint thee. However,
Think or do whatever thou will, it is most wicked, and provoking to attempt it;
but it is vain and impossible to resist God. For though the Ungodly and
Rebellious may seek and endeavor to do it for a while, yet he cannot long
cont;nue to act contrary to what God has purposed. There is no Wisdom, nor
Understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord.

It is my proper business to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to
Israel his sin; even to the King upon the Throne, all one as to the Beggar upon
the Dunghill. And therefore I do here use this freedom in words of truth; for,
Cursed is that Deceiver, who does the Work of the Lord deceitfully. But I do
really and unfeignedly desire, that thou may live out all those days, which
God has appointed to the Life of Man upon Earth. Take heed therefore, because
thou have bern a Man of War, whose sword has shed much blood: And it being
both written, and often experienced, All they that take the Sword, shall perish
with the Sword, Mat. 26.52. and their Blood is oftentimes shed on the Earth:
Thy own memory and knowledge can furnish thee with several Examples of those
who have been at last killed in War, after they have fought many Battles, and
escaped many near imminent dangers, I say again therefore unto thee, Take great
heed unto thy self, least it should happen unto thee after this manner: My
hearts desire and prayer unto God is, that thou may be eternally saved; but
in order to that, it is necessary to tell thee, That it is impossible f^r God
to lie, ahd that it is a contradiction in terms, That he (who accepts not the
person of Princes, nor regards the rich more than the poor, for they are all
the work of his hands) should save any one whatever in the continued breach and
transgression and contempt of his own Laws. If the King does indeed desire to
live for ever, and would be saved by Christ, and partake of the heavenly
Blessing, there is no other way to obtain all this, but by turning himself away
from his Iniquities, or In-Equities, viz. by ceasing to do those things which
are not equal.

As thou have any regard to thine own Eternal Happiness or Misery, consider
what is here written, and give (...)he glory, as to Obey him in all things.
Only in so doing thou shall.

Dated from Lon^^^, May 11. 1691. FARE WELL.

To the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of England, at what Time
or Place soever, They shall be in Parliament Assembled.
Richard Stafford, a Scribe of Jesus Christ, desires Temporal Preservation,
and Eternal Salvation.
IN Order to that, I have sent you these three Printed Testimonies of Truth,
which God has been pleased to show unto me his Servant; to the intent that
they may be carefully laid up against the next Sessions of Parliament, when
they shall continue to sit to do Business. Such a great Counsel and Assembly is
not to be concerned with every trifle and impertinency; but seeing that it is
now come to pass in this Generation and latter days, That they who have so long
sat to make Laws for others, God has now raised up one to set his Laws before
themselves; Ye ought not to be still as your Forefathers, a Rebellious and
Stubborn Generation, who have continually cast away the Law of the Lord of
Hosts, and despised the Word of the Holy One of Israel, who will not suffer all
his Judgments to be before you, but ye do put away his Statutes from you. For
the times past may suffice the Nations to have reigned wholly themselves, and
to shut out the sense of God with the knowledge and Obligation of his Law; this
is hardly suffered to come into their minds, but in no wise to enter into their
Consultations. But this know, that God did never give Riches and Honor to any
of his Creatures for them to despise him after this manner. Wherefore ye ought
to receive and hearken, and attend unto the Words of his Grace and Truth.
Whereby, or the like words, The Lord of Hosts has purposed to Order and
Establish Government and Peace, (for both should go together) with Judgment and
with Justice, from henceforth even for (...), and to settle Righ^eousness in
these three Kingdoms, which are united one to another: And the like way and
method (by Obedience unto the Lord, and by doing according to the Laws, Rules,
and Directions he has given) will be transmitted to all the other Habitable
Parts of the Earth. Which now with its Foundations are out of course, and the
dark places thereof are full of the habitations of cruelty. But the way is
showed, and the means are left in your power to set them in right order again,
and to adjust all things by way of Mercy and Reconciliation.

It will be convenient upon the first day, or at the beginning of your Meeting,
to bring forth these Books of Divine Truths in (which there is not one Sentence
or Line, without Plain and weighty signification) that they may be read amongst
you. For the Word of the Great and Eternal God, should be preferred before the
Speech of a little and Dying Man.

I thought it convenient to do thus, and advertise you hereof by this way of
writing, or Epistle; because in case of my own Mortality, That ye may be able
after my Decease so have these things always in Remembrance, If God, in whose
hand my Breath is, should take it away by Sickness, or common Accident; or if
the Devil by his Incornate Instruments, and by the outward means of
Assassination, Poison, close Imprisonment; (and so dying for want of Air) or by
that Judiciary kind of Murder, as in times past, as by slaying the Prophets
for setting the Laws of God before the People, and for testifying against their
Transgression, and for exhorting to the Observance of (...) Commandments: Yet,
if any of these should happen unto me, I shall see again the People of my
Generation, and more particularly, those who shall Persecute or Murder me.
Which God forbid and restrain them from either. I shall also know, and make my
Return how ye have received and obeyed this Word. However it was sent unto, and
delivered unto you at such a Time, and after such a manner, That ye may
nevertheless take this great Matter into Consultation. And if Righteousness and
Peace be then thoroughly and universally established upon sure, firm and lasting
Foundations, It will be the most Glorious and Happy Session that has been in
England this last hundred years, or ever since it has been a Nation and
People. For it is both their bounden Duty, and it is necessarily required to
their Good, for the whole World, and all things therein to obey the Law of
their great Creator. And notwithstanding all foolish, vain or false
Imaginations, This will be your Wisdom and your Honor in the sight of the
other Nations of the World, and all besides that is really excellent and truly
desirable.

Which, that ye may all do, I shall not only pray to God after the manner of
Formal Clergymen, or Mock-Worshippers; But I do herein put you in Mind, That
ye both may; and also ye are hereby required to do according as God has said
and commanded in the Bible. And to this the Obligation is as much greater then
for any to comply with your Acts, Statutes, Ordinances, Constitutions, as God
is great than Man, Heaven higher than Earth, Eternity longer than this short
Life, a most perfect and enduring Happiness, and Salvation does exceed the
fading, imperfect, trivial Conveniences, and the utmost Preservation which can
be had in this World.

So witnesses, Richard Staffard, a Scribe according to the Promise and sending
of Jesus Christ Who all that he spoke, did or suffered, was to this great and
only end, That he might bring us to God.
Dated from London, July 21. 1691.
FINIS.


