COUNCEL OF States-Policy OR The Rule of Government, set forth.

Showing the Nature of our present Government. In a Dialogue between a Country
Man and a Scholar; As also the various Regiments of Nations, Kingdoms, and
Commonweals, and a lively description of the said Governments, with the
grounds of their Rise, Continuance, and Fall. viz.

Monarchical. Aristocraticall. Oligarchicall. Democraticall, etc.
Whereunto is added the new Engagement, to be taken throughout the
Commonwealth, as touching the lawfullnes of it.

By Robert Spry of Plymouth Gent.

LONDON, Printed for John Hancock, at the first shop in Popes head Ally, next
to Cornhill.

16^^

To the Iuditious, Critic and Honest Reader.
GENTLEMEN,
I Imagine you expect a fro^tispiece, or rather, on Epistle to this Book: b^t
considering that Epistles are, or ought to be the full demonstration of the
ensuing discourse; and taking no^ice that of te^ times the Front ^r Exordium is
only looked on, and the resid^e l^id ^si^e, especially when it sui^s not the
p^late of the Reader; I theref^re wittingly have omi^ted the sam^, well knowing
that the bent of the ^nsuing Lyn^s, could not well be pla^ed in the front of
such a Pamphl^t, or if set, then, It would resembl^ an Alde^ man^ Po^ch, to a
Country man's C^tt^g^ wh^^h ^n^ou^^edly, would render ^he Fahr^ck r^dicolo^s. I
desire that the Aut^o^s fa^^^ngs may be Ca^didly ^e^sured, th^se being the
first fruits an^ga^herings of

Gentlemen, Your affectionat servant Robert Spry.
Plymouth 30. October. 1649.
State Policy.
C. SIR,

I Have of late heard much of a Commonwealth, but know not what it means: I
presume your late coming from Oxford, can somewhat inform me what it i^, and
its my earnest desire to know?


S. A Commonwealth is a multitude of Men, ruled by one government.


C. Our Ancient acquaintance encouraged me to demand this question of you, and
I now perceive by your short Answer, which is so knotty and difficult to my
understanding, that you have a desire to renew our old familia^ity, by more
questions from m^; I shall therefore desire, if your leasur^ will permit, to
unfold to me in our country Language, what this word Government is? and not
answer me by Scholasticall resolutions, which make me farther of from, being
informed, then when I first demanded the question.


S. My friend and Country man, by your last question, I am sensible, you either
go about to inquire of my proficiency at the University; or else do propound
the question thoroughly to be informed; friend, ^nregard of your former love to
me, I will make bold to borrow so much time, if your patience will give
audience thoroughly to instruct you in this matter, by a more larger unfolding
the particulars of this your Quere, that so I may not put you to unnecessary
Questions.


C. Sir, I am greatly beholding to you that you have not forgotten your old
friend, but are willing to have discourse with him, I pray proceed to the
Answer, and I shall attentively give ear.


S. Government is a settled order of Commanding and obeying; Order is maintained
by three things, viz. Religion, Laws, and Magistrates: the definition of
Religion, I presume you know, but because of my promise to you; and to avoid
multitude of questions, I will describe it what it is.

Religion is that worship of God publicly professed and practiced, and is
maintained by Laws and Magistrates.


C. Do all Nations agree that there is a God?


S. Yea; all Nations agree in those three Propositions.

1. That there is a God:

2. That God is the punisher of offenses and rewarder of virtues.

3. That whatsoever is a God ought to be worshipped.


C. Is there not a difference amongst Nations concerning God?


S. The difference of Nations, consists i^ th^se two points.

1. In their opinion, what is God, Christians Jews and Turks, do all hold
there is but one God.

The Heathens in times past, and now many of the Americans: as also the people
far Northward, do hold that there are many Gods, and worship them
accordingly.

2. The second difference amongst Nations is, In the manner of worshipping of
God, and so the Christian Jews, and Turks, do mainly differ.


C. What is the Center of a Commonwealth?


S. The Center of a Commonwealth, where the hearts of all men in the same State
do meet, is Religion. The force of L^^es is sh^wn^ only upon occasions. The
better sort of the people will be sure to observe them, Lex non est justo
posita. The Law is ma^e for the offender: As for offenders, Law can lay hold no
farther then prooffes may be ma^e of offenses: Scelera tan^um Probatalege
P^n^untur. Religion holds a perpetual strength, and aw^t^ the Conscience,
restraining facts, dicta, cogitata, by the power of the which, Nemo nocens, se
judice, absolvitur.


C. What is the chief disturbance in a Common wealth?


S. Nothing s^oner divides a State, th^n distraction in Religion, as may
appear in old stories, by the distraction, as the Egiptians who worshipped
several Gods in their Countries, and of latter times, by the strange Tumults in
Germany, the Civil Wars in France, and the sad condition of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, at this time.


C. What then is the best way to ma^ntaine Amity in a State?


S. The greatest band of unity in a State, is unity and conformity in Relig^or,
neither can any State safely s^ff^r diverse Religions to be publiq^ely
mai^tained, or men of different Religion, from that which is maintained, to
have any power to work a charg.


C. Show me by what Divine power, Magistrates can enforce contentious men to
conformity, in the public exercise of Religion?


S. You now put me to it in deed; but I will not now take it upon me to resolve
you in such a point; our only dis^ourse now is, what the greatest Politit^a^s
hold for the suppa^tation of a Weal^-publick o^ State.


C. I may not then pin my faith, on what you relate, but I am to take it as the
writing of ancient State^ men, who labor to uphold that Government, they have
set up, or have lived under, I pray then go on, and show me what Nations have
been most strict in enforcing men to outward consormity?


S. The Spaniard is the most observant of this, of all Nations, m^i^taini^g an
Inquisition, not only to censure dict^ and facta, of any that se^m to differ
from th^^, but to search the very ^^^^g^ts of (...), (...) by any m^ans they
s^sp^ct different.


C. Are the Turks so ^^^^re, to those (...) live with in their Territorie^?


S. No^. The T^rks ^^^so^ver (...) inquir^ into no man, ^^^rly for Religion, if
he do not scandalize theirs yet they suffer neither Christians, nor Jews, nor
any ^pp^si^s to their Religion, to have either Ar^or or A^thority.


C. Did the Ancient Romans make War for Religion?


S. The old Romans in their m^nif^ld Conquests, never pretended occasion of
quarr^ll, by difference of Religion: but either revenge of wrong offered to
their Citizens, or to their State, or else the roleeving of their Confederates
oppressed, or maintaining of their weak Neighbors.


C. Did the Romans regard the Religion of their Enemies?


S. The Religion of ^^^ir Enemies, they had of it rever^nd esteem; how soever
they strictly observed Patri^s Rit^s, yet they often brought home Peregrinos
Deos. and in the besieging of Cities, they had many Ceremonics and expiations,
ad evocandum tutelares loci Deos, to show they sought not against their Gods,
but d^sired they would not succor their people, and so should be reverenced in
the Roman Territory.

After the Roman Empire was grown to the height, and could not sustain their
own greatness, and the Civil weeds sprang, all those Rites were omitted or
forgotten. Ambition openly professed, that it fought Pro imperio, neither was
there any cause pretended between the Concurre^ces, but the getting of the
Empire. On th^se terms the world passed until Mahomet devised a new and
strange Religion in the East parts, which set the world in a mighty difference,
laying two grounds to encourage his followers, the first, that whosoever dyed
in War against the Christians or other Enemies to the Mohammedan Law, did
instantly pass to all pleasure and delights in Paradise. The second that death
was so necessarily ordained to men, that n^ violence would end a man before his
time, nor weariness avoid it at the time. Of this Mahomet the Saracens first,
and after them the Turks a mighty people borrowed their Religion. Of him there
Haman family l^arned to cover the fire of Ambition, wish the Ashes of Religion,
and under pretense to propogate it, to persuade their followers both to fight
and ^o dye resolutely?


C. I partly believe that the Pope and his Pred^c^ssors have hitherto walked by
the Mohammedan Rule you last discoursed of.


S. The Papa^^, in the general, have very much followed this course or rule,
as you call it; concealing all their private revenges and ambitions desires,
under the pretense of the Catholic cause: And that with that confident
persuasion and c^edulity of heir fellows, that many of the Pap^sticall
Soldiers, if he has a Cro^^e o^ his back, and the Papisticall benediction
over his head, think that either they are not of danger in earth, orif they
dye, they have a present passage to Heaven, at least shall pass through Pur^
gatory, and so escape Hell.

In this point there is great difference betwix^ the present and anci^nt
Romans, that the ol^ Romans had a reverend opinion of the Religion of all
Countries, though different from them, and would never suffer any despite or
wrong to be sh^w^d to the Conq^^r^d under that name of Religion, which is not
in particular men's power to take or leave as they list.

The present Papists m^ke their decrees, the R^les of all truth in Religion,
and those that are different, they curse, and mis^hiefe by all m^ans they can
invent, accounting them Atheists, Miscreants, and Heretics etc. which violent
proceeding has enforced the like vehemence in the opposites to judge of him
and his, in like sort, which has been the sole cause of the great distraction
in Christendom, and laid it so open to the Mahometans.

There is no mischief that works so dangerously as that which is carried with
a Color of Religion. Simulata sa^ctitas duplex iniqu^tas. For that nothing can
carry a multitude so forci^ly, as blind z^^l and superstition in any cause
undertaken. In times past, Sortorius a Roman, raised Portugal, and the better
part of Spain, defeated the Roman Armies, wo^king credit with his followers by
pretendi^^ confer^nce with Diana, by means of a White heart. Mahomet by his Dove
and Bull of late times, the Seriff^ in Africa under a pretended Holiness, gate
first his strength, by which ^e turned the lawful Prince out of the State and
settled himself and his. John of Leyden at one time, and Muncerus at another
time, raised those great Tum^lts in Germany.


C. Sir, in your description of Government, I remember you told me that order
was maintained or supported by those three things, Religion, Law, and
Magistrater, you have given me ample satisfaction concerning Religion. I desire
you would now discover to me what Law is?


S. Laws are certain Rules written, or customs continued, by which the right
of persons, actions, or things are determined.


Ius triplex est.

1. Ius naturae, Is the light of nature, by which we know what is wrong, being
offered unto us, and that the same is wrong, being committed by our selves
against others.

2. Ius Ge^tiu^, The Law observed by all Nations, how different so ever, and is
the rule deciding right between men of sundry Common we^lths, and it specially
concerns Leagues, Contracts, Captives, etc.

3. Ius Civil, Is that by which the Citizens of every state are ruled, and it
is of two sorts.

1. Ius C^m^une, or Ius Iusticiae, the Common Law which is contained in the
letter of the Law, or in the Customs of the Country, and this in particular
causes may sometimes be the cause of wrong, as is often spoken, Summa jus, s^mma
inj^ria.

2. I^s Equitatis, The Law of Equity, when a particular case by reason of some
circumstance, desires help and ease against the rigor of the Law; such wa^ Ius
Pretorium amongst the Romans, and the Court of Chancery with us in England.

In the Case where the stranger saved the City by mounting on the Walls, and
encouraged the Citizens to keep the Town against the Enemy, contrary to the
Law, Peregrinus in mures si ascenderi^ Capitale e^t^: the action in it self
most honorable, is by the letter of the Law, Capital.

Besides all these there is Ius Pr^rogativae, which rests wholly in them, be
they one or more, in whom the Supreme power and Authority rests. Such have
Princes in absolute Monarchies, and such a Power had the people of Rome, when
the State was Popular, to receive appeals from any of their Judges, to call
matters determined by L^w to a new audience, to suspend the ^xecution of any
sentence, or to pardon the punishment: S^c^ also has been the accustomed power
of the Parliaments of E^gl^nd.

The Law is nec^ssary for every State, for that Leges fiunt p^opter bomines;
homines non fiunt p^opter L^ges. Men a^e not made to satisfy the Law in its
rigor, but Laws are made for the safety ^n^ preservation of men. Salus Populi
suprema L^x.

C. D^e all N^^ions ^gree in their Laws?


S. Noe.


C. How then a^ their Laws to be discerned or known?


S. There are two Rules by which the Laws and Custom^s of Countries are to be
discerned.

1. By the Law of Nature, spoken of before, by that light, by which we kno what
is right or wrong, either in doing or suffering. Altrine facias, quod tibi
factum nolis; in this all good estates agree, in the substance, framing their
positive Laws against Atheism, Murder, Adultery, Theft, etc. Things in the
light of Nature Condemned. Nations also differ in the punishment and means of
restraining which is not in Nature defined. If any Law in a State be made
against this of Nature, it must needs be inconvenient as implicating a
contradiction in the Government to other Laws. For that the whole Law of
nature, is most agreeable, and conformable, in all the several parts unto it
self.

2. The second Rule by which the Law of Nations are discerned; is, by the
Supposition of the State, that is; by comparing the Law or Custom, with the
maine government in Practice, for if a Law be made which holds not on scope
with the present Government establish^d, it must needs breed variance and
discord, and in the end some occasion for one party to assail the other. As it
must needs happen to a Monarchy, if the people get any power to deal in the
State; but most commonly in a popular State; if either they continue their
great Offices for too long a time, or yield too great authority, ^y Decree, ^o
any one man. Sylla first, and afterward Caesar gate the whole state into their
hands, by the name of perpetual Dictators. Augustus, ^y a more populer name,
Tribune of the people.


C. By this I understand, that its a dangerous thing, suddenly to alter a
standing Law, or custom of a Nation or State; for you say that diverse
distractions and broils do ensue thereupon?


S. Ancient Laws and customs, are not to be suddenly changed, though they be
but of small importance. Plato thinks that the change of M^sick ought not to be
suffered, least that should also change men's conditions. Amongst the Thurans
whosoever attempted a new. Law, must persuade it with a Halt^r about his neck,
with which he was to be ^anged, if he failed in showing the necessity of it.

New Laws are seldom ^eceived with entire consint, and hardly observed at the
first, if there be not great necessity; which necessity seldom appears, but
with hazard, which may breed much danger before the L^w be established.

Few Laws make show of much vert^e and ^bedience, yet it is more security when
all Laws necessary have been together framed, and by continuance gotten
strength. It is better to prevent a mischief, then to seek for a remedy, after
it is happened; for though it be true, that (in corruptissima Rep. plures sunt
leges) yet its true ratione signi, not ratione Causae, for that Laws do not
make any corruption, but show it, which would be greater if it were not hindered
by Law, and men, must be supposed as they are, not as they should be; that as
occasions of all natures do arise, so in time vices of all soets will sooner
show themselves then v^r^ues.


C. What you have already spoken concerning Law suffices, I shall now entreat
you, for my more clear and distinct apprehension, to resolve Magistracy into
the several heads and branches thereof?


S. Magistracy, is a power in men which boldeth all in obedience to Religion
and Law.


C. You are again harping on your old string, the power of Magistrates in
matters of Religion, but I believe you will not now resolve me, in regard you
have denied me formerly?


S. I told you before, and I tell you again, I cannot now resolve you, because
it is a matter of great consequence, and the greatest Scholars are (if I may
so say) to their Ne plus ultra, concerning this thing, but I shall ^re long
take some opportunity to give you my thoughts herein, I will let it pass now
and proceed to the matter in hand, relating to Magistrates.


Magistrates are of two sorts.

1. Supreme, who have the first place in Honor, and the chiefest in power to
enforce obedience, that Religion and Laws may be observed.

2. Subordinate, be all Magistrates that have delegate power, from the Supreme
authority, to hold men in obedience in their several places.

In the supreme Magistrate is especially considered, capacity of the State.
which is two ways.

1. By his own understanding and experience, knowing and intending what to
advise in all occurrences, which is almost impossible in the variety of
accidents which befall in State business; yet such we read Augustus to have
been; who kept written with his own hand large remembrances, of all his
Legions, Officers, Rents, Customs, Allies, Leagues etc.

2. By Election of advice, propounded by others, which appears in the choice
of the best Counselors, and in the choice of best Council in hard matters,
neither blind by weakness of judgment, nor inclined by partial affection:
for the Princes choice is the life of any advice be it never so wise. If we
look into any of their falls, they must have fallen not for want of fit
Counsel propounded, but for want of Judgment, or partial affection in the
choice of that Counsel which they followed. Qui nec sibi potest recte
consulares, nec aliis been consulentibus auscultare velit, extremi est ingenij.

C. What are the general Suppositions holden by the wisest Magistrates?


S. 1. To prevent all inconveniences, in the beginning, and not to think those
things which severally to the vulger sort seem little, to be little., being
joined together. Insensible vapors, do breed horrible Tempests, and small
grains great heaps.

2. In avoiding inconveniences, to have special regard to the manner of
avoiding them. In making their people obedient and quiet, not to suffer them so
to forget Arms that they may be a prey, to their foreign Enemies, in making
themselves strong against the Enemies, carefully to provide against
disobedience and muti^ing, which often happens amongst Military people.

3. Not to suffer any one part, how good so ever in show, to attain an
overswaying power, or dependence, which cannot be brought and holden in order,
and obedience, if opposition should happen, occasio facit ambitiosis. And men's
powers are more certainly ruled, then their wills.

4. To distinguish warily offenses and good deserts, rewards and punishments,
that neither great deserts may breed Insolency, or hope of impunity for future
offenses, nor ^ff^nces take away all hope of reward for future virtues.

5. Especially to have men from their beginnings, to be brought up to the
Commonwealth in which they live. Legum optimarum nulla est utilitas nisi sint,
qui ad Rempub. informentur.

6. It is imposible, in civil cases, subject to such variety of times and
other circumstances, always to find out optimam ex bonis: It is often times
enough to take that which is mimimum ex malis etc. In those passages there is
not respect always to be had to the greater part, nor yet to the better part,
but to the whole State entirely considered: Pars quicquid est totius est.


C. I conceive those six foregoing suppositions or Rules are peculiarly
incident to the supreme M^gistrate, but how ought a subordinate Magistrate to
be qualified?


S. Three things are to be considered chiefly in a subordinate Magistrate:

1. That they do affectionatly love the State established.

2. That they have sufficient power to execute that which is required by their
Office.

3. That their parts be answerable to that charge which they undertake, in the
Commonwealth. Viz. Valor and Bounty fit for a Soldier, Wisdom and Justice
for a Judge, Frugality and honesty, for an Officer of account.


C. What are the accidental differences of States?


S. They are two.

1. Good, Bad.

2. Weak, Strong.


C. How or in what respects are Commonwealths said to be Good or bad?


S. Three ways.

1. In respect of their good or bad Laws, so the Lacedemonian Respublick, was
thought wanting, which by Laws permitted Theft, and Adultery.

2. In respect of Good or Bad Magistrates, so the Lacedemonian Respublike was
holden the best, in that the Magistrates most strictly observed the Laws and
Customs of their Country, and the supposition of their State, which was
Aristocraticall, and Military.

3. In respect of both, as all good Commonwealths, whose Laws agree with the
Law of Nature, and the Magistrates acting according to the Laws


C. Is the Law, always to be executed according to the letter of I?


S. No. fo it is neither safe that Law alone should rule which can not
distinguish of times, occasions, nor actions. Neither is it safe that
Magistrates should rule alone Without Law, for men are so subject to hatred
love, fcare, passion reward etc. It is best where both have their place, for
that Law directs best actions; but discretion and true judgment best
distinguishes circumstances.


C. How shall a man discern the strength of a State?


S. By observing these three things.

1. Whether it be strong in the frame it self of present Government, so if
Monarchy is held more strong, and in less hazard of distraction and division
then a popular state.

2. Whether it be strong by continuance of time, having long holden on form,
so New Principalities are weak, as wanting time to confirm them; Ancient
Principalities are strong, where the peopl have been inured to reverence and
obedince, Monarchy could not have been taken from the Assyrians, if
Sardanapalus had not been a beast, nor from the blood of the Cesars, if Nero
had not been rather a Monster then a Man.

3. Whether it be strong only by virtue, Wisdom, and Valor ^ of them, which
are in present Authority. So only New Principalities have strength by them
which raise them, Such was the Gresian Monarchy, which appeared in the world,
and vanished again like lightning; the strength whereof wholly consisted in
Alexander, and with his death perished.


C. What are the real differences of Commonwealths, and from whence have
States their Denomination?


S. The real difference of Commonwealths are taken from the different order
in commanding and obeying; the Name of every State is given according to the
Supreme and highest Authority.


C. Wherein is the Supreme Authority manifested?


S. In these four things.

1. Potestas belli et pacis.

2. Potestas vitae and Necis.

3. Po. faciendar. ^egum.

4. Po. Creandor. magistrate.

By these four powers, States are determined in themselves, and distinguished
one from another.

In whom those four powers, or most of them do rest, whether in one, some few,
or in many, in them is the supreme Authority, and they give the Name to the
State. If they be absolute in any, the state of them is called an abfolute
Monarchy, or Aristocraty etc. If they be partly in some, and partly in others,
then the State is said to be a mixed Commonwealth.

According as these powers are diversely settled, so States are really
distinguished.

If those powers be in one person, well used, to the good of the people under
him, the State is called A Monarchy.

If in the person of one, abused, to the profit only of that one, and of his
who has the Authority in his hands, its called

A Tyranny.

If in some few, well used to the common safety it is called,

An Aristocraty.

If in some few abused, to the profit and pleasure of some few.

An Oligarchy.

If the fore said powers, be in the multitude, well used, to the safety of all,
Law having power above the people, i^s then called,

A good Democraty.

If in the multitude, abused to faction. and the setting up the basest of the
people, the multitude overruling Law,

A bad Democraty.


C. Which of these Governments do you esteem the best?


S. Heretofore most Historians were of the judgment that regulated Monarchy,
was the best, but the State of England, as now it stands, admits not such weak
judgments as mine to distinguish.


C. SIR, I see you are silent in your thoughts, I pray tell me what you account
the worst.


S. The worst State is a Tyranny, as being opposite to the best, Bonum and
malum in suo genere maxim distant.


C. I have heard of an Anarchy, I pray what government is that?


S. Anarchy is no State, but a confusion of all order, much worse then the
worst Tyranny, which well appeared at Rome, after the death of Nero, when all
men did what they list, which caused an honorable Senator to say, that if that
misorder should continue, they should have occasion to wish for Nero again. It
is better living where nothing, then where all things are lawful.


C. I remember you told me, that if the forementioned powers were in one
person, it was an absolute Mon^rchy; by which I conceive there are several
kinds of Monarchies?


S. A Monarchy is the government of one to the preservation of all, But
Monarchies are of two sorts.

1. Absolute where the chi^f does rule all causes by his absolute Authority,
not any way determined by Law, and the^e are good, so far as the Authority is
well used, and the chief does hold it, Salus populi suprema L^x* For government
was before positive Laws, and in Nature, there is absolute priority and power
of the Father over his Children.

2. Limited, and that three manner of ways.

1. By Laws a lore, where the Subject may have lawful audience, and he^p in
Law, for holding, or recovering his right against the Prince.

2. By Overseers alone, where there be Officers of Sta^e, which may demand
^enson, when the chief stretches his power ^o the d^triment of the Subject,
such have been the Electors in Germany.

3. By Laws and Overseers, as in times past in France. when the twelve peers
held their places, and their Parliaments had their full power for the process
of Laws.

Just Principalities are generally maintained by hould^ng the favor and love
of the Subject.

Imperium est in voluntate obsequentium.


C. Wh^t means is a Governor to use to gain the love and affection of his
people; and being gained; how is it to be kept, and preserved?


S. The peoples love is houlden by these means.

1. By being Religious, toward God, for that men will never s^ek, nor desire
the overthrow of them, whom they are persuaded to be gua^ded with divine
pro^ection.

2. By showing Care of the pulike safe ty not of private gain, men do most
willingly contribute, when they are persuaded that money is either employed or
reserved for public benefit.

3. By building public works, and releiving public misfortunes.

4. By bestowing honors and rewards upon men of great worth by deserts.

5. By referring all matters of Justice and punishment to their offenses, never
showing contentment in the shame or misery of any.

6. Generally, by bounty, magnanimity, and all honorable and virtuous actions.


C. Tyranny you say is the worst of governments, I shall earnestly desire, you
would branch it forth, into its several parts, by which I may perceive the
iniquity of it.


S. Tyranny is the government of one man according to his own will, and
respecting only his own profit, Tyrants have used two ways to support and
uphold their Tyranny.

1. By taking away all desire and knowledge of altering their government, which
is thus done. First by working pusillanimity. Ignorance, and distrust in the
people; which is acted five manner of ways.

1. By taking away all Schools, and discipline; by which men might understand
what is right or wrong; A thing practiced by the Turks etc.

2. By taking away all societies and fraternities, by which they might be
acquainted one with another.

3. By placing Guards in the strongest places, by which they might suppress
any sudden attempt.

4. By placeing privy spies to entrap such as talk of State matters, and so
make all jealous of one another.

5. By often making show of foreign forces, which may be feared to be ready if
any need require.

2. By taking a way all power from the people, which is thus wrought:

1. By banishing or putting to death, or shutting up in Prison the men of
account and their offspring, that no male contents may know where to find a
leader that the people would follow; the house of Bela took this course in the
Moscovite State, It was Perianders Counsel to Thrasibulu^; the house of
Ottimau is so jealous, that the Grandsenior never thinks his Estate sure,
before he has cut of his Brethren.

2. By utterly impoverishing their Su^jects by exactions. Dionysius in 5 years
gatt all the treasury of Sicily into his hands.

3. By maintaining disscention between the great men and the Commons, or of the
greater men between themselves, taking part with neither, that they may know
and use the griefs and wants of all.

4. By not suffering the great men to live at home, but attend there, where the
higher power do obscure them, or if they be employed to keep their Children as
Hostages, so uses the Magnus Mogor in Asia.

5. To commit no trust to the Natives, or men of great blood or kindred, but to
E^naches or strangers, such as can not be popular, nor hold place, but by their
Tyranny, such are the Turkish Bassaes.

6. To suffer no m^n to be^re Arms, but their sworn Soldiers, to give Lands
only to such, the inheritance depending still at their proper disposition, the
Moscoveticall and Turkish practice, the one to his Gen^le^en, the other to his
Timario^s; All other are slaves to them, as they are to their chief Lord.


C. By what properties shall I know a King from a Tyrant?


S. These four differen^es will distinguish them.

1. Kings were first chosen out of the best, and by the best, to guard them,
and to rule the rash multitude.

Tyrants had their beginning ex Demagogis; such as flattered the people, and
stirred them up against the worthyest persons, and so under show of protecting
of them, made away, all such as might with stand them, Pisistratus at Athens,
Dionysius at Syracuse.

2. The second scope of a King is virtue and honor.

The scope of a Tyrant, profit and pleasure.

3. A King is the protector of all, Rich, and poor, that on neither does, nor
suffers wrong of the other.

A Tyrant only regards the profit and security of him self, and his leaving
others open to al wrongs.

4. The trust of a King is in his Subjects, and of them he makes his Guard.

The trust of a Tyrant is only in strangers, and to them he commits his safety.


C. How are Principalities overthrown?


S. Two Ways.

1. By foreign power, when one state assayleth and overthrows another, the
conquered receives such government as the Conqueror thinks meet, so the
Romans ov^rthrew many Kingdoms, and turned them into principalities; to be
governed by their Lif^tennants.

2. By Domestic^ll seditions, which are commonly raised by th^se occasions, in
number Six.

1. By the Justice of the Rulers.

1. In Injuries toward their persons, which is acted two manner of ways.

1. In murdering, and ravishing their Kinsfolks. As the T^rquin^s at Rome.

2 In bea^ing like sl^ves men of account.

2. In oppressing with exactions, so far that by ^xtream poverty, subjects grow
desperate, havi^g nothing to love, but their If^, whereof want has made them
weary.

2 By contempt of them.

1 For their folly, and incapacity of state.

2 For esseminate manners, as Sard^n^palus.

3 For Drunkenn^sse, as C^mbisis and Dionisius Junior.

3 By fear of death or disgrace in the subject.

1 Either through knowledge or suspicion of anger conceived in the Chief
himself.

2 Or fe^re of sland^r from them which are about him in Authority.

4 By hope of profit and w^al^h, which moves specially base Rebels, which
pretend a community of all.

5 By Amb^tion or desire of Honor, the most dangerous motive, for that it
possesses only great spirits, which are of resolution, to their ^utmost power,
As S^aev^la which a^t^mpted upon King Po s^nna, and the Confed^rats that slew
Caesar in the Senate.

6 By desire of change in Religion, which has only moved men in these latter
times, being never made a pretense or motiv, f^r either foreign Conquests, or
Dom^^^^call s^ditions, before Mabomet. Pa^^t supra.


C. You formerly told me, that Aristocraty was the power of Ruling in some few,
well u^e^, to the Common sefety: I pray acquaint me of what sort of ^he people
they ^re or ought to b^?


S. Aristocraty, is a gou^^n^e^t of the best, for the safe^y of all, but there
ar^ three kinds.

1. The first, where ^respect is had, to both wealth, and virtue, in the chief
of all Officers.

2 The second where respect is only had of wealth, this inclyneth to an
Oligarchy.

3 The third, where respect is only had of virtue, leaving it free to all, to
make way to the chief places, this inclines to a Democr^ty.


C. What means have been used to maintain and uphold States Aristocratic^ll.


S. These Nine Maxims ^ave bee^e held and practis^d.

1 Compelling the Nobility to bring up their Children in feats of Arms, and
politic Discipline, suffering the r^st to do as they list.

So the La^edemonians brought up all their Children in public places,
together, where they learned exercise of Arms and knowledge of government.

2 Constraining the Nobility upon great penalty, to be present at their public
Assemblies, suffering the rest to attend their profit and business.

3 Receiving the Citizens into their sp^ciall patro^ages, that in Popular
quarrels, every man severally might pacify his Clyents, or followers, this
was often practiced by the S^nators of Rome, to uphold their State.

4 Suffering none to continue in the greatest Offices for long time, that he
might procure too many dependents, or weak^n his opposites.

5 Giving noe man that honor whch others might not hope to obtain.

6 Employing them which were too great, in foreign business, that absence
might make them forgotten.

7 Keeping Offices of Honor, wholly amongst the Nobility, leaving them of
petty matters and gain to the people.

8 Suppressing the first occasions of quarrels amongst the greatest men, To
that end to hold friendly meetings in places indifferent, where pacifications
may be made.

9. Holding the people in fehre of public dangers, to make an enemy if there
were none, by that means, to draw from home such as were mutinous: A thing much
practiced by the Roman Senate, while their power held.


C. You have decla^ed nine M^xims or Sophims, that are the props of a^
Aristocraticall State, but by wha^ means is that government overthrown and
changed?


S. Three things alter and ^hange an A^istoc^aty.

1. The Sedition of the great men, when their numbers do so increase, that the
Honors to be divided, are not enough to satisfy their Number, the
Lacedemonian, for remedy of this, sent the Parthen^an^ into Italy which built
Tarentum.

2 The Transgression of that supposition in not making vertuea mean between the
we^lth of the great men, and liberty of the people; yielding too much to the
peoples liberty, makes the State Democraticall, but wholly to wealth
Oligarchicall.

3 Negligence in small matters, suffering inferior Officers to be perpetual,
which after gives example and occasion that the greatest likewise should be^o.


C. By this it is evident to me that Aristocraty may be turned into a State
Democraticall or Oligarchycall: my request is, that you would more fully show
me what Oligarchy is, and wherein it differs from the State last mentioned?


S. Oligarchy is a Government of some few to their own profii; and it may be
branched forth into 4. kinds.

1 Whereall che^fe Officers, are ch^sen only by valuation of wealth and
possessions.

2 Where men of middle wealth, are admitted to Offices, but the preceedent
Magistrate c ^useth his successor.

3 Where, the Magistrates succeed, as in In^eritances, The Son in his Fathers
place.

4 Where all power is in some few, which rule above Law as they list, and this
is like the worst kind of Democraty.


C. How is this Rule of Government kept from fall or ^uine?


S. The Fabric of this government is preserved from fall or ruin, by those
Axioms or Sophismes, as Sir Walter Rawleigh calls them, in his Book, called the
Prince of State, which are these.

1 By suffering no Elections, to pass either by Lo^ or by Common suffrages,
but by a s^t number.

2 By suffering no choice to be made, but out of certain, which likewise had
such a valuation of goods.

3 By making their Officers perpetual or of long continuance.

4 By maintaining great Troops of Horse, imposed on them in Authority, which
make a Terrible show, and can not be maintained but with great wealth so did
the Eretrians and C^alcedonians. But Aristrocratyes and Democratyes have rather
maintained ^ foo^-men for their Soldiers. As the Lacedaemonians, the Romans,
and at this day the Swissers.

5 By keeping the people poor and without Arms, that they might neither know
how to arm themselves, or give pay to them which should take Arms in their
behalf.

6 By raising many Wars, or rumors of Wars; Common people are easily awed
in public dangers.

7 By making Marriages only with themselves, where Marriages are Communicated,
the greater sort is less esteemed.

8 By providing means of employment in Wars, or Colonyes, when their Issue
grows too great, and all can not be in honor.


C. I conceive those political Fabrics are destroyed, and brought to naught,
by fewer means and ways: they are upheld like a house built by many hands, yet
one man or two can pluck it down. My request ^ow is, that you would show and
unf^ld unto me the occasions of Oligarchyes fall?


S. Oligar^hies are overthrown three ^ayes

1 By them that are not in Authority. As at Heraclea and Massilia, where the
younger Brethr^n rose against the Elder, for that they were excluded from the
Commonwealth.

2 By them in Authority, these five ways.

1 Either by reason of the small number, the Father and Son, or two Brethren can
not be in Offi^^^^gether.

2 When the few in place would yet have fewer.

3 When the ^ew having Luxuriously spent their goods and Estates, seek to
spoil the Common Treasury.

4 When of those few which Rule, all can not come to the Chei^est place.

5 When they in Authority by any occasion fall at dissension and assail onn
another, the weaker fetching in the people for his Guard, makes either a
Tyrany or a Democraty.

3 By Accident two ways.

1 In time of War through distrust in the people, those few enforced to hire
forraig^e Soldiers, which committed to one that is populer, with them makes
himself Lord of all.

2 In time of peace, when the people and those few being at v^riance, commit
themselves to a third, which oppresses them both.


C. I remember in your d^scription of States, you mention a two fold D^mocraty;
I request your patience to unfold to me the particulars thereof, and what
difference has been used in their Election of cheif^ Officer^.


S. A Democr^ty, is a Government of all, to ^he good of all, or else A
government of a multitude which are the greater part of the State, to that end
they propou^d to themselves, and this is called a bad Democraty, and of near
kin to Tyranny.

As concerning their choice of State Officers, they had diverse fashio^s of
Liberties.

1 In some; all might be capable of the highest Offices, and all had voices in
the Choice.

2 In others; all had suffrages, but yet they made their choice by certain
estimation of wealth.

3 In some all might be Rulers, Ita ut Lex dominetur.

In others all might rule. Ita ^t Populus dominetur.


C. In my Judgment, those popular States, that are not governed by the Rule or
Square of Law, can have no strength, neither can their basis be well fixed.


S. A popular State, has neither strength nor goodness in the frame it self;
besides it is subject to such daily factio^s and dissension, and mak^ing way
for every impudent flatterer to grow mighty, by fawning ^n people, and
slandering them whose good virtues and fortunes for their greatness might be
occasion of envy.


C. How then is it supported, if it want strength and goodness?


S. The strength of it only consists in the g^odness^, moral virtues and
civil parts of their Citizens, and according to the diverse sorts of people
popular States do differ.

1 The most ancient is of Husbandmen supposed the b^st, because their life
being laborion, and full of business, they have least leisure to mutiny from
their private cares. So the Medians are re^o^ted to have lived before Deiocius
alte(...) government. (...) ^^cond of Shephards much like (...) for their kind
of life. (...) third of Artisans and Merchants (...) must needs be full of
innova(...) roug^ their continual whisperi^g (...) private devices at their
meeti^^^.

4 (...) other is a mixture of all those kinds (...). Ari^totle condemns
utterly (...); and yet we read not of any of (...) first, any thing memorabl^
The Ath^^ians admitted of all sorts to the choice (...) Magistrates, the making
L^wes, and to (...) great censure, when they banished (...) by Ostracisme.

So did the Romans in the latter times howso^ver the ^uncient did hold it a
sufficient commendation to be commended. As Bonus C^lon^s and strenuus miles.


C. What banishment was that Ostracisme, and ^or what time, and what the
Transgression tha^ made men liable thereunto?


S. It was a kind of banishment used ^amongst the Athenians, and the party
exiled was to remain ten years in Exile, which was thus executed; by
delivering Shells, with the names of the persons cond^mned written therein; It
was used not so much to p^nish other Offenses, as to abat^ the immoderate power
of the Noblemen.


C. What are the pretexts of a popular State, and what means do they use to
maintain the same?


S. The supposition of a popular State pretends two things, which in
themselves are plaufible.

1 Equality.

2 Liberty.

The means of maintaining their supposition have been these seven.

1 By choosing all Magistrates by the voices of all, and out of all. Ne quis
sit exclusus a Republica.

2 By giving no power to any Magistrate, to put any to death, though condemned
by Law, if they appealed to the people. Vt libera sit pr^vocatio ad Populum,
abs^luta Potestas in Populo.

3 By causing all to know the use of Arms, that they neither should fear
Foreign forces or powers, nor one pa^tie to stand in awe of another.

4 By suffering no man to contin^e long in Office, and to be called to an
account, his Office being ended and expired.

5 By diminishing the power of them which were grown to great by what means
soever. As the Athenians used their Ostracismus, The Syracnsans their
Petalismus, the parties name written in Olive leaves, upon which he was to be
exiled.

6 The more simple, otherwise. If he can but understand their Laws, and
customs to see execution on Offenders, the fitter and saf^r for a popular
Estate. In some Democraties the chief Officer has been tied to such kinds
as are mechanical.

7 By compelling all to be at Assemblies, especially the m^aner sort, who in
some popularities have been invited by rewards.


C. Sir, I have exercised your patience long, and I fear I am to bold with
you; but your freeness of discourse hitherto, encourages me to demand, or
request some other few resolutions before your departure.


S. The time I have spent with you, I account it not l^st, for I have made a
two fold gain thereof, by renewing our old acquaintance, and thereby our
loves.

2 By bringing to my remembrance what I have read out of diverse au^tient
Authors concernin^ STATE-POLICIE. I shall willingly resolve you, if your
demandes come within the reach of my weak Learning. I pray proceed to your
Question.


C. How are Democraticall States alterd?


S. D^mocraties are ^^a^ged into Oligarchyes, by the banding of them, in great
favor with the people; if they can agr^e between themselves: if they
disagree, the one ass^^yling the other, the conq^eror raise a Monar^hy.

The Popular State of Rome, by the conf^d^racy of Cras^us, Pompy, and Caesar,
proved in effect Oligarchicall, All things being act^d as they would have them.

Aft^r Crassus death, Pompy and Caesar falling at variance, on^ assayling the
other, the Conqueror drew the whole State to himself.

After Caes^rs death it became again Popular. The ^^w Tri^mverate m^d^ it
Oligarchicall, their diss^nti^^, Mon^rchicall ag^in^.


C. What things are those, without which, neither of those forementioned States
can be supported, or continue without ruin.


S. Aristotle says, Sex sunt quae dicuntur necessaria Alimenta, Artificia,
Arma, Pecunia, S^cra, Jndici^. Moreover ^lse where he says. Quin^ue sunt
^rcana quae in potestate superioris M^gistratus reservare solent Resp.
Ther^for^ it behooves the Supreme p^^^r of ^^y State, to h^ve a specia^^ ca^^,
that those fix things be duly ^ad inreg^rd, and according to the respective
qualiti^s and numb^r of their Subjects.


ALIMENTA.
No^rishment which is t^ (...) considered.

1 By what kind the people desire t^ be maintained.

By Tillage. By Pasture.
2 Where they have that which they fancy or most desire, from home, or from
other Countries.

3 With what ease or difficulty the Victualia, desir^d may be gotten, at what
rates, and what quantity is requisi^e.

ARTIFICIA.
Crafts to keep the people from Idle^^esse.

1 Where regard is to be had, of what matter they work upon, whether Mettalls,
Stone^, or Wool, and where those things ^re to be had for the^r use.

2 To what ^alew their works can raise the matter where on they work.

3 Regard is to be had, whether their kind of work maintain health of body,
and strength of mind.

ARMA.
Arms whether made in their own Country.

1 Of what matter, of what fashion, of what use, and of what advantage.

2 Whether brought from Forraig^ers, with what ^ase, and at what rates or price.

3 Consideration is to be had of what advantage to the Nation, either in the
excellency of the use, or in the private or proper usage to men alone. As the
Roman Pilum, and the bow in times past Anglis.

4 Whether Arms be permitted to all so in Democraticall states, or to some
few, as in Oligarchyes.

1 Pecuniae, Money, of what matter it is made, and the, value of the same.

2 Whether the Mines thereof be in their own Country.

3 What things abound, by which it may be fetched from others.

4 Who has the power of valewing.

5 What necessity of levying for public uses.

6 What necessity of disbursing for the same uses.

SACRA.
1 The public manner of serving God.

2 The Orders and Degrees by which the Priests and Levites are distingnished
from the Laytie, and one of them from another.

3 The maintenance, Liberty, and privileges that they have to maintain them
of that place.

4 The power and honor that the Chief of them have either over them of the
Clergy, or over others.

5 The means to hold the reverence of the people.

6 The Scriptures of life, to which they are bound by Oath, Vow, or Custom^

7 Their apparel, in matter, Color, or fashion, how it is different from the
Layety.

The Rom^ns kept the whole ordering of matters of Religion, especially, amongst
their greatest Personages. The Lords of the Senate, were the Ponti^ices, and
Flamines. The Salii who carried their Ancilia in a str^^ge manner about the
City, were of the young Gentlemen, and most of their fraternities. were of men
of the best stocks.

C. What were these Salii?


S. They w^r^ the Priests o^ Mars the gods of Battle, who bearing Ancilia or
Targets and Sheilds dancing about the City in taken of Triu^p^.


C. What is to be observed concerning Magistrates?


S. Four things.

1 Who has the power of choosing them.

2 Who are capable, who are not?

3 What causes are in their power? what not.

4 By what their powers are ^nlarged or r^strained.

So long as the power of the S^nate of ROME availd, though the people did
choose, yet they did choose their great Officers, only ex Patritiis, out of
those that came from the loyuc^ of Senators, who though they determined all
matters, yet there was still liberty to appeal to the p^opl^.

Af^erwards all were made c^p^bl^ and any of the Tribune^ might hinder any act
of the Consul, or decree of the Senate.


JVDICIA.
1 Either criminal; as in cases of life and death.

2 Or Civil; as of personal or real actions which concern^ matters of
Trespass^ and Title

3 The manner of proceeding whether the Trials be.

1 De facto only. 2 De Iur^ only. 3 De Iur^ and de facto, together.
C. There are five Maxims, or secrets as you call them, peculiar to the supreme
power or chief Magistrate in regulating A State or weal public. I pray
discover the particulars thereof, and how they become so necess^ry?


S. Those five. Conciones, Magistratus, Juditia, Arma, and Exercitia. R^quire a
mor^abler Statist the^^ my self, to discover their power or use; and will take
up long^r time^ the^now can be spared, or our patience quietly attend. In
regard of the ^^^ixity, I will only give you the branches thereof, but leave
the demo^stratio^^ of each particular, until another opportunity shall present
it self.


CONCIONES.
Assemblies or Counsels.

1 General. As that Des^estats gene^aux in France, and the Parliaments in
England.

1 of what Persons these states General consist. 2 In what matters they may
deal. 3 What Power they have, limited by Law^ ^or above Law. 4 What Order
they use in proceeding. 5 What Authority in concluding. 6. By what means. 1
Their power is drawn to Act in per^orming any thing. 2 Their power is
restrained from doing any thing.

2 Their Ordinary Counsels for ordinary O^currences. Where in we are to
consider.

1 Their Authority. 2 Their Inclin^tions to peace in VVa^re. 3 Their desires of
honor or wealth. 4 The power of every particular. 1 In respect of the
sufficiency and eminency of his parts. 2 In respect of his special fav^ur and
grace in the state.

I told you before, that Oligarchyes constrained the rich men to be present at
their great Assemblyes, on pai^e of pen^lties.

Democratyes^, sometimes by r^wards, invited the meaner sort at their g^nerall
Assemblies, to make their presence the greater, and that they should not
altogether loose their private profit (which is most regarded by the multitude,
by omitting their private affairs and foll^wing of public.

EXERCITIA of body.
Whether for health only. VV^ether for strength only. Whether for pleasure
only.
Whether and how ^arre they all be mixed. Use and custom, breeds delight in
any exercise, The Romans so practiced themselves with Arms; that they carried
them with as much e^se as their parts; hence came that saying.

Ar^a militis membra s^nt. 2 Exercise of mind.

Whether t^ contemplation especially, as the Indian Gymnosophists, and the
Athenian^, which were great discourser^, whether to action especially, which is
of most use in a civil life, which is active not contemplative: As the
Lacedaemonians, who taught their Children, ^lurimum facere and minimu^ l^qui.

3 What kind of Exercises. Are commanded by Law. Are permitted only. Are
directly forbidden.

As concerning Arms, I have already given you my thoughts of the same.

But you may observe.

1 That Monarchical states have used to train, and discipline all, in the
exercise of Arms. As in England all by an Edict to bear Arms that are upwards
of seaventeen years of Age, and under threescore, except Scholars.

2 Aristocraticall Sta^es, enforced onl^ their Nobles to bring up their
Childr^^ in feats of Arms, and military discipline.

3 Oligarchicall States, keep their Arms, and the use and practice of them
only, amongst their great^st men and their followers, so does the M^scovite and
Tu^k at this day.

4 Democraticall or popular States, have accustomed to bring up all sorts of
their people to Martial seats; and not only permitting, but enjoining all at a
certain age to learn and practice themselves to warlicke exercises. As the
ancient Romans at seaventeene years of Age, the Suiffers at this day sooner.

An Act declaring and Consti^uting the People of England to be a Commonwealth
and Free State.
BE it Declared and Enacted by this present PARLIAMENT, and by ^he authority of
the same, That the People of ENGLAND, and of all the Dominions and Territories
thereunto belonging, are and shall be, and are hereby Constituted, Made,
Established and Confirmed, to be a Commonwealth and Free State: And shall from
henceforth be Governed as a Commonwealth and Free State, by the supreme
Authority of this Nation, The Representatives of the People in Parliament, and
by such as they shall appoint and constitute as Officers and Ministers under
them for the good of the People, and that without any King or House of Lords.

Die Sabbathi, 19. Maii, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Act be forth with
Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

POSTSCRIPT
Gentle READER,
HAving now given you a breife and clean discovery of the Government of
several Nations, Kingdoms and Commonwealths in the World which I have taken
patnes to Collect from Choice Authors, of div^rs Languages, that thou may
the better Judge of the Nature of our present New Established Commonwealth, as
touching the Exclency thereof; and Encouragement to a willing Subjection
thereu^^o, Take Mr. LILLIES expressions, in his conclusion of the Epistle to
his Predictions for 1650. in these words, to every true English man, I heartily
^mplore them, as one man to unite their hearts, their Prayers, their Forces,
and Purses, unanimonsly, for defense of this Commonwealth now es^ablished; For
without it as at present, our Condition stands, our lives and fortunes will be
subject to all the inconveniences, a woeful Nation can expect from devouring
Enemies: Conforming unto, and assisting this Authority; We shall have the
better of all Nations, we shall by degrees arise to the most accompli^hed
Government, that ever was visible since the Creation; and when the Commonalty
of ENGLAND, viz. the Yeomanry, after some years are sitted for the work
intended, it shall not displease them, that they have with patience acted so
long a time without any visible Fruits of their Labors, Since then the Sole
Dominion and power shall rest in themselves, after which universal peace and
never more any Wars shall follow in ENGLAND, until the day of the
dissolution of this earthly Fabric.

In the next place, I shall only put you in mind of the New Engagement, to be
taken generally throughout the Nation, in regard it is of special concernment
to all. The express words of it (are these) as it is Ordered by the
Parliament, viz. I DO DECLARE AND PROMISE, THAT I WILL BE TRVE AND FAITHFVLL TO
THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND, AS THE SAME NOWIS ESTABLISHED, WITHOUT A KING OR
HOUSE OF LORDS.

For such as make any doubt or scruple of taking this Engagement; I refer
them to Mr. JOHN DVRYES Book, lately published, called Considerations,
concerning the present Engagement, whether it may lawfully be entered into, yea,
or no, they are sold at the Star, under St. PETER'S Church in Cornhill, or in
Pope's Head Ally; Licensed by Master JOSEPH CARYLL.

In my apprehension, he removes all the stumbling blocks, and answers all
the Objections that can be made against the taking of it, which may satisfy
all such as shut not their Eyes against the light.

The three Chief Objections are these, viz.

1. OB. That the Oath of Allegiance, and the National Covenant are still
binding and Contradictory to this present Engagement. 2. OB. That the present
power by which the Engagement is tendered is very doubtful as a power,
u^lawfully ^surped, to which usurpa^ion you think you will be accessory, if you
take the engagement. 3. OB. That the Consequence of the Engagement seems to
tend to an opposition against the Lawful Heir of the Crown, and the right
constitution of the Parliaments, whereunto you are preingaged, and from which
you cannot rec^de. All which Obj^ctions a^e loarnedly and fully answered by Mr.
DVRY which has saved me that Labor, and expense of time. VALE.
FINIS.

