The Printer to the Spectator.
THat Emblem whereon thou did look,
Is but the shadow of the Book;
By reading which thou may behold
That in express, which here is told
By Figures; there thou't plainly see
The Pope, and his fraternity
Of Prelates, Presbiterians, and
The Author, Rev. 18. 1, 2, etc.
whom thou see, there stand,
Disputing to the life, where he,
Does use his Christian Mat. 10* 6
policy,
By singling each of them apart,
Aluding unto Daniels Art,
By which he found the Elders lie,
And cleared Susannas chastity.
So he like to a Champion stout,
In this encounter first culs out
Errors chief Patrons, Athists and Anti^rinitarians.
who deny
There is a God, or Trinity.
These being conquered, he does find,
A Monster of another mind,
Who says there is a God, The Pope, 2 These. 2, 3, 4.
but he
Does proudly claim the same to be;
And that he can men's Sins forgive,
If they will but see him whilst they live,
This he subdues likewise; and then
He finds diverse sorts viz Prelates, P^o^b^terians, and other Sectaries, Rev
17 12. 15
of men,
The which from him does hold their power,
All which within one day, Rev. 18. 8.
or hour v^r* 17 18. ( o) R v. 19. 1, 2.

He has subdued. Therefore his head with Bays
I have adorned, do thou the like by praise.
Laus Deo in excelcis.
AN EMBLEM OF ANTICHRIST In his three fould Hirerchyes of Papacy, Prelacy, and
Presbytery

As also a description of the Trenatie in Unity, and Unity in Trenatie. (of
their Lord God the Pope) in his Holyneses Dietie. 2. these. 2. 4.

A Small Rome left for the Pope etc.

Prellat

We are all tatterd and broken to pieces


Pope

Presbiter

They reject our church and calling from thee

Cry aloud for he is a god.

1. Kings. 18. 27. And it came to pass at Noone that Elijah Mocked them saying
etc.

I need not put a Beareskin on A Bear Or pin a Devil to A Cauileare. Rev:
16. 19. 20. 21. And the Great City was divided into THREE PARTS etc.

a prelate, presbyter and cavalier talk to a three-headed pope portrayed as the
antichrist, whose symbols of office are scattered and broken at his feet

ROME RVIN'D BY WHITE HALL OR, The Papal Crown demolisht: Containing a
Confutation of the three Degrees of Popery, viz. Papacy, Prelacy, and
Presbitery; answerable to the Triple Crown of the three-headed Cerberus the
Pope, with his threefold Hierarchies aforesaid.

With a dispelling of all other dispersed Clouds of Error, which does
interpose the clear Sunshine of the Gospel in our Horrizon.

Wherein the chief Arguments each of them have, for the vindication of their
erroneous Tenants are incerted, and refuted; with a description of such whem
the true Church of Christ does consist of: As also how, and by whom, they may
be gathered, and governed, according to the will, and appointment of Jesus
Christ, and his Apostles, in the Primative purity thereof.

Isaiah 40. 3, 4, 5. The voice of him that cries in the wilderness, prepare
ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a high way for our God,
every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low,
and the crooked shall be made straight, and thorough places plain; and the
glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together, for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

By John Spittlehouse, assistant to the Marshall General of the Army, under
the Command of his Excellency, the Lord General Fairfax.

Imprimated by Theod. Jennings, and entered in the Stationers Hall.

Printed at London by Thomas Pain, and are to be sold at his house in Goold
Smiths Alley in Redcrosse Street. 1650

F^llow Christians:
THere has been many predictions of these present times, both o^^ o^
Sc^ipture, and other A^thors, (...) of which (...) he ^s re^ite; which I
profess (before the great God of Heaven and Earth) is not out of any
ostentation (in relation to my own particular person) but merely to stir up
the hearts of all men, to take not ^^e of the Lords present design; to which
purpose in the Old Testament we ha^^ these Scriptures, viz. Dan. 2. 34, 35. and
7. 18. 27. M^l. 3. 1. etc. and 4. 1, 2. 3. 5. 6. Joel 2. 28, 29. 30. 31. ^2. In
the New Testament, Mat. 17. 11. Rev. 18. 1. 2. 4. 6. and Chap. 21, etc.

For Predictions since, I shall only cite these, which I have collected out of
Mr. B^aines writings, a m^n yet I never saw.

I. Viz. One of Merlinus Calc^donius a Scot.

After a long tribulation of Christians, and effusion of innocent blood, the
prosperity, and praise of God shall come to a desolate Nation, I mean the
Christians; for an excellent Pastor shall come, and rectify all things, and
all things, and all things shall be according to the form of the primative
Church.

II. Saint Bridget says of the Pope, that a Sword of God shall pierce his
body, and run him through from head, to heart, never to be pulled out; and after
his Armies, his Viccars, and Ministers, their Souls shall be debarred the
glory of God, and their dignity, and goods, shall be devolved unto others.

III. Joaohim an Italian Abbot, in his concord of the two T^staments, has
written many Predictions, which accord with these.

IV. Joannes de rupe Scissa, once Bishop of Paris, has foretold, that the
Popes, Archbishops, Bishops, and the whole Clergy of Rome, shall be brought
back again to the primative form of Christ, and his Apostles, with most sharp
scurges, and that all temporal principalities shall be taken away from the
Clergy.

V.
Joannes Wolsius cites this Prediction, viz.
Europae genitus terra vir justus and aequus
Pastor earit, caeli claves non regna gubernan;
Pax erit, and toto surget concordia mundo:
Una fides, unus regnabit in omnia princeps.
What other late Predictions you have had, I leave to your memories, I could
say very much, in relation to my self, and how wonderfully providence has
carried on this work by me, but I will not bear testimony of my self, let
what is written do it, whether for me, or against me.

Here likewise follows three general Principles, drawn out of the Treatice
for the inducement of every one to read and practice.
I. BY practicing the Government contained herein, you will manifest your
selves to be Christ's Disciples, by being obedient to his, and his Apostles
institutions; contrariwise you declare your selves enemies to both.

II. By ^o doing, the Church of Christ will be distinguished, from the world,
as also made visible, to the world, as a City which is at unity in it self,
Psalm. 122. 3.

III. Those that participate of that union, will be freed, from these
grievances, viz. 1. From the corrupt Clergy. 2. From the unjust maintenance
which they yet enjoy; and 3. In a great part from the corruption of the Laws
of the Land, as also from the Caterpillars, the Lawyers, which are breed, and
nourished thereby; which two grand Moth-wormes, have almost consumed, both
Church, and Commonwealth, as all rational men very well know*

Against which two Wolves which would devour this Land,
This Treatice like a cumbatant does stand
For preservation of it; therefore all
That does desire to see those Meters fall
Out of their Ayrie Orbs: Read, and comply,
And you are freed, from all such tyranny.
To the Supreme power of the Nation, The Commons assembled in Parliament, with
the Counsel of State etc.
Right Honorable.
IT is acknowledged that like Martha, you are cumbred about much business,
(...) regard of the loud clamors of the men of the world, whose chief
affections are taken up with civil affairs, as in a flourishing State; with
the appurtenances thereunto belonging, (as in a free trade. etc.) But there is
an Vnum necessarium, which is far from their thoughts, and I fear not very
near yours (viz. the flourishing of the Kingdom or Church of Christ) which
ought to be your chief object to adorn, in that the other would fall in of
course, as our Savior affirms, Mat. 6. 33. etc. A chapter worthy of your
most serious meditations in your now present employments. For doubtless
providence does as well extend it self, over whole Nations, as over a
particular Person, or a Sparrow; but such is the frail condition of our
Natures, that we dare not trust God with our temporals; the best of us are
ready with Jacob, to capitulate with our Maker, and to indent with him, viz.
that if God would grant him food, raiment, protection, etc. then he would build
God an house, Genesis 28. 20, 21, 22, etc. So we, if God will but first build us
seeled Houses, make us great and eminent men in the world. put us into a
gallant state, capacity, etc. O then we will promise to do great matters for
God. As in a reformation of Religion, which shall be Jure divino, or agreeable
to the will, and appointment of Jesus Christ, but we will do nothing for him
before, unless with Jacob, to pour a little oil upon the stone, where we
intend to erect our promised Fabric. Right Honorable, you have with Jacob,
made large promises touching a full, perfect, and through Reformation, viz. to
pluck up Antichrist, root and branch, and that without respect of persons; and
the Lord Christ having performed your request, on his part, does now expect a
performance also on your part to him, as he did from Jacob; but so backwards
are you in matters of Divine concernment, as that he is also constrained to
invite you to it, as he did Jacob, Genesis 35. 1. Therefore in Christ's stead I
desire you to imitate Jacob by your free assent, who immediately upon the
reminding him o^ his promise, did instantly, as a preparative to the work)
stir up his Family, to put away the strange gods which was then amongst them,
and to be clean, and wash their Garments, as also to arise and go with him to
Be^^^ where he would erect an Altar unto God. who had answered him, in the day
of his destresse, and had been with him in the way which he went. Now how near
that his relation did, and does agree, with your past, and now condition, I
appeal to your selves. O that you had now also hearts to do the like to your
Family of the Commonwealth, whereof under God you are Keepers; as also that
your Household of the Nation, would as willingly relenquish their Heresies, and
Schisms, as the other did their Idols and eare-rings; which that they may do
with more freedom of spirit, I have (by Divine assistance,) attempted a
discovery of them, to the end, neither you, nor they may be mistaken in them,
viz. Neither they in their Voluntary, delivering them unto you, or you in the
burial of them.

I am bold also in Christ's name, to mind you of something further to this
purpose, as in relation to your duty in this present design of Christ, which I
presume you are not ignorant of; or if you be, that you will not continue so,
having your understanding illuminated; At the present, it is visibly apparent
both to you, and all Professors, that the Reformation in point of Religion, is
at a full stand, which is by means of two distinct Parties, viz. the
Presbiterian, and the Independent, the one pulling one way, and the other
another, by which means it is betwixt them, even almost pulled in pieces; the
Presbiterian Party being such, as would dwell upon a form, and the other being
contrary to all form, running themselves into a Chaos of confusions, their
distempered spirits, being utterly void of all order, or decency, so that it is
as impossible for these two extremes, to unite into one, as Hell, and Heaven;
I have therefore (by Divine assistance,) attained to the discovery of the
Golden Mean, by which they may not only be reconciled together, but also
brought to practice Jure Divino, according to the will, and appointment of
Jesus Christ in his Word; which thing is the now grand design of Christ,
therefore it behooves you, to stir up these two parties, to comply with this
revealed ensuing Truth, which though it be as yet despicable, yet i^ will prove
most honorable. It is confessed, you have by Divine providence, acted very much,
in relation to a Reformation, viz. you have passed over the Red Sea of Prelacy,
in which Pharaoh and his Host were drowned, but all that Spiritual Egypt is
not destroyed; many of them uncircumcised ones have marched with us into the
wilderness we are now in. There be yet thousands of Cavalier Priests amongst
us, besides, you are to know, that before you can enter into the promised Land,
you are also to bear the Ark of God, over the River Jordan, viz. that of
Presbitery, it being also an obstacle in the way, albeit not so seemeing
dangerous as the other. Right Honorable, the Cloud does now remove, and you
are by providence brought even to the brinke of that River, through which you
must pass, or you will never enter the Holy Land; take courage therefore right
Worthies, by considering what the Lord has done for you, and how he has to
that very purpose, purged you, both from the Episcopal, and Presbiterian
dross which were amongst you; and how he has made you, and your Government,
as that new Heaven, and new Earth, from, and unto which, the new Jerusalem is
to descend; the Lord being pleased to make this Nation the Theater on which he
will begin to act his present Design. I shall further presume to mind you,
that as you have, so you are yet to swallow up such waters, as the Dragon of
Prelacie, with his Presbiterian Tail, shall belch out against the Woman (you
being the earth appointed for that very purpose) until you have dried up their
Sea, and River, which you by providence have almost accomplished; but till you
have thoroughly drained them dry, you obstruct the descending of the new
Jerusalem, or the Marriage of the Lamb, which is immediately to ensue.
Therefore I beseech you to delay not time, but with a Christian courage resolve
to act a full Reformation, which you will never effect so long as you support
the Prelaticall, or Presbiterian Clergy, either in office, or maintenance, that
of Presbitery being a Romish Hierarchy as the other, as in this ensuing
Treatice is proved at large; and therefore that River Jordan, ought as well to
be dried up, as either Euphrates, or the Red Sea. R^ght Honorable, there has
been much pains taken by several worthy men in this Nation, by writing, and
preaching, which has been also dedicated unto you to this purpose; I beseech
you, let not them, or this lie as wast paper in your Studies, seeing Viz.
M^ster John Owens S^rmond, of the sh^king and (...) ^i^g of Heaven and Earth,
as also M^. Del^s Book, of praise and unity amongst the ^^i^hfull, as also Mr.
Br^ine's Book of B^o^ls fall in the foolish Virgins, etc. As also on^ ^^^l^d,
The Mystery of the true Minist^y unvailed, etc. all which are very pe^^inent to
this very purp^se.
it is the chiesest work you have to perform, for without all Coutroversie,
you are the men whom God intends to honor, as his Instruments to pluck up
Antichrist, root and branch. Blessed be you amongst men, for what you have done
in it, and the Lord stir up your hearts more, and more, to accomplish the
rest of the work. And know also, that you have a Call unto it, even from your
adversaries the Presbiterian Priests, who have so much urged you to suppress
Schisms, and Heresies in this Nation.

Now if it be proved from the Word, that they are such them selves, how can
they with modesty be offended; if you meet to them the same measure, they would
have had you (as their vassels) to have measured to others. Sure it is, you
have found that Tribe so much averse to your proceedings, as (had you not been
right valiant) might have utterly obstructed the work in your hands; and be
assured, that so long as that Judas of the Clergy lives, it is Witness their
utter disa^^ing of the now present Government, and e^g^gement ther^unto.
impossible that the State should be at quiet, their ambition being such, as
will admit of no injunctions from you, unless of their own framing, so that
you must resolve to suppress them, or be suppressed by them. Now the Lord
knows how the Souls of the Saints (as yet under the Altar) desires to be at
liberty, who are yet kept in bondage by that means, of your yet supporting
them; stir up your selves therefore like men of war, by suppressing them,
as also by giving way to such a method of gathering Churches, as there is a
clear president for in the Word; as also by such as are most meet for such
employments, as also to have them Churches so gathered, to be regulated in such
a method, as Christ and his Apostles has left in the Word, so that the true
Ministers of Jesus Christ may be known from them of Aarons order; and in so
doing we shall be in so happy a condition, as that it will be said of England,
as it was sometimes of Antioch, where the Disciples were first called
Christians; so if you will admit of Christ's own peculiar Government, without
any Antichristian mixture; you will not only bring glory to this Nation, but
also immortalize your names to all posterity; thus Christ is pleased to honor
you with the first proffer of restoring his Church to its primative purity,
(which is a thing you have also engaged your selves to perform) to the
discovery of which this Treatice tends. Which I most humbly present to your
Honors, hoping that the Lord will so stir up your hearts thereby, as to
accomplish the desires of him, who would glory to see the flourish of the new
Jerusalem, (of which I trust you will become Denizons) as also that England may
become a pattern to all that desire to profess Christianity in the whole
World, which the Lord in much mercy give unto your hearts to accomplish, whose
work it is, and who also must move you to it, in daily expectation whereof, I
subscribe my self,

Your Honors most humble Servant in the Lord, John Spittlehouse.

To his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
with the Colonels, and all the other Officers, and Soldiers, under their
Command.
Christian Champions:
THat which I intend to you by way of Epistle, is humbly to desire you to
compare your past, and present condition, with that of the Israelites, during
their Egyptian bondage, as also until they had passed the flood Jordan, and
pitched their tents in Gilgall, in the plain of Jericho, which I take to be
your now present condition; for proof of which (submitting to better
judgments) I shall give you some few hints (of many) by way of Simily, which I
conceive will fitly parallel with our condition, from our bondage unto this
present season; in which Emblem, I shall resemble their Egypt, to our
Antichristian slavery. 2. Our late King, to their Pharaoh. 3. The Monopolists,
to Pharaohs Taskmasters. 4. Our then Parliament, and Sinod, to their Moses,
and Aaron, (who were brethren in judgment) 5. The red Sea to Prelacy, through
which we passed, and in which, Pharaoh and all his Host was destroyed. 6. The
Wilderness, I take to be the various judgments amongst us in point of
Religion. 7. As their Host marched, or not marched, but as the cloudy pillar
moved, no more did the Army under the Earl of Essex command, but as the
Parliaments Commission ordered them. 8. As their Aaron offended by making an
Egyptian Idol for the Israelites to worship, so likewise did our Sinod, by
setting up their Presbitery, it being a limb of that Antichrist we are in
bondage unto. 9. As their Moses was called to mount Nebo, where he dyed, so was
Essex, to the Parliament. 10. As Joshua was appointed Commander of the Host,
before Moses dyed, so was our present General chosen before Essex dyed. 11. As
their Joshua was not bound up to the motion of the cloudy Pillar, but was at
liberty to march when, and where he pleased; so neither was our present
Generell, tied to observe the Parliaments order for his marches, or
enterprises. 12. As their Joshua did lead them over the flood Jordan, when it
over-flowed all its banks, so has our Joshua, or General, led us over the
Jordan of Presbitery, even when the promoters of that Tenent, was in the
greatest hopes to have established it. Instance their Treaty with the late King
in the Isle of Wight. Which twelve observations may serve as a memorial to our
ensuing posterities, as them twelves stones set up in Jordan, was to the
Israelites. And now thrice Worthies, having under God so well discharged your
places, by bringing the Congregation of this our Israel through so many ^minent
dangers, I do desire to enlarge my self a little further, in reference to
your present condition, (which I have told you I conceive to be as in the
plains of Jericho, beyond Jordan) by hinting unto you, what I conceive the
Lord would have you do, in reference to his design; which is only the very
same in effect which he commanded Joshua, Chap. 5. and 6. in which I desire
you, to observe with me, these ensuing particulars, viz. 1. The fear and dread
which fell upon all the Kings of the Amorites, and all the Kings of the
Cananites, that were round about them, ver. 1. 2. How the Lord is said to put
Joshua in mind, of renewing the ancient Covenant of Circumcision, made
formerly to Abraham, ver. 2. 3. The free, and willing obedience of Joshua, in
reference to the injunction laid upon him, in relation to the Circumcising of
the people, ver. 3. 4. The cause of their being so Circumcised laid down from
ver. 6. to ver. 8. 5. The Lords approbation and confirmation of Joshua's
compliance with his commands, ver. 9. 6. In that the Passe-over was likewise
celebrated by them, presently after their Circumcising, upon which their Manna
ceased; and after which they are said to ^ate the old Corn of the Land, yea
they are said never to have any more Manna amongst them, but that they did eat
of the fruit of the Land of Canaan that year. Thrice Honored Valiants, I
shall take on me to mind you of something, in relation to each of these
particulars, as they parallel with our present condition.

1. It is well known to the Camp of our Israel, what the Lord has done by us,
and for us, whereof we rejoice. And is it not also taken notice of in all the
Kingdoms about us, how the Lord has dried up before us, the Euphrates of
Papacy, the red Sea of Prelacy, and the Jordan of Presbitery; as also how he
has destroyed our Egyptian Pharaoh, and all his Host. Yea, does not all the
Nations about us, exceedingly fear, and tremble; yea so, as that their hearts
melt, yea is there any more spirit left in them?

2. Have we not the Spirit of the Lord, at this very instant of time, putting
us in mind to renew the ancient Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper,
answerable to their Circumcision* and the Paschall Lamb?

3. Ought not you the Joshuas of our Host, to be like obedient to the heavenly
voice, as the other?

4. Is there not the like cause as was then? Have either your selves, or any
other in the Congregation, been Baptized (during our wilderness condition,)
according to the primative practice of the Apostles? Or has the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper been celebrated of late, according to the Apostles
institution? Yea, have not all the holy Ordinances been slighted, and contemned
of us, since our Antichristian bondage? Have not all the posterities since
Luthers time perished in the Wilderness, because they obeyed not the voice of
the Lord in these particulars (unto whom he swear that he would not show them
the Land of Canaan, which the Lord swear unto their Fathers that he would give
us, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, upon which your feet now stands) I
beseech you therefore give the Lord cause (in this his day) to say unto you, as
he did then to Joshua, viz. that he has rolled away the reproach of Antichrist
(in the use of his Ordinances) from amongst us, (which have been so long
abused, and slighted by us, even to this present day;) and then be you well
assured, that you shall be fed with the old Corn, and fruit of the Land of
Canaan, and your wilderness Manna shall ^ease, viz. you shall be brought under
the old primative Government of Christ, and his Apostles, by Doctrine,
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, by which means, your confused, and dislocated
Societies shall cease to be, when you come once to be united, by the Word* and
Sacraments, into peculiar, and entire Bodies, (as in the primative times before
mentioned.) There be also many other things worthy your observation, which for
brevity sake I have omitted, being well assured, that your descerning spirit,
will ^^y them out; as also make that use of them, which the Lord requires of
you.

Right Noble Spirits, I have made choice of this method, in regard I know you
can as well exercise the Sword of the Spirit, as the material one; yea I am
well assured, that you have as well conquered by the one, as the other. I shall
now only commend your eye, to the reading, and your persons, to the practice of
what is contained in this ensuing Treatice, so far, as it has relation to
your particulars, which if you become like obedient, (as was your president
Joshua, and those under his command) you will then have the Postscript of the
Book appear unto you, as the Prince, or Captain of the Lords Host, did unto
the aforesaid Joshua; declaring himself for you, by whose directions you may
be put into a way, whereby you may conquer the City Jericho, which you, and the
Host of our present Israel, now lie before, to subdue; but if you refuse to be
obedient to what this Treatice does enjoyne you to accomplish, you are as like
to perish, though beyond Jordan, as the other on this side have done before
you; but being confident of your ready compliance, with the heavenly pleasure,
I rest,

Your most humble Servant. J. S.

To the Presbiterian Layety.
Honored friends:
HAving for a long season been a daily spectator of the tuggings, and contests
betwixt you, and the Independent Party of this Nation (whom you term
Schismatics, Heretics, etc. laboring by all possible power to suppress each
other) and having for my own satisfaction (in relation to your difference in
Judgments, as also of each other opinionists in this Nation) perused such
Authors, as providence supplied me with, for the se^ling my judgment, in point
of Divine worship, as in Doctrine, and Discipline, etc. and having thereby (as
also by other Divine dictates of the Spirit,) received full satisfaction
therein; I conceive my self enjoined, to impart the benefit thereof to others
(it being agreeable to that Divine injunction, When thou art converted,
strengthen thy brethren, Luke 22. 23. as also for some other reasons, which for
the present I shall omit) I have therefore composed, and published this
Treatice, which I present to each particular judgment, and so consequently to
you, whom I find amongst the rest, to be drawn by a contrary Byas, from the
true Discipline, and Government of Christ in his Church; and that by those men
you term Orthodoxall Divines, by whom you have been, and yet are much deluded
in point aforesaid, their design being merely as the rest of the Papal, and
Prelaticall Priests, ( whose offspring they are) to heighten themselves by
your ruins. I therefore desire you to search the Scriptures, and to try their
Spirits, whether they be of God or no. And he^ceforth do not wholly, and
solely, confide in such limbs of Antichrist, as to walk by an implicit faith,
or to pi^ your faith upon their sleeves. Lean not too much upon those Egyptian
Reeds, least they pierce your consciences. Remember it has been the ruin of
many thousands of ignorant Papists, who have been so hoodwinckt, conceiving
they believed as the Church believed, when in very deed they neither knew what
Faith, or the Church were, however I am confident they would have mist their
aim, their being neither true faith, or the true Church to be found, either
amongst them, or their Clergy; I hope better things of you, but it is very much
to be feared in many of you, who are so ready to censure men, and that upon no
other foundation, then your Priests judgments, as though they were infallible,
which is a thing too frequent amongst you, thinking with them, it is enough to
clear your selves, by calling others Schismatics, and Heretics; and thus you
have got the Scolds advantage to cry whore first. I would have you also to
consider, that it is one thing to call Schismaticke, and Heretic, and another
to prove such, whom you term so, to be such, and that from Scripture, and not
only by your Priests sayings, for otherwise both you, and they, show your
selves to be but railing Rabshakees. Act therefore like the noble Bereans, by
bringing their assertions to the touchstone of truth, by which you will
discern their supposed Gold to prove but Martins Ware, or Alcumie; I speak it
by experience, by it you will easily discover their Serpentine-like treacheries
to delude, and enshare you, (as did the Prelates) merely for their own
advantage.

I shall also speak something in relation to their, and your chief plea against
suck, whom they, and you so much exclame upon, as violaters of the Covenant
(which has been taken amongst us.) By which we were obliged, to establish
religion. Jure divino, or according to the will and appointment of Jesus
Christ. Now in that you think your selves such faithful men to that promise
(so made by you) in relation to the reformation of Religion as aforesaid. I
have in this i^suing discourse, proved you to be mere opposers, and
obst^ucters, of what you then engaged to perform, And that in each particular
relating thereunto. Yea that the government, which you so much endeavored, and
do yet endeavor to set up, as Jure Divino etc. is absolutely Jure Humano, or
according to the will and appointment of Antichrist; secondly, in as much as
that Covenant (so taken) relates unto State affairs, As to the preservation of
the late King, with all his Just rights and privileges etc. I suppose you are
or may be satisfied, by the variety of books published to that purpose. But to
cast my myte also into that Treasury, I shall in these few words deliver my
sense therein. That part of the Covenant tending to the preservation of the
late Kings life etc, did bind the Covenanters no further, then it did conduce
to the safety, and preservation of the Kingdom. But did it stand with the
safety, and welfare of the Kingdom, to preserve him, who disclaimed to be
regulated by the laws of the Kingdom, as also to give an account of his
actions to any but to God, being a practice quite contrary to such as reigned
before him, instance in King James, who were several times arrested, and gave
an appearance to the Writs so issued out of the Courts of Justice against him.
Again, was it requisite to preserve his life, who had been the destruction of
so many thousand both in life and estates. Did not himself confess in the I^e*
of Wight, that he was the offensive Party, and the Parliament bu^ the
defensive. Now he being the original of the war, must consequently be the
Author of the effects of it, which I presume you are not ignorant of. If he (by
the Law of the land) shall dye, who steals to the value of thirteen pence
half penny, how much more did he deserve it, for such horred murders* and
barbarous cruelties. You will reply. All be it the Parliament did take his life
away, yet they needed not to have divested his whole Posterity of the Regal
Power, in regard that Magistracy, and Ministry, are the two great Ordinances
of God, and therefore to be preserved, so long as the world continues. To
which I answer. To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose
under the heavens. But them two Ordinances you aim at, viz. the Kingly office,
and the now present clergy are such. Ergo. True they may be termed Ordinances,
Dei, non Deo. Of God* but not in God, and therefore not permanent with God: For
proof of which these ininsuing Scriptures are very pertinent. viz. Dan. 2. 27.
Where the aforesaid Daniel tells Nebuchad^ezzar, That the God of Heaven had
given him a Kingdom, power, and strength, and glory so that wheresoever the
children of men dwell, the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the Heavens,
he had given into his hands and had made him ruler over them all. As also to
his successors, as in the ensuing verses. By which expression, it does
evidently appear, that all such powers, are ordained of God, as in Romans 13. 1.
etc. as also that it is by him that Kings reign. etc. Prove. 8. 15. And
therefore it was that the Apostles used so many exhortations to be subject unto
their powers and others sent by them, as in Romans 13. 1. 2, 3. etc. with 1 Pet.
2. 13, 14, 17. As also to pray for them, and all in a^thotity. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2,
3. Yea not to curse them, no not in our thoughts. Eccles. 10. 20. But as I have
said. This was to be but for an appointed season. For the Prophet Daniel in the
aforementioned Chapter, does clearly demonstrate unto us, that all such powers
should have their period. and so consequently the honor, and o^^^^^^ce due
unto them* as in ver. 44. 45. viz. that there should be a time, when the God of
Heav^n should set up his Kingdom by which that of the wo^ld should ^e
destroyed, broken i^ pieces, and consumed, and that by means of a stone cut ou^
of the ^^^ntain without hands. The Apostle Paul does likewise ^estifie as much
1 Cor. 15. 24, 25. where (...) says* that Christ shall put down all rule, and
all authority, and power etc. And it is worthy our observation, that whereas
there has usually been great plagues in London, and else where in the
Kingdom, at, or immediately after the change of King, (as a si^ne of Gods
displeasure against such governnours, and governments.) Blessed be his name
there has sewer died of that sickness since this present change of
government, then at any other time; which doubtless, was a symptom of God,
owning of it, as more conducing to his will, and pleasure. 2. As in relation to
the Ecclesiastical government (as you term it) I likewise answer. that it
also is to have its period now, as the other, To prove which I shall also rip
up its pettigrees also. To which purpose, there is a most remarkable passage in
the aforementioned Chapter of Daniel, at the 38 ver* where the great Kings and
Monarks there mentioned, are not said to have rule over the sea, or the fish.
By which is clearly intimated that the great Leviathan, the Pope was not to be
under their command, he being as it were to be sole Lord of that part of the
terrestrial Globe of the Earth* which is also made good unto us by the
aforesaid prophet Daniel Chap. 9. 27. as also by our*Saviour Matthew. 24. 25.
Mark 13. 14. Luke 21. 20. As also by the Apostle Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. Where
there is a complete description of him, and his pride. viz: as in relation to
his person, he is termed, The man of sin, the son of perdition. 2. As to his
pride. He is said to oppose himself against all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, so that he is as God, sitting in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God, etc. Now having thus described his Person, and
quality, I shall also discover how he is to be also consumed, which is also
cleared unto us, by the said Apostle in the same Chapter, from ver. 6. to ver.
13.) part of which Antichrist your Clergy is also proved to be in this
Treatice; and thus you see that so soon as Christ's Kingdom shall approach
(which is even at this present season) that all the forementioned powers shall
be consumated,) which stand in opposition to his Kingly Government in his
Church amongst his Saints; therefore in what thing soever you now conceive your
selves engaged to perform, in relation to the aforementioned Covenant, in
Church, or State, (as they then were, or now are established,) is obsolutely to
oppose Jesus Christ in his present design, which I hope you will forbear,
lest you be said to fight against God, Act. 5. 39. this being the fifth Scaene
of the last Act in their Tragic Comedy.

I therefore desire you to peruse this Treatice with an impartial eye, which I
have collected to alienate your affections from error, as also from the
Tyrannical desire you have to impose that upon others, which (with your
Brother Pharisees) you will not touch with one of your fingers, as may be
instanced in the Order which the Sinod procured to compel men to their
obedience, and now refuse themselves to be like obedient to others; as also in
their utter dislike of the Parliaments Act now (to be tendered to the Assembly
of them at Westminster, (in relation to the disclaiming of Kingly Power, and
House of Lords.) And indeed I cannot blame them, for I am sure their Cake will
be dough without them; but they may as well sit still, as rise up and fall, for
in their prosecution of such thoughts, they do but wash the Moore; it is but
labor in vain, seeing the Lord is determined to destroy all Rule, and all
Authority, and Power, 1 Cor. 15. 24. which opposes him, and his Saints; of
which number I fear very few will be found fit (either of your Clergy, or the
worlds Magistracy) to enter with them into the Marriage Chamber. The Lord put
it into your hearts to consider seriously of your present condition, and to
make you all wise to Salvation; which is the hearty desire of your wel-wisher,

J. S.

To the courteous Reader.
FRiend, (for so I presume thou art, or however wish thou were;) it ought to be
thy daily practice to observe the revolution of providence, wherein if thou
be a constant Studiant, thou will be so favored of the most High, as that
he will cause thee to understand wisdom secretly. I suppose the Title fronting
this ensuing Treatice, will seem strange unto thee, as that Rome Viz.
Cardinal Wolsie.
should be ruined by the productions of White Hall, a place whose Founder was
as a ravening Wolf to the little Flock of Christ; a place which has been
esteemed, as the Signit upon the right hand of that Romish Whore; a place of
succession to the chief promoters of Antichristianisme in this Nation, and of
Saints persecutors, Vid. Fox Acts and Monuments.
by Banishments, Imprisonments, as also of Martyrdomes, by Fire, and Faggot;
that such a place as this should now be a receptacle for persons of so contrary
a frame of Spirit (as to ruin the Successors of such Ruinours) doubtless will
be a Paradox to many; but to such as are practical in the aforementioned
Theory, it will not be admirable; I mean to such as act the Noble Bereans, by
studying the Scriptures, observing the Actings of God therein, in his
Judgments, and Mercies; for there they may behold his suitable Judgments, to
men's Transgressions, as may be instanced in Adonnibezeck, who was taken in
Bezeck, the Metropolis of his Empire, where he himself suffered like
punishment to that, which he had caused to be inflictrd upon others; which he
himself was forced to acknowledge, as a just reward of God upon him. The like
also may be observed in wicked Jesabell, whose blood was spilt, and flesh eaten
by Dogs, in the same place where she caused Naboths blood to be shed. Now God
is the same, for with him there is no varience, or shadow of change, and
therefore his Actions ought to be observed, as well now, as formerly, both in
his Mercies, and Judgments, in regard that not one title of what he has
promised, shall fall to the ground, unaccomplished. And he has declared the
destruction of Antichrist, and his Adherents, and that even by such a means as
they have used to suppress the Saints; and to this purpose providence has
been, and may be wonderfully observed, in that the late Kings blood, was shed
in the same place, where ^e cau^ed his Russ^ans, to shed the blood of honest
Petitioners, (whose ^r^sp^ss^ was only for desiring him to call a Parliament)
as also that he should walk through that very place, even to the Scaff^ld, in
which formerly he had so much abused God, and his Creatures, by unchristian
Recreations, and prodigal Banquets, even to the excess of Riot. As also in
relation to his acts of Mercy, I have likewise observed as to my own
particulaer, Gods wonderful providence, in selecting a place for my ^^^d^ in
White Hall, yea such a (...) the gorgious Apparel of the Court was said up,
viz. the Ro^^r^y* in which I writ this Book, (being against the present powers
of ^^e wo^ld, and the pride of Antichrist, and his A^^^rents, such as they
were, who had their chief residence in White Hall,) and therefore I thought it
a suitable Title for the same; as al^o in that White Hall is now become white
indeed by the assembly of S^i^ts, which of ^a^e have been, and I hope are
Collegated in it. ^o^^^^esse the name of White Hall was not given to it (by
that Antichristian who ^^e^^ed it) without the consent of Divine providence,
the Lord ^^^^ing a determination to make it the beauty of ^^l^^^sse, by ^l^sing
such an Assembly of Saints in it, as should ruin them, who (...) to ruin the
Saints. It is also well k^^wne to many, what other divine actions have bin
promoted in that (...) wherein thi^ Tr^atice was composed, which was a great
encouragement to my spirit to prosecute the work, but I shall forbear in
regard it would be (to many*) but a thing rediculous, I shall commit the
effects thereof, to him who ^^^^d me thereunto, desiring it may (...) to thy
(...) welfare; let this suff^ee to have bin spoken in relation to the Title.

2. As touching the matter therein contained, I am confident thou will since
something, which will please thee as well as disaffect thee, for our pallates
are such (in Spirituals) as will r^l^sh the discoveries of errors in others,
but we utterly dislike that glass, which reflecteth our own d^^^^mi^i^es.
^elix could ^eare Paul gl^dly, until ^e reasoned of righteousness,
temporance, and judgment to come, but he could not then be at any further
leasu^e; so whilst I am enveighing against the Atheists, and Anti-scripturians;
the Papists themselves will willingly read my lines, but when I come to harp
upon their string, then they will bid forewel^ to me, but yet this Music will
please the Prelaticants, but when I once come to their doors, I shall be sure
to be ^^ut out for a wrangler. The like I may also say of Presbitery, and the
rest of the errors confuted in this Book; therefore I earnestly desire thee,
who even thou art, to lay aside all partiality and self, and to set the door
of thy conscience wide open to entertain Truth, the King of glory, who here
presents himself to lodge with thee, and be consident he will be a good Guest
unto thee; therefore turn him not out again, it is likely thou will find many
things therein which will be cross to thy principle, but emember the old rule,
If thou would lay hold on Time thou must take him by the fore-top* for
otherwise, post es^ (...) ^e is bald behind. If thou ar^ ^o^ p^^s^^^ly
satisfied in what thou read, do not immediately pronounce it an (...), but
act the noble Berean, by searching the Scriptures, and trying the Spirits,
whether they be of God, or no, fancy not the (...) of thy opinion, neither
believe your ^rthodox^^l men (as thou (...) them, who are of thy judgment)
therein u^^^sse they fetch it from the r^dex or r^^t, from whence it had its
(...), ^^e^^er from the lord, or from tradissions, if not from the Word, let it
have no longer any ^^^i^ation in thee; doubtless a truth of sixteen ^^^dred
and (...) years, ought to be admitted by thee, rather ^^^n an error of
fourteen hundred years; and know for a certain, that Truth was before Error,
and therefore ought to have the (...); Neither let it trouble thee that thy
Ancestors were of this or that judgment, for they served ^^d according to that
measure of knowledge, he was then pleased to afford them; and do^^^l^sse, that
service was acceptable unto him, for to whom little was ^^^, of them but little
will be required; without all controversy our Pr^^^^^^sors, which suffered
Martyrdom in ^ueen Mary's days (who in their judgments were Prelati^ants) did
dye as real Mar^yrs, as any in the primative times; yea it would be too deep
(...) ^o judge all damned under the notion of Papists, but Christ being now
^l^ased by gradations, to clear the light of his Truth, and to r^^u^e his
Church, to its primative purity; we ^^gh^ as much to renounce, every tradission
of Antichrist (which has er^pt into the Church since the Apostasy) as the
Churches gathered by the ^postles, did relinquish the Levittical Ceremonies,
and as then, he, (...) would not comply with the Apostles rules, ^as not to be
a Member of their Church, so neither ought any now to have admittance, without
the like compliance; and this is no more a new truth I would possess thee
with, then tomorrow may ^e termed a new day, for the day is the same it was
from the beginning of the Creation, it being only the intervall of darkness
(by reason of the declination of the Sun) which makes the distixction in our
Horizon, for otherwise the Sun never sets; and so consequently the daylight
is one and the same. And albeit in some Countries (by the same reason The Jews
obscurity produced light (...) the G^n^^^les.
of the Suns far remoteness) it is dark for many months together, yet
during that time, other parts of the earth enjoy the benefit thereof: So though
the Son of Truth has been interposed by Antichristean darkness, for many
hundred years, yet has some glorious Vid. Fox Acts and Mo^uments.
Rays thereof been beamed forth into several parts of the earth, for the
illumination of the people of God. True, this sulperous cloud of
Antichristianisme, was once of that magnitude, that it did almost totally
eclipse this Son of Truth, so that very few enjoyed the benefit thereof; but in
process of time, by its daily progress under it, has wrought it so thin, as
that now the whole luster thereof may clearly be discovered, which Son of truth
is now mounting up to the Meridian, where until the true Church of Christ have
prevailed, it will be fixed (like Joshuas Sun) until it has wholly dispelled,
and dissolved all the clouds in its firmament.

Fiend, in this Treatice thou may* behold the several gradations, by which
it mounts it self into its Mid-heaven, where he will enlighten the whole
world, here is that path of truth discovered, by which thou may also safely
betwixt the S^ylla and Caribdian errors of Prelacy, and Presbitry, into the
Mari pacissicum, or Church of Christ; here is the Golden mean that will
preserve thee from such as err on the right, or left hand, from such who place
their sole affections upon outward ordinances, making the practice of them,
their sole Religion; as also from them who utterly reject such Ordinances (as
Christ and his Apostles left behind them, as a pattern for us to imitate)
esteeming them of no value, amongst the Saints; here (as I have said) thou
may behold light breaking through darkness, the Son of Truth driving his
fiery Chariot through the maine ocian of Error; here thou may see each
opinion, in its natural colors, as also each seed of Error ripened to its
full perfection, with its name, and quality, as also the good seed of Truth;
here thou may discern the Milk and Honey, of Spiritual Canaan, from the
Garlic, and Onions of the Antichristian Egypt; in a word, here thou may
behold Christ, and his Antagonists. Know therefore that which of them thou
obayest, his servant thou art, etc. I therefore advise thee, with Mary, to
choose the better part.

Now to render Sir John, the Parish Priest, a reason why I have not fixed the
Authors names to such of the matter as has been collected by me; 1. It was,
because I questioned whether they were their own, from whom I had them. 2.
Neither was it ever thought unlawful to fight an enemy with his own Weapon,
being obtained; neither have I done any more in this, then by using the
Prelates against the Papists, and the Presbiterian against the Prelates; by
which contest of theirs, amongst themselves, Providence is wonderfully seen,
in that like the Assirians, they help to ruin one another, so that my chief
work is to subdue that Hierarchy of Presbitery, who has conquered the other
two, and now would reign it self in their stead. Again, I would have such
Sir John's to know, that to fight a public enemy, requires the public
Magazine, both for offensive, and defensive Weapons; and seeing the Lord has
moved me to be his Churches Champion, against that three-headed Monster of the
Pope, with his threefold Hierarchies, of Papacy, Prelacy, and Presbitery,
certainly he will allow me (as Saul did to David) his own Armor; however that
I may gather, such materials as I shall think meet for the encounter (in such
common places) as David did in the Brook, which having gathered, I therewith
advance in the spirit of David, toward that Zanzumim, or Gyganticall Annakim,
hoping the Lord of Hosts (the only giver of Battles) will so prosper the event,
as that I shall, (as David did Goliath) head him with his own^ Weapon, and bring
them as Trophies to the Camp of our Israel.

Take notice Rome, even in the same WHITE HALL,
Where here, thou had thy rise, thou have thy fall.

A general Preface to the Book.
IN as much as the present design of Christ (by his Spirit, which is now to
reign in the Saints,) is to destroy Antichrist, Root a^^ Branch; and this
Antichrist (so to be destroyed,) consisting of the pollutions, and delusions of
the world, the ^lesh, and the Devil, (viz. in the now temporal powers of the
world, the now various forms of Church Government; as also in many
fundamental points of Religion) and it being the office of the aforesaid
Spirit, to convince the world of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment,
Joh. 16. 8. viz. Of Sin, in point of fundamentals; of Righteousness, in
point of their Pharasaicall glosses, by which they color their Hypocrisy in
matter of form; of Judgment, in point of the Ti^anicall, and Arbitrary powers
of the world. In reference to which, I have suited my Discourse, to them three
particulars, hoping the Reader will ^^ade that conviction, as to be persuaded
from any further contest with Christ, in all, or any one of the a^oresaid
particulars, resident in him; in relation to which, Christ has in effect
declared, that whosoever is not against them, or any one of them, in any
particular of them, is assuredly against him. The Method I shall observe in
this Discourse, is by making the first last, and the last first, viz. I have
first endeavored to convince Errors, in fundamental points of Religion (as
in relation to the Trinity, etc. secondly, in the forms of it; and lastly in
the powers opposing Christ, in, or under them forms. I have also used the
Scripture method, by reproof, and instruction, where there is occasion; I have
also (where need requires) composed this Book, by way of Dialogue, it being
as I conceived, the chief means to convince errors. This I presume is
sufficient, to illuminate your understandings* in relation to the scope, and
intent of the Book, which is here presented unto you; I shall only add this,
that the Reader would p^ruse the 24. chap. of M^thewes Gospel, and parallel it
with this present time; as also in particular, to take notice of the 30. ver.
viz. Then shall appear the SIGN of the Son of Man in Heaven, etc.

To the Assembly of Priests and Lay Elders, who were lately met together (as a
Provincial Synod.) London, November. 2 1649. Being a lightning before the final
ruin of their present Hierarchy.
Gentlemen Presbyters,
THe reason why I have printed this sheet, was because (when my book was
printed off) I happened to meet with a book published by you, (titled, The*
Vindication of your Government and Ministry, etc.) which in regard mine being
to succeed, and not positively intended as an answer to yours, I thought it
requisite to write some what, whereby you may take notice that I have been at
the charge of one of them books (so published by you) to the end I might
discover how far providence had provided you of an answer to your thoughts,
before they were either published, or penned: As also to take notice what that
Antichristian Spirit (which is yet so predominant in you) had dictated unto
you, as a preparative for its own Ruin, and your perpetual shame, and
disgrace. To which purpose, I have taken notice of some passages in your book,
which clearly tend to that purpose. As first, in that great oversight, in not
proving you had a Church. Did you never hear that the Schismatics and
Heretics ( you so much gape to devour) did as well oppose your Church, as
your Government, and Minstry. Could you think they were now satisfied in the
lawfulness of it, more then formerly, viz. That the whole frame of it is
Antichristian, as also the appurtenances thereunto belonging. Certainly you
thought your book would have happened in the hands of none, but such silly people
you dedicated it unto, whom you have so long blinded by your Lucifer-like
Luster, or Janes, and Jambres-like delusions: But if so, providence has
otherwise disposed of it, to the end you might deceive them no longer. It
appears, you would gladly now content your selves with them you have under
your Churches, in London; but I hope they have ^ither more wit, or grace, then
to be any longer deluded by you. And for the other Sectaries, etc. they adjure
you to beguile your auditors no longer with such vain pretenses, and seeming
shows of the purity of your Church Government, and Ministry; but that you
would prove them to be of such like metal, as you boast them to be. And that
not only (as you have done) from your infallible tongues, pens, sic volo, sic
jubeo, or from your old Grandam at Rome; but from the institution of Christ and
his Apostles, ( not legal, or politic observations of the Jews, etc.) And
until you have so done, (whsch I am confident you will never do) they are all
fools, or madmen, that will harbor a conceit that you have either a true
Church Government, or Ministry. And therefore in the name of all such as desire
to practice Religion in the primitive purity thereof, I pronounce and declare,
whatsoever you have said in that book, to be of no more esteem, than a Castle
built in the Air, or a Babell of confusions. For where do you find in the New
Testament, a Church merely composed of Officers, or any part of the Church,
termed by the name of Laytie, or Lay Elders, Lay People, etc. Or where such
sorts of people were admitted to Churchfellowship, as there was a need to
examine them touching their faith before the receipt of the Lords Supper. Or
where in any Act of Judicature, or advice, that the brethren were exempted from
their vote, and consent, or had not a joint interest, and concurrence therein.
Or where read you (there) of A Classical, Provincial, or National Synod, or
National Church, or of one sort of Pastors, that were Superior to others,
being of the same calling, whether mediate, or immediate. I might insert many
other things, but I conceive these few particulars will serve you billing at.
In the next place, I observe your notable juggle, in that you would clearly put
upon them whom you call Schismatics, etc as that they have abused, or
slandered you, ( with a matter of truth) and dealt with you, as the Old
persecutors dealt with the Christians, by putting them into Bearsskins, and
then bait them with dogs; or, as the Papists dealt with John Hus, when they
painted a picture of a Red Devil upon his head, and then exposed him to the
laughter of the people. Gentlemen, this was never your own practice, witness
the Mild and Modest books of your late Champion Edwards, etc. And truly them
that deal so with you, are too blame in being at such pains about you, in
regard your nature of it self is sufficient to discover what you are, without
such Badges, or Characters: And therefore you see I did not Muffle, or disguise
you in that Manner, in the Frontispeece, where I have also given my reason for
it. After which your Prologue, you begin the Comedy, by rehearsing what they
tax you with, which chiefly consists in these ensuing Particulars, which are
as follows. 1. As to be such as are Lordly, and Domineering Men. But your
Classical, Provincial, and National Synod, argue the contrary. 2. Such as
would Lord it over the people of God, more than ever the Prelates did. But the
Act you procured to punish Schisms, etc. Argues the contrary; yea, the truth
is, you have been, and yet would be, as Mild and Modest, as Wolvs or Tigers. 3.
Such, as instead of one Bishop, would have set up many hundreds. But your
forementioned Synods argue the contrary. 4. Such as would erect A Tyrannical
and Cruel Government, had you power to establish it. I shall want Rome to
excuse you in this particular. 5. Such as would Fine and Imprison all, that
would not yield unto your Church, and Government. Tush, the Aforementioned Act
does clear you in this particular. 6. Such as would erect an Arbitrary Power,
and Challenge an unlimited Jurisdiction. But the thousands of Parishes, subject
to your Triple Synod, does clearly free you of Any such purpose. 7. Such as
would rob the Congregationall Churches of their power and liberty. But your
Dis-affection to Tithes, as also your Affection to Such Churches, shows the
contrary. 8. Such as would not change domininum, but dominum. Do you and the
Prelates clear this Scruple amongst your selves. 9. Such as seek for unity,
but not for purity. Your National Church proves it clearly (not) to be
otherwise. 10. Such as will not assent A Jus divinum, but depend upon a Jus
humanum. But your several Edicts and Injunctions show the contrary. 11. Such
as depend more upon an Ordinance of Parliament, than an Ordinance of God. Tush,
the Aforementioned Ordinance clears you. 12. Such as are the Only troublers
of Israel, and the Only hinderers of a Blessed Reformation. Witness your late
book Against the present Government, to the Contrary. 13. Such as are Pestilent
fellows, and Movers of Sedition. Are they such Mr. Lilly? 14. Such as are
Pulpit Incendiaries. Witness your Billingsgate divinity, quoted by Mr. Lilly,
to the Contrary. 15. Such as have separated their Consecrated lungs, to blow up
the fire of A second War. I should have said A third, should I not Mr. Lilly,
16. Such as were bringers in of the numerous Army of the Scots, to invade the
Parliament, and Army of England. But did your Astrology tell you so, Mr.
Lilly? I must tell you, they do not love you for telling such Schoole-tales of
them. 17. Such as were the great Parliament-Assertors, and are now the only
Parliament-Opposers. But the second particular in your late book, proves the
Contrary. 18. Such as seek their own Ease and Intererests, and not the things
of Jesus Christ. O fie! how they wrong you. 19. Such as are Notorious
Hypocrites, Baals Priests, Limbs of Antichrist, etc.

Mr. Lilly I pray say, are they such? do they not deserve Bridewell, do they?
Twentieth such whose reasons of dislike, and unsatisfiednesse with these times,
and alterations therein made; is because they fear that their great Diana of
tithes, will be pulled down, and that their gain will be less, and their pains
greater; as also that they cannot so Lord it over the people, as they have
done. Gentlemen you see I have endeavored to excuse you, as well as I may. I
will assure you they have scored you up, a very large reckning, pay it how you
can. And I must further tell you, that if these be the Bear skins they put
upon you, and the red Devils they pin on you, I fear they will cleave as close
to you, as the skins to your backs; therefore I advise you to beware how you
offer to dis-case your selves of them, least you tear the flesh off also,
which would be a greater mischef, then the wearing of them with pat^ence; I
presume this last pull you made at them, will be a warning to you for the
future. I shall tell you how, you may bestow your time much better, which will
be in numerating up the Errors committed by the Compositer of my Book, (which I
presume he committed to that very purpose, as also in the Frontispiece) against
your second part to the same tune. But it is to be feared that you have sung
your Swan-like ditty, in the late praise of your Government, yea, I persuade my
self it will be the very last Inconium of your Heirerchy that ever will be
chanted by the Provincial quire in London, or elsewhere in this Nation, (if
not in Scotland) will it not Mr. Lilly? will they make an other betwixt this
and the 132. day, prefixed by you? Thus I think I have served your turn, and
yet spared paper, which rather then It shall lie all bare, I will e^ver it with
my judgment in relation to Astrology, which Art, or Science, I deem of much
exellency; yea, as the Princes to the rest of the Sciences. My reasons are
these;

First, in that it is said, The Heavens declare the glory of God and the
Firmament shows His handy Work Psa. 19. From which words, I thus argue, That
which God declares, or manifests, ought to be observed by them, to whom they
are manifested unto; But they are declared or manifested unto rational
creatures, as men, etc. Ergo,

If it be demanded, how they declare, or show such things.

I answer, By their illumination, and influences, the one is made good to us by
their glorius Splendor, and the other by their powerful influence, or
effects, which are also made out unto us by the ebbing and flowing of the
Waters, or in mad people ( such as the Presbyterians, whose final exit Mr.
Lilly says will jump with the last quarter of the Moon.) Now as these
observations requires an observer; so the observer requires a judgment in
the thing to be observed, and judgment is obtained by practice, and
experiments.

Ergo, It is lawful to study and practice Astrology as any other Art.

If that Text of Isay 47. 12. 13. etc. be objected.

I answer, Them Texts are spoken of such as depend upon the Aspects of Stars,
and confide in their Influences, as inevitable causes of joy, or sorrow. But
shall we therefore reject a thing that is lawful in it self, because some
people abuse it? Because Papists give Alms by way of Merit, shall we therefore
give none at all? Because Ordinances are slighted by some, and Adored by
others, shall we therefore despise them?

Again, if the Presbyterians look well unto themselves, they will be found the
very Sorcerers, etc. for that Prophecy alludeth unto Rome, of which they are
Members.

If it be demanded, what good is got by the knowledge of Astrology.

I answer, It is the same to the outward or external man, as Divinity to the
inward or internal. And therefore as a man does labor to know the mind of
God (by studying the Scriptures) in relation to his soul: So may he practice
the other, in relation to the preservation of his body.

Again, He that is well read in Astrology, has these advantages above other
men.

As to know the Inclinations of the Heavens toward him, which if he discern
to be good, it will, or at least ought, to procure thankfulness in him to the
Creator of that means by which he obtains that knowledge; as also to stir
him up to a pious life and conversation, lest he should be deprived of that
good portended unto him, in regard he knows, they are not so irrevocably
fixed, but that his sins may divert his enjoyment of them.

2. If they presage evil toward him, he is also thereby stirred up to
petition the disposer of such events, that they may be diverted from him; so
that there can no harm happen by the knowledge of Astrology, to a Believer,
but rather, much good.

If it be demanded whether we may or ought to confide, or depend upon
Astrology, or Astrologers? I answer, that we ought to have respect to them, as
we have to Physicians, who by Symptoms does discover the condition of thy
body, as also will tell thee that God has ordained such and such herbs, etc.
for the healing of thy infirmity, etc. Now, albeit his judgment is such, thou
art (...) therefore positively to conclude that these things will (...) thee,
because he tells thee so; for a Believer knows, that God is able to divert
the operations of such things, as in their proper natures are good for us. So
is it in Astrology, the Astrologer discovers unto us the Predictions of the
Heavenly Bodies, tells us such and such things seems to be intended by the
Creator, (in regard he discovers them by the Conjunction and operations of
the Heavens;) yet are we not positively bound to believe that they shall so
come to pass: We ought therefore to confide in neither, as solely to depend
upon them, neither are we to reject them.

Again, we are not bound absolutely to depend upon such as teach Divinity, and
yet the Profession is lawful; and so of any other Art, or Science. But yet
where experience teaches us, that a man is an able Divine, Physician, etc. we
ought to confide in them, more then in others of their Function, or Science.
And in the same sense I approve of Mr. Lilly, as an able Artist in his Science,
in regard that experience has taught me, that he is an inge^^ous Profi^ient in
the same. If that Prediction of his cited in the beginning of the month of
January be applied to my book (where he says, that it will begin with
mutanous Paradoxies, by means of a froward, repining, and seditious Clergy, or
men pretending Religion, endeavoring to affront our State, which must stand
though not statu quo.)

I answer, That I take Mr. Lilly (if he be of the aforementioned judgment) to
be a better Astrologer then a Divine, for otherwise he would not have given so
dubious a construction of that passage. I desire therefore he would more fully
amplyfie his judgment in that particular.

As to what he has predicted against the Presbyterian Government, and the
prefixed time he has set down, as A full period to it, time will make
manifest; but as to my own particular, I am fully satisfied, that it will be as
punctually accomplished, as he has said it, (unless it be upheld, more out of
obstinacy, then Affection.) Yet I am verily persuaded that God has endued that
man with a knowledge above other of his Science, to the end he may discover how
the Stars in their Courses fight against all that oppose the true Church of
Jesus Christ, under what form, or notion soever, I shall therefore add one
question more to the Provincial Sinnod, in Mr. Lillies behalf, (whose Person
and Profession they so much vilify) which I desire they would satisfy me in,
viz. How, or by what manner, Deborah and Barack (Judge. 5. 20.) knew that
Sisera, was fought against from Heaven, or by the Stars in their courses (if
not by their influences.) And if so, why may they not be observed now, as then?

In the interim, I take my leave of the Provincial Synod, And Master Lilly the
Prince of the Astrologers.

In that he has prefixed the precise day,
That Presbytrie shall pass, fade, and decay,
In that he has avowd, Its Consummation,
Or banishment, out of this State, and Nation.
Rome ruined by White Hall. Or, The Papal Crown demollish^t.
Containing a confutation of the three degrees of Popery, viz. Papacy, Prelacy,
and Presbytery, answerable to the triple Crown of that three-headed Cerberus
the Pope, with his three fold Hierarchies aforesaid.
CHAP. 1. The first Chapter treats of the opinions of Atheists, and the
confutation thereof.
IT was the opinions of the ancient Heathens, Atheistical opinions.
That there was no God, ascribing the event of all things to natural causes,
as to Fortune, Chance, and Fate, which things they conceived to have great
power upon Counsels, Laws, and Actions of men; the best learned of them did
distinguish, and determine them thus, viz. To Fortune they ascribed such
things, as when any dug the ground (as to lay a foundation, or the like) and
found a treasure, which he did not look for* to Chance, when any thing good,
or bad, happened to any whilst they slept, or thought not of it, or to infants:
To Fate those things which proceeded from the influence of stars, motions, or
operations of the Heavens* and all inferior bodies subordinate to them; the
counter-change of the day, and night, and all other seasons* of the year.

Now (...) such (...) a^ I fear there is many) I demand of them what they
mean by the word Nature, and whether they apprehend it to be a thing, which
has reason, or understanding in it self, and so moves all creatures,
according to the proper nature, and kind of every of them.

For (if so) in that sense, God and Nature are both one, and God and Nature
compared.
therefore is called, Natura naturans, that Nature, which gives nature to all
things, so that one defining of Nature, calls it, God, and divine reason,
incerted, and put into the world, and every part thereof* but if by the word
Nature they mean a certain power, influence, or instinct, which (without
sense, or understanding in it self) has an opperation in things senseless,
inclining, and moving them to a certain end: It must needs follow, that the
same nature, influence, or power has that motion, force, or opperation, from
some superior essence, which has understanding, and is of infinite power and
wisdom; who creates, moves, guides, and concerns it: In which sense it
is defined of some to be principium motus and quies, the beginning of motion
and rest, and so numbered amongst such causes, as work for an end.

From all which it may be concluded, that nature must needs Nature Gods
instrument.
be directed by the providence of God; for nothing that is void of
understanding and sense, can tend to a certain end, except it be directed by
some, that knows the end, As an Arrow cannot tend to a certain mark, except
it be shot by some that knows the mark; in which sense nature can be nothing
else, but the instrument Nature Gods order.
of God. Again, nature may be termed Gods order; and so things extraordinary
are called unnatural For^une his unrevealed will, and so we call things
changeable, that are besides reason and expectation. What then is Nature but
God! call him what thou will, Nature Jupiter, etc. he has as many names as
officer, it comes all to one pass; That God it the fountain of all the first
giver and preserver, from whom, and of whom all things The universal world is
nothing but God ^^prest.
depend: and that he is all (...) all, and in every place* so that the
universal world is nothing else but God expressed, and therefore every man that
has reason, or is reasonable, may know out of the same reason, that he that
made him is God, as the Psalmist confesses, Psalm. 100. It is he that made us,
and not me ourselves* for as a man seeing a great fabric, or building, will
conclude that it did not make it self: so we seeing the great fabric of
Heaven and Earth, must needs conclude, that it had one that framed and produced
it in that beauty we see it have. As the Psalmist also acknowledges, Psalm. 19.
1. 2. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firm^ment shows his handy
work. One day tells another, and one night certifieth another, etc.

SECT. 2. Of the Appellations of God, whereby he is made known unto the world.
THe name of a thing, is that whereby it is made known unto others, and
severed and distinguished from other things. In this latter respect God needs
no name, because he is but one: Of the Appellations of God.
neither can properly any name be given him, because he is infinite, and cannot
be comprehended in a name. Neither is a name given to God, in respect of
himself, but to us: that in some sort he might be made known unto us. That
there is a God, Nature it self will teach us: but what this God is we know
not, but as it pleases him to reveal unto us in his Word. Now the name of God
in Scripture is five ways to be taken: As,

1. For God himself, Joel 2. 32. Whosoever shall call upon the The names of
God five ways taken.
name of God shall be saved. 2. For the Word of God, as in Joh. 17. 6. where
our blessed Savior says, I have manifested thy name, etc. 3. For the
wisdom, power, mercy, and other Attributes of God, as in Mal. 1. 11. Great is
my name, that is, my glory power, and majesty. 4. For the commandment of God,
Joh. 17. 8. I came in my Father^ name. 5. For that whereby God is called, viz.
Jebovah, Exed. 3. 15. where the Lord says, This is my name for ever.
Further touching the names which are given to God, they The names of God of
sour so^ts.
may be reduced to four sorts, viz.

1. The names whereby the divine Nature and Essence is expressed, a^ Eheje
Jehovah, which are only peculiar unto God.

2. His name taken from his Attributes, as his Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, and
such like, which properties though (in a most excellent manner) they agree unto
God, yet are also communicated unto Creatures: and so he is called Creator,
Lord, Governor, Preserver, his opperations being threefold, as 1. In
Creation. 2. In Formation, and 3. In Consummation.

3. Some of his names include a Negation, or absence of some imperfection
incident to the Creatures: and so he is called immortal, immutable, as also in
regard of the vain opinions, and estimations of men, as the Idols of the
Gentiles were called gods.

4. The name of God is given him by way of Similitude, as Magistrates, in
respect of their Authority, are called gods, so also Prophets, in regard of
their divine knowledge, Holy men, for their sanctity, and Angels for the
excellency of their Creation, and so are called gods, Nun cupative, by a kind
of Appellation: as Moses is called Aarons God, Exodus 4. 16. but the Lord is
called God essentially, The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Exodus 3. 4.

Besides these, there are other names which belong particularly unto God, as in
Exodus 3. 4. where the Lord says to Moses, Eheje, or, I am that I am has sent
thee.

Which word according to the Expositers of the Hebrews signifies The peculier
name of God.
all the differences of time, both past, present, and to come, as it is
expounded, Romans 1. 8. 2. Others term it a name of Of his name these.
unchangeablenesse, for the creatures which have their dependencie of
themselves cannot say Ero, I shall be. 3. It shows the perfection of God,
that has his being of himself, and not of any other. 4. The goodness of God,
that gives to all things their being, as i^ Romans 11. 36. where the Apostle
says, Of him, through him, and for him are all things: therefore in that
things are said to be, they have it given them by the goodness of God. 5. It
declares the infiniteness of God, that God is all in all, as in 1 Cor. 15.
28. so that this is unto God to be, to be all things, as wisdom, goodness,
righteousness, etc. 6. This name makes a difference betwixt the true God, and
the false gods of the Heathen, that had no being at all. 7. This name shows
both the power of God, that nothing can hinder his everlasting being, and his
goodness in promising his continual presence, and assistance to his Church:
and this name of God was not unheard of amongst the wiser sort of the Heathen,
for it is said that this sentence was written upon the doors of the Egyptians
Temples, Ego sum omne, etc. I am whatsoever was, is, or is to come. It is also
reported of a Heathen, that being asked what God was, said, Quod semper est,
neque principium habens, neque finem: That which always is, having neither
beginning, nor ending. It is also reported, that upon the Temple of Apollo,
were written Tues, intimating, that such things as are mutable, and changeable,
may rather be said not to be, then be.

There is also the name Jehovah given unto God, which signifies the same with
Eheje, being added as more usual, and better known, and it betokens two
things principally, viz. The Eternity, Of his name Jehovah.
and always being of God, and his cause of being to all other things, as the
efficient cause from whom, the formal cause through whom, and the final cause
for whom all things are., 2. It betokens Gods power in his goodness, and
truth: the first, in being able: the second, in being gracious, and willing:
and third, in being constant to fulfill his promise. Fourthly, this name
Jehovah is also incommunicable to all other, El^him, which signifies God: is
sometimes given to Angels, sometimes to Judges, etc. but Jehovah is peculiar
unto, God; so that of all names that are given unto God, none does more fully
express what God is, then the name Jehovah.

CHAP. II. Treats of the opinion of the Anti-trenitarians, and the
confutation thereof.
THe opinion of the Anti-trenitarians, is either to deny the Divinity of
Christ, or that he is not equal with the Father, and the Holy Ghost.

That there is a God I have proved, and it cannot be denied by any who believe
the Scriptures, or are Rational. Now that Christ is God, is also sufficiently
confirmed That Christ is God.
by the Apostle Paul. Col. 2. 9. In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. As also the testimony of John, (Chap. 1. 1, 2, 3.) In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; the same was in the
beginning with God, all things were made by him, and without him was nothing
made that was made: In him was life, and that life was the light of men, etc.
with Col. 1. 16, 17. For by him were all things created that are in heaven, and
earth, visible, or invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principallities, or powers, all things were created by him, and for him, and he
is before all things, and by him all things consist, as also Ioh. 5. 10. Phil.
2. 6.

SECT. 2. That the Holy Ghost is God.
THat the Holy Ghost is God, is also proved by diverse places of Scriptures, as
in Genesis 1. 2. where it is said, that the Spirit of God moved upon the waters;
by which the creatures were fostered and formed, as Job 26. 13. His Spirit has
garnished the heavens.

2. Again, as God only created the world, so likewise the renovation of the
heart, is only the work of God, because it is a new creation, as the Prophet
terms it, Psalm. 51. 10. where he says, Create in me a new heart, but this is
also the work of the Spirit, as it follows, take not thy holy Spirit from me;
and again in the 12. verse. Hold me up with thy free Spirit, intimating, that
without the aid and assistance of the blessed Spirit, no divine work (viz. as
the creating of a new heart) can be wrought, or effected.

3. It is Gods work to teach us his will, and to bring us to eternal life; but
this is wrought by the Spirit, as the Psalmist confesses, Psalm. 143. 10. in
these words: Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God, (let thy good
Spirit) lead me into the land of righteousness; in which place the Prophet
confesses, that he could not do the will of God, without the assistance of
the Spirit of God.

4. The Holy Ghost is excellently proved to be God, from that passage
concerning Sampson, where it is said, The Spirit of the Lord came upon him,
Judge. 14. 5. but after his locks were polled, it is also said, that he knew not
that the Lord was departed from him, Judge. 16. 20. from whence we may gather,
that he that came upon him before, was the same that departed from him then,
(there called the Spirit of the Lord) and so it is evident, that the same that
is called the Spirit of the Lord, is also called the Lord.

5. It is also proved from Act. 5. where Peter reproving Annanias for his
dissemulation, says, Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost,
and to keep back part of the price of the Land, etc. Why have thou conceived
this thing in thy heart, thou have not lied unto men, but unto God? Where
comparing the fourth verse with the third, it is evident, that the lie which
Annanias made to the Holy Ghost, was made unto God; as also Mat. 12. 31, 32.

6. Our Savior also testifies as much, Joh. 14. 15, 16, 17. I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, How the Holy Ghost dwelt with
the Apostles, and not in them.
even the Spirit of truth. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come unto
you; by which words it is evident, that the Comforter he spoke of was himself;
for says he, he dwells with you, and shall be in you. As if he had said, as
I have formerly declared my self the first Person, in creating of you, and now
the second Person in redeeming of you, so when I am ascended into Heaven, I
will then show my self the third Person, in sanctifying of you: I will not
leave you comfortless, I will come unto you. He did then acknowledge himself
to be the Comforter, which he would send them.

SECT. 3. Of the Unity of the Trinity.
HAving thus procured the Trinity of Persons, in the next place I will treat of
the Unity of them; which is sufficiently proved by one Text of Scripture, 1 John 5. 7. There be three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost* and these three are one. It is also confirmed by our
Saviors answer to Philip, Joh. 14. 8. 10, 11. where desiring to see the
Father, is answered by Christ in these words: Have I been so long with you, and
yet have thou not known me? Philip, he that Christ equal with the Father.
has seen me, has seen the Father; how say thou then, show me the
Father; believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me; the words
that I speak, I speak not of my self, but the Father that dwells in me, he
does the works; believe me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me,
Joh. 17. 21. I and The Holy Ghost one with the Father.
my Father am one, Joh. 10. 30. And that the Holy Ghost is one with the Father,
and the Son, we have also the testimony of our Savior, John 16. 1^. where he
promising the Holy Ghost to his Disciples, says, He shall glorify me, for he
shall receive of mine, and show it unto you; All things that the Father has
are mine, therefore I said unto you, that he shall take of mine, and show it
unto you, with Joh. 15. 26. But, when the Comforter is come, whom I will send
unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the
Father.

Object. Our Savior acknowledges the Father to be greater then he, Joh. 14.
28. how then can he be equal with him?

Answ. That was spoken in respect of his Humanity, with his How the Father is
said to be greater then the Son.
Diety; for as he was God, he was greater then as he was Man, and therefore he
says, that he speaks not of himself, Joh. 14. 10. but that he was equal
with the Father, may further appear in the 14. verse. where he says, If ye
ask the Father any thing in my name, I will do it: As if he should have said,
If ye ask any thing of my Diety, in my name, ( as I am Man) as I am God* I
will grant it.

SECT. 4.
Object. WHerein consists the union of the two Natures?

Answ. In this blessed union, the humane Nature of Christ, assumed not the
Divine, but the Divine assumed and took unto Of the union of the two Natures.
it the humane nature: for the Divine nature of Christ was a Person subsisting
of it self from all beginnings. In the union of the blessed Trinity, the
humane had no subsistence of it self, before it was so assumed, but as soon
as it began to be, it was assumed into the Person of the Son of God: And so
that human nature consisting of body and soul, which Christ assumed, became
the particular body, and soul, of the Son of God: And therefore the Apostle
says, that God purchased his Church with his own blood, Act. 20. 28.

Yet in the uniting of the two Natures of Christ, we must take heed of two
errors:

1. That by uniting them, we imagine not either of the two We are to avoid two
errors in the uniting of them.
Natures to be absorpt, or abolished, or that there is a confusion of Natures
(as in the commixion of Honey and Water, neither of them retaining the same
name, or nature) or that out of these two natures, a third comes forth
compounded of them both: as in the commixion of the Eliments.

2. Neither is this Unity to be too much extinuated, or lessened, as to think
the Union to consist only in Assistance, as the Angel stood by Peter, Act. 12.
or only in a certain conjunction, (as when two diverse Mettels are put
together) but they are so united, as that the properties of both natures
remain, and yet there is but one person subsisting of them both: Like as the
body, and soul are united together, and the fire and red hot Iron.

SECT. 5. Of the communion of the Graces in the union of the two natures.
AS touching the communion of the Graces, in the union of the two Natures:

1. The Divine Nature received not any increase of Grace, in regard it can have
no imminution, (being it self most perfect, and unchangeable) but the Humanity
was perfected, by this union, and received increase of gifts, Joh. 16. 4.

2. The Graces communicated, are either created, or finite, or Graces of two
sorts, finite, and infinite.
uncreated, and infinite.

The created, and finite Graces, as Wisdom, Knowledge, Holiness; (and the
rest) are not in Christ, as he is Man, the essential Of finite Graces.
properties of his Diety; but effects only thereof, infused into Christ's human
Nature, being finite, and created, as the Humanity it self was; yet they are
given to Christ without limitation, and measure, which in the Saints are
limited, and given by measure.

3. These Graces were not all at once in the highest perfection appearing in
Christ, in the days of his flesh; but they received increase, by reason of the
infirmity of the human nature which he assumed, as it is said, Luke 2. 52. That
Jesus increased in wisdom; but after Christ was glorified, then they shined in
him in the greatest perfection.

SECT. 6. Of infinite Graces.
BEsides these finite, and created gifts, there are others, that are not
finite, neither can be referred to the first sort; as the universal dominion
over all Creatures, the power of remitting of sins, of judging the world,
adoration, vivification, inffnite glory, etc. For,

1. These being particular to the Divine Nature, yet by virtue of this union
are even communicated to the man Christ, Who is made Heir of all things, Heb.
1. 2. Judge of the world, Act. 17. 31. and 10. 42. And whose flesh gives life,
Joh. 6. 51.

2. These divine gifts are not formally, or essentially, in the human nature,
nor as the first gifts, for this were to make the t^o natures equal, and to
confound their properties.

3. It is more then a visible communicating, for such as is the communion, such
is the union; as the one is real, though not essential, so is the other. As
in Iron made red hot with fire, neither Simile.
has the Iron lost his former qualities, and yet it gives light, heat, and
burns (not by any essential Physical quality infused into it, but by the
real union, and conjunction of the fire) and so the Godhead shines and
works really in the human nature of Christ.

4. The Divine Nature of Christ works not now by it self alone, as before
his Incarnation, Sed cum ea and par ^am; but with it, and by it, exercising and
showing it self, for the human nature of Christ quickneth and knows all
things as omnipotent, not formally, and essentially by it self, in its own
being, (as the Godhead does) but in having the Divine Nature inseparably
united unto it, by virtue whereof it does all those things; even as the hot
Iron burns, and heateth by the virtue of the fire which is in it.

5. As before was showed, that the gifts and graces of the human nature of
Christ did not appear in their perfection all at once, so this communion of
these Divine properties did not wholly show it self in the days of Christ's
flesh; for though the Godhead was united to his Humanity in the very first
conception, yet it did somewhat restrain the opperation thereof, because of
the work of our redemption: the Divine nature did rest in Christ, that the
Humane might dye.

6. In that Christ is said after his Ascension, to sit at his Fathers right
hand, it is neither in respect of his Divine nature, which was never absent
from thence, nor yet as though his Human nature did not sit there before,
seeing in the very conception, the Humane nature was united to the Divine; but
because then the power and kingdom of Christ was made manifest to all the
world, which before lay hid in him: the Divine nature works by the Humane,
and the Humane by virtue thereof administreth all things.

And yet albeit betwixt the Divine and Human nature of How these Graces were
really and personally communicated unto Christ's humane nature.
Christ there is a communion real, and personal the Graces created, and
finite, are really communicated to Christ's humanity; as his wisdom,
knowledge, holiness, etc. but the gifts which are infinite, and peculiar unto
God, as to be omnipotent, omni-present, knowing all things, etc. are imputed
only personally. As the man Christ, is omnipotent, omni-present, knowing all
things, but not the Manhood of Christ; for our blessed Savior says, that the
Son himself (that is in his humanity) knows not the day, and hour of his
coming to Judgment, Mat. 13. 32. And this is further to be considered, that
the Manhood communicates not any property to the Godhead of Christ really,
for the Divine nature receives nothing, but gives all; but only personally,
^in concreto, non in abstracto. As Mary is called the Mother of God-Christ, not
of his Godhead; and God suffered for us, but not the Godhead: but the Diety
of Christ communicates to his Humanity both really and personally.

SECT. 7. Heretics condemned touching Christ's Divine Nature.
HEre then are condemned all such Heretics, which err touching the Divine,
and Human nature of Christ.

1. As touching Christ's divine Nature, some utterly denying it, making Christ a
mere man, and not to have been, before he was conceived in the Virgin Mary,
which was the Heresy of Corinthus and Ebion contrary to Scripture, which
says, that the Word which was made flesh was in the beginning, Joh. 1. 1.

2. Them that would have another Nature in Christ, besides his Human, but not
of the same substance with God, yet of an higher nature then any creature, as
Carpocates, and Arius, but our blessed Savior himself says, I and my Father
am one, Joh. 20. 30.

3. Them that affirm, that Christ besides his Human nature consisted of a
Divine, yet not begotten of the Father, but making one Person with the Father,
as well as being of one substance; so the Sabellians, and Patro-passians,
whereas the Apostle says, God sent his Son, made of a woman, Gal. 4. 4. the
Person then of the Son, and not of the Father was made man for us.

SECT. 8. Touching Christ's human nature.
1. IT condemns all such as affirm that Christ was not a true man, but only
in outward appearance; as the Manaches, and The like touching his Human nature.
Mertionites, who are confuted by Christ's own words, Luke 24. 29. Handle me,
and see me, for a Spirit has not flesh, and bones, as ye see me have, with 1
Cor. 15. 47. Act. 2. 22. 1 Timothy 2. 5.

2. Those which hold that Christ had not his flesh of the Virgin Mary, but
brought it with him from Heaven; contrary to the Apostle, who says, that he
was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, Romans 1. 3.

3. Those who hold that Christ had a true Human nature, but in respect of his
body only, as Apollonaris of La^dicea, who is convinced by the words of our
Savior, Mat. 26. 38. My soul is heavy unto the death.

4. Those who grant that Christ took upon him our whole Nature, but not our
human infirmities; for the Apostle teaches the contrary, that Christ was in
all things tempted in like sort as we are, yet without sin, Heb. 4. 15. For,
infirmities are of two sorts, Personal and Natural.

SECT. 9. Of Personal and Natural infirmities.
1. SOme are Personal, as blindness, sickness, diseases, as Leprosy, etc.
and these Christ was not subject unto.

2. There are Natural infirmitios, which do belong to the whole Human nature,
as weariness, hunger, grief, and such like; and these our blessed Savior
undertook, that he might in all things be like unto us, Heb. 5. 2. which is
also evidenced, Mat. 4. 2. where it is said, that after he had fasted forty
days, and forty nights, he was afterward an hungered; and Mat. 26. 38. where
himself confesses, that his soul was exceeding sorrowful, even to the
death, etc.

5. Those that hold that Christ had a true Human Nature, but after the uniting
thereof with the Godhead, it was absorpt of his Divine Nature which only
remained; and this was the Heresy of Swen^feildius. But we are otherwise
taught in the Scriptures, that Christ ascended up in a true visible Human Body,
and that he shall with the same return again into the world at the last day,
Act. 1. 11.

6. Those who hold that the Divine Nature of Christ causes his Humanity,
(which by the property of its own nature which The Luthreans error.
it retains for ever, can be but in one place at once) to be every where;
which is the opinion of the Luthreans, their reason being this, viz. because
(say they) the Godhead being every where, makes the Humanity for the union
sake partakers of its glory.

To which we answer:

SECT. 10. The Luthreans confuted.
1. THat the Assertion, concludes a contradiction, for how does Christ's human
nature retain the natural property thereof for ever (in being but in one place
at once) if it be every where by virtue of the Godhead?

2. If by virtue of this union the human nature can do all things which the
Diety does, then the human nature should be absorpt, and as it were changed
into the Divine.

3. There is a mutual communion of the properties, betwixt the two Natures of
Christ, but such as destroys not the true properties of either; but if the
property of the Diety were communicated to the humane nature to be every where,
the Humanity of Christ should be altered in nature, being without the true
property thereof, which is to be but in one place at once.

4. As the reason of this Assertion is not sound, so the conclusion it self
(viz. of Christ's omni-presence in his Humanity) is contrary to the Scriptures,
where the Apostle Peter says, Whom the heavens must contain, until the time
that all things must be restored, Act. 3. 21.

This which has been spoken, I suppose is sufficient to convince all such as
deny the Divinity of Christ, or that he is not equal with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost; but least some curious Naturalists should not be herewith
satisfied, in the unity of the Trinity, and the Trinity in unity, (relying more
upon human, or carnal reason, then Scripture) I will therefore recite the
opinions of sundry men touching the Trinity, and Unity, of the three Persons in
the same; by which they may be made unexcusable, and also shamed out of their
absurd Heresies, and Blasphemies, and so revoke them for ever.

SECT. 11. Several sorts of people, proving a Trinity of Persons in the
Godhead.
1. TO which purpose some of the Rabbis, do in the name Jehovah, comprehend a
Trinity, for Jehovah (say they) betokens a God begetting, or giving essence;
and if there be a God begetting, there must also be a God begotten; and because
it is impossible, but that betwixt the God begetting, and the God begotten,
there should be a coeternall, and substantial love; therefore in this name is
also insinuated the Holy Ghost, the God of love. And hereupon some think, that
our blessed Savior alludeth to this name in his prayer, Luke 17. 16. (where he
says, Father, I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me,)
that is (say they) he declared openly the Doctrine of the Trinity, commanding
his Disciples to baptize, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Mat.
28. 19.

2. Damascen does most excellently prove the Trinity, by this demonstration,
Vnus Deus, non sine verbo est, God being but one, is never without the Word,
but the Word he has in himself, begotten of his own substance; not like unto
our word which has no substance, but vanishes in the air (because the
conditions of our natures is temporal:) But like as our word proceeding from
the mind, is neither the same with the mind, nor yet altogether diverse from
it; so is the Son unto the Father, which is his Word, being the same in
substance, but diverse in subsistence: But the Word must also have a Spirit, for
neither is out word without a Spirit; but here is the difference, our spirit is
not of the same substance with us, but the drawing in of the Air, (for we are
of a compound nature) but the Spirit of the Word, is of the same substance with
the Word. He also says, that it is impossible, that God should be without
natural fecundity, the Lord therefore must needs beget, but he begets out
of his own substance, and that from all eternity: but if the Son had not been
from the beginning coexistent with him, of whom he was begotten, we shall bring
in a change of his substance, for so when he was yet no Father, he should
afterward become a Father.

3. Bernard also thus eligantly infers, What means this number, without a
number: if there be three, how can there be but a number: if one, where is the
number, but here I have what I may number, and what I may not number: there is
one substance, and three Persons.

4. Philo the Jew commenting upon Ephesians 5. 8. (where the Apostle speaking
of the state and condition of the Ephesians, before their calling) says, Ye
were sometimes darkness, but now are light in the Lord. God is the sovereign
Giver, and next to him is the Word of God: also there is two firsts, the one
is, Gods Word, and the other is God, which is before the Word: and the same
Word is the beginning, and end of his good pleasure, intent, and will. And like
as a City, whereof the Plat-forme is but yet set down in the mind of the
builder, (has not being elsewhere but in the mind of the builder) so the
world had no being elsewhere then in the Word of God, which ordained all
things, and separated light from darkness, both in the world, and men's minds.

5. Rabbie Azariel terms God, Spirit, Word, and Voice, saying, that the
spirit brings forth both the word and voice, but not by speech of the tongue,
or by breathing after the manner of men, and these three being one spirit, viz.
one God, one Spirit, rightly living: Blessed be he, and his Name, who lives
for ever and ever, Spirit Word, and Voice: that is to say, one Holy Ghost, and
two spirits of that Spirit.

6. Rubbie Joseph also says, that the light of the Soul of the Messiah is the
living God, and the living God is the fountain of the living waters and the
Soul of the Messiah is the river, or stream of life, and none but the Messiah
knows God fully: He is the light of God, and the light of the Gentiles, and
therefore he knows God, and God is known by him.

7. Mercurius Thresmigests says also to this purpose, I thy God, says God, am
light, and mind, and of more antiquity, then nature of moisture that is issued
from the shadow: and this light some speech which does proceed from the mind
is the Son of God, that which sees and hears thee i^ the Word of the Lord.
and the mind is God the Father, these differ not one from the other. As for
their Union, it is the union of life; and this speech being the workman of
God, the Lord of the world, has chief power next him, and is uncreated,
infinite, proceeding from him, the Commander of all things, which he made of
the perfect and natural first-bor Son of the most perfect.

8. Numius a Pithagorist says, the first God is free from all work, but the
second is the Commander, which makes heaven; and God the worker and maker
(says he) is the beginner of bebetting, and God the Good, is the beginner of
being, the second is the lively express of the first, as begetting is an image
of being, and that this worker being the Son, is known to all men, by reason of
the creating of the world: but as for the first Spirit, which is the Father, he
is unknown unto them.

9. Jamblicus another of the Philosophers says plainly, that God made the
world by his divine Word, and the first God being before the Beer, is the
Father of a first God, whom he begets, and yet nevertheless abides still,
in the solenesse of his Unity: which thing far exceeds all ability of
understanding. This is the original pattern of him, that is called both
Father to himself, and is the Father of one alone, a God verily good indeed.

10 Aemelius the Disciple of Plato, notwithstanding how great an enemy he was
to Christians, speaking of the second Person, yields to that which John
speaks, Chap. 1. 1. in these words, viz. Surely, says he, this is the Word
which was from everlasting, by whom all things which are, were made, as
Heraclitus supposeeth: and before God (says he) this is the very same word
which that barbarous fellow avoucheth to have been with God from the beginning,
in the ordering, and disposing of all things when they were confused, and it is
the same God by whom all things were absolutely made, and in whom they be
living, and of whom they have their life and being, which very Word clothed it
self with man's flesh, and appeared a man so much, that after he had bin put to
death, he took unto him his Godhead again, and was very God as he had bin
before, ere he came down in bodily flesh and man.

11. Another of Plato's imitaters speaking to the same effect, says, That the
beginning of St. John's Gospel, was worthy to be written every where in letters
of gold.

12. Suidas relates, that the Devil being asked by the King of Egypt, who he
was that reigned before him, and who should reign after him, answered in these
four verses:

First God, and then the Word, and then the Spirit,
Which three be one, and joined in one all three,
Their force is endless; get thee hence frail weight,
The man of life unknown excels thee.
Thus have I brought a jury of Rabbis, Fathers, Philosophers, yea, and the
Devil himself (to evidence against the Athists, and Anti-trenitarians of these
times,) who were compelled to glorify God in their speeches, making as it were
a large Volume of the Creation of God by his Word, and that the same Word is
his Son. How then is it possible, that men living in so shining a light (as is
now defused amongst us,) should espape the force, wrath, and vengeance of God,
for not imbrasing of the truth, seeing that the other (as it were) through a
mist, did see a cleernesse of his brightness, and that we, whom he has
nourished in his own bosom, and comforted with the grapes of his own
vineyard, fed with the bread of his own Flesh, and bathed in the blood of his
own heart, should refuse to give him that respect which was acknowledged by
them. Doubtless those whom I have named shall rise up in judgment against all
the Arians, Anti-trenitarians, and what others, who yet wilfully oppose the
truth, as it is in Jesus; yea, when the Scriptures do so punctually declare
Christ to be the Son of God, as in these five respects, which agree to no other
but him.

As first in his Name, for he is simply called God, as Joh. 1. 1. Christ
declared to be the Son of God in five respects.
the Word was God; as also 1 Epist. John. 5. 20. where the Apostle speaking of
Jesus Christ, says, the same was very God.

2. By his Nativity and Generation, and so he is called the Son of God, Romans 1.
3. 3. By nature, he is one with God, as in Joh. 20. 30. I and the Father am
one. 4. In power, as in Mat. 28. 18. all power is given me in heaven and earth.
5. By his own profession, for he professed himself to be the Son of God, and
therefore the Jews went about to kill him, because he said, that God was his
Father, Joh. 5. 18.
Which five places, (if there were no other expressions to make out the truth
of it,) is sufficient to convince the worst of men; and certainly, such as
refuse to subscribe to this truth, may justly be termed worse then the Devil,
for he freely confessed, that Jesus Christ was the Son of the most high God,
Mark 5. 7. and surely none will any longer persist in such blasphemies, but
such as despair of their salvation, (and therefore indeavoureth to entrap
others in the same snare) for if there be no God, and Christ be an imposter,
what expectation of any good can be hoped from them?

CHAP. III. Antiscriptarists objections cited, and answered.
SECT. 1.
THis Herisie has been maintained of old by the Maniches, who held that the
Old Testament was contrary to the New, and that in these respects:

1. Object. Because that in the Old Testament the Lord professes enmity
against the Cananites, and charge the Israelites to kill and destroy them;
how then is this (say they) consonant, and agreeable with the Gospel, where
Christ commands to love our enemies, Mat. 5. 44.

Ans. 1. That discention and enmity was not in respect of the Persons, but of
the manners of the Gentiles; the Israelites were not so much enemies unto them,
as they were enemies to the true religion of the Israelites, in worshipping of
God aright.

2. The killing of the enemy did agree with that carnal people, to whom the
Law was given as a Schoolmaster, Gal. 3. 24. Revenge may be taken of some
people in charity.


3. The Apostle when he delivered over the incestuous man unto Satan, (for the
destruction of the flesh,) did sufficiently declare, that revenge may be taken
of some enemies in charity; therefore there may be love in him that takes
revenge, as we see in Fathers which correct their children whom they love, and
although Fathers kill not their children in correcting of them, yet God that
knows what is better for every one, can correct with love, not only by
infirmity, and sickness, but also with temporal death; as is evident in the
Corinthians, where the Apostle says, For this cause many are weak, and sick
amongst you, and many sleep. And that these corrections proceed of love, he
presently after shows, as in these words; But when we are judged we are
chastened of the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the world, 1
Cor. 11. 30. 32.

4. Neither did they do this without divine Authority, which sometimes ^s
manifested in Scripture, and sometimes concealed, lest any should think it was
permitted them to kill whom they would at their pleasure.

5. Albeit that in the Old Testament it be permitted to kill The Old Testament
not contrary to the New.
the enemies of God, yet is there also examples of loving our enemies, as in
David, who when Saul was offered into his hands, he chose rather to spare him,
then kill him; where then there was neither difficulty, nor fear of killing
the enemy, it was love that helped him; and therefore in that respect the Old
Testament is not contrary to the New.

SECT. 2.
Object. THat precept of honoring Parents, is contrary to that in the New
Testament, where our Savior being asked leave by one to go and bury his
Father, answered, Let the dead bury their dead, Luke 9. 60.

Ans. If herein the Old Testament and the New do vary, When God is in
computition, Parents ought to be contemned.
and contradict one another; then the New Testament therein will be contrary to
it self: for, the Apostle urges this Commandment, Ephesians. 6. 2.

2. It is manifest that honor in a certain degree is to be reserved unto
Parents, yet in comparison of the love of God, there is no doubt but that they
ought to be contemned, Mat. 10. 37. He that loves father or mother more then
me* is not worthy of me.

SECT. 3.
Object. IN the Old Testament, the Lord is said to harden men's hearts, which is
an evil work; and therefore it proceeds from a God that is a worker of
evil.

Ans. God is said to harden the heart, without any touch of God hardneth the
heart without any breach of sin.
sin. 2. It was not any violence from God that hardened Pharoahs heart, but
his own impiety and obstinacy that hardened him; like as the water is frozen
until the Sun shine upon it, and then it resolves, but when the Sun is
departed it, is bound with cold again; now the Sun is not the cause of the
freezing of the water, Simile*
but the coldness of the water binds it self: So properly, God causes not
the heart to be hardened, but by the absence of his grace it is hardened. As one
speaking in the Person of God to Pharaoh says, When my grace is drawn from
thee, then thy own wickedness shall harden thy heart, the cause then must
needs be ascribed to their own wickedness, which deserves to be hardened, or
it must be referred to the just judgments of* God, which are often hid, but
never unjust; it suffices us to know and believe, as the Apostle says, Romans
9. 15. Is there unrighteousness with God, God forbid.

SECT. 4.
Object. IN the Old Testament the Lord is said to dwell in houses made with
hands, Exodus 25. 8. whereas our Savior says in the New Testament, that heaven
is his throne, and the earth is his footstool, Mat. 5. 34, 35. there can then
be no house made for God.

Ans. That testimony is objected first in the Old Testament, as in The Old
Testament and the New compared.
Isay 66. 1. and therefore therein the Old Testament and the New concur, that
God dwells not in temples made with hands, and yet both in the Old and New
Testament, God is said to have his house, as in Psalm. 69. 9. and 93. 5. Mat.
21. 13. and Joh. 2. 16. that therefore is so said and taken to signify some
other thing: God therefore was said to dwell in the Tabernacle, not because any
place can comprehend his Majesty, but because there it pleases him by some
visible signs to manifest his presence, so that all the difference betwixt the
New Testament and the Old, consists chiefly in these respects. The difference
betwixt the Old and New Testament.


1. The Old Testament does signify the Covenant and League which God made with
his people, as to be their God, and they to be his people, Genesis 17. 7. 8.
wherein the New and Old Testament do much differ: 1. In that the one was given
by Moses, and the other by Christ. 2. The one was propounded upon conditions of
their obedience, if they kept the Law; the New Testament requires faith, and
belief. 3. The Old Testament was consecrated by the blood of Beasts, but the
New Testament is confirmed with the blood of Christ. 4. That had but Types and
Figures which are now abolished, the New Testament has the very body and
substance. 5. The one was particular to the Israelites only, the other in
particular to all believers.

2. The Old Testament and the* New, are distinguished in time, that was before
the coming of Christ, the New Testament comprehends the time since: and so
they differ in manner, and measure of revelation, and opening of Gods will, as
also all things are more plainly opened in the New Testament.

3. The Old Testament is taken for the Prophetical writings, the New for the
Apostolical; and so they differ, because the Old receives light from the New,
and cannot well be understood without it, for as the Poet says:

The Law was like a misty Looking-glass,
Wherein the shadow of a Savior was
Treating in a dark strain, by Types, and Signs,
And what should pass in after days divines:
The Gospel tells us he is come, and dead,
And thus the riddle of the Law is read:
So that,

Gospel is Law, the mystery being sealed,
And Law is Gospel, being once revealed.
4. Again, the Gospel may be termed the complement, or fulfilling of the Law,
which our Savior verified upon the Cross, when he had fulfilled it for us,
Joh. 19. 30.

SECT. 5.
Object. But the New Testament differs from the Old in substance and matter,
because they have diverse and contrary effects; neither is there the same
substance of their Sacraments, and ours.

Ans. The diverse and sundry effects, as because the Law works The contrary
effects of the Law and the Gospel.
terror, and the Gospel comfort, proves not a diversity of substance; the Sun
works contrary effects, it hardneth the clay, and mollifieth the wax, yet the
substance is the same, the difference of the work is in the diverse natures of
the things. So the Law works terror in respect of the infirmity and
weakness of our flesh, and the Gospel brings comfort, our hearts being
mollified by the Spirit. 2. Christ is the end of the Law, and the Law is a
Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, therefore the matter and substance is
the same, but the manner, condition, and qualities are diverse. 3. The Apostle
shows that Christ was the substance of their Sacraments, as he is of ours;
for, they did all eat the same spiritual meat with us, 1 Cor. 10. 3. yet our
Sacraments do after a more lively manner exhibit Christ, then he was
represented in the legal Sacraments; and truly if we did rightly consider the
happiness we enjoy by the revelation of the Gospel, toward those which in
them dark days had only the Law read unto them, we may think our selves in a
happy condition: for the Law of it self discomforts, and takes advantage
through the breach of it; for the Letter kills, and can no way admit release
by pardon, for by Law we dye.

SECT. 6.
Object. WHy did man hope, when as he seemed to be without hope; the Poet
answers:

Answer.
Although they saw no Sun before their eyes,
They knew by 'th twilight that the Sun would rise;
For he that with a sharp contructed eye
Looks in a clear Prospective-glasse, does spy
Objects remote, which to the sense appear
(Through 'th help of the Prospective) very near:
So some that lived within the Laws dominion,
Did here far of a brute and buzzed opinion,
A Savior one day should be borne, but he
That had the glass of faith, might plainly see
That long expected day of joy, as clear,
As if even solemnized then, and there.
SECT. 7.
5. WE may also observe these differences betwixt the Law and the Gospel; as
1. In the knowledge and manifestation thereof, for to the Moral Law we have
some directions by the Law of Nature, but the knowledge of faith in Christ by
the Gospel, is revealed by grace. 2. The Law teaches what we should be, but by
faith in Christ, we are made that which the Law prescribes: which the Gospel
^ffecteth in us. 3. The conditions are unlike, the Law tyeth the Promise of
eternal life to the conditions of fulfilling the Law in our selves, the Gospel
to the conditions of faith, apprehending the r^ghteousnesse of Christ; the one
is Lex timoris, the law of fear, and the other is Lex amoris, the law of love,
which has also a threefold difference: as 1. The Law of fear makes the
observers thereof servile, but the Law of love makes them free. 2. The Law of
fear is not willingly kept, but by constraint, but the Law of love is
willingly observed and kept. 3. The one is hard and heavy, the other is easy
and light.

SECT. 8.
6. THe Law and the Gospel differ also in the effects; for the Law strikes
terror by the manifestation of our sins, as the Prodigal child confessed,
Luke 15. 21. I am not worthy to be called thy Son. It made the Publican also
stand afar of beating upon his breast, as not worthy to come near the
presence of God. But the Gospel comfort, and allureth, as our Savior
verifieth (in these words) Come unto me, all ye that are w^ary and heavy
laden, and I will refresh you, Mat. 11. 28. As also, my yoke is easy, and my
burden is light.

Now they that find not the Law, and the Gospel, to work these contrary
effects, declare, that they understand neither the Law, or the Gospel aright.

A Confutation of all such Popish Tenants as are maintained by the Demetrious
like Pope, and his fellow crafts-men the Cardinals, Jesuits, Abbots, Monks,
Friars, and the rest of that Hierarchy, in vindication of their Goddess^-like
Diana of Popery, whom all Rome and the World worshipeth.
SEeing this massy logge of Popery lies yet so cross in the way The Preface.
toward a full Reformation, I will therefore bend my utmost power to remove
it, by hewing it in pieces with that Sword, which proceeds out of the mouth
of the Lamb, being the very means appointed for that purpose, Rev. 19. 21. and
in prosecution thereof, I will propound the weightiest of their Argument^ which
they use in the vindication of such their assertions, and so return an answer
to each of their objections; whereby the most ignorant of them may apparently
see to come forth of that dundion of darkness, and superstition, in which they
have been so long kept by slavish thraldom.

CHAP. IIII. Treats of Idol-worship, with the confutation thereof.
Question. WHether do you conceive it to be a stubborn wilfulness, or a gross
ignorance that causes them to retain so many Errors and Heresies?

Answ. I hold the cause to be the same (in the Pope, and the rest of his
Hierarchy) as was in the aforesaid Ephesians, who because their Idol was of an
ancient standing, and withal beneficial* they therefore will set down their
staff, with a desire that it might not be removed; and like as Let (regarding
more the firtility of the place, then the corruption of the people) contented
himself to be in Sodeme: so those Popelings (I have named) finding (with
Demetrious and ^^i^e and cove^o^snesse the chief supp^rters of Popery.
his fellow crafts-men) much gain to redound unto them by the use of it, are
exceeding loath to have their Diana despised, or brought to contempt; but in
that the Lay People retain that Idolatrous worship is merely out of ignorance,
and accustomed blindness, the Idol of the Mass being to them (as Diana was to
the Ephesians, or Bell to the Babilonians, rather a cause of expense, then any
way beneficial.

Quest. Is there any hopes to reclaim them?

Answ. I hope the Lord has many Dionissiousses, and Damarisses amongst them,
with whom the truth will prevail; yea, that many of their Epicurian and
Stoicall opinionists will thereby be drawn to the knowledge of the truth,
though in the attempt, I shall seem unto them as one setting forth a new
doctrine.

Q. Can you tax them as Paul did the Athenians, with an ignorant worshipping of
an unknown God?

A. Yea, and as justly as Paul did them, witness their Idolatrous worshipping
of stocks and stones.

SECT. 2.
Q. What do you term Idolatry?

A. Idolatry is when any Divine worship, either internal, What Idolatry ^^.
or external, is given to any Image, or Idol, set to represent God; of what
kind or fashion soever it be.

Obj. There is a difference betwixt an Image and an Idol, for an Idol is a
representation of a thing that is not, neither has any being in the world, as
if one should make the Image of a man's body, with the head of a dog, or a
body with two faces, being such a shape as the eye has not seen, but the mind
imagined; but an Image is of such a thing as may be seen in the world.

Ans. The difference betwixt a graven Image, and a similitude The difference
betwixt an Image and a Similitude.
is this, the graven Image is a picture proportioned and fashioned out of wood,
stone, or metal, and so carved, or graven; and a similitude is an Image,
painted in plain Tables, therefore that distinction is vain.

Obj. Man is the Image of God, but it is lawful to make the Image of the Image
of God, ergo the Image of God.

Ans. Man is made the Image of God in his Soul, and not in his Body, which
Image (the Apostle says) consists in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians.
4. 24. and therefore that in man, wherein he is like unto God, is spiritual,
and invisible, and therefore cannot by a visible Image be deciphered.

Obj. They do not worship the Image, but the thing represented by the Image.

Ans. That was the Gentiles pretense in maintaining their Idolatry, as also the
Israelites, in making their golden Calfe, Psalm. 81. 11. 12 Romans 1. 23, 24 1 Samuel 7. 3, 4, 5
had relation unto God; for they proclaimed an holy day, Exodus 32. 5. yet their
pretext excused them not; God therefore forbids Idolatry under any pretense
whatsoever, and if they do not worship the Idol it self, why do they give
diverse kinds of worship unto Images, as to the Image of Christ more* and to the
Image of Saints less.

Obj. The honor of the sign, redoundeth to the thing signified.

Ans. If the sign be pleasing to him that is signified, but if it be such as
he forbids, and condemns, it is rather a dishonor then an honor, and so
the adoring of Images, is a dishonor to God.

Obj. The contumely and dishonor offered to the Image of God, is a dishonor
to God himself; therefore the honor thereof redouneth unto God.

Ans. If any man with a spightfull intention against Christ, do deface his
Image, or Picture, it is contumelious against Christ, because of the evil
intention of the heart, but if any do it out of a zealous mind against
Idolatry and Superstition, it is no dishonor unto Christ, in which zeal
(against Idolatry and Superstition) Epiphanius is said to have rent a certain
cloth in a Church, which had on it the picture of Christ; in which sense also
Constantius, and Theodotius destroyed Images in every place, and therefore that
Argument holds no better then the other.

SECT. 3.
Object. IMages may be tolerated in Churches, because they are an ornament
unto it.

Ans. 1. Churches (as you term them) are for the living Images Deuteronomy. 16 22.
Against Images in Churches.
of God, and not for dead Images. 2. The adorning of Churches must not be
otherwise then God has appointed, and so to his dishonor, nor to the offense
of the members of Christ. 3. As a man would not have his wife decked in Harlots
apparel, so is it not fit such places should borrow ornaments for Idolaters.

Obj. Moses caused Ch^rubins to be made over the Arc, and a brazen Serpent to
look upon, and Solomon made Images of Oxen in the Temple, for the brazen Laver
to stand upon; ergo it is lawful to have Images in such places now.

Ans. 1. These Images had Gods special command. 2. They were not in the view
of the people which were in the Temple, or Tabernacle, but there where the High
Priest had only access; neither were they set up aloft as Images are, to be
worshipped, but only set forth the work of the Tabernacle, and Temple. 3. The
brazen Serpent was used as a figure of Christ, which figures do now cease the
body being come, which is Christ, Col. 2. 17.

Obj. Images are Laymens Books, that they which cannot read, may learn by the
History what was done.

Ans. This was the very reason which the Gentiles used in vindication Papists
use the Gentiles plea, etc.
of their Idols, but if Images were a means to instruct the rude and ignorant,
certainly God would have commanded it in the Old Testament, which he did not,
but contrariwise strictly forbids it. And if they be for instruction, they
must have an Interpreter, for they are dumb of themselves, and an Interpreter
can better instruct without them. Again* the Scriptures Images and Idols
teachers of lies.
says, that Images are teachers of lies, Hab. 2. 18. and that Idols speak
vanity, Za^. 10. 2. If they serve then for Laymens Books, they only teach them
lies, and vanities. Again, Images set up in Churches to be gazed upon, do draw
the minds of men from celestial cogitations, and therefore according to the
Prophet David's exhortation, we ought to turn our eyes from beholding vanities
(especially in such a place) all vain objects therefore ought to be removed
from peoples sight: and it is reported of the ancient The danger of Images and
Idols in public places.
Romans, that they would suffer no Images in their Churches, that the worship
of God might be more pure, the sight of them therefore (in such public places)
are very dangerous, and that for these reasons, viz. 1. In regard that men's
hearts being naturally corrupted, and prone to Idolatry, by such objects are
nourished to error, and therefore when Hezekiah saw the brazen Serpent abused
to Idolatry, brake it, 2 King. 18. 4. and thereby took away the cause of
stumbling. 2. Those resemblances come so near the nature of things living, and
so does the more easily deceive.

Obj. The Image of Christ may be made as he was man.

Ans. The Picture of Christ ought not to be made at all, for in The Image of
Christ a lying Image.
regard Christ is both God, and Man, therefore* all such Images as are made of
Christ must needs be lying Images, in respect they cannot express his Godhead.

SECT. 4.
Obj. THe Image of God may be made, because God was sometimes seen in corporal
shape, Exodus 33. 22.

Ans. It follows not because God by his authority could Moses could not see
Gods effiges.
make a representation of himself, that man therefore of his own authority can
do it without Gods warrant. 2. That Vision was showed to Moses alone, and in a
secret place, but their are set up in the public view of all, and in public
places. 3. It was an Image passing, and not continuing, but theirs are
permanent. 4. That were of his back parts, but they are bold to picture the
glorious countenance of God, which is most rediculous, seeing the Apostle
says, No man has seen God at any time, Joh. 1. 18.

Obj. The Scriptures testifies, that God spoke to Moses face to face, Exodus
33. 11.

Ans. It is not possible in this life to see God with the eyes of the body, for
if so, it must needs follow that God must be of a corporal and substantial
substance, (if he might be seen with carnal eyes) for nothing by the eyes of
flesh can be discerned, but that which is visible, finite, and
sircumscriptable, but the Lord is infinite: Ergo,

2. God being of a spiritual nature, cannot be seen by the God cannot be seen
with corporal eyes.
eyes of the body, for that which is of a spiritual nature, does not come
under the sense of the body.

3. It is said, that God is Love, 2 Epist. joh. ver. 8. which shows his
substance, not a quallity, (as our love is) so then as faith, hope, and love in
us cannot be seen, much less can God.

4. The Image of God in man (which is the inward renovation of the mind)
cannot be seen, much less God himself whose Image we are.

5. The mind of man is invisible, much more that most pure and infinite mind.

6. God is of a simple nature, without any composition, he has no form, or
figure; but nothing is perceived of the sense, but that which is of a mixed, and
compound nature, that has form, and fashion.

7. The Divine Nature is infinite, and not to be confined, or limited; and that
which cannot be limited, cannot be comprehended, for that which contains is
greater then that which is contained, and it is also Heterogen^ae naturae, of
another nature: as the Fish is contained in the water, and the Birds in the
air, but nothing is greater then God, and he being perfectly good, that which
should confine him being of a diverse kind must be perfectly evil: and so it
would follow, Deus vinci a malo, that God should be overcome of evil.

8. Whereas diverse of the Saints have been said to see God after a diverse sort,
if they had seen the substance of God, then it would follow, that God is of a
diverse nature and substance; for he was diversely seen of Ezekiel, and Isaias,
Ezekiel. 1. 26. Esai. 6. 1. etc. intimating thereby, that God can no otherwise be
seen of us, then in Christ his Son, who is the very graven form of his person,
Heb. 1. 3. and if Christ would not grant any such carnal vision of God unto
his Disciples, (who were convenant with him in the Flesh,) who can in this life
expect it?

9. Whereas the Prophet Esaias says, I saw the Lord sitting upon a high throne,
and is also said to have been seen of others of the Saints; we must not think
that they saw Gods substance with their carnal eyes, but as men's nature could
apprehend him; not as he is, but as it pleased him to reveal himself unto
them: for no created understanding can come near unto God; the understanding
may come near the nature of another, but it is impossible that the
intellectual part should comprehend God, seeing he is infinite to be known;
but the power of the understanding, or intelligence created is finite, how then
can that which is finite comprehend that which is infinite; yea even the
understanding of Christ (that is, as he was man) did not comprehend God* The
Apostle says, he dwells in that light which none can attain unto, 1 Timothy 6.
16. the reason is, because no power can do any thing in that which is higher
then the object, but God is higher then the object of our understanding, Ergo:

Again, a thing is said to be invisible two ways, 1. In regard of the defect
in it self, as darkness and shadowed places. 2. Because of the excellency
thereof, as the Sun is to our eye: and so God is invisible.

SECT. 5.
Obj. IT is said,, Exodus 24. 9, 10. that Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and
the seventy of the Elders of Israel saw the God of Israel, etc. as also Deuteronomy.
34. 10. where it is said concerning Moses, that the Lord knew him face to face,
viz. as men may know one another by their countenance.

Ans. They saw God not in his divine Essence, and substance, The glorified
Saints shall not behold God in his essence.
which is invisible and incomprehensible, but they saw some evident signs of
his glorious presence and Majesty, for otherwise the glorified Saints shall not
comprehend and see God in his Essence, they may have certain representations,
but according to the show of his nature they cannot. It Is true, the faithful
in this life have a certain sight of God, as our Savior says, Mat. 5. 8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: and they shall see him
more fully in the next life, for the Apostle says, We know that when we shall
appear we shall be like unto him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. 2.
but yet this saying must be understood with three conditions.

1. That not only the Divinity of the Father, but neither of the Son, or Holy
Ghost can the eyes of the body see, but of the mind, for God is altogether
invisible, Col. 1. 15. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Heb. 11. 27. which sight the Apostle
says, no man ever saw, or can see: So then, if it appertain to the nature of
God to be invisible, as to be incorruptible, that nature shall not be changed
in the next world, viz. of invisible, to become visible, because he cannot of
incorruptible become corruptible; we ought not therefore to distinguish these
things which the Apostle has joined together, as to say to him that is
incorruptible for ever in this, and the next; but invisible not in the next
world, but only in this.

The fullness therefore of God cannot be comprehended in seeing, unless the
Seer so see, that no part can be hid from him; but God cannot be seen, if any
thing in the Godhead be hid from us, which must needs be in regard of his
infiniteness: so that Moses, and the other Prophets mentioned, did not see God
(as to take his effigies) he being incomprehensible; the Picture therefore of
God the Father, which the Papists make (like an old man, which they gather from
Daniels vision of God, Dan. 7. 9.) or of any other Person in the Trinity is
rediculous.

SECT. 6.
Object. SO that Images be not adored, they may be used for matter of
beautifying, and adorning of Churches.

Ans. It is a dishonor to God to have such places (set apart for his worship)
stuffed with Monuments of Idolatry, such things as draws the mind of man
from a Divine worship; and it is evident, Exodus 34. 15. that the Lord would
have the occasion of The occasion of evil ought to be removed.
stumbling removed, and Images to be defaced, lest the people might be
corrupted by them, and therefore he simply commands to break down their
Images, Deuteronomy. 7. 5. and that because they were an holy people to God. As if he
should have said, you Israelites are a people prone to Idolatry, and therefore
I charge you ^o pull them down. The Apostle also reviveth the same precept, 1 John 5. 21. where he says, Babes, keep your selves from Idols; showing that
now under the Gospel there is danger to be feared from Images, and Idols.

Obj. The Commandment for abolishing and destroying of Images was ceremonial*
and therefore concerns not christians n^w. Ans. To take away all occasion of
Idolatry is not ceremonial, because it tends to the maintenance of a Moral
Commandment.

Obj. A thing must not be taken away for the abuse.

Ans. If the thing be good in it self, and necessary, it ought not to be taken
away for the abuse; but the case is diverse where both the thing, and the abuse
are unlawful.

SECT. 7.
Object. IT is sufficient that the people be taught and admonished, that Idols
and Images are not to be worshipped, and not to be taken away.

Ans. The Apostle exhorts us to abstain from all appearances We are to
abstain from all appearance of evil.
of evil, 1 Pet. 3. 22. and the surest way is to remove from the sight, the
occasion of stumbling, and therefore Moses did not only restrain the people
from worshipping the abominable Idol, but he defaced it, and took it away;
which practice and example of Moses condemns the Luthreans, who allow not the
worshipping of Images, and yet will tolerate them in their public places of
meeting; for it appears that Moses could not endure the very sight of that
Idol: which president may teach us, not only to be ware of worshipping them,
but also of the offense that may happen by the very sight of them. The example
of Hezekiah is also very pertinent to this purpose, who brake in pieces the
brazen Serpent, 2 King. 18. 4. moreover, whatsoever it is in religious worship
which has not the testimony of the Word for its approvement, may without
controversy be reputed for a device of man, and so consequently rejected; for
the true worship of God How God will be worshipped.
must be spiritual, answering to his nature, as our Savior says, Joh. 4. 24.
God is a Spirit, and such as worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth;
which worship cannot be performed by the natural, or artificial abilities of
men, in regard it is wrapped up in the mystery of the Word, to which it is not
lawful to add or detract any thing, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32. Rev. 22. 18, 19.
but to be directly agreeable to that pattern, and therefore the Lord commanded
Moses to make the form of the Tabernacle agreeable in every thing, to that
which he had showed in the Mount, Exodus 25. 9.

Again, it is the true devotions, and affections of the heart, which God only
looks upon in his worship; as in Prove. 23. 26. My son, give me thy heart:
As also in the very words of the Prophet David, where he says, My heart is
fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise, and not to make
an Image of God; for, to whom will ye liken me, says the Lord, or to whom will
ye compare me, Isai. 40. 18. Such therefore err exceedingly, who not only
tolerate Images, and set them up in their Churches, but also maintain and
defend the adoring of them, yea, and that they are to be adored with the same
adoration with the thing it represents, which is both blasphemous, and also a
robbing of God of his honor, who says, I am Jehovah, and my name, and my
glory will I not give to another; Isa. 42. 8. as also, Cursed be the man that
shall make any molten or carved Images, an abomination to the Lord, and shall
put it in a secret place, Deuteronomy. 27. 15. I will only add that of the Prophet
David to clear this discourse, they that make them are like unto them, etc.
Psalm. 133. 13.

CHAP. V. Treats of their invocation of Angels and Saints departed, with a
confutation thereof.
SECT. 1.
THe manner of Invocation used by the holy men of Against the invocating of
Saints and Angels. Judge. 13 15, 16. Mat. 4. 10. Act 10. 25, 26. and 11, 12. 1
Col. 1 13. and 2. 18. 1 Cor. 3. 5, 6. Heb. 7. 25. and 9. ^^.
God ought to be our pattern to immitate, but they never invocated any but the
Lord Jehovah, and Christ in him, as the Scriptures do plentifully prove;
therefore the Adoration, or praying to Angels, is a superstitious, and new
device of Doctrine, and ought to be rejected, Isa. 63. 16.

Object. Jacobs Ladder on which the Angels ascended, and descended from heaven,
does intimate, that they did not only reveal unto us the counsels of God, and
execute his will, but also report unto God our prayers, vows, and necessities.

Ans. We grant that the Angels do report unto God the affairs of the world,
the Acts and Gests of men, and so their supplications in general; but this
they do as Messengers, not as Mediators: the Prophet Zachary shows a
distinct office of the Angelical Spirits, and Jesus Christ (there called the
Angel of the Lord,) where they, (viz. the Angels) returns this answer to God,
We have gone through the world, and behold, all the world sits still, and is
at rest. But the Angel of the Lord, Christ (the Mediator of the Church,)
steppeth forth and prays, O Lord of Host, how long will thou be unmindfull
of Jerusalem; so that albeit the Angels are witnesses of our devotions, and
beholders of our tears and plaints, yet have they no office of Mediatorship,
neither have we any warrant to pray unto them.

SECT. 2.
Object. IT is said, Genesis 17. 3. that Abraham fell upon his face and talked
with God, which doubtless was an Angel, by the like expressions in the 18.
Chap. etc.

Ans. If that were an Angel in the person of God which talked Angels will not
be worshipped.
with Abraham, then was it no gesture of Adoration (in that Abraham fell on his
face) for the Angels will not suffer men to worship them, Rev. 22. 9. but if
they will needs have it Adoration, then it was God that talked with him, as the
words of the Text intimates.

Again, though Abraham had said to his Servant, that the Angel should go
before him, Chap. 24. ver. 7. yet read we not, that the Servant did pray* to
the Angel that was appointed to be president of his journey, but solely
directs his prayer unto God, as in the 12. verse. which example our Savior
himself urges, Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve.

Obj. Jacob prays, that the Angel bless the children, Genesis 48. 16. and Moses
wishes the good will of him that dwells in the Bush, to come upon the head of
Joseph, Deuteronomy. 33. 16.

Ans. We deny not but that Angels as well as men, may instrumentally pronounce
the blessings of God as from him, and in his name; but not originally, and so
to be resorted and prayed unto, as the Authors and fountains of blessings.

2. It is without example in Scripture* to wish any blessing but from God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Apostle Paul confirms, Romans 15. 30.
and 2 Cor. 13. 11. Phil. 4. 6, 7. Col. 5. 15.

3. The Angel whom Jacob there speaks of, is in the same place called, the
God of his fathers, Exodus 3. 6.

4. Moses also calls him that dwells in the Bush Jehovah, verse 13.

SECT. 3.
Object. John wishes grace, and peace to be given to him that was, and is, and
is to come, and from the seven Spirits which is before the Throne, that is,
from the seven Angels. Therefore Angels though they bless not as the authors
of Grace, yet a blessing may be asked of them as impetrators, and intercessors
of the same, at the hands of God; as also Genesis 32. 29. where the Angel is said
to bless Jacob.

Ans. That was not an Angel, but the Son of God, which ^^ was no Angel but
Christ that wrestled with Jacob.
wrestled with Jacob, because it belongs not to Angels to bless, but to God
himself; for spiritual blessings are either conferred by the Author thereof,
which is only God, or by the Mediator thereof, which is Jesus Christ, or by the
messengers, or instruments thereof, which may be as well Angels and Men; for as
Isaac blessed Jacob, and Jacob his sons ministerially, only as being Gods
mouth to pronounce them; so Angels likewise may be the Messengers, or
instruments of Gods blessing, and not otherwise. For the Apostle says, that
every good and perfect gift comes from God, Jam. 1. 17. neither are the
Angels to be s^ed unto for any spiritual or temporal blessing, but only God;
for if any one Lack wisdom (says the same Apostle) let him ask it of God,
Jam. 1. 5. and so consequently in any other thing, yea the promise is made only
to such as ask in Christ's name, Joh. 16. 23. and no otherwise; and as to that
place in the Revelations, (where mention is made of the seven Spirits,) we must
understand the Spirit of God with his manifold graces, for the seven Spirits
are also said to be the seven lamps of fire burning before the Throne; they are
also termed the seven eyes of the Lamb, all which do intimate as formerly.

SECT. 4.
THe arguments which the Papists use to justify their Invocation of Saints
departed, are chiefly these which follow, to which I shall return an answer.

Obj. Saints do pray for us, and therefore we may and ought to pray to them;
that they pray for us is proved by these places of Scripture, viz. Exodus 32.
13. where Moses desires God to remember Abraham, Isaac, and his servants. And
Baruch. 3. 4. where he says, O Lord God Almighty, hear now the prayer of the
dead Israelites, with 2 Maccabees 14, 15. where Onias spoke and said, this is a
lover of the Brethren, who prays much for the people, Jeremiah the Prophet of
the Lord.

Ans. To the testimony cited out of Baruch and the Maccabees, they prove
nothing, because they are no Books of the Cannonicall Scripture. 2. The other
testimonies are impertinently alleged, for Moses makes not mention of the
prayers which Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob should make for the people, but of the
Covenant which the Lord made with them; true, the Saints do pray to God by
their general wishes that the kingdom of God were accomplished, as Rev. 6.
10. but our particular necessities they know not, and so does not make
particular requests for us; therefore the argument follows not (that they
pray by their general desires for the Church) that therefore they pray for us
in particular.

Again, seeing these Papists hold that the Patriarcks, and Fathers of the Old
Testament were in Limbus Patrum, a dungeon of darkness, and a member or part
of Hell, they do absolutely contradict themselves, in making them Mediators,
and Intercessors in heaven; neither was Moses request for the merits, or
worthiness of the Fathers, but in respect of the Messiah which was promised;
for neither was Abraham himself justified by his merits, but by faith, as Paul
shows, Romans 4. 30.

SECT. 5.
Obj. GOd tells Abimelech that Abraham was a Prophet, and should pray for
him, Genesis 20. 7.

Ans. That place does not make for the invocation of Saints that are departed,
for God sends not Abimeleck to Noah, or any other departed to pray for him,
but to Abraham then living; which duty may be mutually performed in charity,
whilst one knows another necessities, but for the living to pray to, or for
the dead (which knows not their wants, being already certainly disposed of,
in an unchangeable estate, as the living are not; as also in that the Prophet
tells us, that Abraham is dead, and Isaac is ignorant of us, Isa. 63. 16.) is
such a conceit as has no warrant from Scripture, or any sound reason, because
they are not present to hear our prayers, neither do they know our hearts;
and we have one sufficient Advocate and Mediator, Jesus Christ, 1 Ioh. 3. 1.
and therefore need we not the mediation of any other, neither will they assume
unto themselves any part of We ought to confess our fins only to God. 1 King.
8. 47. Psalm. 19. 120. and 33. 5 and 41. 44. Jer. 14. 20. D^n. 9. 15. Mat. 15.
18. 1 Ioh. 1. 9.
Christ's Office; for as the perfume, Exodus 30. 8. was always before the Lord
(which does signify the prayers of the Saints) so God only through Christ must
be invocated, which honor he will not give to any other, for God must only be
believed upon, as our Savior says, Ye believe in God, believe also in me,
Joh. 14. 1. and the Apostle says, that men cannot call upon him on whom they
have not believed, Romans 10. 14. and certainly they would not have us believe in
Saints departed.

Obj. Abs^lon could not be admitted to his fathers presence until Joab had
mediated for him, and Bethshaba, Solomon's mother, entreated for Adoniah, so it
is necessary to have Mediators unto God.

Ans. 1. We have one sufficient Mediator, Jesus Christ, who is able
sufficiently to reconcile us unto God. 2. Though many mediators are used in
Princes Courts, because either they are ignorant of our affairs, or their
affections is estranged, yet it is not so with God who knows all things;
besides the love of Christ to us, exceeds the love of all other inferior
Mediators which men can seek unto. 3. The example of Bethshaba is unfitly
alleged, for she obtained not her suite.

SECT. 6.
Obj. ELiphas says to Job, Job 5. 1. Call now if any will answer thee, and to
which of the Saints will thou turn thee. 2. David exhorts to praise the Lord
in his Saints, Psalm. 150. 1. 3. It is said in Ezekiel, I sought for a man
amongst them to make up the hedge, etc. but I found none.

Ans. Eliphas in that place speaks of the Saints, and righteous living, to
see if Job could find amongst any of them a patron to defend his cause. 2. The
place in the Psalms is, Praise God in his holiness, or in his sanctuary;
neither does it follow that because God is praised in his Saints, that
therefore we are to pray to Saints; as it follows in the next words, praise
him in the firmament, will they therefore have the firmament prayed unto. 3.
The place in Ezekiel is spoken of men living, and not The Saint^ to whom the
Papists pray, shall be their accusers.
of men dead; the answer therefore which Jacob gave to Rachiel (when she called
to him for children, saying, Give me children, etc. Am I in Gods stead) may
fitly be applied ( by the Saints departed) to such prayers, or desires made
unto them. And as our Savior said to the Jews, There is one that accuses
you, even Moses in whom ye trust; so the Saints which these men so
superstitiously worship, will at the last day be their accusers.

CHAP. VI. Treats of their Idolizing of the Pope, etc. with a confutation
thereof.
HAving discussed their folly in worshipping of Idols, and Images without life,
as also their adoration and invocation of Angels, and Saints departed, I shall
now discover their folly in worshipping a living Idol, viz. the Pope, to whom
they ascribe an infallibility, as also the title of their Lord God the Pope.

SECT. 2.
Object. IS not the Pope Peter's successor, and is not Christ said to speak
these words to Peter, viz. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my
Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; and I will give
thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth,
shall be loosed in Heaven. By all which expressions, doubtless he gave unto
Peter a special privilege above all the other Apostles.

Ans. That the Pope is Peter's successor I grant, but yet in Wherein the Pope is
Peter's Successor.
this one particular, which was, in denying his Lord and Master, (whose servant
he pretends to be,) and as to the urging of them words mentioned to the
particular person of Peter, as that thereby he had a more special privilege
then the rest of the Apostles, is to go about to prove that our Savior did
contradict himself, in his expressions used to the two ambitious Suitors,
James, and John, (whom no other place would serve them then, to sit on the Mat.
^0. 20.
right and left hand in his kingdom) in these words, It shall not be so
amongst you; in which words there is an absolute nullaty of any superiority
amongst the Apostles, or Disciples of Christ; and that by a Statute not to be
repealed, being the determinate law of a just authority, by a Cannon ordained,
and irrevocably fixed by the wisdom of God, and confirmed by an example beyond
all arguments, even by an example fetched from his own particular, verse. 28.
where he says, that the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister; as also Luke 22. 27. I am amongst you as he that serves; now seeing
this humility was in Christ himself, how much more ought it to have been
amongst Job. 15. 10.
his Apostles and Disciples? The servant must not be greater then his Lord,
Joh. 13. 16. neither he that is sent greater then he that sent him; it is
enough that the servant be as his Master, Mat. 10. 25.

2. To stop these blasphemous and Antichristian mouths, I An equ^ll power and
commission, were g^ven to all the Apostle^*
shall also prove, that an equal power and commission (in use of the keys,)
was likewise given to all the rest of the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, as
well as unto Peter; and that by the words of our Savior, both before his
Passion, and also after his Resurrection; before his Passion in these words,
Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth etc. and whatsoever
ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven, Mat. 18. 18. as also after
his resurrection, as we have it, Joh. 20. 23. Whosoever sins ye remit they are
remitted, and whosoever sins ye retain they are retained; in both which places
of Scripture the words are directed to all the Disciples, as also in Mat. 18.
18, 19, 20. but before I urge this point any further, I will show what is meant
by binding and loosing, as it is there mentioned.

SECT. 3.
THese words of binding and loosing is not to be taken as many What it is to
bind and loose.
ignorant people conceive, who takes Peter to be the Porter of heaven gates,
and therefore said by them to bear the keys thereof; in imitation of which
rediculous conceit, the Pope includes himself as one of those Ignoramusses,
making himself more rediculous then the rest, by carrying abroad with him two
great keys, with which he is as able to open Heaven as by the rest of his
Popish power, which is even nothing at all, etc. for binding and loosing is
quite out of his eliment; it being effected by the preaching of the Word, which
he is not guilty of, but if he was, it would be to no purpose, seeing he would
only breath out the spirit of Antichrist, and therefore not likely to benefit
the kingdom of Jesus Christ, which is his Antagonist.

The heavens are opened and shut at the preach^ng of the Gospel, which is a
thing granted by all the people of God (whereof the Pope is none) and therefore
when a Sinner is thereby converted by the Ministry thereof, then heaven is said
to be opened unto him; and contrariwise, when by the preaching of the Word a
Sinner becomes more obstinate, then heaven is said to be shut unto him.

Also when a Sinner becomes penitent, then sins are said to be remitted; but
when they grow more obdurate, and stiffenecked by the preaching of the Gospel,
then their sins are said to be retained; and to this purpose our Savior
tells the Jews, that if they had not known these things, they did know, they
had been more excusable, but seeing they did confess they knew them, they were
inexcusable, as in building the Sepulchers of the Prophets, Joh. 15. 22.

Our Savior therefore spoke them words no otherwise to Peter, then Peter and
Paul spoke to all Christians, who are said to be built upon the foundations of
the Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone, as Peter himself
confesses, 1 Pet. 2. 6. Paul also affirms, that another foundation can no
man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Ephesians. 2.
20, 21, 22. that Peter therefore was set over the whole Church of Christ, is
but a Friars dream, seeing that all the Apostles were in equal commission,
and all were sent immediately to preach the Gospel; As my Father sent me, (says
our Savior) so send I you, Joh. 20. 21.

SECT. 4.
Object. Our Savior charge Peter three several times in All Christ's ^l^ck
not committed to Pete^s charge.
particular, to feed his sheep, Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17.

Ans. That will not bear such an universal jurisdiction, for all Christ's
Sheep were not only committed to Peter. Again, feeding does not signify
ruling, and commanding, but teaching and instructing; a duty ( Peter himself
being Judge) common to all Pastors, and to which he exhorts them, 1 Pet. 5. 2.

Obj. Peter was the first that preached to the Gentiles, Act. 10. 20. and 11.
12. and 13. 7.

Ans. Paul was converted, Act. 9. before Peter saw that Vision, Act. 10. who
immediately upon his conversion preached to the Gentiles in Arabia, Gal. 1. 15,
16, 17. Peter indeed was both the first, and the last that was resolved by
Vision, of the calling of the Gentiles; but Paul was certain thereof before by
revelation, and communicated not with Peter about his Vision before he preached
to the Gentiles, Ibid. Neither is it true that Cornelius's Family (to whom
Peter preached) was the first that was called amongst the Gentiles, for
Andronicus, and Junia were in Christ before Paul, Romans 16. 7. who was converted
before Cornelius was called; and although the priority of preaching to
Superiority does not go along with priority.
the Gentiles were yielded to Peter, yet the superiority does not go along
with it.

SECT. 5.
Object. PEter certainly was the most eminent, because he was always first
named.

Ans. It is to be observed, that the twelve Patriarckes are not always
rehearsed in the same manner or order, not in Genesis 49. 3. as in Genesis 27. and
Genesis 30. and afterward, Numb. 1. and Deuteronomy. 33. yet in all these places Ruben is
named first, but not always, for sometimes Judah is named before him, as in
Numb. 2. 3.

As then this were but a simple Argument for the pre-eminence of Ruben before
his Brethren, because he is in the most places named first, being the eldest,
so as simply do they conclude for Peter's supremacy before the other Apostles,
because he is commonly named the first; which was rather because of his
Eldership then any priority before the rest; neither is he always named in the
first place, for Gal. 1. 9. the Apostle James is named before him.

Again, we do not read that Peter did ever command his Fellows Peter never
commanded his fellow Apostles.
in office, but exhorted them; as in 1 Pet. 5. 1. he was also subject to
accusation as well as the rest, instance concerning his preaching to Cornelius
and his Family, for which being called to question by the rest of the Apostles
purged himself, by acquainting them with the whole matter, as we may read, Acts
11. 3. likewise being taxed by Paul for his dissimulation, Gal. 2. 8. by
silence confesses his fault; by all which it does manifestly appear, that
there was no more superiority in Peter then in the rest of the Apostles.

SECT. 6.
Object. PEter resembled Abraham's Stewart, Genesis 29. 2. in these respects; 1.
For as Eliazar was the eldest servant that Abraham had, so Peter was the eldest
Apostle that Christ had.

2. As Eliazar was said to have rule over the rest of Abraham's servants, so
likewise Christ set Peter over the whole Church.

Ans. That Peter was one of the eldest in years amongst the Apostles we deny
not, but that he was the eldest of all as it Frivolous comparisons to prove the
Popes supremacy.
seems Eliazar was, cannot be proved; as that he was set over the Church of
Christ, has been sufficiently confuted; and thus you see rather then fail,
what inventions they have to uphold the proud and vainglorious assertions
touching their lord god the Pope, and to prove his privilege and dignity from
such men as have no relation at all unto him.

So that this that has been spoken may give every Christian, yea even the Pope
himself satisfaction, touching his pride and arrogance, in assuming to himself
that which Peter (whom he pretends to succeed) would have bin ashamed of;
behaving himself altogether like a Priest of the Law, whose ceremonies are
abolished; but nothing like the Ministers of the Gospel, which is permanent; or
like another Elimas the Sorcerer, Act. 13. 8. 10. full of subtilty and
mischief, a child of the Devil, and an enemy to all righteousness, forcing
Scripture contrary to the true meaning thereof, although he knows that it
tends to his* own ruin and perdition.

SECT. 3.
NOw seeing they thus fail in their foundation, what can be The Papists
foundations infirm.
expected concerning their building* seeing they fail in their Principles,
what may be expected in their Consequences; seeing they fail in proving the
Supremacy of Peter over the other Apostles, how far will their lord god come
short to justify the wearing of a triple Crown of Gold, and the rest of his
Pontifical Vestments, being far more fit for a Stage Player then a Minister
of the Gospel: I wonder what Scripture he has for the wearing of such like
toys, unless (as I said) he derive them from Aarons garments, which the most
ignorant know that they were but Types of Christ, and are also abolished by
Christ, (as that Antichrist of Rome very well knows) but where does he read
of a triple Crown which Peter wore? he may be ashamed: to abuse the world with
such fopperies, as that it was left by the Apostle Peter, and that it is yet to
be seen in Peter's Church, and that Silvester showed it to Constantine, which he
said Peter used by the instinct of the Spirit, that the verity might be
answerable to the figure, viz. that Christ's Highpriests might wear that,
which the High Priest (the Figure of Christ did wear.)

SECT. 8.
NOw who (that is in his wits) will believe that Peter did wear a triple Crown
of Gold, who had not (sometimes) a penny in his purse* Act. 3. 6. as also in
that his Lord and Master The glory and Crown of the Apostles.
was crowned with Thorns; I blush therefore to see men so stupid, as to
believe that the Apostles used such worldly pomp, whose glory was their
poverty, and the contempt of the world their Crown and suffering; and if there
had been any such Crown, it had rather belonged to Paul, then Peter, for he was
the Apostle of the Gentiles, the other of the Circumcision. Again, if that be
Peter's triple Crown, which is to be seen, in Saint Peter's Church, why does his
Holiness refuse to wear it, but rather make use of a Massy triple Crown of
Gold and precious Stone; and as for Aarons Crown, it was a Type of Christ, and
not of the Pope, and temporal things does not prefigure temporal (one triple
Crown another) but that outward Crown did shadow: forth that Spiritual
Kingdom, and regal dignity of Christ.

SECT. 9.
LEt all the world therefore take notice what subtle and devilish The Popes
subtilty.
inventions this Instrument of Satan uses, that he may still delude the world,
and continue in his worldly pomp and glory; and the better to bring the world
to his bend, he terms himself a Servant of Servants, which his Claw-backs
say, he assumeth as a sign of great humility, which he cunningly ^^sinuateth
from the words of our Savior, Mat. 20. 26. He that will be great amongst you,
let him be your Servant; and thus does he wrest the Scriptures to his own end,
but it will speedily appear that like another C^iphas he proficieth of the
destruction of his own kingdom, and that he will very suddenly become a
servant of servants indeed, as Canaan was, yea and become a servant to them
that served him.

Again, his insolency is intolerable, in that he thinks scorn to be
reproved, yea though he should send ten thousand souls to Hell, yet none must
say why do thou so.

SECT. 6.
Object. WHat need is there of reproving him, seeing he cannot err?

Answ. The Pope is far inferior to Aaron, who erred by The Pope ^^rre
inferior to Aaron or Peter, who erred.
making the golden Calf, and though he was appointed of God, and elder brother
to Moses, yet did Moses openly reprove him; at the least I hope he will not
challenge to be superior to Peter, who erred in denying his Master, Mark 14.
68. 70. 71. as also by dissimulation, whereof he was openly reproved by Paul,
Gal. 2. 11, etc.

His unparalleld presumption appears also in taking upon him to forgive
sins, yea to have God at his command, for in case a man sin, and crave
pardon of God (and he forgive him, it is to no purpose unless his holiness
do the like, for the Lord has engaged himself to the Pope, that whatsoever
(he) does remit on earth, shall be remitted in heaven; but the Popes Holiness
has not done the like to God, by which means he forces the ignorant people to
a composition, as did his Brother Judas, by a quid dabitis, What will you give
me? so that he has not only man at his command, but he has also got God upon
the hip, (as we use to say) forgetting the saying of his cosen Germen, the
Scribes end Pharisees, Mark 2. 7. (which may very justly be attributed unto
him) viz. Why does this man thus blaspheme, who can forgive sins but God only?

SECT. 11.
Object. What difference is there betwixt absolving, and remitting of sins?

Ans. Absolution implies a forgiveness of sins by Authority, The difference
betwixt Absolution and Remission of sin^
remission only by way of Declaration, wherefore the latter may be permitted to
men, but the former only to God; for if man could forgive, we need not ask
pardon from God: but how should a Man forgive another sins, who cannot forgive
his own? true, they may absolve by preaching sins in general, but not apply
their absolution to particular men, because they know not whether their
repentance be sound, or hollow; for God only knows the heart of man, and
therefore is only able to forgive the sins of men, Mark 2. 7.

CHAP. VII. The seventh Chapter treats of Transubstantiation, with a
confutation thereof.
SECT. 1.
THe next thing which I will insist upon, is their detestable Heresy of
Transubstantiation, by which they say the Sacrament of bread is converted into
the real Body and blo^d of Jesus Christ, in which he was conversans here on
earth, and in which he was crucified; yea, that they eat his very Flesh, and
gnash his very Bones in their teeth, like so many Caniballs, or Man-^aters; and
that after the words of Consecration, there remains not so much as the
substance of bread, but only the mere accidents and qualities of it; yea that
it is substantially, and really the Body and blood, together with the Soul and
Divinity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and that under each kind, and
under every part of each kind, whole Christ is comprised, and that it is not
so whilst it is taken, but before, and afterward in the consecrated pieces
reserved, and remaining after the Communion; and that all Communicants, both
bad and good, do eat the very natural Body of Christ.

Obj. Does not our Savior say in plain terms, that if we eat not the flesh
of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, we have no life in us; and that
whosoever eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, has eternal life, and he
will raise them up at the last day: as also that his flesh is meat indeed, and
his blood is drink indeed, and that he that eats his flesh, and drinks his
blood, dwells in Christ, and Christ in him, Joh. 6. 53, 54, 55, 56.

Ans. The wicked and unbeleevers, neither have eternal life, The wicked
neither eat or drink the body or blood of Christ.
neither do they dwell in Christ, or Christ in them, neither do they live by
Christ, which life is by faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. therefore they
can neither eat, nor drink, the body and blood of Christ; this proposition
therefore is directly opposite to the Scriptures; but yet to give such of them
satisfaction, that are yet kept in ignorance, and in the chains of darkness
(by that man of sin) I will therefore branch the Argument into these three
particulers (...) as 1. What a Sacrament is. 2. How Christ is said to be eaten
in the Sacrament, and 3. Who they are that eat Christ in the Sacrament?

SECT. 2.
What the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is, Bernard terms What the Lords
Supper is.
it, Canalis grati and lavacrum anime, the cunduit of Gra^^, and the has of
the Soul, which the whole company of the faithful do consecrate and
sacrifice as well as the Priest, or Mi^ister, and it consists of two things,
viz. the visible substance, which is, Bread and Wine. 2. The invisible grace,
which is, redemption by Christ's death from the punishment due unto our sins;
that like as by Baptism we are inis^iated into the Church, so by this
spiritual Banquet, we are preserved in that life, into which he has begotten
us through the Word, and in this holy Mystery three things are to be
considered: as 1. The signification. 2. The matter, and 3. The effect: now the
signification is placed in the promise, the matter is Christ's death, and
resurrection, and by the effect is meant redemption, righteousness, and
eternal life, which is the fruit which a worthy receiver obtains, by being
partaker of that Divine Mystery.

In the second Circumstance the great controversy will fall by course to be
disputed upon, viz. Whether or no our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (whom the
Apostle says the heavens must contain until the restoration of all things,
or until the day of Judgment) be so eaten in the Sacrament, as these
Popelings seem to be confident of, according to the former expression
delivered.

SECT. 3.
ANd for the better clearing of the truth in this particular, When Scripture is
to be taken literally, and when spiritually.
there is a way discovered whereby we may understand when Scripture are to be
understood literally, and when spiritually; for the first, when Christ seems to
command a foul and wicked act, that must not be taken literally (as in them
words of our Savior formerly expressed, in which he seems to command a foul
and wicked act) it is therefore figuratively spoken; now it is the spiritual
understanding that saves him that believes, Joh. 6. 47. For the letter
kills, but the Spirit quickneth, Joh. 6. 63. neither is it Christ's bodily
presence, (if it were in the Sacrament according to their opinions) that could
save a receiver of it, for Judas (a Son of perdition) received panem Domini,
sed non panem Dominum; the bread of the Lord, but not the bread the Lord.

So that when Christ says, This is my body, he means the figure of his body,
and therefore we are to understand it by way of signification, and not
properly, for it is his presence in our hearts, through faith in his blood,
which we receive profit by, and not by his bodily presence in the Bread and
Wine, as I have formerly said: and if we believe not his bodily presence there,
that will not damn us, but it is his absence out of our heart^ which brings
damnation.

SECT. 4.
THis Sacrament then being a Spiritual thing must be spiritually The Soul
cannot (...) ^^d wi^h co^po^al^ ^ood.
deserned, for the food of the Sou^e upon earth, is no other then the food of
Angels, which is the joy, and delectation which they have of Gods glory; and
therefore not to be fed with corporal food, such as they would make Christ's
body: and seeing that all corporal food is digested into the stomach, and so
cast o^t into the draugh^, I blush to think of their audacious blasphe^^^s, who
doubtless cannot be ignorant, that if they eat him ^^rnally, that they do
also expel him in that manner as they do other meat, which thing is a shame
to any Christian to conceive, much more to express and vindicate. And it may
very ^ell be thought, that though the Apostles of Christ would have been ^^y
s^r^pilous to have drunk Christ's very blood, seeing it was so plain against the
Law of Moses, (and their own decrees, A^^, 15. 29.) if they had understood him
in that gross sense which these Papists do.

Ag^in, the writers of Scriptures must be examined as Spiritual Scripture must
be (...) st^od (...) spiritual sense.
men, and not as Carnal men, in regard they were delivered by holy men of God
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; and therefore one taking upon him the
person of our Savior (to whom in the sixtieth verse of the sixth of John, who
is said to murmur^ at his sayings) answers them thus (by expounding of our
Saviors words in the 63. ver.) " You (says he) shall not ^at^ this body which
you see, nor drink this blood in my v^^nes; but I shall give a certain
Sacrament unto you, which if it be spiritually understood quick^^th you,
otherwise it profi^eth nothing.

SECT. 5.
IT is also evident from Exodus 12. 11. that the Paschall Lamb The ^^gne called
by the name of the thing signified.
was called the Lords Passover, whereas it was but a sign, and representation
of the Passover: As also, Circumcision was called the Lords covenant, Genesis 17.
11. whereas it was only a sign, and seal of i^. Then as neither the Lamb was
the Passover it self, nor Circumcision the Covenant it self, it is but weakly
inferred by these people (from the words of our Savior) that the bread should
be the body of Christ, Mat. 26. 26. so that it must needs follow from hence,
that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is only a sign, or representation of
the body of Christ; yea, the Apostle Paul expounding them words of our Savior
in the institution of the Sacrament (viz. This is my body) exhorts us to do
it in remembrance of him. And that so often as we eat this this bread, and drink
this cup, we show the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. 26.

If then it be but a sign, and representation of his death, it is not his
absolute death; for if it were so, then must Christ be really s^aine, and
crucified at every Sacrament, which God forbid we should imagine, and therefore
the Apostle says, it is a remembrance of the Sacrifice of his body, and blood
which was shed for Believers; and so also did the Fathers of the Church expound
them words of our Savior, Hoc est corpus meum, to be a figure of his body.

And there is none so childish, but knows that the figure of Christ is not
Christ himself; nor the Picture of Peter, Peter himself, and yet nevertheless
we call the picture by the name of the party they represent; as when we see the
picture of Peter, we say, this is Saint Peter, and yet we should take him to be
a fool that should think this figure or picture to be the corporal body of
Peter himself as he was living, it being only the representation of him, and so
of any other.

SECT. 6.
IF a man therefore seek health in the external sign of the H^alth is not to
be sought in the sign.
Sacrament, he may be compared to a fond fellow, who being very thirsty
inquireth for an Al^-house, whereupon one shows him an Ale-poole, and tells
him there is Ale to be had; the ^i^^y fellow understanding him that there was
Ale in the poole o^ sign, sucketh it, thinking thereby to quench his thirst.
It Is so in the Sacraments, for if we seek health in the outward sign, we suck
the Ale-poole, and labor in vain; but if we understand the Sacraments
meaning, and so seek what they signify, and go to the thing signified, we
shall surely find perfect health; in which sense the Sacrifices of the Jews
were well allowed, and accepted of God, but when they forgot the signification,
and sought their health and righteousness in the Sacrifice it self, then were
they abominable in the sight of God; then he cried out of them by his Prophets:
and so it is in all other ordinances.

As for the sign in the Sacrament, Paul calls it bread, 1 Cor. 11. 23.
Christ calls the other the fruit of the Grape, or Vine, saying, I will drink
no more of the fruit of the Vine, etc. Mat. 26. 29. and further, Nature does
teach us, that the Bread and the Wine in the Sacrament, retains their former
nature; for the bread mouldeth if it be kept long, yea worms breed in it, and
the poor Mouse runs away with it; and likewise the wine sowreth, and
therefore one commenting upon them words of our Savior, says thus: " Why
preparest thou teeth or belly, Creed quod habes, and habes, b^leeve thou have
eaten him, and thou have eaten him. So that Christ's words must be understood
spiritually, and not after the letter.

Obj. The Apostle says, He that eats or drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation; now, how should he be guilty of damnation, which
receives the Sacrament unworthily, except it be the very body and blood of
Christ which he receives.

Ans. He that violently teareth the States Arms, breaks open the broad Seal,
commits treason against the State, or Commonwealth; even so does a man
offend against Christ's body and blood, by abusing the Sacrament of his body and
blood, although Christ be no more present in the Sacrament, then the
Commonwealth is present in the Seal, Arms, Coin, etc. Again, the Apostle
says, that he that prays or preaches with his head covered, dishonors
his head, and his head is Christ; shall we therefore imagine that Christ is
naturally in every man's head.

SECT. 7. Of the change of the bread in the Sacrament.
Obj. A Arons Rod being changed into a Serpent, Exodus 7. 13. is still called a
Rod; not because it was so, but for that it had (...) so. In like manner the
bread in the Sacr^ment being converted into the body of Christ, is yet called
bread, because it was so before.

Ans. If they can show Scripture for the convertion of the bread into Christ's
body, as there is an evident text for the changing of Aarons Rod into a
Serpent, they would say somewhat: but until they can do that, their error
can have no color from hence. 2. Aarons Rod is so called, not only because it
was Arons Rod before, but for that it was to return to be a Rod again; but
they will not have the body of Christ to return again to bread.

Obj. Amongst the Israelites there was many wicked men, which did drink of the
water which did issue out of the rock, which notwithstanding did not enter into
the Land of Canaan, but fell in the wilderness, so amongst Christians, many
do eat and drink the body and blood of Christ, which for their unbelief
shall not enter into eternal life: and so consequently wicked men, and
unbeleevers, eat the very body and blood of Christ in his Sacrament.

Ans. The Text makes directly against that carnal and gross* conceit, for
Christ says of the bread (which he brake to his Disciples) This is my body,
which is the chief text they have to ground their fantasy: So Paul says, the
rock was Christ. Like as then the rock was neither the body of Christ, nor the
water issuing from thence his very blood, but only in signification, and
representation, so the bread and wine in the Sacrament, are lively and
demonstrative significations, or exhibiting signs of the body, and blood of
Christ to the faith of the receivers, and no otherwise.

Obj. Though the body of Christ be visible, yet in the Sacrament it lies hid
under the form of bread, after the words of consecration, so that only
whiteness remains.

Ans. My former answer concerning the water which flowed out of the rock in the
Wilderness, which was a sign of the same thing to the Fathers, witness the
Apostle, who says, that rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. as the wine does
prefigure unto us the Lords Supper, but the same water was also common for
watering of Cattle, and so by the same consequence the Cattle did drink
Christ, as the silly Mous^ may eat of their Sacraments, and so consequently
have eternal life: For, our Savior promises eternal life to them that ^a^^
him, Joh. 6. 51. (O damnable doctrine.)

SECT. 8.
AGain, the name of a thing is given unto the sign, because Why the name of
the thing signified is given to the sign.
of the alience betwixt the thing signified and their signs, for so
Circumcision is the Covenant, Genesis 17. 13. the Lamb is the Passover, Exodus 12.
43. the Dove the Holy Ghost, Mat. 3. 16. the Rock Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. the
Sacrifice of the Law the putting away of sin, etc. because such things were
prefigured by them; and in the same sense if Scripture be taken literally,
then God is a man of war, Exodus 15. 3. and has eyes, ears, nose, mouth,
hands, and feet, which is contrary to Scripture, Luke 24. 39. where our Savior
says, that a Spirit has not flesh and bones. But God is a Spirit, Joh. 4. 24.
ergo he has no such things; these terms being only incerted, as to suite
with our capacities, so that in some sort we might apprehend his manner of
action, and leportment toward us his creatures.

SECT. 9. How the Body of Christ in the Sacrament is eaten.
2. THe Sacrament then of the Body and blood of Christ is given, The Body and
blood of Christ only eaten and drunk by faith.
taken, and eaten only after a spiritual manner, by the mouth of faith, and it
is a token of love which Christians ought to have amongst themselves, and for
which it is called the Lords Table, 1 Cor. 10. 11. the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.
10. a communion of the body of Christ, and they that partake thereof, though
they be many, yet are but one bread, and one body, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. Now the
same faith shall save us which saved the Fathers before Christ's Incarnation,
who did eat his body, and drink his blood spiritually through faith, and
therefore as the Manna which came down from Heaven, and the water which issued
out of the Rock, was the same to the Israelites as the bread and wine in the
Sacrament is to us* and in regard as many as did apprehend Christ in the Manna,
and water of the Rock; are said to eat the same spiritual meat, and to drink
the same spiritual drink which we do; and albeit the figures are changed and
altered, yet faith abides one and the same. And thus the Fathers did eat
Christ before the Manna, and after the Manna was ceased.

Having showed the manner of eating Christ in the Manna, (and seeing the like
may be spoken of the Pascall Lamb, which was not to be eaten raw, Exodus 12. 9.
that is, carnally, substantially, and visibly) with what face can these
blockish people think to eat with their mouth, and teeth, the very body and
bones of Christ. And who may better be said to eat Christ raw, then they which
come not with a true and a lively faith, but with such an erroneous persuasion,
therefore as raw flesh is offensive to the stomach, and such an one as eats
it may to said to eat his own death; so they that eat and drink in the
Sacrament unworthily, are said (by the Apostle) to eat and drink their own
damnation, 1 Cor. 5. 7.

SECT. 10. By whom the Sacrament is truly eaten.
3. AS none were admitted to eat of the Lamb of Consecration, Exodus 29. 33.
but such as were of Abraham's Family, so none but those that are of Christ's
Family indeed, and do believe in him, can be partakers of his body and blood,
for whosoever (says Christ) eats of my body, and drinks of my blood, has
eternal life, Joh. 6. 54. so then those men are grossly mistaken and deceived,
that think that the wicked and unbeleevers do eat the very flesh, and drink
the very blood of Christ in the Sacrament, for then it would follow upon our
blessed Saviors words, that they shall have eternal life.

Further, as the Pascall Lamb was not to be eaten by uncircumcised persons, or
such as were strangers from the faith of Israel, Exodus 12. 33. so neither are
those Mysteries or Sacraments of Religion to be given to Infidels or profaine
persons, for our Savior would not have us give holy things to dogs, or cast
pearls amongst swine, Mat. 7. 2.

This shall seem to be spoken in confutation of the Papists detestable and
damnable opinion of Transubstantiation, as also that the Sacrament of the Altar
gives life, Ex epere operato, by the thing done, and being present at, though
there be never a good thought thereunto by him that is present, and a receiver
thereof; as also that the true and natural body of Jesus Christ is in, with,
and under the Bread and Wine, and may be eaten, chewed, and digested even of
Turks and Infidels, as also that the same true and real body of Jesus Christ
may be devoured of Dogs, Hoggs, Cats, Rats, and so consequently these
creatures receive, and enjoy (by virtue of the same) eternal life, which is
blasphemy in the highest degree.

SECT. 11. Whether the corporal presence of Christ can be in more places then
one, at one time.
Obj. THe Papists verify it may, their reason is, because Christ's Manhood
(say they) is so annexed to his Godhead, as fire in Iron, which cannot be
separated, and therefore must be in all places with the Godhead.

Ans. That assertion is false, as may evidently appear by The body of Christ
not in two places at one time.
these Scriptures, as Luke 24. 6. when the woman sought Christ at the
Sepulcher, where the Angels told them that he was not there, for he was risen;
but if his body had been in every place the Angel had lied. As also at the
raising of Lazarus Christ says to his Disciples, I am glad for your sakes that
I was not there, Joh. 11. 15. and so Christ should not have spoken truly if
that he had been there as he was Man. Moreover, Christ says, The poor you
shall always have with you, but me you shall not have always, Joh, 12. 8.

Again, it follows not that every thing that is in God should be in every
place as God is; for the Scripture says, That in him we live, move, and have
our being, Act. 17. 28. and yet we are not in every place as he is God, for so
he is in all places; but as he is man he sits at his Fathers right hand; and
if we should grant Christ to be in all places as he is Man, we should take away
the truth of his body, for though his Manhood be in God, and God in his
Manhood, yet is follows not that it should be in all places, as his Diety
is, for as touching his Manhood, he was on earth, not in heaven, when he said,
No man ascends into heaven but he that descended from heaven, Joh. 3. 13. And
further to confirm this point, Christ says to his Disciples, I ascend to my
Father and yours, my God and yours, Joh. 20. 17. Again, the being of one body
in diverse places, or in two places at once is against nature, and Scripture
cannot allow of it.

One writing to his friend, to resolve him touching that passage of Christ to
the Thief on the Cross (where he says, This day shall thou be with me in
paradise, Luke 23. 43.) whether our Savior meant he should be with his Soul,
or his Body, or his Godhead in paradise; to which question his friend returned
this answer:

Touching Christ's corporal Body that day, it was in the Sepulcher, and that
was not in paradise although in a garden; and as touching his Soul, it was
that day in Hell, and none will say that paradise was there, therefore that text
(says he) must needs he understood to be spoken of his Godhead, and therefore
Christ's Manhood was neither that day in heaven, or on earth, but in the
Sepulcher.

SECT. 12. Of Christ's preaching to the Spirits in prison.
Object. IN that reply is confirmed, that the wicked of the old world were not
so condemned, but that they might be redeemed from them by the descension of
Christ, who is said by Saint Peter to be quickened in the Spirit, by the which
he preached to the spirits in prison, which sometimes were disobedient.

Ans. Those imaginations are contrary to Scripture, for out of Out of Hell is
no redemption.
Hell is no redemption, as Abraham said to the rich man, They which would go
from hence to you cannot, neither can they come from them to us, Luke 16. 26.
Again, Hell is thus described, Where the worm dies not, and the fire never
goes out, Mark 9. 45. the worm of the conscience in everlasting fire shall
torment the wicked; and therefore that place in Peter, or the other cannot be
understood of the descending of Christ's Soul into Hell, for Christ cannot be
said to be quickened, or made alive in his Spi^^^ that is, his Soul, because it
was not subject to death; and (...) fore by the word soul, or spirit, they
truly understand the Divine power of Christ whereby he preached to Noah. 2. If
there were preaching in Hell, then it will follow that there is a Church there,
and repentance and conversion of souls. 3. The Apostle only speaks of such
as were disobedient, but they were not delivered by Christ. 4. It cannot be
showed in all the Scripture where the resceptacle of the souls of the
faithful and believers is called a prison.

SECT. 13.
Object. TO proceed where we left, God is Almighty, and therefore can do what
he will.

Ans. That God is Almighty because he can do all things, is Why God is said
to be Almighty.
to prove that he is not Almighty, for all things he cannot do. As he cannot
deny himself, he cannot restore virginity being once violated, he cannot sin,
because there is no superior above him, but that he may do all things what he
will; but he has no will or pleasure to make his Son a liar, or to make his
Scriptures false, and yet notwithstanding he is Almighty, and may do what he
will; and thus they allege, that God by his power might make Christ's body in
many places, but they forget to prove that he has done so.

Obj. God works by Miracles, and therefore he may do it, though to us it
seem not to be done.

Ans. As before I desire to know where God has promised to do so, we read,
that the shadow of Peter did heal many, Act. 5. 15. and yet the shadow was not
Peter's own person. We read also, that Napkins and Handkerchiefes were carried
from Paul to many that was sick, and possessed with unclean spirits, and they
received their healths, Act. 19. 12. and yet it were a madness, to think that
Paul's body had been actually in those things, which was sent from him to them
which were diseased, or possessed with the unclean Spirits; so that these their
assertions being proved false by Scripture, we may conclude against them all
that Christ's body is but in one place only; As concerning his flesh the Church
enjoyed him but a few days, but as he is God he is every where, and at all
times by his grace, providence, and Divine Nature. His Natural Body, which was
borne of the Virgin, dyed, rose for us, and sits on the right hand of God,
he went away by that which was but in one place, he stayed by that which was in
all places; he ascended above all Heavens in his body, but he departed not
hence in his Majesty.

Again, to show the unmesurablenesse of his Godhead, he says to his
Disciples, Lo, I am with you ever, even to the end of the world, Mat. 28. 20.
and how could he ascend into Heaven but as he was local, and very Man; and how
he is present with the faithful, but because he is unmeasurable and very God.

SECT. 14. Against the reservation of Relics in the Sacrament.
Obj. HAving thus (as I conceive,) manifested their error aforesaid, I shall
say something concerning their superstitious reservation of the Relics of the
Sacrament, which they gather from Gods command to the Israelites to keep a
gomer of Manna, Exodus 13. 32. to evidence to their posterity how, and by what
means they were sustained, and preserved in the Wilderness for so many years.

Ans. That Relic was an holy Relic, kept by the Commandment of God, not to
be adored and worshipped, but to put the people in mind of that benefit in
feeding of their Fathers in the Wilderness; but the keeping of this Relic
does offend against all these rules: As,

1. God has not commanded them to keep any such thing. 2. In that they show
them to the people for adoration, and not for the commemoration of any benefit.
3. The Manna which putrified, being one day kept contrary to the Commandment
of God, Exodus 16. 20. indures many hundreds of years by his appointment, but
Popish Relics are not preserved from putrefying, therefore God has not
ordained them so to be kept. 4. God commanded that no part of the Pascall Lamb
should be reserved until the morning, which doubtless was to take away the
cause of superstition, lest they might have adored and abused the Relics of
the Passover; which charge given to the Israelites may also reprove the
superstition of the Papists, which do reserve the Relics of the Sacrament,
and of Saints carrying them about to sick folks, as things of great virtue and
holiness.

Obj. Joseph's bones was carried from Egypt to Cannan, Genesis 50. 26. ergo the
Relics of Saints may be preserved.

Ans. Joseph was laid in a Coffin, they did not rake out his ushes, and take
his bones and carry them about to work Miracles, as the Papists seem to do by
the bodies of Saints (if they be their bodies) and in that Joseph desired to be
carried to the Land of promise, the Scriptures directly shows the cause to
have been the profession of their faith, and hope, that the Land of promise
should be given unto them, as Joseph had formerly said (in these words) God
shall surely visit you, and you shall carry my bones hence, Genesis ^0. 25.

SECT. 15. Against the posture of kneeling to the Sacrament.
A Word also as touching the gestures and deportments of the body in the act of
receiving the Sacrament, which has been variable according to the manner of
the Countries where it has been, and is administered, as it was the custom of
the Jews to sit upon the ground, as Christ leaning upon John's breast at
Supper, which is imitated now by the Irish; but the Communion of the body and
blood of Christ is called the Lords Supper, and sitting being an accustomed
gesture amongst us at our ordinary suppers therefore sitting is a gesture most
stress for such an (...). Again, some Churches use the posture of standing as
well as sitting in imitation of the Passover, but we never read that the
Apostles kneeted at the Sacrament, for so to do is directly Idolatry and
Superstition, as may thus appear:

For to worship God in act, or desort a creature is Idolatry and Popery, but
such is their kneeling, ergo. 2. To worship Christ's Manhood as present when it
is absent is Idolatry, but Christ's local body is in Heaven as I have proved,
and therefore being so adored here on earth is Idolatry, and Superstition.

CHAP. VIII. The eighth Chapter treats of their Limbus Patrum, or their
Purgatory.
SECT. 1.
Objection. THeir opinion of Purgatory, or Limbus Patrum, (where they say all
the ancient Fathers were before Christ) they ground upon such Texts of
Scripture as these, viz. In that it is said, that Abraham was gathered to his
people, Genesis 25. 8. etc. which Purgatory (say they) is not for the purging of
Mortal, but Venial sins; and therefore the sins of the Fathers were
purged there.

But that Abraham went to no such place is evident, Luke 16. Against these
gross opinion of Purgatory, or Limbus Patrum.
15. where the place to which he went is called Abraham's bosom, which
certainly cannot be a member of Hell, as they make Limbus; the Apostle also
shows to what place the faithful are gathered unto, Heb. 6. 12. where he
exhorts to be followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the
promises; as also Heb. 12. 22, 23. where the Author terms the place to which
they are gathered, The City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, the
place of an innumerable company of Angels, the general Assembly, and Church of
the first borne which are written in Heaven, to God the Judge of all, and to
the spirits of just men made perfect; so that where the spirits of just men
were, there the Angels were, for so we read, Luke 16. 22. that Lazarus's Soul
was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom; but Angels are not in Limbus
Patrum, ergo not the souls of Saints departed.

Again, Henock is said to be of that people to whom Abraham was gathered, but
Henock was not in Limbus, for he was taken up into heaven, Genesis 5. 24. 2.
Abraham, went to his fathers in ^race, Gen: 25. 8. that is, with joy and
comfort; but what joy and comfort is there in Limbus, a Lake, and dungeon of
darkness. 3. To be joined to his people, is not to be joined to the Angels,
for Abraham is said to go to his Fathers, but the Angels were not his Fathers,
neither is the phrase alone, as to say, he slept with his Fathers, or went the
way of all flesh, or changed his life, for Ishmael is also said to go to his
people, Genesis 25. 17.

SECT. 2. Of Abraham's and Ishmaels people.
NOw Abraham and Ishmael had not the same people to go unto, the faithful
cannot be said to be Ishmaels people, nor the profane sort to be Abraham's
people; but if the meaning of the phrase were no more then that they were
joined to the state of the dead, the faithful and profane should all go to
one people, wherefore this phrase, must needs imply a special disposition of
the Souls of the faithful after this life, in being associated to the company
of the just, and laying up their bodies in an assured hope of the resurrection.
The Apostle also shows what it is for the righteous to be gathered to their
people, Heb. 12. 22, 23. to which we are joined by faith whilst we live, and
really when we are dead, as one says, now, quo ad spem, in hope, but then, quo
ad rem indeed.

Again, the Spirit of the Lord pronounces a blessing to them that dye in the
Lord, Rev. 14. 13. which are three Arguments against Purgatory: 1. In that they
which dye in the faith of Christ are blessed, but they which are in Hells
torments (for Purgatory they say is a part of Hell) are not blessed. 2. They
are said to rest from their labors, but they which are in Purgatory are in
labor and pain. 3. Their works are said to follow them for their reward, but
they which are tormented and punished are not rewarded.


Therefore we acknowledge no other Purgatory, but in this life No other
Purgatory but in this life.
a perfect purgation of our sins in Christ, and an imperfect, which is by a
fiery probation of affliction, as the Apostle terms it, 1 Pet. 4. 12. where
he wills the Jews not to think strange concerning the fiery trial which was
amongst them to prove them; Job also shows, that our Purgatory fire is in the
affliction and sorrow of this life, where he says, Ex ibo and aurum, I shall
come forth like Gold, Job 23. 10. As also the Prophet Isaiah says, That the
Lords fire i^ in Sion, and his furnace at Jerusalem, Isa. 35. 9. it is not then
in Hell, or Purgatory.

SECT. 3. The Papists leave many things uncertain, and undiscussed touching
Purgatory.
AGain, the most learned of them showing the difference betwixt the ministry of
the Angels in this life and in the next, leaves it as uncertain, and
undiscussed, whether the good Angels or the bad are the Ministers of the
torments in Purgatory; as for the bad Angels, that they should be the Ministers
of the Torments in Purgatory, or that they should exercise power over them,
that in their life time did conquer the Devil, they hold not; neither yet will
they have them to be the good Angels, for it is not meet (say they) that they
which shall shortly come to be fellows and partakers with the blessed Angels
in Heaven. should be punished by such Angels.

Now let any reasonable man judge, whether Purgatory be a mere fantasy, yea,
or no, where there is supposed to be torments, and yet no tormentors, viz.
neither good or bad Angels, and if not they who then, not Christ I am certain,
for he has redeemed them, neither God himself, for the Apostle says, Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, it is God that justifies, who
shall condemn? Romans 8. 33, 34. God then having justified them by faith in
Jesus Christ, there is nothing further to be laid to their charge; if then
there be no tormentor in Purgatory, there is no torment in Purgatory, and so
the fire of Purgatory is quite extinguished, and put out.

SECT. 4. Other circumstances not agreed on, etc.
AGain, besides the uncertainty who should be the tormenters; there be other
maine points not yet resolved amongst them concerning Purgatory; as 1. Of the
place, where it is. 2. Of the fire, what it is, whether it be Corporal, or
Spiritual. 3. Of the time, how long it shall last, whether for hundreds of
years, or thousands. 4. Concerning the greatness of the pain, whether it
exceed all the torments and punishments in this life; all which Articles are
not yet defined and determined amongst them, we will therefore leave them to
their uncertainties, and as they make question of the circumstances of
Purgatory, so let all Christians not only make question of Purgatory it self,
but also assure themselves Purgatory and Absolution invented only to get money.
that it is merely an invention of their own, as that of Absolution, which
they invented for no other end then to advance themselves in wealth and dignity.

For otherwise, what rational man can think that it is in the power of any man
to forgive the sins of another, which cannot forgive his own, as in example;
If Peter had the power to have forgiven the sins of other men, what need had he
to have wept and ^^pented for his own, or of whom needed he to have asked
pardon, seeing he had all the power in his own hands, as they expound the
Text, Mat. 16. 19. and if so then it must consequently follow, that if God
would forgive sins he could not without Peter's consent, of whom the Pope is
Successor (as they also say) in power and holiness.

SECT. 5. From whence all the glory of Popery sprung, and is continued.
ANd from hence sprange all the glory of the Papacy, threatening the Layety,
whom they kept in the darkness of ignorance, by withholding from them the
light of the Scriptures, that if they would not give such and such gifts to the
Church, build such a Monastery, Abbey, Nunnery, Cathedral, (and what not which
they pleased, as also give a great part of their estates to the maintenance of
such of their Hierarchy as was to live in them) they should incur his Holiness
displeasure, who had power either to damn or save them; by which juggling we
have had all the Popish buildings erected, which either are or have been in
this Kingdom, for if his Holiness commanded, it must be accomplished in pain
of Damnation, or a worse turn, which God himself could not hinder if it were
his Holiness pleasure to the contrary; and in this manner was the Laiety
brought poor and the Clergy rich, engrossing (by this means) into their hands
even the very fat of the Land, as it is most apparent to them that observe in
what places of the Kingdom those religious houses (as they term them) are
situated.

But had Peter had that power which the Pope claims (as We need not fear the
Popes curse any more then Paul did Peter.
his Successor) doubtless Paul durst not have gain-sayed him as we read he
did, ( Gal. 2. 11.) for fear lest he should have damned him; as also by this
means one of the Apostles should have been greater then another in power,
which is absolutely forbidden, as I have formerly showed; it is therefore most
evident that Peter had no prerogative above his fellow Disciples, neither do
we read in Scripture that ever Peter pronounced Absolution to any man; so that
Absolution and Purgatory are the Popes Stewards to gather in his revenues or
impositions, which he requires of his simple stupid Tenants, whom I hope will
now have more wit or grace, then to be any longer cheated by him, or inthralled
in his Tyrannical and Antichristian Kingdom.

CHAP. IX. Treats of their superstitious meriting by good works, etc.
SECT. 1.
THis opinion is also opposite to the Scriptures, as the words of the Apostle
shows, Ephesians. 2. 8, who speaking concerning the means of our salvation,
says absolutely, That it is by grace that we are saved, and not of our selves,
and that it is the gift of God. He also shows that grace and works cannot
stand together, Romans 11. 6. If it be of grace, it is no more of works; and if
of works, then no more of grace; and the Patriarch Jacob confesses himself to
be less then the least of Gods mercies, or unworthy of the least of them; by
which it plainly appears that be attributed no merit, or worthiness to
himself, but does acknowledge all to proceed from Gods mercy; which reasons are
surely of power to convince any rational man, that we deserve nothing at Gods
hands, in regard that our best works are imperfect, and have need of grace to
pardon the imperfections thereof; as also that we are the Lords bounden
servants, and do no more then our duty when we do our best, and even then we
are unprofitable servants, Luke 17. 10. God therefore crowns our good works,
but rather of his goodness and mercy then our deserving, whose mercy is seen
in his gracious promising, and righteousness in his faithful performing; it
is his mercy in calling us, before we can any ways be prepared thereunto:
there is no fitness, aptness, or congruity in our nature, but all is of
grace; and therefore Moses tells the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 4. 27. that because
the Lord loved their fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them.

SECT. 2. No preparation in a man's nature to his calling.
IT does also plainly appear, that Gods love was the first motive for the
choice and calling of Abraham, in regard that Terah his father was an Idolater,
under whom Abraham was brought up, and by all likelihood infected that way,
before the Lord called him; what preparation could there be then in Abraham, or
provocation ( as in himself) to his calling; neither was the beginning only of
Gods favor to Abraham of grace, and the increase thereof by merit, for Jacob
being of Abraham's faith, says, that he was less then the least of Gods
mercies, or that none of Gods graces first or last, were conferred upon him for
his worthiness: So then where the Lord finds his servants faithful and
obedient, he will increase them with further graces, not merited by their
obedience, but added in mercy, according to the gracious promises of God, that
vouchsafes of his fatherly goodness to The foresight of obedience, is no
cause of the increase of grace.
crown the faithful service of his children; for otherwise, if our service
and obedience be weighed in it self, it deserves nothing. In vain therefore (I
hope) will the Popish Clergy plead any longer for such fopperies, as to say
that Abraham's faith, godliness, and obedience, was acause that God bestowed
upon him them great favors, as the revealing of the destruction of Sodom,
etc. when as the chief reason was in respect of his fatherly love toward him,
who having once made choice of his servants does for ever love them, adding
grace upon grace, until he has accomplished their Salvation; or otherwise as
the Prophet says, all our righteousness We offend in ou^ bestworks.
are as a menstruous rage,; neither did the holy men of God present their
supplications for their own righteousness sake, Dan. 9. 8. and being
unprofitable servants in our best services, we are far from meriting or
deserving any thing; and if we do no more then we are bound in duty, nor yet
all that, we have no reason to expect any reward beyond our desert, and if the
benefit of this life cannot be merrited, much less the Kingdom of Heaven.
Again, if we can merit nothing for our own particulars, how much less for
others.

SECT. 3. Against election by works foreseen.
1 Inst. AGain, that God has not elected or made choice of any for good works
foreseen in them, may evidently appear by diverse places of Scripture. As for
instance in Simeon and Levi, who were two fathers in Israel, the one chosen
from amongst his brethren to execute the Priests Office, and yet we see they
were guilty of much blood; so that we may perceive, that God chose them not for
any virtue or worthiness in them, but for his own mercies sake. And Moses
tells the Israelites, that God did not set his love upon them, because they
were more holy then other Nations, for says he, you are a rebellious people,
but because the Lord loved you, therefore he has done this unto you, Deuteronomy. 7.
8.

2. Inst. Neither did Joseph obtain that great favor with God to have the
pre-eminence over his Brethren by any merit, or worthiness in himself, but of
Gods mere mercy, grace, and favor toward him, for as yet Joseph had not
showed his faithfulness and chastity in Potiphers house; the purpose of God
then to exalt Joseph (revealed to him in his dream) Genesis 37. 6. went before
any merit on Joseph's part, so also Gods free and gracious election, in setting
us apart to everlasting salvation is without all respect or works in us, as
the Apostle touches, Romans 9. 15.

3. Inst. Yea, the Book of Exodus shows us on the one side the ingratitude,
and disobedience of the people of Israel; and on the other side the steadfast
love of God toward them, which offers unto us an evident argument of Gods
free election, without any respect to works; the Apostle likewise to the same
purpose alleges that notable Text, I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy, Romans 9. 15.

4. Inst. Neither did the Lord look upon us Gentiles, in making of us his
people, for any worthiness in us, but for his own mercies sake, he has
called us to the knowledge of his truth; for otherwise what we are in our
selves, the Apostle shows out of the fourteenth Psalm, where it is said, that
they are all gone astray, etc. there is none that does good, no not one.

So then it is most evident that Gods election changes not, but Good works is
no precedent cause, but a consequent effect of election.
whatsoever he has decreed concerning any man's Salvation shall stand, for the
gift and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11. 29. And the Apostle
shows us, that the Lord has chosen us, that we should be holy, not that
because we were holy; so that good works is no precedent cause of our election,
but a consequent effect thereof.

CHAP. X. Treats of their tenent of justification by faith and works.
SECT. 1.
THe Popish tenent concerning faith is, that it justifies A Popish assertion.
not as it apprehends and applies the righteousness of Christ, but as it is
a meritorious work, by the worthiness and dignity thereof, and that it is a
presumption for any man to be assured of his salvation.

Ans. Now that this their assertion is contrary to Scripture will thus appear,
as Genesis 15. 6. where it is said, that Abraham believed in God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness; the Apostle also concludes the contrary,
where he says, That to Faith justifies not as a work, but as it apprehends
the righteousness of Christ.
him that works not, but believes, etc. his faith is counted for
righteousness, Romans 4. 5. where righteousness then is imputed and accounted,
there it is not obtained by works, faith then justifies not as it is a work,
or meritorious, but as an instrument it apprehends the justice of Christ
which is imputed by faith.

SECT. 2. Faith a special application of the promises of God.
Object. A Justifying faith is not a special application of the promises of
God in Christ, but a general belief only, that whatsoever God says is true;
as Abraham's giving of credit to Gods speeches, that he should be the father of
many nations.

Ans. It is otherways evident, for Abraham did not only believe Gods promises
concerning his carnal seed, but his faith reached also to the spiritual seed,
which was Christ, as the Apostle applies it, Gal. 3. 16. yea, Abraham rejoiced
to see Christ's day, Joh. 8. 16. as having a particular interest in him, as his
Savior; the forenamed place does therefore strongly prove against that their
assertion, for whereas Abraham had formerly showed many excellent works, as of
Piety, in building Altars in many places, and calling upon the name of the
Lord; in charity in seeking reconciliation betwixt Let and him, Chap. 13. of
mercy, in redeeming of Lot being taken prisoner, Chap. 14. contempt of riches,
in refusing to take the King of Sodoms goods; yet none of all these works are
reckoned, or imputed to him for righteousness, but only his faith.

SECT. 3. How Phineas zealous act was imputed to him for righteousness.
Obj. PHineas work in executing judgment upon the Adulterer and Adulteress,
was imputed to him for righteousness: faith then is not only imputed for
righteousness, but works also.

Ans. The Prophet in that Psalm speaks not of that righteousness whereby
Phinias was originally counted righteous, or just before God (for that was by
fai^th, because without faith it is unpossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6.) but
of that righteousness whereby Phinias faith was declared and testified, and
thereby his zealous act (because of his faith) was counted a righteous work.

The like is also where the Apostle Paul denies that Abraham Paul and James
reconciled.
was justified by works, Romans 4. 2. and the Apostle James affirms, that he
was justified through works, Jam. 2. 21. The first speaking of justification
properly before God, the other of the same testified, and declared by works
unto men; and therefore Phinias fact is said to be imputed to him for
righteousness, from Generation to Generation, that is, in all ages he was
known, and reputed just before God and men. And therefore the Apostle James
says, Show me thy faith by thy works, Jam. 2. 18. as if he should have said;
It Is true, before God it is thy faith only that justifies thee, (in regard
that he only knows thy heart) but in that I cannot judge of thy inward
affections, it is requisite that I should discern some actions from thee,
which may testify to me that thou art godly, and therefore our Savior says,
ye may know them by their fruits, etc.

Albeit therefore the Apostle urges the showing and approving of faith, that
Abraham was justified through faith in the offering up of his Son Isaac, yet
before God he was formerly justified by faith, but by this his obedience his
faith was both approved to God, and made manifest unto men.

SECT. 4. Four sorts of faith.
Object. WHat manner of faith is that which you term justifying faith?

Ans. For the better discerning hereof, it is requisite to know the diverse
kinds of faith, which are of four sorts, viz.

1. There is fides inissialis, vel fundamentalis, the faith of beginning, The
faith of beginning.
or fundamental faith, whereof the Apostle speaks, Heb. 11. 6. He that
comes to God, must first know that God is, etc. and this kind of faith
toward God, the Apostle refers to the doctrine of beginning, and essence of
God, in knowing him to be the only God.

2. There is another faith called, fides miraculorum, the faith The faith of
Miracles.
of Miracles touched by the Apostles, 1 Cor. 13. 2. If I had all faith, so that
I could work miracles, and remove mountains.

3. There is fides Historica, an Historical faith, which believes The
Historical faith.
all things to be true which are written in the Scripture, in which sense the
Apostle James says, the Devils believe, and tremble; they believe there is a
God, and that all is true that the Scripture speaks of God, and of his
Justice, Power, Judgment, and rewarding of the righteous, as may be gathered
from their own expressions, as, I know thee who thou art, even the holy one of
God, Mark 8. 7. in which expression the Devil did both acknowledge Christ and
God; as also Mat. 4. 6. It is written, he shall give his Angels charge over
thee, where he acknowledges that the Scriptures shall be fulfilled; as also
Mat. 8. 29. Art thou come to torment us before the time? In which they do
acknowledge Gods Justice; as also Job 1. 9. where Satan says, Does Job serve
God for naught, have thou not set an hedge about him, etc. by which they
acknowledge a reward to be given to the righteous.

4. The faith of faiths, or the justifying faith, which the Apostle The
justifying faith.
Paul makes mention of, Gal. 2. 20. viz. In that I now live in the flesh, I
live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me; and
this faith is the life of the Soul, whereby he that believes is able in
particular to apply unto himself the merits of Christ's death.

And the difference betwixt these four sorts of faith are The difference of
these faith^
these: the 1. Apprehends the essence, and being of God. 2. (The faith of
Miracles) his power. 3. The Historical faith, his truth; and 4. Namely, the
justifying faith, his mercies.


SECT. 5. These faiths not one and the same in substance.
Obj. THese four sorts of faith are not the same in substance, they differ
only in property, which (as the Gospel) is contained and included in the Law,
as a tree in the seed.

Ans. If that were true, then it were possible for them which have the one, to
have the other; and so Devils also which in some sort believe, (as I have
showed) should also be capable of justifying faith. And as to that you say,
that justifying faith is contained in the Moral Law, we are to distinguish of
the Law, The Law distinguished.
for it is sometimes taken more largely, either for all the Scriptures of the
Old Testament, as Luke 16. 17. It is more easy for heaven and earth to pass
away, then that one title of the Law should fail. So Joh. 15. 25. It is
written in their Law, they hated me without a cause, which testimony is found
in Psalm. 35. 19. or else the Law is taken for all the Book of Moses, and so the
Law and the Prophets are named together, Mat. 7. 12. This is the Law and the
Prophets; but the Law sometimes is taken more strictly for the Moral Law,
whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans 7. 7. I know not sin but by the Law, and
so the Apostle opposes the law of works to the law of faith, Romans 3. 27.

Now as the Law is taken generally, either for all the old Scriptures written
by the Prophets, or for the writings of Moses, it cannot be denied, but that
faith in Jesus Christ, is in this sense both contained, and commanded in the
Law, for the Lord spoke of Christ by the Prophets, Luke 1. 7. and Moses wrote
of Christ, as our Savior says, Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed
me, for Moses wrote of me, Joh. 5. 15. but as the Law is strictly Justifying
faith not contained in the Moral Law.
taken for the Moral Law, the law of works, which contains only the ten
words, or Commandments in the decalogue, so we deny justifying faith to be in
the Moral Law, and that for these reasons following.

SECT. 6. The Law and the Gospel differ in nature and substance.
1. IN regard that the Moral Law and the Gospel differ in very nature and
substance; for the one is naturally imprinted in the heart of man, and the
other is revealed and wrought by grace; the first the Apostle testifies where
he says, The Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law, Romans 2. 14. the other also is witnessed by the same
Apostle, Romans 2. 24. We are justified freely by grace; the Argument then may be
framed thus:

The Moral Law is grafted into the heart of man by nature, but faith in Christ
is not by nature, but by grace above nature* for if it were natural, then all
men shoule have faith, which the Apostle denies, 2 These. 3. 2. faith then in
Christ belongs not to the Law.

2. The effect of the Law of works and the Law of faith are They differ in
effects.
diverse, for the one works fear, and the other love and peace, as the
Apostle says, Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but
ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba father. Romans 8.
17. The same Apostle also says, that the letter kills, but the Spirit gives
life, 2 Cor. 2. 6. thus then the argument stands.

The same thing cannot be the instrument of contrary things, of life and death,
peace and terror, love and fear, for a fountain cannot send forth salt water
and sweet, Jam. 3. 12. but the Law is the minister of dread, of fear, and
terror, ergo not of life, and peace; and so consequently not of the faith of
the Gospel, which brings all these.

3. The same thing does not make the wound, and give a plaster to cure it; the
Law does show us our sins, faith by grace in Christ heals them; The Law
reviveth sin, without the Law sin is dead, Romans 7. 8. But we are dead to
sin, and alive to God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6. 11. the same
cannot make us dye to sin and revive sin, the Law does the one, therefore
not the other.

4. The Preachers, publishers, and givers of the Law and the Gospel were
diverse, the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ,
Joh. 1. 17. but if justifying faith were commanded in the Law, then grace also
should come by the ministry of Moses that gave the Law, and so prove the
Scriptures false.

5. The qualities and conditions of the Law and the Gospel are diverse, the Law
promises life to him that works; Moses thus describes the righteousness of
the Law, that the man which does these things shall surely live thereby, Romans
10. 5. but the Gospel requires not the conditions of working, but believing,
to him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness, Romans 4. 5. if then faith were commanded in
the Law, to believe should also be a work of the Law, and then the Apostles
conclusion should be in vain, who faith, I conclude that a man is justified by
says without the works of the Law; but if faith be excluded out of the works
of the Law, then it is not commanded, or contained in the Law, for then it
should be a work of the Law.

SECT. 7. How the Popish writers would reconcile Paul and James.
NOw whereas Paul thus proving Abraham to be justified by faith without works,
Romans 4. 2. 5. and James, that Abraham was justified through works, which at
the first seem to be contrary to each other, the Popish writers go about
three ways to reconcile these places, viz.

1. Say they, The Apostle in that expression excludes Abraham's Moral works
before faith, and therefore by such works they grant a man is not justified,
but by such as follow and proceed of faith.

Ans. Before that God had imputed righteousness unto Abraham by faith, he had
done diverse faithful works, as the Apostle shows, As that by faith when he
was called obeyed God, and by faith abode in the Land of promise, Heb. 11. 8,
9. therefore the Apostle speaking of Abraham's justification by faith after he
had done these faithful works, excludes even such works also from
justification. Again he says, to him that works, the wages is not counted
by favor, but by debt; but the works done before, or without faith; no wages
is due, because without faith it is impossible to please God, therefore he
means not such works.

2. They say that Paul speaks de fide charitate formala, of a says formed
with charity, and furnished with good works, and such (...) faith truly
justifies.

Ans. True it is that Abraham's faith, which Paul so much commends, was a
lively and working faith, and yet it did not justify him as it was active, in
bringing forth good works, but as it was passive in apprehending, and laying
on hold of the righteousness of God, as the Apostle shows, in that Abraham's
manner of justifying and David's was all one, but David declares that man
blessed to whom God imputed righteousness without works, Romans 4. 6. to which
the Apostle adds Abraham's full assurance, that he that had promised was also
able to perform, and therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness, Ver.
21, 22. it was not then imputed for the working of his faith, but for his
bebeeving.

3. They use a distinction of a first and second justification, the first as
when of a sinner a man is made just. 2. When a just man becomes more just: of
the first (say they) Paul speaks, of the second James.

Ans. The Scriptures knows no such distinction of a first, and second
justification; that which they call the second justification, is no other but
sanctification, which is an increasing, and going forward in the fruits and
further assurance of justification; the Prophet saying, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered, speaks of that
justification when of a sinner a man becomes just before God, which they call
the first justification. But to that blessedness is promised, and where
happiness and blessedness is obtained, no further justification is necessary;
wherefore the first and one justification suffices, and so there needs not a
second.

Further, this distinction admitted, Paul should rather treat of the second
justification, because he alleges the example of Abraham, who was called
already, and had done many righteous works, before the Scriptures makes any
mention of the imputation of any righteosnesse unto him by faith; and James of
the first, who brings in the example of Rahab the Harlot, who was called,
before she had done any worthy works, so that the two Apostles must be, and are
truly reconciled as aforesaid. And as to the assurance of our justification,
the same instance of Abraham's offering up his Son Isaac will verify; at which
time the Papists themselves confess that Abraham was certain of his salvation,
or that he was in the state of grace.

SECT. 8. Believers may be assured of faith and salvation.
Obj. THe assurance which Abraham had then, was a particular experimental
knowledge, that in that work he had pleased God.

Ans. Abraham in this particular, was not only assured of Gods favor, but was
undoubtedly persuaded of the promise in general concerning the Messiah, as the
Apostle says, Neither did he doubt of the promises, but was strengthened in
the faith, Romans 4. 20. and this is that our Savior says, that Abraham desired
to see his day, and saw it, and rejoiced, Joh. 8. 56. his assurance then which
he had of Salvation in the Messiah, procured unto him this great joy.

Obi. Abraham knew that he was in the state of grace by special revelation.

Ans. This assurance that Abraham had, was not by any particular or
extraordinary revelation, but by the proper and ordinary operation of faith, as
the Apostle says, He was strengthened in the faith, Romans 4. 20.

Obj. This revelation was made to the Patriarchs in the Old Testament, and the
Apostles in the N^w; who was (as it were) the founders of the people of God.

Ans. Paul (in matters of faith) makes no such diffence betwixt the Patriarchs
and other believers, where he says, Now it is not written for him only, that
it was imputed to him for righteousness, but also for us, etc. Romans 4. 23. and
he also says, that a crown of righteousness was not only laid up for him, but
for them also that love his appearance, 2 Timothy 4. 8. to whom then the same
certainty of faith is decreed, the like assurance is not denied.

Obi. All believers are not sure of their Justification, seeing Abraham had
served God most faithfully before, and yet never till then, was assured of his
Justification.

Ans. It follows not (because Abraham was not (...) assured of his
Justification) that therefore every believer cannot be justified at all; it
does only follow, that there was a time that Abraham had not such an assurance,
for the dearest child of God (being naturally prone to sin, as the sparks
to fly upwards) having committed some grievous offense, does after the act
(many times) conceive in himself that he is the child of perdition, or
otherwise he could not have been so forsaken of God. Instance in David, who had
the testimony of the Spirit of God, that he was a man after Gods own heart,
and yet we see after his sin of Murder and Adultery, he conceives that God
had forsaken him, and therefore desires the comfort of his help again, as
though he had been utterly deprived of it; and yet at other times both before
and after, he was fully assured of it, as the Scriptures do plentifully make
appear; so likewise it is untrue, that Abraham had not this assurance until
he had offered up Isaac, for the Apostle shows, that he had that assurance,
when faith was imputed to him for righteousness, Romans 4. 22, 23. which was
before he was circumcised, Genesis 15. 6.

SECT. 9. The assurance of Justification, best known to him that has it.
Object. THe Scriptures commending the righteousness of Abraham and other
Patriarks, does rather make ((...)) sure and certain of their salvation then
themselves.

Ans. No man's salvation can be better known unto (...) then to himself, for as
the life of the body is more felt where that life is, then of others which only
see the body to live; so faith which is the life of the Soul* (as the
Scripture says, the just shall live by faith) is better apprehended of those
that have the possession of it, then of such as only behold it. Again, in vain
does the Apostle exhort us, to labor to make our calling and election sort, 2
Pet. 1. 10. if it could not be accomplished.

Obj. The Apostle exhorts us, to work it out with fear and trembling, Phil.
2. 12.

Ans. The Apostle in that place does not deny but that it may be wrought out,
he therefore exhorts us so to demean our selves, as that we do not presume
of any worthiness in our selves, that may deserve it, and therefore he also
exhorts them that stand, to take heed lest they fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. lest
being secure of our election, which is certain and infallible (in regard that
whom God loves, he loves unto the end.) We sin presumptuously, trusting to
Gods election, and therefore the Apostle exhorts us, to work it out with
fear and trembling, least we being circumvented of Satan (who can transform
himself into an Angel of light to deceive us) and so be prevented of that which
we vainly hoped for.

Obj. When may a man be certain of his election or salvation?

Ans. When he regards not sin in his heart, and until When a man may be
assured of his salvation.
then he cannot; for the Prophet David speaking by experience says, that so
long as he regarded sin in his heart, the Lord would not bear his prayers,
Psalm. 66. 18. so that when we feel in our selves, that we are thoroughly dead
unto sin, and to all the affections and desires of the same, it is impossible
that we should be certain of our election; for in this it may be said as of
the Commandments, that he that keeps them all and offends in one (that is,
he that keeps them all but one) is guilty of the breach of all, in regard
that the charge was to keep that one as well as all the rest. So he that in his
affections, is dead to all manner of sins; but one which he still desires to
retain, being his darling sin, and that either for profit or pleasure, is in
the same respect guilty of all, it being probable that he would break the rest
upon the like terms, in which state and condition a man cannot be fully
assured of his salvation.

SECT. 10. How a man is said to sin, and yet sins not.
Object. SVppose, that a man should find in himself, that he is dead in his
affections to all manner of sin, yet this man so long as be lives will
sin, how can be then be assured of his salvation?

Ans. I have told you that was the maine reason, why the Apostles did give the
exhortation, to work it out with fear, and trembling, yet nevertheless,
though such a man sin daily (so is be not with a desire and affection, but in
respect of the flesh ^usting against the Spirit) yet may he be assured of his
salvation; for, the Apostle affirms touching his own person (being in the
same predicament) that it wa^ not he that sinned, but sin or the corruption
of his own nature that dwelled or remained in him, Romans 7. in which Chapter he
makes an absolute distinction betwixt them, who may be assured of their
election, and them that may not, and that in respect of men's affections and
desires to sin, or not to sin, where making himself the president, he
confesses, that in him (that is, in his nature) there dwells no good thing,
and that to will was present with him, but how to perform that which was good
he found not; and that the good which he would have done he did not: Whereupon
he makes a second conclusion, that it was not he that did it, but sin, etc.

So that the reason of the Apostle thus excusing himself in sinning, was
because he had a delight in the Law of God, in the inwardman. And that he had
no pleasure in those sins, which he daily committed through the infirmity of
his flesh, and the temptations and allurements provoking him thereunto, from
Sin is made g^eater or l^sse in respect of the delight which is taken. in
sinning.
which he desired deliverance; so that albeit his so sinning, he does not doubt
of his election, but was assured of it, (as appears in the 25. verse.) by
Jesus Christ, who had taken away one guilt of such sins. And from this argument
(of the Apostle) we may conclude, that it is not sin that procures damnation
to any one, but merely the delight which men take in the action of sin.

And therefore the Apostle describing the blessed estate of a The bl^ssed state
of a regenerate man.
regenerate man, says, that he sins not, neither can sin; which is so
spoken in regard he takes no delight or pleasure in that sin so committed by
him, and so is not imputed unto him as sin. The same Apostle also says, that
there is no condemnation Romans 8. 14, 15, 16, 17.
to such as wal^ not ^f^er the flesh* but after the Spirit, Romans 11. 1. And
that as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God; and if
Sons; then Heirs; and Co-heires with Christ; so then as many as are such,
may claim such a title and privilege, And contrariwise, them that are not
such, are not to enjoy such privileges or prerogatives.

CHAP. XI. The eleaventh Chapter treats of their tenent of Free Will.
SECT. 1.
THe Pelagians were of opinion, that they (could without the grace of God) do
some good work or act, by which they put a thick wall betwixt them and the
fire of Gods Spirit, lest they should be heated thereby, and warmed with love.
To which opinion the Roman Catholics consent, whose assertion is --

Obi. That a man naturally without faith, or without the special assistance of
God, can perform some Moral good works if no temptation let.

Ans. Both these assertions is sufficiently confuted, in that one sentence of
our Savior, Joh. 15. 5. Without me you can do nothing, yet to clear the
point more fully, I will lay down all their arguments by which they vindicate
their assertions, and answer ^o each particular; and to this purpose.

SECT. 2.
THey urge the words of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 1. 19. If ye will consent and
they, ye shall eat the good things of the Land. As also, Exodus 15. 26. If thou will give care unto his Commandments. As also, Exodus 19. 5. If ye ^ill hear
my voice, and keep my covenant: From these, and such like places they argue
thus.

Obj. If it be in our power to perform these conditions, then have we free
will, if not, to what end are they propounded; these places therefore prove
Free Will, or else they are propounded in vain. They argue thus also: Will a
Father command a Child do a thing which he knows is unpossible to be done by
him?

Ans. In the same respect a man may be said of himself to keep all the
Commandments, as that he has Free Will; but that we have such power the
Apostle does utterly deny, Gal. 3. 10. where he concludes, that every one that
is under the works of the Law, is under the curse, because they cannot keep
it; for by the deeds of the Law no flesh can be justified, Romans 3. 20.

2. These places in their sense being urged, do as well conclude, that a man of
himself without grace, can keep all Gods Commandments; for if a man cannot
perform them wholly of himself, the same question remains, why they are
propounded to them that cannot keep them, and yet albeit it is not in man's
power to keep the Commandments, yet are they not therefore in vain, The
Commnadements not in vain though we cannot keep them.
for they serve as spurs to invite and stir us up to obedience, and to strive
unto perfection, and to labor to go forward. But the chief reason the Apostle
shows, Gal. 3. 29. viz. That it was a Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ,
the Law therefore was given to that proud people of the Jews, that they seeing
themselves to fail in their own strength wherein they trusted, they should
seek for an helper, and deliverer to do it for them, viz. Christ Jesus; for
otherwise to what end came our Savior to perform the Law for us, but that we
in regard or the weakness of our flesh could not perform; so that these
precepts was propounded for these two ends:

1. That man's nature should thereby be stirred up to labor for perfection.

2. That finding himself to come short of the ability, he might see his own
weakness, and fly for succor unto Christ, without whom we can do nothing,
Joh. 15. 5.

SECT. 3. In what condition Adam was first stated.
Object. ADams freedom still remains (to us) who had power to eat, and not
to eat; and so we have power to sin, and not to sin.

Ans. Adam was stated in that condition, as was the Angels before their fall,
who was created in potestate standi vel caenandi, in possibility to stand or
fall; power of continuance he had from God, but possibility of falling he had
from himself; for it is a maxim in Divinity, Immutabilliter bonum esse Dei,
proxemum est; to be immutable good is proper only to God; and therefore the
Devil is said, Non perstitit in veritate, not to abide in the truth; and so
also it is said of man, Perditio tua, ex te, O Israel, thy destruction is of
thy self, O Israel.

I desire to know of these vain boasters, wherein Adam made it appear that he
had Free Will, for I conceive it may rather be argued that he had none; for no
man can be said to have Free Will, but he that is able of himself to resist a
temptation, but Adam did not make it appear that he had such a power as to
resist a temptation, ergo it did not appear that Adam had Free Will. If he had
power to resist, where did he show, or express that power; seeing he could not
resist the very first temptation, his will being then in its first purity, and
full strength, yea never assailed before by any temptation; yea, having not
only a freedom to eat, and not to eat, but also an express command from God
not to taste of that fruit, and that under pain of death, and yet what a
slender reason Adams slender reason for his excuse.
does he render for his excuse; The woman (says he) whom thou gave to be
with me, she gave me and I did eat. Lo, what great resistance, what great
arguments was used on his part to dissuade the woman from that wicked act, in
tempting of him against the peremptory command of God. Where is he once said to
express the punishment due to himself, or her, for so offending; the
consideration of which thing might have been a sufficient motive to have
persuaded him for committing of that sin. If Free Will must be ascribed to
one of them, it is more properly to be attributed to the Woman; for when the
Serpent tempted her, she as it were made a resistance, by pleading Gods
express command to the contrary; which thing Adam is not said to have done,
either to the Serpent, or the Woman; but say that he had not assented unto her,
but had powerfully withstood all the assaults of the Devil, and the Woman,
giving them the foil by the sword of the Spirit; yet could it not have been
said to be Adams not eating could not have argued free will in ^i^.
done of Free Will, but rather by the power given him of God, who had said,
Thou shall not eat thereof, etc. or else rather to Ave, then good will,
because God had bound him, and that under pain of death not to do it; but
being so charged, and yet not obeying Gods command before the inticements and
alurements of a Woman, is the least, yea no token at all of Freewill in him.

SECT. 3. What small cause we have to boast of Free Will from Adam.
THus these Pharisaicall boasters may see by these glimps of Adams trial, what
cause we have to boast of Free Will as successive or hereditary from Adam to
us, which indeed is nothing, for as the Apostle says, of our selves we can do
nothing, no not so much as to think a good thought, or to speak a good word;
as we may see by the example of Jacobs sons unto Joseph, Genesis 17. 4. where it
is said, they could not speak peaceably unto him; and our Savior says of the
Pharisees, How can ye that be evil speak good things; so that Jacobs sons
abounding with malice could not speak peaceably unto Joseph, and the Pharisees
being a generation of Vipers, could not speak well of Christ; As an evil tree
then cannot bring forth good fruit, Mat. 7. 18. and as a Moore cannot change
his hew, or a Leopard his spots, no more can he that is accustomed to do evil
do that which is good.

Again, sin has not a desire to the Soul, but the Soul rather The Soul
has rathers desire to sin, then sin to the Soul.
to it, and so at the uttermost it can but follow, that man by his natural
power can only resist a temptation; which thing was not apparent at all in
Adam, for it is not said that he made any resistance at all, but presently at
the first sight received it, The Woman gave me (says he) and I did eat. A
very powerful resistance for us to imitate or boast of.

So far are we then from having Free Will, as that both the preparation of
the heart, and the answer of the tongue, is both said to be from the Lord,
Prove. 16. 1. The Wise man also says, Man's goings are of the Lord, how can he
then direct his own steps, Jer. 10. 23. Again, Who is he that says, and it
comes to pass when the Lord commands it not? Lamen. 3. 37. as also by
these words of our Savior to his Apostles, Take no thought what ye shall
speak, for it shall be given you, etc. for it is not you that speak but the
Spirit of the Father that speaks in you, Matthew. 10. 19. It is also said,
Exodus 31. 2. that the Lord called by name Bezaleell the son of Uzzi, the
son of Hur, etc. and filled him with the spirit of Wisdom, and
understanding, and knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship, etc. from which
we are taught, that the honor of every good thing ought to be given to God;
and if humane Arts proceed from Gods Spirit, how much more has man no activity
at all in divine things, but as it is wrought by grace; this therefore which
has been spoken with them words of our Savior, Joh. 15. 5. Without me you can
do nothing; is sufficient to overthrow all opinions of Free Will in divine
things.

SECT. 4. Why a Law was given to Adam.
Object. Why did the Lord give that precept to Adam?

Ans. For the better trial of Adams obedience, it was fit that he should be
prohibited to do that, which in it self was not evil, that Adam abstaining
from that which was good, might show his humanity to his Creator.

Obj. The Apostle says, that the Law is not given to the righteous man, but
unto the disobedient; and Adam in his innocence was just and righteous, and
therefore he needed not a law.

Ans. The Law in two respects is not to be given to a just man, as 1. In
respect of the negative precept, as to abstain from Murder, Theft, Adultery,
etc. but in regard of the affirmative precept, to return them in obedience,
and doing of good works; and so the just man had need of a Law, and so had
Adam. 2. A just man need not fear the punishment of the Law, as Paul speaks
in another place concerning the Magistrate (which i^ the speaking, or living
Law) who is not to be feared for doing good works, but evil, Romans 13. 4. and
in this respect so long as Adam lived in his integrity, the punishment in the
Law concerned him not.

Obi. Why did the Lord give that precept to Adam which he knew he could not
keep?

Ans. I have answered formerly; but further, God gave him a Law which was
possible to be kept, and Adam had power to keep it if he would; it was not then
Gods fault that gave him Freewill, but his own that abused that gift.

Obi. Why did not God give him grace to abstain from transgressing that
precept?

Ans. God could have given him such grace, and to the Angels also, that they
should not have fallen, but it was fit that God Why God did not restrain Adam
from sinning.
should leave the Creature to their Free Will, and not hinder the course of
Nature which he had made; and albeit that God did foresee man's transgression,
yet that was no reason to withold the precept, for then God should neither
have made Angels nor men, because he foresaw that some of both should be
reprobates; as also God by the same reason should not have given his written
Word, because many Heretics do pervert it to their own destruction. As
therefore God foresaw man's transgression, so likewise he knew how to turn it
to good, as in showing mercy to sinners, and in sending Christ to restore what
man had lost; so that notwithstanding Gods foresight of Adams transgression,
he was not to forbear to charge Adam with this Commandment, in regard of the
great good which he did foresee should ensue by it.

CHAP. XII. Treats of original sin.
SECT. 1.
Objection. CHrist by virtue of his Passion, has set us in that first estate
in which Adam was created, by taking away original sin, for the Apostle
says, Cor. 15. 22. That as in Adam all were dead, even so in Christ all are
made alive; that is, in every respect.

Ans. To clear that and other Texts of All man Kind c^^pable of original sin.
Scripture, which seems to admit of such interpretations, it is requisite
first to know the state, and condition which Mankind was involved in by
reason of Adams transgression, by which means we shall with more ease discover
the virtue and efficacy of the Passion of Christ, and how far, and to whom it
does extend it self.

SECT. 2. The people of God confessed themselves guilty of it.
ANd first, that all Mankind became culpable of original sin by the fall of
Adam, is most certain, witness David, a Prophet, and a man after Gods own
heart, who says, that he was borne in sin, and brought forth in iniquity,
Psalm. 51. 5. from which Text, as also from the testimony of the Apostles, (who
says, that we are all by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3.) It is
evident, that all that were before Christ, as also since Christ, are by nature
the children of wrath; for if we observe, the Apostle speaks not of the time
past, viz. before Christ's coming in the flesh, and so says, we were the
children of wrath; but he speaks of the time present, for he says, We are
all by nature the children of wrath; intimating that the Passion of Christ as
it was an Act, viz. by the thing done did not cleanse us ( though under the
Gospel) from original sin or corruption of the flesh, for that is only done
by faith in his blood; for as the Sacraments do not confirm grace, Ex opera
operato, by the thing done, the same is in the sacrificing of himself for the
sins of the world.

It is also confirmed by our Savior, Matthew. 15. 19. where he says, Out of the
heart proceeds evil thoughts, etc. as also Genesis 8. 21. where it is said,
that the imaginations, purposes, and desires of the heart of man are evil, and
that continually, or from day to day, even from the day of his birth, Chap. 5.

Now in those places I have named, we are not to think or understand them to be
meant passively, of the frame of the heart which was created of God, for that
is good, because God created nothing evil; but we are to understand it
actually, for that which the heart of man imagines, or frames it self, which
is called the imagination, or framing of the thoughts, it is that The substance
of the heart nor evil, but the actions^^i.
which is esteemed evil; wherefore that place gives no occasion to profane
persons to conceive of God, as though he was the Author of evil. For the heart
as it is created of God, is good, the substance thereof is of God, but the
evil qualities thereof is of the corruption of our own nature; so that it
makes directly against the Pelagians, who deny sin to be a deprivation of
nature, but say, it is a corrupt imitation; whereas it appears by the Text,
that even in the very youth, and first age, when we are not so apt to imitate,
there is evil and corruption in the heart. Again, sin is the cause of death,
for if Adam had not sinned he had not dyed, but it is most evident that Infants
dye (which if sin were not the cause) then were the Scriptures false, which
The death of Infants an evident demonstration of original sin.
says, the wages of sin is death. Now what other sin can procure an
infants death, (which has not sinned according to the similitude of Adams
transgression,) viz. actually, unless it be original sin, which certainly
is a most infallible demonstration, that children are borne in original sin.
In the next place I will show you what it is.

SECT. 3. Original sin described.
Original sin is an inherent corruption of our nature, powered out into all
the parts of the mind, by the guilt of Adam; who was not only the Progenitor,
but also as it were the root of man's nature: for the Lord committed those gifts
to Adam which he intended to bestow upon man's nature; which when he had lost,
he lost them not only for himself, but also for his while posterity, by means
of which we bring forth the works which are called the works of the flesh,
Gal. 5. 19.

Now to the further description of original sin, we find in Scripture the
cause, the subject, and the effect of it.

1. The cause as I said before was Adams fall, as we may see, The cause of
original sin.
Romans 5. 15. and 1 Cor. 15. 21. as also by the suggestions of the Devell, Genesis
3. 4. as also through Adams Free Will, whereas he might have refused.

2. The subject of it we take to be the old man, with all his The subject of
original sin.
power, mind, will, and heart; for in the mind there is darkness, and
ignorance of God and his Will, as appears by the words of our Savior, Mat.
12. 34. O generation of vipers, how can ye being evil speak good things? The
Apostle also says, that the carnal mind is at emnity with God, for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither can be, Romans 8. 7. The Apostle James also
testifies the same in these words, Let no man say when he is tempted, that he
is tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil; neither tempts he
any man, but every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lusts, and
inticements; then when lust has conceived it brings forth sin, etc. Jam.
1. 13, 14, 15.

3. The fruits of original sin are either internal, or external; The
fruits of original sin.
internal, as ungodly affections, or evil concupisence, which the Apostle
terms Idolatry. 2. External, as wanton looks, prophaine speeches, and
devilish actions; as in Mat. 15. 19. Out of the heart proceeds evil
thoughts, etc. which procures a cauterised conscience, the which procures the
wrath of God, and eternal damnation, as the Apostle testifies where he says,
that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men, that holds the truth in unrighteousness, for which
thing sake the wrath of God is come upon the Children of disobedience, Col. 3.
16. Joh. 8. 24. Romans 5. 12. 18. and Jam. 1. 15.

SECT. 4. Of Concupisence.
THe Pelacians do hold this tenent in the general, that Concupisence was not
sin in any man; and so do the Papists generally, in particulars, (viz. that
concupisence after Baptism is not properly sin, nor forbidden by
Commandment; and that it is not verily and properly a sin in the regenerate,
but that it is only so called, because it comes of sin, and inclines to
sin;) each of their Objections shall be propounded, and answered: Questions
propounded and answered touching Concupisence.
And first in answer to the Pelagians objection, that hold it in the general,
that concupisence ( which is the first fruit of original sin, being to will,
or to desire without the external action) is no sin; to which purpose they
argue thus: viz.

Obj. Such things as are natural, are not evil, but concupisence, or to will,
is natural; therefore it is not evil, nor consequently sin.

Ans. The Apostle says, that we are all by nature the children of wrath,
therefore because we are so by nature, by the same reason it should be no
discommodity unto us to be the children of wrath, which would be a mere
madness to conceive.

Obj. Even in our nature as it now stands corrupt, the appetite or desire of
such things as tend to the conservation of nature, and to decline and shun the
contrary are not evil, but such is the concupisence to meat and drink, and the
like; ergo.

Ans. Such motions and appetites of themselves are not evil, Concupisence how
evil, and how not evil.]
as they are natural motions, but if they be inordinate motions, and exceed a
just measure, they are evil; as to have an immoderate desire to meat and
drink, for as it was natural for Eve to desire to eat of the fruit of the
tree, yet to desire it against the Commandment of God was evil; so it is
likewise with these natural motions, if they be immoderate, and inordinate,
they are evil.

SECT. 5. How Sin is to be measured.
Obj. THat which is not in man's power to avoid, is no sin, but not to covit
is not in man's power; ergo it is no sin.

Ans. Sin is not measured by the necessity, and liberty of Nature, How sin is
to be measured.
but by the disagreement which it has with the Will of God. 2. When God first
printed the Law in man's nature, before his fall, then were the precepts of God
given unto him in his power to keep. 3. Though man by his voluntary corruption
has lost his power and liberty, yet God fore-goeth not his power, and right in
commanding; but that Concupisence is sin, Concupisence is sin.
it is most evident by the Moral Law, that would not forbid it unless it were
sin. As also the Apostle who urges the same argument, saying, I had not
known sin but by the Law, for I had not known lust except the Law had said,
thou shall not covit, Romans 7. 7. Thus much touching the objections of the
Pelagians, next in answer to the Popish objections.

Obj. The objection which the Papists make touching concupisence is, viz. That
it is taken away by Baptism, to whom I return this answer, viz.

Ans. The subjects which they and many other Societies admit Popish objections
touching concupisence answered.
to Baptism, are not at that time of their admittance, fit members, or
subjects to receive that Sacrament of initiation into the Church of Christ,
which in its due place I shall fully prove. But as to such persons as are meet
Members, (and have also received it according to the direction, and institution
of Christ, and his Apostles) I answer thus.

That original sin is not simply taken away in Baptism, but O^iginall sin
not taken away by Baptism.
only in respect of the guilt. It is taken away formally, but not materially.
There be two things to be considered in original sin, as first, the
disagreement, and repugnancy it has with the Law of God, and the guilt of the
punishment; the latter way, original Two things to be considered in original
^^^.
sin is remitted, and released in Baptism, it shall never be laid to the
charge of the truly faithful members of Christ's Church, as the Apostle says,
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, Romans 8. 33. but the other
remains still in Gods Children, as the Apostle Paul confesses of himself,
Romans 7. 23. I see another law in my members, rebelling against the law of my
mind, but yet though it remain, and have a being in the faithful, yet it
does not reign and exercise the power of an absolute Monarch, to make its will
their law. To which purpose the Apostle exhorts the Romans, that they would
not suffer sin to reign in their mortal bodies, to obey it in the lusts
thereof.

SECT. 6. The Virgin Mary borne in original sin.
Obj. YOu will surely confess that the Virgin Mary was borne without
original sin, it being for the honor of Christ?

Ans. The Apostle acquainteth us, that whatsoever the Law says, it says to
them that are under the Law, that every mouth may to stopped, and all the World
be culpable before God; but the Virgin Mary was under the Law, and blameable
as others were, and therefore guilty of original sin. She was also made
righteous by faith, for she called Christ her Savior, in her Song, Luke 1. 47.
the Apostle also says, that we were all the children of wrath, and if all,
then the Virgin Mary, and so borne in original sin; the Scriptures also
discovers diverse infirmities Diverse infirmities in the Virgin Mary.
in the Virigine Mary, as Luke 2. 48. in finding fault with Christ, whom she
had formerly acknowledged to be her Savior. 2. Her interrupting of Christ in
his Sermon, Mat. 12. 46. 3. In her prescribing a time for Christ to show a
Miracle, for which she procured a rebuke from him, Joh. 2. 2. upon which
reasons and testimonies of Scriptures, describing her infirmities, we infer;
that the Virgin Mary was conceived, and borne in original Christ only
exempted from original sin.
sin, as others are, and Christ only is exempted, of whom only the Apostle
says, He was in all things in like sort tempted, and yet without sin, Heb.
4. 15.

CHAP. XIII. Treats of the Popish distinction of Mortal and venial Sins.
SECT. 1.
Objection. THough concupisence be a corruption of our nature, yet it is but a
venial sin, or at the most partly mortal, and partly venial; for when our
desires are without reason, then it is a mortal sin, but when they are
reasonably required, it is but a venial sin?

Ans. The distinction of Mortal and venial Sins being understood in their
sense, that some sins (in the condition and qualities thereof) are mortal,
and some venial, is contrary to Scripture, which makes death the wages of
sin, Romans 6. 23. that is, of all. But to the faithful (it is true, through
Gods grace) Ho^ sin^ are venial and no^
all sins are venial, and shall never be laid to their charge, (and so no
concupisence is mortal;) otherwise, there can be no reasonable coviting of any
other man's things; for reason ^s grounded upon the Law of Nature, against which
is all concupisence: therefore the coveting of any thing which is our
neighbors (being a transgression of the Moral precept) is in its own nature
mortal.

SECT. 2. No worthiness to be attributed to our selves from any gift of Nature.
ANd if we rightly understand our selves, it is contrary to the nature of a
true Christian to justify, or vindicate himself in any thing that may tend to
his own glory and praise, by ascribing any worthiness to himself from any
gifts of Nature that is resident in him, or to endeavor to lessen, or
mittigate a sin, but rather to acknowledge himself to be altogether sinful
and unclean, which was the qualities of all the holy men of God, as the
Scriptures does plentifully express; for if we did but truly conceive what
sin is, there is none which we ought to esteem little or venial, unless it
be comparatively, seeing there is none so small but that without repentance is
able to sink the soul to eternal The danger of the smallest sin
damnation, who will think that a slight wound which gives a sudden inlet to
death; but should we grant this error, of all other sins they are most
dangerous, both for their frequency and security, the one increasing them to a
large heap, and the other so covering them that we see not how they wrong us;
so as we see the rain that falls in smallest drops moystens the earth, and
makes it more slimy and dirty then a shower which descends violently, which
washes away but sinketh not in. And as the smallest letters are more hartfull
to the sight, then they that are written with a text pen; so those sins which
are esteemed as small and venial, and we take no notice of, may soonest prove
our fatal overthrow.

And for the better progress in this question, we will observe Three degrees
in the nature of sin.
the degrees which are to be considered in the nature of sin, which are
three, viz. Appetitus, assentio, and actio. The appetite, or first desire. 2.
The perfect assent. 3. The action.

Now the very appetite is restrained in the Moral precept, although it does
not yield to the desire, if it do but tickle us with a delight, it is
sufficient to make us guilty; for our Savior says that, He that looks on a
woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart,
Mat. 28. where if we observe, our Savior means not in these words, he that
looks, and lusts, but he that looks ( to) lust; that is, he that looks
upon a woman as an object to kindle, or set an edge to his lust, or to give way
unto it in the least degree; which instance suiteth with the first degree of
sin, which is the appetite, and not within All concupisence forbidden.
the bounds of consent, or action. By which it is evident, that all
concupisence is forbidden, yea that which has the least inclination of the
will though no consent be given.

SECT. 3. Concupisence of two sorts, good and bad.
Obi. ARe those thoughts which are in the mind without any consent of the will
to be counted as sin before God?

Ans. We are to distinguish betwixt concupisence and desire, Good concupisence
of two sorts.
which is either good concupisence, or bad; the good is of two sorts, either
perfectly good, or imperfectly good, such as is now in man, mixed with many
infirmities and imperfections, which is either natural in man, as the coveting
and desiring of meat and drink, and other things necessary for the use of man,
or supernaturally wrought in man by grace, as is the love and desire of virtue;
or it is mixed, partly natural, and partly supernatural; as Matrimonial
concupisence for procreation, which has both a natural cause or being, and is
likewise guided by grace unto a right end, and none of these kinds of good and
commendable concupisence is sin.

Evil concupisence is of three sorts; 1. As Idle, roving, and Evil
concupisence of three sorts.
impertinent thoughts, which the mind may easily reject. 2. Violent
cogitations, which sticks more closely and nearely, as the immoderate desire
of meat and drink, and such things as belong to the necessity of nature, as
sumptuous apparel, and the like. 3. There are filthy and unclean
cogitations, as lasciviousness, envy, vainglory, and the like.

The first of these may be compared to thin Clay that sticks or cleaves not;
the second to tough Clay, that sticks fast; and the third to unclean and
stinking Mire and Mud: ( otherwise) the first motion is not voluntary, (as a
certain preparation of the affection;) the second is with the will, (but the
same not obstinate,) as when it comes to ones mind to revenge himself when
he is hurt; but the third kind is so outrageous that it will not be ruled by
reason, as when a man is carried to revenge himself without measure. The first
of these can be no more ruled by reason, then such things as happens to the
body; as when one yauneth when he sees another yaune, or suddenly winketh,
when one puts their finger toward another eye, etc.

SECT. 4.
Obj. ARe these idle wanderings (being without respect to any certain object)
sin, and so forbidden in the Moral precept, seeing the Moral precept aymeth
at a certain object, as thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, etc.

Ans. If we do reject these thoughts at the very first moving of them; and yet
if so, they carry some stain and guilt in them, in regard children which have
no such evil thoughts, yet are not clean before God, being conceived and
borne in sin, as in Psalm. 51. 5. and which is also most evidently confirmed by
the death of Infants, (as I have formerly showed,) sin being the cause of death.

Therefore the best solution is, that those cogitations (which do vanish
before the mind be affected;) be not comprehended in the precept as actual
sins, until the will of man in some degree give consent, till then sin is
only in the conception, but not in the birth, as the Apostle James says, When
lust has conceived it brings forth sin, Jam. 1. 15. but as it is the first
fruit of original sin, together with that native corruption, they are
contrary to the precept, for the Moral Law being grounded upon the Law of
Nature, which was perfect in man by creation before his fall, and from which
perfection original sin being a defect. It may well be concluded, that
though they do not come to reckoning before God, if they presently vanish
(before the will and affection be inclined unto them) yet do they show the
corruption of our nature; and although they break not into a a flame, yet they
are sparks that fly upward; but if those sparks do not break into a flame,
they shall never burn us, nor be laid unto our judgment: for if the will
assent not, concupiscence shall never hurt. But this is through Gods mere
mercy, for otherwise Original sin enough to condemn us.
this very original corruption is enough to condemn us. And thus I have
showed the distinction of sins venial, and yet not venial in their proper
nature, in respect of their greatness and smalnesse, but not to be permitted,
for these reasons.

SECT. 5. Why original corruption is not to be permitted.
1 IN respect of the nature of sin, which of it self deserves death, Romans
6. 23. The wages of sin is death, as also in that it is a transgression of
the Law, 1 John 3. 4. and every transgression of the Law is under the Curse,
Gal. 3. 10. 2. In respect of the infinite Majesty of God, who to offend can be
no venial sin of it self, considering his perfect and absolute
righteousness, which cannot abide the least blemish and imperfection.
Therefore in regard of the perfect righteousness, and infinite Majesty of God,
no sin against him can be venial, as in the sudden motion and passion of
anger, even when it is sudden and unadvised; yea, though there be no further
purpose or intendment of hurt, is notwithstanding guilty of judgment, Matthew.
5. 22.

So then we admit of a distinction of mortal and venial sins, The
distinct^o^ of mortal and venial sins.
if it be understood not of the nature of sin, but of the qualities of the
persons: for unto them that believe, all sins are venial and pardonable,
through the mercy of God, Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus; but to the wicked and unbelievers, all their sins are
mortal, Romans 6. 23. to them the stipend and wages of sin is death.

Now if we trace this original and spaune of sin unto the birth, we shall
find it in action, which action proceeds from the conception of the will, to
enjoy the thing desired, as the Apostle James says, When lust has conceived,
it brings forth sin, Jam. 1. 15.

SECT. 6. Five things to be considered in every sinful act.
ANd in every sinful act there are five things to be considered, as Actus,
Peccati, Culpa, Macula, Reatus, Poena. 1. The very act of sin. 2. the fault. 3.
the blot. 4. the guilt. and 5. the punishment.

1. The act of sin, as it is an act, is not always evil: for, there Sin as it
is an act, is not always evil.
is the same act in substance, in sin, as in doing that which is honest, as in
adultery, there is the like external act, as in lawful Matrimony; so that
only the fault, which is in respect of the circumstances (which are not
observed) make the difference.

2. The second thing to be considered is, Culpa, the faultiness of the action,
which is committed by the not due observing of the Circumstances, which are
these, First, Quid, what it is that he Nine things to be considered in the
faultiness of an action.
does, whether it be lawful, or not lawful, honest or not honest. 2. quantum,
the quantity must be considered; as one may steal much or little, or rail
sparingly, or with a full mouth. 3. quoties, how often; for he that commits
the same sin often, is more blameable then he that does it seldom. 4.
qualiter, after what manner, whether willingly or unwillingly, whether he be
quick or slow in doing of it. 5. Cum quo, with what instrument; as he that
smites with a switch, is not equal with him that strikes with a sword. 6.
Cum quem, with whom the sin is committed; as fornication betwixt them that
are married, is more heinous then betwixt single persons. 7. Vbi, where, in
what place it is committed; for it is more heinous to steal in a Church, or
Congregation of Gods people, then in another place. 8. quando, when, for it is
more heinous to steal in time of Divine worship, then at other times. 9. Ad
quid, to what end; for the end makes a thing of it self lawful or unlawful.

Now to make an action lawful or good, all these things must concur; but it
is enough to make it evil, if it fail in any of them; and this faultiness of
the action, passes with the action it self, which is the subject thereof, and
remains not.

3. There is left behind a macula, a certain stain or blot in the Soul,
whereby the Image of God is deformed.

4. Besides this stain, there is a guiltiness of punishment.

5. The punishment it self, which is Hell Fire, without true repentance.

SECT. 7.
Object. Whether do we sin of necessity, or of a voluntary disposition: for
if it be of necessity, it cease to be sin, and if it be voluntary, it may be
avoided.

Answ. Sin is both of necessity and voluntary: First, it is of Sin is both of
necessity and voluntary.
necessity in respect of Adams fall, by which we became Bondslaves to sin and
Satan. Secondly, in that we have originally a seed of that defect in us
procured by him, and so can will nothing but that which is evil; that as the
Apostle says, We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing of our
selves, as of our selves, 2 Cor. 3. 5. it being proper to God alone to work in
us both to will and to do of his good pleasure.

Object. The Apostle says, he would that which was good, though he could not
accomplish it, Romans 7. 15. Therefore man of himself can will that which is
good.

Ans. The Apostle in that place speaks not of the Natural man, but of the
regenerate; for he adds, I am delighted in the M^n corrupt both in soul and
body.
Law according to the inward man; but (says he) I see another law in my
members, resisting the law of my mind, Romans 7. 22. And it will fully appear
that we are corrupt in both parts, viz. in soul and body: For that which is
born of the flesh is flesh, John 3. 6. And, to be carnally minded i^ death,
Romans 8. 6. And therefore in vain do we seek in man either integrity,
understanding, or the fear of God: For the will is so fast bound by the
slavery of sin, that it cannot move it self to that which is good, and much
less apply it self thereunto. For such a motion is only a beginning of
turning unto God, which is wholly attributed to the grace of God in Scripture;
as in Jer. 31. 18. where Ephraim is said to desire of God, to turn him that he
might be turned. And the Spouse in the Canticles, Draw me, and I will run after
thee, with diverse other The effects of Nature and Grace.
places of Scripture which does testify the same. It is therefore proper to
Nature to will that which is evil, and to Grace that which is good, whereupon
it follows that men are drawn unto evil by necessity of will, and yet they
are not constrained to commit it. Again, on the other side it comes to pass
through the the infinite goodness of God, that godly men cannot do evil
through any forceable compulsion; for otherwise the mind of man in its own
nature is void of all grace, for which cause it is said that he that has begun
a good work in us will also finish it, Phil. 1. 6. and 2. 13. as also, It is
God that works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure. The Lord
also speaking by his Prophet, says, that he will give his people a new heart,
and take from them their stony heart, and also put his Spirit in the midst of
them, and make them walk in his Commandments, Ezec. 35. 26. by which it
appears, that all the inclinations to goodness proceed only from Gods Spirit
moving us thereunto, secretly saying, This is the way, follow it.

Grace then goes before every good work, it does not follow after, but so that
will, and desire does accompany it, not lead it; For the will does work by
grace, the Lord preventing him that is unwilling that he may be more willing,
and that he may not will in vain, so that there can no will be found which is
inclining to good save in the elect, but the cause of election must be sought
without men; whereby it is proved, that man of himself has not a right will,
but that it flows from the same good Man of himself has not a right will.
pleasure whereby he was elected before the Creation of the world; as also that
the beginning of willing, and doing well, proceeds from faith, and faith is
the gift of God; it must needs then follow, that it is of mere grace, when we
begin to will that which is good, being inclined and bent naturally to evil.
As also by the instance of David, who desired the Lord, to create in him a new
heart, Psalm. 51. 12. yea we are as prone thereunto, as the sparks to fly
upward.

SECT. 8. The Pelagians twofold question answered.
THe will therefore is the Patient, and not the Agent, and therefore to resolve
the Pelagians twofold doubt, viz. whether we sin willingly being made
bondslaves to Satan; and whether in evil works we ought to attribute any
thing unto God; we thus answer.

As touching the first we answer, that men's wills may be compared to an Horse
that waits his Masters pleasure, and God and the Devil may be compared to
Hors^-men, or Riders, but if the Devil possess it he carries it headlong
unto death, as it were an Hunter over hedge and ditch; as we may instance in
that example of Job, upon whom it was the Lords pleasure to exercise by
calamity the patience of his servant, but contrariwise Satan endeavors to
drive him into despair. Again, the Caldeans study contrary unto equity, to get
gain by that which was another man's, in which passage one and the same act may
be ascribed unto God, Satan, and Man, but the variety in the manner and end
makes the justice of God appear without any fault; and in the other the
wickedness of Satan and Man is discovered, to their perpetual shame and
reproach.

Obi. If it be not in the power of a Sinner to obey, exhortations should be
made in vain, admonitions should be superfluous, and reprehensions rediculous.

Ans. Our Savior says, that without him we can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. and
yet notwithstanding he does nevertheless reprove those that did evil without
him; as we may see in his reproves which he uttered against Corazin and
Bethsaida, Mat. 11. 21. as also to the Scribes and Pharisees, and others of the
Jews, ver. 23. terming them Vipers, Mat. 12. 34. children of the Devil, Joh.
8. 44. by reason of their unclean thoughts, and ungodly actions, and yet these
sinned not of absolute necessity, as we may instance in Phara^h, Exodus 7. 22.
where it is said, that Pharaoh did not hearken to Moses as the Lord had said.

From which instance we may collect, that it was necessary that Pharaoh should
not have harkened to Moses, because the Lord had foretold so much, who cannot
be deceived, but Pharaoh was not forced or compelled thereunto.

SECT. 9. Two sorts of necessity.
THere are two sorts of necessity, viz. a violent necessity which forces and
compels, and there is a conditional necessity, when a thing is said to be
necessary, another thing presupposed. So Pharaohs disobedience and obstinacy
was the second way necessary upon the proposal of Gods presience, but the
first way it was not necessary.

The first of these is coactive, the second is voluntary; the first neither
justifies a man if he do well, being forced thereunto, nor condemns him if
he do evil, but the second has place in both; for by it the righteous have
praise (whose obedience in respect of Gods ordinance is necessary, and
infallable;) and contrariwise the wicked are condemned, who sin willingly,
notwithstanding (Gods presience considered) in some sort, it is also necessary.
As our Savior said concerning Judas, It is necessary that offenses should
come, but woe be to him by whom they come, Mat. 18. 7. It was necessary that
Christ should suffer, being the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God,
Act. 2. 23. but Judas did not know that he was appointed to be the man that
should act that treason, but he did it voluntarily, out of his covetous
affection to money, as does evidently appear by his own expressions, What
will ye give me and I will betray him unto you, Mat. 26. 14.

Again, it was necessary that the Prophets and Wise men should be killed,
crucified, scurged, and persecuted by the Jews, as Christ had foretold, Mat.
23. 34. but nevertheless the Jews did it out of a voluntary hatred they had
to Christ, and his Gospel, as plainly appears in Scripture.

CHAP. XIIII. Treats of the power of a regenerate man in point of sinning.
SECT. 1.
Objection. TOuching which the Papists affirm, that the precepts and
Commandments of God to a man regenerate, justified, and in the state of grace,
are not impossible to be kept.

Ans. In answer to which it is requisite, first to lay open the point touching
the extent of the truth therein contained, and then to answer to their
objections.

1. We are to consider a fourfold state and condition of man; A fourfold
estate and condition of man.
first as he was created in a perfect state before his fall, when it was
possible for man to have kept the Law, and have conformed himself in perfect
obedience to the will of his Creator.

2. But man considered in his corrupt estate, before he be regenerated and
restored, can by no means keep the Law, as the Prophet says, Can the
Black-a-moore change his hew, or the Leopard his spots, Jer. 13. 23. so the
Apostle, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23. And we are not able of
our selves to think any thing as of our selves, 2 Cor. 3. 5.

3. In the restored estate of man by Regeneration and new Birth the Law is
partly possible to be kept, and partly impossible. It is possible two ways; 1.
By the imputation of the righteousness of Christ, who has fulfilled the Law
for us, for he needed not to have fulfilled it for himself, as he suffered not
for himself, for he was perfectly holy and just even from his conception, by
the communication of the Divine Justice, for the Apostle says, Romans 10. 4.
Christ is the end of the Law, that is, the fulfilling of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes. 2. The Law is possible to be kept
of the regenerate in respect of the incoation, or beginning of obedience
internal, and external, as the Apostle says, This is the love of God, that
we keep his Commandments, 1 John 5. 3. for he which is without this being of
righteousness (that is, without regeneration) and says he knows, and
serves God, he is a liar, etc.

SECT. 2. The power of Regeneration.
NOw this regeneration, and incoate obedience being wrought in the faithful by
the Spirit of God, though it do not wholly extirpate and root out sin, yet
it keeps it so under that it reigns not in them, and does so revive them
that they labor to resist sin, and to live according to the Law of God;
which obedience though it be (in it self) imperfect, yet it is accepted of God
by faith in Christ, in whose perfect righteousness^ whatsoever is imperfect in
our obedience is perfected, and our imperfections pardoned.

Yet even in those regenerate ones the Law is impossible to be The Law
impossible to be kept of the regenerate in respect of that perfect on which God
requires.
kept, in respect of that perfection which God requires; and therefore the
Prophet David says, Psalm. 143. 5. Enter not into judgment with thy servant,
for in thy sight shall none living be justified; the faithful then, do both
imperfectly keep the Law, committing many things against it. 2. In those things
wherein they do keep the Law. They have some imperfection as the Prophet
Isaiah says, Chap. 64. 6. All our righteousness are as a stained clout, with
Deuteronomy. 27. 16. Mat. 5. 21, 22. 28. Act. 15. 10. Romans 7. 8. 24. 25. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
Jam. 2. 20.

But there is great difference betwixt the regenerate, and the The difference
betwixt the ^^ns of the regenerate and the unregenerate^.
unregenerate, even when they sin; 1. In that Gods purpose stands to save the
Elect, though they sometimes slip, but so it is not with the other. 2. Their
repentance in the end is cortaine, so it is not in the unregenerate. 3. Even in
the sins of the regenerate, there yet remains some seed of faith, which is
not utterly extinguished, nor they wholly given over; but the wicked, and
unregenerate, are wholly sold over unto sin, and their very conscience is
polluted, and defiled with it. 4. The glorious state of the Saints in the next
life, their obedience shall be perfect, and they shall be wholly conformable to
the Will of God, and then we shall be just, not only by the imputative Justice
of Christ, but by a proper essential Justice, and then we shall fully be made
like unto the Image of Christ, as the Apostle says, Romans 8. 29. Those which he
knew before, he also predestined to be made like the Image of his Son.

SECT. 3.
Obj. IN the next place their Objections shall be cited, and answered in order,
their first objection being this, viz. The works of the Spirit are perfect, but
good works in the regenerate are works of the Spirit, ergo they are perfect.

Ans. This Argument proceeds from that which is simpliciter (simply and
absolutely of the Spirit) to that which Secundum quid, after a sort is of the
Spirit. The works of the faithful are not absolutely the works of the
Spirit, but they be so the works of the Spirit as they be also our works, so
they are pure, as they proceed of the Spirit; but impure, and imperfect as they
be our works.

Obj. They which are conformable to Christ have perfect works, but the
faithful are conformable in this life to the Image of Christ. Ergo.

Ans. The proposition is only true, of those which are perfectly conformable,
but so are not the faithful in this life, but only in part, as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Now I know in part, etc. And as our knowledge, so our
obedience, both imperfect.

Obj. There is no condemnation to the faithful, Romans 8. 1. therefore their
works are perfect.

Ans. The argument follows not, for the privilege of the faithful, and
their exemption from condemnation, depends not upon the perfection of their
works, but upon the perfection of Christ's righteousness, imputed to them by
faith.

Obi. Christ at his coming shall render to every man according to his works,
but it stands not with Gods Justice to give a perfect reward unto imperfect
works; therefore the works of the regenerate, because they shall be perfectly
rewarded are perfect works.

Ans. The obedience of the faithful shall be perfectly rewarded, not according
to the Law of works, but according to the Law of faith, whereby the
righteousness of Christ is imprinted, and rewarded in them, being theirs as
fully, as if they were their own. 2. Christ shall also judge according to
their works, not as causes of their reward, but as testimonies, and lively
arguments of their faith.

SECT. 4.
Obj. THe Scriptures ascribes perfection to the works of the Saints, as it is
said of Noah, Genesis 6. 9. that he was a just man, and a perfect man in his time.
Hezekiah also says, I have walked before thee with a perfect heart, 2 King.
20. 3.

Ans. These and the like sayings must be understood of the perfection of the
parts of obedience, not of the degrees of perfection; that is, the faithful
do even exercise their obedience in every part of the Law, but not in a
perfect degree, or measure. 2. They are said to be perfect only in comparison
of such as are weak, and imperfect. 3. Their sincerity and perfection is
understood, as being opposite to dissimulation and hypocrisy, that their
hearts were perfect toward the Lord, that is, unfainedly, without
dissimulation, in which sense the Prophet David says, Judge me according to my
innocence, etc. Psalm. 7. 8.

Obi. The Apostle says, Whosoever is borne of God sins not, 1 John 3. 9.
The faithful being borne of God cannot sin.

Ans. The Apostle in that place does not understand the dwelling of sin, but
the reigning of sin, for otherwise he should be contrary to himself, who had
said before, Chap. 1. 8. If we say we have not sin we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us. So they which are borne of God sin not; that is, sin
though it remain in them, it reigns not in them, as the Apostle says,
Though we walk in the flesh, we are not after the flesh, 2 Cor. 10. 3. neither
was the Law given to justify men thereby, for the Apostle says, That by the
deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justifled in his sight, for by the knowledge
of the Law comes the knowledge of sin, Romans 3. 20. this then is the end and
use of the Law, viz. 1. It shows what God is, viz. one that loves Justice,
and hates iniquity. 2. It is a glass, wherein we may see that Image after
which man was at the first created, which now is defaced in him by sin. 3. It
is a rule, and line, after the which we should square our lives and actions. 4.
It shows the corruption of our natures. and so it is a The end and use of the
Law
Schoolmasters to bring us unto Christ. So that this is the profit of the Law;
First, to convince a man of his infirmities. 2. To drive him to seek the
medicine of grace in Christ.


CHAP. XV. Treats of the Popes dispensing with the Moral Law.
SECT. 1.
ANother of the Popish Tenants is, That the Moral Law, or any precept thereof
may be by humane authority dispensed withal, to which purpose the Popes
Cannonists do give to their Terreine god, an infinite and unreasonable power,
these being their conclusions, viz. Papa potest dispensare contra jus divinum.
The Pope may dispense against the Law of God. 2. Contra jus Naturae, Against
the Law of Nature. 3. Contra novum Testamentum, Against the New Testament. 4.
Contra Apostolum, Against the Apostles. 5. Papa potest dispensare de omnibus
preceptis veteris and novi Testamenti. The Pope may dispense with all the
precepts of the Old and New Testament, and that for these reasons following,
each of which shall receive its answer; their first reason being this, viz.

SECT. 2.
Obi. AS amongst men, the Lawgiver may dispense with his Law, so God that gave
the Moral Law, is therefore above the Law, and may dispense with it. And if
God may dispense, then the (...) of the Church may certainly dispense, because
they are in (...) ^^ead.

Ans. 1. As to that concerning humane Laws, which tend to The Law*giver cannot
dispense in human Laws as to over* throw them.
the common good, the preservation of the Public State, the maintenance of
peace and justice, the Lawgivers cannot so dispense as to overthrow the end
of those Laws, (as it shall be lawful to disturb the public State, or the
like;) for this were to evert the very scope and end of the Law. But yet in
particular cases they may dispense, as that where an order is that every one
shall watch, which is intended for the good of a City, yet some may be
dispensed withal, and exempted from watching, who may more necessarily be
employed for the common good; for here, although the letter of the Law be not
precisely kept, yet the intention of the Lawmakers is observed, which is to
seek, and procure the common good. So likewise universally, the Lord neither
will, nor can dispense against his Law, as to make it lawful to have other
gods, to take Gods name in vain, and the like; for this were for God to deny
himself to be just, 2 Timothy 2. 13. and to make it lawful in general to violate
the precepts of the first and second Table, were to deny his own Justice, and
so consequently to deny himself, for God is most true, yea Justice it self, and
the Law is a perfect rule of justice, yet in the particular determinations
Exodus 3. 22. and 22. 35, 36.
of the Law, the Lord does dispense; as with Abraham sacrificing of his Son,
Genesis 2. 2. the Israelites in robbing of the Egyptians, the fornication of
Hosea the Prophet, Hosea 1. 2.

For the Will of God which is most just, and the right (which he has in the
lives, bodies, and goods of men) makes these things lawful, (being done by
the Commandment of God) which otherwise would be unlawful; for a man may use
his Ox, or his Ass at his pleasure (because they are ordained for his use) so
likewise may the Lord do with men, take away their lives at his pleasure, and
that by a double right; both because man by his sin has deserved to dye. 2. As
he is his Creator, and may use the creature at his pleasure, or as may best
serve to his glory. And as man may use his own goods, and that which is lent
unto him precario, freely and frankly, during the pleasure of the lender:
(which when he will he may require again) so the earth being the Lords, and
the fullness thereof, which he (as it were) lend^th to man so long as it
pleases him. He may justly at his pleasure, transfer things from one to
another, and like as Matrimony makes carnal copulation lawful, so the Lord
may by his Commandment bring, and supply the like bond as Matrimony is, as in
the instance of the Prophet before mentioned, when the Lord bid him take unto
him a Wife of fornication, the Commandment of God made that lawful, which
otherwise was unlawful, and so in the other examples.

But albeit, God can make that which seems unjust to be lawful and just, yet
can he not make a just, and a good act, to be evil and wicked, as that he
which worshippeth God aright does evil, or such like; and the reason is,
because God by this means, should be contrary to himself, in commanding one so
to worship him, and yet counting him for so worshipping him to do evil.
Again, it is impossible for God to do that which he cannot will; now the Lord
wills no evil to be done, therefore he cannot make that which is good to be
evil, because he cannot deny himself, who is only good.

SECT. 3. A difference betwixt the precepts of the first and second Table.
THere is also a difference to be made betwixt the precepts of the first and
second Table. God does dispense with the second, which he referred to the good
of our neighbor, (when he sees it more to make for his own glory, which is
the true end and scope of the first and second Table;) as when God commands
to dishonor Parents, rather then to dishonor him; and bids them kill; and
so in the rest. But with the precepts of the first Table he dispenceth not,
because they are immediately referred to his own glory, for otherwise it were
to consent to dishonor himself; and thus much for the answer of the first part
of the Argument.

2. It follows not (if God can dispense) that therefore the Though God can
dispense the Prelates cann^^*
Prelates and the Church may. 1. Because the dispensation against a Law, must
be by as great authority as the Law was first made by. But the Moral Law
(grounded upon the Law of Nature,) was founded by the Author and Creator of
Nature, and therefore by him only, and not by any else may it be dispensed
with. 2. As in natural effect^ ordinarily there must go before an
extraordinary cause, a natural cause; as a thing cannot be made hot, unless
fire or some other efficient cause of heat be put unto it; so that the Pope
himself cannot command a thing to be ho^, but by such efficient cause of heat.
Yet the Lord without such ^ediate and ^rdinary mean^s, can make a thing hot by
his infinite power, supplying that cause himself.

So likewise in Spiritual actions, the Lord may supply that which makes the
thing lawful, which man cannot do without some external cause, or
circumstance do concur in making the act lawful. As to kill is an unlawful
act in it self, neither can the Pope, or any other man make it lawful to kill,
unless there be some cause that makes it lawful to kill; as when the party
commanded to be slain deserves to dye. But God (to whom all men are debtors,
and who is the Lord of every man's life, may command to kill without any
injustice, although there be no such apparent cause or circumstance, which
should make that act lawful.

SECT. 4.
Obj. But they further object thus: To restore that which is committed to a
man's trust is a natural duty; yet this is dispensed with, when as a man
refuses to restore to a Madman his sword or weapon, which he gave one to
keep; so the Magistrat^ ordinarily dispenceth with that precept, Thou shall not
kill, when he commands Malefactors to be slain: So also the Maccabees
dispensed with the Sabbath, when they resolved to fight with their enemies on
the Sabbath day, 1 Mac. ^. Chap. As these precepts then were dispensed withal
by men, so may the rest.

Ans. For the first instance, there is in that particular case, no dispensation
against the Law of Nature, for then by such dispensations it would be made
lawful, not to restore that which is committed to trust, which cannot be made
lawful by any dispensation; for this were to cross and overthrow the Law of
Nature, but not to restore a sword to a furious man, is but a particular
interpretation of that general Law of Nature, wherein the in^ent of that Law
is kept, for it is agreeable to the Law of Nature, to render whatsoever
belongs unto another; and the reason thereof is, because it is just. So it is
lawful by the same Law, (notwithstanding) not to give unto a Madman his own
sword, because it is just. Also the meaning and reason of the Law is kept,
because the furious man would do some hurt with his weapon, and therefore to
administer occasion and instrument unto his rage, were unjust.

In the other two particulars, there is no dispensation, but an interpretation
rather, or declaration of the Law; as that it is no Murder when one is justly
slain. And in the other, that it is no breach of the Sabbath, when necessity
compels to break the rest thereof; but thus to dispense were a dispensation
to make it lawful to kill where one cannot justly be put to death, and to
work upon the Sabbath where there is no necessity. 2. Thus to dispense were to
make it lawful afterward, which was not before such a dispensation; but it was
always lawful for the Magistrate to put to death, and upon like necessity to
intermit and suspend the rest of the Sabbath. 3. Besides these interpretations
and declarations of these Laws, they are not devised by man, but warranted in
Scripture by the Lord himself, the Maker and Author of the Law, and therefore
they are not to be interposed by any humane authority.

CHAP. XVI. Tr^ateth of their opinions touching ^he Sabbath day, etc.
SECT. 1.
Objection. TO this particular they say; That the keeping of the Lords day, or
the first day of the week instead of the Jewish Sabbath, is not warranted by
Scripture, but only by tradition from the Apostles.

Ans. There are three most evident Texts of Scripture which does make appear,
that this change of the Sabbath began in the times of the Apostles, and so by
their Apostolic authority being thereto guided by the Spirit of God, is
warranted, and so declared, and testified in Scripture, Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16.
2. Revel. 1. 10. In the first of these Scriptures we have the exercises of
religion, preaching and administering of the Sacrament, which were peculiar to
the Sabbath, transferred to the first day of the week. In the second, a public
charitable collection for the poor, which was also used upon Sabbaths. And in
the third, the very name of the Lords day is set down.

SECT. 2.
2. ANd further, that this day was consecrated by Gods divine Authority, the
great works which he honored that day with, does show, as one has collected
from Scripture. As the Israelites passing through the red Sea, the Manna first
rayned upon the Israelites in the Desert, Christ was Baptized in Jordan, water
was turned into Wine in Cana of Galilee, wherein the Lord blessed the five
leaves wherewith he fed 5000. men, wherein he rose again from the dead,
entered into the house the doors being shut, and wherein the Holy Ghost
descended upon the Apostles.

3. This reason also may persuade it, because the Lords day is sanctified to
holy uses, as the Sabbath was to the Jews; but it belongs only to God to
sanctify by his Word, as the Apostle says, Every creature is sanctified by
the Word of God, and prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 5. therefore the Lords day must be
warranted by the Word, before it can be changed by the Word, there must be the
same authority in the alteration of it, as was in the first institution. The
Lords day then was not ordained by the ordinary authority of the Church, for
then the Church by the same authority might constitute another day if there
were cause, which cannot be admitted. The Apostolic Church according to the
liberty given them of Christ did make choice of the first day for the seven,
being specially directed thereunto by the Spirit of God, for the reasons*
abovesaid.

Obj. The Apostle reproves the Galathians for observing days and months, etc.

Ans. In that place the Apostle does not simply prohibit the observation of
days, but with an opinion of religion placed in the day, and necessity. It Is
true, the Jews kept their Sabbaths, as making the observation of the day a
part of Gods Worship; and they held it necessary to keep that day unchangeable,
as it was also The Lords day observed for decency and order, and in regard of
the Moral precept.
unto them a type and figure of their spiritual rest: but Christians now keep
not the Lords day in any of these respects, either as a day more holy in it
self then others, or of necessity to be kept, but only for order and decency
sake, because that it is meet that some certain day should be set apart for
the Worship of God, as also in regard of the Moral precept which is not
abolished, viz. the fourth Commandment.

SECT. 3. Against satisfaction for sins by a temporal punishment.
Obj. THe Papists are of opinion, that satisfaction may be given for sin by
temporal punishments, for proof hereof they instance in that passage of the
Levites, in slaying of their Brethren at the command of Moses, Exodus 32. 28.
from which punishment inflicted by the Levites upon the Idolaters, the Lord
(say they) was well pleased.

Ans. We must not think that Gods wrath was thereby satisfied, for God was
appeased before by the prayer of Moses, ver. 19. neither was it likely, that
the punishment of a few, could satisfy for the sins of the whole Host, that
the death of three thousand, should make amens for the sins of sixty thousand;
and besides, one man's punishment cannot satisfy for the sins of another, no
more then one man's faith can save another. But the Prophet says, the just
shall live by his faith, viz. his own faith, not another man's faith; ergo As
also in that the Scriptures does positively set down and declare, that the
soul that sins shall dye. Again, that which God forgiveth he perfectly
pardons, Jer. 31. 34. I will forgive their sins, and remember their
iniquities no more, with Ezekiel. 18. 22. His transgressions shall be mentioned no
more unto him. But if the punishment of sin should be reserved, the fall being
pardoned; sin shall be remembered after forgiveness, which is contrary to those
Scriptures I have named.

Obi Adam and Eve had their sins forgiven them upon the promise of the Messiah,
yet they both received punishment, Numb. 14. 20. God at Moses request forgave
the sins of the murmurers, yet all their carcasses fell in the wilderness.

Ans. That punishment inflicted upon them was not a satisfaction for their sins
past, which was already upon their repentance remitted unto them, wherefore
those chastisements which folfowed Corrections many times rather for the
examples of others then for the punishment of sin.
after remission of sins, (as in the other example given in instance) were
rather correction for their own emendations, or examples of others, then
punishments for sin; for if sin should be directly punished, it should never
have temporal but eternal punishment. Therefore when the sin is pardoned, it
is not the punishment of sin, but a certain admonition, for the Lord thinks
good to chastise those which have offended (though their sins be forgiven) for
these causes.

1. That they may be thoroughly humbled, and take heed that they commit not the
like again. And therefore David says, It was good for me that I was
afflicted. 2. For the example of others, that they likewise may be warned that
they offend not in the like. As the correction of Simeon and Levi was for the
admonition of their brethren, and posterity. 3. That men feeling the Justice of
God in their due correction, may fly unto Gods mercy, and the promises of God
in Christ. As Adam when he received the sentence of death for his
transgression, had also the promise of the Messiah given him.

SECT. 4. Why God punished the Creatures which had not offended.
Obj. HOw could it then stand with Gods Justice to punish the Creature for the
sin of Man, seeing they had not offended, as in the destruction of the old
world, wherein the Lord is said to destroy the Beasts of the fields, and the
Fowls of the Air, reserving only a few to preserve seed.

Ans. Seeing the Creatures were made for man's use, therefore when man was taken
away, there should be no further use of them. 2. Like as when the head is cut
off the members dye, so together with Man, the Creatures over which he had
power, are punished, not only he, but his; as we see in the like president of
Achan, and all that he had: and hereby the severity of Gods punishment
appears, as also the greatness of man's sin that brought destruction upon
many. As David^ sin in numbering of the people, did procure a punishment upon
the whole Land. 3. Because beastly men had abused the Creature to their beastly
pleasure, and riotous excess, it stood with Gods Justice to punish the
instrument with the principal; and though it pleased God to spare the Fish,
(in regard that man had not so much abused them, yet at other times, the Lord
threatened to take away the Fish of the Sea, Hos. 3. 4.

Obj. Seeing the Lord says (by his Prophets) that the Son shall not dye for
the Fathers iniquity, how stands it with the Justice of God, to visit the
iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children to the third and fourth Generation?
Exodus 34. 7.

Ans. By sin in that place is neither understood the act of sin, which cannot
be transmitted over unto another, but being a transitory thing rests in the
doer; neither the fault which goes with the act, nor the blot which is only in
the Soul of the offender or sinner, nor yet the guilt, for if children were
guilty of their Fathers sins, then for the same they should be everlastingly
punished, therefore by sin in that place, is meant the punishment of sin,
which is extended to their posterity.

SECT. 5.
Obj. THe contrary may be argued in these two respects; 1. In that it is to be
considered who are the Authors of the infliction, God or man; If by man the
punishment be imposed, it is in the loss only of temporal things, as of
possessions, privileges, honors, etc. for the transgressions of their
Parents; as by humane Laws, treason against the State or Commonwealth, is
punished with death in the Offender; and loss of honor and goods in their
posterities. But the punishment of death cannot be inflicted upon the children
for their fathers offense, as a rule is given in Deuteronomy. 24. 16. The Father shall
not be put to death for the Children, nor the Children for the Father.

2. If the punishment be inflicted of the Lord, it is either eternal or
temporal; now eternal punishment is laid upon none but the party that
sins, the soul that sins shall dye. If it be temporal, it either
consists in some temporal benefit, or of life. If the first, not only little
ones and infants, but even they which are of years, shall suffer for their
Fathers sins; as the Israelites did bear the iniquities of their Fathers forty
years in the Wilderness, and the Jews great and small, were afflicted in the
Babilonish Captivity. But where the punishment of temporal death is decreed by
the Lord, there only, the infants are punished for their Fathers sins, as the
children of the rebellious Corah, Dathan, and Abiram were swallowed up with
their Fathers; the greater sort also perished in that destruction, but then
they were such as consented thereunto. Achan also was punished with his Sons
and Daughters for the sacrilege by him committed, which was done for the
greater detestation of the fact, and the examples of others, these are the two
Arguments which the Popish Writers use for the vindicating of this their
assertion, which may be thus answered.

Ans. These two opinions will allow of two exceptions, 1. That they make
Infants liable to those sins of their Fathers, which the Lord says, he will
visit to the third and fourth generation; whereas those children which
continue like haters of God (as their Fathers were, and imitate their impiety*)
are only included in that combination, as appears by that clause incerted in
the second Commandment ( of them that hate me) again, when Infants are cut off
by death, their own original sin is a sufficient cause thereof, which
brings death upon them.

Secondly, they restrain this general speech, ( visiting the si^s The Lord
Judgments are not to be limited.
of the Fathers, etc. only unto tempo all punishment, whereas the Lords
Judgments are not to be limited to this, or that kind, but sometimes by
corporal death, sometime by other temporal punishments, he does visit the
iniquity of wicked Fathers upon their evil posterity; and as concerning the
third and fourth generation, there are four answers usually made to show the
equity, that the posterity of the wicked should be punished for their Fathers
sins.

1. Because God which gave life, may without any injustice The Lord which gave
life, may also require it again at his pleasure.
require it again; he does no wrong by slaying of any. 2. They do not so much
rue the sins of their Parents, as yield Natures debt, which God may exact,
when, and of whom he will, and how he pleases, as Josh. 7. 25. 26. 3. It must
be understood of temporal punishment, which may be inslicted for their Fathers
sins; but the best solution is, that God is said to show mercy to thousands of
them that love him, so that he is to visit the iniquities of them that hate
him.

SECT. 6.
Obj. THe wicked Children of godly Parents, are found to be respected for their
Fathers, as the Lord suffered the wicked Kings of Judah, to sit upon the Throne
for their Father David's sake.

Ans. It is not denied, but that God may bestow temporal blessings upon the
Children of the righteous, although they be wicked, but that is general or
particular; God sometimes is merciful, as he was to David's posterity, for some
reasons best known to himself, but this promise in general certainly holds
not, but where the children imitate their fathers piety.

Obj. If this should be meant of showing mercy to the virtuous seed, and
vengeance to the wicked race, they should be respected or punished for their
own piety or sin, and not for their parents.

Ans. The condition of them that love me, and of them that Sin punished in a
double respect.
hate me, is not understood of the particular, but of the exemplary virtues or
sins of the Children, where they imitate their Parents; and so they are both
their Parents, Origin, and exemple, in respect of the original, and example,
and the Childrens in imitation, so that mercy is extended to the righteous seed
of the Mercy extended in a double respect.
righteous, in a double respect, viz. both for their exemplary virtues of their
Fathers, whom they imitate; and of their own righteousness, and this without
limitation, even to a thousand generations, not that there shall be so many
generations in the world, but to show that Gods mercy shall never be drawn
dry. And so the wicked race of the ungodly is also punished in a double manner
for imitating their Fathers sins, which punishment extends not beyond four
generations, and for their own sins, which every one shall be judged for in
his own generation, and that for ever; so that the Son does not here bear
the Fathers iniquity, when he does not imitate his Fathers sin: Moses and
Ezekiel are here then reconciled, Ezekiel saying, the Son shall Mose^ and
Ezek^el reconciled.
not bear the iniquity of the Father, and Moses, that he will visit the
iniquity of the Fathers, etc. the first speaking of such as decline their
Parents evil way; and the other, of imitating their Fathers impieties.

CHAP. XVII. Treats of Popish Chrismes, or Ointments, and other Popish
trinkets, etc.
SECT. 1.
THe use of their superstitious Chrisme, they gather from Exodus 30. 29. where
the Lord commands Moses, to make the Oil of holy Ointment, which holy Oil
or Ointment (say they) is a Type and Figure of the spiritual Ointment, viz.
the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, which should be shed upon the faithful
under the Gospel.

Thi^ consecrating of their Chrisme mixed with Balm, to anoint their Bishops
and Priests, does fully declare them to be Priests of the Law, and not
Ministers of the Gospel; the consecrating of which Chrisme, and how they apply
it, I will also make known, that thereby their Idolatrous and Superstitious
folly, may be made more manifest.

Their Chrisme (says my Author) they consecrate in this manner, How they (...)
their (...).
1. The Miter'd Bishop muttereth certain Charms, and enchanted words over the
Chrisme, and then blows upon it. And after him comes there other twelve
Priests in their order, who breaths over the Chrisme; then the Bishop uses
certain exorcismes, with prayers, wherein he makes mention of Moses, Aaron,
David, the Prophets, Martyrs, etc. praying that this Chrisme, may have power to
confirm the like gifts as they had; then he puteth to a little Balm, and at
the last boweth himself unto it with these words: Ave sanctum Chrisma, All
hail holy Chrisme; the like do all the Priests in their order. Thus make they
an Idol of their Chrisme, which manner of consecration they never learned of
Christ nor his Apostles. For,

The Apostle shows what is the ointment and anointing of Christians, viz. Ye
have an ointment from him that is holy, 1 John 2. 20. the Anointing or Chrisme
which we receive from him dwells in us, and the same Chrisme or ointment
teaches us all things; we have therefore no Chrisme or ointment of Christ, but
the graces of his Spirit, which are bestowed upon the faithful; and the
Prophet David speaking of that ointment, says, Thy God has anointed thee with
the eyle of gladness above thy fellows, Psalm. 45. 7. this Ceremony therefore
of anointing being fulfilled in Christ, it savoureth strongly of Judisme, as
also to be wiser then Christ, who commands no such thing to be done. As also
his Apostles, who used no such Ceremony in the ordaining of Ministers.

SECT. 2. Of Popish Altars.
LIke unto their Chrisme, is their invention of Altars, and their anointing of
them, seeing the Altar in the Leviticall Law, was a Type and Figure of Christ,
and was only to continue until Christ, the true Sacrifice, should offer
himself upon the Altar of the Cross. It Is true, Altars were holy before Christ
came, who was promised by it, but after he entered into the most holy place, it
was repealed and rejected; it is therefore Judisme, to retain Altars still in
their Churches, the Primative times knowing no such Alters, neither have they
any color for their Altars out of that place, Heb. 13. 10. We have an Altar,
whereof they have no authority to eat which serve in the Tabernacle, etc.
which plate they allege for the maintenance of their Altars, for the Apostle
speaks there, of no material Altar, but of the death and passion of Christ,
as it follows, ver. 17. their imitating, therefore of Jacobs anointing Altars
as he did the Pillar, Genesis 28. 18. is superstitious, for the Ceremonies of the
Law, (which were but figures and shadows of things which were to come,) are
not meet ornaments for the Gospel, as their Washings, anoyntings, Sacrifices,
and their other rites, which as the Apostle says, were but shadows of things
to come, the body being of Christ, Col. 2. 17. the body then being come, what
needs the shadow?

Again, the same anointing that Christ was anointed with, his members also
receive; but that was a spiritual unction, Luke 4. 18. The Spirit of the Lord
is upon me, because he has anointed me; of which anointing the Apostle
speaks, You have an ointment from him that is holy, and ye have known all
things, 1 John 2. 20. but if Jacobs anointing must be a pattern, why do they
also sprinkle water which he did not; Jacob also used profane and common oil,
such as he carried for his journey, but their oil must be hallowed first, and
consecrated by their Priests.

SECT. 3. Of their use of Candles.
THe like Superstition is used by them in burning of Daylight, wherein they use
more Superstition then did the Jews in their Tabernacle, for they burned
Candles only in the night, Exodus 28. 21. bnt these set up Candles and Tapers by
day in their Churches, when as properly they are only to qualify the darkness
of the night, therefore as it is rediculous to burn daylight (as we say) by
setting up lighted Candles; so he is not to be thought well in his wits, who
offers the light of Candles for a gift to the Author and Giver of Light.
Again, the use of Candlesticks and Lamps, was to no other end then to give
light; and therefore at N^one-day when there is no use of Candlelight, to set
up Tapers and Candles is a superfluous and superstitious use.

Their places of Sanctuary, may also be put in the number of O^ their
Sanctuaries.
their Superstitions, by which the course of Justice is hindered, Malefactors
being thereby sheltered, and secured from the Magistrate, by the immunity and
privilege of the place, by whichalso, Servants are encouraged to be
contemptuous and disobedient to their Masters, finding succor elsewhere; as
also unthrifty and careless Debtors, by which devise will seek to defraud
their Creditors, and therefore they err exceedingly, to set up their
Sanctuary-places to all kind of Malifactors.

The like Superslition is also used in their Pilgrimages, which Of their
Pilgrimage.
they observe in imitation of Abraham, who left his fathers house to travel,
whereas it is evident that Abraham did not do it out of an unconstant mind to
change Countries, nor of a thirsting desire to see strange fashions, and learn
curious Arts; nor yet out of a coveteous mind to enrich himself, as Merchants
use; nor yet of a superstitious devotion to visit the Sepulchers of holy men,
and to go in Pilgrimage to holy places, but he traveled to be out os the
perilous Society of Idolaters where he lived, as also with a purpose to draw
others to the knowledge of God.

SECT. 4. Of their Monks and Hermites.
IN the next place, may be brought in the profession of their Monkish,
Anchorish, and Hermites lives, which they would maintain from Lots living in a
Cave, Genesis 12. 38. but it appears by the example of Lot, who in a solitary
place committed sin, that it is not the place that mendeth men's manners; for
if the heart be wanting, the place helps not: Lot sinned in the Mountain,
Adam fell in Paradise, the Angels in Heaven; it is then but a mere fancy for
them to think that a Monks Coule, a Cloisters life, of a Hermites Weed, can
make a man more holy, but it is to be seared, that as Drunkenness, and Incense
were committed in the Cav^, so the Cloisters, and Seles of Popish Votaries are
not free from the like uncleanesse.

Obj. We read that holy men required often to desert (...), as Moses, Elias,
John Baptist, yea our Savior himself, who often went apart to pray.

Ans. That is no warrant for these Popish Professions aforementioned, for these
holy men did but for a time sequester* themselves, that thereby they might more
seriously be given to Prayer and Meditation, not leaving and renouncing their
callings, as the other superstitious people do.. Again, they also in time of
persecution fled into desert places, therein showing their humanity and
infirmity, least they might have been forced by persecution to deny the faith;
but these do place the greatest perfection (in this life) in that solitary
profession.

Like unto these, is their superstitious Washings; when they address Of their
superstitious Washings.
themselves to consecrate the Heast, and to approach unto the Altar, muttering
these words of the Prophet David, I will wash my hands in innocence, and so
will I compass thine Altar. But this superstitious washing does not justify
their Idolatrous service, who whilst they wash their hands, do profane
Christ's Supper, and take away the fruitful application and efficacy of his
death, by instituting a new Sacrifice. Therefore as Pilate washed his hands,
and yet delivered Christ, even to be Crucified, so they wash their hands, and
yet do crucify Christ daily in the Mass, in offering him up still in
Sacrifice.

SECT. 5. Of their Penance, and auricular Confession.
THeir Penance consists of these three particulars, viz. Contrition of the
heart, confession of the mouth, and satisfaction of the work; Now all these
may be in a reprobate, as in the example of Pharaoh, who confessed that he had
sinned; though it was no true confession, being forced thereunto by the
grievous plagues of Hail and Lightning that was upon him, and his people, Genesis
9. 27. for he simply confessed not his own sins, but now, that is, at this, or
that time I have sinned, in this, or that manner; yea, he also imitated
satisfaction, for he was also content to let the people go. As also in the
example of Judas, in (...) may find them all three; as contrition and
confession in these words, I am guilty in betraying the innocent blood; and
satisfaction, in the restoring of the money which be had taken to betr^y
Christ. But he wanted the fruit of true repentance, the peace of the
Conscience, and clearing thereof before God by remission of sins, as the
Apostle shows, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. As also 2 Cor. 7. 9. 11. where he shows, that
repentance to salvation, is wrought by godly sorrow not to be repented of; and
contrariwise, that the sorrow of the world worketh-death, viz. the counterfett
repentance before mentioned, as was evident in Judas.

But more fully to express their meaning in these three particulars, they
would have contrition to be just, due, full, and perfect, and such as shall
last to the end of a man's life, never expressing when a man may be out of doubt
that he has performed this contrition, but shall be in a continual suspense
of the pardon of his sins; they also appoint a full and perfect contrition of
heart, appointing no measure unto it, and so make it a part of satisfaction of
their sins, before God, appropriating that unto man, which is only proper to
God himself.

Auricular confession, is that which they would have made to their Priests, and
Shavelings, to whom (say they) we must reckon up all our sins, which can never
be, for as the Prophet says, Who can recite all his transgressions? As also,
Whom have I in heaven but thee, or in earth in comparison of thee. Again, I
said I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and so thou forgavest the iniquity
of my sin. As also in Psalm. 51. Against thee only have I sinned, etc

SECT. 6.
Obj. THe Apostle James does exhort us to confess our sins one to another,
etc.

Ans. In those words the Apostle does not mean that we should confess them to
Popish Shavelings, neither does he injoyne us to confess our sins one to
another, as though we might expect pardon from one another, but to the end that
we might pray one for another (as the ensuing words do make it appear) for
otherwise none can forgive sins but God only.

Satisfaction (say they) is made by tears, and prayers by tail, before this
or that stone, Taper, Lamp, Coules, with fasting, Sackcloth, Alms,
Pilgrimages, large Offerings, or the like; by which they think they pacify the
Lord, and pay that which is due to Justice, and make amends for their sins;
whereas Christ being our Advocate, Mediator, and Propisiation for our Sins, we
need no other recompense, or satisfaction, our sins being forgiven for his Name
fake, 1 John 2. 2. 12. seeing he is the Lamb of God, which takes away the
sins of the World, Joh. 1. 26. whose satisfaction being perfect and absolute,
is imputed to us by faith, which no man can obtain but he that is also
sanctified by the Spirit; so that the Apostle speaking of such like traditions,
Colos. 2. 20. says, That they all perish with the using, being the
commandments and doctrines of men, having only a show of Religion, and
humbleness of mind, but the body is of Christ, Col. 2. 17. which very words
of the Apostle like a Thunderboult, breaks in pieces all the traditions of
the Romish Church, as of Vows, Auricular Confession, Satisfaction, Purgatory,
Pardons, and whatsoever is by them added to the Word of God, which their Monks
define to be the Service of God, and by which they declare themselves to be
Anti-christians.

SECT. 7. Of speaking in an unknown Tongue, in the exercise of Divine Worship.
THe next thing that presents it self, is their reading the Scriptures in an
unknown Tongue, whereas in common reason, if a man make a Covenant, he ought
to know those things whereunto he binds himself; and therefore the Papists
err exceedingly, in that they suffer not the people to understand those things
which they bind them to keep, seeing neither the Scriptures are read, or the
Sacraments delivered in such a tongue, as they do understand; for the Apostle
says, If I come unto you with tongues, what shall I profit you? 1 Cor. 14. 6.
in which Chapter this error is so sufficiently confuted, as that it is
needless to speak any thing more to that purpose.

Another of their positions is, that faith is not to be kept with Heretics,
for so contrary to the safe conduct given by the Emperor to John Hus, and
Hierome of Prague, in the Counsel of Constans, where they condemned them to
death. For justifiing of which, they allege; That it belongs unto the
Magistrate to punish Heretics having them in their power; which Counsel and
Act, I hope, will shortly be returned upon themselves, as a just revenge from
God, for that their cruelty, and treachery, there being many presidents in
Scripture, to evidence against such dealing; as Abraham's Covenant by Oath, with
Abimelech, Jacob, with Laban, Joshua, with the Gibionites, all which were
strangers from the true Worship of God, and yet they kept their Covenants and
Oaths, which these Popelings refused to better Christians then themselves.

CHAP. XVIII. Treats of their Equivocation, and mental reservations, as also
of a sort of Lies, which they term Mendatia jocosi, Lies in merrement.
SECT. 1.
Cosen German to this, is their position lately taken up by those Jesuits, is
their Equivocation, and mental reservations, by which they think it lawful to
dissemble with the Magistrate, and to delude him with their ambiguous and
equivocating answers; as if they be asked, Whether in such a place, as beyond
the Seas (in France or Spain) at such a time, when, and where, it is certain
they were, they will answer, that they were not, (understanding to themselves,
secretly) to such an end, and purpose. The falsehood of those their deceitful
equivocations, does directly appear.

1. In thinking that if they hold the truth inwardly, in their heart, it were
no matter if it were not always in their mouths; but a right Christian is
known by this, He speaks the truth in his boart, Psalm. 15. 3. he having it
both in his heart, and mouth.

2. By this device of theirs, they invert the order and nature of things,
making falsehood truth, and truth falsehood, they turn affirmatives into
negatives; and contrariwise, as if it were all one to say, I was not in such a
place, (with a mental reservation) as to say I was, by which means they make
truth the patron of a lie.

3. If every man should take this licentious liberty, there should be no truth
amongst men, nor certainty of any thing, all testimonies given in Evidence, all
promises and contracts might justly be suspected, lest some secret condition or
reservation might be understood; for who can trust him at any time, that
thinks it is lawful to lie and dissemble sometimes; for whilst he applies
himself when he lies, aptly to the time, he is to be held uncertain, when he
speaks the truth.

4. Whereof came this doubting and dissembling, but of fear, and a bad
conscience; what needed the Martyrs by a plain confession of the truth, to
have adventured and lost their lives, if they had held such a dissimulation,
and equivocating lawful; if it were lawful to dissemble, why did not they?

SECT. 2.
Object. THey use this mental reservation for the maintenance of the Popes
Catholic Faith, and for the discovering of Heresy.

Ans. It were better that Heresy lay hid still, then that the verity should be
endangered, but by that which they call Heresy, we worship the God of our
Fathers, according to the direction of the Prophets, and holy men of God, and
they the Heretics themselves.

Obi. Our Savior himself made use of such dealing, as in Mark 5. 30. where he
made himself as ignorant who touched his clothes, whereas he knew it well
enough who touched them, as that they were touched. So Luke 24. 28. Christ made
as though he would have gone further, and yet did not. Likewise Joh. 7. 8. he
says to his brethren, Ye go up unto this feast, I will not yet go up
(whereas indeed he did go up,) meaning, not with them.

Ans. These instances are thus answered by a Father. viz. that the first two
instances are sigures of other things, as in that Christ made himself ignorant
who touched him, therein the Gentiles were prefigured, who were a people whom
the Lord says, ^e knew not. In the next Christ spoke no untruth, for indeed he
went further, even unto heaven. But we are not here put to such a straight to
sinde out a Mystery, our Savior in neither of those places dissembled; for
dissimulation is a hiding and clokeing of the truth, but in both these places,
Christ intended by this means to bring the truth to light. In the first, to
try out the faith of the Woman that touched him, and in the other to make
trial of the humanity and charity of his Disciples; as he did the like to
Philip, Joh. 6. 6. to prove him; and in the third our Savior speaks as he
meant, sor he said, he would not go up yet, or now, because his time was not
come. So Joh. 2. 4. though he would not show a Miracle, to turn water into
wine at his Mothers bidding, saying, My hour is not yet come; yet ere the
feast was finished he did it. They may as well say here, that Christ did
equivocate with his Mother; by this then that has been said, it does appear
what vain shifts the Papists are driven unto, and how in all their dealings
they hate the light, and as our Savior says, will not come to it least their
deeds should be reproved.

SECT. 3. Christians ought both to believe with the heart, and confess with
the mouth.
Obj. A Christian is only bound to speak the truth to his neighbor, but they
who are of another religion, are not our neighbors; Jehu feigned himself a
worshipper of Ball.

Ans. The Apostle requires both to believe with the heart, and consesse with
the tongue, Romans 10. 10. and Peter denied Christ only with his mouth, and not
with his heart, and yet he was feign to wash away his sins with tears; and
though some truths may be hid from him that is not initiated into the Mystery
of Religion, yet false things are not to be uttered; as for the example of
Jehu, he had not a right heart before God, and therefore his example in every
respect is not to be justified; the example also is much unlike, for Jehu did
not seek his own gain, or propounded his own safety, but did it in a zeal
to Gods glory; whereas the other tends merely to their own safety, and the
dishonor of God, spreading their Heresies by this means. Neither for the
matter did Jehu speak untruly, for indeed he had a great Sacrifice for Ball,
when he sacrificed his Priests, and in the rest he lied not, but used a kind of
outward dissimulation, which in Politic affairs (where the rule of charity is
not broken, and Gods glory sought) is not unlawful.

SECT. 4. Of their Mendatia jocosi, or lies in merrement.
Obj. THere is also another sort of lies, which are allowed by the Papists,
which they term Mendatia Jocosi, lies in merrement, and that they are
tolerable, tum ex necessitate, both for necessity sake, because they are made
for delight, and recreation, which is necessary, and, nulli nocent, for that
they hurt no body.

Ans. Though recreation and delight be necessary, which we grant; for as rest
is necessary for the body, so recreation is for the mind, yet there are other
delights and recreations which No necessity to tell lies.
may be used. There is no such necessity to jest and make sport with telling
of Lies; David could say, That the Laws of God was his delight. 2. Though none
other be hurt, yet the liar hurts his own Soul, because he speaks not the
truth; therefore this kind of lying is not tolerable. 3. There is diversity
of recreations, and also diversities of men, which are affected with such
delights and recreations, which may be reduced to these four sorts.

1. Our Savior needed no such delight or recreation at all, Four so^^s of
recreations belonging to four sorts of men.
who as he is often read to have wept, so is he never found to have laughed;
for whereas recreations and delights are to succor the infirmities of our
Nature, Christ being God, could rear himself up from all such mortal defect
as he would himself, without any help or supportation.

2. There is another sort of perfect men, who are given to heavenly Meditation,
and their delight and recreation is not in such jeastings and merrements, but
in holy exhortations, and ^haste communications.

3. There is another sort in another extreme, who are altogether earthly
minded; who when they will recreate themselves, turn them to their sports of
iniquity; as unto eating, drinking, wantonness, lasciviousness.

4. There are others which are in the middle betwixt these two, which turn
them to delights of a middle nature; which are neither spiritual, nor
altogether carnal, but honest and seemly No kind^ o^ lies tolerable.
recreations; but that no kind of Lies at all are tolerable, may appear by
these reasons ens^ing.

SECT. 5.
1. ONe reason may be taken from the nature of a Lie, the Law of God is truth,
and whatsoever differs from truth, does transgress the Law; therefore a Lie,
which is a swarving, and declining from the truth, transgresses the Law, and
so consequently is sin.

2. By way of comparison with other sins, why should it be rather lawful to
lie then to commit Adultery, if it be not lawful to do the one, upon any
occasion whatsoever, then neither the other also; for by Adultery the body
chiefly is corrupted, but by making a lie principally the Soul.

3. Diverse special cases may be propounded, wherein if lying were in any case
to be tolerated, it should seem to have the most just excuse, but not being
allowed in these things, it is lawful in none, viz.

1. That it is not lawful to tell a Lie, and commit a less evil, to avoid a
greater evil; as if one had rather make a lie, and offer sacrifice to Idols,
then to have his body de^iled, which was Origins case; for here the case is
this, They which force a man to do any unlawful thing, threatening that they
will do worse, do in a manner say thus; Fac tu male, ne nos faciamus, do
thou evil, to prevent us from doing evil; now whether is it better to do
evil, or to suffer it to be done by another: this rule therefore ought to be
held; We ought rather to shun our own sinning then another. Again, it is not
in sin as in matters of profit in the world, we call not that a lose, which is
lost in hope of a greater gain, but it is not so here; that it should be no
sin that is admitted, lest a greater be committed.

2. Neither is it lawful to tell a lie to save a man's life, for he that lies
slays his own Soul; and a man is not bound to slay his own Soul, to save
another temporal life. We must leave our temporal life for another eternal
life, but to hazard our eternal life, for another temporal life, there is no
reason. Again, in sins we must more take heed of the commission of any fact of
our own, then the permission of another fact.

3. We are not to lie, for another everlasting Salvation; as if one in
captivity not perfectly won unto the faith, who is not like to be brought unto
the faith, unless the Keepers be deceived by some lie, and he delivered out of
their hands; for a lie in this case is no more to be devised, then adultery to
be committed; for if chastity be not to be violated, much less is verity: if
then in these special cases, a lie is not to be admitted to avoid a greater
evil, as to save another man's life, to preserve the chastity of the body, nay
not to save another man's Soul: then much less is it lawful to make a lie in
jest to show others sport, or to delight them.

4. If the examples be objected out of the Old Testament, as Objections of l^^s
in Scripture answered.
of Jacobs dissimulation with his Father Isaac, when he got the blessing, of
the Midwifes excuse, of Rahabs lie made for the Spies received into her house,
these answers are made.

SECT. 6.
1. EIther are they figuratively spoken, and so no lies. 2. If lies not to be
imitated, for we must consider not what is expressed in fact, but what is
signified in sense; for it is no lie in speech, when one word is put for
another, as in Metaphors and other Tropes, neither is it in matter, when ^ne
thing is signified by another.

2. Neither are they lies which are mentioned in Scripture, if they be spoken
figuratively, or if they were lies they are not to be imitated, no more then
was David's murder and adultery.

3. They are condemned by way of comparison not absolutely.

4. Concerning the excuse of the Midwife and of Rahab, their fallacy was not
rewarded in them, but their mercy, the benignity of their mind, not the
iniquity of their lying.

Therefore by that straight charge and Commandment of God, Four reasons why we
ought not to l^e.
Thou shall not bear false witness, men are warned to take heed of lying, and
speaking untruths under what pretense soever, and that for these four causes.

1. Because lying makes men like to the Devil, for as God is truth, and all
that love the truth are the children of God; so they that use lying are the
children of the Devil, for he is a liar, and the father of lies, Joh. 8. 44.
he told the first lie that ever was made in the world, when he said to Eve, Ye
shall not dye, etc.

2. Because humane society and intercourse is by this means dissolved, for how
can one man trust another, if lying and disse^ling should be used; this reason
the Apostle urges, Ephesians. 4. 25. Cast away lying, and let every man speak truth
to his neighbor, for we are members one of another.

3. Because the liar loses his credit, that he cannot be believed, no not
when he tells the truth, as Eccle. 34. 4. Who can be cleansed by the
unclean, or what truth can be spoken of a liar?

4. We must take heed of lying, for it destroys the soul, Wisd. 1. 11. The
mouth that lies slays the soul.

SECT. 7. We ought not to conceal the truth.
AGain, as one ought not to lie, so ought he not to conceal the truth, either
publicly or privately; as when one suffers his neighbor to be overcome in
judgment, where he by his testimony might deliver him.

To which purpose may be applied the saying of the Wiseman, Prove. 24. 11.
Deliver those that are drawn to death, and wilt tho^ not preserve those that
are led to be slain? And of this kind is that usual negligence and
oversight of men, that privately do not tell one another of their sins, which
duty is reproved by the Law, Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in
thy heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to
sin; he then which suffers his brother to sin, in drunkenness, profaneness,
swearing, or whatsoever else, and holds his peace therein, offends against
the rule of charity, and is found before God to be an hater of his brother.
Upon which text one uses this Simile, for the further clearing of the point; "
If (says he) thou should see a man walking in the dark without taking heed,
where thou know there is a pit, and hold thy peace, what manner of one
should thou show thy self? The like is also when a man casts himself
headlong into vice, and vanie^h himself in thy hearing of his evil doings, and
yet thou praisest him, and smilest to thy self.

CHAP. XIX. Treats of simple Fornication, and marriage of their Priests, etc.
SECT. 1.
THese Popelings also affirm, That simple Fornication ought not to be punished
by humane Laws, and that it is an unjust human Law, to take away Strumpets,
and simple Fornication, their reasons shall be produced and answered. First say
they*

Object. Civil Laws are only to restrain such sins, whereby Justice is
violated, and injury done unto another; but in Fornication there is no act of
injustice, there is no person there, to whom any injustice can be done.

Ans. There is a manifold wrong committed in single Fornication; 1. They offer
wrong and dishonor to Christ. in making the members of Christ the members of
an Harlot, 1 Cor. 6. 15. 2. They injure themselves, in sinning against their
own bodies, in defiling, and polluting them. 3. They do wrong unto their
posterity, bringing upon them the shame of B^stardy, making them illegitimate,
and disabling them to inherit.

SECT. 2. Human Laws ought to forbid Fornication.
Obj. IF humane Laws should punish Fornication, it would give occasion to
Adultery, ^n^est, etc. seeing the most of a Commonwealth are weak and
imperfect, and if they were restrained from this smaller vice, they would fall
into greater inormities.

Ans. Seeing God has appointed a remedy against Fornication, and all other
uncleanesse by lawful Matrimony, why then should men make themselves wiser
then God, and seek to cure one evil by another; for in this manner is the
Divine order perverted amongst men, by restraining of Marriage in their
Priests, and giving way to Fornication; and therefore it is no marvel if such
unlawful lusts do reign amongst them.

Obj. Human Laws are not to forbid all sins, because men making a Law cannot
give preserving grace to keep it; and this was the cause why Moses Law did not
forbid all vices, because there was no grace given, or help ministered to avoid
them, theref^r^ some things was permitted amongst them; as to take Vs^ry of the
Gentiles, to give a bill of divorcement, and such like.

Ans. By this reason human Laws should forbid no sins, because Gods Word, and
not man's Laws gives grace to a^st^ine from any sin. 2. Neither is there any
sin forbidden in the New Testament against the Moral Law, which is not
prohibited in the Old, as may appear by our blessed Saviors interpretation of
the Law, Mat. 3. wherein he gives no new Law, but only expounds the old. 3.
Though Moses Law gave no grace to keep it, yet because it was a Schoolmasters
to bring us unto Christ, Gal. 3. 19. it was fit it should be a perfect Law, and
contain a strict rule of all righteousness; that men the rather should be
driven unto Christ, seeing themselves to come far short in the performance of
it as it ought to be. 4. The tolleration of some things amongst the Israelites
for their hardness of heart, shows not a defect in the Law, but an
interpretation in them that could not be subject to the perfect rule of the
Law. 5. Concerning the punishment of Fornication, it was not omitted in Moses
Law, for although Fornication with one was recumpensed with Marriage, and
paying of the Dowry, Deuteronomy. 22. 24. yet if a Daughter in Israel did play the
Whore, she was stoned to death, ibid. verse. 21. And seeing the Law says, There
shall not be a Whore amongst the Daughters of Israel, Deuteronomy. 23. 17. how dare
any defend the tollerating, and suffering of Whores in Christian Commonwealths.

SECT. 3. Of their injoyning of single life to their Priests.
TO this former tenent of theirs, may be added their not tollerating of their
Priests to marry, injoyning them single life; as more agreeable to their
Orders, which they think is defiled and Marriage of M^nisters ^^^^ll.
polluted by marriage; which opinion is quite contrary to the Apostles
doctrine, who calls it the doctrine of Devils to forbid marriage, 1 Timothy 4.
1. 3. and also gives liberty to every man to avoid fornication, to have his
wife, 1. Cor. 7. 2. As also that Marriage is honorable amongst all men, Heb.
13. 4. so that this practice of theirs does not only contradict the Apostles
doctrine, but gives occasion to Adultery, Fornication, and other unclean
lusts, by their restraining the remedy against these inormities, which is,
lawful and honest Marriage, and so they are apparent transgressors of the
Commandment, giving themselves over to all filthiness; which hypocrisy, and
dissemulation of theirs, was notably discovered in the suppression of their
unclean Cages and Cells, here in England there being many hundred sculls of
Infants, found in feying of the Moats which did compass their religious
buildings, which without doubt was begotten by means of their restraint before
mentioned.

SECT. 4. Of Swearing by Saints and other Creatures.
Obj. ANother of the Popish tenants is, That it is lawful to swear by Saints
or other Creatures, for proof of which they instance the words of Christ, Mat.
23. 21. Whosoever swears by the Gold of the Temple, swears by the Temple,
and him that dwells therein.

Ans. Our Savior in that place does not justify swearing by Creatures, but
confuteth that nyce distinction of the Pharisees, who thought it was nothing to
swear by the Temple, but by the Gold of the Temple, ver. 16. and shows that
in so doing they could not avoid swearing by God, because it was the place of
his Habitation, and so they did in such an Oath take the name of God in vain,
for otherwise if our Savior should have allowed swearing by Creatures; as by
heaven, saying, He that swears by heaven, swears by the Throne of God; he
should be contrary to himself, for elsewhere he says, Swear not at all,
neither by heaven, for it is the Throne of God, Mat. 5. 34.

We are also commanded by God himself, that we should swear We ought only to
swear by the name of God.
only by his name, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and swear
by his name, which text our Savior abridging, Mat. 4. interprets it by the
word only, ( him only shall thou serve.) So also, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. and Exodus 23.
13. it is directly forbidden that they should take the name of any other God in
their mouths.

2. God reprooveth those that swear by any other then by him, as Zep. 1. 5. I
will cut off him that worship and swear by the Lord, and Malcham.

3. Invocation only belongs unto God, but the taking of an Oath is a kind of
invocation, therefore it is a service due only unto God.

4. In the taking of an Oath, we call God to witness unto our Souls, that God
only knows the secrets of our hearts, but neither Angels or Saints do so.
Ergo.

5. He that swears gives power to him by whom he swears, to punish him if
he swear falsely, but God is only able to punish the Soul, Mat. 10. 20.

SECT. 2.
Obj. ^Oseph did swear by the life of Pharaoh, Genesis 42. 15.

Ans. Some held that this was no Oath, but a vehement kind of asseveration, as
Hanna said to Eli, As thy soul lives, 1 Samuel 1. ^6. and Abner to Saul, Sam.
17. 56. And so they would have the meaning to be this: As truly as Pharaoh
lives, or as I wish his life and he^lth, so it is true that I say; but it is
not all one kind or phrase, to say unto one present, As thy soul lives, and
of one absent, to say, by his life, or soul; it therefore showed some
infirmity in Joseph, though he worshipped the true God, yet he learned to
speak as other Courtiers did, to swear by Pharaohs life; yet rather of
custom of speech, or the more cunningly to conceal himself from his Brethren,
then of any purposed imitation of their superstitious Oaths; therefore Joseph's
example can be no warrant for us to imitate.

Obj. It is usual when men take an Oath, to lay their hand upon the Gospel,
therefore it is lawful to swear by the Creature.

Ans. Men using the external sign do not swear by it, no more then Abraham's
servant did swear by his Masters Thigh when he put his hand under it, Genesis 24.
1. he swear by the name of God. So the Lord says, I will lift up my hand to
heaven, and say, I will live for ever, Deuteronomy. 32. 40. and the Angel lifted up
his hand to heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever and ever, Rev. 10. 6.
so they lay their hands upon the Book, as a visible sign or seal of the Oath,
but they swear not by the Book, but by God the Author of the Book; but of the
two, I rather approve of the lifting up of the hand, as in the presence of God;
'it being the posture which the Angels and God himself are said to approve of,
as in the texts before mentioned.

SECT. 6. The close of the first Book.
LAstly, and to conclude the Discourse touching the Popes Tenants of the first
Magnitude, I will close them with the Magistrate, from whose Power and
Jurisdiction they exempt their Ecclesiastical persons, whereas in the time of
the Law (from whence they derive all their trumperies) if the Priest ministering
at the Altar, had committed wilful murder might be taken from it, and put to
death by the Magistrate, wherein appears the sovereign right and power,
which then the civil Magistrate had over the Priests of the Law (as they were
subject to the Magistrate, in which respect, neither are the Ministers of the
Gospel any more exempted now from the Civil, power then them Priests were
then, for the Apostle says, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers,
Romans 13. 1. In which general speech none are exempted, yea Christ himself, who
might have pleaded greater privileges in that behalf then any, refused not to
pay tribute for avoiding of offense, Mat. 17. 27. So that touching the outward
man, we see both Christ and his Apostles yielded themselves unto Caesar, viz.
to the Civil Magistrate.

Thus have I, by Gods assistance, discovered the greatest part of the grand
treacheries of the Church of Rome, or their Mass of delusions, by which they
have melted away all true religion, and devotion from their ignorant followers,
as also have drawn tribute and advantage to themselves, by wasting and melting
their su^stances, and running it into their own Coffers; the Lord therefore in
mercy open the eyes of these poor Creatures, who have been so long deluded by
that man of sin, who has so long reigned over their bodies and souls in
that tyrannous manner, and that they may apply themselves to the Prophets
direction, to ask for the old way, which is the good way, and to w^lke
therein, Jer. 6. 16. as also to give them a heart to loath and abhor those
damnable doctrines, which are maintained by him, and his adherents, so directly
against the Word of God; as has been made manifest in this Treatise, which the
Lord in mercy grant.

The Second part of Romes ruin by White Hall, etc.
Wherein is contained the confutation of Prelacy, with other erroneous opinions
of the times, etc.
CHAP. I. The first Chapter treats of Universal redemption.
SECT. 1.
HAving in the first Treatise displayed the highest, or grand delusion of
Antichrist, I shall now encounter with the second sort of them, being as
branches of the same Tree, or streams of the same fountain, which remain yet
unlopped, or dried up in this Nation; in which onset, I shall in the first
place adventure of that too much owned Tenent of Universal redemption; which
gangreen does much endanger the Spiritual life of many a poor soul. My
resolution (in the enterprise) shall be only to strike at the head of the
Argument (viz. Whether Jesus Christ by his death, and passion, redeemed the
whole world, yea, or no) against which affirmative part, if I shall prevail,
the circumstantiall members will fall of themselves. And,

1. That these places of Scripture (cited by them, to prove their assertions)
cannot possibly be meant, of every particular person in the world, will plainly
appear by Christ's own distinction (in that expression of his to his Apostles)
Joh. 17. 11. 16. by comparing of which texts it will evidently appear, that
the elect are a sort of people, which are in the world, and yet not of The
elect in the world, ^n^ yet not of the world.
the world; in the world, in respect of their external form, and substance,
and yet no^ of it, in respect of their internal affections; so that they are
in the world no otherwise then the Soul^ is in man, as will appear by comparing
the one with the other, as thus.

SECT. 2.
THe Soul is said to be in all, and every part of man; and so The elect in the
^^^d, comp^^^d to the ^^ul^ in man.
are the Elect disporsed into every part of the world* Mat. 24. 31 2. As the
body of man is carnal, and the Soul spiritual, so are the men of the world
said to be carnal minded men, and the elect spiritual minded men, Romans 8. 4,
5. 3. As the Soul is a companion to the body, until the death of the body, so
the elect be in the world, until the desolution of it, Mat. 28. 22. 4. As the
absence of the soul procures the death of the body, so the extracting of the
elect, will procure the consummation of the world, Mat. 24. 22. Psalm. 50. 3, 4,
5, 6. 5. As the carnal substance of man cannot properly be termed man, without
the Soul (which gives its being unto it) no more can the men of the world be
properly termed a world, without the elect, who as it were gives a being unto
it, for whose cause the world does subsist, being such as stand in the gap
betwixt the wrath of God and the world; to which purpose Scriptures are
plentiful. 6. As the Soul is said to be the chief part of man, or the man it
self, by whose infusion man is said to become a living soul, Genesis 2. 7. So are
the elect the chief part of the world, and so consequently a world it self,
the wicked of the world being only the external form, as the Body is to the
Soul.

Again, the world may be divided into two distinct Kingdoms, The ^lect (...),
or li^^le world.
the one belonging to Christ, consisting of the number of the elect, Heb. 12.
23. and the other to Satan, who rules in the hearts of the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. and in this sense the one may as properly be termed
a world as the other; the elect being a Microcosme or little world in respect
of the greater (as man is so termed in regard of his respondance with the
greater, being the Bo^ke of Nature, and car^ying about him an epitomy of the
world) and so are the elect in respect of the ne^renesse of the relation
betwixt them and the men of the world, or the world of worldly men; there being
no difference in respect of their external form and outward condition, Eccle.
2. 14. one event of death happening to both sorts of them, Eccle. 9. 2.

SECT. 3.
Obj. WHerein does the chief difference consist, betwixt the men of the world,
and the men in the world?

Ans. In the internal motions of the mind which are of two The motions of the
mind c^mpared (...) the m^ions of the world.
sorts, for as in the world there is two local motions, Rational, and
Irrational, so in the mind of man there is likewise two sorts, viz.
Intelectuall, and sensual; the one good, and the other evil; the one
proceeding from the God of the elect, and the other from Satan, the god of the
world, or carnal minded men, 2 Cor. 4. 4. by which two distinct motions, the
two distinct Kings govern, and rule their distinct Kingdoms, or Subjects.

Now these two Kingdoms being thus mixed and undistinct to Christ's Kingdom
and the world mixed.
the eye of man, and in regard there is, and will be some elect to call out of
their natural estate and condition, until the now second coming of Christ to
judge Anti-christians; therefore he puts his elect under the same notion, in
which the men of the world are under, for though there be not many wise after
the flesh, not many rich or noble, (that are of the elect world) yet the
comparison admits of some such.

The Elect being thus in the world, as the Soul in man, can no The elect
cannot be calle^ ^ut by preaching to ali Nations*
more be called out of their natural estate and condition (by reason of
original corruption, being all by nature the children of wrath) without
preaching to the men of the world (amongst whom they inhabit) then a Soul can
be converted without preaching to the body, in which it is contained. And
therefore it is, that Christ commands his Disciples to preach to all nations,
Mat. 28. 19. in regard he had in each nation kindred, and people some elect,
which he had ordained to call out of their natural condition, by that means.
Unto which elect, he gives an understanding faculty, that they shall attend to
the words which shall be spoken by such Messengers. As the Lord is said to open
the heart of Lidia, that she attended to the words spoken by Paul, Act. 16. 14.
which Christ also affirms, Mat. 13. 11. To them it is given to understand the
mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to the other, (viz. the men of the
world) it is not given. And hence it is, that many are called, but few chosen;
for though all be preached unto, yet no more then are ordained to eternal
life, shall believe, Act. 13. 48. As for the rest Satan their God, shall so
blind the eyes of their understanding, that in seeing they shall see and not
perceive, and hearing they shall hear and not understand, Mat. 13. 13, 14, 15.
Mark 4. 12, 13. Luke 8. 10. Joh. 12. 39, 40. Romans 11. 8. it is therefore a
frivolous conceit that the Passion Christ redeemed no more then his Father gave
him.
of Christ should extend it self to redeem any more then God the Father had
given him, Joh. 17. 12. which being lost in Adam may fitly be termed lost
sheep; and certainly if Christ had redeemed them whom he terms the men of the
world, Joh. 17. 14. he would not have refused to have prayed for them, but he
says in plain terms, he prays not for the world, verse. 9. viz. for the
men of the world; for if Christ's Humanity should will his Diety to save
reprobates, and children of perdition, without doubt they should be saved. For,
who has resisted his will?

SECT. 4.
Obj. CHrist is said to pray for his enemies, Luke 23. 34. viz. which was
actors in the crucifying of him.

Ans. It is likely that some of the Elect, not being as then called Elect
people might be guilty of the Passion of Christ.
out of their natural state, and condition, might consent unto his death, and
be as fierce and violent in that act as any other amongst the multitude, yea
more violent, not knowing what they did, as may be collected from the words of
Christ in his prayer for them. Father forgive, etc. which was made manifest in
many of them, after Peter's Sermon, Act. 2. 36. where it is said, (that hearing
of what they had done to the Lord of Life) they were pricked in their hearts,
and cried out, Men, and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved. The like
forwardness was also in the Apostle Paul, Act. 9. 15. (before his conversion)
in persecuting of Christ in his members, yea who more fierce and violent
against Christ, then Paul, and yet a chosen vessel to salvation, and a choice
instrument to gain Souls to Christ, it being merely out of ignorance, that he
made such havoc of the Church, Act. 8. 1. and 9. 1, 2. The like may be also
said of the St. Theife, who as it appears by the testimony of Matthew, Mat.
27. 44. did first revile Christ (as well as the other) until the patience of
Christ had convinced his judgment. After which he is said to reprove the
other, as also become a penitent, as will appear by comparing the two
Evangelists together in that relation, viz. Mat. 27. 44. with Luke 23. 40. etc.

Now for such offenders as these who were amongst the rest of The elect take
pleasure in sin before their conversion. Romans 1* 32.
them, which scurged and crucified Christ, he might pray, for it is likely that
Saul (whom we call Paul) was there, and might give consent unto his death, as
to the death of Stephen, Act. 8. 1. our natures being so prone to evil, that
the very elect before their conversion, do take pleasure in doing many things,
of which they are afterward ashamed, Romans 6. 21.

SECT. 5.
Obj. Jesus Christ gave himself a ransom for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 6. and tasted
death for every man, Heb. 2. 9.

Ans. It may as well be inferred from the words of the Apostle, Romans 11. 33.
(where God is said to include all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all) that all shall be saved, for wherein consists mercy if not in pardoning
offenses; and where offenses are pardoned, there is no use of punishment.
Christ therefore to The word all cannot be meant of every man.
clear such scruples, betwixt the all of the men of the world, and the all of
the elect, does thus distinguish them, Joh. 17. 10. where he says, All mine
are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them. In which words he
does not say, that all men in general are mine, and thine. But all mine, viz.
all them whom thou have given me, as in the 6. ver. in whom I am glorified,
ver. 10. but Christ is not glorified, by all men in general, viz. by all the
world, or men of the world, for they are of their father the Devil, whose
commandment they obey, Joh. 8. 42. 44. and not Christ's; therefore the all
spoken of in them and the like places, cannot be meant of all men in general.

Again Christ says, Joh. 10. 27. My Sheep hear my voice; Christ distin^uish
^h betwixt the all ^^^h^ w^^ld, ^^d (...) of (...).
which does imply, that all are not of his sheep. He is also said to lay down
his life for his sheep, ver. 15. but God the Father did not give him all the
men of the world to be his sheep, but a certain number of them, which he
terms a little flock (in comparison of the generality of men) as the
Scripture witnesses; Fear not(...) and chiefly intended by the Spirit. But so
is this spiritual sense, as the Prophet expounds this place of Gods eternal
love or hatred of Jacob and Esau.

2. That is the proper sense of the place, from which an Argument is framed,
and a conclusion inferred, but out of this spiritual sense, concerning
everlasting election, the Apostle reasons, and concludes election to be only
of grace, not by works; ergo it is the proper sense of the place.

Obj. How would you clear Gods Justice in creating some to destruction?

Ans. God created none to destruction, but by Adams transgression Gods Justice
vindicated and cleared.
we all became the children of wrath, and disobedience; now put the case that
many Malifactors were found guilty of death for one and the same fault, not
knowing any other but that they shall all suffer according to the Sentence
pronounced against them; but it happens that the superior Magistrate does send
a pardon to some few of them by name; not because they have less offended, or
less deserve to dye, then the rest, but because it so pleases him out of his
grace and clemency to save them, has the other therefore (whom he does not
pardon) cause to say he is cruel, or tyranous, in that he did not do the like
for them all? certainly they have rather cause to extol his clemency, in
sparing some of them.

So in like manner Adam having sinned, and so made guilty of eternal death; if
God had taken him away immediately, he had ^^t off the whole race of Mankind;
he therefore out of his free grace and mercy suffers him to live, and
propagate, not to the end that he will destroy all his Progeny, but because he
will provide a means whereby some of them shall be saved from that death
whereof they all are guilty; and that by sending his Son out of his own
bosom, to take their sins upon him, and to satisfy his wrath for them;
assigning him a certain number whom he shall so redeem, not by any external
and visible mark, but by some innate marks best known to himself, Shall
therefore the rest of Adams posterity tax God of injustice, in that he has not
redeemed them all? Certainly they rather have cause to extol and magnify the
exceeding mercy, and compassion in God, that did vouchsafe to preserve some of
the race and posterity from that eternal destruction which by that sin of
Adam they were all involved.

SECT. 7.
Obj. IT was hard that the Lord should for one sin condemn so many of Adams
posterity, for the eating of one poor Apple, a hard case.

Ans. Because carnal men do thus extenuate our first Parents The (...) of our
first Parents transgression.
sin, I will briefly show the greatness of that transgression, for therein
many sins concurred; as 1. Incredulity, in not believing Gods Word to be true.
2. Unthankfulness, in not being content with their estate. 3. Pride, in
desiring to be like unto God. 4. Wantonness, in sinning without any necessity,
having all the trees in the Garden besides to eat of. 5. The sin of Gluttony,
in pampering the desire of the belly. 6. Disobedience, in transgressing of the
Commandment. 7. Curiosity, in coveting to know the opperation of the fruit in
bringing them to knowledge. 8. Presumption, in that they presumed of Gods
mercy, that they should not dye though they did eat. 9. Then followed the
concupisence and rebellion of the flesh, in being ashamed of their nakedness.
10. They excused their sin. 11. They were guilty of Homicide, in bringing death
not only upon themselves, but all their posterity. 12. Beside, Eve seduced her
Husband. 13. Adam sinned in his inordinate affection to his Wife in listening to
her. 14. The easiness of the Commandment, made the transgression greater. As
one answering to the question, why God forbad Adam to eat of the fruit of that
tree, which was good, says; "True it is good, but I will not have thee touch
it, because I will have thee obedient; God could not then make better trial of
man's obedience then in forbidding that which is good. But to the point in
question, if all were alike saved by the death of Christ, why then are the
terms of election, and Predestination used so frequently in Scripture.

SECT. 5.
Object. What is meant by the word Election and Predestination?

Answ. Predestination is the eternal decree of God, whereby he determined with
himself, what he would have become of every What election is in the general.
man, for men are not since the fall of Adam created to the like estate and
condition, but for some eternal life, and for others eternal death is
appointed, whereby Gods free election is made manifest, seeing it lies in his
will what shall be the estate and condition of every Nation, whereof the Lord
shows a token in the whole issue of Abraham, as we may read, Genesis 24. 37.
Deuteronomy 32. 8. Psalm. 147. 20.

There is also a certain special election, wherein appears Of particular
election.
more plainly the grace of God, seeing that of the same Stock of Abraham God
rejected some, as Ishmael, and Esau, and at length most of the Tribes of
Israel, unto whom the entery of life were shut before them by his just, yet by
his incomprehensible judgment.

In the next place it is requisite to show the effect that Gods The effects of
election and repto^ation.
election and reprobation works, and 1. Touching the elect, whom God in his
mercy has appointed to salvation, for his own righteousness sake, and not for
their desert. Those he guides by the grace of his holy Spirit, Romans 8. 14.
etc. and 9. etc. As many as are led by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God;
as also the Prophet Isai. All those that I have called by my name, I have
created, fashioned, and made for my honor, Isa. 43.

SECT. 6.
NOw as the elect are led, guided, and directed by the Spirit of God, so on the
contrary are the reprobate by the spirit of Satan, who is the God of the
world, or worldly-minded men; and hence it is that Christ tells the wicked
Jews, That they were of their father the Devil, Joh. 8. 44. whose works they
did; so that as on the one side, the elect endeavored to do the will of God
their Father, so the other, the will of their father the Devil.

And those sort of people are compared by the Prophet Isaiah S^mpromes of the
sons of Satan.
to a raging Sea, that cannoe rest, whose waters foameth with mire and gravel,
for they have no peace with God, Isa. 57. 20. The Prophet David also
considering of their estate and condition, Psa. 73. 4, 5, 6. gives this reason
for it, viz. The Lord suffers them to come to no peril of death, but they
are lusty and strong, they come in no danger like other folk, neither are they
plagued like other men. Their eyes swell with fatness, and they do even what
they lust; they have riches in possession, and they call their Lands by their
own names. And this is the cause says, he that they be so holden with pride,
and overwhelmed with cruelty: these are they that talk against the most
highest, which say, Tush, how shall God perceive it, is there knowledge in the
most high? Can he hear our Swearings, see our secret Wheredomes, and
Adulteries? Does he take notice of our profaning the Sabbaths, or of our
quaffing and drinking of healths, of villifying Professors, with reproachful
terms of Schismatics, and Heretics, and the like; surely no.

Such as these were Cain, Cham, Ishmael, Pharaoh, Ammon, Their predecessor.
Saul, Absalom, Antiochus, Herod, Pilate, Judas the traitor, and many others,
who brought upon themselves eternal condemnation. The same Prophet David, also
describes the end of such men, with another reason of it, in these words,
namely, That the Their end.
Lord has set them in slippery places, and cast them down and destroyed them;
by which means, how suddenly do they consume, and perish, and come to a
fearful end; yea, even as a dream, so does he make their image to vanish.

SECT. 7.
Object. IF God have reprobated and cast them off, how can they do any other,
the cause of sinning therefore is not in them, but in God, who leaves them to
themselves; how do those Scriptures agree then where the Lord says, that he
delights not in the death of a sinner, Ezekiel. 33. 6. And, O that Israel would
obey me, etc. with, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered
thee together, and ye would not, Mat. 23. 37. As also, that he wills not the
death of a sinner; and other while, that some are ordained of old to
condemnation; as in Jude, verse. 6. Judas also is called, the son of
perdition, Joh. 17. 12.

Ans. To the Answer which has formerly been made to such Sundry arguments
answered touching rejection.
a question as this, may be added this answer of the Prophet. Jeremy, The Lord
is more righteous then to be disputed with, Jerem. 28. 6. And the Prophet
Isaiah says, We are in the hands of the Lord, as the Clay in the hands of the
Potter. Isa. 47. 9. And the Apostle says, Has not the Potter power over the
Clay, and of the same lump, to make one vessel to honor, and another to
dishonor, Romans 9. 21. Again, Who art thou that replyest against God, ver. 20.
Was there unrighteousness in God, in loving Jacob, and hating Esau, God
forbid, ver. 14. For he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
compassion on whom he will have compassi^n, ver. 15. and whom he will he
hardneth; so that there is vessels of wrath, and vessels of mercy, as in ver.
22. and 23. for otherwise why should these phrases be used in Scripture.

CHAP. III. Treats of hardening the heart.
SECT. 1.
Objection. IF God harden the heart of a sinner how can he choose but sin,
seeing that by nature we are all the children of wrath?

Ans. In every action, the and and means must go together; the cause does
never follow the effect, but the effect the cause; and in one and same action
there is a double cause; as 1. The isntrumental cause moving. 2. God
separating from the instrument, yet giving power of motion to the same; and so
the wicked may be said to be the instruments of God, yet not God the cause of
their wickedness, and therefore one says, Deus agit per malos, non in malis,
God works by evil men, not in evil men. God therefore may be said to be the
cause of the action, but God is no way the author of sin.
not of the quality of the action. Gods decree is no cause of their sinning,
but the voluntary inclination of the will unto evil, being neither forced, nor
by any violence compelled, and therefore no evil is either to be attributed to
God or his decre^.

2. Again, God is no way the author of sin, seeing he neither tempts nor
persuades unto it, Jer. 1. 13. neither has he commanded it, but forbidden it
in his Law, neither does he work with them that does evil; for all that God
does is good, and so there is none good but God, Mark 10. 19. neither does the
Lord approve sin being done, Psalm. 84. Thou art a God that hate wickedness.
So then if God neither move to sin, nor commend it being done, nor yet assist
the actors of it, he can in no wise be said to be the author of sin,

3. If God should cause sin, then every man should sin of necessity, and so his
punishment should be unjust, being forced to sin; but God who cannot be
deceived, has not brought upon any a necessity or willingness of sinning; for
it cannot be that by whom men rise from sin, by him they should fall into sin.
God that is good cannot be said to be the cause of evil, for then he should be
contrary to himself. Again, if God should be any ways the Author of sin, then
it should be no sin; for whatsoever God does is good, nay not to do that which
the Lord wills, is sin.

Yet seeing, 1. God is said in Scripture to harden the heart, which betokens
an action; and likewise in other terms, as God is said to give some over to
vile affections, as in Romans 1. 26. and to send upon some strong delusions that
they should not believe the truth, 2 These. 2. 11. and to make the heart fat,
the ears heavy, and to shut the ^yes, Isa. 6. 10. all which phrases implies
an action, or opperation; it is therefore requisite to show what the hardness
of heart is. 2. By what means it is effected or procured; and 3. In what
respect God may be said to work in the action.

SECT. 2.
1. IT may be described negatively, by the unaptnesse of it to any The
qualities and inseparable adjuncts of a hard heart. Reader, examine thy self
by these ten Simptomes.
thing that is good, being neither passive, active, or apprehensive of any good
thing; it is neither moved by prayers, nor gives way to threats; it is
unthankful for benefits, unfaithful in Counsel, unshame faced in evil
things; there is no activity at all to any good thing, it remembers nothing
that is past but wrongs, and injuries, nor has any forecast for the time to
come, unless it be to seek revenge.

2. It may be described by the inseparable companions thereof, viz. the
blindness of the mind, for as ignorance blinds the understanding, so
hardness of heart blinds the will and affections; as the Apostle says,
speaking of the Gentiles, Having their cogitations darkened through the
ignorance that was in them, because of the hardness of their hearts, Ephesians. 4.
18. both which concurred in Pharaoh, who showed his blindness, in saying, he
knew not Jehovah, and his hardness of heart, in adding, neither will I let
Israel go, Exodus 5.

3. The third property of the hardness of heart is thi^* that it not only a
great and grievous sin, but also the punishment of sin; 1. That it is a sin the
Apostle shows, Heb. 3. 12. where he says, Take heed brethren, least therein
at any time in you be an evil heart to depart from the living God.

And that it is a punishment of sin, the Apostle testifies also, Romans 1. 21.
because (says he) when they knew God they did not glorify him as God. And
therefore it follows, ver. 29. That God gave them over to their own hearts
lusts. Now the qualities and inseparable adjuncts of hardening the heart are
these, viz.

1. Blindness of judgment, and understanding, as Isa. 6. 10. where the Lord
says, Make the heart of this people fat, etc. lest Reader* examine thy self
by these Simptomes.
they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their hearts, and be converted, and I should heal them.

2. They are obstinate and wilful, and refuse to be admonished, and
instr^cted, and say unto God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways, Job 1. 14.

3. They delight in doing of evil, and make a sport of sin, Prove. 2. 14. which
rejoice in doing of evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked.

4. They regard not to do things honest in the sight of God, but contrarily
contemn, and despise them that do such things, as Prove. 18. 3. When the
wicked comes, then comes contempt.

5. They are incorrigible, and past all hopes of amendment, Prove. 1. 30. They
would none of my counsel, but despised all my corrections.

6. They are not ashamed of most vile sins, as Jer. 3. 3. Thou have a Wh^res
forehead, and would not be ashamed,

7. When the Lord smites them they feel i^ not, neither have they any fear
of Gods judgments, whom the Wise man compares to those that sleep on the Mast
of a Ship, and as drunken men that are stricken, and knows it not, Prove. 23.
24. 25.

8. They are grown to such an evil custom of sinning, that they can do no
other, as the Prophet says, Can the Black-amore change his hew, or the Leopard
his spots, then may they yet also do good that are accustomed to do evil,
Jer. 13. 23. So that the sins of such seem to be inexpiable, as the same
Prophet says, that the sins of Judah were written with a Pen of Iron, and with
the point of a Diamond, Chap. 17. 1.

9. They wax worse and worse, of whom it is said, Rev. 22. 11. He that is
filthy, let him be filthy still; and as they increase in sins, so do they
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath; and so treasure up Gods judgments
against themselves, Romans 2. 5.

10. They are rejected, and cast out of the presence of God, and left to
themselves, such an one was Saul, of whom it was said, That the Spirit of the
Lord departed from him, and an evil spirit from the Lord vexed him, 1 Samuel 16.
14. And thus have I showed what the hardness of heart is.

SECT. 3.
2. IN the next place, I am to show by what means it is effected How the
hardness of the heart is effected.
and procured, of which subject there are varieties of opinions, I shall give
you the most material of them.

Some are of opinion that the Lord hardneth the heart by way of manifestation,
instansing in Pharaoh, where the Lord by his plagues and judgments, declared
how hard Pharaohs heart was. But this cannot be the sense of it, for so God
might be said to commit any other sins, when he does manifest them, and bring
to l^ght; and though the expression might serve upon that occasion, yet it
fails in other places; as Deuteronomy. 2. 30. where it is said, that God hardened
the heart of Sihon King of the Amorites, and Joshua 23. where the Lord is said
to harden the hearts of the Can^a^it^s, and Romans 9. 15. God has mercy on whom
he will have mercy, and whom he will h^ hardneth; in these places it cannot be
expounded that God hardened; that is, declared their hearts to be hard.

Others expound it by way of permission, because those that are hardened, God
depriveth of his grace, and leaves them to themselves, as God is said to shut
up all in unbelief, and that he gave* them (...) spirit of slumber, eyes that
they could not see, etc*

Now these sayings (say they) are not to be taken as though God did these
things, but that he suffered them to be done; As I will harden the heart of
Pharaoh, that is, suffer it to be hardened; as that he gave them up to a
reprobate sense, is nothing else, but that he permitted it; as a Captain
leaving his Soldiers in the midst of a Battle, may be said to deliver them up
to his enemies hands

But although this be most true that God suffers such to continue in the
hardness of their hearts, yet this is not all, for so the Lord suffers all
other sins to be done; for there is nothing done in the world, unless the
omnipotent God will have it done, either by suffering it to be done, or doing
it of himself; again, if so The Lord goes further in the act then by his
permission.
the Lord might as well be said to steal, or the like, because he suffers
such things to be done; but the Lord does not only concur in the hardening of
the heart, by permission, or suffering it to be hardened, but according to his
own power and action, not by the which immediately the hardness of the heart
is made; but whereby many things are done, by the which a sinner by his own
corruption does conceive the hardness of the heart.

Now the induration of the heart is two ways to be taken, or The Induration of
the heart two ways taken.
considered; 1. As it is a sin. 2. As it is a punishment of sin. In the first
of these God has no part, but for the other, as he is a just Judge, he
inflicteth the hardness of the heart as a punishment, as the Apostle shows,
Romans 2. 28, For as the Gentiles regarded not to know God, so God delivered them
up to a reprobate mind. And 2 These. 2. 11. because they received not the love
of the truth, etc. therefore God sent them strong delusions, that they should
believe lies; in which places the Apostle shows how the Lord punished them
with blindness of heart, because of their former sins; as also Sam. 12. 11.
Behold, I will raise up evil upon thee out of thine own house, which was
verified in Absol^m, that rose up against his father; as also in the act of
Shimei in cursing David, whom David says, The Lord bid curse him. Now
concerning this rebellion of Absalom, and railing of Shimei; they are not to be
ascribed to God, as they were sins in Absalom and Shimei, but as they were
punishments of the sins of David, they were sent of God.

SECT. 4.
Obj. IF God be the Author of the induration of the heart, as it is a
punishment of sin, then he may as well be said to be the Author of other sins,
when as a man falls into them, as the punishments of his former sins.

Ans. All such sins proceed from the hardness of the heart, Popish objections
answered.
that confirms and setleth a sinner in his wickedness, and therefore God
cannot be said to be a cause of those sins, for a man by continuing in sin has
his heart hardened, by the just judgment of God; and then out of the hardness
of his own heart, he brings forth other sins of himself.

Obj. The hardness of the heart as it is a great and horrible sin, so is it
the punishment of former sins; wherefore if God do cause it to be a
punishment, he also causes it as it is a sin.

Ans. In this Argument there are ambiguous terms, for in the first clause this
note of similitude, (as) is taken for the being of the thing; the bardnesse of
the heart, as it is a sin, so it is the punishment of sin, that it could not
be the punishment of sin unless it were sin; this we grant in the first part:
but the same word (as) signifies also the manner of being. Therefore if the
first be taken in the same sense, for one and the same manner of being, we deny
that the hardness of the heart ( in the same respect) is both sin, and the
punishment of sin. It is, both in respect of the subject, and being; but not
both in the same quality, affection, and manner of being.

Obj. All punishments of sin, because they are just stand with the will of God;
now hardness of heart being a sin, if it should stand with the Will of God,
then it would follow, that sin should stand with the Will of God.

Ans. If sin should no way stand with the Will of God, then it should not be
committed in the world, for against his will can nothing be, so that we must
admit a distinction of Gods will which The will of God twofold.
is twofold, viz. his will of approbation, and his will of providence; by the
first he wills not sin, but by the second he wills it to be in the world,
because he knows how to dispose of sin even unto good. Many things are done
without Gods Will, nothing without his providence. Providence is that whereby he
disposeeth of things, Will whereby he wills, or nilleth any thing; and
therefore it is good that evil should be done, because thereby Gods power and
goodness is seen, in turning evil unto good. If therefore God did not see how
to turn evil unto a good end, he would not suffer evil to be done in the
world. So then retaining the forms distinction, still hardness of heart (as it
is a sin) God wills it not, but as it is a punishment of sin, it stands
very well with the Justice of God.

SECT. 5.
THere be also several other opinions concerning the manner Other opinions
touching Gods ^^^d^ing the heart.
how God hardneth the heart, which being very profitable, will not be amiss to
be rehearsed.

As that God does it by way of patience, and long suffering, because (say they)
the Lord does suspend his Judgments, and does not presently punish the wicked;
whereupon they abusing Gods patience As by way of patience and longsuffering.
and long suffering are hardened, and this exposition they ground upon that
place of Scripture, Romans 2. 4. Despisest thou the riches of his bountiousnesse,
patience, and long suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance; but thou after thy hardness, and heart that cannot repent,
heapest up against thy self wrath against the day of wrath. Of which patient
forbearance, they make a figurative Locution; Like (say they) as a Simile.
Master should say to his servant that abuses his gentleness, it is I that
have made the thing, because I did not punish thee.

Again, As the Sun (say they) hardneth the Clay, and mollifieth Why ^he Lord
uses such great patience
the Wax, so the goodness of God hardneth the vessels of wrath, and mollifieth
the vessels of mercy. And this is true, that God does use a great patience, and
long suffering toward sinners, and that for these reasons:

1. That thereby Gods goodness and mercy may appear, and the great malice and
frowardness of men's hearts, that cannot be drawn to repentance by the Lords
rich and bounteous mercy. 2. By this Gods Judgments appear to be most just,
when he punishes the hard-hearted and incorrigable, as it is evident in the
example of Pharaoh. 3. By this also God teaches his children to be patient,
and long suffering one toward another. 4. This patience of God though some
abuse it, yet others profit by it, and their hard hearts are mollified, for
though Pharaohs heart by Gods sparing of him became more obstinate, yet
Nebuchadnezzar at length by the Lords lenity, goodness, and fatherly
correction, was brought to know himself, and confess the true God. 5. Though
the evil and wicked should reap no profit by the Lords wonderful patience,
yet the Elect, and such as are ordained to salvation, are thereby called, and
brought to Grace, as the Apostle shows of himself; For this cause (says he)
was I received unto mercy, that Jesus Christ should show on me all long
suffering, unto the example of them, who in time to come should believe on him,
1 Timothy 1. 16. so that this is true which is affirmed by the Authors, but this
is not all; God has yet a further stroke in the hardening of the heart, then by
connivance, and long animity toward it.

2. There be others also who hold that the Lord hardneth the By withdrawing his
grace.
heart subtrahendo, gratiam, by withdrawing his grace; God (say they) gives
men over to a reprobate sense, to harden the heart, to blind, etc. not because
these things are done by God, which proceed of men's malice, but because whilst
God does justly forsake men, these things do happen unto them; the Lord
therefore hardneth whom he will not mollify, and blinds them whom he will
not illuminate.

SECT. 6.
Obj. WHerein consists the blinding, and hardening of the heart?

Ans. In two things, as 1. The internal act of the mind, adhearing H^rdness^
of heart implies 2 things.
unto evil; and in this respect God is not the Author thereof. 2. In
subtraction of grace, whereby it comes to pass, that the mind is not
illuminated to see God. And in this respect God is the cause of the duration,
but yet this is not all that seems to be contained in Gods hardening of the
heart.

There is also another interpreting the manner of Gods hardening of the heart,
and it is occasionalliter, by way of occasion, as when the wicked take occasion
by such things as fall out, and are done by Gods providence, to be more hardened
and confirmed in their sins.

1. For as all things, viz. prosperity, adversity, life, death, fullness, want,
and whatsoever else, do work together unto good, to All things fall out for
the good of them that fear God, and for evil to the wicked.
them that fear God, as the Apostle affirms, Romans 8. 28. so on the contrary,
all things fall out unto the worst, unto the wicked, and impenitent, and so the
wonders which God wrought in Egypt, served to confirm the Hebrews in their
faith; but Pharaoh by his own malice was thereby hardened.

2. The things which the Lord does, whereby the wicked do The wicked take
occasion by three things to be hardened.
also take occasion to be hardened are of three sorts; as First, either inwardly
in the mind, as by stirring their affections, as of anger, fear, hope,
desire, which they by their corruption turn to evil. 2. On such things as are
done about them, as admonitions, corrections, mercies, benefits, which also
they ungratefully abuse. 3. Or they are things* external, or without them, as
the objects of pleasure, honor, and such like, whereby their hard heart is
polluted, puffed up, and swelled; and all these things being good of
themselves, they through the hardness of their hearts pervert unto their
destruction, as the Apostle Peter speaking The wicked pervert their own heart.
of some, which through ignorance, and unbelief, pervert the Scriptures, 2 Pet.
3. 16. The Apostle Paul also shows, that sin took occasion by the
Commandment, and wrought in him all manner of concupisence, Romans 7. 8. Pharaoh
also was hardened, by reason of Gods works, the plagues and wonders that were
showed in Egypt; By the wonders, because he saw the Magicians could do the
like; by the Plagues, because they touched not him, but happened without; they
came not also at once, but with some intermission and respit between, and
because he saw they continued not long, but were soon removed.

Therefore in that Pharaoh had such a heart, as could not be moved by the
patience of God unto piety, it was his own fault; but that such things were
done, (whereby his heart being evil of it self, did resist the Commandment of
God) it was by the divine dispensation; but there is something further yet to
be considered in Gods concurring in the hardening of the heart.

SECT. 7.
Again, there is another Exposition, which declares, that The event often times
taken for the cause.
God hardneth the heart, as the event is taken for the cause, as it is often
taken in Scripture, as Joh. 17. 12. None of them perished, but the child of
perdition, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled. Here the Scriptures puts
that for the cause, which was the event of the cause; for Judas did not perish
that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, but so it fell out, that the Scriptures
in Judas perishing was fulfilled. There is also the like instance in the 51.
Psalm. Against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight, that thou
might be justified in thy sayings, and clear when thou art judged. But
David did not sin to that end, that God might be justified, God had no need of
his sin to set forth his glory; but so it fell out, that God spared David, and
by his mercy over-came his sin, and yet David sinned not to that end.

Like as when a man being at work, and one of his acquaintance Simile.
comes to see him, (he desisteth from working) he should say, My friend came
to day, to hinder my work; whereas he had no such end in his coming. So Jacob
said to his Son, Why dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell the man ye^ had yet a
brother, Genesis 34. 6. whereas Jacobs Sons (in so saying) intended no evil, or
hurt to their Father; but so it fell out, etc. The wicked also are said to hate
their own soul, and to procure unto themselves eternal death; whereas
simply, they hate not their own souls, neither would be damned, but upon
their committing of sin it so falls out, that their souls perish by their
means, as if they hated them. An unruly Patient that will not obey his
Physician, whereupon death insueth, is said to seek his own death, and yet
they desire to live, but upon their unruly and disorderly behavior death
follows. So God is likewise said to harden the heart, by the like figurative
speech, because the harding of the heart insueth upon the abuse of these
things, which God tends not to that end, but they pervert them to their own
hurt; and this opinion may also be safely received, and acknowledged, but yet
there is somewhat more to be added.

SECT. 8.
BUt by the way to bind, and harden, though it signify an Act Four things
are said to blind or harden the heart.
proceeding from him that hardneth, yet it is not always so taken, for we shall
find in Scripture that four ways a thing is said to blind, and so
consequently to harden, viz.

1. Gifts are said to blind the eyes, as Deuteronomy. 16. 19. not that they being a
dead thing, can corrupt the judgment, but men's corrupt hearts taking occasion,
is thereby enticed to corrupt, or pervert Justice. 2. The Devil is said to
blind the eyes of the wicked, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Whom the God of this world has
blinded the minds of them that believe not, least the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ should shine unto them. 3. The malice of a man's own heart is
said to blind, and harden, as Pharaoh hardened his own heart. 4. God is said
to blind the eyes, and harden the heart, Esa. 6. 10. Make the hearts of this
people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see
with their eyes, and heart with their ears, and understand with their hearts,
and be converted, and be healed.

1. Gifts does blind occasionalliter, by way of occasion. 2. Man's heart
blinds, meritori^, by way of desert, or meritoriously, because it deserves
to be further blinded and hardened. 3. The Devil blinds insitando, by
insisting, and stirring up to sin; and 4. God blinds, subtrahendo gratiam, by
withdrawing his grace, and inflicting the punishment of induration upon them.

SECT. 9.
FUrther God is said to harden the heart, in his diverse leavings, In what
respects God is said to work in the action of the hardening the heart^
and forsakings of them; as

First, he suffers them to follow their own lusts and desires, not giving
them power or grace to restrain them; as Romans 1. 24. He gave them up to their
own hearts lusts. 2. He gives them abundance of ease and prosperity, whereby
they are entangled, and therefore the Prophet prays, Give me neither poverty
nor riches, Prove. 3. 8. 3. He denies them the benefit of wholesome correction
and affliction, whereby they should learn to know themselves, as the Apostle
says, The Lord does receive no child whom he does not chastise, and if we be
not chastised, then we are bastards and no Sons, Heb. 12. 6. 8. 4. God
forbids his Servants to pray for such, 1 John 5. 16. and so they want the
benefit of their prayers, as Jeremiah is forbidden to pray for the people, Jer.
14. 11. 5. God in his Justice depriveth them of such as should travel for
their Souls, and bring them unto God, as the Apostle left the wilful and
obstinate Jews, and shoke of the dust of their feet against them, Act. 13. 51.
6. The Lord takes from them the preaching and knowledge of his Word, as the
Lord threatened by his Prophet Amos, to send upon them a famine, but not of
bread, or water, but of hearing the Word, Amos 8. 11. 7. God suffers them to
be deceived by flatterers, and unfaithful Counselors, as Rehoboam was by his
young men, 2 Chro. 10. 8. 8. The more strongly to delude them, the Lord
sometimes suffers false Prophets to show signs, and wonders, as the Apostle
says of the false Prophet Antichrist, whose coming is by the working of
Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, 2 These. 2. 9. 9. The Lord
permits Satan to invade them, and to work upon them all his pleasure, as the
evil spirit sent of the Lord upon Saul, 1 Samuel 16. 14, And a lying spirit was
in the mouth of Baals Prophets to deceive Ahab, 1 King. 22, 2^. 10. God takes
from them all helps, whereby they should be defended from the assaults of
Satan, as the Lord threatened to do to his unfruitful Vineyard, saying, I will
take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; I will break down the
wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down, Isa. 5. 4. Now the Lord does not
thus forsake until they have forsaken him, as Isaiah shows, Chap. 59. 2. your
wickedness have separated betwixt you and your God.

SECT. 10.
Obj. GOd may be also said to harden the heart, because he disposeeth thereof,
and directs it to such an end as he himself propounds.

Ans. It Is true, as God ordains the end, so has he also ordained the means
to the end, as Act. 2. 23. where Christ is said to be delivered by the
determinate counsel, and foreknowledge of God, yet was he betrayed, and
delivered by Judas, whose act in some respects is said to be the Lords, because
he so disposed of it, to affect and accomplish his glorious Counsel, in
redeeming his elect, by the death of his Son. But this cannot safely be
affirmed, that the Lord should be said to do these things, which he ordains
and disposes; for God so disposed of that Spiritual Cumbat, which the Apostle
Paul found in his flesh, that it tended further to Gods glory, and the
manifestation of his power, as the Lord says, My grace is sufficient for thee,
my power is made perfect through weakness, yet God was not the worker of that
temptation but the Apostle imputes it unto Satan, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Like as in the
Creation, God made light, but made not darkness, but only Sin a defect of
good, as darkness of light.
made a separation betwixt the light and darkness, it being only a defect of
light, Genesis 1. 14. so the works of darkness, God cannot be said to make, only
he disposes, and orders them.

SECT. 11.
Again, some refer the work of God, which he shows in the hardening of the
heart, to that general power which he gives unto the Creature, in whom all
things live, move, and have their being; as Act. 17. 28. for the hardening of
the heart, as it is an action, or work, is of God; but as it is evil, it
proceeds from man. Evil acts, as they are acts are good, and proceed from
God the Author; but this solution does not take away the doubt, for as God is
the Creator, and so the general Good and evil mo^ions of the heart.
worker, he only gives power to move the heart; which moving being the
general action, is divided into two parts; for there are good motions of the
heart, and evil, the one mollyfying the heart, and the other hardening of it.

In the good motions God concurreth two ways; 1. As a How the Lord works in
them motions
general mover, by his crea^ing power. 2. As a particular direction, by his
regenerating grace. But in the other motion he has a stroke, as a general
mover, in the particular act of hardening; as it is evil he concurreth not,
therefore according to that general power the Lord is only said to be a mover,
not an hardner of the heart.

Now of these ways before rehearsed, there are three chiefly to be made choice
of, viz. 1. That God hardneth the heart by leaving it to it self, and depriving
it of his necessary grace, as he is said to have given over the unbeleeving
Gentiles to their own hearts lusts, Romans 1. 24. 2. That God causes many
things to be done, which are not in themselves causes of the hardening of the
heart, yet the wicked take occasion thereby to be further indurate, and
hardened, as the Apostle shows, that the wicked abuse the patience and long
suffering of God, thereby to be further hardened. 3. That God by his just
judgment does force them to their own hurt, whether they run headlong
themselves, even to the end. For God as a just Judge, seeing a man's heart bent
upon wickedness, does as a just Judge inflict upon him the spirit of
induration; and to this purpose, one handling that place, Romans 1. 14. says,
that some things there rehearsed are sins, and no punishments; as the pride,
and vanities of their minds, ver. 21. they were not thankful, but became vain
in their imaginations. And some also punishments and no sin, as eternal death,
which they were Worthy of, ve^ ^^. and that the rest that come betwixt, are
both sins and punishment.

SECT. 12.
Obj. Why should God take such a punishment of sin, that the sinners thereby
commit more sin?

Ans. We answer with the Apostle, Romans 1. 27. where he says, Man with man
wrought filthiness, and received such recompense to themselves as was meet for
their errors; so that God did not send them upon the Gentiles, as they were
sins, but as they are considered as punishments of their sins; for as God has
an hand therein, he does incline the will (being evil by its own fault) to sin,
by his just and secret Judgment; as for instance.

There is but one kind of heat in the Sun, and according to Simile.
the matter it works upon, some things it melts, and some things it
hardneth, the Wax it melts, the Clay it hardneth; so God (as the Sun,
hardneth the Clay) is said to harden the heart which is earthly, and muddy; as
also by the same work of the rain, the earth being well tilled, brings forth
good fruit, but being untilled, thistles, which is not of it self as it is
rain, but by reason of the nature of the thing concurring, whereupon it
works; so by the working of God after a most secret and hidden manner, the
heart of the wicked are hardened, but the cause thereof is in themselves.

Obj. Gods must needs be a worker of evil in hardening of men's hearts?

Ans. God hardneth the heart without any touch of sin, as God hardneth the
heart without any to^ch of sin.
may be illustrated by this Simile; as in the winter quarter the water is
frozen until the Sun shine upon it, and when the Sun is departed from it, it is
bound up with cold again; the Sun is not the cause of the freezing of the
water, but the coldness of the water binds it self; so properly God causes
not the heart to be hardened, but by the absence of his grace it becomes
hardened.

Obj. Why does the Lord suffer any to be hardened?

Ans. That must be ascribed to the Judgment of God, which are often hidden,
but never unjust; it should suffice us as the Apostle says, to know, and
believe, and that there is no iniquity with God.

SECT. 13.
Obj. NO man in this life can become altogether so impenitent, incorrigible, or
without hope of grace, or in such a desperate state as to be forsaken; for God
would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, and
I will not the death of a sinner, etc. so then if mercy be offered to all, then
the way is open to all, to repent, and turn unto God.

Ans. God indeed offers himself to all, and denies not the God offers
grace to all.
external means to any, if they had grace to apprehend them. The Gospel has
been preached to all the world, and so to the impenitent, and reprobate; God
therefore offers grace unto all, but all will not receive it; as one says,
the wholesome medicine of admonition must be administered to all, though the
health of the sick be uncertain. But if he that is admonished belong to the
predestinate, it is to him a wh^lsome medicine, if he do not, it is a penal
torment. Again, the argument follows not, God calls all men to repentance,
ergo all may have grace to repent; for, the Scripture says, that many are
called, but few are chosen. Grace does prevail with some, but with others
their obstinate natures resists; to which purpose the Scriptures are very
plentiful, as in Act. 2. 41. Act. 16. 14. and 13. 45. etc.

Obj. So long as men are in this life they are in the way, and are not deprived
of all grace, nor utterly forsaken until they be in Hell.

Ans. Everlasting punishment in Hell is the end, and execution Man in this life
may be in the state of damnation.
of damnation, but men in this life may be in the state of damnation, and be
utterly forsaken of Gods grace, as Saul and Judas, and they whom the Apostle
says, God gave over to a reprobate sense, Romans 1. 28. Erg^.

SECT. 14.
Obj. IF any man in this life had been utterly excluded from grace, Pharaoh of
all other had been most like, yet his estate was not desperate, seeing he was
in the same case with Nebuchadnezzar, who repented, and confessed God.

Ans. This reason is flatly against the Apostle, who pronounces Pharaoh as a
vessel of wrath, prepared for destruction, Romans 9. 17. now if there be hope
for a vessel of wrath to come to grace, then there was hope for Pharaoh. The
Apostle makes these two distinct things, God has mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardneth, Romans 9. 18. so then as God hardneth not those on whom
he has mercy, so neither shows he mercy on those whom he hardneth.

2. Nebuchadnezzar and Pharaoh were most unlike, for the one had not so many
wonders showed as had the other, neither so often dallied, and made show of
repentance as did the other; which shows their state to be most different,
for if Pharaoh had been no more hardened then Nebuchadnezzar was, he would
likewise have repented, as Nebuchadnezzar did.

Obj. We are to despair of none in this life, therefore it is probable for all
to repent.

Ans. Such as we see, and know, commit a sin unto death, The sin against the
holy Ghost unpardonable.
which is the irremissable sin against the Holy Ghost, (which we confess a
rare thing to be deserned) such we may despair of, because the Apostle
forbids us to pray for them, 1 John 5. 16. and those for whom the Lord did
forbid Jeremiah to pray for, Chap. 14. 11. and those for whom our Savior says
he prays not for, Joh. 17. 9. what hope was there for these, when he forbid
to pray for them, who (if any) was to pardon them.

2. Though we in charity are to hope the best, even of the greatest sinners,
yet this follows not, that all of them may have grace to repent. We judge
according to that we see, but the Lord sees the heart, and knows from the
beginning who are his, and who are not. Now on the contrary side, that some in
this life are so hardened, that they cannot repent, and are so incorrigable and
without hope of remission of their sins, may thus appear.

The sin against the Holy Ghost is irremissable, as our Savior says, He that
blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, Mark. 3. 29.
therefore there are some in this life which cannot repent, neither can have
their sins forgiv^^ them. Again, a remarkable testimony of rejection is
declared in such, as wilfully make away themselves, by an untimely death.

SECT. 15.
Obj. THe sin against the Holy Ghost is said to be irremissable, or
unpardonable, not because it cannot at all be unpardoned or forgiven, but
because it is hardly forgiven.

Ans. In answer to this objection, the place of the Apostle may be urged, who
says, that it is impossible for such to be renewed by repentance, Heb. 6. 6.
so then that which is impossible, is not only hardly done, but not at all.

2. The Free-knowledge and Decree of God concerning the rejection of some is
unchangeable, and cannot be altered, but God has foreseen some to be damned,
and decreed them to be rejected; as Judas is called, the child of perdition,
Joh. 17. 12. therefore it is not possible for such to come to repentance, to be
saved, for those things which are not predestined, cannot be obtained; but
Cod has not decreed repentance for such as are rejected and reprob^te, ergo
they cannot repent; and where there can be no repentance, there can be no
remission of sins; but some have such hearts they cannot repent, Romans 7. 5.
therefore the sins of such are irremissable, and cannot be forgiven; as one
speaking concerning Judas, says, that repentance in him was in vain* in
regard he had sinned against the Holy Ghost.

Obj. If it be so, that God has chosen a certain number to be saved, and the
rest to be damned, then we may live as we list; if we be appointed to be saved,
we must be saved; if not, we must of necessity be damned.

Ans. We ought not so to reason with our selves, but rather We ought to st^ive
^o ma^e ^u^ calling and election sure.
strive to make our calling and ^lection sure, for who knows whether he be
elected to salvation or no; thou may for the present be a grievous sinner,
and y^^ belong to the remnant of the election of grace, as may be instanced in
the Apostle Paul, and the Thiese on the Cross, for where sin abounds, there
grace does superabound, but shall we therefore sin that grace may abound, no
(says the Apostle) God forbid; for so long as we continue in sin, we are the
servants of sin, and who knows the day of his death, that he may take his
own leisure to repent; and it is a great sign of a reprobate thus to reason,
and to hazard his Salvation on so desperate a point. It is true, if God have
appointed thee to be saved, thou shall be saved, otherwise not; but let us not
in the mean time despair of our selves, but use the means that God has
appointed to call the Elect for whom God has called to the end, he has also
called to the means to obtain the end; albeit some at the eleventh hour,
therefore whosoever thou art, that despisest the means, may also be sure
never to obtain the end.

The cause why I have so long insisted upon this point is, in regard I would
have it sufficiently opened to every Christian, it being the most absolute
cause of difference betwixt Christians, the clearing of which, I am confident
will give much satisfaction to the minds of many, which are unsettled in this
particular, which is the hearty desire of the publisher hereof.

CHAP. IIII. Treats of the use of the Moral Law.
SECT. 1.
IT is reported that those under the notion of Antinomians, are such people as
deny the use of the Moral Law, since the publishing of the Gospel.

To the clearing of which point, we are to consider of the Law of Moses in
general, and of the differences of them.

1. The Law of Moses delivered unto the children of Israel, The Law of Moses of
three sor^*
were of three sorts, viz. Moral, Judicial, and Ceremonial; the first does
prescribe a persect rule of righteousness, discerning Moral.
things that are right and just, from them that are contrary both toward God,
and Man, in external and internal duties, requiring obedience under pain of
everlasting death.

2. The Ceremonial Law concerned such rites, and services, as Ceremonial.
belonged to the external worship of God, prescribed unto that people, both to
distinguish them from other Nations of the world, and to be signs and simbals
unto them of the Spiritual grace in the New Testament, to be fulfilled by the
Messiah.

3. The Judicial Laws belonged to the Civil State, which Judicial.
were such ordinances as contained rules of equity, for the judgeing, and
deciding of Civil controversies, and questions, and decreed punishments for
the transgressions, against both the Moral, and Ceremonial Laws, and kept
the people under obedience.

As touching the difference of these Laws, the Moral are The Moral Law
grounded upon the Law of Nature.
generally grounded upon the Law of Nature, and so are not the other. 2. They
are perpetual to endure for ever, and so do not the other. 3. The Moral
requires both external, and internal obedience, the other only external;
the Moral Law was given as principal, and the other Laws were to give place
unto them, and were the end unto which the other tended; and yet these three
sorts of Laws are not severally, but jointly handled by Moses, so that amongst
the Moralls are found some Ceremonials, and amongst the Judicials, both Moral
and Ceremonial Laws; this being the difference betwixt the Moral Law
contained in the Commandments, and the other, that the first was delivered by
the Lords own voice to the people, and the other was received by Moses from
God.

SECT. 2.
2. AS touching the validity of these Laws; 1. The Ceremonials The validity of
Moses Laws.
are utterly abolished, so that there is now no plac^ for them under the
Gospel, neither can they be revived without derogation to the Gospel of Christ,
as the Apostle says, If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing,
Gal. 5. 2. for when the body is come, the shadow must be abolished, but the
Ceremonials were shadows, the body is Christ, Col. 2. 17. their Temple
signified the Church of God, their holy place, Heaven, their Sacrifices, the
Passion of Christ; their expiations, the remission of sins; these things then
being fully exhibited, and fulfilled in Christ, have now no more place in the
Church.

Again, the Ceremonials served only for that carnal people, To what end
Ceremonies served.
which were as children kept in bondage, under the rudiments of the world, Gal.
4. 3. but now we are no longer under tutors, and governors, (the time
appointed by the Father being expired) but are set free, and redeemed by Christ.

Another reason for the abolishing of them is, in respect of that people to
whom they were prescribed, as a mark, and cognizance to discern them from all
other Nations, but now this distinction being taken away, and the wall of
partition being broden down, both Jews and Gentiles being made all one in
Christ, that also is abolished, which discerns them from other people, for
the causes being changed for the which the Law was made, there must needs also
follow an alteration of the Law it self. As Of the juditiall Law.
for the Judicials, they are neither abolished, nor yet with such necessity to
be enjoined, the equity of them binds, but not the strict severity, they do
not hold affirmatively (that we are tied to the same severity of punishment
now, as was inflicted then) but negatively they do hold (that now the
punishment of death should not be adjudged where sentence of death is not given
by Moses) Christian Magistrates living now under Christ, the prince of peace,
Isa. 9. 6. that is, of clemency, and mercy, may abate of the severity of Moses
Laws, and mittigate the punishment The severity of the judicial Law to be
abated.
of death, but they cannot add unto it, to make the burden more heavy. To
show more rigor then Moses, becomes not the Gospel, to extend more favor is
not unbeseeming, of which two assertions, these are the reasons.

1. The first is urged from Lukes Gospel, where our Savior Example.
reproves his Disciples, because they would have had fire to have come down
from Heaven upon the Samaritans, by which we are showed that vengeance is not
always to be taken on them that offend, because oftentimes clemency is more
profitable, both for patience in the offended, and amendment in the offend^r,
and that by the example of our Savior, Luke 9. 54. The Son of man is not come
to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

2. In that example of Christ, who suffered the woman taken Example.
in Adultery to escape without punishment of death, Joh. 8. 11. from which may
be inferred, that the Adultresse now is not to be put to death, but to live
rather to be reconciled to her Husband, or to come to repentance; in which
instance our Savior does not abrogate the Law against Adultery, but refuses
only to meddle with the Magistrates office. And albeit Christ did not exercise
the Magistrates office in his own person (giving unto Caesar the things that
was Caesar's, according to his own direction) yet in this case it had not been
impertinent to have given directions to have had her before the Civil
Magistrate, as in another case (he did send the Leaper to the Priest, Mat. 8.
4.) if it had pleased him to impose still the severity of the Law; yea, our
Savior shows by this answer ( Let him that is amongst you without sin)
cast the first stone at her, Joh, 8. 7. so that he would not have them such
straight executors of the rigor of the Law of Moses upon others, but rather be
severe Judges of themselves, and with charitable affections to support the
frugality of others, to which they themselves were subject unto.

SECT. 3.
THe difference betwixt the time of the Law and the Gospel The difference of
time to be considered.
must be considered, then they received the spirit of bondage to fear, but now
the spirit of adoption, Romans 8. 15. Then they which came near the Mount (where
the Moral Law was given) were stoned, or stricken through with a Dart, whether
man or beast, Heb. 12. 20. but it is not so now, then the blood of Abel called
for vengeance, but the blood of Christ now calls for mercy, and so speaks
better things then that of Abel, ver. 24. therefore to mittigate the severity
of Moses Law in some cases, (yet not leaving sin unpunished, nor by connivance
cherished) it is more suitable to the profession of the Gospel, of peace, and
mercy.

4. The continual practice of the Church shows as much, The practice of
succeeding Churches decline them to b^ mitigated.
that the rigor of Moses Judicials is mittigated, the Apostle only willing the
infectious man to be excommunicated, 1 Cor. 5. 5. by which it seems there was
no Law in force to put such to death; neither therefore was the Law cruel
then, neither now does the Gospel seem to be desolate but in them both, the
benignity of God appeared yet by a diverse dispensation. Then by the death of
the body, the people was rather parged from their sins, then cond^mned, but
unto us, sin is not purged by corporal punishment, but by repentance. The
death of the body then served a^ an expiation of their sins, prefiguring the
death of Christ, Gal. 3. 13. but now the expiation of sins, is by repentance,
and remission of sins in Christ. Now a greater punishment abides the
contemners of the Gospel, even eternal in the next world; and therefore
corporal death is not so much inflicted now.

As to the continuance of the Moral Law, it is yet in force, The Moral Law
yet in force.
and is not abrogated in respect of obedience (which thereunto is still
required under the Gospel) but in respect of the curse and ^alidictio^ which
Christ has taken away; so that it is most true which our Savior says. He
came not to dissolve the Law, but to fulfill it, Mat. 5. 17. he has fulfilled
it in his own person in keeping it. ^. In paying the punishment which was due
by the Law, to the transgressors thereof. 3. By inabling us by his grace to
walk in obedience to the Law.

SECT. 4.
Obj. THe Moral Law only prescribes duties concerning God and our Neighbor,
and speaks nothing of man toward himself. 2. It forbids perjury, whereas
blasphemy and heresy was ^s needful to be forbidden. 3. The precepts of the
Sabbath is only expressed, whereas there were diverse other Feasts, as of the
Passover, P^ntic^ast, and others which the Israelites were bound to keep. 4.
The duty of Parents is commanded, but not the the love of Parents again unto
their children. 5, The inward act of Murder is not forbidden, as the inward act
of Adultery, namely concupisence, therefore there is not a sufficient
enumeration in the M^rall Law of all Moral duties.

Ans. The Moral Law is perfect, and every way sufficient, as may appear by
the general contents thereof, in prescribing all kind of duties, both toward
God, and man. 1. A^ these things are to be performed by us to ^^rr^^^
Governors* namely fidelity, reverence, and obedience; so likewise the like
duties (but in a higher nature and degree) are required toward God; as 1.
Fidelity, in acknowledging him to be the only God, which is commanded in the
first and second Pr^^ept. 2. Re^^r^^^^ in the third, not to profane his
glorious name. 3. Obedience, and Service, which is performed in consecrating
the Sabbath Day holy, unto Gods Worship. Again, as to our Neighbor, our
duties are either special toward those to whom we are bound by any special
kind of benefit, as we are in our Parents, and Superiors (which is required
in the fifth precept;) or generally toward all men, in forbea^ing to do them
any hurt. 1. Either in deed, as in their single persons, concerning their life,
or their coupled persons, touching their Wife; or in their Goods* we must not
steal; as also in words, where falls witness bearing is forbidden; either in
heart, as in the tenth Commandment, yea there can be no duty rehearsed, either
by God, or Man, which is not comprehended under some of these; therefore the
decal^gue contains a perfect Law.

Again, it was not necessary that any particular precept should be given as
touching the duties of a man toward himself, both because nature is not
corrupted in such duties, but that a man still retains love to himself, as
it is in our love toward God, and our Neighbor; as also in that the rule of
our love one toward another, is taken from a man's love toward himself, he
shall love his neighbor as himself. And the Apostle says, That no man ever
yet hated his own flesh; this is therefore presupposed as granted of all, and
as a ground to the rest, that a man loves himself.

2. The Law gives instance in the more general, and no^orions Transgressions,
such as at the first would be acknowledged of all; and therefore because
perjury is more general, and more easily discerned then blasphemy, and
heresy, under that the rest are understood.

3. The other Festivals were memorables of particular benefits, which concerned
the Israelites only, as the Passover, and ^east of Tabernacles, of their
deliverance out of Egypt; but the Sabbath was a memorable benefit of the
Creation, which concerns all Nations, and therefore it only was to be
inserted into the Moral Law.

4. The love of Parents toward their children, though it be natural, yet the
duty of children toward their parents is more agreeable to the Law of Nature,
and the contrary, namely their disobedience more unnatural; and therefore
instance was to be given in this, rather then in the other; and besides, the
name of Father, and Son, being relatives, the duty of each toward other are
reciprocal, and one may be inferred upon the other.

5. Concupisence is expressly forbidden, rather then the first motion of anger
and revenge; First, because it is harder to resist the motion of Concupisence,
then of rage, and revenge, and we are more apt to sin by that, then this. 2.
Because the inward wrath and purpose of revenge begins with a desire. For
there are two things in revenge; as 1. That which we pursue. 2. The pursuit it
self; that which we pursue we judge to be evil, and so hate it; but the
action of pursuit we think to be good, namely, to seek revenge, and so we
desire it. Seeing then that all kind of coveting and desire is forbidden, even
that also is included; from which rage, and revenge, takes its rise or
beginning.

SECT. 5.
Obj. IN the next place it is requisite to consider of the perpetuity, and
continuance of the Law, for in some places the Scripture says, that Christ
came to fulfill the Law, not to destroy it, Mat. 1. 17.
and in other places as though the Law was abrogated, as Romans 6. 14. Ye are not
under the Law, but under grace, with Heb. 7. 12. If the Priesthood be changed,
there must of necessity be a change of the Law.

Ans. For the solution hereof this is to be added here, though How the Laws of
Moses are in force and how not.
the question be partly answered before. And first in relation to the
Ceremonial Law, which was prescribed unto the Jews, to be observed in the
Worship of God, it is wholly abrogated. 1. The body being come the shadow is to
be done away. 2. These Ceremonial observations were tied to a certain place;
as 1. To the Tabernacle. 2. To the Temple of Solomon, but now the Worship of
God is not tied to a certain place, as at Jerusalem, where the Temple was,
Joh. 4. ^^. 3. Other Sacraments are instituted, as Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, ergo they are to be abrogated. 4. The Ceremonies do bind the
observers, to keep the whole Law, but Christ having freed us from the bondage,
ergo. 5. The Ceremonies were a wall of partition, and distinction betwixt the
Jews, and the Gentiles, but now that distinction is taken away, all being one
in Christ.

2. Touching the Pollitick, and judicial Laws of Moses, neither do they
absolutely bind now. 1. In regard that many of them were particular to the
policy of that Commonwealth, as the Laws concerning their inheritances, and
possessions, which were not to pass from Tribes. They also showed the fashion,
and manners of their Country, as in building their houses with slat roofes,
Deuteronomy. 22, 8. of these positive constructions there is now no use amongst other
Nations. 2. The condition of all people are not alike, some are more stubborn
and obstinate, some more civil and tractable, and therefore some have need of
more strict and severe Laws then others; one kind of pollitick Law, then
cannot serve all Nations. 3. The Gospel which is perpetual, prescribes not a
certain form of Government to all Nations, neither overthrows their
several policies, but in general commands obedience to higher powers, Romans
13. 1. ergo much less the Law which was to be changed; but the judicial Law
is* not abrogated in respect of the substance, end, and universal equity,
which is punishing of vice, and maintaining of peace.

3. The Moral Law is not now in force in respect of Justification, How the
Moral Law is not in force.
Romans 3. 28. A man is justified by faith without the works of the Law; but it
binds in respect of obedience, we are bound to keep all the precepts of the
Law; but yet in respect of the terror of the Law, and manner of obedience (to
which we was to be obedient, and subject, for fear of punishment) we are freed
from it; and therefore the Apostle says, The Law is not given to a righteous
man, 1 Timothy 1. 9. because they of love rather then fear do yield their
obedience, and so are a Law unto themselves. But this is a privilege only of
the regenerate; as for carnal, and unregenerate men, they are still under the
curse, and terror of the Law, according to that saying, Cursed is every one
that contin^eth not in all things that are written in the book of the Law to
do them.

SECT. 6.
BUt though the Moral Law be now in force, and binds us The difference
be^wixt the Law and the Gospel.
to obedience, as well as it did the Jews, yet there is a great difference
betwixt the Law, and the Gospel; as 1. In the knowledge, and manifestation
thereof; for by the Moral Law we have some directions by the light of nature;
but the knowledge of the faith in Christ, by the Gospel, is revealed by grace.
2. The Law teaches what we should be, by faith and grace in Christ, we are
made that which the Law prescribes, which the Gospel effects in us. 3. The
conditions are unlike, the Law tyeth the promises of eternal life to the
keeping of the Commandments, the Gospel to the condition of faith,
apprehending the righte^^snesse of Christ. 4. The effects are diverse, the Law
works terror, the Gospel peace and comfort; the Law strikes terrou^ by the
manifestation of sin, as the prodigal Child confessed, I am not worthy to be
called thy son; it causes us to go afar of with the Publi^an, as not
worthy to come near to the presence of God; but the Gospel has two other
contrary effects, for it comfort and alureth, as our Savior says, Come
unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you, Mat.
11. 28. and they that find not the Law and the Gospel to work these their
contrary effects, do show that they neither understand the Law revealing sin,
nor the Gospel giving remission of sins, the one being Lex timoris, the law of
fear, and the other Lex amoris, the Law of love; and these two Laws have also
a threefold difference, viz. The law of fear makes its observer servile, the
law of love makes free. 2. The first is kept by constraint, the other
willingly. 3. The first is hard and heavy, the other easy and light.

CHAP. V. Treats of Gods seeing sin in the Elect.
SECT. 1.
THere are other opinions also, which are attributed to them under the notion
of Antinomians, which I hope are but aspersions cast upon the Professors of
Christ; but however, I shall propound the charge which they are accused with,
and return an answer to it.

Obj. 1. The first is, that God does not, will not, nor cannot see any sin in
his justified ones, which they gather from the text, Number. 23. 21. 2. Though the
children of God sin never so grievously, yet God is not so much as angry with
them for it, much less does he chastise them for it. As also, that the Moral
Law is of no use at all to a Releever, nor rule for him to walk or examine his
life by, and that Christians are free from the mandatory power of it, and that
it is as impossible for a child of God to sin, as for Christ himself; and
that to ask pardon for sin is no less then blasphemy.

Ans. As I have made appear that the Moral Law is yet in force, so also in
the other, that God does not, will not, n^r cannot see any sin in his justified
children; I answer by thi^* demand, viz. Whether David was one of Gods elect
sanctified ones David did repent of his sin.
or no, if he was, why then did the Lord reprove him for his Adultery, and
Murder, by the Prophet Nathan; and what was the cause of his writing the 51.
Psalm, with 2 Samuel 14. 15. I will be, etc. if he commit iniquity, I will chastise
him with the rod of men.

2. As to that they say it is as impossible for a child of God to sin, as it
is for Christ himself; I advise them to take notice of what is affirmed by
them, viz. that they may sin grievously, as before mentioned; now that it is
possible to sin grievously, and yet to be as free from sin, as Christ (to me)
is a paradox; like to which is the other, (That the children of God need not to
ask pardon for their sins, and that it is no less then blasphemy so Peter
and others repented of their faylings.
to do) for thus they make the Apostle Peter a blasphemer, in weeping and
repenting for his inconstancy, Mat. 26. 75. now to acknowledge, that a man may
commit gross and grievous sins, and yet term him a blasphemer, if he repent
of them, is manifestly to declare themselves reprobates; for the Scripture
says, that he only that confesses his sins shall find mercy; and therefore
the Prophet David says, I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and so
thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin: In which wards there is both sin
confessed, and repented of, with a pardon annexed, as the fruit of his
confession and repentance. The same Prophet also says, If I regard sin in my
heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer. Which words does also declare the
detestation which the Lord has of sin, even in his very elect. As also, Rev.
2. 16. where the Lord speaking to his Church, says, Repent, or else I will
come unto thee quickly, etc. the Apostle Paul also The Lord requires
repentance under the Gospel.
says, that godly sorrow works repentance, never to be repented of, a Cor.
7. 10. the Apostle Peter also exciteth Converts to repentance, Act. 2. 38. I
hope these Tenants are but aspersions cast upon the people of God
(undeservedly) by the enemies of God, but if there he any such, I desire them
in the name and fear of God, to renounce such blasphemous Heresies, and that
they will An admo^^tion.
be no more a scandal to the true professors of Jesus Christ, and not hence
forth to give occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme; A word (says
Solomon) to the wise is enough, and being spoken in due season is like apples
of gold, in pictures of silver, Prove. 25. 11.

CHAP. VI. The sixth Chapter treats of such tenants as are most scandalously
imputed to such as are now under the notion of Anabaptists in this Nation, but
if there be any such opinionist now extant, he is answered as follows.
SECT. 1.
Object. FIrst, it is imputed to them aforesaid, that no day ought Several
Tenants laid down and answered. Of he obser^^^^on of the Lords day.
to be kept holy, in that the Apostle says; Let no man judge you, in respect
of an holy day, etc.

Ans. The observation of days are not simply prohibited by the Apostle, sed
cum opinione cultus, vel necessitatis, but with an opinion of placing Religion,
and necessity in them. The Jews kept their Sabbath, as making observation of
the day a part of Gods Worship; and they held it necessary to keep that day
unchangeable: it was also unto them a Type and Figure of their Spiritual rest.
But Christians now keep not the Lords day in any of these respects, either as a
day more holy in it self then others, or as of necessity to be kept, but only
for decency and order, because it is meet that some certain day should be
kept, and set apart for the Worship of God, A^ in practice of Physic, in
pollitick Affairs, and in the trade of Husbandry, there is a lawful
observation of days, but to make some fortunate, and some unfortunate, and to
depend wholly upon the Aspect of S^arres is a vain and idle thing. So likewise
in the practice of Religion, as days may be superstitiously kept, so they may
also be distinguished, for order and decency sake, for other good uses; as to
observe seasons of the year for tilling of the earth, and for the
administration of Physic to the body of man; as also to observe convenient
times for civil businesses, and the like.

SECT. 2.
THe error of Community was first maintained by the Heathen, Of community.
for Plato held that all things ought to be common; the same also was held by
the Heretics called Apostoloci, and attributed Several objects answered
touching community.
in those days to them under the notion of Annabaptists, which particular I
cannot believe of them; but if in case any of them be of that judgment, I hope
these reasons following will convince them of that error.

Obj. The Apostles had all things common at Jerusalem, Act. 2. 44. etc. ergo.

Ans. That custom then was easy, because they were few, and necessary, for if
they had not sold their possessions, and so made the common use, they by
violence should have been stripped of them; but now there is neither the like
facility, or necessity.

2. That community was voluntary, not imposed upon any, for it was in their
choyces whether they would sell their possessions or not, as Peter said to
Annanias, Act. 5. 4. After it was sold, was it not in thy own power, etc.

3. Neither were all things common amongst them, they had some things private
and peculiar to themselves, as Mary had her proper house and dwelling in the
City, Act. 12. 12.

4. This was not the general custom of the whole Church, for in Achaia and
Macedonia, there was gatherings made, for the Saints at Jerusalem, it was then
particular for that place, and peculiar for that time; and therefore a general
rule for all times and places cannot be taken from hence.

5. Neither were things so indifferently common, as that every man might take
what he would, but the things in common were distributed as every man had need,
Act. 5. 35.

Obj. Christ says to the young man in the Gospel, Mark 10. 21. Go and sell
all that thou have, and give to the poor, ergo we must do^ the like.

Ans. That was a personal precept, and belonged to them times, for the
Apostles did leave their parents, and their houses, but we are not commanded to
do the like. Besides, our Savior V^less^ Christ be in composition.
so said, to show how far he came short of the perfection of the Law, and to
humble him, that thought so well of himself; again, he says not, make thy
goods common, but give unto the poor.

SECT. 3.
Obj. ALL things are yours (says the Apostle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3. 11.
all things therefore ought to be common.

Ans. The Apostles meaning in that place is, that all things were ordained for
their good, whether life or death, things present, or things to come.

2. He speaks not of a common possession of all things in right, but that
they are common to use, they had Jus ad rem, non jus in ree; right to the
thing, not in the thing.

Obj. He that gathers much has nothing over, and he that gathers little
had no lack* 2 Cor. 8. 15.

Ans. The Apostle in that text thus infers; upon this condition, out of your
abundance at this time, supply their lack* that their abundance may be also for
your lack, that there may be an equality, as it is written, he that gathers
much, etc. ver. 14. Now the Apostle in that place does not speak of confused
community, and equality in possession of things, but in the use of them, and
that not at all times, but when the necessity of our brethren requires it, and
such community is yet required; and therefore his exhortation is, that like as
in the gathering of Manna, one helped another, and that which any gathered over
went to make up his part which had gathered less; so the supersluity, and
abundance of the rich, should supply the necessities and wants of the poor;
for otherwise, if it were Gods will, that all things should be common amongst
men, then would it be no sin to steal, nor could there theft be committed,
seeing that no man could take any thing, wherein he had not as good an interest
as him he took it from; which is contrary both to the Law, and the Gospel. To
the Law, as in Exodus 22. 1. where it says, If any man steal an Ox, he shall
restore five Oxen; and the doctrine of the Gospel forbids all kind of theft
and stealing, Ephe. 4. 28. Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather
labor with his hands, etc.

Again, that it is lawful for Christians to retain a several right and
property, in those things which they possess, may thus appear; 1. In that the
Scripture allows Contracts, as buying and selling; as Abraham bought a
burying place of Ephro^, Genesis 23. David the threshing-flore of Araunah, 2 Samuel
24. but there can be no such Contract, where there are not distinct properties
in things.

SECT. 4.
Obj. THe examples of the Old Testament belong not unto us.

Ans. That is no less then Blasphemy, seeing the Apostle says, that
whatsoever is written, is written for our instruction, Romans 15. 4. but there is
also the like warrant in the New Testament, as that the Disciples of our
blessed Savior, bought such things as were necessary, Joh. 4. 8. and 6. 5. and
13. 29.

2. The giving of Alms are every where commanded in Scripture, but men are not
to give Alms of such things as are not their own. But if no man have any
peculior property in things, but one man have as much interest as another, men
could not not have where withal to give, neither should there need any alms
at all.

3. Riches are the gift of God, Prove. 10. 22. The blessing of the Lord makes
rich. And Chap. 22. 2. The rich and poor meet together, the Lord is the Maker
of them all. So that it is evident, the Lord allows distinct properties, and
proportions, without which none could be richer then another.

4. The Lord himself appointed that the Tribes, with their several Lots and
possessions should be distinguished, and therefore the fact of Naboth is
defended, and justified, because he would not part with the inheritance of his
fathers.

5. Many other examples may be produced, not only out of the Old Testament, but
also out of the New; for diverse Saints had their proper possessions, and goods,
as Tabitha, Act. 8. that made Coats for the poor of Lidia, Act. 16. who was
also a seller of purple.

6. It is lawful for Christians to have their p^oper servants, much more his
proper goods, for the peculiar possession of servants seems more to be
against the liberty of Nature, then of goods, and lands, but the distinction of
Masters and Servants are not taken away but maintained, and continued in the
New Testament, Ephe. 6. and in other places; much more distinct possessions of
things.

SECT. 5.
Obj. T is also appropriated unto them of this notion, that they are of opinion
that it is not lawful to take an oath before a Magistrate, aleadging the Text,
Mat. 5. 34. But I say unto you, swear not at all, etc. but that it is lawful
to take an oath amongst Christians is thus proved.

Ans. If it had not been lawful to swear, and if the thing were The
lawfulness of an oath, to which purpose many objections are answered.
evil in it self, then the holy Servants of God would not have sworn at all,
as Abraham did to Abimelech, Genesis 22. Jacob to Laban, Genesis 31. 53. Jonathan to
David, and David to Jonathan 1 Samuel 20. 42.

2. God commands us to swear by his name, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20. but God
commands no evil to be done.

3. The end of an Oath is, to put an end to all strife and controversy, Heb.
16. 16. therefore it is to Gods glory, and profitable to humane society, that
by Oaths such businesses should be ended.

Obj. Although it were permitted in the Old Testament to the Fathers to swear,
yet it is forbidden in the New, at Mat. 5. 34. I say unto you, swear not at
all.

Ans. Christ came not to dissolve the Law, viz. the Moral Law, which being
perpetual does yet remain in use. 2. The Prophets speaking of the times of
the Gospel, and o^ the state of the Church under Christ, does foretell that
they should swear by his name, Isa. 65. 16. He that swears on earth, shall
swear by the true God. 3. We have the example of Paul, which often called God
to witness; as Romans 1. 9. and Cor. 1. 23. Romans 9. 1. Phil. 1. 8. Gal. 1. 23.

Obj. Our Savior gives a general prohibition against swearing in that text
of Mat. 5. 34. and the Apostle James says, Above all things my brethren swear
not at all, but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, etc.

Ans. Our Savior does not generally forbid all kind of oaths, but only rash,
and unadvised oaths, which were used in their common talk; so that there he
only corrects an abuse amongst the Jews, who were allowed to swear by
heaven, and earth, and such like, as though such kind of oaths nothing
concerned God; but our Savior tells them, that even in such oaths the name
of God is prophained, and abused, because there can no part of the world be
named, where the Lord has not sent some prints of his glory.

Again, as touching the instance of our Saviors, Mat. 5. 34. he means such
oaths as came of an evil mind, for otherwise he himself used more then yea,
and nay in his speech, saying, Amen, etc. the Apostle Paul also oft-times
called God to witness, which should have been against his Masters rule, if it
had not been lawful at all to have taken an oath; and therefore in regard of
the incredulity, and deceitfulness of men, the necessity of oaths were
brought in; therefore the Argument does not follow, that whatsoever is more,
etc. comes of evil,: for albeit that good Laws are caused by evil manners,
it does not therefore follow that they are evil.

Obj. It is not in man's power to perform what he swears to do, for things
to come are not in his power; therefore it was better to forbear an oath, then
to fall into apparent danger of perjury.

Ans. Though this were granted, yet does it not take away the use of all
oaths, but only such as are for the performing of Covenants, and promises.
There is another kind of oaths, which is called Acirtorium, which affirms
the truth of something already done, which oath (if this objection were
admitted) were not to be taken away. It satisfies that he that takes an oath
to perform some covenant and promise, have a full intent, and purpose to do
it, though it fall out otherwise afterward.

Obj. The oaths which are allowed in Scripture were public, such as were
required of the Magistrate; this gives not liberty to private men.

Ans. Jacob swear to Laban, Joseph to Jacob, Jonathan to David, and David to
Jonathan, yet all these which took these oaths, swear privately, and as
private men; and so an oath serves Several objections answered touching the
power of the Civil Magistrate.
for the evidence of the truth, for the ending of strife, and controversies, in
which there may be a lawful and necessary use of oaths, as well publicly as
privately, not upon every occasion, but when the matter is urgent, and the
place so requires.

SECT. 6.
Obj. ANother Tenent which is urged upon them is, that they deny the lawful
power of the Mastistrate, viz. that he has power to put any to death, or at
least for a Christian to be a Civil Magistrate.

Ans. The Apostle affirms the contrary, Romans 13. 4. where he says, That the
power bears not the Sword in vain, and that he is the Minister of God, to
show revenge upon them that do evil.

Obj. Our Savior exhorts us (in his Sermond) not to resist evil, so that
Christ restrains the power of revenging evil, given by Moses to the
Magistrate.

Ans. Although this power was first given to the Magistrate, yet the Scribes
and Pharisees corruptly applied it to private revenge, so that Christ in this
place disanulleth not the Law of Moses, but speaks against their corrupt
glosses of it.

Obj. We ought not to be subject unto Magestracy, because Christ has made us
free.

Ans. The internal liberty and freedom of the Spirit, does not take away
external subjection unto the Magistrate, as the Apostle says, Art thou called
being a servant, care not for it, 1 Cor. 7. 21. As one then may be a servant,
and retain his Christian liberty; so he may also be a subject. We read also
that Cornelius a Centurion, and Sergius Paulus Pre-consul after their
conversion, was not charged to leave their calling.

SECT. 7.
ANother Tenent which is attributed unto them is, That they Several objections
answered touching the lawfulness of War.
hold it not lawful for a Christian to bear Armor, or Weapons, or wage
Battle, their reasons and objections being these, viz.

Obj: Our Savior exhorts us not to resist evil, but whosoever shall smite
us on the cheek, to turn to him the other also, Mat. 5. 39.

Ans. It is evident that Christ does not here bring in a new Law, but only
freeth it from the corrupt glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, he therefore
gives the true sense of the Law, given by Moses, which allowed lawful war to
be made; therefore Christ's meaning cannot be, that evell, and injuries should
no ways be resisted. It must also be considered, that Christ spoke there to
private men, (not unto Magistrates) that they were not to seek revenge, which
belongs to Rulers and Governors; as also his intent was to restrain men's
corrupt affections, and grudges to seek revenge, and to exhort them to
patience, for according to the very letter our Savior himself did not
perform this precept, for being smitten with a Rod, did not turn the other
cheek, but answered for himself, Joh^ 18* 23. so did also the Apostle Paul,
when the High Priest commanded him to be smitten on the face, Act. 23.

Obj. The Apostle would not have us go to Law one with another, 1 Cor. 6. 1.
etc. much less is it lawful to make war one against another.

Ans. The Apostle does not simply find fault with their going to Law one with
another, but because they convented one another, before Heathen Judges, and for
that they were impatient of wrongs, and would put up nothing at one another
hands; as also in refusing to be tried by the Saints, and their own Church.

Obj. Our Savior bids Peter to put up his Sword, adding further, that they
which take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword, Mat. 26. 32.

Ans. It is plain that our Savior in that place speaks of the private use
of the Sword, not of the public, in lawful Battles; when as the soldier does
not take the Sword in hand by private authority, but it is committed unto him
by the Commandment of the Magistrate.

SECT. 8.
Obj. Our Savior would have the* Tares to grow w^^h the Wheat, until the time
of harvest.

Ans. The end and scope of that Parable is to be considered, which is to set
forth the state and condition of the Church of Christ in this world, and that
the wicked and Hypocrites are mixed amongst the faithful, and that it shall be
so until the second coming of Christ (to purge his flower, and to take away
the chafe) for otherwise, if it were not lawful to take away the evil, there
should be no place for Civil or Ecclesiastical Discipline; and so the Apostle
Paul should have been contrary to his Master, in willing the incestious young
man to be excommunicated, 1 Cor. 5. and so the tares to be weed out of the
wheat, for otherwise they being of such a growing, and spreading nature, they
would overrun, and spoil the wheat.

Obj. The Apostle says, that the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
Spiritual, 2 Cor. 10. 4. we must not then use carnal, and outward weapons.

Ans. The Apostle speaks there only of such weapons as we are to use against
Spiritual evils, which indeed are Spiritual, and not of those that are used
against men; likewise after the same manner the Apostle says, Christ sent me
not to baptize, but preach the Gospel, 1 Corinthians. 2. 17. yet he baptized some,
1 Cor. 1. 14. his meaning therefore is, that he was not chiefly sent to
baptize, but to preach; so the choycest armor of of Christians is Spiritual,
but they may use carnal, or external also.

Again, that it is lawful for a Christian Magistrate to wage battle, may
thus appear, and that by the authority of the Word of God, Deuteronomy. 1. 20. where
there are diverse Laws prescribed to that purpose, viz. As whom they shall make
choice of to go to battle, and how they should be exhorted by the Priests,
with diverse other directions, which had been super^^uous if it had been a thing
simple unlawful to enterprise War; and in the New Testament, when the
Soldiers came to John Baptist, to know of him what they should do; he bids
them not to lay aside their Weapons, or to forsake their Callings, but not to
do wrong, and be content with their wages, Luke 3. 14. we also read in the New
Testament of two Centurions that believed in Christ, and yet retained their
office and calling still.

Further, seeing that it is the office of a Magistrate (that bears not the
Sword for naught) to take vengeance on him that does evil, Romans 13. 4. and
probably it may fall out that not only one or two may commit evil, but a
multitude may also do evil, and commit outrages (as we have had woeful
experience of for these many years) who cannot be resisted, or reduc*d by the
civil Officers, as Constables, Sheriffs, or the like, but by force of Arms;
the Magistrate then is to do his duty, to suppress the evil, and take
vengeance of them (which we may bless God for them) they have in a great
measure done.

SECT. 9.
THere is no precept in the New Testament touching this matter, but only in the
Old.

Ans. It is sufficient that we find it there, for whatsoever is prescribed in
the Old Testament, not repugnant to (nor reversed in) the New, Christians are
to receive and obey. And the reason why no mention is made in the New Testament
of waging of Battle, or making of War is, for that there was no Christian
Magistrate (by whose authority War must be taken in hand) as also because
there was no Civil power in the Church, the Lord gave unto his Apostles an
extraordinary power in punishing the wicked, as Peter did strike Annanias and
Saphira with sudden death, Act. 5. 5. so likewise they needed no Schools
then, because they were furnished with extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, but
now they are needful, them extraordinary gifts being ceased. And so it is
necessary now that the material Sword be used, that Spiritual sword of
vengeance (which the Apostles had) being no more exercised.

And now that I am speaking of War, it will not be impertinent (in respect of
the times many being dubitable to take up Arms for the reasons before
mentioned) to show you what things are required, and do concur to make a
just War, wherein Christians may engage, and be also an honor to their
profession; for I do admire, that seeing the enemies of Christ, and the
Kingdom, are so active for Antichrist, and Christians sit still and do
nothing, not considering the curse which the Angel of the Lord pronounced
against Mer^s (for not, coming out to help the Lord against the mighty) may
fall upon them; for though the Lord can, and will do it, if they help not, yet
are they not thereby excused, as in that example. These three things are
required, and ought to concur to make a just War.

SECT. 10.
1. BY whose Authority it is commanded; 2. Upon what occasion; Three things
required to make a just war.
and 3. In what manner War must be taken in hand.

1. War must not be attempted without the authority of the Magistrate, for he
bears the Sword, Romans 13. 4. if the example of Sampson and Abraham be
objected, this answer is made; for the first, he was moved by the Spirit of the
Lord, which is said to be upon him; for the second, he was no private man, or
subject to any other, but free, and at his own command; beside, he was not
without direction of the Spirit of God, and further if a true man shall defend
himself against a Thief by the Sword, or a City being suddenly besiedged, or
invaded by an enemy, the Magistrate being absent, in these cases it may be
lawful to use the Sword, because albeit in particular they have not the
express consent of the Magistrate, yet in general, the Laws permits, that
it shall be lawful for every one in such a desperate case to defend himself.

2. The causes of War are these three; 1. When any Battle is undertaken, or
enterprised by the special command of God, as Saul was sent against Amaleck.
2. To rescue and recover such things as are unlawfully taken away, as David
pursued the Amalakites that had burned Ziklag, and carried away (...) Goods,
and their Wives, and redeemed them again, 1 Samuel (...) To deliver the
oppressed, and to bridle the insolency, pride, and cruelty of the wicked, as
Abraham pursued the four Kings that had taken Lot prisoner, and delivered him
out of their hands, Genesis 14.

3. The manner also is to be considered, that although the cause of war be
just, yet it is not rashly to be set upon, but all other means must be tried;
as the Israelites before they assaulted their Brethren by open war, (moved by
the Benjamites in the rape of the Levites Wife) first, required the wicked men,
which being refused; they resolved to set upon them, Judge. 20. 13.

There are also many other Tenants, which are attributed to them under the
notion of Annabaptists, as that original sin is not derived from Adam to his
posterity, and that a man has free will in Spiritual things; which Tenants
(if they hold) they are already sufficiently confuted by what has been
formerly delivered; but I find the enemies of Christ so various in their
description of Heretics, that they seem rather to do it more out of malice
then any ways to convince their judgments, making three or four Sects and
Heresies of one and the same. Tenent, as may appear by their printed papers to
that purpose, instance in the Socinians, Arians, Familists, Anti-scripturians;
all which opinions might well be confined to one of the notions before named,
but that such delight to show themselves forward in reproving of others, that
so they might be thought innocent themselves.

CHAP. VII. Treats of the opinions of them under the notion of seekers.
SECT. 1.
IN dealing with them under this notion, I will rather adhere to Mr. Saltmarsh
his description of them (then their other malicious Sensurers) who defines
them to be of this judgment, viz. That there is neither Church nor ordinance
y^^, and that if they did not and with the Prima^ive, or Apostolical times,
yet they are to begin ^s in the Primative time, with Gifts and Miracles.
Several objections of the S^^kers a^swered.


To which Assertions I answer; That Jesus Christ has always had, and yet has
his Church Militant; for when he departed in the Flesh, he promised to be with
it, even to the end of the world. Now in that he so promised, it must of
necessity follow, that the Church must be permanent so long (viz. to the end of
the world) for he cannot be said to be with that which is not. Ergo.

2. As to the period and end of Ordinances I answer; they never yet ceased, but
do yet continue in their Primative purity; true Antichrist has cast his two
vailes of Schism and Heresy upon them, but that of Heresy (lying uppermost,)
is so old, that it is falling off by peece-meale; the other of Schism being so
thin, that good eyes does see truths through it; but that also will speedily be
taken off, and then they will be visible to each spectator.

3. As touching the Gifts and Miracles, which they expect from them that are to
gather the flock of Christ out of Antichristian Pastures, I will answer in Mr.
Saltmarsh his own words, viz.

SECT. 2.
1. THat such Gifts and Miracles were rather for bringing the Word into the
world, and for glorifying Christ's first coming in the Flesh then after, Joh.
20. 29, 30, 31. Mat. 10. 7, 8. Mark 6. 7. Luke 9. 20.

2. That if we must have Miracles to make us believe, and not believe any truth
until then, we must have for every truth, (as for one, or two,) a Miracle to
give it evidence, and so there must be a continual and new Miracle working,
for every new believing.

3. If there must be Miracles for believing, truth is not of Ephe. 5. 1^*
that excellent nature as it seems, for if it be not able to make it self
evident, and cast a native or special shine, or brightness upon that Soul it
comes into, it is but weak, dark, and insufficient.

4. If truth be not discernable in it self, by its own glorious lightsome
nature, by beams from it self, it is in a worse condition then many things
below; as the Sun, Stars, Candles, etc. which bring that light in their
own nature and dispensation, by which they are discerned.

5. If every truth be a beam of Christ the Truth, then every Joh. 8. 12. and
9. 5. Romans 22. 5.
truth has light in it self, because it streams from the fountain of light,
and so is discernable.

6. No Miracle can in its own nature make one believe, without a Spiritual
conviction from the Spirit of Christ, going along with it; for as we see when
Miracles were wrought, some believed, and some believed not; so there is no
such reason for Miracles as pretended, because that conviction which comes
from the Spirit, through the work of a Miracle, may come by another
isntrumental, or organicall way; or it is a more glorious opperation, by how
much more single, or immediate revelation it works.

SECT. 3.
7. THat when Miracles are wrought, yet a Pretender may work a Miracle for the
contrary, like the Sorcerers of Egypt against Moses; and Antichrist is rather
spoken to come with Signs and Wonders of the two then Christ; so that there
shall be a loss to any that think to believe merely by a Miracle, the Spirit
being only that which must make us believe, beyond all power of Miracle, which
can give out its power but upon the sense at the farthest, being merely
outward, and visible.

8. That the Scriptures of the Gospel, or New Testament, are Mat. 23. 24.
of such a divine, and even Spiritual glory in the letter, as no other word.
There is a power to discover the reasons, and secrets of the heart, which the
reason and heart of man witnesses unto; there is a power to convince, and
advise, to terrify, and comfort; clearly, undeniably, and experimentally
known.

9. The Scriptures we have, as they are, do make a discovery 2 Cor. 3. 6. 8,
9. Romans 11 16. Tim. 3. 16, 17
of such a way of religions Reason, as was never yet in any age attained unto;
for the men of purest reason, as the old Philosophers, never attained further
then the knowledge of some things infinite, which they did not know; a Religion
of Moral righteousness and purity, and some Sacrifices of atonement, etc.
and there is not any Religion in the world, Jewish or Turkish, but they are
made up of carnal principles, and are founded upon reason and nature; but this
Gospel Religion, has opened a new way to salvation, a way of worship, cross
to all Methods, and Heb. 4. 12 1 Pet. 1, 19
w^yes of reason; the word opening new ways by a new Spirit, purifying
natural reason into more divine and glorious notions, then reason ever
attained; bringing in a way of believing, and placing a Religion, placed upon a
spiritual persuasion called faith, which is more proportionable to an infinite
God, and an infinite way and depth of Salvation, then reason ever invented. For
the Soul to believe upon one, even Jesus Christ, in whom God has laid up all
love, and fullness, and so for man to come one with him, who is God, and Man.
And there cannot be a more rational way for man to become one with God, then
by one, that is both God, and Man.

SECT. 4.
10. THat the Scriptures, or Gospel of the New Testament, being a many hundred
years old, as from the Apostles even in that original we have them, no very
material difference is to be found, albeit the Copies have passed through the
greatest Apostasy, God restraining Antichrists power to corrupt them
materially, in the original, to advantage their Heresies and corruptions;
which very constant preservation of truth, in the very midst of the enemies of
truth, is both a constant and standing Miracle of it self; and so we need not
stay for a Ministry with Miracle, seeing we have a word with Miracle, which in
its matter, subject, power, speaking of God, of his Son, God and Man, of his
Spirit, the actor in man, from both, by way of outward ordinances, of the
depths, windings, and workings of reason, etc. and is of as much efficacy to
persuade as any thing else we can have; and though there be not such pouring
out of Spirit, and such gifts as believers may and shall have, yet all
believers ought to practice so far of the outward ordinances, as is clearly
revealed; which conviction of his I suppose is sufficient to dissuade any
rational man from thinking, that either Miracles, or new gifts of Tongues, is
now requisite for the gathering the Church of Christ out of Antichristianisme,
as there was in the Apostles time out of Judisme and Heathenisme.

Thus have I (by Gods assistance) confuted the tenants of the Atheists,
Anti-scripturians, Papists, Pellagians, Armenians, Antinomians, Seekers,
Annabaptists, saving that tenent, from which they have their denomination,
which I shall hereafter discourse of, in its more proper place, and in the
confutation of these former opinions, is sufficiently confuted that other
r^bble of Schisms and Heresies, which are new coined with the Presbiterian
stamp, unless it be the Quakers, divorcers, and Soul-sleepers, which if there
be any such, as I hardly believe, they may tell thee; 1. That when they be
hungry or thirsty, they will remember themselves; and the second, That to the
pure all things are pure; and ask the third, which part of the St. Theife was
with Christ in Paradise that day after his Passion, Luke 23. 24.

CHAP. VIII. The eighth Chapter, treats of Prelaci^.
SECT. 1.
IN the next place (by the same assistance) I A preface to the Prote^^ant.
intend to prosecute the discovery of all the Relics of Popery, which is yet
harbored in any other opinions now extant amongst us in this Nation, in hope
that each ^pinionist will be as willing to embrace the truth, as it is willing
to offer it self unto him; and in regard the chief cause of the quarrel
amongst us (in matters of Religion, consists in observing or not observing of
Ceremonies, which in respect of their long continuance, is the greater cause
that men's minds are hardly persuaded from them; as also in regard of the
outward ^stentation, or Aronicall glory which they retain, I will therefore
take some pains to discover the ridiculousnesse of those needless Ceremonies,
which is yet fostered amongst many thousands in this Nation, being verily
persuaded, that after they once see the vanity of them, and how punctually they
are against the precepts of Christ, and his Apostles, they will utterly
renounce them, albeit they have hitherto so much delighted themselves in them.
By which means (their consciences being convinced) they may use the Apostles
word, (in the Apostles sense) and say, What pleasure had we then in those
things whereof we are now ashamed. And contrariwise, if any (whom I have, or
shall convince) remain refractory, and obstinate, it will be a means to leave
them without excuse, in regard they refuse to have their understandings
eluminated, loving darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil,
Joh. 3. 19.

SECT. 2.
ANd in the first place I will encounter with such who call Ch^istians the most
proper ^itle of the Disciples of C^^^st. Act. 11. 26.
themselves Protestants, being ashamed of the name Christian, which the
Apostles and Disciples of the Primative Church took upon them, as an ornament
of their profession, being derive^ from their Masters name whom they professed
to serve; these Protestants, or rather Prelatticants (in regard of their dear
affections to Bishops, and their Popish Ceremonies, and superiority) being
overruled by Satan's policy (which is, to draw us to the outward imitation of
Ceremonies, that thereby we might leave the substance) have under pretense of
decency and order (and as it were to step out of the way, to bring the Papists
in, to them,) maintained these their superstitions, but by woeful experience
they have found a contrary effect; for instead of so doing, the Papists have
caught the most of them, so that now they would rather be deprived of their
Lives and Fortunes, then part with such Toys.

Now in regard I would show them the vanity of each of their Their mistake in
the Church*
errors, I will first begin with their opinion touching the sanctity, and
inherent holiness which they attribute to that place which they call the
Church, which indeed is not the Church, but merely a Meeting Place for the
Church. The true Church of Jesus Christ being a company of Men, or Women, or
both, acknowledging or worshipping the true God, (being gathered into A
diffinition^ of the Church of Christ.
a Body, or Fellowship by the Word, and Baptism) whom Christ does regenerate
and sanctify here with his Spirit, and purposes afterward to glorify in his
heavenly Kingdom.

SECT. 3.
ANd as they are mistaken in the Church, so are they also in Their mistake in
the sanctity ^r inherent holiness they attribute to their Steeplehouses.
the sanctity, and holiness which they attribute to that place (which they so
term;) for though before Christ's coming in the flesh, the Lord had chosen one
special place where he would have Sacrifices offered unto him, and not in any
place beside, and so was privileged with a legal kind of Sanctity more then
others; yet now since Christ has every where opened Heaven to the prayers of
the faithful, (as appears by his own words, Mat. 18. 20. Wheresoever two or
three are gathered together in my name, I am in the midst of them, that
distinction holds not. And for further proof of which, we have a further
evidence from Christ and his Apostles, who neglected no opportunity to gain
Souls to God, witness our Saviors preaching on the top of an Hill, Matthew. 5.
1. out of a Ship, Mark 4. 1, 2. Paul in an upper Chamber, Act. 20. 8. and by a
river side, Acts 16. 13. Peter in Cornelius house, Act. 10. 27. and in
Solomon's* Porch, Act. 3. 11, 12. Philip in the Ennuchs Chariot, Act. 8. 31, 32.
yea, the Apostles went from house to house, Act. 20. 20. that distinction of
holiness does not therefore remain in places, nay even Bethel it self did
not retain an inherent holiness; for we read, that after that Jeroboham had
defiled it by Idolatry, it was no more Bethell, the house of God, but Bethaven,
the house of iniquity, Hosea 19: 5. Again, the Apostle wills men every where
to lift up holy hands, 1 Timothy 1. 8.

Obj. The Lord wills Moses, to put off his shoes from off his feet, in
regard that the^ place whereon he stood was holy ground.

Ans. It was holy for the present, in regard of the apparision What caused the
then holiness in the ground.
and presence of God; but this was no inherent holiness anexed continually
unto the place, but when the cause of this holiness ceased, (viz. the heavenly
Vision and apparision) the effect also, (viz. the holiness in the ground) was
suspended. The Temple of the Jews was likewise holy, and because of it
Jerusalem was was called the holy City, so long as they continued in the true
worship of God, but after they had Crucified the Lord of life, hoth the Temple,
and City, as profane was destroyed. And herein also appeared the error of the
former times, when such bloody battles were fought for the recovering of the
holy Land (as it was called) by the evil success whereof it is evident; that
Christians were too much addicted to the holiness of the place, and therefore
to attribute religion, or holiness to such places, is absolute superstition.

SECT. 4.
NEither ought the glorious pomp of the Temple or Tabernacle Against adoring
of Churches.
to be imitated by us under the Gospel, and that for these reasons. 1. Because
that was prescribed to the Hebrews because of their infirmity, and to win them
from the glorious pomp and vanity of the Heathen. 2. Most of them things had
their proper use in the Temple, which being now abolished, there is no further
use to be made of them. 3. Neither was they simply necessary for Gods Service,
for if they had he would not have suffered them to have been carried into
captivity. 4. They had a direct command from God to make that Tabernacle in
that glorious manner, but no such charge is given to us under the Gospel, our
bodies (as the Apostle says) being the temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19.

Again, as they err in their judgments concerning the place which they term
the Church, as also concerning the sanctity and holiness which they attribute
unto it; as also in the adoring, Against their Common Prayer-booke, or Liturgy.
and beautifying of it; so do they also err exceedingly concerning the Book
(which they so Idolize) termed the Common Prayer Book, and the rediculous
ceremonies therein contained; against which Book I thus argue.

That which is taken out of the Masse-Booke of the Pope, who is an Idolater, is
the Liturgy, as is most evident; which being Popery in Latin, doubtless is
the same in English. Again, every thing that is necessary to salvation is
commanded in holy Scripture, as our Savior affirms, Joh. 5. 39. but set
Prayer is not commanded in holy Scripture, ergo not a thing necessary to
Salvation. Again, no part of Gods Worship ought to be imposed by man's
authority, but such is the Liturgy, ergo.

CHAP. IX. The ninth Chapter treats of Prayer.
SECT. 1.
Objection. THe Lords Prayer is o set form of Prayer, therefore The Lords
Prayer a form to make our prayers by.
a set form of prayer is lawful?

Ans. The Lord is only to be worshipped in Spirit, and in Truth, and as
concerning the Lords Prayer, it is only a form to make our Prayers by, Mat. 6.
9. Again, all the circumstances in both the Evangelists, as Luke 11. 1. 4. does
lead us thus to understand it, as namely, that Christ there shows the right
manner how to use Prayer, as he does for the right use of alms, and fasting,
and to avoid ambition, hypocrisy, babbling, and the like; as also that we
should come to God in prayer, as children do unto their Parents, asking Bread,
Fish, an Egg, or the like; that is, making our requests unto God according to
our particular wants and necessities.

Again, no man can be so wilful to doubt, that Christ did not unfold the
meaning of this Prayer to his Apostles, and that they did truly understand his
meaning therein, and did also carefully observe his commands; yet did they
never bind themselves to these words, but prayed still as they had several
occasions according to these rules, Act. 1. 24, 25. and 4. 24. Mat. 14. 30. 2
Cor. 12. 8. Ephesians. 3. 14. Phil. 1. 4. 10. 11. Rev. 12. 20.

Neither when they wrote unto others concerning Prayer, did ever teach them to
say the Lords Prayer, which certainly they would have done if they had so taken
the will, and appointment of Jesus Christ to have been; but it is evident that
they taught them in their necessities and occasions, to show their requests to
God in all manner of Prayer and supplication in the Spirit, with giving of
thanks, watching thereunto with all perseverance, being the will of God in
Christ Jesus; as also it does evidently appear by these Scriptures, 1 Timothy 5.
17, 18. Phil. 4. 6. Ephesians. 6. 18. Romans 15. 30, 31, 32. 2 These. 3. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 2.
1, 2, 3. Jam. 1. 5, 6. and 5. 23. 1 Pet. 4. 7. 30. 1 John 5. 14, 15. Jud. ver.
20.

SECT. 2.
AGain, if Christ have commanded us to use these words, in number, and order,
then all such doc sin as pray at any time, and does not use these very words,
and no other; for Christ says, When ye pray, say, Our Father, Luke 11. 2.
which words (when ye pray) shows, that this Commandment is to be observed at
all times; and if so, then the Apostles sinned, which prayed, and used not
these words, as I have formerly instanced. Again, by these words (say ye, etc.)
being pressed according to the letter, might seem to exclude all prayer in the
Spirit alone, that is, without words, or distinct voice, which is lawful, and
oftentimes used by the people of God, as we may read, Exo. 14. 25. Neh. 2. 4. 1 Samuel 1. 13. Romans 8. 26, 27.

Again, the heads of that prayer is general, so that no man can apply them
aright without some special relation or application to his or their particular
estate, and condition; Christ therefore prescribed that form of prayer, that
it should be a rule, and pattern to make our prayers and supplications by, and
has not commanded to use, or promises to accept of such Prayers, as are
framed by man's invention, but only such as proceed from the Spirit.

Now in regard the Book of Common Prayer has been the The Common Prayer Book
the chief cause of the difference betwixt us.
chief cause of the difference, betwixt them who term themselves Protestants,
or rather Prelatticants and us, who term our selves Christians, I am the more
induced to treat of it at large, hoping that the Lord will so eluminate their
understanding, that they will duly, and seriously consider of their opinions,
and renounce their errors, which the Lord in mercy grant.

SECT. 3.
IN the first place I will show them what Prayer is; the holy The deffinition of
Prayer.
men of God do define Prayer to be the interpreter of the mind, Non vox sed
votum, (as one says) the wings wherewith our Souls do fly to heaven, as
swife as Cannot Shot out of a Camon; the Key of the Gates of heaven, that which
either early, or late, finds admittance; that which forces an audience, and
unlocketh the ^ares of God himself. It is also defined to be a calling upon
God by celestial cogitations, of which there be Two sorts of prayer, mental
and vocal.
two sorts; 1. Mental, or that which is not uttered by the tongue, but by the
mind, and this sort of Prayer is called ejaculatory prayer, by which the
people of God dart up their requests, through silence of speech; the second
sort is vocal, or that which is expressed by speech, or words.

For the first of these we have many examples in Scripture, as in Of mental
P^ayer.
Moses, Exo. 14. 15. where the Lord says unto him, Why cryest thou unto me,
etc. whereas Moses is not said to utter any voice, but sighed unto God, and
cried in his heart; whereupon one says, Egit vocis silentia, ut cord
clamarit; he in the silence of his voice so wrought, that he cried in his
heart. We have another example in Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 13. in these words; Now
Hannah she spoke in her heart, only her lips moved, but her voice was not
heard. We have also another example in Jehoshaphat, who when he was compassed
with the Assyrians, is said to cry out unto the^ Lord, which probably was not
vocally, but mentally, 2 Cor. 18. 31. so that the lifting up of the voice is
not the most necessary part of Prayer, but the sorrow, and contrition of the
heart, and therefore the Lord says by his Prophets, Before they call I will
answer to their secret requests, and enward grievances of their heart. And this
is most probable, for God being a Spirit, will especially be invocated by the
spiritual part of man, Joh. 4. 24. and contrariwise abhors those that come
near unto him with their lips, their hearts being far from him, Mat. 15. 7,
8. now with such as have the Spirit of God, this sort of Prayer is much used,
for by it we may pray upon all occasions, unknown unto the world, by lifting up
pure hearts unto the Lord, in reference to which comes this saying, Pii ^rat
tassatie, good men pray in silence.

SECT. 4.
THe other manner of Prayer is vocal, that is, when the O^ Prayer.
tongue expresses, and utters the desires of the heart; either of which
being produced from a true, and a lively faith in Christ, is so prevalent with
God, that they procure our wished desires, so far as the Lord knows it
needful for us, according to the promise of our Savior, Ask and ye shall
receive; as also the Lord by the Prophet, Call upon me in the time of trouble,
and I will hear thee.

Now as there be two sorts of Prayer, viz. a Natural man, and Two sorts of
men, v^z. a. natural man, and a spiritual man.
a Spiritual man, of which two sorts of people the world does consist, and
they are utterly opposite the one to the other, as light and darkness, Heaven
and Hell, Christ and Beliall. As for the Natural man, in regard he would not
absolutely declare himself to be an Athiest, (in respect he sees so many in
the world that do acknowledge that there is a God) therefore for fashion sake,
he will also have a way, and rule to worship God by, which shall suite with his
condition; and to this purpose he does furnish himself with all materials, Cap
a pea, as may conduce to his humor, viz. He will have a Church, but they shall
consist of his own fraternity, who shall scorn the very name of a Saint, ye
hate him more then a Devil.

2. They will have a place to meet in, as others, but it must be The natural
man's humor.
decked, adorned, and beautified, with whatsoever seems delectable, and
pleasant to the sense, for being sensual themselves, and having no other
understanding, therefore they place their delight merely in sensual things, as
the Apostle testifies at large, Romans 8. 5. so that if they preach, or hear a
Sermond, it must be if possible the quintesence of Eloquence. If they pray, it
must be in a studied set speech, in choice Oratory, their Priests being attired
like Havest Dames, etc. and thus in all their worship do they express
themselves to be carnall-minded men, and such as the Apostle declares to be at
enmity with God; which does fully appear by their Serpentine like hate to all
such as go about to dissuade them from their folly and madness; and this they
do in regard they would seem somewhat religious, and cannot perform it in
another way, it being contrary to their game.

SECT. 5.
Obj. Why do you endeavor to reclaim them if you can have no other?

Ans. They can do no other during the time they are in their carnal
condition, but I hope the Lord has many amongst them The d^spera^e resolutions
of some Cavaliers.
who belong unto him (albeit under that veil of ignorance) whom my desire is
to dissuade from their errors; for otherwise I am confident that it is no more
possible for a Camel to pass through the eye of a Needle, or to make Hell,
Heaven, then to reclaim the other, whose desperate resolutions are so
apparently manifest.

Now contrary to this Natural man, there is a Spiritual man, The Spiritual
man's humor in point of Prayer.
who is of a quite contrary mind, and opinion, for whereas the carnal man's
judgment is, that Prayer although invented by another, if but read over by
them, or any other, is sufficient for the Service of God (as indeed it is to
that God they worship) the Spiritual man he is of another judgment, for he
says, that true prayer is that which is dictated to the mind, by the Holy
Ghost, and so makes prayer the voice of Gods own Spirit, which arises from
the regenerate part within us, being quickened, and enlarged to pray, from the
immediate help of the Holy Ghost, and such prayers (say they) are only
acceptable to God, and no other.

Now to know whether of these opinions retains the truth, it Of the Spirit of
God in prayer.
is requisite to have them to the touchstone of truth, viz. the Word of God,
which is able to convince all errors, and to make them appear in their
natural colors; to which purpose the Apostle Paul is very pertinent in his
Epistles, as in Romans 8. 26. where he speaking of the act of Prayer, (or ^ather
the Spirit of God in him,) says, That the Spirit helps our infirmities, and
that we know not what to pray for as we ought, but that the Spirit it self
makes intercession for us with sighs, and groan^s which are unutterable;
which he does also thus further illustrate in the 27 ver. viz. And he that
searches the heart knows the mind of the Spirit* because he makes
intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God.

SECT. 6.
FRom whence I thus argue: If the intercession of the Saints (who are
predestined to salvation) be not availeable without the direction and
guidance of the Spirit of God, as it is evident they are not. Instance in holy
David, who says, If I regard wickedness in my heart, God will not hear my
prayer) what will become of the other, and what better testimony can we have to
decide the controversy, then when the Holy Ghost himself confirms the point
as a witness to his own act; their audaciousnesse A set ^o^me of Prayer has
not the Spirit of prayer.
and stupidity is therefore to be admired, who think that Prayer and Preaching
can avail, although the Spirit of God do not Co-opperate with it; for the
Holy Ghost teleth us plainly, that we know not what to ask without his
direction; now what direction from the Spirit of God can be imagined in that
prayer, which is formerly composed by another party, then he who reads or
prays it; or what benefit can be expected from that prayer where the tongue
expresses that, which was not formerly conceived in the mind to ask; well
may they therefore be compared to Steevens uncircumcised Jews, in that they
still resist, and flatly deny the motions of the Spirit of God in the act of
prayer.

Again, the Children of God have sundry occasions to pray unto God by reason of
their manifold temptations, by the flesh, the world, and the Devil, which do
war continually against the Spirit; now let any judicious man censure,
whether a child of God finds greater comfort in expressing his misery, and
unfeigned repentance (being moved thereunto by the Spirit of him to whom he
prays, rather then to express himself by such a prayer as is invented by
another man. Again, what prayer can be more acceptable to God then when he is
invocated by a penitent sinner, who is dictated what to ask by the Spirit of
him to whom he prays; certainly then we ought rather to join our selves with
the Spirit of God, rather then the spirits of men.

SECT. 7.
Obj. SVch as pray by the Spirit use Tautollogies, and vain repetitions in
their prayers.

Ans. God does not give the measure of his Spirit to his Children by equal
proportions, but to some more, to some less, but to all some; yea such a some,
that he that has the least of it, has so much as to make his prayer
acceptable, though not so much prevalent with God, as them who have a greater
measure of it.

Again, Gods ways are not our ways, he is not like an earthly Prince, who is
commonly petitioned, with a premeditated speech; It is not eloquence of words
that God rega^deth in p^ayer.
neither is it eloquence of words, which works upon him, but the pious
thoughts and desires of the heart, which the Lord being formerly acquainted
withal, before they be expressed by the tongue, are even then accepted of him,
which the Lord testifies by his Prophet in these words; Before they call, I
will answer, Isa. 65. 29. so that it is not so much the expression of the
tongue, as of the heart which God accepts, or flows as pleasing unto him.

Again, let them peruse their Liturgy, and see if they can excuse Their Liturgy
ha^h many tautologies in it.
it of Tautologies, when they repeat these Sentences, viz. Lord have mercy upon
us, Christ have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy upon us; Christ hear us, O
Christ hear us, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us; with, Thou
Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world, three times repeated
together; with, Good Lord deliver us; and, We beseech thee to bear us good
Lord, very many times: repeating the Lords Prayer also many times at one
Service. And yet to see those vain bablers, that will accuse others with that,
which they are the most guilty of themselves; yea, what is their Pulpit Prayers
but mere tautologies, the same the next Sabbath as was the former, A carnal
man tyeth God to one and the same prayer.
and so for all their life long; yea let the occasion be what it will, Funeral
or Feast, Plenty or Famine, Wars or Peace, or what occationals soever, God
must either be pleased with their set form, or he is like to have none at all;
yea though there be never a clause in their expressions, which tends to the
present occasion: whereas through the whole Book of God, we neither read of
any child of God that prayed, but that his prayer did solely tend to his
present occasion, as I have formerly proved when I spoke of the Lords Prayer it
self.

SECT. 8.
SO that if these vapouring Russians were tied to pray in the same nature as
do the Children of God (whom they so villifie) certainly they could not be so
rash in censuring as they are; when as some of them in mine own hearing being
to pray for a sick Party in their Pulpit Prayers, have had much ado to bring
it in, and much more to get into their set prayer again; but has been in very
great danger of an non plus.

Again, the Apostle James says, that the effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much. From which expression we may gather, that true
prayer must tend to effect the necessity of the Party praying. 2. That this
prayer must also be full of servency, and zeal to have it effected, as the
Prophet says, I roared even for the disquietnesse of my soul. 3. That it must
proceed from a righteous man, or else the other are in vain; and this is
evident by the Prophet Hosea, who speaking of such prayers as are made by
ungodly men, calls them houlings, They called A p^a^er ^^^m a (...) is no
(...) then (...).
not upon me when they houled upon their beds. And the reason thereof is also
rendered by the same Prophet (why such prayers are not accepted of the Lord) to
be this, viz. that they assem^led themselves for corn and wine, and not for
Spiritual blessings, Hosea 7. 14. so that carnal minded men pray only for
carnal things, such as tend to their outward estate and condition, but not any
ways to the desire of Spirituals, that being the furthest thought in them.

Obj. Do you disallow the reading of good prayers, which have been made by
godly men?

Ans. No, for by reading such prayers, our infirmities in praying How set f^^ms
of prayer may be used.
may be strengthened, and our desires enlarged, there being many things in them
which we have need to pray for; but not to present such prayers to God, by
reading of them for our selves, but if in the act of prayer such expressions be
presented to our minds, by the Holy Ghost, doubtless they are so made our
own, and as acceptable to God as may be, but not otherwise; for as it would be
counted a rediculous thing for a child, who having an occasion to crave a
courtesy of his Father, writes his mind in a paper, and so reads it to his
Father, even so it is with him that comes to pe^ition God, by reading a
prayer for his own particular, which another man has formerly inv^^ted.

SECT. 9.
Obj. But suppose he invent it himself, and so read it, is not that lawful?
To read a prayer is rediculous, i^ in tended as a prayer in the act of reading.


Ans. It is more rediculous, then for a Son to read his desires to his Father,
for his Father is ignorant of it before he hear it, or read it: But it is
otherwise with God, for he accepts of no prayer but such as his own Spirit
dictateth, so that the very concerving of a Pitition in the mind is the act of
prayer, and that which is only acceptable to God, though not vocally expressed;
as in Isa. 65. 24. Before they call, I will answer, etc. and whilst they are
yet speaking, I will hear, with Dan 9. 23. At the beginning of thy
supplication the commandment came forth; therefore as I said before, it is
rediculous to think that God stands upon such curiosities, as set speech is, or
printed papers read unto him, since he knows the mind of the Petitioner
before he has expressed himself; and I dare boldly affirm, that if a
Christian can but from a contrite heart, say with the Publican, Lord have mercy
upon me a sinner, it shall be better accepted with God, then to read the most
learned Oration that ever was yet invented by man.

SECT. 10.
Obj. May not a wicked man make an extemporary prayer?

Ans. Though they can Hypocresse it, yet are not the children of God therefore
to desist from that manner of expressions, for it may as well be argued, that
because the Devil quoted Scripture, that therefore none ought to do the like
to justify the truth.

By this then that has been spoken, it does fully appear, that true prayer
has the spirit of prayer; and contrariwise, such prayers as are imposed by men
(as are still in use, and ever will be amongst carnal men) has only the spirit
of man, and not of God; for although they might be composed by such men, as
it is The title common, fitly (...) to such praye^s.
likely had the Spirit of God, yet are they of no validity to a carnal man;
and as for a Spiritual man, he has no further need of them, then to read them
(not as an imediate prayer, but as an help to him against he pray) and
therefore a very right and suitable name is given to such sort of Prayers, by
calling them, Common Prayers, as they do that of the Liturgy, they being
indeed common to all licentious fellows, who are so accustomed unto them, as
that their Priests can repeat them, although they are three quarters drunk,
and yet think they pray gallantly.

Again, by these prayers the godly cannot be distinguished from the wicked, or
reprobate, when as in truth the gift of prayer is a maine cognizance to know a
child of God by, and by which they are stirred up to a greater fervency,
zeal, and cheerfulness in praying, by perceiving the Holy Ghost to put such
words into their minds, as are suitable to their present necessity; but for the
other sort of prayer, it cannot comfort at all, so then to conclude, the one
does so far excel the other, as that it is a Prayer, and the other is not,
as I have proved out of the Prophet Hosea* Chap. 7. 14.

SECT. 11.
ANd like to their Book of Common Prayer are their Homilies, seeing to preach,
and to pray in the Church, are two Against ^eading o^ Homilier.
special duties of the Ministers of Christ, who gives his Servants gifts for
the whole Ministry, and therefore as in Prayer, to be the mouth of the people
unto God, so also in Preaching, to be the mouth of God unto the people, Ephe.
4. 8. 12. Act. 6. 4. and if any take upon them the calling of a Minister, and
be not endowed with such gifts, there is no warrant in the Word of God to make
use of them as Ministers of Jesus Christ; but if they be so endowed, there is
no warrant to prescribe them stinted prayers, or Homilies, for in so doing they
derogate from the honor, fruit, and benefit of Christ's assention into Heaven,
and from the care, love, and bounty that he has continually showed unto his
Church Militant, to whom he gives gifts for the work of the Ministry, as in
Ephesians. 4. 8. 12. 13. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. Mat. 28. 20. It also abridgeth the
office of the Holy Ghost, which is only said to teach us to pray as we ought,
and also keeps out of the Church the gifts, and graces of God, quenching the
Spirit in the Ministers and people, in the service of God, Romans 8. 26, 27. Ephesians.
4. 8. and 6. 18. 1 These. 5. 19. Jud. ver. 20.

Now if these set forms had been appointed by Christ, then God will only be
worshipped as himself has prescrib^d.
his Apostles had showed themselves unfaithful, or insufficient for the work
committed unto them, who never left such a president or commandment to the
Churches; neither can it be of faith in us, or pleasing to God, to worship him
after another manner then himself has prescribed, as may appear by these
Scriptures, Exo. 20. 4, 5, 6. and 30. 9. Psalm. 141. 2. and 119. ver. 113. 118
Col. 2. 23. Romans 14. 23. Heb. 11. 6. and 12. 28, 29.

This which has been spoken, I hope will be sufficient to dissuade every one
(that has the least measure of the grace of God) from the fond conceit they
have had of that Book, tituled, The Book of Common Prayer, which hitherto
they adore with as much zeal, as the Ephesians did their Diana; and in that I
would not only draw them from worshipping the Image, but also from her Shrines,
and her Dimetriousses, who still with open mouth cry them up, (desiring rather
to set the Commonwealth in another cumbustion, then that their craft should be
despised, and set at naught, it being the chief instrument of their
subsistence, and livelihood) I shall therefore act the Town-Clarke, in
persuading them to be patient, (in regard another uproare will not end the
controversy) and implead one another at Law, viz. by the Law of the Spirit
(which is, the Word of God) who will speedily give the right to whom it
belongs.

CHAP. X. The tenth Chapter, treats of Priestly Garments, etc.
SECT. 1.
Object. ARe not particular Garments and Vestments to be used in Gods Service?

Ans. The Apostle tells us, Romans 14. 17. That the Of peculiar v^stmen^s used in
Gods Service.
Kingdom of God consists not in meats, and drinks, viz. not in outward
ostentation of apparel, or rather humane inventions, to delight the fantasies
of men.

Obj. The Priests under the Law had their Garments appointed them?

Ans. That example now does not bind the Ministers of the Priestly Garments
abolished.
Gospel, because it was a legal observation, and these Priestly Garments were
types of Christ; the Body then being come, the types and figures should cease,
and to keep some of the legal Ceremonies, bind us to keep all; Ministers
therefore ought not to be discerned from the people, Pileo, sed pietate, by
their Cap, How the Ministers of Christ ought to be known.
Surplisse, and Tippit, but by their piety, and integrity of life and
conversation, therefore such like Popish trinkets having no warrant in the
Word, to be used under the Gospel, ought to be rejected of the Professors of
Christ, and that further for these Reasons following:

1. Because the outward glory of the Vestment does effect the Humane inventions
do not edify.
eye of the beholder, and so hinders the meditation. 2. In regard no humane
invention ought to be admitted into the Service, or worship of God. 3. In
regard every Rite of the Church should edify; but these humane inventions, and
significations cannot edify: And 4. Because they were brought into the Church
by Antichrist, and therefore ought to be abandoned.

SECT. 2.
ANd as the Garments, so are the many and sundry Ministerial actions, which
being done without them, they esteem as not done at all, putting a bar of
silence before their mouths that refuse to make use of them; as also the
certain fees which they claim as proper unto them, called, Surplissefees, for
which they have no more warrant from the Word of God then the rest, which is
none at all; now by these and their other fine knick-knacks which they used in
their Cathedrals (as they term them) how near they imitate the Leviticall
Priesthood, let themselves judge, and how by so doing they rob God of his
honor, deriving that unto themselves which was fulfilled in Wherein the
comeliness of the Church does consist.
Christ, converting the substance of his glorious Priesthood into an earthly
pomp; far be it therefore from Gods people to entertain or renew such
fopperies in the Church of Christ, but rather subscribe to the Apostles
simplicity, for the comeliness of the Church does not consist in Cerico and
auro, sed edificatione, not in silk, and gold, but in edification. Seeing then
that these Ceremonies do not only offend the weak, but is also a means to
advance Popery, let us therefore relinquish them, and those also that provoke
us to use them.

Obj. Ought not days (dedicated to Saints) to be celebrated as holy?

Ans. Days wherein God has permitted man to work in, may be employed to that
purpose, but the Lord has given sufficient What days ought to be observed,
and what not.
liberty to work for six days in the week, as in the fourth Commandment,
ergo no day of the six ought to be observed to any other use, unless appointed
by the Magistrate, or the Church, for Humilations and Thanks-givings, as was
Hesters Fast, and the rest which we find in the Scriptures, but in no wise to
observe Popish Feastivals, in remembering of men, for the Lord is the Creator of
time and days, and therefore he only ought to have the honor of them.

SECT. 3.
THe like may also be said concerning Godfathers, and Godmothers, Of God
fathers and God mothers
for which some pretend ancient custom, begun by a Bishop in the days of
Antonius Pius, who first ordained that such choice witnesses should present
children to the Congregation, in case their Parents were dead, or fled for
persecution; but all this is to no purpose, unless they can produce such a
custom from Christ or his Apostles, which I am confident they cannot; for
though we read of diverse that were Baptized by the Apostles, yet that the
Parties so Baptized had such Sureties, is not any where spoken of; and there is
a good reason for it, for they admitted of none that stood in need of such like
to promise for them, accepting only of such as members, who were able to
express their own faith and repentance, as I shall (in its due place) make
appear at large. And it is much to be admired, that learned knowing men should
yet remain so ignorant, or rather stupid in that particular of Baptism, as
either to admit of such subjects to it as are not capable of it, or for such
people to promise that for the Infant, (viz. That it shall forsake the Devil,
and all his works, and constantly believe all Gods holy Laws, and
Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of its life;) which to
perform (either for themselves or others) I appeal to the judgment of any
rational man, who knows what we are by nature; yea, when as they know not of
what disposition the Child will be of when it is of capacity. Again, if that
promise and vow were kept by all such Covenanteers, (which must be or they are
perjured,) then were there no need of Christ, to have fulfilled them for the
Infants or themselves, which to conceive will surely make them blush for shame.

SECT. 4.
Obj. HOw comes it to pass that these learned men continue in such errors?

Ans. Our Savior gives a reason for the continuance of Reasons of the
continuance of errors.
errors, viz. in not searching the Scriptures, and comparing their tenants
with them; and this is the only reason of the errors of the times, for men
look not so much upon the Scriptures, as upon them whom they term Orthodoxall
Divines; instance in this particular of Baptism, it being an ancient custom
of many hundred years continuance, and yet tolerated by the Orthodoxall men
as aforesaid; therefore (without any further search of the radex, or first
institution of it) they possitively conclude, that it must be so of necessity,
although (in the truth of the assertion) it is no way agreeable to the will and
appointment of Jesus Christ; and thus have the rude multitudes been deluded by
their Orthodoxall men for many ages, who have purposely, and knowingly kept the
people in this blind obedience, for their own particular advantage.

SECT. 5.
OF the like stamp is the sign of the Cross which they use in Of the Cross
in Baptism.
Baptism, being no more practiced by the Apostles then the former, for if they
had, without doubt they would have left some president for it in their
writings, which is not in the least to be found as mentioned to any such
purpose, as their Orthodoxall men very well know. Historians say, that this
Ceremony of making The first use of the Cross.
Crosses took its rise in the Primative times upon this occasion, viz. The
Pagans having the predominant power over Christians, did in derision of Christ
(whom the Christians adored) erected Crosses, because he was hanged upon such
an one; hereupon the Christians to show themselves not ashamed of such a God,
(as did not despise so ignominious a death for the love he had to his elect)
did also make Crosses themselves, in signification that they willingly owned
that God, whom the Pagans so much derided.

Now there being no such cause for the continuance of such Ceremonies, (viz. no
people so shamelesly impudent) why should not the effect cease, viz. material
Crosses; for otherwise it was never used in Baptism, until the Idolatrous and
Superstitious Papists brought it in as a Sacramental and signifying sign,
which being scandalous, and having no ground from the Word; as also never so
used before amongst Christians, or at the least by Christ's Apostles, as also
abolished by all the reforming Churches, it ought not to be approved, or
tolerated by us.

SECT. 6.
THeir confirmation, or laying on of hands is also of the same O^ confirmation
and laying on of hands.
lineage, for though the Apostles had power to give the Holy Ghost to whom they
were directed so to do, by a secret inspiration of the same Spirit; it does
not follow, that the Mitered Bishops has the like privilege, or power, to
grant the like strength of Spiritual grace in that manner, and that for these
reasons:

1. Because they are usurpers of that Office, and calling which Bishops
usurpers of their office.
was conferred by Christ or his Apostles, and so cannot any way justly claim
any such power and anthority as the Apostles had; which may appear in that
Christ did not commit the Government of his Church to dumb Priests, for whom
he sent, he sent to preach, Luke 10. and not to make Crucifixes, and bless
Altars, or to observe men's traditions; he meant not to play a Pagiant, that men
should disguise themselves, by wearing Rochets, Copes, Surplices, etc. neither
to preach his Gospel with windy eloquence, but in the celestial power of the
Spirit, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2. 1. 4. but all these are done by these
Prelates, ergo not fit instruments to preach the Gospel.

SECT. 7.
Obj. PAul says, that he that desires the office of a Bishop, desires a good
work.

Ans. The Apostle in that place does not mean a Bishop in his Bishop and Elder
taken for one and the same. Christ does not commit the government of h^s Church
to dumb Priests
Palfrey standing like an Image, but these words, Shepherd, Minister, Bishop,
Elder, etc. are taken in holy Scripture for one and the same, witness the
Apostle Peter, who terms himself an Elder, 1 Pet. 5. 1. he meant therefore
such as are called into the Church of God to teach the people, and to be a
Watchman over the Flock, to preach the Word in season, and out of season, and
not to put forth their own Fantasies, and Dreams; that calling is not an
honor of idleness, but a Soule-saving service: and therefore to be a true
Bishop is, to be a faithful Pastor to his Flock.

And certainly this dignity and superiority which they usurp, The original of
Bishops.
came to pass by some proud fellows, having a degree in humane learning above
the rest of their Function, and so took upon them that name of Bishop, changing
the tongue of the Holy Ghost, for otherwise the same was a Priest, which was a
Bishop, all executing the same office of Teaching, and exhorting, which Paul
appointed for the Bishops; yea it is most apparent, that our Savior gave no
such power, or pre-eminence to his Apostles, as The Apostles of Christ did not
usurp authority on one another.
these usurp one over another; but contrariwise forbids them to desire it,
Mat. 20. 26. It shall not be so amongst you. As also Mat. 23. 8. where he
exhorts them not to be called Rabbi, Rabbi, as was the Scribes and Pharisees,
and that in regard he himself was their Doctor, and they all Brethren, and
therefore ought not to Lord it one over another.

SECT. 2.
Obj. IF their calling be not from God whence (...) it?

Ans. From the Devil, for they received it from the The Bishops calling
originally from the Devil, and so consequently those ordained by them.
Pope, who is a Rebel to Christ, and has received his Calling from the
Devil, Rev. 17. 2. neither can these be said to be the Apostles Successors, in
regard they have not taken the Word of God for their guide, but the traditions
of Men, and devices of their own brain, and the corrupt customs of their own
Courts, all which Christ abhors, witness his sharp invectives against the
Scribes and Pharisees for the like, Mat. 7. 8. as also in that he terms it a
vain worship, in regard he is only to be worshipped in Spirit and in truth.

Obj. They do not deny the Word of God, they would only have those Ceremonies
and Customs of decency (which has been for a long time used in the Church)
still to be continued.

Ans. To plead for Custom is dangerous, Christ tells us, He A long and evil
custom is not to be followed.
is the way, the truth, and the life; he does not say, He is the Custom; but
he is the truth, for in process of time an evil custom may grow strong, yea,
to be kept for a Law; and yet it is not therefore the truth; we ought then in
matter of worship, to apply our selves to Christ the truth, and not to custom.

Again, that they are not called of God may appear, in that Reason^ why they
are not called of God.
they have combined together for themselves, and contrived for their own
sinister ends, and usurpation, though to the great dispersion, and division
both in Church and State, moving, and fomenting of War, and afflicting of the
people of God, not respecting any thing more then their own glory, and
sinister respects, by which they have labored to raise themselves to honor;
as also in that they have not gone about to settle the Church in true order,
and discipline, according to the Word of God, but in such a way as they thought
best to confer honor upon themselves, and those by respects at which they
aimed, insnaring the people with Rites and Ceremonies devised for their own
profit; as also in that they have labored to suppress the Gospel, by
silensing of such as were far better then themselves, by which means they
have scattered the flock, and driven them away; witness New England.

SECT. 9.
Obj. ^Hey have silenced and punished none, but such as have gone about to
bring in some new Heresy, which the Church of England has not allowed of.

Ans. Let them take heed unto whom the thing seems new A c^viat to the
Pri^st^ of these times.
that in it self is old, it is not so much the novelty of the matter, as the
truth that proves what is Heresy; it is not the calling of an honest man
knave or a rogue that makes him so; but as it is the custom for a scould to
call an honest woman whore, to prevent the other for calling of her so, (who
justly deserved the title) even so it is with such as call Heretic, Heretic,
scandalizing others with their own imperfections. It is not therefore the
r^yling Rabshakeyes of the times that can make truth of less virtue, and power
in it self, for when they have spit their utmost venom, it will at length
prevail, and show it self in its full and perfect luster, and beauty; it is
not the seeming of a thing to be ^ew that makes it an Heresy, but whatsoever
savoureth to oppose the truth, that is an Heresy, let the custom be never so
old.

SECT. 10.
Obj. IS not Burial a Ministerial duty?

Ans. The Law of Moses forbad the Ministers thereof, Of burial of the dead.
to defile themselves with the dead; and we read not that the Priests did bury
any: therefore to make this punctually their, office is against the Scriptures.

Obj. Ought not the dead to be buried in the Church, or Churchyard?

Ans. Jacob carried not the body of Rachel whom he dearly It mattereth not in
respect of the dead, where the bodies are laid.
loved (dying in the way to Mam^^, Genesis 35. 19) to Mamre, where Abraham and
Sarah were bur^^^) but buried her in the very way. We see then that it
mattereth not (in respect of the dead) where their bodies are laid; so that the
superstition of the Papists, and their adherents are hereby reproved, for their
transporting of dead bodies from place to place, and coviting to be buried in
one place more then another; for wheresoever the body is laid, we know that
Christ will find it out in the Resurrection, for then even the Sea shall give
up their dead, Rev. 20. 13.

Again, we read that it was the use of the Hebrews to bury The Jews practice
in burying their dead.
their dead without their Cities, as we may see, Luke 7. 12. where our Savior
is said to meet the people at the Gate of the City of Naim, carrying a young
man to be buried; as also in that Joseph had prepared a Sepulcher for himself
in his Garden, in which he laid the Body of our Savior, albeit they had
Sinagogues, which had places to bury in, as our Steeple Houses have, and this
custom of the Jews was for a long time used amongst the Heathens; Papists the
first who buried their dead in Churches, etc. and their reasons for it.
the Papists were the first that buried their dead in Churches, and
Churchyards, (as they call them) and that out of a superstitious conceit to be
helped by the prayers of the living, which is without any ground of Scripture;
for if they dye in the Lord, they rest from their labor, and their works
follow them; if otherwise, they are in place of torment, from whence there is
no return, where our prayers can do them no good; but in regard the body
being dead, it must be buried by some, and also have a place of burial; it may
as well be buried by the Priest as the Sexton, who may also make the Grave in
the Churchyard, as well as in the Field, or Garden.

And as to the expression used by their Priests (in the act of Burial) is only
a fransick custom of a brainsick people, as may appear to the most stupid of
men, viz. that they commit the body of the deceased to the ground, etc. In sure
and certain hope of Resurrection unto eternal life through Jesus Christ, who
shall change that vile body, and make it like unto his most glorious Body,
according to the working by which he is able to subdue all things unto
himself. Which words do fully discover their rediculous solly, for can it be
imagined that the most notorious wretch which ever breathed, (being so buried
by them) shall have his resurrection unto eternal life, through our Lord Jesus
Christ^ or that his body shall be changed, and made like unto Christ's glorious
Body, sappeale to any rational man. What more Bedlam-like madness can be
expressed, who if they were to have buried Judas, would use the same
expressions. I shall forbear to aggravate their folly any further in this
particular, seeing it is so notoriously palpable, as is also the rest of their
Liturgy, as has been proved.

SECT. 11.
Obj. WHether is Church Music lawful, yea or no?

Ans. Nothing ought to be done in divine Service, Music does not edi^i^ the
vulgar or illiterate.
but what tends to edification, but Music does not edify the vulgar, or
illiterate, having no computent understanding in Musical proportions, without
which a man cannot judge thereof; for as the Apostle says, such knows not
what is piped, or harped. Church Music therefore may fitly be compared to a
Sermond in Greek, or Latin, which to them that understand the Languages, do
as much edify as if they were delivered in English, to an Englishman, howbe^t
if there be any amongst that Audience, who does not understand such Language,
it is (as the Apostle says) a Barbarian Language to them, for Church (...) to
the (...).
they are nothing edified by such Sermons; so likewise to such (...) do
understand Musical proportions, it does exillerate the Spirits, and sets an
edge upon their zeal, (if rightly applied) but to such as are amongst them,
and does n^^ understand them, it is only a cause of admiration, but tends
nothing to edification in either, and therefore to be abolished; for if things
tending to edification be only to be used in the Church, then such things as
do not edify are to be rejected.

SECT. 3.
Obj. BEcause Church Music, and eloquent Sermons cannot be understood of the
whole Congregation, or Church, ought they not therefore to be used?

Ans. That manner of teaching ought to be used in the Church Wh^^ manner of
teaching ought to be observed in the Church.
of Christ, as that every of his members may receive edification, and not only
some part of them, in regard the Sovle of the most contemptablest member
thereof (in respect of outward condition) may be as precious in the eyes of God
as he that is the chiefest in esteem (for wealth or honor) and this
doubtless was the cause why the Apostle Paul (though he could have expressed
himself in as eloquent terms as most men) did rather make choice of plainness
of speech, as we may read, 1 Cor. 2 chap. where he gives his reasons for so
doing.

Again, it is a far more surer way, then to preach in a lofty Plain Sermons
the most surest way of teaching.
style, for to preach so (as that they may be understood of the simple and
illiterate) they may be confident that they are understood of the Learned; but
to preach in an eligant phrase of speech, they may be sure that they are not
understood of the unlearned, to whom they are chiefly sent to preach, for the
Apostle says, Not many wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble
are called, but God has made choice of the poor of the Such preaching
practiced by the Apostles, and their reasons of it.
world, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 17. 18. 27, 28, 29. etc. As also in the Parable of the
Marriage Supper. And the Apostle does further acquaint us, that such wisdom
of words is foolishness with God, and therefore ought not to be used in his
Service; yea, he admonishes the Ministers of Christ, that they would not
imitate the eloquent Orators of the world, least (says he) by so doing ye
make the cross of Christ of none effect, 1 Cor. 1. 27. so that Music, and
Music and Rh^^oticall Sermons very dangerous.
Rethoricall Sermons, are very dangerous in the Church of Christ; for the
minds of men being prone to delights, (especially such as are in their carnal
condition) may by such means have their external senses so rapt with the
melodious harmony of the Consort, and pleasing Language, as may very easily
draw their thoughts from the object aimed at in the service, most men rather
desiring to exercise their voices, with ravishing Devisions, then their hearts
with humble contritions.

Obj. What think you of singing of Psalms?

Ans. Singing is a thing commanded by the Apostle James, Chap. 5. 13. and has
been practiced in all ages, as before the Law; instance in Moses, Exodus 15.
Chap. under the Law, instance in Deborah and Barack, Judge. 5. Chap. as also
under the Gospel, instance in Paul and Silas, Act. 16. 25. and therefore cannot
be unlawful now (so it be done with understanding) whether it be in Psalms,
Himes, and spiritual Songs, viz. the Psalms of David, or what other
spiritual ditty which shall be invented by the Saints, so it be suitable to
that occasion of rejoicing.

SECT. 13.
Obj. Whether is Marriage a Ministerial duty, yea or no? Of Marriage.


Ans. Some (as the Papists) do esteem it as Sacrament, others as an Oath, or
Vow, made in Gods presence; to the first of these, who affirm that Marriage
was consecrated, to signify the Mystery betwixt Christ and his Church, this
answer is given, viz. That which was before the Mystery, could not be Marriage
not cons^crated, to show the mystery betwixt Christ (...) his Church
consecrated to signify the Mystery, but Marriage was before the Mystery of
that Union, betwixt Christ, and his Church, and therefore could not be
consecrated to show the Mystery, or signify it; at the most it does but
parabolically signify that Mystery, and we can no more imagine it, to be
consecrated to that purpose, then that every Vine with the branches, and head
with the members are so consecrated, for they are also in like manner so
resembled by Christ, Joh. 15. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 15.

To the second, that it is an Oath, or Vow made in Gods presence, Marriage a
civil action.
it is answered; that an Oath may be tendered before a Civil Magistrate, and
therefore in that respect it is but a civil action.

SECT. 14.
Obj. PRayer may be repeated before a Civil Magistrate, is it therefore Civil?

Ans. The Civil Magistrate has not jurisdiction in prayer, as he has of an
Oath; and Matrimony is of two sorts, either incoatum, Matrimony of two sorts.
which is only initiate, and begun by the Espousals and contract only; or it is
present and consumate when it is accomplished and performed.

1 Concerning the Contract, or Espousals, which is the affiancing and
betroathing of the man and the woman each to other, by their own voluntary and
full consent, with the liking and approbation of their friends, and there are
two sorts of contracts; 1. Some contracts are conditional, and de futuro of
the time to come, as if the man make his promise that he will marry a woman if
her friends consent, or if he may have a computent dowry with her, these
espousals being only a promise of marriage for the time to come, do not bind
the parties any other ways, but that they may show their levity in not
performing the promise made, and are not to be forced by any such promise of
marriage to accomplish the same.

2 The other Espousals is de presenti, pronounced of the time present, viz. as
if one should say, Ego te mihi despondeo uxorem, I take thee to my wife, this
contract is actual, and effectual, and cannot be dissolved, being lawfully
made, for that which God has joined together, let no man put asunder, Mat. 19.
6. and they which are thus contracted, are man, and wife before God. And
therefore Jacob calls Rachel (being only espoused) his wife, Genesis 29. 21. and
the Angel calls Mary espoused to Joseph his wife, Mat. 1. 20. and hereof it
was that by Moses Law, he that defloured a maid, espoused to another man, was
to be stoned to death, Deuteronomy. 22. 23.

SECT. 15.
ANd as concerning the celebration, we neither read, either in The manner of
celebrating marriage in the Old Testament.
the Old or New Testament, that ever any Priest of the Law, or Minister of the
Gospel in the Old or new Testament that did join any man or woman together in
Matrimony, but it is manifest that after such a contract made, that the Father
of the woman so betrothed might give her himself unto the man; instance in
Laba^, who gave Leah unto Jacob in the evening instead of Rachel, Genesis 29. 23.
as also Rachel, ver. 29. and the circumstances of Labans so giving his
Daughters to Jacob, does argue no great Ceremonies in the act of Marriage; yea
it does clearly appear by the passage betwixt Boas and Ruth, that after the
parties were agreed the very acknowledging of it before witness was
sufficient, Ruth, 4. 10, 11. And I cannot conceive why any greater testimony or
ceremonies should be required in Marriage now, more then was by them performed,
they being man and wife (before God) by their contract, the other being only to
testify the same unto the world, and therefore in such civil actions it was
the custom of the Israelites to take off their shoes at the confirmation of
such contracts, as I have instanced in Boas, who is said to take Ruth to wife
before the Magistrates of the City, by using these words, viz. Ye are witnesses
this day that I have taken Ruth the Moabite, The custom of the Country to be
observed in marriage, it being a civil action.
the wife of Naomi, to be my wife, etc, So it being the custom of our Country
to use a ring in the like act, it ought not to be withstood by any, so it be
done in that manner as Boas did, viz. before the Magistrate, or in the presence
of the Church or Congregation; yea to use the same expressions which is also
accustomed to be used by such parties, viz. With this Ring I thee wed, etc. but
that the Priest should claim it as a thing merely peculiar to his office, and
that a certain stipent is absolutely due unto him for the Marriage, or that the
office is peculiarly proper unto their function is rediculous, there being no
president for it in the Word.

SECT. 16.
Obj. What think you of the Purification, or Churching of Women?

Ans. Purification is a Jewish Ceremony, and Of purification of women.
therefore ought to be abrogated, the Judisme of it appears, in that the
Woman so to be purified, must be covered with a Veil, which is a rag of
Superstition.

Obj. What think you of the Veil which Rebecca put on in the presence of
Isaac?

Ans. It was a model of her modesty, but what is that to the Veil of the
Church?

Obj. The Veil is required by the Apostle in the Congregation, 1 Cor. 11. 10.

Ans. That Veil was imposed upon all women, and not upon them alone which came
to be Churched; again, the Judisme thereof appears, in the offering imposed
upon women, as being pretended to be due to the Minister, as Wages, or Stipent,
which term offering does fully discover their Jewish heart, and by the same
rule they may demand a pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pidgions, (to boil
with a piece of Bacon) for every male Child that opens the Matrix, or Womb
of conception; but that their other gratuity of -- and a good dinner they take
to be better.

And truly these Ceremonies which these Popish Priests have These ^ovish
^^r^mo^^es declare what these Priests ^re.
used, and yet desire to use, does fully discover them to be Priests of the
Law, and not of the Gospel; witness their pomp in Apparel, their coveting of
Tithes, or using of any Ceremonies which will advantage them a penny; witness
their Surplisse, or rather Surplusse-sees, their Harth-penny, and Garth-penny,
and for every Communicant two pence.

SECT. 17.
Obj. So that we agree in the substance, it mattereth not though we differ in
circumstances.

Ans. I suppose you will not account him wise that will agree touching the
meat, and yet will quarrel for the bone.

Obj. Wherefore then is the quarrel begun in relation to the bone?

Ans. Our Savior condemns such men, as love darkness Why ceremonies ought
to be opposed.
r^^^^r then light, viz. such as will rather maintain an error of t^^^^een
hundred years standing, then a truth of sixteen hundred and odd years
continuance, and that because of some profit redounding to them by such means;
now in that the bone, viz. matter of Ceremony ought not to make a difference
amongst Christians, let all of capacity judge who is most in fault, seeing they
are termed (by them that desire them) but as things indifferent, which being so
in their own esteem, why should they not rather relinquish them then
endeavor to uphold them by force of Arms, especially when they appear so
repugnant to the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, and all the reforming
Churches of the times, yea not only to retain them, for their own use and
service, but also in a compulsive way, to force such things upon those who know
them to be rediculous, and of no concernment in the Church of Christ; yea let
their own Consciences judge, whether in this they seem to be what they
pretend, viz. such as hold them as things indifferent, and not as necessary to
Salvation; when they yet endeavor, with might and maine, yea though with loss
of lives and estates to uphold them.

Obj. Why may they not be vindicated as things indifferent, by them that
esteem them so, as confronted, by such as do not allow of them?

Ans. Because we are not to reject light being offered, and seeing the Lord is
resolved to subdue Antichrist in every particular, and would have us come
utterly out of Babylon, why should we desire to maintain any thing, that is
contrary or repugnant, to the will of Christ in his design, but (being
Christians) rather endeavor to help on the work, then any ways to retard or
oppose it; As also seeing it is the thing which the Pope has so long gaped
after, as a means to allure us to their pompeous and vainglorious worship
(adorning themselves with the gorgious Robes of Aaron, and tearing in pieces
the seamlesse Coat of Christ) why should we adhere with them in the least
particular, but rather utterly renounce them, and labor to suppress them, in
our selves and others; which the Lord give us hearts to accomplish.

The third part of Romes ruin by White Hall, etc.
Wherein is contained the Confutation of Presbitery, etc.
HAving discovered the first and second degree of Popery, I shall now enter
upon the third, in which encounter I shall charge them of the Presbiterian
judgment, who are so forward in condemning The Preface.
all but themselves, for Schismatics, Heretics, and violaters of the
Covenant; and for the better progress herein, I shall present the chief heads
of the Covenant (touching Religion) from which Magazine, I hope to furnish my
self with Arms, and Ammunition, not doubting to foil them, at, and with,
their own Weapons.

CHAP. I. Treats of the Covenant, etc.
SECT. 1.
THe heads of the Covenant in reference to Religion Two heads of the Covenant
^ouching Religion.
are these:

1. That we shall sincerely, really, and constantly endeavor the reformation
in Religion, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the
Word of God, etc.

2. Without respect of Persons, to endeavor the extirpation of Popery, etc.
Superstition, Heresy, and Schisms, etc. and whatsoever shall be found
contrary to sound Doctrine, etc.

From which I infer; that who so does not sincerely, really, The inference
drawn from them.
and constantly endeavor these things above mentioned, are guilty of the
breach of Covenant.

But that the Presbiterians are guilty of all, or most of these, and so
consequently violaters of the Covenant, will appear, and that most evidently,
in these respects, viz.

1. In the matter, or subject which they compose their Church of.

2. In the Pastors whom they make use of, or set apart for Teachers of their
Church.

3. In the means they use to uphold, or supply their Church with Members.

4. In their manner of governing of it.

And first of the first, touching the quality, or condition of the people whom
they compose their Church of, and that is, all the people of the Nation,
consisting of men, women, and children.

Now that a Church so modelled, is contrary to the precepts of The Presbiterian
Church not truly modeled.
Christ, and the examples of the Apostles, is sufficiently proved by Mr.
Saltmarsh, (in his answers to Mr. Lees of the Synod) in his Book titled, The
smoke in the Temple, unto which I refer you; and yet not to leave it without
some convincement, I thus argue against their Agents in so doing.

They who wilfully admit of the professed enemies to Christ, as Members of his
Church, are peremptory confronters of Christ, and his Church, and so
consequently violaters of the Covenant.

But the Synodian Presbiterians do freely permit, yea rather compel the damme
Cavaliers of this Nation, to be members of the Church of Christ, as also their
children; Ergo the aforesaid Priests are wilful and peremptory opposers of
Christ and his Church, and so consequently violaters of the Covenant.

SECT. 2.
YEa I appeal to any rational man, whether all the people of All the people
of the Nation not fit members for the Church of Christ.
this Nation be fit materials at the instant, to be admitted Members of the
Church of Christ, (which according to the Apostles expressions, were, or at the
least seemed to be, beloved of God, sanctified in Christ Jesus, and called to
be Saints) or whether their Church may not rather be termed a Gallimanfrey,
Medley, or Hodgepodge of all manner of opinions together, (as of him that
swears, as him that trembles at an Oath, and so consequently of all manner
of vice and virtue) then properly be termed a true gathered Church, for to
gather a people out of a people, does intimate that some are to be left out, as
not fit for admission; therefore I admire their presumption, that dare admit
the apparent sinagogue of Satan for the Temple and Church of Christ; For what
communion has light with darkness, or Christ with Antichrist, so that either
must they maintain that there is no Antichristians in the Nation, either of
Clergy, or Layety, or else confess that they allow of such to be made Members,
for they have hitherto labored, and does yet labor to compel all such,
Subjects to their Government, and why under their Government, as if not Members
of their Church.

Now, it is very apparent that Christ and his Apostles did ever Christ and his
Apostles did distinguish betwixt his fl^ck and the world.
make a distinction of the true Church, from the men of the world, as in Mat.
18. 17. Tell it to the Church, etc. which was not to the Scribes, Pharisees,
Saduces, or Herodians, or to the worshippers of the Calves in Dan, and Bethel,
though all of Israel, for the Disciples of Christ (to whom he there spoke) was
no Members of such Societies, and therefore not to make their appeals to them,
in point of difference amongst themselves; it must needs follow then that the
Church there spoken of by Christ, was an Assembly of his Disciples and
followers, as may clearly be collected from his after expressions to the
aforesaid Disciples, in the 19. and 20. verses of that chapter.

SECT. 3.
AGain, for the further confirmation hereof it is evident, that the Apostle
Paul in all his Epistles, whether he writ to Cities, or Countries, did ever
make a distinction, betwixt them whom he had gathered into Church Fellowship,
(through the opperation of the Spirit of God) by his preaching (and his fellow
Apostles) and them who were not of that Brotherhood; instance in his Epistle
to the Romans, viz. To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be
Saints, etc. these are they in Rome which he writes unto, and no other; it was
only them whom he acknowledges to be the called of Jesus Christ, it was for
their peculiar faith (which was spoken throughout the world) that he gives
thanks unto God for, chap. 1. ver. 7. It was only them in Rome which he would
make mention of in his prayers. As also to the Church of God which is at
Corinth, To them that are sanctified in Jesus Christ, and called to be Saints.
It is to them only in Corinth, which he so saluteth, 1 Cor. 1. 2. As also Ephe.
1. 2. Phil. 1. 2. Col. 1. 2. in all which places he does distinguish them by
some special mark, from the rest who lived in such places, and were not such
like, as to whom he wrote his Epistles.

Now seeing that there was such a distinction betwixt the Scribes, Pharisees,
Saduces, and the Church of Christ, consisting of his Apostles, and Disciples,
why ought not the Pharisees, and Saduces of this Nation, to be admitted as
Members of the Church of Christ, which is now to be extracted out of the world,
and Antichristianisme, as it was then out of Judisme, and Heathenisme.

SECT. 4.
Obj. WHo are those whom you term the Pharisees, and Saduces of this Nation?

Ans. The Presbiterians, and Cavaliers of this Nation.

Obj. Wherein does the Presbiterians resemble the Pharisees?

Ans. In three particulars, viz. The Presbiterians compared with the Pharis^es
in three things.


1. In that it is reported of them Pharisees, that they maintained, that the
promise made to Abraham, recited by Jacob, and often repeated by the Prophets
(concerning the promised Mesiah) was spoken only of a Political Kingdom, and
that the Mesiah should come like another Alexander the Great, to rule the whole
Empire of the world, the people being subject unto him.

And in this particular, let all that have a discerning eye in the promise of
Christ, touching the renovation of his Church out of Antichristianisme, viz.
concerning that Spiritual comfort betwixt the seven-headed Beast and the
Dragon, against the Lamb, and the Saints (where the conquest is to be effected
by the Sword which proceeds out of the mouth of the Lamb Christ Jesus, Rev.
19. 21. viz. by the power of the Word) judge, how near these Presbiterians are
in judgment with them Pharisees, in that they think the victory (there spoken
of) which is now to be effected, viz. the subduing of Antichristianisme, and
renovating the Church of Christ, shall be accomplished by a Political
Government, and power of the civil Magistrate, which they chiefly make use of
to that purpose; witness the several Votes and Orders, which they procured
from the two Houses of Parliament to bring men into a Spiritual obedience, by
their temporal power, which is to no more purpose then to wash a Moore, to
make him white, and as much rediculous, as I shall hereafter make appear.

2. As the Pharisees thought it much better to give somewhat to the Temple,
then to releeve and nourish their own poor Parents, Mat. 15. 6, 7. so in like
manner do the Presbiterian Clergy, for so as their Parishioners pay them their
Tithes, (or Church dues, as they call them) they matter not whether they have
another penny to buy their Children bread or no; certainly if their intents was
to suppress Prelacy, that themselves might reign in their stead, they have
not as yet failed in their design.

3. It is manifest, that the Scribes and Pharisees was ignorant of the truth it
self, albeit, it were amongst them; as also instead of the true interpretation
of the Scriptures (being carnally minded) they corrupted them by their false
glosses, adding many tradissions of their own forging; and in this respect
they are one and the same with the Pharisees, which to make appear more at
large, will be an occasion to treat upon the second branch, concerning their
manner of composing their Church.

SECT. 5.
BEfore you enter upon this particular, first show me wherein the Cavaliers are
like unto them of the Sect of the Saduces?

Ans. It is reported that the Saduces retained the name of The Cavaliers
compared with ^he Saduces.
God, mearly for fear, least it might appear that they should dissipate the
policy which was singularly manifested by the bond of Religion, yet
notwithstanding they endeavored to efface out of men's minds, and
understandings, the invocation, and true fear of God, and that men should
revive no more after death, neither that any other Judgment was to be
expected, wherein the just was to be discerned from the unjust; the names

CHAP. II. The second Chapter, treats of Separation, etc.
SECT. 1.
Objection. THe Apostle tells us, that it is impossible to separate from such
a people, as to go out of the world, 1 Cor. 5. 10. intimating, that so long as
the world subsisteth, we cannot avoid the company of such ^^^ple, so that of
necessity it must be tolerated.

Ans. Is it not as possible now, as it was in In what respects Believers ought
to separate from unbeleevers.
the Apostles time? Again the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. does fully clear himself, in
what manner he would have the Church to be separate from such men, ver. 19.
where he says, yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world, etc.
meaning, that we should not so shun their company, as to have no commerce, or
dealings with them, as in bargains, etc. or not to use a civil carriage or
behavior toward them; or that we should not admit of such persons to the
public ordinance of hearing the Word, for by so doing they would ever be kept
in blind ignorance, and never be converted to the faith; therefore to eschew
them in such things, is as impossible, as to go out of the world, in regard
the world does chiefly consist of such people, (to which the Church of Christ
in all ages has been as a little flock) as also in that Christ commanded his
Apostles to teach all Nations, Matthew. 28. 19. (that is, all the world, that
thereby, they who are ordained to eternal life, may be discerned, and
distinguished from the rest of unbeleevers, by joining themselves in a League,
and Covenant, to be obedient to the rule, and Government which Christ by his
Apostles has prescribed for them. And this will more fully appear to be the
intent and meaning of the Apostle, by his expressions in the 11. ver. of that
Chapter, where he says, If any one be called a Brother, who is a fornicator,
or covetous, or an extortioner, with such an one no not to eat; which eating
there spoken of cannot possibly be meant of the corporal feeding of the body,
for if that were a sin to do, our Savior could not be innocent, but had
offended, by eating with Publicans and sinners, Mat. 5. 24. 30. it must
therefore of necessity be meant, of the eating of the Sacrament of the Body,
and blood of Christ.

Now in that such an one that is called a Brother, viz. one incorporated into
the body of the Church, (being such an one) is not to be admitted to that
Sacrament, how much less he that is without; viz. he that is not admitted a
member of that society, or flock of Christ, but is yet in the state and
condition of a Publican and sinner, or out of the payle of the Church, Mat. 18.
17.

SECT. 2.
Obj. CHrist commands us to love our enemies, to bless them that curse us, to
do good to them that hate us, and to pray for them that despitefully use us,
and persecute us, etc.

Ans. Gods Actions are of two sorts, general and particular; Gods actions are
of two (...), general and particular.
general, in as much as he suffers the Sun to shine, and the rain to fall
to the benefit of the wicked as the godly; the other in particular toward the
elect, by sanctifying of them by his Spirit. In like manner ought our actions
to be expressed toward men. A general love we must show to all men, although
Turks, Jews, or Infidels, in procuring their good, and seeking to do them no
hurt, in preserving them and theirs, so far as we be not prejudiced With whom
we ought to h^ve familiar^^^ and society.
by so doing. Out of which general fountain of love flows these courtesies,
as in bringing home his strayed Ox, and helping his over-laden Ass, etc.
Deuteronomy. 22. 1, 2, 3, 4. But friendship, familiarity, and society, we must only
have with the people of God, or at least seem to be such; and this difference
is further evidenced by the Apostle in these words, Do good to all, but
especially to the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10.

Obj. Wherein consists the conditions that is to be observed in Leagues and
Covenants, betwixt the godly and the wicked?

Ans. In these three particulars; 1. That we do not promise Conditions to ^c
observed in Lea^ues and Covenants.
to aid and assist the wicked, or bind our selves to mutual help, for
therefore was Jehoshaphat blamed by the Prophet in these words, Would thou
help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.

2. Neither must we send to Infidels for help, for that is to distrust the
Lord; if they offer their help upon good conditions, it is lawful for us to
use it, as sent of God, but we must not seek for it.

3. Leagues which have been made with such in former times, are not to be
broken, for the Gospel condemns truce breakers; yea Leagues for removing
hostility, or intercourse of Merchants, and continuance of peace, may be made
with Nations of a strange Religion; yea the Apostle exhorts, that as much as
in us lies, to be at peace with all men. But as touching friendship,
familiarity, etc. we ought to have as little as possible may be, for, he that
touches pitch shall be desiled with it. As also by the example of the people
of God* both before the Law, under the Law, and now under the Gospel.

SECT. 3.
1. BEfore the Law, as in Genesis 4. 26. where it is said, that then There was
ever a separation betwixt Believers and unbeleevers, viz. before the Law.
men began to call upon the name of the Lord, or then began the posterity of
godly Seth, to separate themselves from the children of wicked Caine. And we
may also see, that upon their reuniting again, viz. when as the Sons of Seth
took wives of the seed of Caine, and that they joined together in amity with
them wicked people, Genesis 6. The heavy wrath of God is said to fall upon them,
Genesis 7. 21. etc. By which example we may see, how highly the Lord is
displeased, to have his children polluted, by mixing themselves, by friendship,
familiarity, and society with the wicked. As also in Genesis 12. 1. where the Lord
commands Abraham to separate himself from his fathers house, because he
would have him weaned from his fathers false worship, Joshua 24. 2.

SECT. 4.
2. Under the Law, or during the time of the Law, we have also these
presidents, as in Levit. 20. 24, 25, 26. where the Under the Law.
Lord is said to separate his people of Israel from the Cananites, that they
might not learn their wicked and ungodly ways. As also in Ezra 6. 21. where
none but such as had separated themselves from the filthiness of the Heathen
(where they had been Captive) were suffered to eat of the Passe-over; the
Prophet David also professes his delight in the society of the one, and his
dislike to the other, Psalm. 84. 10. the Spouse in the Cantacles does also the
like, Cant. 1. 7. desiring Christ to direct her to his flock. We have also an
evident expression from the Lord by Jeremiah, Jer. 15. 19. in these words; If
thou take forth, or separate the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my
mouth (which is said in the Revelations to spew out the lukewarm Laodiceans)
Let them return to thee (says he) but return not thou to them; from which
place we have as strict a charge as can be given for a separation, and not to
adhere, or join our selves to the wicked, but if they will return to us,
acknowledging themselves Penitents, then we are to admit of them, and not
otherwise.

SECT. 5.
3. Under the Gospel, we are also excluded any society, or fellowship Under the
Gospel.
with them, unless as formerly, as being conversant at the Word preaching,
etc. for by that means we read, that three thousand souls of such like were
converted at one Sermond by Peter, and so added to the number of them, who were
then of the Church, Act. 2. 41. We also read, that when diverse were hardened and
believed not, but spoke evil of the way before the multitude, that the Apostle
departed from them, and separated the Disciples, Act. 19. 9. intimating a
division, as to divide the Sheep from the Goats, least they should corrupt
them, by their life and conversation; For with the pure thou shall be pure, but
with the froward thou will learn froward things. The Apostle also exhorts,
not to be unequally yoaked together with unbeleevers, for what communication
(says he) has light with darkness, righteousness with unrighteousness, and
what concord has Christ with Beliall, or what part has he that believes with
an Infidel, and what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols, 2 Cor. 6.
14, 15. He wills them also to come out from amongst the wicked, and be
separate, ver. 17. We are also commanded to come out of Babylon, Rev. 18. 4. We
read also how Lot fared by living amongst the Sodomites, when the Lord punished
them, Genesis 19. Joseph also being in Pharaohs Court, and accompanying himself
with his Courtiers, got an habit to swear by their accustomed Oath, viz. By
the life of Pharaoh, Genesis 42. 15, 16. by all which presidents the people of God
ought to separate themselves from the deboyst Russians of the times, unless in
the cases aforementioned.

SECT. 6.
2. AS they err in mixing the prophaine with the holy, as Of their mixture in
their Government.
members of Christ, so do they also by mixing the Government, whereby they
would regulate their Church, making it partly Divine, and partly Moral, or
prudentiall, partly of Christ, and partly Politticall, witness Mr. Lees, in
his Answer to Mr Saltmarsh his new Quaree, page 10. and in so doing they
disparage Christ, and his Apostles, in matter of judgment and abilities, as
that they had the Theorie, to gather a Church, and not the Practick, to govern
it being so gathered.

Now that it was a practice even abominable in the eyes of Christ abhorteth
such mixtures.
Christ, to mix a prudentiall Government with that of his, in his Church will
evidently appear, by his bitter invectives against the Scribes and Pharisees;
as also in calling it a vain worship.

Again, They who endeavor by a Temporal power, to subdue the inward, or
Spiritual man, take a course contrary to what Christ and his Apostles used to
that purpose, as will appear by these texts of Scripture, viz. Mat. 10. 13,
14, 15. Mark 6. 11. Act. 13. 51.

But the Presbiterian Priests does endeavor by such a power to Compulsions in
Spirituals a breach of the Covenant.
suppress, and bring into subjection, the aforesaid inward or Spiritual man
to their obedience.

Ergo they practice contrary to the example of Christ, and his Apostles in that
enterprise, and so consequently are violaters of the Covenant.

SECT. 7.
YEa this course or method which they take (and so much vindicate) Contrary to
the practice of the Apostles.
is not only a contrary way to what Christ and his Apostles used, but also a
way utterly impossible to effect their desires, as will plainly appear by
comparing the Kingdom of Christ, and Christ's Kingdom compared with the
Kingdoms of the world.
the Kingdom of Caesar, or of Prudens together, as may be demonstrated by
these particulars. 1. In that they be two distinct Kings. 2. In having two
distinct Kingdoms. 3. Two distinct Subjects to govern. 4. Two distinct Powers
to rule by. 5. Two distinct Laws to govern by; and lastly, in that two
distinct obediences is required of these distinct Subjects; to prove which, I
shall speak something to each of them in order, as they are prefixed: And,

1. Of the first, viz. That they are two distinct Kings, I presume will not be
denied by any that are rational.

2. That their Kingdoms are distinct, our Savior proves, Joh. 10. 26. where
he says, his Kingdom is not of this world, but we all know that the other is
of this world.

3. That they have two distinct Subjects to govern, will also appear by the
words of our Savior, Joh. 17. 16. (where speaking concerning his Disciples)
says, They were not of the world; but we all know that the Subjects of Caesar
are of the world.

4. That they are two distinct powers, by which they are Authoritative, over
their distinct Subjects, will also appear, in that Christ rayneth merely by a
Spiritual power over his Subjects, viz. by the power of the Word preached,
Joh. 10. 16. and 16. 27. but Caesar rules his temporal Kingdom, by a
temporal power, by the power of the Sword, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, etc.

5. That their Laws are distinct will also appear, Romans 8. 5, 6. etc. where
the Apostle says, that the Law of Jesus Christ is a Spiritual Law; but we all
know that the Law of the Civil Magistrate is a Political Law.

6. That the obedience which is required of each of them, are distinct
obediences, will appear by the words of our Savior, Joh. 4. 24. God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and truth; yea it
is such (says he) whom the Father seeks to worship him; but we all know the
other obedience is carnal or temporal.

Again, the Subjects of these Kingdoms are of two distinct humors or
affections, as will also appear by these words of our Savior, Joh. 15. 19. If
ye were of the world, the world would love his own, but ye are not of the
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore does the world hate
you. And what thing is more apparent in this Nation then the deadly enmity
betwixt the Subject of the temporal Kingdom of Caesar, or the World, and the
Subject which belongs to the Spiritual kingdom of Christ, betwixt the
subjects of the flesh and the Spirit.

SECT. 8.
Obj. HOw can the Kingdom of Christ be said to consist of men, when they
belong to the Kingdom of Caesar, or the civil Magistrate?

Ans. Men may be in the world, and yet not of the world, as our Christ's
Subjects, in the world, but not of the world.
Savior affirms, where he says, I am no more in the world, but these are in
the world, (viz. his Disciples) and yet in the 16. ver: he professes, that the
said parties were not of the world; the distinction then betwixt the Subjects
of Christ, and them of Caesar must be this; that them of Christ's Kingdom are
in the world, but not of the world, as the other are.

Obj. One man cannot serve two Masters, and therefore not both Christ and
Caesar.

Ans. Man is composed of two parts, viz. a Soul and a Body; Of the composition
of man.
which Soul or Spirit is that which Christ accepts of as his Subject, and
therefore it is distinguished from the external part of man by these notions,
viz. The inward man, the Spiritual man, the hidden man, etc. And the other
part of man, viz. the visible part of man is termed, The outward man, the
carnal man, the son of man, etc. Now this inward man, or Spiritual subject
of Christ, being obedient to the Spiritual governance of Christ, (as that of
the outward man, to the Political government of the How a man may be a subject
to Christ and to Satan.
Civil Magistrate) may be subject to both, yea and give unto both their just
rights; yea I may safely say, that he whose Spirit, or inward man, is Christ's
loyal subject, will also in his external man, be the like to the Civil
Magistrate, and so may (as our Savior commands) Give unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. And contrariwise that
outward man, whose inward man is a subject to Satan (the Prince of this world)
is the greatest enemy both to Christ, and to the Civil Magistrate, witness
the Cavaliers of this Nation.

SECT. 9.
Obj. THey seemed to testify their affections to the late King, much more then
the Parliaments Party.

Ans. A seeming friend is no friend, and such were they to him, for-the love
which they pretended to him, was merely for their own ends, why did the
Papists in these last Wars fight Wherefore the Papists fought for K. Charles.
for King Charles, who would have murdered Queen Elizabeth and King James, was
it not apparently manifest, because he was for them, and the other against
them. Again, wherefore was it that the prophaine Sabbath Breakers of the Nation
fought for him, but because of his Book of tollerations of such like stuff as
they most desired; and contrariwise, why was it that they fought against the
Parliament, but because they conceived they would curb them for doing such
things as they desired to have done; yea I appeal to any conscientious man to
judge, that in case the King had been of the Parliaments Opinion, and the
Parliament of the Kings, whether they would have fought for Parliament or King,
whether then they would have adored, or Idolized him, as then they did, and by
so doing, is it not apparent that they procured his ruin?

Now these things formerly spoken of being granted, it must Christ (...) m^^^ly
Spiritual.
needs follow, that the Kingdom of Christ consists merely of Spiritual
things, and the Kingdom of Caesar, or the Civil Magistrate, of temporal
things, so that whatsoever is of a Spiritual cognizance, belongs to Christ's
Kingdom, and Government, and whatsoever is of a temporal, or civil
cognizance, to the Civil Magistrate; they are therefore as distinct as the Sun
from the Moon, that of a civil cognizance receiving its light from that of
Christ, as the Moon does receive her light from the Sun; yea each of them does
as merely belong to the distinct persons of Christ, and the Civil Magistrate,
as the Sun proper to rule the day, and the Moon the night.

Seeing then that each Kingdom has its distinct Governors, Subjects, Power,
and Law, why should they entrench upon one another liberties, especially for
the inferior to disturb the superior, a King an Emperor; and doubtless
conceive how ill it would be taken for one King to invade another Kings
Territories, and so much, and more cause has Christ to be offended with the
Civil Magistrate, that will presume to interest himself in that which does
not concern him, especially when the Civil power whereof he is made an
officer, is given to him by Christ.

CHAP. III. Treats of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion.
SECT. 1.
Object. Has not the civil Magistrate ought to do in matters of Religion?
Caesar's Governmen^ merely civil.


Ans. The Civil Magistrate is only concerned in things of a civil Cognizance,
his duty in point of Religion, is (chiefly this, viz) To keep the Kingdom* How
far he ought to act in point of religion.
of this world in such awe, as that the Kingdom of Christ may not receive
damage by it; to keep wicked, and debauched people in such obedience, by the
power of the Sword, as that the power of the Word may have its free progress,
in their Dominions, so that the Saints, or Church of Christ may live under
their protection, a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty; yea to any
rational man, the very name of his Office, viz. Civil, does clearly
demonstrate that his power consists, merely in Civil things.

Obj. Has the civil Magistrate no power from God, to compel the outward man
to observe spiritual injunctions?

Ans. The Magistrate ought not to force any man, in respect of his opinion or
judgment, neither to punish him in regard he is not of their judgment, but
only* in case that such people disturb the Church, or professors of the
Gospel; for the power of the Magistrate is only external, and not internal,
but it being the He cannot compel the inward man.
inward, hidden, or Spiritual part of man, which is (or at least ought to be)
Christ's subject; it is therefore utterly out of the power of the civil
Magistrate, to subdue, or bring it to obedience, that being a power, which at
the furthest extent, can but reach to make an Hipocrite, as to make the outward
man, seem to be, what it is not, as thus:

The civil Magistrate by threatening imprisonment, persecution, How far he
may prevail.
loss of estate, and the like; may so far terrify a wicked debauched
fellow, as that he dare not swear, prophaine the Sabbath, etc. yet
nevertheless his heart is yet the same it was, and his desire is, that all
such Magistrates were confounded, that establish such Laws, witness the
Cavaliers of these times, in their affections How far his power can extend.
to the Parliament, for crossing their accustomed revilings on the Lords day,
etc. as also their subjection to the government now established in this Nation,
without King or Lords, etc. which we all know is more for Ave then good will,
their affections being quite contrary to it; so that this power at the furthest
extent, yea even in things Civil, can only make a man seem what he is not;
but the other power is of force to make a man to be, what the other can only
compel to seem.

SECT. 2.
AGain, the fear and obedience which is forced by the Magistrate, Obedience
forced by the Magistrat^ but slavish.
is at the best but a slavish fear and obedience, such as the Devils have,
which cannot possibly be accepted of our Savior, it being a voluntary
affection of the heart which he accepts of, such as freely, and willingly
present themselves to be made Citizens of the Spiritual Jerusalem, or City os
the great King; In the day os his power the people must bring a free will
offering unto him, and not a compulsive one; faith then which procures Christ
and his Apostles never used a compulfitory power.
obedience to Jesus Christ, is wrought by the power of the Word, and not by the
power of the Sword, as these Scriptures witness, viz. Go and teach all
Nations, etc. He that believes, etc. he does not say, Go and compel all
Nations to believe; seeing therefore it is only such a spiritual affection,
which this Spiritual King looks upon and regards, it is but labor in
vain for the Magistrate to compel a carnal man to the obedience which is
required of the Spiritual man, since he is incapable of it, for the Apostle
affirms, that a carnall-minded man cannot comprehend It must be a spiritual
power which must work upon the spiritual part of man.
the things of God, yielding this reason, because they be spiritually
discerned. So that it must of necessity be a Spiritual power that must work
upon the Spiritual man, and that is no other then the Word of God, which the
Apostle says, is mighty in opperation, to the bringing down of strong holds,
to captivate, and repel the rebellion of the flesh against the Spirit, to call
us out of the state of Nature into the state of Grace, as our Savior
affirms, My sheep hear my voice, etc. other sheep I have, etc. and they
shall hear my voice. He does not say, they will, but, they shall, Joh. 10. 16.
As also, I pray not for these, etc. but for them who shall believe on me, etc.
Joh. 17. 20.

SECT. 3.
NEither was it ever the desire of Christ in gathering of his Christ never made
use of the civil Magistrates power.
Church, that his Apostles should make use of the Civil Magistrate, to compel
whole Nations (consisting of several judgments) to be obedient to their
Doctrine, and rule of Government, but that they should go and preach, etc.
Neither did Christ make use of Herod to subdue the Scribes, Pharisees, Saduces,
or any other Sect amon^^t the Jews, but what he did was merely by his
Doctrine. Neither do we read in all the Acts of the Apostles, that ever they
used any other means then the power of the Word preached; and that if any
compulsive way were used, it was only by the Scribes and Pharisees, etc. as the
Evangelists plentiful^y testify; instance in Paul himself, whilst a Pharisee,
Acts 8. 3. and 9. 1. Act. 22. 4, 5. Gal. 1. 13. and is now practiced by the
like zealous persecuting Pharisaicall Presbiterians of these times.

Christ only admonished his Disciples, that in case their Doctrine What the
Apostles were to do where they found men obstinate
was refused, or flighted, to shake off the dust of their feet against such
parties or Cities, Luke 10. 11. which was also practiced by the Apostle Paul
and Barnabas, as we may read, Act. 13. 51. So then the compulsive power of the
Magistrate will only make a Medley in the Church, yea it is a way punctually to
oppose Christ in the method which was used by himself and his Apostles, in
gathering his Church out of Judisme, and Paganism; yea a way whereby the flock
of Christ will never be discerned, or distinguished The event of the Magistrates
power in matter of Religion.
from the world, a way never to restore it to its primative purity, but to
continue it in the same Gall^maufrey it has been in since the Apostacy, a way
merely to sorge Hypocrites, a way whereby Dogs, ^orcerers, Whore-mongers,
Idolaters, and the like, shall have admittance, as free denizons of the
Spiritual Jerusalem, which our Savior commands to be kept out, Rev. 22.

SECT. 4.
Obj. THey of the Presbitery intend to exclude such kind of people from the
receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

Ans. In that they make themselves rediculous, for as it would The
Presbiterians practice rediculous.
be counted an idle thing, to invite a company of Guests to a Feast, and when
they be come give them nothing to eat; so it is for the Presbiterians to use
the public power of the Magistrate to bring in such like as Members of the
Church, and yet will not permit them the benefit which the rest of the Members
have; which manner of juggl^ng does discover the two great hinges which they
hang upon, viz. Pride and covetousness.

Obj. In the Parable of the Marriage Feast it is said, that the Kings Servants
had power, and were ordered to compel Guests?

Ans. That which Luke renders in the word ( compel) by Matthew When
computation is said to be used.
is rendered ( bid) or invite, by comparing of which it appears, that there
was no great violence used by the Kings Servants that so invited them; neither
can a man properly be said to be compelled, unless he be forced to do a thing
contrary to his will, but it is evident that those men who had formerly re^used
the invitation, was not compelled contrary to their minds, therefore there was
no compulsion used by them messengers.

Obj. It appears by them whom the King took view of, that they had been
compelled, in regard that one of them wanted a W^dding Garment?

Ans. No such thing for we read that Annanias, Saphira, Simon How far (...)
may deceive.
Magus, etc. were no otherwise compelled, then the ^est of the Believers, and
yet by their Hypocrisy they had got admission (as Members of the Church of
Christ) as well as the truest Believer, and so continued until the Spirit of God
found them out, and discovered their Hypocrisy; and albeit the field of the
Church cannot be thoroughly weeded from its tares, must we suffer it therefore
to be so overspread, as that the Corn cannot be discerned from them; because
some Hipocrites will surke in the bosom of the Church, so long as it is
Militant (by means of their Pharisaicall gloss and varnish, which they put
upon their actions) must we therefore suffer all manner of scandalous notorious
Blasphemers to cumber that little flock.

Obj. It is said, that the Servants did as their Lord commanded them, which was
to compel, and if they had not been so compelled, why was the word used?

Ans. I have told you, that a compulsive power is then said to be used, when
such as are obstinate, and refractory, are forced, and constrained to become
obedient, and willing, but them who so declared themselves, were not compelled.
And according to the Simile such kind of people as the other, needed no
compulsion to come to a Feast, however to such a Feast. And if we take the King
there spoken of, to be meant of a temporal King, speaking to his Servants, or
Ministers, then must the Parable also aim at a temporal power; but if it be
meant of the Spiritual King, Christ speaking to his Ministers, or Messengers,
it must needs be meant of a Spiritual power, which does not belong to the
civil Magistrate, but to the Spiritual power of the Word, in the Ministry
thereof.

CHAP. IIII. Treats of Cavalier Priests, etc.
SECT. 1.
TO prove that those Priests whom they so employ, are not fit instruments for
such a Calling, or Office, The Ministers they employ, viz. the Cavalier Priests
not fit for such a service.
I thus argue.

All such Persons, as obstinately, and peremptorily confront the directions,
and precepts of Christ, and his Apostles, ought not to be employed, as
Ministers of Christ.

But the Presbiterian Synod, has, and does admit of such men, as do
absolutely oppose Christ, and his Apostles.

Ergo in such Elections, and Missions, they do wilfully, and peremptorily
oppose Christ, and his Apostles, and so consequently declare themselves
violaters of the Covenant, they so much plead for.

SECT. 2.
THat they do employ such Instruments as I have named, I The numerous fry of
them which yet remain in that service.
instance in that fry of Cavilian Priests, which are tolerated by them; yea I
blush to think, what a Gallemaufrey, or Hodgepodge they make in their Church,
whereas three parts of their Ministry, and a third part of the fourth,
consists of Cavalier Priests; yea it is to be admired in the highest degree,
that such fellows, ( who are companions far more fit for Devils, then such
as profess Christianity) should be employed in so sacred a Function; yea when
it was notoriously known unto the Sinod, what persecutors they have been, and
yet would be of such men (as the Sinod did consist of, were it in their powers)
their words and actions still expressing their deadly hate, both to them, and
the Government they would establish; and yet for those men (whom they so hate)
not only to make use of them, to fill up their Classical Parishes, (whereby to
make themselves potent Wherefore the Presbiterians employ Cavalier Priests.
in the world, in having such numbers of Parsons, and Viccars under their
Jurisdiction) but also to procure augmentations to the livings of diverse of
them, either to the end that they may be more willing to submit to their
Government, or else to requite the good service they have already done for the
Nation,

Now let all true Christians judge, what will be the event of What hope of good
can be expected from them.
the Presbiterian Government in this Nation, by admitting such Antichristian
Priests to preach Christ, and what likelihood there is, that such Priests
should make choice of Round-headed Elders, etc. (if there be any in his Parish)
and what hopes of peace and truth can be expected, when so many villains shall
be permitted to do mischief, by sowing tares amongst the wheat.

SECT. 3.
Obj. Were not those Priests you speak of, lawfully called to their function,
or office?

Ans. I deny they were, for they cannot be lawfully called to Cavalier Priests
not lawfully called to their office.
that office or function, except either by an immediate calling from God, as
the Prophets and Apostles were called; or by God and Man, as was Matthias, and
the four Deacons, viz. by the Spirit of God, and the Church, where they are to
officiate; but that these Priests aforementioned, have neither of these callings,
will appear by these reasons.

1. In that immediate callings are ceased, and therefore cannot Two sorts of
calling to the Ministry of the Gospel, viz. immediate and mediate.
be expected, Gifts and Miracles being acted by the Apostles, etc. rather for
the glorifying of Christ, first coming in the flesh, then after, as will
appear by these Scriptures, Joh. 20. 29, 30, 31. Mat. 20. 1. 8. Mark 3. 15.
Luke 9. 1. etc. As also in that the Manhood of Christ is to be contained in
the Heavens, till the restoring of all things, Act. 3. 21. therefore they that
expect men to be so called, and so gifted, as the Apostles were ( to rebuild
the Spiritual Jerusalem, or to extract the Church of Christ out of the world,
and Antichristianisme) may as well expect Christ coming None called now as
were the Apostles.
again in person, which cannot be, for the reasons formerly alleged; and
therefore it is impossible for them, or any other, to be so called to the
public Ministry in the Church of Christ, in these times.

2. As these Priests have not this immediate calling from God, so are they not
rightly constituted to their office, by the immediate calling of the Church of
Christ, viz. according to the example of the Apostles, in their constituting of
Ministers; it being then effected by the general consent of the Church, as of
the Apostles, Elders, and Brethren, as hereafter I shall make appear at large.

SECT. 4.
Qu. WHat manner of calling have they?

Ans. No other then the false Prophets had, What calling the Cavilear Priests
have.
whom the Lord himself complains of, for preaching in his name, and he had
not sent them, Ezekiel. 11. 28. and this will evidently appear. by comparing them
with the false Prophets and Apostles, which usurped the like privilege and
prerogative.

Now what manner of people the false Prophets were, the Spirit Ezekiel 22. 25. 26.
28. and 34. What sort of people the false Prophets were. Jer. 23. 1, 2, 3.
of God by the mouth of the true Prophets does fully demonstrate, viz. To be
conspirators where they live, roaring Lions, roving for their prey; devourers
of souls, takers away of treasures, and precious things; violaters of holy
things, such as put no difference betwixt prophaine and holy things, such as
hide their eyes from the Lords Sabboths, such by whom the Lord is prophained,
such as daub^ with untempered Mortar, such as see vanity, and divine lies; that
say, Thus says the Lord God, when the Lord has not spoken; such as feed
themselves with the flock, cloth themselves with the wool, and kill such as
are fed, but feed not the flock; such as have not strengthened the diseased,
have not healed Micha 3. 11. Zeph. 3. 4
that which was sick, nor bound up that which was broken, nor brought again
that which was driven away, nor sought that which was lost; but are such that
by force and violence have ruled over them, such as teach for hire, and Divine
for money.

And as these sorts of Prophets were contemners, and despisers These sort of
people foretold by the Apostles.
of the Doctrine of the true Prophets of God, merely seeking their own
advantage, so also does the same Spirit foretell, that there shall in the last
times arise such a sort of people, who shall also bend all their endeavors to
contaminate the true Ministers of the Gospel, as will also evidently appear by
the Writings of the Apostles; and to this purpose the Apostle Peter acquainteth
us, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3
that as there were false Prophets amongst the Brethren, even so there shall be
false Teachers in the latter times, which shall maintain moct damnable
Heresies, and bring upon themselves swift destruction; yea many (says he)
shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom, the way of truth shall
be evil spoken of, and through covitousnesse shall they with unfeigned words,
make Merchandise of you. Again he says, There shall come in the last 2 Pet.
3. 4.
days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and speaking perverse things.

SECT. 5.
NOw whether these Priests (as aforementioned) be not Cavalier Priests proved
to be such as the Apostle foretold.
those aimed at by the Apostles, which should oppose the Church of Christ in
the last days, let their own Consciences judge; yea if the Devil himself
were examined, he could not deny it; yea they are such lively Simptomes of the
Apostles Predictions, that even Appelles Grapes could not be drawn nearer the
life, then these are to them, whom the Apostle did foreshew, should come into
the world; and albeit they have put on a Whores forehead, and have got the
Scoulds advantage, to cry Whore first, yet their quotidian actions is a
sufficient testimony against them; witness their accustomed drunkenness,
slighting of the Lords Day, neglect of Preaching, Swearing, Whoring, insulting
speeches, their temporising, covitousnesse, lasciviousness, and
unchristian-like discourse, yea and what not, that may conduce to oppose them
that desire to fear God; all which is so manifestly apparent in them, as that
there needs no furthe^ expressions to make them more manifest: But above all,
the An evident demonstration of their ^als^oods.
chiefest, and most evident demonstration of their falsehood, is their audacious
villifying of the Spirit of God, which they do not only loath themselves to
name with reverence, but do also hate the very persons of all such as are
thought to be endowed with it; yea albeit the Apostle tells us, that he that
has not the Spirit of God, is none of Gods, and that, of our selves we know
not what to ask in prayer, without the dictates, and directions of the Spirit
of God, which (says he) helps our infirmities. And yet for all these, and
many other expressions to this purpose, what approbrious language do they
daily dart out, against the efficacy of the Spirit of God, whether in
preaching, praying, or the like; yea if they know but one failing in any of the
Professors of Christ (which may happen by reason of infirmity) it is enough to
scandalize Christ in all his members; O how they will act it, with, these are
your Professors, these are your David's, your men after Gods own heart, these
are your Roundheads, your Puritans, your Professors, etc. but contrariwise,
let a thousand palpable notorious evils be committed by such like as
themselves, they are not to be taken notice of* No, to them, to swear, whore,
and be drunk, are true emblemes of Gentility; yea though in Moral civillity
they are ashamed one of another actions, yet will they vindicate one another
to the utmost, yea so far are they from imitating Christ, and his Apostles,
either in Doctrine, or conversation, as that if they were now living, they
would term them the veryest Roundheads in the Commonwealth.

SECT. 6.
What, tell them of preaching in season, and out of season, How they despise
the practice of the Apostles.
2 Timothy 4. 2. Not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, 1 Pet. 5. 2. Not to
be a drinker of Wine, not to preach with the in^icing words if men's wisdom, 1
Cor. 2. 1. 4. but in the demonstration of the Spirit, to be blameless, apt to
teach, not to be a striker, not given to filthy lucre, not to be a brawler, or
covetous, 1 Timothy 3. 3. Not to be Lords over Gods heritage, but examples to the
flock, 1 Pet. 5. 3.

No Paul, and Peter, you are the most fit for those things your selves, you can
preach by the Spirit, and pray by the Spirit; and as for you Paul, you have
lungs to preach, and pray until midnight, Act. 20. etc. you were the chief
Tub-preachers of your days, you care not where you preach, whether in a
Chamber amongst your holy brethren, Act. 20. 7. or by a river side amongst your
holy Sisters, Act. 16. 13. yea, you could go from house to house, to pray, and
preach, Act. 20. 20. yea, you hired a house for that purpose, Act. 28. 30. but
for our parts we scorn such actions, for we can pray, and preach, as much in
an hour, as you did in six; you pray and preach as the Spirit moves you, but
the prayers and Sermons which we make, are so pleasing to our Auditors, as that
they will produce hums from them; we can run such divisions, and subdivisions,
and subdivisions upon subdivisions with the stringed instrument of our tongue,
as a right good Organist can (...) upon his full blown Organ, so that your
Sermonds in comparison of ours are poor, and beggarly, such as the rest of
your Brethren make in these days. I should be ashamed to speak The Cavalier
Priests reproach Christ himself.
such things of them, had I not been so well acquainted with them, and their
expressions of this nature; yea I persuade my self, that they are so well
known to every Professor of Christ, as that they think I have not spoken more
then they would perform in case the Apostles were extant amongst us; yea it is
clearly apparent, that they have done, now do, and hereafter will do as much
as I have spoken. Christ tells his Disciples, that he that despised them,
despised him; and is it not their daily custom to deride the Professors of
Christ, with taunting language? and in so doing they do not only reproach the
Brethren, (who practice according to the example of the Apostles) but the
Apostles themselves, who left us the examples to follow; and in villifying
them, it must consequently follow, that they do the like to our Savior
himself, who says of them (and so consequently of his Professors) He that
despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me Luke 10. 16.

Now these being such a sort of people, how is it possible they should be
thought fit instruments, to execute the Apostles office, in the now gathering
of the Church and people of God, out of their Antichristian estate, and
condition, being it self predominant over them) as if a Devil would persuade
a man to Christianity.

SECT. 7.
Obj. THey have the same calling that the rest of the Clergy of the Kingdom
have, and therefore, why may they not be made use of, as well as the other?

Ans. All that are so called, are under an Antichristian calling, The
Antichristian call to the Minist^y ought to be relinquished by all such as have
taken it upon them, whatever they be.
which ought to be relinquished, for the calling you speak of, viz. by
Bishops, may fitly be compared to a scarlet Coat, lined with a course cotton,
the one shaming the other; but there is a calling whose inside does excel the
outside, viz. the calling by the Spirit, by which he that has it, is enabled,
both to testify himself, and others, and no man ought to take this calling
upon him, but he that is so called of God, as was Aaron; the other calling
therefore is to be disclaimed, of all that has it, whatsoever they be.

Obj. You formerly said, that none are immediately called to that office in
these times, wherefore then speak you of the calling of the Spirit to that
office?

Ans. He must first have the Spirit of God, or else he is utterly unfit for
that office; for he must have his calling from God, as well as from the Church,
or he can be no true Minister of Jesus Christ, for the Church desiring his
Spiritual gifts, are thereby encouraged to accept of him as a Minister sent
them by God, The calling by the Bishops a delusion.
so that the other calling by the Bishops is a mere delusion, because they
judged only by the letter, and not by the Spirit, viz. by gifts in humane
learning. which is foolishness with God, 1 Cor. 3. 19. it principally tending
to ^dor^e the outward man, touching their civil deportment to, and for the
State.

Obj. How are you able to distinguish who is called by the Spirit, and who is
not?

Ans. By their fruits, for otherwise our Savior expresses these words in
vain, By their fruits you shall know them; rendering also this reason for it,
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figgs of brambles, Mat. 7. 16.

SECT. 8.
Obj. WHat are the simptoms, or fruits, whereby you know that Ministers are not
called by the Spirit?

Ans. There are many signs, and marks to know them, as I How such Priests may
be known who have not the true calling, viz. Such as preach out of envy, or to
cause contention.
have already instanced; I will therefore only insist upon these four
particulars.

1. They are such as preach Christ out of envy, 1 Cor. 3. 3. or to cause
contention amongst the people of God, such as were the Pharisees which came
from Judea to Antioch, Act. 15. 1. 5. such were also the false Apostles, of
whom the Apostles of Christ much complained of, for opposing their Doctrine, as
Himineus Alexander, etc. And such are the railing Rabshakeys of this Kingdom,
whether Prelaticants, or Presbiterians, whose sole delight is to villifie such
of the Members of Christ (with their scurralous language) as do the nearest
correspond with the Apostles, both for pains in the Ministry, as also in a
contentedness, with what the people of God will freely bestow upon them for
their pains, in the labor of the Lord, for their souls.

2. They are such as desire to show themselves, rather Scholars, Such as
rather desire to show themselves scholars them edificers.
then edificers, such as will familiarly speak Greek, and Latin, to them that
cannot read English; that will dish up their Sermonds with such a garnish of
Rethoricall elocution, as the silly Auditors stand amazed at; these be the
boon Athenian-like blades, who guild their Pulpit expressions with terms of
Art; these are the brave Aronicall Ruffians of these days, which if their
black Velvet and Satine, were metamorphized into Chrimson, (which would far
better suit with their life and conversation) there would be no greater
Gallants in the Nation.

SECT. 9.
Such as esteem more of the fleece then of the flock.
3. THey that esteem more of the flesh, then of the fleece, that with the
covitous Wooer, inquireth rather, what the woman(...) these Preachers, and
casters out of Devils did, was merely for their own advantage, and self ends,
albeit they did it, in pretense of doing Christ service; instance in Judas,
Simon Magus, What the Priests of these times preach for.
and the Damsel, which had the Spirit of Divination, Act. 16. 16. and so it is
with many of the Prelaticall, and Presbiterian Priests, who though they pretend
that they preach to gain Souls to Christ, yet is it merely for matter of
maintenance by Tithes, and the like Antichristian allowances, which if once
taken away, it will quickly be discerned how many of them will preach for
couscience sakes

SECT. 2.
Obj. THese casters out of Devils, did the parties good whom they released of
the unclean spirits, although they perished themselves.

Ans. I confess that such sorts of people, by Gods permission, Carnal men
cannot give spiritual comfort.
may do many things which may tend to the corporal, or temporal good of men,
as these casters out of Devils did to them, who were possessed of them; as also
by them whom they term Wise men, or Wizzards, who by their Art can help a man
again to such things as are lost or stolen from him, or the like (albeit in the
act they both endanger their Souls, the one taking an unwarrantable course to
gain them, and the other an unlawful action to accomplish them) but that such
carnal people, can produce spiritual good to the Soul, I utterly deny.

Obj. The Apostle says, that he was glad that Christ was preached, albeit it
were through envy, therefore envious men may preach Christ.

Ans. The Apostle spoke them words in that sense, as in 1 Cor 11. 19. where he
says, thit it is requisite that Heresy should be, in regard thereby the truth
may be made more manifest; so in like manner, by the preaching of these envious
men, they make such as preach Christ out of a good intent, to be better
esteemed, and approved. Likewise them that preach Christ merely for lucre, and
ostentation, do add a luster to such men as abhor such things, but
otherwise it is not to be imagined, that Heresies, and envious preaching, do
benefit the people of God, in point of Salvation.

SECT. 3.
Obj. THe Apostle Paul tells the Church of Corinth, that he would bring his
body in subjection, etc. least that he preaching to others, should himself be
a castaway, 1 Cor. 9. 2. 7.

Ans. The Apostle for his own particular knew that he was no castaway, for
beside the testimony of himself, that he knew nothing by himself, 1 Cor. 4.
4. as also, that he kept a good Conscience in all things, 2 Timothy 1. 3. Heb. 13.
8. he had also the faith to believe, that whom God loves, he loves to the
end; and that he will never leave or forsake his elect, Job. 13. 1. his meaning
therefore must needs be, that he would do so, least he should seem to be such
an one as aforesaid; for I will not deny, but that such men by reading of good
Books, may attain to such a notionall degree of knowledge, as that they may
imitate the true Ministers of Christ; as Janes and Jambres did Moses, and as
the N^tionall Priests like ^o fanes of ^ambres.
false Prophets, and Apostles, did the true Prophets, and Apostles. As also in
regard that Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light, but that
such a Teacher can convert a Soul to God, I utterly deny; for if the Divine
actions of a David, a Prophet, and a man after Gods own heart, were not
acceptable unto God, so long as he regarded sin in his heart; how much less
acceptable will be the actions of a carnal man, and if he cannot prevail for
himself, how much less for another.

It must needs be then a rediculous tenent, that such kind of God must either
co^apperate in the act of preaching or i^ avails not.
people can do God service in the Ministry, for if his prayers prevail not
with God, with whom do they prevail? And the Text says, that God will not
hear such prayers, but terms them houlings. Again, though Paul plant, and
Apollo water, yet God must give a blessing of increase unto it, 1 Cor. 3. 6. 7.
or it profits nothing; and if so, then what blessing can be expected from
God, upon the actions of notorious, and wicked persons, who (as the Prophet
says) ^hath sold themselves to do wickedness; as also being such Prophets,
whom the Lord has not sent.

Again, though Paul preached to Lidia, yet the Lord is said to open her heart,
to attend to the words which he spoke, Act. 16. 14. but it cannot be expected,
that the spirit of Discipline, (who loatheth such Vessels) should Co-opperate
with such Preachers (as aforesaid) though never so learned, and without its
assistance it is impossible that their preaching should convert a Soul from
the error of its ways.

SECT. 4.
Obj. CHrist sent Judas forth to teach, as the other Disciples, Mat. 10. 5. and
also gave him the like power as his other Apostles, verse. 8. why then might not
Judas do as much good as the other?

Ans. Judas was a type of such Hipocrites as was to be in the Church unto the
end of the world, unto whom the Lord affords the like external gifts, as he
does the true Ministers of his Church; as fo^merly in healing all manner of
Diseases, casting out Devils, and the like, which he did to Judas, Simon Magus,
and diverse others which we read of in the Gospel, who by the Lords permission
did many excellent external works, (...) the benefit of the outward man (as I
have told you) but no further; for if Judas preached Christ, doubtless it was
for the same ends for which he betrayed him, viz. for money, Mat. 26, 15. as
do his disciples, the full bagg'd Priests of these times; for otherwise for
him (who was a Son of perdition, Joh. 17. 12. a Theif, yea a Devil) to apply
Christ to the Soul of a Christian, in that Spiritual sense, by which the
Saints are to apprehend him, certainly cannot be the thought of any ration^ll
man; for if Satan should cast out Satan, how should his kingdom stand; so that
for Judas, to gain Souls to God, would have been a Miracle of Miracles. It Is
true Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light, but it is only to
deceive, and so do all his Judas-like disciples, by kissing when they intend
to betray.

Again, that sort of preaching the Apostles then used was rather external,
then internal, a preaching to the outward man, then to the inward man; a
preaching to acquaint the world, that the Kingdom of God was at hand, Mat. 10.
7. that Christ was come in the flesh; a preaching to Repentance, and Baptism,
as a ^^ares by these Scriptures, viz. Mat. 3. 2. as also, Act. 2. 38. where the
people a^king Peter, what they should do to be saved, he wills them, to
repent, and be baptized, etc. As also, Acts 2. 38. where the Jailer asking the
like question, is required by Paul and Silas, to believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ. With Act. 8. 12. 37. now if repentance, or being baptized, or to
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, would procure eternal Salvation, then shall
Judas, Simon Magus, and diverse others be saved, for Judas repented, Mat. 27. 3.
etc. and Simon Magus is both said to believe, and to be baptized, Act. 8. 13.
The preaching then which they then practiced, without all controversy tended
only to the exalting of Christ in the Flesh, and not in the Spirit, and from
hence it was that the Apostle Paul used this expression, viz. He that thinks
he knows any thing knows nothing yet, as he ought to know. Yea, Christ
himself told his Disciples, that he had many things to say unto them which
they were not able to bear; so that if I should grant you, that Judas did
preach as the other Apostles at their first entrance into their Ministry, yet
would it come far short of a Soule-saving service, that being as it were a
preaching of Christ by way of Dispute, which was practiced even by Christ
himself after his resurrection, with two of his Disciples going to Emmans,
Luke 24. 17, etc. as also by Peter, Act. 2. 22. etc. and 3. 12. and 4. 8. and
5. 29. as also by Stephen, Act. 8. 51, etc. by Saul, Act. 9. 20. 22. 29. by
Peter, Act. 10. 36, etc. with several other places of Scripture, being a
preaching only to gather the Church of Christ out of Judisme, and Heathenisme;
a preaching of Christ by the ear, as Job says, or from report, viz. merely
notionall, which is the furthest extent, which the Preachers we are now
discoursing of, can attain unto; we may therefore safely conclude, that such
notionall Preachers are not fit instruments for the now Church of Christ (being
in a Spiritual condition) in regard it is out of their eliment or sphere; and
without all controversy, that which a man cannot comprehend himself, he
cannot teach to another.

But the Apostle says, that a carnall-minded man cannot discern the things of
God; ergo it is impossible they should teach them to others.

This therefore with the other reasons before mentioned, I presume will persuade
the Magistrate from suffering such Priests before mentioned, to preach, as also
the people of God from hearing of them.

CHAP. VI. Treats of the Presbiterian Clergy, etc.
SECT. 1.
Objection. HAve you any objections against the Presbiterian Ministers?

Ans. Yes, they are within the compass of the two last Simptomes of the false
Prophets, and Apostles, viz. in pre-eminence, and Covit^usnesse.

Obj. Wherein consists their pre-eminence or superiority?

Ans. In three degrees of Majority, which they exercise, one The Presbi^erian
Clergy guilty of pride
over another, viz. in their Classical, Provincial, and National Sinods, or
Assemblies; as the Classis being superior to their vulgar Clergy, the
Provincial, superior to the Classis, and the National, the superlative, or
most Supreme. And that these degrees of superiority one over another, is
contrary to the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, and so consequently a
breach of the Covenant, I thus prove.

SECT. 2.
ALl superiority, where there ought to be an equality, is contrary 1 Instance
of their pride.
to the will, and appointment of Jesus Christ, who commanded his Apostles not to
insult, or be authoritative one over another, Mat. 20. 26. in these words, But
it shall not be so amongst you.

But the Ministers of the Presbitery (being equals by the aforesaid example)
notwithstanding that injunction aforesaid (and so consequently to them, they
claiming to be their Successors) do yet retain that superiority, which Christ
denied his Apostles. Ergo the Ministers of the Presbitery, does peremptorily
confront that command of our Savior, in establishing a thing contrary to his
injunctions, and in so doing, they are also violaters of the Covenant, (it
being to establish things touching Religion, according to the Word of God, as I
have formerly showed.)

And further to enlarge the Sinods guiltiness (of the breach of Covenant,) in
this particular I thus argue.

All inventions of men, ought to be ejected the Church of 2 Instance.
Christ, whether in Doctrine, or Discipline, Mat. 15. 9. In vain do they
worship me, teaching for doctrine the tradissions of men.

But those three degrees of superiority, not being found in Holy Writ, is
contrary to the precepts of Christ, yea it is acknowledged by themselves, in
their answer to his late Majesty in the Isle of Wight, page 8. at the second
and third line, and at the close of their answer.

Ergo those three degrees of pre-eminence, is contrary to the will, and
appointment of Jesus Christ, (and that by their own confession) and so
consequently a breach of Covenant. And further,

Whatsoever is contrary to the Word of God, is Antichristian, 3 Instance.
and consequently contrary to the Covenant, in regard the Covenant is
punctually against it.

But those three degrees before mentioned, are contrary to the Word of God, ergo
Antichristian, etc.

Note also that superiority was a chief thing, which the Sinod They con^m^e
that in others which they allow in themselves.
endeavored to suppress in the Bishops, and their O^^iates, and now
entertained by themselves.

SECT. 3.
Obj. THese degrees of superiority, is not of so high a garb or nature, as
that of Lordly Prelacy, and therefore may be the better dispensed with.

Ans. Popery is Popery, albeit in the least degree, and though Presbitery is
Popery though in a less degree.
it be not so great a ^ish, yet it is manifest to be of the same fry, and if
this lesser Fish, may enjoy its freedom and pleasure in the pleasant river of
Presbitery, (whose gliding streams like them of Jordan into Mari Mortuum) take
their course into the Sea of Prelacy, and so into the maine ocian of Papacy; I
say, if it may enjoy its liberty of growth, for a small season in the gliding
river of Presbitery, it will in a short time approach the narrow Seas of
Prelacy, if not the maine Ocian of the Romish Hierarchy. The Apostles
disclaimed majority one ever another.


Now the very truth is, that all majority, and pre-eminence amongst the
Ministers of Christ, is utterly forbidden by Christ himself, as I have
formerly proved; as also by the example of his Apostle Peter, who did not only
disclaim pride in majority, but majority it self, 1. Pet. 5. 1. And albeit
that our Savior sometimes told his Disciples of thrones of glory in the Church
triumphant, yet did he never acquaint them with any in the Church militant (it
being rather a place of suffering, and persecution for his name sake, as his
expressions to that purpose is very plentiful. But if any such throne, whether
of Eclesiasticall authority, or perpetual precedence, had been lawful,
certainly he would at some times have taught them, what it was, and with what
caution, or limitation they were to possess it; as that they should have
precedence of degree, but not of power; of dignity, but not of authority, etc.

SECT. 4.
AGain, we must, and ought to understand the Commandment How the commands of
the Gospel are to be understood.
of Christ in the Gospel, according to the rules agreed upon in the
interpretation of the precepts of the Law, as we have them interpreted by our
Savior. Matthew. 5. 19, 20, 21. 27. 33. 38. 45. And if so, then not only the
tyranny, the pride, the pomp, the priority, and power of Lord Bishops, etc.
are forbidden, but even all the parts, all the degrees, means, causes
incentives, occasions, provocations, beginnings and appearances of these evils,
are also forbidden; yea we are to stop the way with thorns, as in Hosea 2. 6.
least they return to their former Lovers, and with Jacob to hide all their
eare-rings, that they may not be found again.

For otherwise, those degrees of order, and primacy, by which Primacy in order
cannot be separate from a primacy in power.
some of the Ministers are lifted up above their Brethren, cannot be separated
from some primacy of power; and when it meets with ambition, and opportunity
of advantage, it will gather strength again, and regaine what it has lost by
the rasor of reformation.

So that the time which the Sinod has hitherto spent to that They suppress
one, to erect a hundred as ill, or worse.
purpose, of disthroning the Prelates, and of establishing those three degrees
of superiority, may fitly be compared to the dis-heading of an Hidra, where the
separating it from the Body (as Historians say) produces, an hundred like unto
it self; so their taking off Prelacy from 26. Bishops, will be the cause of
producing of so many hundreds, yea if not of so many thousands, which will, ( if
suffered,) be as Pontifficall, as they were, if not worse. And thus have I done
with the second branch.

CHAP. VII. The seventh Chapter treats of Tithes, etc.
SECT. 1.
THirdly, they do not only err, in permitting Against their exaction of
Tithes under the Gospel.
of utter unfit Instruments for the use of the Ministry, as also in assuming an
unlawful power unto themselves; but they do also err in respect of the
maintenance, which they themselves, and the rest of their fraternity, now, and
yet hope to enjoy, viz. their maintenance by way of Tithes, which I thus prove.

All such means of maintenance, as is extorted by the Clergy, contrary to the
will and appointment of Jesus Christ, and the practice of the Apostles, a^e
Antichristian, and so a breach of the Covenant.

But the Sinod and their Creatures, extract by violence such Exaction of Tithes
a breach of the Covenant.
things as Christ never set apart, or the Apostles ever enjoyed, viz. the tenth
part of their Auditors estates for their maintenance.

Ergo the Sinod and their Creatures, are wilful opposers of Christ's directions
in that particular of maintenance, as will fully appear by these texts of
Scripture, viz. Luke 10. 7, 8. where Christ willed his Apostles, not to take
the tenth of peoples estates to whom they preached, but to accept of such
things as were, or should be set before them, by such to whom they should
preach, or were willing to receive them. And if the Apostles were to be so
satisfied, and contented, how much more ought the meare titular Priests of
these times, to be content with the like stipent (their deserts being compared
together) neither was it ever the property of the Apostles of Christ (whom the
rabble of Baals Priests in these days pretend to be followers) to covit such a
proportion for their livelyhoods.

SECT. 2.
PEter could say, Silver and Gold have I none, Act. 3. 6. He The Apostles not
covitous of money.
also exhorted not to preach for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, 1 Pet. 5.
^. and the Apostle Paul could testify of himself, that he had covited no man's
silver, neither did he seek theirs, but them; 2 Cor. 12. 14, 15. yea were it
that they had given him nothing, yet he concludes a necessity to be laid upon
him, and a woe pronounced against him, if he neglected the preaching of the
Gospel; and that his reward was to make the Gospel of Christ without charge, 1
Cor. 8. 16. 18. as also, that his own hands had ministered to his necessity.
Neither can it be gathered from the New Testament, that the Apostles, or
Disciples of Christ, had either Parsonage, Vi^caridge, Surplisse-fees, or the
like; neither are they so much as named in it.

Obj. Tithes were given before the Law, as by Abraham to Melchisadeck, Genesis 14.
20. as also under the Law, and therefore now.

Ans. By the same rule, Sacrifice being offered before the Tithes no m^ne
payable now, then Sacrifice is to be offered.
Law, as by Caine, Abel, Noah, Abraham, etc. as also under the Law, ought
likewise to be offered by us now; for the same injunction which tyeth us to
observe any part or parcel of the Leviticall Law of Moses, obliges us to
observe all; and yet as full of levity as they are, I suppose they will not
impose all that Ceremonial Law upon us; however I hope we have more grace then
to be persuaded to it by them. Again it is evident, that the Tithes under the
Law, was given as a portion to the whole family of Levi, so that they had no
other maintenance allowed them for their whole Tribe, Numb. 18. 20, 21. but we
have no Let them practi^e (...) of be^sts, (...) they h^ve done the souls of
me^
such Tribe amongst us. It was also given them for their service at the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, (viz. for killing of sheep, and ^x^n, and
offering them in Sacrifi^e) now when we have the like kind of service to
employ them in, we will allow them wages of the like nature, but until then, I
advise them to be sparing, and to practice that trade of Butchery, which is
far fitter for many of them, then to officiate in that sacred Function, which
they have so audaciously taken upon them.

SECT. 3.
Obj. THe Apostle tells the Corinthians, that he had robbed other Churches,
taking wages of them, to do the Corinthians service, 2 Cor. 11. 8.

Ans. Take notice withal how far the A^^stle justifies The Apostles
maint^ined by a free benevolence.
himself in so doing* in that (...) it (...) Robe^y, and yet that Robery was
n^ other, t^e^ by (...) of such, to whom he had formerly (...) (...) to the
faith, as may appear by the n^nth verse of (...) where he acknowledges, that
his supply at Co^i^th* (...) ^y the Macedonians, which ^enevol^^^^ was (...) of
(...) etc.

Obj. The Apostle plead^ ^^r (...) to ^^m from the Church, 1 Cor. 2. ^. 9. 10,
etc.

Ans. Let such as plead Pa^ls privilege, be of Paul's temper, Such as plead
(...) privileges (...) to be of his ^^mper.
and practice, who before he deman^^d any thing a^ d^^ unto him, does in the
three first Verses of that Chapter, prove himself to be an Apostle, and that
they, of whom he required such things, were his workmanship, and seal of his
Apostleship in the Lord, viz. that under God, he had been a means to draw them
from darkness, to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; yea he
refers it to their Conferences, whether he were such an one or no; Are not
ye my wo^kmanship in the Lord, etc. now when any of these Priests can so
justify himself, in truth, and sincerity of heart, it is fit he should be
recompensed with that reward the Apostle pleads for, which certainly was no
matter of Tithe; for if so, had Paul been of the temper of our Leviticall
Blades, he would not have used those mil^e expressions, to persuade them; but
rather have taken it by violence from them. The Apostle Paul very (...) full of
his (...).
But certainly, had Tithes been due to the Ministers of the Gospel, the
Apostle Paul writing so many Epistles, and speaking in so many places
concerning the maintenance of Ministers, was very much to blame, that could not
think on (at one time or other) to call his many, and great Livings, (which he
possessed) either by the name of Bishoprics, Parsonages, etc. or to have have
written particularly, and punctually for his Tithes, or Surplisse-fees; O such
a passage had been worthy to have been printed in letters of Gold, and guarded
with Angels of the same mettell.

SECT. 4.
Obj. THe Apostle exhorts them that are taught, to communicate to him that
teaches, in all good things, which cannot be effected but by way of Tithes.

Ans. Such gratuities may be effected, and not by way of Tithes, Ti^hes no^ ^f
necessity.
for if I give a Crown, or an Angel, out of my estate, to a Minister, may he
not be said to participate of all my estate, certainly it cannot be denied.

Obj. If Ministers should stand to the reward of what men shall freely give
them, they are like to be poorly recompensed for their pains.

Ans. Far better then the Apostles were, for they did not only want the
benefit of Tithes, but they also suffered impri^onment, and persecutions, as
the Scriptures does plentifully witness; the Apostle Paul could say, that
bonds and afflictions waited upon him where ever he went; such was the
condition of the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, which now to suffer by these
fine todd Priests, would prove a very hard task for the most zealous of them
to take out.

Obj. Three parts of the Kingdom will give nothing to a godly painful
Minister.

Ans. Three parts of the Commonwealth, and a third part There will be a
sutablenesse betwix^ the f^^ck of Christ and the true Pastors of it.
of the fourth will not be found sit materials for the building of the new
Jerusalem, or Church of Christ, and therefore as there will be but a little
flock of sheep, so will they stand in need of the sewer Shepherds; and
doubtless God has so ordered it, that they should be alike suitable to the
flock, for I am verily persuaded that three parts of the Clergy of this
Nation, and a third part of the fourth, will not be found fit Pastors for the
flock of Christ.

Obj. You seem to be of a very strange opinion, do you ever think to see
such things come to pass, as the cashering of so many of the Clergy as you
speak of?

Ans. Truly until all such of them, as I have named, viz. the Cavalier Priests,
be outed of that Function, or calling they have so arrogantly usurped (viz. as
Successors of the Apostles of Christ, being as mere Antagonists to them, as
light and darkness, Heaven and Hell) there can be no true Reformation; yea
until the best of their grime, have disclaimed that Antichristian Calling, by
which they claim their Office, it being (as they very well know, or may know,
quite contrary to the election of Pastors in the primative times, who was
neither so initiated into their office, or maintained by any such donation, as
that of Tithes, which the greatest part of the best of them plead for.
Therefore to conclude our Discourse concerning Tithes, whether belonging to
Parsonages, or Viccaredges, as of Corn or Hay, Piggs, Geese, eggs, etc. I am
confident, that the Pope, Cardinals, Jesuits, Monks, Friars, Abhots, with all
the rest of that Hierarchy of Rome, as also the late Archbishops, Bishops,
Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Arch Deacons, etc. may as justly claim their
former Stipends, or Church dues as they call them, (which they once enjoyed
amongst us,) as the present Priests, their Parsonages, or Viccareges, they
having no more right to them from the Word, then the other before mentioned.

Obj. Them you formerly mentioned had their Revenues taken from them by the
Civil Magistrate, but so have not these yet, therefore they may justly claim
them,

Ans. It is yet to prove that the Civil Magistrate, has a power to dispose of
the Commonwealths Estates, in a Spiritual cognizance, their office being
merely Civil, as I have showed; especially toward the maintenance of the
grand enemies to Christ, and the Commonwealth, as they very well know; as also
in that they have no warrant for any such maintenance, (albeit for the best of
their Tribe, as I have proved at large,) and therefore for the Civil
Magistrate, to dispose of men's Goods, to the maintenance of Antichristians, is
more then they ought to do, or can justify from the Scriptures, that of
Presbitery being a Hierarchy as the other, and therefore to be ab^lished, in
each particular, as the other, and that without respect of persons, as the
Covenant injoynes.

Obj. They of the Presbitery have been such, as have stood up with you, in
defense of Religion, as also by wh^s^ means you have provailed against the
common enemy, viz. the Hierarchy of Bishops, etc. and will you now contemn
them?

Ans. The Bishops by the same rule, might have pleaded the like privilege, for
they also did well (in their time) by opposing the Popes grand Hierarchy in
this Nation; but yet notwithstanding being pressing forwards toward a fuller
Reform^tion, the Civil Magistrate has abolished them, being the (ne^)
subordinate Hierarchy, etc. now, this of Presbitery being (...) a whelpe of the
same Litter (as I have, and shall pro^e) they are also as much engaged to
suppress it; notwithstanding, (...) can be said in vindication of them. Yea it
is worthy the observation of all Christians, how the Grand^es of that (...),
have also (through the just judgment of God) (...) the very (...) course to
that end, as have the rest of the Hie^^rchies (...), viz. by the cruelty that
they would have imposed upon (...), as would not imitate them, in their ways;
the first with (...) and Fagg^^, the second by Banishment, etc. and these by
the imp^isonment, etc. they had obtained (for their opposits) by an Ordinance
of Parliament; which aforesaid Cruelties has been, and is like to be, the
ruin of themselves, whereas otherwise, if they had been more modest, in all
probability, they might have been continued (to this present time,) in pomp
sufficient for such opposers of the truth, as the other were, and this of
Presbitery now is:

And therefore Jack. as thou did imitate,
So thou must likewise suffer; it is thy fate,
It cannot be avoided; thou must be
Deprived also of thy Hierarchy.
The fourth part of Rom^s ruin by W^ite-Hall, etc.
Treats how the Church of Christ may be restored to its Primat^v^ pur^y, in
its Gatherers, Members, Discipline, and Government, and that Jure Divino, or
according to the will and appointment of Jesus Christ.
ANd I John saw the holy City, the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of
Heaven, prepared as a Bride, adorned for her Husband; and I heard a (...) ort
of Heaven saying, the The Pieface.
Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwel^ with them, and they shall be
his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God, and God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the
former things are passed away, and he that sat upon the Throne said, behold, I
make all things new. And be said unto me, write, for these words are true and
faithful; and he said unto me, it is done; I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the end. I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water
of life, freely; he that over-commeth shall inherit all things, and I will be
his God, and he shall be my Son, but the fearful and unbeleeving, and the
abominable, and murderers, and whore-mongers, and s^rcerers, and Idolaters, and
all lyar^, shall have their part in the Lake, which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death. He that has ears to hear, let him
hear what the Spirit says, etc.

CHAP. I. Treats of fit Pastors, or Gatherers, etc.
SECT. 1.
HAving thus discovered the corruptions, with which the man of sin has
infected this Nation, and in as much as the Spirit of God exhorts us to come
out of Babylon; as also in that I would not only search the wound to the
bottom, but also apply a salve whereby to cure it; I have therefore (by Gods
assistance,) ventred upon the Cure, which sovereign Plaster, if the Patients,
(viz. the people of God be willing to admit, and suffer to continue on,) until
the virtue thereof infuse it self into the Malady, (I doubt not but to set
them in a perfect state) and condition, which doubtless is the ultimate end,
and desire of every true Christian.

Obj. What materials are they, which you would compose the remedy of?

Ans. They consist of four ingredients, viz. First, in meet Gatherers Four
ingredients to cu^e the Churches malady.
of Churches; 2. Of meet Members to be gathered. 3. Of a meet way to
distinguish them, from others which are not meet Members; and 4. Of a means to
govern them being so gathered; of each of which in order, and first of the
first, viz. Touching the qualities, and conditions of such persons, as are fit
Gatherers, or to be employed in the gathering of the Church of Christ, out of
the Kingdom of the world, and Antichrist.

SECT. 2.
Obj. What qualified people would you have them to be?

Ans. Such as will most conform themselves to Of what quality the ministers
ought to be.
the nature, and disposition of them, whom our Savior first employed, in
gathering it out of Judisme, and Heathenisme, etc.

1. Of such as will freely labor in the work, and willingly be content with the
like allowance for their labor, as the Apostles of Christ were, viz. of such
things are set before them, or which is given them as a free benevolence, by
the Churches which they shall gather, Luke 10. 7, 8.

2. Of such as will take the oversight of the Flock of Christ, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; not as
being Lords over Gods heritage, but examples to the flock, 1 Pet. 5. 2. 3.

3. Of such as with the Apostles, seek not theirs, but them, that will
willingly spend, aad be spent for the flock of Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 14, 15. that
will acknowledge a necessity to be laid upon them, and a woe to be pronounced
against them* if they preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 15, 16, 17, 18. yea
rather then they will be burdensome, will cause their own hands to minister
unto their necessiti^^* Act. 20. 33, 34. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 6. 7. 9. 10. and 2 Thessalonians.
3. 8. 1 Cor. 4. 12.

4. Of such as will rejoice in the tribulations, and afflictions which shall
happen unto them, for the dispensing of the Gospel; that w^^ freely hazard
their lives amongst Pagans, and unbeleevers, to bring them to the knowledge of
the truth, as it is in Jesus, Act. 15. 26. 2 Cor. 11. 24, etc. and will think
themselves happy, that they are accounted worthy to suffer for the profession
of their Master Christ, Act. 5. 41.

Such like men as these, would I have employed, to rebuild the The practise^ of
the Apostles ought to be our pattern to imitate.
walls of the spiritual Jerusalem, to separate the stones which shall be sound
(in the ruins of the Antichristian fabrics) to be pollishing proof, (at
least in their esteem) out of that mass of rubbish which they lie amongst,
according to the method which the Apostles used in their gatherings of the like
nature in the primative times, for without all controversy, to take any other
course to effect the work* is a way to join light, with darkness, Christ with
Beliall, Believers and unbeleevers, to make Christ's Kingdom, an imperfect
Kingdom, his Government an imperfect Government, his Agents imperfect Agents,
and so become wilful and stubborn opposers of that method, and order, which
was used by our Savior, and his Apostles in their gatherings of Churches.

SECT. 3.
Obj. You will find but few instruments of such a mind to employ in that
service?

Ans. I am of your judgment in that, yet nevertheless, seeing they ought to
be such men (who are to take the employment ( upon them) we ought to make use
of no other; and having confined Those few that are me^^ for employment ought
to be employed, and no ^the^.
our selves by Covenant, to observe that method, and order (in the Reformation,
we are now upon) as is Jure Divine, or according to the will and appointment of
Jesus Christ, and the best reforming Churches of the times) let us in the name,
and fear of God, be obedient to every precept, which he, and his Apostles has
left to direct us by* not turning either to the right hand of addition, or the
left of detraction, to what is prescribed by them; it being chiefly by that
means, that the Church planted by the Apostles became adulterated: Therefore
though there he but few such men to be employed ^s is mentioned, yet let us
consider the battle is the Lords, and he has promised victory to the Saints,
Rev. 17. 14. and he that has promised, is both faithful, Heb. 10. 23. and
able to perform.

Again, though there be but few who will lay their helping hands to the work, or
put their fingers in the rubbish, to grope out the stones fit for use, yet had
we better make use of that few, then to employ such builders as will put in such
stones as will first come to hand, although unpollished, or approved of, by the
Master builder Christ Jesus, and his Apostles, in the Word.

Obj. Would you have every stone, brought to the Master builders for their
approbation, before they be put into the building?

Ans. There is a Rule and Square, which they have left to try Faith and
repentance the instru^^^^^ to fi^ us ^o* the building.
by, viz. Faith and Repentance, which if they be not capable of, are not fit
for the work.

Obj. Must every stone be answerable to that Rule, and Square, which is to be
employed in that building?

Ans. As none were admitted into the first Temple of Christ, (built by himself
and his Apostles) without being answerable to the proportion of their Rule, and
Square aforesaid; no more ought they now to be, in the second Temple which is
to be built, but further of this, in its due place.

SECT. 4.
Obj. Who are they whom you term such builders as aforesaid?

Ans. Such as build with unhew^n stones, daubing them with The H^p^cricy o^ ^h^
^at^ builders*
untempered M^rter, and so cover them over, with an Orthodoxall varnish, by
which Hipocriticall dealing, they have exceedingly enriched themselves, which
craft does clearly appear; by the materials which are now found in their
dismantled fabrickes of Papacy, Prelacy, and Presbitery, there being few, or
none of them fit to rebuild the Temple of Christ.

Obj. True, in the two former buildings you have named, there has been found
much deceit, and cous^^age, whereby they have very much enriched themselves,
but the Presbiterian buildings is not taken to be such, for the Parliament does
esteem them builders as honest men, and their buildings without deceit, yea as
such a building as they themselves intend to live under; therefore the
Presbiterian builders are none of that linniage, with the two former Builders,
or buildings.

Ans. As the Pope, and his Hierarchy, prevailed with Emperors, and the Prelates
with Kings, so have the Presbiterians lately with Parliaments; to support their
powers, and justify their Doctrines to be Jure Divino. But the falsity of the
two first I presume is manifest to all Gods people, and as for that of
Presbitery* it is one, and the same with them, in many degrees (as I have and
shall prove); and therefore, seeing the Lord is pleased to discover the
faultiness, and errors of it, as of the other, the Magistrate ought no more
to countenance it then the other of Popery, and Prelacy, they certainly being
the three material foundations, of Presbitery ought to (...) no more
countenanc^d then Prelacy.
the Popes assumption of his Triple Crown, viz. one for Papacy, another for
Prelacy, and the other for Presbitery; the three P P Ps of pleasure, profit,
and preferment, by which the Dragon, and the Beast has subsisted, and been
supported, that of Presbitery being the Dragons tail.

SECT. 5.
Obj. Presbitery is a Government which all or most of the reformed Churches now
enjoy, and have done for many years, and therefore without doubt, it is
according to the will and appointment of Jesus Christ.

Ans. Antiquity cannot make error truth, neither is it a sure Antiquity how a
sure mark of the truth, and how not.
mark of the true Church of Jesus Christ, unless fetched from the Radex, or
the first root of it, (viz. from himself, and his Apostles;) for if Antiquity
any other ways should carry it, the Papists would have it clear both from
Prelates, Presbiterians, and Independants. Again, that Antiquity is no sure
mark of the truth, may be proved by several instances, viz.

1. In the time before the Law, where we find that Laban (...) be^or^ ^h^ L^^
pretended Antiquity for his Gods, Genesis 31. 53. whom his Father, and
Grandfather worshipped; but Jacob swears by the fear of his Father Isaac,
he ^iseth no higher, neither to Grandfather, or Grandfathers Father; Terah
Abraham's Father, being an Idolater, Joshua 14. 2. and it is likely that Abraham
also had a touch of the same superstitious worship before his calling from his
Fathers house; for the Lord appearing unto Jacob in a Vision, Genesis 4^. 3.
calls himself, The God of thy Father; Jacob then could not at the furthest
go beyond Abraham, for diverse hundred years to fetch his faith, though the
most ancient Patriarchs, Noah, Sem* Heber, was not of the same faith and
Religion, Antiquity therefore is no sure mark, unless as before; for so
indeed the truth is more ancient then error.

2. Stephen (under the Gospel) could not prove his faith from Under ^^e Gosp^l.
the immediate descent of his Parents* for of them says he, Ye have always
resisted the Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do ye^, Act. 7. 53. he
ascended up to Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets time, and so must the
Government of Christ be now fetched from its primative purity, viz. from Christ
and his Apostles, and not from Prelacy or Presbitery, they being the Relics
of Pop^ry, as I have and shall prove. Again* we are not to worship God any
other way, then he has prescribed in the Word; for as he is only to be
^or^^ipped, ^o he is only to prescribe a rule how he will be worshipped, and
therefore all will worship (as the Apostle (...) i^, ^^l. ^, ^3.) is condemned,
seeing he will not be Man. 15. 8 9.
worshipped, according to the ph^n^^sie of men, as our Savior also ^^^^meth.
It can then be no warrant for us, to be of the same Religion with our Fathers,
or Grandfathers, because all the worl^ has been blinded with Superstition,
and ignorance, for diverse hundreds of years* and therefore we are to acsend up
to the first Original, viz. to Christ and his Apostles.

Obj. Doubtless the Presbiterian Government is according to the will, and
appointment of Jesus Christ, in regard it has past so many refinings?

Ans. I shall prove there is but one step betwixt it, and Papacy But one step
betwix^ Presb^^ery and Papacy
in gross (viz. Prelacy) and therefore until it be purged also from its
dross, we are not to join in League with it, viz. until they conform unto
the rule prescribed in the Word.

SECT. 6.
Obj. IF the Government which ought to be established be not yet known, what
is become of all since the primative times (^^ring the Apostasy) that have
practiced contrary to the truth, (through ignorance) and yet have thought they
have sacrifi^^^ their lives for it; witness the many Martyrs, that has
suffered fire, and faggot, for their judgments, which since are de^me^
^ro^ious?

Ans. Ignorance is of two sorts, viz. Simple ignorance* and O^ simple ignorance.
Wilful ignorance; simple ignorance is such as was in the Disciples of
Ephesus, that did not know whether there were any Holy Ghost or no, Act. 19. 2.
under which notion may be concluded all those whom the Lord is not pleased to
reveal many of his secrets, and yet practice according to that knowledge they
have, with a desire to improve their Talent, and not to bury it M^n mig^^ he
sa^ed formerly by such means ^s (...) co^dem^^.
in a Napkin; such people (I say) though they come far short of the knowledge
which others have, may be saved thereby; (yea albeit under the least degree of
Knowledge in Christianity, if it be but as a grain of Mustard seed) as well as
he that has attained to the highest pitch of it, for to whom little is given,
little will be required.

2. Wilful ignorance is such as the Psalmist speaks of, where O^ (...).
he says, The fool has said in his heart that there is ^o God, Psalm. 14. 1.
such an one was Pharaoh, who said, I know no^ the Lord, Exodus 5. 2. and such
are all Athists, and wicked people, which love darkness rather then light;
such as ^^^e to be better reformed, and reject apparent light being offered,
and under this stubbornness of Spirit, men may as well be damned under the
notion of Presbitery, or Independenly, as of Papacy, and rather, for to whom
much is given, of them much will be required.

Again, God has had his Church in all ages, and albeit that every (...)
no^^^n* (...) kn^w^^^ (...)
age has not had the same measure of light to worship him by (for Abraham saw
more of Christ then Adam, Moses more then(...) a pattern for us to imitate;
(as that in the Mount was unto Moses for building the Tabernacle,) and in so
doing, I hope I shall not be gaine-sayed; presuming also, that it is the desire
of all, that the Reformation ( now intended) may be punctually according to the
will, and appointment of Jesus Christ, and not to be mixed with humane
inventions, or traditions of men, it being a thing so much de^ested (both of
Christ, and all true Christians) as that it de^er^eth to be hissed out of the
Church of Christ.

Obj. Hold me no longer in di^^ence, but acquaint me with your intention.

Ans. I will deliver it in the express words of our Savior to Christ's way of
gath^^i^g Churches.
his Apostles, to that very purpose, viz. Go teach all Nations, and Baptize
them, etc. Mat. 28. 19. As also, Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature; he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved,
etc.

SECT. 2.
Obj. WHat would you infer from them words of our Savior? Doctrine an^ faith
ought to go before baptism.


Ans. That Doctrine and Faith ought to go before Baptism, and if we duly
observe the words of Christ, they testify as much. For he does not say, Go,
baptize all Nations and teach them, but he gives them directions in the first
place to teach them, and then Baptize them. As also in that other place, he
says not, He that is baptized and then believes, but contrariwise, he that
believes before Baptism. Baptism being a consequence thereof, so that of
necessity Doctrine and Faith must precede Baptism, and Baptism the initiating
of a Christian into the society of the Church Militant; yea for the fuller
confirmation of it, our S^^iour does iterate the word (teach) as if he should
have said; First teach them the principles of Religion, by way of (...), which
is the milk of the Word, and when they h^ve learnt to k^ow me, and what I have
done for (...), as also what I have enjoined them that are my Disciples to
observe, if they be willing (...), then Baptize them, then (...) th^^ into my
^^^^k* and after they be so admitted, then (...) them with the strongest meat
of the Word, with the Mister^^^ of Sal^ation; then te^^h them to observe all
things whatso^^^^ I have commanded you, and (...) doing, I will be with you
unto the end of the world.

As also in them words of our Savior, ( Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved) makes it evident, that Droctrine and faith must go
before Baptism; for there can be no belief, without faith, and faith is said
to come by hearing, and he that hears, must first be capable of hearing,
before he can understand what be is to believe, and until then (the text says)
he is not to be admitted a member of the Church of Christ.

SECT. 3.
Obj. BY your expressions, I perceive you would not have Infants admitted to
the Sacrament of Baptism?

Ans. We ought not to admit any as Members, of the Church Against infants
Baptism.
of Christ, until they be capable of the profession of a Christian, would you
not think it a mere madness to bind an Infant to a Trade, before it can
either go or speak?

Obj. Yes certainly it were a madness indeed, but what of that?

Ans. It is as great a folly in Parents to desire, or the Church to The folly
of baptizing infants.
admit of such Infants, as Members of the Church of Christ, and so consequently
professors of his Name (for the Apostle says, that as many as are baptized
into Christ, have put (...) Christ Gal. 3. 27.) before they know either the
Church, or Christ.

Obj. By these expressions you show your self contrary to the judgments both
of the Presbiterians, Independants, etc.

Ans. By them words, I show my self such an one, as would be guided and
directed by the precepts and examples of Christ, and his Apostles.

Obj. Did not Christ and his Apostles allow of Infants, as Members of his
Church?

Ans. The elect of them he did, and does admit, as Members of his Church
triumphant, but not of his Church Militant.

Obj. Did not the Apostles of Christ baptize Infants?

Ans. Where do you read of any that they baptized?

Obj. True, we do not read nominally that they did baptize infants, but we
read that they did baptize whole families (amongst which infants might be
included) as the family of Lidia, the Jailer, etc.

Ans. That is but a mere supposition, without any ground from the Word, for
do you think that Christ would leave the Sacrament of Baptism, without a
sufficient discovery to whom it did belong.

SECT. 3.
Obj. IT does belong to the children of the faithful, for if the root be holy,
so are the branches?

Ans. That does not always follow, for Isaac and Rebecca was holy roots (as
you term them) and yet Esau was not an holy branch, whom the Lord has
rejected before his birth.

Obj. It is said concerning him, that the elder shall serve the younger, or the
greater the less, but not as you say?

Ans.. I pray whether are you, or the Prophet Malachy, the Godly Parents may
have wicked children.
more able to expound the meaning of that text of Scripture, if the Prophet, he
rendereth it thus? I loved Jacob, and I hated Esau, Mal. 1. 1, 2. Again, the
Prophet Ezekiel tells us, that godly Parents may have wicked children, Ezekiel.
18. 5. 10. 14. 17, etc. and wicked Parents may have godly children, so that
your Argument cannot hold water.

Obj. Does not Peter tell the Jews, Act. 2. 3. 6. that the promise is to them
and their children?

Ans. It Is true that Peter acquainted them so, but what is that to us?

Obj. Does not the same belong to us, and our children, as did to the Jews,
and their children?

Ans. No, for the Jews were a peculiar people, chosen of God, above all the
people of the face of the earth, and so were not we Gextiles, and therefore,
that holds no better then your former Argument.

For to whom that Covenant was made, to them only it did belong; but that
Covenant was made to Abraham, and his carnal Seed, (of which we are not) and
none other.

Ergo that Covenant belonged to them, and to none other.

SECT. 4.
Obj. BY your own confession, that Covenant belonged unto Esau as well as to
Jacob.

Ans. The external covenant of Circumcision did, but not the internal
covenant of Grace and Salvation.

Obj. It is the external covenant which we dispute of, and therefore as Esau
being included in that external Covenant, was admitted to the external sign,
or badge of the Covenant, (viz. Circumcision) why should not our children being
of that Church, as Esau and Jacob was) be admitted to the external sign, or
badge of Baptism, which we retain in the room of their Circum^ision?

Ans. Because we are not borne under that external Covenant, as they were (as
I have showed you) for that Covenant was made unto Abraham, and his external
Seed, so that if you can prove that we Gentiles are sprung from the carnal
loins of Abraham, then I will yield, that we ought to be Circumcised as they
were, but not Baptized, as I shall hereafter show you.

Obj. That we are sprung from the carnal loins of Abraham, I cannot prove,
but the words of Peter extend further, viz. to all that are afar off, even as
many as the Lord our God shall call.

Ans. There you have hit the nail on the head, for I yield that in them very
words the Apostle includes the Gentiles, but mark the Proviso, viz. no more of
them or their children, then shall first be called by the Lord our God, viz. by
the power of the Word preached, which was then, and is now (in relation to the
Gentiles) the very means of their initiation into the Covenant, as the text
does verify, Acts 2. 39. for otherwise what can you infer from that text of
Scripture?

Obj. That all the Gentiles were included under that promise.

Ans. You see it very evident to the contrary, and how no more then are so
called, can be comprehended in that Covenant, or be made heirs of Abraham.

SECT. 5.
Obj. YOu cannot deny but that we Gentiles are made the children of Abraham by
faith, as well as the Jews, for the Apostle says, that as many as are of
faith, are of faithful Abraham, Romans 4. 16.

Ans. It is granted we are so, but not then, before we have We are not of
Abraham's seed until we have Abraham's faith.
faith, and that by your own confession; therefore until we have faith, we
are not heirs of the Promise, and so consequently ought not to be admitted to
the badge or seal of the Promise. But suppose (that which cannot be proved by
Scripture) that the external Covenant did belong to the Gentiles, as well as
to the Jews, yet certainly we ought not to think that we have a greater
privilege then the Jews could obtain by virtue of the promise made unto them
in Abraham, they being the natural branches of the true Olive Tree, and we
branches of the wild Olive only incerted by faith, Romans 11. 20. 24.

Obj. We desire no greater a privilege, but only the same.

Ans. But you do, and that a far greater privilege then the Jews could
obtain by virtue of the promise made unto them.

Obj. Wherein I pray you, did they not obtain Circumcision by the virtue of
that Covenant made to their father Abraham, whereby they were made members of
the external Church; and do we any more in requiring Baptism, then to be
acknowledged Members of the same now?

Ans. Yea, and that a far greater privilege then the Jews We assume a
greater privilege in Gods Covenant to Abraham then did the J^wes.
had; for though they by means of the Covenant, and promise aforesaid, were
admitted to Circumcision, and so made members of the external Church of the
Jews, yet were not them Jews (so Circumcised) admitted to Baptism, before an
actual acknowledgement of their faith, and repentance; as in Act. 2. 23. to
which purpose the Scripture is very significant; (yea upon every occasion of
Baptism, whether they were Jews, and so included in the external covenant of
Circumcision; or Gentiles, and so excluded the same) but we Gentiles expect to
be admitted to Baptism by virtue of that Covenant made to them, and that
without that faith and repentance (which was required of them) therefore
certainly we claim a far greater privilege then the Jews could obtain by
virtue of the Covenant aforesaid.

SECT. 6.
Obj. HAve not Children faith? The Church cannot be assu^ed that this or tha^
Infant ^ath faith.


Ans. Children which are of the elect of God have the seed of faith, but how
shall the Church be satisfied that they are so, until they express it in the
fruits thereof. And we may safely conclude, that seeing faith was required of
the Jews, (which had those former privileges above us, as also, of such whose
lives might be partly known to the Apostles) that it ought Three arguments
against Infants Baptisms.
much more to be required of us Gentiles (which are no ways in the Covenant
unless by faith, which does not at all appear in Infants) and from hence I
thus argue touching the further clearing of the point in controversy, viz.

1. In the thing wherein we ought to be cautalous of them, whose actions are
visible, in the same thing, we ought to be more careful of them, whose actions
does not yet appear.

But in matters of Baptism, the Apostles themselves were cautalous how they
admitted of men, whose deeds or actions might be partly known unto them.

Ergo in the same case ought we to become more careful how we admit of
Children, whose faith, and actions does not yet appear.

2. The example of Christ and his Apostles in gathering of that Church out of
Judisme, and Heathenisme, ought to be our pattern now to imitate.

But we read not that they did admit of Infants, as Members of their Churches.

Ergo to Baptize Infants, is a way never to compose such a Church of Believers,
as was in the Apostles time.

3. That thing that makes us Heirs, must first be obtained, before we can be
said to be Heirs.

But it is only faith, that makes us Gentiles, Heirs of the Promise, made
unto Abraham, and his Seed, viz. Jesus Christ.

Ergo we must first have the faith, which Abraham had, before we can be said to
be Heirs of Abraham; and until then, the Promise does in no wise belong unto
us; and if not the Promise, consequently not the seal or badge of the Promise,
viz. Baptism.

SECT. 7.
Again, as the Sacraments of Christ are perfect, so ought the Receivers of
Sacraments ought to he capable of them.
receivers thereof, to be capable of their perfection; and seeing faith and
repentance is, or ought to be required of such parties as communicate at the
Lords Supper, why ought not the like to be required of such as are admitted to
Baptism, it being also a Sacrament as the other, the one giving admittance,
and the other entertainment, to the faithful, and penitent.

Obj. Will you say, that Infants have no faith until they be able to express
it to the Church?

Ans. I will not say but such of them, as are of the elect, have the seed of
faith, but until those seeds produce the fruits of faith, the Church is
ignorant that they have them; and therefore until then, may justly refuse to
admit them as Members of the Church (which at the least ought to consist of
seeming Christians) as I have and shall prove.

Obj. We ought to have a charitable opinion of all Christians, but especially
of the seed of the faithful.

Ans. It was and is such a charity, as that which has made, Charity toward
in^an^s has (...) the Church.
and yet does make our see^ing Churches as they are, viz. a Den of Thieves, a
House of Merchandise; we have had too charitable an Opinion of many, yea of the
most, which desperately, and without reverence, have been admitted Pupels, to
that Trinity College of Saints, as Co-heires with Christ, who have after
proved a d^sgrace, and scandal to that Divine Fellowship, which simply, and
unadvisedly, we supposed they took upon them, when they knew not their right
hand from their left, yea when Baptism was not so much as in their thoughts.

SECT. 8.
Obj. HOw can you be assured who has true faith, seeing the Apostles
themselves were deceived, as in Simon Magus, Annanias, Saphira? etc.

Ans. Therefore ought we to be more cautelous whom we receive, We ough^ to be
mo^^ Wa^^ se^^^g the Apost^es were mistaken.
and to require as great a testimony of their faith as possible may be before
we admit of them to the Sacrament of Baptism, in regard that the more there is
so admitted into that sacred Society, the more it will be polluted, and made a
scandal by the enemies thereof; and the plain truth is, out of a careless
neglect of so doing* as also out of a too indulgent charity, that Children have
the seeds of faith, and so are included in the The fruit of baptizing Infants.
covenant of grace and salvation, Religion is made abominably scandalous, by
making such of the number of the faithful, as yet never attained to the
measure, or proportion of the faith of Devils, yea by this means such a people
is admitted as Christians, as is too apparent (if possible) would tread both
Christ and his members under foot, yea by this means as aforesaid, what a
company of debauched Water-rats, and Mault-wormes, etc. I mean Drunkards,
Whore-masters, Sabboth-breakers, and what not, have we now in this
Commonwealth, under the notion of Christians and Protestants, yea such, who if
they, who are most invetterately bitter against this Method (which I, or rather
Christ himself, and his Apostles has prescribed) were now to Baptize such,
they could not with modesty, without repentance, and a promise of new obedience
went before.

SECT. 9.
Obj. DId not our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ meekly embrace Infants which
was brought unto him, yea and blame his Disciples, who would have kept them
from him, saying, that of such were the kingdom of heaven?

Ans. Christ blessed them, because he might know them to be of the elect, for
otherwise he would not have done so; for as himself confesses, he prays not
for the world, Joh. 17, 9.

2. Though he blessed them, does it therefore follow that all Children are
blessed, if so, a gallant conclusion.

3. Though he blessed them, it does not follow that forthwith he commanded them
to be Baptized, and as for himself, he baptized none, Joh. 4. 2. neither is it
sa^d that he commanded his Disciples to do it, no doubtless he left that to
do, until they were of years of knowledge what the profession was, which
they were to undertake, for it is the hardest task that ever flesh and blood
took upon them, to become a Christian indeed.

4. Neither are we to think, that the Kingdom of God, whether The Kingdom of
God consists not of young infants
militant or triumphant, does consist only of young Infants, (as you would have
them consequent words of our Savior, Mat. 19. 13.) for then men of years
should be excluded; therefore it must be that our Savior means such as
become Infants by a second Birth, which is the substance of his Discourse with
Nichodemus, Joh. 3. 3. as also whereof the Apostle Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
where he wills the Jews to become as newborn babes, desiring the sincere
milk of the Word, that they might grow thereby. He shows them also in the
third verse, how this birth is produced, viz. not of corruptible, but of the
incorruptible seed of the Word of God, which lives, and abides in them, The
Apostle Paul also terms it, the putting off the old man, and putting on the
new, Col. 3. 10. and in relation to which, he testifies himself to be a
Father to the Corinthians, by begetting them to the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 15. by
all which it clearly appears, that them words of Christ (viz. of such are the
Kingdom of heaven,) are not meant possitively of little Infants, but such as
become so, by a Spiritual birth, as infants by a Carnal birth.

SECT. 10.
Obj. THe Apostle tells us, that the unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the
believing husband, and the unbeleeving husband, by the believing wife, for
otherwise their children would be unclean, but by that means they are made
holy; so that the Children of believing Parents are holy, and therefore to be
admitted members of the Church.

Ans. The same Apostle does also give us to know, Romans 5. 12. No feadrall
holiness in Infants.
that we are all under original sin, and all by nature the children of wrath,
and therefore faeadrall holiness is not to be imagined in Children; yea it is
very probable by my former instances of Esau, Judas, and that passage in
Ezekiels Prophecy, that godly Parents may have wicked Children; and the
Prophet Habakkuk also says, that the just shall live by his faith, (viz. by
his own faith) for otherwise (if one man's faith would save more then himself)
that Popish tenent of Supererrogation might lawfully be justified, which we
utterly disclaim (as well we may) doubtless then the Apostles meaning in that
place was no other but this, viz. that like as all things are clean to the
clean, Tit. 1. 15. as food, raiment, etc. so was the unchristian woman to the
Christian man, as that he may be conversant with her, and not offend; and that
the children begotten by such a couple, are not to be, reputed as unlawful, or
impure; or else the Apostle writ to satisfy a scruple, viz. That if
unbeleeving made a wife unholy unto her husband, or a husband unholy to his
wife, it would make their Children unholy too, and so both or none was to be
put No holiness incorporated into the woman by the man, etc.
away; but in regard, that to the pure all things are pure, therefore as well
the children, as the wife, in that sense aforesaid. And not that the believing
husband, does incorporate an inherent holiness into the unbeleeving woman, or
the woman to the man, in the act of Marriage, or both of them into the Child,
for that is punctually to contradict the aforesaid Scriptures, and so
consequently for the said Apostle to contradict himself.

SECT. 10.
Obj. IF Infants be not Baptized, then are they left in death, and ought to be
of no more esteem then Pagans, or Infidels.

Ans. To the first of these I answer, that the Lord knows who Infants though
not baptized may be saved.
are his; and though Children should dye unbaptized, yet if, of Gods elect,
they shall be saved, as if they had been Baptized; but though these things be
known unto God, yet as I said before, the Church is ignorant, who are elect,
and who are not; and therefore they ought to be as careful as may be, whom
they admit into their Societies, for fear of the scandals which may accrue by
the entertainment of the wicked.

And as touching the second, viz. that Children unbaptized are Believing
Pa^en^s may be comforted in ^^eir children*
of no more esteem then Pagans, or Infidels, I answer; that to speak such
words is like a Pagan or Infidel; for being Children of believing Parents,
they may have great hopes that they appertain unto election and salvation; as
also they may be comforted, by their godly endeavor to educate them in the
fear, and nurture of the Lord.

To conclude then this point touching Infants Baptism I affirm, that Infants
being detained from Baptism, until they be capable of the profession of a
Christian, will be a great inducement The baptizing of Infants do make Parents
ca^el^sse, and their children refracto^y.
to Parents to educate their Children in the ways of godliness. (that they
may fit them as soon as possible they can, to be ingrafted into the Church of
Christ, or communion of Saints) knowing that the longer they are kept o^t of
the Church, the more will be their disgrace and disesteem of the Church; and
contrariwise, the admitting of Infants to Baptism, before such education, is a
way to make Parents careless, and their Children refractory.

CHAP. VI. Treats of rebaptizing, etc.
SECT. 1.
Objection* THough you do not allow of Baptizing of Infants, yet surely you
do not demand it again of them who are already baptized?

Ans. Yes certainly but we ought, else wherefore did the Apostle demand a
^^nfess^on of Faith, Men ^ught to be bap^^zed before admittance as members of
the Church.
and Repentance, of the men of the Jews, Acts 2. 38. (who were before of the
Seed of Abraham, and already Circumcised, and so consequently of the external
Church) before they would admit them to the Sacrament of Baptism. And seeing
that the Apostle required such things of them Jews, how much more ought the
like to be required of us Gentiles, who as I have already showed, are not by
nature in the Covenant, and so consequently not of the external seed as they
were, the dim Circumcision compared with baptism
light of Circumcision being as far inferior to the glorious and shining
light of Baptism, as the office of John Baptist exceeded that of Moses, or the
smallest Star a flash of Lightning.

SECT. 2.
Obj. IS not Circumcision and Baptism one and the same in quality?

Ans. If they were so, then the Jews who were formerly Circumcised under the
Law, had no need of being Baptized under the Gospel.

Obj. What difference make you betwixt them?

Ans. Circumcision was of the same nature, as was the rest of the Ceremonies,
which was by an external sign, to show the internal meaning; as the Paschall
Lamb did represent Christ, and so of the rest.

And in like manner the Circumcision of the flesh, did prefigure the
Circumcision, and mortifying of the corrupt affections of the heart, as the
Apostle shows, Romans 2. 2^. He is not a Jew that is one outwardly, and
Circumcision is not that which is outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew that is
one inwardly, and Circum^^sion is that which is of the heart, and not of the
l^^ter; and to this purpose Moses wills the Israelites to circumcise the
^ore-^kins of their hearts, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. so that Circum^^^^^^ was my (...)
preparative to Baptism, as we may see, Act. 2. 3^. wh^^^ (...) requires of
them Jews, who were already Circumcised, to repent, Circumcision a (...) ^o
Bapti^me.
and be Baptized; by which it is evident* that Circumcision whose effects was
to mortify the corruption of the heart, was merely a preparative to Baptism.
And from hence I argue, That seeing Mortification, which is a dying to sin, and
living to righteousness, were required of the aforenamed persons, before they
could be admitted to Baptism, how much more ought it to be required of us
Gentiles before our admittance unto it.

Again, take Circumcision as a seal of the righteousness of External
circumcision a t^p^ ^f the internal.
faith, and it also appears, that the external Ceremony of circumcising the
flesh, was but a type of the internal circumcision of the heart, which is
expressed under the name of a new Creature, which is wrought in us by faith in
Christ, and is required of as many of us, as desire to put on Christ in
Baptism, as will clearly appear by these places of Scripture, as by the words
of Christ, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16. 16. as also by his Apostle, Act. 2. 38.
and 16. 30. and 18. 8. etc.

SECT. 3.
SO that Circumcision is no more the same with Baptism, then Circumcision no
more the same with Baptism then he Pasc^all L^mb^ with Christ.
the Paschall Lamb was the same with Christ; as then the Paschall Lamb and
other representations of Christ, were abolished by the coming of Christ, so
likewise Circumcision was abolished, when the purity of faith was required; for
the greater measure of light requires the greater measure of faith to
proportion or suite with it; for as before or under the Law, when Christ was
discovered mistically, as in a Glass, by Types, and Figures, he was also
pleased that their faith, and repentance, should be likewise typified unto
them, as by circumcising their foreskin; but when Christ came clearly to
reveal himself, then as well the representation of their faith must be
removed, (viz. Circumcision) as the other representations of his person; and
therefore as he was then visible, and audable, so he then likewise required,
that their faith should be no more shrouded under the vizzard of Circumcision,
but that it should be as clearly expressed to the world, as he himself was in
the world; witness the former Scriptures.

Baptism is then the same with Circumcision only in this, viz. How Baptism and
Circumcision agree.
that as circumcision did belong to the external Covenant of God to Abraham
and his seed, as that he would be their God, etc. so Baptism does likewise
belong to the internal Covenant of Grace and Salvation, and therefore when the
Jews were to take that degree, Circumcision could be no longer a sign unto
them, but must give place to Baptism, to usher them into that Spiritual
society, whereof it is a badge. All then who have been hitherto Baptized, in
relation to that external Covenant as aforesaid, are no more privileged by
it, then the Jews were by their Circumcision, which they shook off, when they
were to be admitted to that of Grace and Salvation, by the gate of Baptism;
and therefore it ought likewise to be relinquished by such now, as the other
was by the Jews then.

SECT. 4.
Obj. YOu have given me much satisfaction concerning the parties who are to be
admitted to Baptism, I now desire to be satisfied in some particulars touching
the Sacrament it self, and the circumstances that do belong unto it.

Ans. As I have given you satisfaction in the one, so I hope to do in the
other, in whatsoever you shall demand; for I am confident that as it is a
Sacrament, (as the Lords Supper is a Sacrament) so the Lord of the Sacrament
has as fully revealed in his Word touching all the materials of it, as of the
other, and first I will show you the nature, and property of a Sacrament.

1. A Sacrament is an outward sign, whereby the Lord does What a Sacrament ^^.
seal up in our Consciences, the promises of his good will, to support the
weakness of our faith; and we on the other side, to testify our godliness,
as well before him, and the Angels, as before men, call it a visible sign of an
holy thing.

2. As touching the office of a Sacrament, it is no other, then The office of a
Sacrament.
as the Word, whose office is to offer unto us Christ, and in him all the
treasures of the heavenly Grace (which if we have not faith to apprehend, it
avails us nothing) so likewise unless we have faith (which is as the mouth
of a vessel, to receive liquor) to apprehend and receive these mysteries of
Salvation, and graces of the Holy Ghost, they do nothing at all profit us; yea
the receivers of these Sacraments, without this faith, does make them liable to
the wrath of God, as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 11. 50, etc.

3. The word Sacrament does generally comprehend all signs What the word
Sacrament imports.
which ever God gave to Mankind to use, by which he might assure them of the
truth of his promise, which in former times he gave out in natural things; as
when he gave Adam the Tree of Genesis ^. 22. Gen 9 13, 14, etc.
Life, to be a pledge of immortality, and the Rainbow to Noah, and his
posterity; and sometimes in Miracles, as when he showed Abraham a light in a
smoking Oven, Genesis 15. 17. as also when he wet the Fleece with dew, all the
ground being dry about it, to promise victory to Gidion, Judge. 6. 37. etc.

SECT. 5.
BUt these two peculiar Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Sacraments kn^^
men together.
Supper, Christ has only ordained in his Church, to nourish his Children in
one faith, for men cannot be perfectly joined together into one frame of
Religion, either true, or false, unless they be knit together, in some
fellowship of visible Sacraments, which have been diverse, in regard of the
diverse respects of the times, for Circumcision was granted to Abraham, Genesis 17.
20. whereunto Purification, and Sacrifices were added, as these also left unto
us by Christ, viz. Baptism, and the Supper of our Lord, as these Scriptures
witness, Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16. Mat. 27. 27, 28. Mark 14. 22, 23, 24. Luke
22. 19, 20. therefore until these two Sacraments be joined together (as at the
first institution thereof, in their perfect purity) which has been so long
divided by the power of Antichrist (who as it were gave these holy How the
Sacraments have been abused.
things to Dogs) permitting all sorts of people to make use of these holy
vessels of the Sanctuary, to press in at this sacred gate of Baptism into
that glorious Temple of Christ, yea even of such as would tear Christ and his
Church in pieces, which this Nation has had woeful experience of, for these
many years; I say until these Sacraments be administered according to the
first intent of them) it is impossible that religion should flourish in its
primative purity. And as for the defining of this particular Sacrament of
Baptism, I term it a gate or entrance, whereby those who have a hungering and
thirsting desire to be admitted into the society of the spiritual Jerusalem,
or the City of the great King, Rev. 22. 24. may have access, through which
gate ought in no wise to enter any thing that defiles, or makes unclean,
neither Sacraments given for a double use.
what works abomination, or makes a lie, Rev. 22. 15. And this Sacrament of
Baptism is given by Christ for a double use, as first, for the manifestation of
our faith in Christ. 2. For the satisfaction of the Church, viz. that we have a
desire to be incorporated into the society of the faithful.

SECT. 6.
Obj. IF any come to present themselves to the Church, or Congregation,
desiring to be made a member of the same, what would you require more then an
expressive faith, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

Ans. In regard we have not so much knowledge (as the Apostles had) to discern
the sincerity of their faith and repentance, we desire it may be more
exemplified, then it was to the Apostles, who as we read was satisfied with the
bare confession, that Jesus Christ was the Son of God; it being also all the
acknowledgement whch we read was made by the Ennuch, Act. 8. 37.

Obj. What further enlargement would you require of them that desire to be made
members, seeing Philip was so satisfied with that Why the Apostles were
satisfied with the (...) ^^ssion, etc.
confession of the Ennuch as aforesaid, (whose life and conversation he could
not know) it being also all, that was demanded of the Jailer, and his family,
Act. 16. 31.

Ans. There may be some reason given, why the Apostles were so satisfied, as,
1. In that the Doctrine of Christ was not at that time drawn into a form.

2. In that Christ the fountain of that Doctrine, was but even revealing to
the world.

But it is otherwise now, for the Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, is not
only drawn into a form by the Apostles, but Christ is also thereby clearly
revealed unto us. And therefore faith and obedience is to be given to as much
of Christ, as is clearly revealed in his Word, before we be admitted as members
of his Church.

SECT. 7.
ANd it is also to be observed, that the Baptism unto which Baptisms has
attained its ^^owth by many degrees.
we are to be Baptized, has attained its growth by many degrees, and according
to the measure of each degree, Christ was pleased to accept of the like measure
and proportion of faith, which was suitable to each degree of knowledge then
extant; as in that of Circumcision, as also when the Israelites were baptized
in the cloud, and in the sea; in all which, our Savior did require no more
says, and obedience, then did proportion with that light of knowledge then
extant; and so as the D^y-starre did appear more visible, the more visible
appearance of their says was required. As appears by John's Baptism, wherein
was required external repentance, as we may read, Luke 3. where he exhorts
the Jews, to bring forth fruits meet for repentance, or as became penitent
men; and nor to think it were sufficient then to say, they had Abraham to their
Father, in that the time was come that they must express that faith publicly
themselves, which was in Abraham, and that if they refused so to do (that then
rather then God would w^nt a people to profess him) he would raise them out of
the very stones that should effect it; and this was, in regard of the then so
near approach, or manifestation of the person of Christ, who was the light it
self; and thus each of these Baptismes did prefigure other, until it came to
the highest pitch, viz. the most glorious Baptism of Christ, viz. of the Holy
Ghost, and of Fire, which was accomplished, at the day of Penticost, Act. 1. 2.
3. 4. at which time, it was delivered in its full perfection.

SECT. 8.
Obj. BY your own acknowledgement, the Sacrament of Baptism having attained
its perfection, it ought to be delivered now, in that nature, or else it is not
punctually exhibited by him who does administer it.

Ans. That does not follow, for the gifts of the Holy Ghost Why the Holy Ghost
was given in to that power to the Apostles at the ^east of Pen^icost*
was never given in that power, and efficacy, by the Apostles as was then by
Christ, that being a Baptism which Christ did peculiarly promise to bestow
upon his Disciples only (to the end they might be enabled the better to carry
on that great design he had then to act by them) as will appear by our
Saviors expressions, Act. 1. 5. But ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost
and with fire, etc. intimating them only whom he meant to impl^y; as also ver.
8. but ye shall receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and
ye shall be witnesses unto me, etc.

Obj. We read that whilst Peter pr^ached to Cornelius, and his Kinsmen, that
the Holy Ghost fell upon them, and that they spoke with tongues and glorified
God.

Ans. But we read not that the Holy Ghost appeared in the Why miracles were
p^^mitted.
shape of cl^ven tongues, like as of fire, etc, however the gift there spoken
of was not the donation of Peter himself, but of Christ; neither can it be
expected that the like gift of the Holy Ghost should be now given, as was then
by the Apostles, in regard that such Miracles was only permitted for the
bringing in of the Gospel into the world, as also for glorifying Christ's first
coming in the flesh; and albeit the Apostles had power to give the Holy Ghost,
yet did they not always exercise it, for when Peter baptized that number
spoken of, Act. 2. 41. it is not said, that he gave the Holy Ghost with it;
neither is it said to be given to the Jailer, the Eunuch, Lidia, and many
others.

Obj. In all the places you have named, it is not said, that the Holy Ghost was
not given at the time of their Baptizing, so that i^ is only your suspicion
that it was not given at that time?

Ans. It is punctually proved, Act. 8. in that passage concerning Baptism
admi^i^^red without the donation of the Holy Ghost.
Philip, and the Samaritans, whom he is said to have baptized, ver. 12. as also
of Simon Magus, ver. 13. yet notwithstanding that baptizing them by Philip, it
is said that the Apostles being then at Jerusalem, sent Peter and John unto
them, who is said in the 15. ver. to pray for them that they might receive the
Holy Ghost, for as yet says the text (in the 16. ver.) he was not fallen upon
none of them, only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And in the
17. verse it is said, that they laid their hands upon them, and they received
the Holy Ghost. In which passage we may observe* 1. That Philip did Baptize,
without the additionall gift of the Holy Ghost given with it. 2. That it was
not John's Baptism wherewith he did so baptize them, but that of Jesus Christ;
and 3. That the Holy Ghost was given by other distinct parties, after the
Samaritans was so baptized by Philip.

It is evident then that Philip did not give the Holy Ghost to them Samaritans
whom he Baptized, and therefore it must consequently follow, and that of
necessity, that Philip either had not the power to give the Holy Ghost, or
else, it was no usual thing for to give it upon such occasions.

SECT. 9.
Obj. PHilip being but a Deacon, peradventure had not the power to give the
Holy Ghost to them Samaritans?

Ans. If he had power to Baptize, and not to give the Holy The Holy Ghost
seldom given at the time of Baptism.
Ghost, it proves that such an one may Baptize, as cannot give the gift of the
Holy Ghost; so that you are met with either way; yea it does plainly appear by
Scripture, that the Holy Ghost was seldom or never given in the act of
Baptism, but sometimes before Baptism, as at the Sermond made by Peter to
Cornelius, Act. 10. 44. and sometimes after Baptism, as in that forenamed
passage of the Samaritans; yea it is without dispute that such might Baptize,
who could not, or at least did not give the gift of the Holy Ghost with it.
Instance in Philip, as also in that passage touching Cornelius, where Peter is
not said to baptize them to whom he preached, for the text says, he commanded
that they should be baptized; now whom was there present to command, but either
Cornelius or his Kinsmen, or his six Brethren, which came thither with him from
Joppa; and for Cornelius and Kinsmen to baptize one another, is rediculous to
imagine; therefore it must needs follow, that it was the six Brethren, or some
of them, which had not Cornelius and his company formerly received the Holy
Ghost, it is likely they could not have obtained it by any donation from them;
but whether them Brethren had the power to give the Holy Ghost or no, it is
apparent, that diverse have been baptized at which time the Holy Ghost has not
been given, as in Acts 18. 8. etc. by all which it appears, that Baptism may
be administered by them, who could not, or at the least did not give the Holy
Ghost with it.

SECT. 10.
Obj. THe Apostle seems to c^^^radict that Precept, given by our Savior unto
t^^^* Mat. 28. 19. willing them to baptize in the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; it being the Apostles practice to baptize only in the name of the
Lord Jesus, as these Scriptures witness, viz. Act. 2. 38. and 10. 48. and 19.
5. and 8. 16. Romans 6. 3.

Ans. There is no question but the Apostles did follow that Why the Apostles
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
direction of our Savior during the time he was resident in the flesh with
them, but after his ascension, their usual practice was to baptize in the name
of the Lord Jesus, the reasons of which might be these, viz.

1. Because that then they knew that through faith in him alone (viz. as he was
the Son of God, and the Redeemer of his elect) we should receive remission of
fins, and eternal life.

2. In that they were satisfied, that in him was contained the other persons in
the Godhead, viz. the Father, and the Holy Ghost, in whose names they formerly
used to baptize.

3. In that they were to preach Salvation only in his name, Act. 4. 12. of
which Mysteries (before his ascension) they were almost, if not altogether
ignorant, as may appear by their question unto him, Act. 1. 6. Lord, will thou
at this time restore the Kingdom again unto Israel? Intimating, that they
knowing him to be of the Seed of David (according to the Flesh) thought he
would like another Alexander the Great, in a glorious manner have restored
their former immunities, and privileges, which they enjoyed before, their
Conquest by the Romans, to which thing, the request of the two ambitious Suitors
did alude unto, Mat. 20. 20. etc.

CHAP. IIII. Treats of John's, and of Christ's Baptism, etc.
SECT. 1.
Objection. IT seems there was a difference betwixt the Baptism of John, and
that of Christ, Act. 19. 3. 4. 5. in regard that the Apostle is said to Baptize
again, such as were formerly baptized, by John's Baptism?

Ans. It was requisite that Believers should not only be baptized to him that
was to come (to which only John's Baptism did tend) but that also they should
be baptized in his The difference betwixt Christ's Baptism and that of John's.
name, being already come; for otherwise, the Baptism of John, and the
Baptism of the Apostles were all one, and the same, both of them Preaching,
and Baptizing, to repentance, as will appear by comparing Luke 3. 36. with Act.
2. 31. so that diverse hands does not make the Baptism diverse.

SECT. 2.
Obj. But it seems that the Baptism in the name of the Lord Jesus, was not
altogether sufficient of it self, without the gift of the Holy Ghost, which
the Apostles is said to give unto them (who had been formerly baptized, in the
name of the Lord Jesus) by the laying on of their hands, as in Act. 8. 16, 17.

Ans. The gift of the Holy Ghost was a thing which was not Christ commanded not
his Apostles to give the H^ly Ghost with bapism, mo^e then wi^h preaching.
always confined to the act of Baptism, yea very seldom or never, as I have
showed; neither did the Apostles or any other offend, in not giving it at that
present time of Baptism, (in regard there was no such command given by our
Savior to his Apostles, as that the one, should not be administered without the
other, or that he, that had not the donation of the Holy Ghost, should not
administer the Sacrament of Baptism, as appears by the Samaritans who
received that Sacrament, and not the Holy Ghost imediatly, at the same instant,
as an inseparable concomitant annexed unto it; as also by them whom Paul is
said to lay his hands upon, Act. 19. 4. 5. by all which it appears, that the
gift of the Holy Ghost, was chiefly given to the Apostles, to testify the
dignity, and excellency of their calling and Ministry, and no more a
concomitant to their Baptism, then to their Preaching, it being as well given
at the act of one, as of the other; instance in Peter's preaching to Cornelius
etc. and therefore it may be as well argued, that none ought to preach, but such
as is of Peter's ability, to give the Holy Ghost with it; as that none ought to
baptize, but such as are able, yea, and does give the Holy Ghost with it.

But in regard that it is manifestly apparent that such have Baptized, Such
might Baptize that should no^, or at the least did not give the Holy Ghost with
it.
as either could not, or at the least did not give the Holy Ghost with it, we
may safely conclude, that he that is thought able by the Church, to exercise
the duty of a Pastor, (as Philip the Deacon was to the Samaritans,) may also
administer the Sacrament of Baptism. And that such Ministers or Pastors, may
permit such of the Brethren, whom they think fit, to execute the same office;
and that by the aforesaid example of Peter, as Act. 10. 48. as also Act. 2. 41.
where it is very probable, that the Apostles made use of such Brethren, as
assistants to baptize, who had formerly been baptized of them.

SECT. 3.
Obj. THere be diverse who strongly affirm, that the Baptism in the name of
the Lord Jesus, was not a baptism by water, as was that of John's Baptism?

Ans. It is manifestly apparent, that the Baptism, which was Christ's Baptism
a baptism by water.
instituted, and administered by the Apostles, in the name of the Lord Jesus,
was a Baptism by water, as that of John's; and that by comparing of these
Scripture, viz. Act. 8. 16. with the 36. and 37. verses of that Chapter, in
which texts of Scripture, we have first a description of that Baptism, by
which Philip the Deacon baptized the Samaritans, viz. the baptism in the name
of the Lord Jesus, ver. 16. and in the other texts of Scripture, we have also
the aforesaid Philip, baptizing the aforesaid Enuch in water. Now that Philip,
and the Enuch, should go into the water, and yet Philip not to Baptize him
with that water into which they entered, would be a paradox. 2. If that Philip
so baptizing him, should baptize him with any other Baptism, then that, with
which he had formerly baptized the Samaritans, would be as strange as the
other; but both being confessed, which (with modesty) cannot by any rational
man be denied, (viz. that Philip baptized the Ennuch, in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and also by water) it must needs follow, that the Baptism of Jesus
Christ, was a water Baptism, as was that of John's, the difference being only
that before mentioned, viz. that John's baptized unto Christ, as to come; and the
Apostles unto him, being already come.

Again, it would be as frivolous, as the other to imagine, that Philip should
baptize in the name of the Lord Jesus, with water, and the rest of the
Apostles, and Disciples, should baptize in the same name without water, or that
Philip did baptize, and was ignorant of the manner and matter, how, and with
what to baptize; and therefore I admonish such as oppose this truth, not to
persist any longer in their obstinacy, or give any further occasion to the
enemies of God to blaspheame, in that they who seem to stand most for Christ,
most to villifie, and nullify his ordinances.

Obj. After what manner would you have Believers Baptized now?

Ans. In the act of Baptism, the present Brethren are too rigged, The present
Brethren too rigged in the act of Baptism.
which has been some hinderance to the increase of their Churches, viz. in
that they admit of none as Members, but such as will be dipped over the body in
water, viz. in a River, or the like, which custom cannot be made out from the
Apostles, as to be always practiced by them, as also for other reasons.

Obj. How prove you the contrary?

Ans. By necessary consequence, where that ordinance was administered, as in
Act. 16. 33. where the Jailer and his Family is said to be baptized in the
night, which certainly was not in a River, or any other water, by dipping, or
plunging them over the body; therefore I suppose it is not of extraordinary
necessity whether by dipping or sprinkling, as the season, and opportunity does
require.

SECT. 4.
Obj. Christ's Baptism was a baptism of the Holy Ghost, and of fire, Mat. 3.
11.

Ans. It is most evident in that passage of Cornelius, Act. 10. Such as were
formerly bap^ised wi^h the H^ly Ghost and with ^^^^, af^^^* and baptized with
water baptism.
that although he and his friends were formerly baptized with that baptism you
speak of, ver. 44, 45, 46. yet nevertheless they were afterward baptized with
water baptism, in the name of the Lord Jesus, as in^er. 47, 48. according to
the practice of the Apostles at other times, as in Act. 19. 5.

Obj. It will be a great disgrace for the Nobility, and Gentry of this Nation,
that have been formerly baptized in their infancy, to be rebaptized, a^ also
for their delicate Ladies, etc?

Ans. Our Savior himself thought it no disgrace to be baptized Our Savior
thought it no disgrace to be baptized of John in Jordan.
by John, in Jordan, Mat. 3. 13, 14, 15, etc. and has also enjoined all such
as would be his Disciples to be baptized, Mat. 28. 19. and Mark 16. 16. before
admittance into his Church Militant, which the constant practice of the
Apostles does evidently declare, as in several instances in that Book titled,
their Acts, does clearly manifest, as I have formerly made appear at large;
and therefore those ( albeit the greatest in the Nation) which are convinced of
the truth of this assertion, and shall refuse to admit of that ordinance (which
Christ has so instituted as aforesaid) for fear of the shame, and disgrace
which the men of the world can put upon them, let them be assured, that Christ
will be as much ashamed of them, before his Father which is in Heaven; yea he
has foretold as much, Mark 8. 38. Again, let such know that as great, and
good as themselves, have not been ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. King David
could say, that he would speak of his testimonies before Kings, and would not
be ashamed, Psalm. 119. 46. And the Apostle Paul could say, he was not ashamed
of the Gospel of Christ, Romans 1* 16. yea Christ himself was not ashamed to
call the poor despised ones Brethren, Heb. 2. 11, 12, 13. yea we read of
Cornelius the Centurian, the Ennuch, and diverse other eminent persons, in Paul's
Epistles, which were not ashamed to be baptized; yea we read that many of the
Pharisees, and Saduces came to be baptized of John in Jordan, Mat. 3. 7.

Obj. Most of our Rulers will prove Nicodemusses, they will scarce admit of
that ordinance in the day time, they will come withhim in the night.

Ans. Hope makes not ashamed, Romans 5. 5. and he that believes in Christ shall
not be ashamed, Romans 6. 21. yea the Apostle exhorts us thereunto, 2 Timothy 1.
8. Be not, etc.

SECT. 5.
AGain, it will be no greater a shame and disgrace for those Probable some were
twice baptized after Circumcision.
great ones you speak of to be rebaptized, then it was to them, who as the
Apostle says, were the true Olive branches, Romans 11. 17. who were formerly
Circumcised, yea it is probable that some of them so circumcised, were
afterward twice baptized, viz. with the baptism of John in Jordan, and after
by the Apostles, as in that number of about three thousand which we read of,
Act. 2. 41. We read also that the Disciples at Ephesus, were first baptized
unto John's Baptism, and after were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus,
Act. 19. 5. therefore albeit those great ones of the world be now baptized, in
relation to the Jewish Circumcision, yet must they likewise be baptized
according to the Apostles example, or they cannot be admitted as members of the
Church of Christ, according to the Apostles institution, which if they refuse,
they ought to be refused here, and will be elsewhere; yea let such great ones,
and all the rest of the Nation Such as refus^ to be b^ptized according ^o the
Apostles institution refuse Christ.
be well assured, that so far as they are from complying with this ordinance,
that so far they are from acknowledging Christ to be their Master, and so
consequently their Savior; yea the contaminating of this ordinance (now so
fully manifested) will be as much as in them lies, to crucify Christ again in
the flesh, and to put him to as open shame, as ever did the Jews, Heb. 6. 6.
and this they may be as assured of, as Christ is in heaven, or his truth on
earth. Selah.

Obj. You speak very strangly, for the omission of this, or any other
ordinance, is no fundamental point of Salvation, and therefore not of so great
a consequence as you conceive, for the Israelites omitted circumcision in the
Wilderness, for the space of forty years, at which God seemed not displeased.

SECT. 6.
I do acknowledge, that in that Churches wilderness condition, the Lord was
pleased to pass by that omission, by reason of their several motions therein,
yet doubtless that was one of the tentations, whereby they tempted, grieved,
and provoked him for that forty years, as we have it, Psalm. 95. 9. etc. unto
whom h^ The Lord has with much patience borne wi^h the omission of Baptism,
in our wilderness condition.
swear in his wrath, that they should not enter into his rest; which we have
also verified, Josh. 5. 4. etc. where he renders the neglect of Circumcision,
(as may be gathered from that his expression) as a cause why they were
consumed, viz. in ver. 6. so in like manner, whilst we have been in our
wilderness condition, viz. under the slavery of Antichrist, and his adherents,
the Lord has with much patience forborne to be much angry with us, for our
neglect of Baptism, according to his own institution, and the practice of the
Apostles, yet being now, not only freed from that spiritual Egypt of the
Romish Hierarchy, but also from the Cald^an, and Babilonish captivity of
Prelacy, and Presbitery, as also entered into the Verge or borders of the
spiritual Canaan; we are doubtless bound in duty, according to that example
of Nehemiah, to separate from the mixed multitude, Neh. 13. 3. viz. from such
as despise ordinances, or such as would merely dwell upon them; withal, the
Heretics, and Sectaries of the time, (which may fitly be compared to the
Moabites, Ammonites, etc.) as also, such Priests as have their call from
Antichrist, ought to be discharged of their office, by the Magistrate, as then,
Neh. 7. 64. albeit they have accompanied us, during our said Captivities, the
ancient Statute Law of Christ and his Apostles, being now clearly discovered
unto us, and therefore we ought to baptize all such as are of the household of
faith, and desire to renew the Covenant which their predecessors in
Christianity practiced in the primative times, and that who ere they be, that
shall refuse to be so initiated, or incorporated into the Body, or Church of
Christ now militant, that soul ought to be cut off from the Church of Christ,
as the other was from the congregation of Israel. Again it is evident, that as
the Israelites had offended in the Wilderness, by their omission of
Circumcision, so they were likewise moved, by a secret constraint, to be
Baptized of John the Baptist in Jordan, as in Matthew. 3. yea many of the
Pharisees, and Saduces, verse 7. 8. etc.

SECT. 7.
Obj. Where is any now so called to Baptize as John the Baptist, and the
Disciples, or who must first Baptize him, that begins to Baptize others?

Ans. Who Baptized John the Baptist, or the Apostles, or Disciples of Christ,
seeing that Christ himself baptized none, John 4. 2.

Obj. They were immediately called to that office by Christ himself, but there
is none so called in these days?

Ans. It Is very true, there is not so, and therefore the now The Church of
Christ has retained the purity of baptism by succession.
Church of Christ has it by succession, from them Apostles, and Disciples,
that were so immediately called and gifted.

Obj. How can that be, in regard of the general Apostasy which has happened
since by means of Antichrist, and his adherents?

Ans. General Rules admit of some exceptions; again, that is but merely your
conceit, as it was sometimes of the Prophet Elisha, who thought the Apostasy
in his time, to have been universal amongst the ten Tribes, 1 King. 19. 10.
yet the Lord leteth There has not been a total apostacy.
him know that he judged amiss, for says he, I have left me seven thousand in
Israel, all the knees, which have not bowed unto Baall, and every mouth which
has not kissed him, ver. 18. So in the Apostasy which has happened by means of
Antichrist, and his adherents, though you imagine it to be general, yet has
it happened but in part, as that of the Jews, Romans 11. 25. for otherwise Christ
should have been deprived of his Church militant, which he has ever preserved
in part since he had a Church; as also in that he has promised to be with it,
unto the end of the world, Mat. 28. 20. therefore albeit the true Church has
been hid for one thousand two hundred and sixty years, in its wilderness
condition, yet we must not therefore conclude that she has been so long dead,
or utterly lost, God having ever preserved her under that despised notion of
Annabaptists, unto this present time.

SECT. 8.
Obj. CAn you say, that the Church of Christ has been ever preserved in
England, since the Apostasy, under that n^tion?

Ans. It is impossible I should, but yet it does not follow, that therefore it
has not been preserved in any place, for the true The Churches of Christ in
England received their rise from other Churches.
Church was given to understand, that there was many Apostates, or Antichrists
even in the Apostles time, 1 Epist. John, 2. 18. which doubtless had their
increasings, until that Prophecy was fulfilled, which is described unto us by
the Apostle Paul, 2 Thessalonians. Chap. 2. which Man of sin, when he had obtained
his highest altitude, was to be destroyed by the brightness of the coming of
Christ, as is there also expressed; which the Apostles foreseeing, did
admonish the Churches then extant, to keep close to the faith, as also to
demean themselves according to their direction, as in the three first verses
of that Chapter, with ver. the 15. as also Chap. 3. 1. etc. and therefore it is
likely that those Churches in England received their rise from them of Geneva,
and them from others, and so by gradations even from them Churches planted by
the Apostles themselves; for otherwise how could such Churches remain extant,
but by succession from the Apostles, being so lively a representation of their
Churches, as if they had been planted by the Apostles themselves; a Church most
likely of any Church in the world, to be the true Church of Jesus Christ.

SECT. 9.
Witness the little noise it has made in the world, 1 Kin. The
Anabaptisticall church so called proved to be the true Church.
19. 12. in comparison of the Church of Rome, or the Prelaticall, or
Presbiterian Church; as also how little it has interposed the civil
Magistrate, witness the Churches in London under that notion, to their
immortal praise be it spoken, who when invited by the Levelling Party to
disturb the present Parliament in point of their civil Office, did manifest
their utter dislike of such actions, desiring only to live under them, a
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, as by their Petition to the
Parliament, will fully appear; wherein also, the now Parliament is
acknowledged by them to be the supreme power of the Nation; yea I am much
mistaken, if they were not the very first that did subscribe by Petition, to
the present government of the Nation; for which, with the reasons before
mentioned, I conclude that that Church which you (by way of reproach) call
Anabaptisticall, is the true Church of Jesus Christ, which has been preserved
from the power of the Dragon of Papacy, and his Angels of Prelacy, and
Presbitery, which was ready to devour it, so soon Rev. 12 5, 6.
as it was borne (viz. in the Apostles times) but it was caught up unto God,
and to his Throne, and is now to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron, this is
the woman which fled into the Wilderness of the world, viz. amongst so many
various opinions as has been for these thousand two hundred and threescore
years, during which time she has by providence, been kept from their errors,
and preserved in her primative purity. This being the time that her Michael,
and his Angels, viz. the Pastors of that Church, Michael the now Angel of the
Church of Christ Rev. 12 7, 8, 9
is to make war against the Dragon and his Angels, and the old Serpent,
called the Devil, and Satan, as viz. the Pope and his Hierarchies of Papacy,
Prelacy, and Presbitery, and shall so prevail, as that there shall not be
found any more place for him in his heaven, or ministry, which the Lord in
mercy accomplish. Now this Church being so preserved, has as much power to
send out Laborers into Christ's Harvest, to teach, and baptize, (for the
rebuilding of the Church of Christ,) as any Church either in, or since the
Apostles days.

And thus by divine assistance, I have discovered unto you the three first
Ingredients, whereby the Church of Christ may be brought into its former or
primative condition, viz. 1. In its Pastors, or Gatherers; 2. In its meet
Members, whereby it ought to be compounded, as also the way, or rule, whereby
they may be distinguished, from the men of the world, or worldly men, which
directions, that they may be put in practice, (by all such who desire to see
the flourishing of the Church of Christ in its pristine purity, as also the
desolation of the scarlet Whore of spiritual Egypt and Babylon, (with all her
accomplices) is the cordial desire of the servant to all, who are so devoted.

CHAP. V. Treats of the Government of the Church.
SECT. 1.
HAving thus discussed of the three first Ingredients, I The fourth Ingredient.
shall now treat of the fourth, viz. Of the Government which ought to be
observed, for the regulating of Churches so gathered.

Obj. When the Church is gathered as you desire, by whom, and by what means
would you have it governed, so that it may agree with the will, and appointment
of Jesus Christ?

Ans. To the first of your demands I answer, (and yet not I, By whom the Church
ough^ to be governed.
but the Scripture) that it ought to govern it self (viz. by the real Body
thereof) and not to be governed by any particular Members set apart from the
whole; or by any other Church to do it for them, without the consent, or
approbation of the whole Church.

SECT. 2.
Obj. WHat is that you term the Church?

Ans. A company* of Believers met together in What the Church is.
one place, for the administration of the Ordinances of God, to public
edification.

Obj. Who do you term Believers?

Ans. Such as are willing, and do comply with the precepts of What a Believer
is.
Christ, who has said, By this ye shall know ye are my Disciples, if ye
keep my commandments; as also Joh. 14. 15. 21. 23. 24. and 15. 10. 14. as also
Luke 14. 26. 27. it is not therefore every one that says Lord, Lord, but he
that does the will of Christ that is his Disciple, and therefore they are much
mistaken that think the assumption of the name of a Christian, does make them
one, as the generality of people do in these days.

Obj. Suppose there be one thousand Believers in one place, or City, must they
all meet together at one place, or else is it not a Church?

Ans. I have no such drift in this definition of the Church (as you would
either opprobriously, or for want of judgment cast upon me) as that the
Catholic Church cannot be a true Church, because they cannot all meet
together at one place; for,

I acknowledge a Church may as well consist of part of the Believers How a
church may be divided into parts, and yet continue a church.
of a city, or kingdom, as of all the Believers thereof; Paul writing to the
Galatians, writes not to the Church of Galatia, (as if they had all been
Members of one individual Body) but to the Churches in Galatia, (in the
Plural) so that as well part of the Believers of a City (met together) may be
termed a Church, as well as if they were all met together; therefore in such a
case, as when all the Believers of a City, etc. cannot conveniently meet
together in one place, to receive edification, they may without all doubt meet
at two, three, or more places, each distinct from other; so that as you
Presbiterians err in the general, so also in the particular diffinition of
our Church.

SECT. 3.
Obj. Would you have each of these particular Assemblies called a Church,
being contained in one City?

Ans. Each of these particulars, being governed by one and the same rule, may
as well be termed a particular Church of that City, etc. as all the Believers of
that City, may be termed a particular of the universal Church; instance your
Parish Churches.

Obj. Whether ought the particular Churches of a City, to have its distinct
officers or no?

Ans. Yes doubtless, and yet there may be so few Believers in some place, as
that it will afford none; as when there shall be found but one family in a City,
etc.

Obj. If so, would you have that family termed a Church?

Ans. Our Savior says, that where two or three, are gathered together in his
name, he will be present with them, Mat. 18. 20. and therefore one says, Vbi
fides, ibi est Eclesiae, where true faith is, there is the Church, be they many
or few.

Obj. Do you infer from hence, that Church Officers are not needful?

Ans. I do not deny the use of them, or that there is no occasion for them,
but this I say to acquaint you, that there may be some Churches, which will not
consist of so many persons, as to make Officers, and yet to leave some to be
governed; as in the Church which was in the house of Aquilla,* and Prissilla,
Romans 16. 3. 5. or in the house of Nimphas, Col. 4. 15.

SECT. 4.
Obj. Whether did our Savior leave the power of Judicature, to the real or a
representative Church?

Ans. Let the Apostle Paul decide the controversy; To whom did he present his
Epistles, to a representative part, or to the whole?

Obj. I say to the representative part, prove you the contrary?

Ans. It is very easily done, and for proof hereof, I instance, first in his
Epistle to the Romans, where in the first Chapter, and Christ le^t the
government of his Church to the real body thereof.
seventh verse, he thus expresses himself by way of dedication, viz. To all
that be in Rome, beloved of God, and called to be Saints, etc. Now if the
representative Church (which you dream of) in Rome, consisted of all such as
were beloved of God, and called to be Saints in Rome, then must it needs follow
that the rest of the real Body of the Church o^ Rome, was not beloved of God,
nor called to be Saints; as also by the close of his Epistle it appears by
them whom be greeteth, and saluteth, that he w^^t the said Epistle to the real
body of the Church in Rome, unless you will make Prisilla, and Mary, and the
other women there mentioned, to be of the representative Church, which I
persuade my self you will not.

I instance also in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, where he is said to
write to the Church of God, which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in
Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, etc. from which word is easily to be
understood, that all such in Corinth, as was sanctified in Christ Jesus, and
called to be Saints, were such unto whom the said Apostle, did write his
Epistle; now unless you would have all these, to be of the representative
Church, it must needs follow, that he writes unto others.

But least you should not be satisfied with this that has been spoken, he
gives you fuller satisfaction in the latter clause of the second verse, where
he adds to the former number of Saints spoken of at Corinth, All that in
every place call upon the name of the Lord Jesus; now if you would have all
that in every place call upon the name of the Lord Jesus, to be of the
representative Church, then we shall soon agree.

Again, the second Epistle to the said Corinthians, is said to be written to
the Church of God, which is at Corinth, with all the Saints which are in all
Achaia; now shall we think that the Church at Corinth, with all the Saints in
Achaia, were only of the representative Church; if so, what kind of people
would you have the rest of the Body to consist of.

SECT. 5.
Obj. I Must confess, by this you have spoken, it is evident that Paul wr^t
them Epistles, and the rest, to the real Body of the Church, to whom he sent
them?

Ans. If you had not, I could have instanced in diverse other places, as Ephesians.
1. 1. Phil. 1. 1. Col. 1. 1. wherein then do you require any further
satisfaction touching the point in question, which may not be concluded from
your confession.

Obj. What can you infer from my confession, which may avail you in your
enterprise?

Ans. As much as possible I can desire, for by granting to this, That which was
written to ^h^ whole Church, does ^el^ng to the whole Church to effect.
(which indeed you could not avoid) it must of necessity follow, that
whatsoever is contained in those general Epistles, (to the whole Body of the
Church) must belong to the whole Church, and not to any members set apart from
the whole, which you would have a representative Church.

Obj. You seem to have read Doctor Stewarts Dupley to M. S. alies two
Brethren, who were Independants.

Ans. Yes, I have read the first, and second part of it, but the title of
Independent, which he puts upon the quinque Eclesian Ministers, rather
suteth with himself.

Obj. Why do you take him to be an Independent?

Ans. Yea rather then the other, for he that will rather subscribe He is no
Independent that does depend upon the Scriptures.
to the judgment of any reforming Church now extant, then to the president
left by Christ, and his Apostles, may certainly he termed an Independent,
rather then they, who do subscribe to the practice of the Apostles, and does
relinquish the other.

But Doctor Stewart, and the the rest of the Presbiterian Faction, subscribe to
the tradissions of their Orthodoxall Divines, (as they call them) and not to
the Apostles (as I shall clearly make appear) Ergo such men deserve the title
of Independants, and not the other, whom they so term.

SECT. 6.
Obj. Would you not have them depend upon their Classical, Provincial, and
National Sinods?

Ans. We find no such terms of pr^heminence in Scripture, as No such terms
as Classical, Provincial, or National Sinods found in Scriptures.
I have formerly told you, and therefore we are not to allow of any such place
of dignity; and if there had been a dependancy belonging to the Apostles,
(after the Assention of Christ) certainly it had belonged unto Peter, as I
have formerly showed; but that the Apostles did not absolutely depend upon the
judgment of Peter, is manifestly cleared, at the decision of the controversy
about Circumcision, Act. 15. the due observance of which Dispute, will fully
clear the matter in question; For,

1. We find that the Assembly collegated together, to decide that
controversy, was not merely the Apostles themselves, (who certainly either
then or since, was the most able to have decided it of themselves) but we find
in the same text, that the Apostles admitted also of the Elders of the Church
(then with them at Jerusalem) yea, and not only these, but also the Brethren;
so that it is manifest, that Counsel consisted of the real Body of the Church
then at Jerusalem, and not of any members set apart from the whole.

2. We read that albeit Peter was the first that opened the The Breth^en had a
joint interest and concurrency in all matters concerning the Church.
case in that difference (as commonly he was in all other, in regard of his
boldness) yet did the Apostles, and Elders, and the rest of that Church,
rather allow of the judgment of James, then of Peter, as we have it in the 22.
verse of that Chapter, whereas had they been absolutely to have depended upon
Peter's judgment, it had been a presumption in James to have spoken; or if they
had been to have depended upon the judgment of James, it had been the like for
Peter to have spoken; but that they were not bound to depend on either of them,
or any of the rest, may appear, in that either all, or most of them, used
their Christian liberty in the matter of Dispute, as either Peter, James, or
any other of the Assembly, as clearly appears in the seventh Verse.

3. It is also evident, that not only in this matter of controversy, but also
at other times; yea the Apostles never urged the Church to confide in their
Judgment, or Doctrines, further then they found it consonant to the
Scriptures, witness the Bereans, whom they commended for so doing, Act. 17. 11.

SECT. 7.
NOw it thus appearing, that there was no Priority amongst No priority amongst
the Apostles.
the Apostles, under their immediate calling; why should there be any amongst
the Ministers of Christ, under their mediate calling,; if not amongst them
equals, why amongst these?

Again, to depend upon any, unless we knew him, or at least did believe him
to be infallable, were a mere madness, and absolute Popery; yea in such a
dependence, the Papists are to be commended, above the Presbiterians; for their
dependence upon the Pope, is on no other ground, but that they think he cannot
err; but I suppose the Presbiterians, will not deny, but that their Classical,
Provincial, and National Sinods, may, and does err, and therefore to depend
solely upon such, is no less then popery.

Obj. They hate Popery, they will depend upon the Canonnicall Scriptures of the
Old, and New Testament.

Ans. If so, therein they agree with them, whom they term Independants, and
this they may do, without appealing to their Classical, Provincial, and
National Sinods; for in matters of Divinity, to appeal to such, is either
that we hold them to be infalible, or our selves novices. Again, thus to
depend, is to run What it is to depend upon one another.
our selves into an infinitum, as from the Brethren, to the Elders, from the
Elders to the Pastor, from the Pastor, to the Classis, from the Classis, to the
Provincial, and from the Provincial, to the National, which if not
infallible, to whom, unless to the Pope.

Obj. They hate the Pope, I told you to the Canonical Scriptures*

Ans. And I tell you again, that the Canonical Scripture, must then be the
Umpire, when all is done.

CHAP. VI. Treats of the judgeing of Scripture, etc.
SECT. 1.
Objection. WHo must be Judge of the truth of the Scriptures, touching such
particular differences, as may arise in controversy?

Ans. Who was Judge betwixt the Apostles, Paul, and Barnabas, and the noble
Bereans, in any difference The Scriptures must be the Vmpire when all is done.
of opinions, which they either were, or might be formerly possessed of
(before, or during that time the aforesaid Apostles were conversant amongst
them) was it not the guidance of the Spirit of God, the only true interpreter
of Scripture, which did dictate to them the truth thereof? Which spirit of
discerning they obtained, by their industry in studying the Scriptures daily,
Act. 17. 11.

SECT. 2.
Obj. TRue, that indeed is the only interpreter of the Word, but is it not more
likely, that Learned men should have it, rather then them that have little, or
no learning; such as Cobblers, Tinckers, Weavers, Millers, etc.?

Ans. What was Aquilla, Prisilla, or the real Body of the Church in Corinth,
unto whom the Apostle Paul gave way to Prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. 41. yea and wills
them to covit it, chap. 14: 39. were they all Accademicks? Again, if the
Spirit of God be confined to Learning, then such as are illiterate are void of
it, and so consequently are not the children of God, for the same Apostle
says, that if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans
8. 9. Again, if the Spirit of God be confined to Learning, then the greater
Scholars the greater measure of the Spirit; and so consequently the Church of
Rome would carry it from all the Churches in the world, which I presume you
will not condescend too; yea the contrary is most evident, as may appear by
them learned ones at Athens, Act. 17. 23. yea I desire you to read the first
Chapter of the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, from the seventeen
verse to the end of the Chapter; as also, Jam. 2. 5. and then tell me, if it be
not more probable for such, (whom you term illiterate fellows,) to have the
Spirit of God, rather then the great Rabbis, and Doctors of the world; and if
so, consequently they have more knowledge in the Scriptures, for the Spirit
searches all things, even the deep things of God, (as in the tenth verse of
that Chapter) by which they are made more fit, and able, to teach, then the
other, yea and ought so to do, no man being to hide his tallent, but to put it
into the bank, Mat. 25. 27. etc. Again, all Scriptures are given by
inspiration, and 2 Timothy 13. 16. and not of private interpretation, 2 Pet. 1.
20, 21. But holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; so
that, it is impossible for the greatest Scholar in the world to apprehend the
mist^ry of them, being in a carnal condition; yea to such, they are
foolishness; and therefore not regarded, or esteemed of them, further then
they can accomplish their own private ends, by making a seeming show of their
affection to them, (as is too apparent;) witness the Hypocritical Clergy of
the times, who preach merely for matter of Stipent, or Wages, as if Christ
intended to make a Trade of his Ministry; yea I appeal to the consciences of
such parents, who put their Children to the University, whether it be not more
out of an intent to get their Sons Livings, (viz. a Parsonage, etc.) then out
of a cordial desire to advance the Kingdom of Christ; by all which, it is
manifest, that such Mechanic men (as you have named,) being endowed with the
Spirit of God, may do better service in the Ministry of the Word, then the
most learned Doctors in the world, being most of them destitute of it, and
therefore cannot discern the things of God.

SECT. 3.
Again, the same question might have rissen betwixt the aforesaid Apostles,
and the Bereans, yea doubtless the Apostles might rather have blamed the
Bereans, (for not confiding in their judgments) then the Presbiterian Sinod,
the Independants, for the Apostles were assured of the Spirit of God to direct
The Bereans commended by the Apostles for compa^^^g their Doctrine with the
Scripture.
them ( in their expositions of the Scripture) and yet they were so far from
envying the Bereans, (for not presently complying with their Doctrines, until
they had compared them with the Scriptures) as that they applauded them for it.
Again, of the two, one would have thought, the Bereans should have grounded
upon the Apostles judgment, then their own, but we see that such a christian
liberty was given them (by the Apostles) as that they were not constrained to
believe; they rather desiring, to leave the issue of their Doctrine, to the
opperation of the Spirit of God, by which they might be guided in the truth,
which (being but one) would make their judgments one, as it did at length.

So in like manner, ought the Spirit of God to have its opperation, betwixt
Teachers, and Hearers; and not because men will not immediately comply with
men's Doctrines, to rail upon them, and call them Schismatics, Heretics,
Independants, etc. when as indeed, if the Raylors themselves, would act the
Bereans part, they would not long continue in their own present judgments, in
many things.

SECT. 4.
Obj. IS any Church now extant so infallable, that it needs no advice of any?

Ans. No Church ought to be so esteemed upon earth; infallability One Church
may advise with another.
ought only to be ascribed to the Spirit of God, in the Scriptures; and for
matter of advice, and counsel, in any Spiritual matter, it is requisite, that
one Church make use of another, as the Church of Antioch, did of the Church at
Jerusalem, but not absolutely to depend upon them.

Obj. Did not the Church of Antioch, depend upon the determinate conclusion, of
the Church at Jerusalem? Act. 15. 2.

Ans. The text does not say, that they did absolutely depend The Church at
Antioch did not depend on that a^ Jerusalem.
upon it, but that it sent to the Church at Jerusalem about the question; which
does imply, that it was only to advise with them, or to crave their judgments,
in the matter in controversy, and not to resolve, right, or wrong, to depend
upon their judgments; as also in that the Messengers which were sent, were
Apostles, as the other were, to whom they were sent, and as infallible as the
other, and so their equals, as the Apostle Paul testifies of himself, Gal. 2.
6. Again, suppose that the Church at Jerusalem had determined, that the Church
at Antioch, should have admitted of Circumcision, and enjoined it upon the
Brethren at Antioch, were either the Apostles, or them of Antioch, bound to
have obeyed them decrees, knowing that all such Ceremonies were ended in Christ?

Obj. No, in that they ought to have obeyed God, rather then Man.

Ans. Then you conclude, that such injunctions as be commanded Authority ought
not to ^e obeyed in unlawful things.
by the greatest authority, being contrary to the Word of God, ought not to be
obeyed; and if so, why ought we now to depend upon a Presbiterian Sined, who
are far inferior to the Apostles? or to obey them in such commands, as are
as contrary to the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, as Circumcision was to
them of Antioch, being abolished as aforesaid?

SECT. 5.
Obj. Doubtless Paul at that time, did depend upon the Apostles, as well as at
other times, as when he went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, Gal. 1. 18.

Ans. That is weakly argued, Paul went up to Jerusalem to Paul did not depend
on Peter.
see Peter, ergo he depended upon him; whereas it does clearly appear, that
Paul had no such intent; for in the precedent verses of that Chapter, he
acquainteth the Galathians with his conversion; and that after which, he
communicated not with flesh and blood, neither went he up to Jerusalem, to them
that were Apostles before him, but that he went unto Arabia, etc. Lo here was
a great dependancy upon his fellow Apostles, when he preached for three years
space, without their knowledge, and consent; yea so far was he from depending
upon Peter, that meeting with him at Antioch, he withstood him to the face,
Gal. 2. 11. all which actions certainly declare him, to be no dependant, either
to Peter, or any other Apostle.

For where there is a dedendancy, there the dependant is confined What a
Dependant is.
to the conclusions of him, on whom he depends; but Paul, went not to
Jerusalem, to receive any conclusions from Peter, but only by way of
conference, as appears by the second Chapter, and the twenty sixth verse. Now
seeing there was no dependancy amongst the Apostles (under their immediate
calling) one to another, (by way of infallability) but only by way of
conference, why ought there to be any now amongst the Ministers of Christ under
their mediate calling, they being the same one to another (under that calling)
as the Apostles were under the other?

SECT. 6.
Obj. Wherein consists the chief difference, betwixt the Presbiterians, and
Independants?

Ans. In that the Independent does only depend, upon the The difference betw^xt
the Presbiterian and Independent.
dictates of the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, and the Presbiterian upon the
corrupt Churches of the times; by which way they show themselves
Antichristians, then Christians, rather of them of Thessalonica, then of them
of Berea, Act. 17. 11.

Obj. Do you think the Presbiterians, go about to foster any known t^nent
of popery?

Ans. I have already proved, that they do retain several tenants of Popery,
as also this of Superiority, and infallability, for were superiority (in the
Clergy) tolerable, then why ought we to have subdued, it in Bishops,
Archbishops, or in the Pope himself?

Obj. Because there is no such Titles, as Pope. etc. found in Scripture.

Ans. Neither is there any such Title of preheminences, as a We may as lawfully
retain Archbishops, etc. as Classical, Provincial, and National Sinods.
Classical, Provincial, or National Sinod, each of which excelling other in
dignity, as that of Bishops, etc. and therefore as direct Popery as the other,
and more rediculous; in that they would have each of these degrees, superior
one to another; and yet the members of each of them to be equals. And if so,
why might we not have retained Bishops, and Archbishops, and so on, to the
Popes Holiness; for he terms himself, Serv^^ serv^rum Dei, to color his
Hypocrisy. Now if you would not have this termed Popery in gross, we will
call it double refined Popery.

Obj. Why so?

Ans. Because it has received two refinings from the grosnesse Presbitery
double refined Popery.
of the error, whereof Lordly Prelacy was the first, and that of Presbitery the
second, retaining part of the same spaune of Antichristianisme, as did the
former.

Obj. In what respects?

Ans. In that all Majority, and Preheminency, amongst the Ministers of the
Gospel, being taken away, that they will yet strive to uphold it, by these
three degrees aforementioned.

SECT. 7.
Obj. Would you have every particular Church to reflect merely upon their own
judgments, without any to control them in their errors?

Ans. Who art thou that judge another man's Servant, since What ought to be
done in case of error in the Church.
he stands or falls to his own Master, Jam. 4. 2. yet to prevent such
evils, it will be requisite, that a confession of Faith be drawn up, and that
none be admitted, but such as make public confession of it; desiring to be
admitted a Member of that Society, as also promising to walk in obedience to it.

Obj. But in case such an one (as is admitted a Member) decline from the
covenant which he has taken, what means must be used to reclaim him, and
reduce him to ^^e obedience of it?

Ans. In such a case (as if he refuse to be ruled by the Church, whereof he is
a Member) it is requisite that advice be tendered him, from neighboring
Churches.

Obj. But what if he refuse to be admonished by them?

Ans. In so doing, he is not only a violater of the Covenant which he has
engaged in, but thereby indeavoureth, as much as in him lies, to make a
fraction in the Church; which rather then he should effect, it is requisite,
that one Member should perish, rather then that the whole body be ruinated.
Mat. 5. 30.

SECT. 8.
Obj. Would you have Members ejected upon every occasion of difference?

Ans. No, unless the matter be capital, viz. to the sub^e^si^^ of a
fundamental part of Religion.

Obj. But in case the greater part of the Church, shall decline such a part of
Religion, what can the lesser part do against them?

Ans. The lesser part adhearing to the Covenant, are to be esteemed the Church,
and not the other, in regard they have violated their faith, aed obedience, and
so are to separate from them, Acts 19. 9.

Obj. This will be a means to tolerate all manner of Sects and Heresies
amongst us.

Ans. It is requisite (as the Apostle says) that Heresy should Heresy will
advantage Gods glory.
be, for thereby the truth is made more manifest, 1 Cor. 11. 19. what mattereth
in that the Turkish Alcaron is printed in London, and published in the
Commonwealth, to such as know it to be rediculous? and so of any other Sect or
Heresy; ye^ I do verily believe, that it would more advance Gods glory (in
the Gospel) if such lisenciousnesse were set at liberty, as did not run it
self into a Moral offense; and that the forceing of such like to Hypocrisy
it, does prove more damage to the Church of Christ, then the other; yea
doubtless it would be a means to make such like people more ashamed of
themselves, then all the rigor that can be used against them; they being of
the nature of a Scold, who if she be not opposed, will sooner keep silence,
then by all the punishments you can inflict on her; besides, we have no
presidents for any such cumpulsions, in the Scriptures.

CHAP. VII. Treats of Cumpulsive power, etc.
SECT. 1.
Objection. THe Spirit of God in the Revelations, reproves the Churches, for
suffering such sorts of people to be amongst them?

Ans. But the Spirit of God in that Chapter, The Apostles used no cumpulsive
course to any.
does not give those Churches, a cumpulsive ^^wer, to force such Sectaries, to
be of their opinions, whether they would or no; he only taxes them for not
objecting such people, from their society; so that the cumpulsive power which
you would have the Civil Magistrate use for you, as your executioners, is a
way to contradict our Savior, who calls his Church, a little slock; whereas
you would force it, to consist of whole Nations, making no distinction betwixt
it, and the world.

SECT. 2.
Obj. WOuld you have the whole power of the Church consist in the real Body of
the Church, and not in some chosen out of the rest as a representative thereof?

Ans. I have formerly showed you, that the Apostles writ them The Apostle writ
his Epistles to thereall bodies of Churches.
Epistles (which I have quoted) not to any one particular man in the Church, or
to more sequestered from the whole, but he writes to all them, to whom he sent
his Epistles, which was to the whole real Body of the Church; and therefore it
must needs follow, that they had all equal power.

For to whom the Apostle writ his Epistle unto, of them he requires a
performance of his will.

But he writ to all the real Body of the Church, to whom he sent (as I have
heretofore clearly proved) and not to any one a part, or to more sequestered
from the whole.

Ergo he requires such things as he writ for, to be done by the real Body of
the Church, as in 1 Cor. 5. 4. and 12. 13.

Obj. Doubtless such business, may be despatched, with more facility, by
certain Members of the Body, chosen out of the whole, as a representative
Church; then otherwise it can be done, by the real Body of the Church?

Ans. We are not to deprive the poorest or meanest Member The meanest member of
Christ ought not to be deprived of his Christian liberty.
of Christ, of the right, and privilege, of his Christian Liberty, it being as
due, and proper unto him, as a Crown to a King. And yet for order sake we
allow, that Church business may be dispatched by some eminent persons, who are
Members of it, so that they be chosen by the consent of the real Body, as in
the elections of Parliaments, etc. sor in such a manner was the controversy
dispatched, which happened at Antioch, viz. by choosing certain Members out of
the real Body, by the real Body, as appears, Act. 15. 2. as also at
Jerusalem, where the Brethren, viz. the real Church did the like, by sending a
Committee to Antioch, as in the 25, 26, and 27. verses of that Chapter does
expressly appear) viz. Judas, and Silas, etc.

SECT. 3.
Obj. YOu boast much of that passage, but you cannot prove, that Paul, and
Barnabas, and the certain Brethren there mentioned, which went to Jerusalem,
were sent by the real Church at Antioch, seeing the text only says, that they
determined to send Paul, Barnabas, and the other Brethren; but what they it
were, is not mentioned, and therefore it lies on your part to prove.

Ans. As for our boasting of that passage (if there be any) it The
Presbiterians wilfully exclude them selves of the liberty which Christ has
afforded.
is not without cause, seeing that Christ has bestowed upon his Church, such a
large privilege from which, you of the Presbitery, wilfully exclude your
selves and as to that, you think it such a difficulty to prove, who they were,
that sent the Apostles, and the Brethren from Antioch, to Jerusalem; I will
partly answer you by a question, and after give you other satisfaction. And as
to the question, I demand of you, by whom were Judas, and Silas sent from
Jerusalem, to Antioch?

Obj. It cannot be denied, but that they were sent, by the Apostles, and
Elders, and Brethren at Jerusalem, for the text does plainly, and possitively
express it, ver. 23. but what these Brethren were, is uncertain, they might
be the rest of the representative Church at Jerusalem, for any thing that
either I, or you know to the contrary.

Ans. Not so, for if you be ignorant of it, so am not I; call Paul and Barnabas
sent to the real Church of Antioch.
to mind the 22. ver. of that Chap. and there you shall find, that them who
are called Brethren, in the 23. ver. are called, the whole Church, ver. 22. Now
if you be not satisfied, that Paul, and Barnabas, and the other Brethren, were
sent by the real Church at Antioch, as well as Judas, and Silas, was by the
Church at Jerusalem, I will thus further prove it unto you.

In the first Verse of the fifteenth Chapter we read, that certain Pharisees
came from Jerusalem to Antioch, to dissuade the Brethren of that place, from
the Doctrine which they had been taught, by Paul, and Barnabas, who being then
at Antioch, set upon these Jews by Disputation, the matter of which Dispute
(being about Circumcision) remaining dubitable to the (...) of the said Church,
it follows in the same verse, that they determined to send Paul, and (...)*
and certain other (...) the Church.

SECT. 4.
Obj. But yet you have not (...)* that they there spoken of (...) real Church
at (...).

Ans. What they can it be, to whom the Apostle, and Elders, and the whole
Church at Jerusalem, sent their ^nswers in writing unto? ver. 23.

But the writings which they sent, was directed, to the Brethren of the
Gentiles, which were in Antioch, etc.

Ergo the Apostles, and Brethren, were sent by them.

Again, what other they can it be, that sent Paul, and Barnabas, then they
whom the Pharisees of Judea, would have persuaded from the Doctrine, which they
had formerly been taught, by Paul, and Barnabas; for if it should be otherwise
understood, that they were only sent, by the representative Church at Antioch,
(as you would have it) then the first verse of the Chapter, should have run
thus, viz.

That certain men, coming from Jerusalem, to Antioch, taught the
representative Church, at Antioch; and so it must consequently follow, that the
representative Church at Antioch, was only called, by the name of Brethren; and
if so, what would you have the other part of the Church called, which were not
of the representative Church, which consequently were not to be called by that
name.

Obj. You have put me to a loss, but nevertheless, the Indipendants, and
Annabaptists, ^rre in many things, which they presume to have power in, as the
chosen Church officers, etc.

Ans. Instance in any particular Officer (which may concern The real Church
had power to choose Deacons
the Church) where the real body of the Church, has not to do in his
election.

SECT. 5.
Obj. Show me where the real Body of the Church at Jerusalem, had power to
elect Deacons.

Ans. To prove that I instance in Act. 6. 5. where the multitude of Disciples,
is said to make choice of the seven Deacons there mentioned.

Obj. It cannot be collected from that text, that the multitude, had a voice,
in that election; but if they had, it was only in the instituting of Churches,
but not in a Church already established, and furnished, with all her ordinary
Church Officers.

Ans. When a Church is already established, and furnished, with all her
ordinary Church Officers, what need then has it, to elect more Officers, but
not to mistake your meaning; your Argument is very weak, yea very rediculous,
for if the real Body of a Church ( gathered by the Apostles) were permitted
that privilege, and power, by the Apostles, themselves, yea even in the first
instituting of Churches (which if ever a representative Church ought to have
done of it self, ought the most to have been then, both by reason of the
abilities of the Apostles above others, as also to have been a pattern, to all
representative Churches for the future;) but seeing at that time (when if ever
it should have been done, as a president to all ensuing Ages;) it was not
effected without a joint interest, and concurrence, of the rest of the Brethren
which appertained to that Church, then present at Jerusalem; how much more
ought they now, to enjoy that privilege which the Apostles so confirmed upon
them: And seeing they were thought worthy by the Apostles, to lay the
foundation of the Church; how much more ought they to be permitted, as
coasistants, in the building; if in the institution of Churches then gathered
out of Judisme, and Heathenisme, why not in the like gatherings now, out of
Antichristianisme?

SECT. 6.
Obj. PVt the case they had a voice in the election, yet it follows not, that
they had a voice in the examining, or judgeing of their sufficiency: seeing
they had not judgment, or sufficiency of themselves, to judge thereof?

Ans. To see how you will prejudicate things, How know you the abilities that
them Disciples had? yea you dis-allow that judgment to be in them Disciples,
which the text does justify of them, for how could they have made choice of
such a man, as Stephen, and the other Deacons, who is said to be full of the
Holy Ghost, if they had not had judgment to have discerned their abilities,
yea those of your own judgment allowed them Disciples, to have judgment in
the examen of a Deacons life, as D. S. grants.

Obj. If they have judgment in the examen, yet have they not judgment in his
other gifts.

Ans. Wherein is the Apostles ever said to question them more, after their
election by the Disciples, but that forthwith after they were so elected, and
presented, by the Disciples, or Brethren, to the Apostles, and Elders,) they
are said to go to prayers, and then laid their hands on them, Act. 6. 6.

Obj. Put the case that these Deacons, were ordained, by the consent of the
people, yet follows it not, that this consent, was a voice, because it was
not asked of every one apart.

Ans. Put the case it signifies, what it does signify, viz. that they were
ordained, by the content of the people, which is that I stand for, and for that
their consent, was not a voice (because it was not asked of every one apart) I
answer, by a demand; how you know they were not asked every one apart, seeing
the text is neither for it, or against it; neither is it needful (at all
times) in Counsels, to put questions, to particular voices (when the case is
clear) as it is very probable it was to them Disciples, in that they
immediately consented; but however they agreed, we read they did agree, without
any noise of strife, or division amongst themselves, which you think to be a
thing impossible to be done at any such occasion. And seeing that election was
so quietly carried on, why may not the like be done in these days?

SECT. 7.
Obj. BY your former expressions, you confess that the Eldership, and
Presbitery of the Apostles, and Elders, did principally, and authoritative act,
and not the whole Church, or people, they in a lower, and less interest, as by
way of choice, vote, and consent.

Ans. It was very requisite, that the Apostles of our Lord and How the Apostle
had a pre-eminence above others.
Savior Jesus Christ, who was immediately called by him, to that purpose,
should have a pre-eminence, before them who were but mediatly called by them;
but seeing there is no such immediate calling to be expected, all being now
called, by one and the same mediate means (whether it be to the Ministry, or
any other Office in the Church) it is very fitting, that the Members of each
Church, so called, should likewise enjoy the same privilege, under the mediate
calling, as did the other, under the immediate calling.

Obj. What privilege would you have allowed the Church now under its mediate
calling?

Ans. That one Minister should not usurp over another (and so in the rest of
the Offices in the Church) neither to take place each of other, unless upon a
Moral respect, of age, zeal, gifts, or the like.

Obj. Would you not allow the Pastors, and Elders under this mediate calling
the same power, which the Apostles, and Elders had under their immediate
Calling?

Ans. Yes, if they prove the like Proficients as did the Apostles and Elders;
but they of the Presbitery take far more state upon them, then did the
Apostles and Elders, as I have, and shall yet make appear.

SECT. 8.
Obj. IT is manifest, that the Apostles did ordain Presbiters, and Deacons,
and gave rules concerning christian Discipline, and had power of exercising
censures, over Presbiters and others, which these places of Scripture, as Act.
14. 13. Act. 6. 6. 1 Cor. 16. 1. 1 Cor. 14. 1 Cor. 5. 3. 3 Epist. Joh. 9. 10.
do prove.

Ans. It is acknowledged, but I have told you, and now tell The real Body of
the Church had an interest and concurrence in all things appertaining to the
(...).
you again, that there ever went a joint interest, and concurrence of the
Church, in all their proceedings, which those Scriptures, viz. by comparing the
15. and 23. verses of Acts 1. as also by comparing Act. 6. 3. 5. 6. Act. 13. 1,
2, 3, 4. with Act. 14. 26, 27, 28. and so in the consequences of the Discourse,
in the ensuing Chapter, as ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 12, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30.
33. as also the whole of all Paul's Epistles, do prove (as I have formerly
declared) in that they were written to the real Body of every Church, to whom
they were sent, and therefore each thing concerned in them, was also to be
performed by the whole Church, and not of any other particular part thereof, as
a representative of the whole, without elected by the whole, as hereafter I
shall prove at large.

Obj. It is manifest, that Timothy, and Titus ( who were mediately called) had
power also of exercising censures over Presbiters, and others, which these
places of Scripture, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 5. 19. Tit. 3. 10. do
witness.

Ans. This is also granted, but you are so sottish to think, that the
privilege which the Apostles permitted the real Body of the Church in such
affairs, was taken from them; had they interest in all the Apostles affairs,
concerning the Church, and must they be debarred it by Timothy, and Titus?
Might they be be permitted (as I said before) to ^ay the foundation, and not to
build; to elect an Apostle, and not a Presbiter; to have voice in the counsels
and decrees of the Apostles, who were immediately called, and be debar^ed the
like privilege by Timothy, and Titus? doubtless it was the gross, or rather
wilful mistake of some proud Lucrean Priest (such as the Sinod consisted of)
who first assumed that christian privilege unto themselves, from them
Scriptures.

SECT. 9.
Obj. PAul had a commanding power over Titus, chap. 1. 5. ergo one Minister
over another.

Ans. Paul and the rest of the Apostles, were immediately called, None now
equal in power with the Apostles.
and therefore had a greater privilege, then them, who were but mediatly
called by them, and the Church; but there is none now so immediately called, and
so equal in power, and authority, to the Apostles; and as touching the
commanding power you speak of, I answer; that the Apostles under their
immediate calling, could not compel, or force one another, by way of
authority, and would you confer a greater power on the^r, who are but
mediatly called? I see your pride will appear above board, you have forg^t
Christ's answer to your Predecessors in ambition, M^^. ^^. ^^, ^6, ^7, etc. as
also how it was relished, by the rest of the Apostles, ^^r. 24.

Obj. The Apostles sent Judas, and ^las, to Antioch, ergo they had power over
them.

Ans. That is argued like the rest, for by the same reason, the rest of the
Apostles, had a commanding power over Peter, and John, (whom they are said to
send to Samaria,) Act. 8. 14. as also the Church at Antioch, in sending Paul,
and Barnabas, to Jerusalem, Act. 15. 2. which were to cross the injunction of
our Savior, Mat. 20. 25. etc. therefore no rational man can imagine, that
those Missions, or sendings, were any other, then when Committees are appointed
by the Parliament, out of their own Members, to act particular businesses,
proper to the House; which Committees, being Members, do not lose any part of
their power, or Membership, during their absence in the House, upon that
Committee, though distant from the House; have you been seven or eight years
so near the House, and yet ignorant of such customs.

Obj. As them Members of Parliament are a Committee, the remaining Members in
Parliament have a superior power above them, they being the supreme Court.

Ans. Were it so, yet you still argue against your self, for that proves that
the supreme power remains in the real body of the Parliament, and so
consequently of the Church, viz that the Church at Antioch had a supreme
power, over, and above, Paul and Barnabas, as the Church at Jerusalem over
Judas, and Silas, being sent by them as Committees; so that you no ways
advantage your self, by your evasion.

SECT. 10.
Obj. TImothy, and Titus, had not only power to ordain Presbiters, and
Deacons, but also of exercising Sensures over Presbiters, and others; as also
the Angels of the Churches are said to have, Rev. 2. 3. chap.

Ans. What work you make with poor Timothy and Titus, to uphold your pride and
covitousnesse, but I cannot better answer this point, then in the words of your
own Language, to his late Majesty in Carisborow Castle, only I shall
paraphraise something by the buy, as in answer to your own particulars, by
speaking to you, as to them of the Sinod, that writ that answer, viz. I cannot
say they had this power as the Apostles Substitutes, or Successors, in
Presbiterian Government; or that they exercised the power they had, as being
Presbiters, in the sense of you Presbiterians; but as extraordinary Officers,
or Evangelists, which Evangelists were an office in the Church, distinct from
Vid* fol. ^.
Pastors, and Feachers, Ephe. 4. 11. And that they were Evangelists, it
appears by their being sent up and down by the Apostles, or taken along with
them in company to several Churches, as the necessity, and occasion of the
Church did require; the one of them being expressly called an Evangelist, 2 Timothy
4. 5. and neither of them being any where in Scripture called Presbiterian in
your sense, neither were they fixed to Ephesus, and Creet, as Presbiters in the
Churches committed to them, as you would be in London, and Westminster; but
removed from thence to other places, and never (for ought appears in
Scripture) returned to them again. And it seems clear to me, that neither
their abode at Ephesus, or Creet, was for any long time, especially for so long
a time as you have sitten at Westminster. Nor was it so intended by the
Apostles, or our Parliament, for the Apostles employed them there upon
occasional business, as his expressions intimates, 1 Timothy 1. 3. Tit, 1. 5.
which words does not carry the fixing and constituting of a Sinod of
Presbiters, in a place, as perpetual Governors.

SECT. 11.
ANd as touching those Angels, mentioned in the Revelations, Vid. fol. 7^*
I answer also in words of your own coining, viz. that they were in no place
called Presbiters, in vulgar acceptance; neither is there mention of
Superiority, of one Presbiter to another, as a Classical, Provincial, and
National Sinod, but in Diotrophes in effecting of it, as you of the Sinod did
not. And for the more clear and full satisfaction of your Worships in this
point, I will briefly declare into what Officers hands the ordinary standing
Office of the Church were transmitted, and derived, by and from, the Apostles.

The Apostles had no Successors, in eundem gradum, the Apostolical office was
not derived by Succession, being established by Christ, by extraordinary and
special commission; but for the ordinary, and standing use of the Church,
there were ordained only two orders of Offices, viz. Bishops, and Deacons,
which the Apostle expresses, Phil. 1. 1. and only of them, does the Apostle
give the due character of (...) ^. 1 Ti^^ 3. 2. 8. from both which places of
Scripture, (...), that besides Presbiters, Vi^, fol. 8.
there is no other Order, but (...); and though the order of a Presbiter, (...)
order of a Dea^on, yet in the same order of a De^^on, or (...), there was not
any one superior to another; no (...) w^^ above an Apostle, no Evangelist
above an Evangelis^ (...) Presbiter above a Presbiter, no Deacon above a
Deacon. And if ^o, how will your Classical, Provincial, and National S^^ods
^o^d together, by which you do assume a power, beyond the power which the
Apostles used in the Church, binding, and consining your fellow Presbiters, to
observe your Injunctions, and Decrees, as if you were rather Apostles, then
Presbiters, admitting only such Creatures as are of your own stam^e, into the
Ministry; and to such, must all the Parishes of the Kingdom subscribe, and
admit of, whether they have either seen, or heard of them before or no; your
approbation is sufficient, if they have but received the Popish stamp of
Orders, by your Predec^ssors the Bishops, they are well enough, otherwise not,
how gifted soever they be.

SECT. 12.
Again, in your answer to his late Majesty you say, That no other Persons, or
Officers of the Church, may challenge, o^ assume to themselves, such power as
did the Apostles, in that respect alone, viz. because the Apostles practiced it
(except such power belong to them in common, as well as to the Apostles by
warrant of Scripture,) which that it does, your Sinod is yet to prove. You
there also confess, that our Savior, and his Apostles, did not so leave the
Church at liberty; as that any substantials belonging to Church Government,
which were appointed by Christ, and his Apostles, may be altered at pleasure,
and then I am certain that your Classical, Provincial, and National Sinods,
will not agree with the other left by Christ, and his Apostles; and therefore I
beseech the Honorable House of Parliament, to look rather to the original of
those your Powers, then the succession of them. And thus you have made an
Episcopal rod, to whip your own britch.

Obj. That which is called ordination was by the Apostles, and a power
established in the Presbitery, and not in the Church as m^^re believers.

Ans. I have proved and shall prove, that the Brethren as well as the
Presbitery, had a joint interest and concurrency in all power which belonged to
the Church.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Churches power to choose their Officers.
SECT. 1.
Objection. HOw prove you the election of Pastors, and Elders, by the Church,
or people?

Ans. Even by the renowned Doctor Stewarts The Church has power to chu^e its
Pastors.
own confession, in his learned Dupley, where he voluntarily, and ingeniously
confesses, and acknowledges (albeit to the marring of his Market) that no
Minister, or any other Church Officer, ought to be thrust upon a people, or
Congreg^tion, no more then a Husband, is to be forced upon a woman, against her
will; and that however such a Pastor, may go to the Pulpit, and preach amongst
them, yet unless they consent, he is not their Minister. Thus far the learned
Doctor.

And if so, with what impudence, have you of the Sinod, dispatched your own
tribe, to officiate where you your selves please, by virtue of an Apostolical
power, which you proudly usurp, unto your selves, condemning it in others,
when as it so clearly appears* (and that by a Bird of your own feather,) that
every Church has power to judge of the ability, and sufficiency of their
Pastor.

Obj. If the Dector had thought you would have made such use of his
expressions, he would have kept them in, however it is but one Doctors opinion.
Are you able to prove from Scripture, that the real body at ^erusalem, had
such power given them by the Apostles, and Elders?

Ans. Yea I am able to prove, that they had a voice in choosing The real Church
chose Matthias to be an Apostle.
of Matthias to the Apostleship, from Act. 1. 23.

SECT. 2.
Obj. THat text does not say that the people, viz. every one of them gave their
voice, for if so, then Mary, and the rest of the women voyced also; which was
contrary to Paul's command, who says, that women are to keep silence in the
Church; and therefore certainly, none did voice but such as had power to voice.

Ans. Neither does the text say, that the women did transgress Women may
proph^sie if so gifted.
that precept (given by Paul) in speaking, but as you might^ly mistake the
Apostle in other things, so in this; for in that place, where the Apostle
commands women to be silent in the Church, it is only meant concerning
preaching, and propheying, as does clearly appear, 1 Cor. 14. 36. and not of
other conference, in the Church; for if so, Aquilla surely did offend in
speaking in her own house, it being a receptacle for the Church. Neither is it
altogether forbidden in the sense, of Prophesying, if they be so gifted.

Obj. I pray you remember your self, do^ not go about to contradict the
Apostle* as that he knew not what he said.

Ans. That which I have said, I am able to justify by Scripture, yea by the
Apostle Paul himself if need require.

Obj. Hold me no longer in dispense, but satisfy me how it may be, and not to
contradict the rule, set down by the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor- 14. 34.

Ans. I shall prove it by the Old and New Testament, and first in the Old
Testament; I instance in Miriam, Numb. 12. 2. where Aaron and Miriam object
against Moses, in these words; Has not the Lord also spoken by us? Such
Prophetesses also were Deborah, Hanna, and Huldah; and in the New Testament,
Hanah the daughter of Pannuel, as also Philips four daughters, which were
Prophetesses, Act. 20. 9.

SECT. 3.
Obj. But were these Prophetesses, to teach publicly?

Ans. These Prophetesses being extraordinarily stirred Gif^s of Prophecy a^e
given to ^di^^^ the Church.
up, did also publicly Prophecy, and not only privately in their families, as
may appear by these reasons, viz.

1. Because the gift of Prophecy was given them, to edify the Church withal,
1 Cor. 14. 3. they then having the gist, did use it to the right end, viz.
publicly.

2. It is confirmed by example, in that passage I have named touching Miriam,
Numb. 12. 2. Has not the Lord spoken also by us?

3. Deborah is said to judge Israel publicly, being a Prophetess, Jud. 4. 4.
she did therefore exercise her Prophetical gift publicly.

4. The Apostle Paul himself dis-alloweth not of it, 1 Cor. 11. 5. where
speaking of women Prophesying, says not that it is unlawful for women to
Prophecy, but that it is not decent for them to Prophecy, with their heads
uncovered; by all which it appears, that some women in Paul's time, being
Prophetesses, such as Philips four daughters, did Prophecy, and that
publicly.

Obj. The Apostle there does not speak of the particular act of women, but of
the act of the Congregation, which is said to pray, or prophecy.

Ans. It is apparent to the contrary, by the use of the Word elsewhere, viz. Ye
may all prophecy one by one, 1 Cor. 14. 31. for there the Apostle speaks of
the particular act of Prophesying.

Obj. Wherefore then does the Apostle injoyne the women silence in the Church,
1 Cor. 14. 31.

Ans. To reconcile these places we are to observe, that where Wherein the
Apostle injoyne^ women sil^^ce in the Church.
the Apostle is said to allow of the Prophesying of women, 1 Cor. 11. 5. is
meant of the extraordinary gift, and function of Prophesying, wherein he did
not dis-allow the act, but the manner, willing that it should be done with
comeliness; and order. And as concerning the place where you object, that
silence is enjoined women, the Apostle speaks of the ordinary calling of
preaching, or prophesying, which women ought not any way to usurp; but for the
extraordinary calling, which the Lord has sometimes given to women, there is
no doubt, but they accordingly used the same, and may now use, if so inspired.
As for other conference in the Church, I see no cause, women having the same
need of Pastors for their Souls as men) but that they may have a voice in the
election of their Minister, as any man whatsoever, as no doubt but many of the
rest had, Acts 1. 14.

SECT. 4.
Obj, LEt us leave the women in silence, did the rest of the people voice in
that election of Matthias?

Ans. For any thing I know to the contrary, or you either; do you read that
any of the Assembly was forbidden to voice? But if there were any that were not
capable of the business in hand, we do not read, that they procured any
disorder, or fraction amongst the multitude.

Obj. The text does not punctually make out, that the people made choice of
Barnabas, and Matthias, but that they, viz. the Apostles, and Elders, and the
Church Officers; and if you would have it otherwise, you are to prove it from
the text, otherwise I neither can, nor will believe you.

Ans. But if I can prove it from the text, then you both can, and will believe
me, and so renounce your error.

Obj. I promise you I will, but I fear you will fail of your expectation.

Ans. Call to mind the 15. ver. of that Chapter, and compare it with the 2^.
ver. where Barnabas, and Matthias, is appointed, and then judge, whether it be
not more likely, that they were chosen by them, to whom Peter spoke unto, in
the 15. ver. then to any other parties mentioned in any part of the Chapter,
for in the 15. ver. the Disciples, are not only numbered, but Peter also
begins his speech unto them, which he continues unto the very election of
Barnabas, and Matthias, not diverting it from them, to whom he began it (which
in the 15. ver. is said to be the Disciples, who were about 120) how can you
then with modesty deny, that Matthias, was chosen, by any other, then by the
Parties there mentioned; and if granted, then it must consequently follow, that
Matthias had the peoples appr^bation, before the Apostles acceptance.

SECT. 5.
Obj. I Conf^^se that it does appear that Barnabas, and Matthias was chosen by
the multitude, mentioned in the 15. ver. but whether that number of Disciples
mentioned, were the real, or the representative Church, I am not yet satisfied.

Ans. Do you read of any other part of the Church, then at Jerusalem, beside
that number?

Obj. Suppose I grant you, that the election of Church Officers, does belong to
the promiscuous multitude, yet do^ I not hold, that they have any
Ecclesiastical power in Judicature.

Ans. I thought I had heretofore satisfied you, that the Church The real
Church has power os Judicature.
of Christ has sufficient power in it self, and that by the authority of
Scripture, to decide all matters of controversy touching it self, viz. of a
spiritual cognizance, but if you scruple at it, I will further enlarge my
self in the point; for proof of which I could instance all Paul's Epistles,
but for brevity sake, I will consine my self to the passage of the Apostle to
the Corinthians, in his first Epistle, and fifth Chapter, where writing
touching the ejecting of the incestious person, does not attribute the powes
thereof, to his own particular person, or to more Apostles, and Elders, joined
with him, but solely to that Church at Corinth, in these words; Do not ye
judge them that are within? verse. 12. he does not say, Do not we the Apostles
of Christ judge them that are within, or we of the Classical, Provincial, and
National Sinod judge them; but do not ye, etc. viz. the real body of the
Church, to whom he writ his Epistles? yea he further ratifieth it in the 13.
ver. viz. therefore put away from your selves that wicked person. And the like
order have they also sor his reception, upon his humiliation, 2 Cor. 6, 7, 8.
by which two texts of Scripture, the Apostle ^leerly shows whom they be, that
the Church has power over, and whom the civil Magistrate has to rule over;
as also, what have I to do to judge them that are without; do not ye judge
them that are within? Again, them that are without God judges; intimating by
the first, that Christ has given the rule of such as are without, (viz. not
members of the Church) to the rule of the civil Magistrate, as in Romans 13. and
the latter sort, (viz. such as are members of the Church) to the rule and
government of the Covenanted members of the Church it self, viz. to the real
body whereof they are members.

Obj. Has the Civil Magistrate nothing to do in Churchgovernment?

Ans. As he is merely a civil Magistrate, he has not, for his The Civil
Magistrate has nothing to do in Church government.
power, as a civil Magistrate, is confined without the Church, as I have
formerly showed; neither is the Law, (viz. the Moral Law) given to a righteous
man, but for the unrighteous, Romans 13. 3. and therefore so long as a member of
the Church, continues his integrity, and without running himself into a
Moral offense, he is without the verge of the civil Magistrate.

Obj. Has not a civil Magistrate, being a member of the Church, a greater
power then the rest of the members?

Ans. Not at all, as he is a member of the Church, for there is no respect of
persons with God, whether they be Jews, or Gentiles, bond, or free, rich, or
poor, they are all one in Christ Jesus, Leut. 10. 17. Act. 10. 38. Romans 2. 11.
Gal. 2. 6. Ephesians. 6. 9. Col. 3. 11. Romans 12. 5. etc. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13, 14, etc.

Obj. What things be they, which you ascribe as things proper to be done by the
Church?

Ans. They chiefly consist in these particulars, viz. as in election The chief
actions, which concern the Church.
of Pastors, and Church Officers, as I have proved; as also in matters of
advice, and counsel, as I have also proved; as also in sending of Messengers,
from Church to Church, to advise, and to hold correspondency together, as being
all members of one universal Church, as in Act. 15. 2. 22. 2 Cor. 1. 18, 19. 1
Cor. 16. 3. 10. Act. 18. 37. As also in receptions of members, into the Church,
as in Romans 16. 1, 2. Act. 9. 26, 27. 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8. as also in ejections of
members, as in 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. 12. 13. as also touching any matter of
controversy, as in Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2, 3, etc.

CHAP. IX. Treats how matters of controversy may be decided in the Church.
SECT. 1.
Objection. AS concerning matters of Judicature, certainly neither them words
of our Savior, Mat. 18. 17. viz. Tell it to the Church, cannot be meant of the
promiscuous multitude, seeing that in many places, the number may be so great,
as that it would be rediculous to acquaint so many, with every business,
seeing the Church by that means would be continually employed about trifles.

Ans. As touching the multitudes of Believers which you speak of, I have told
you, that if the Brethren be so numerous, as that they cannot conveniently meet
together in one place, that then they may divide into more, as there shall be
occasion, so that they be all governed by one, and the same rule, with that
from which they are divided; and being furnished with Pastors, and other
Officers, may decide controversies amongst themselves, as if all in the City
were met together about it; yea were there as many parts in that particular
City, as there is such particulars in the Universal, yet if each of these
particulars, be governed by the Universal rule, they are as complete Churches,
as the Universal, and may be termed a particular Church of a City, as all the
Believers of that City may be termed a particular to the Universal, or
Catholic Church.

But put the case that twenty thousand Believers, were of one It is not
requisite that every member of a Church meet upon every occasion.
individual Body, or Church, yet it is not of absolute necessity, that each of
these particular members should meet together, upon every particular occasion,
then it is for the members of each particular Church to meet together about a
general business of the Church.

For in such cases, it is with the Church, as with the Body pollitick, of the
State, who in regard they cannot all meet together, to advise about the common
good, therefore they divide into parts, each part electing two or more, to act
for them, as their representatives, which we call Knights of Shires, as also in
Towns Corporate.

Now in choosing of these Knights, it has been the custom that every
Freeholder of so much per annum, had a voice in the election of such
representatives, and yet was not every such Freeholder bound of necessity, to
make his appearance at such an election, but was at his own choice, to go, or
stay at home, and yet his, or their absence, did not retard the business; for
if but any part of the Freeholders of the said County, or Counties did
appear, and make choice of such representives, for their County, it was
sufficient in Law; and the rest being lawfully summoned, and not making
appearance, at the time, and place proposed, must be forced to subscribe, and
so in the other.

SECT. 2.
Obj. But suppose there was no appearance made, upon such a Writ from the King?

Ans, Then were it in the power of the King, and his Privy Counsel to do it
themselves, and so the Common^^s would lose their privilege.

The like instance may also be made in laying of a Tax, or Sessement for a
Town, etc. where all the inhabitants, ought to have public notice given them,
of the time, when, and place where, such a Tax is to be laid; yet is not every
one, absolutely bound by this Summons, to appear at the time, and place; but
if he, or they do not appear, such as do appear, may lay the Tax, and the
other not appearing, are bound to stand to the conclusions of them who did
appear, whether for them, or against them.

Obj. But if none make their appearance, what would follow?

Ans. Upon such neglects, the Pastor, and Church Officers, may do it
themselves, according to my former instance.

Obj. What would you infer from hence?

Ans. That in any act of Judicature, (which may concern the members of the
Church) if the real body thereof have public notice of the time, and place,
where a controversy (betwixt the Part of the Church may decide controversies.
members thereof, is to be decided, and most of them forbear coming
thereunto; that then the parties, which shall so come, albeit, inconsiderable
to the other, may decide the controversy* and being so done, the re^^ are not
to gainsay it.

Obj. But if none of them should appear upon the Summons, what would follow?

Ans. Then the Pastor, and Church Officers, have power to do it themselves,
according to my former instances.

SECT. 3.
Obj. Would you have every ^particular controversy so decided, albeit of the
smallest concernment?

Ans. That every particular business, should not be a trouble to the whole
Congregation, or real body of the Church, our Two remedy appointed by Christ
for the ease of the Church.
Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, in his Divine wisdom, has left two remedies,
which as far as I perceive, is not discerned by you Presbiterians; for
otherwise, you would not think such businesses, so impossible to be effected as
you do.

Obj. I wonder what remedies they be, I pray discover them?

Ans. You will wonder indeed when you hear of them, seeing they are as a pair
of Spectacles, to discern the truth, and easiness of the method, which Christ
left to regulate, and order, the affairs of his Church Militant by, the which
you so wilfully, or ignorantly oppose.

SECT. 4.
Obj. Where are those Spectacles you speak of, to be found in the Scripture,
that I may put them on, to discern the truth of the matter?

Ans. You may find them, even before your nose, in the two verses, when you
read the text, Mat. 18. 17. Tell it to the Church, etc. which sentence you so
much wonder at, using it, as a means to amaze us, as the intricatenesse of the
thing, as being impossible, that every trivial thing should be disputed on, by
the real body of the Church; when as the weight of every business, is ^
c^v^at t^ he Church.
taken off, before it come at the Church; for in case any difference shall
happen in the Church of Christ, which I hope will be seldom, or never.

(Knowing that they be all members of one Body, Christ Jesus being the head;)
as also in regard that the enemies of Christ and his Church, will take occasion
thereby, to blaspheame, making it their chiefest joy to see the Professors of
Christ at varience; in which respect I say, they ought to be very cautalous,
either to give, or take, occasion of revenge, or offense, and that by the
example of Abraham. Genesis 1^. 7, 8, etc. who when his, and Lots Herdsmen fell at
varien^e, desired, that no such thing should be amongst them, for said ^e, W^
be brethren; yea rather then he would continue a difference, though he were
more potent in every respect, he gave the cho^^e of the Country to Lot; which
president, I hope will be imitated by our Brethren, in any difference betwixt
party, and party; as also concerning any criminal offense, committed by any
member of the Church, I hope our Brethren will take notice of the event which
happened by the sins of David, viz. his Murder, and Adultery, (by which he gave
occasion to the Philistines, and other of the enemies of God to blaspheame,)
and so avoid all such occasions of evil; but in case such differences, and
misdemeanors, should be made, and acted, by the members of Christ, which may
happen, seeing by the former examples, that holy men, may be at difference, and
also sin in a high degree; yet as I said before, o^r Savior in case of such
difference, has left these two remedies in the 15. and 16. verses of that 18th
Chapter of Matthews Gospel, in these words.

SECT. 5.
IF thy brother trespass against thee, tell him his fault, betwixt thee, and
him alone, if he shall hear thee, then thou have gained thy brother; but if he
will not hear thee, then take with thee one, or two more, that in the mouth of
two, or three witnesses every word may be established: And if he shall neglect
to hea^e them ^^ll it to the Church; but if he shall neglect to hear the
Church, let him be to thee, as an Hea^hen man, and a Pu^lican.

In which words of our Savior, we may e^sily perceive, the method, and order,
that he would have used, in such differences, as does arise amongst the members
of the Church, for otherwise, the Church is not to meddle with them, who are as
Heathens, and Publicans, as may be gathered from them words of our Savior
formerly mentioned.

Then, least the real Church, should be cumbred with every 1. Remedy.
small business, the party offended, is enjoined by our Savior, to go to the
party offending, or who has offended him, as by occasion of trespass, or
otherwise, which is a thing I confess quite contrary to flesh and blood, as is
also the like expressions of our Savior, viz. If thou bring thy gift to the
Altar, and remember that thy brother has offended thee, leave thy gift at the
Altar, and go and reconcile thy self to thy brother; as also, in praying for
our enemies, in blessing them that curse us, to turn the other side, to part
not only with our coat, but cloak also; yet being the injunction of our
Savior, they must be observed, and so far as any man is from yielding
obedience to them, so far is he, from being a true Christian; these being the
simptomes to distinguish the Church of Christ from the world, and therefore our
Savior in such cases commands, to go and tell him of his fault privately,
or betwixt thee, and him alone.

SECT. 6.
AS if he should have said, The eyes of the Heathen, and Publicanes are set
upon you, and would much rejoice, to hear that you, who are brethren in
professing my name, should differ. And therefore, in such a case, go first by
thy self, and do it with all the privacy that may be, for fear of the
scandal, which otherwise may arise by the difference betwixt you, and when ye
are so met, use all the wholesome perswation thou c^ust (according to the
measure of the gift which is given thee) to incite, and stir up, to give thee
satisfaction, and if thou can persuade him thereunto, thou have then gained
thy brother; which shall be a glory unto thee, so that thou shall shine, as the
Stars in the firmament.

But if he yet remain obstinate, and will not give thee some 2. Remedy.
reasonable satisfaction for thy loss by him, then take with thee one or two
more of thy neighbors, of which number, may be thy Pastor, or whom else thou
shall think meet. And in so doing, certainly they will moderate the business
betwixt you, (unless Law business may be decided in he Church.
ye be both Hipocrites, so that no reason will persuade you) yea certainly,
rather then you will make it any further trouble, one of you will put up with
some loss, (least it beget a scandal to the Church*) but if it so be, that
thou show thy self before thy neighbors, to be a reasonable man, rather to
put up with loss, then to exact more then thy own, and yet he will not
reconcile himself, or give thee thy own.

Then thou art of necessity, to put him to a greater sh^me and disgrace, being
constrained to acquaint the Church with it, which after notice given, when so
many of the members are met together, as shall please to come, thou shall
produce the Witness, which thou tookest with thee, and they shall declare the
truth and equity of thy cause unto them, as also the refractorinesse of the
offender, or trespasser, which being so manifestly ^pparent, to such members of
the Church, (by thy credable Witnesses) it will be quickly decided.

But if he shall yet refuse to be so ordered by the Assembly then gathered
together, as likely he will (having had all the fair motions that might be
before) let him then be unto thee, as an Heathen man, and a Publican.

And thus have I set forth unto you, a representation, how our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, would have differences, decided in his Church Militant; which
remedies (before mentioned) considered, there will seldom, or never* any small,
or trivial business, trouble the Church, in regard the party offended, or
injured, is positively enjoined by our Savior, to use the remedies aforesaid,
which if he refuse to perform, he ought not to be releeved by the Church.

SECT. 7.
Obj. But if the Defondant refuse to be ordered by them members so gathered, in
regard of the smalnesse of the quantity of them, in comparison of the real
body of that Church, may he not appeal to the real body?

Ans. The Church having had public notice of it, as also of the time, and
place, when, and where, the difference is to be decided, and not appearing, at
the time, and place, doubtless those Few trivial businesses trouble the Church.
few, who does appear, ought to end the business, and being so determined, it
ought not to trouble the Church any further; but I would have you know, that
such causes, as come to such a trial, ought to have a deliberate hearing, both
by Pastors, etc. for you may well imagine, the two remedies considered, there
will seldom, or never, any trivial business trouble the real Church.

Obj. Suppose the difference betwixt them be for title of Land, or the like;
are such Churches able to decide such controversies, What judgment do you
read them Corinthians had in La^?
having no judgments in the Laws of the Land, by which such differences are
to be tried?

Ans. All Laws are, or ought to be, grounded upon Scripture, and reason, and
as to that of Scripture, I suppose none will deny, but such as are of the
Church, have the best judgment, in such things as are, or tend to a spiritual
cognizance, to whom the Apostle writ, and therefore the best able, to decide
such controversies in Law, as does arise, or has bottom from them.

2. As to that of Reason, I suppose also none that has reason will deny, but
such as understand Scripture are Rational Men, and therefore, have likewise
judgment in such controversy in Law, as have bottom from them.

3. We see that no Judge does of himself determine a case in Law, but it is
done by a verdict passed by a Jewry of the Neighborhood, etc. Then who more fit
for such puposes then the Church, yet we are engaged as Christians, to admit
of such decisions amongst our selves; Instance the Apostle Paul in his first
Epistle to the Church at Corinth, who after he had in the fifth Chapter showed
them from whence they were to separate, viz. from the fornicators of this
world, as also from the Covetous, Extortioners, Idolators, Raylers, Drunkards
and ver. 10. As also of whom they had power to Judge, viz. of such as were
within, verse. 12. As also of such as were not in their power, (but in the power
of the Civil Magistrate) viz. Such as were without verse. 13. he does continue
his discourse in the beginning of the ninth chap. with a note of reprofe, viz.

Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to Law The Apostles
reproof to the Corinthians for not deciding Controversies.
before the unjust, and not before the Saints? Do ye not know, that the Saints
shall judge the world, and if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy
to judge the smallest matters? Know ye not that we shall judge Angels, how much
more things that appertain to this life? If then ye have judgment in things
pertaining to this life, set them to judge, who are least esteemed in the
Church; I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is not a wise man amongst
you, not one that shall be able to judge, betwixt his Brethren; but brother
goes to Law with Brother, and that before the unbeleevers; now therefore this
is utterly a fault amongst you, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.

Obj. The Apostle in that Chapter does only condemn them, for that they went
to Law before such as were not Christians, and not otherwise.

Ans. He that is without the payle of the Church of Christ, is not to be termed
a Christian, let him pretend what he will; and therefore the Church ought not
to make use of them, in any such difference as does arise amongst themselves.

SECT. 8.
Obj. Suppose none of the Magistrates of the Kingdom, will join with you in
your Church Government, will you therefore esteem them no Christians?

Ans. There is but one perfect rule of worship, and the rest But one perfect
rule of worship.
are false, and therefore all that do not practice that rule, are false
worshippers, be it in part, or in whole, according to the measure of the
degree, wherein they differ; yea so far they may be termed Antichristians,
for he that is not with Christ, (in that sense) is against him, and he that
gathers not with him, scatters abroad; in which respects, they ought to be
distinguished, from such as are conformable. Again, it was, is, and ever will
be, that a very few of the Gallantry of the world, were, are* or will be
followers of Christ, in his commands, which the Apostle Paul affirms, where
he says, Not many wise after the flesh, not many mighty, etc. are called; no
doubtless, to be good and great, is very rare, few of the first magnitude of
greanesse, are called, converted, or go to Heaven, it falls chiefly to their
Lot, who are contemned, and despised, of such proud ones; as Christ himself
affirms, where he is said to thank his Father, that he had hid such things
from the wise, and prudent, and had revealed them unto babes; aluding, to the
learned Scribes and Pharisees, who out of their pride, malice, and disdain,
did contemn his glorious Gospel, and divine Messeng^^s, in regard, they were a
company of poor Fishermen, and some few other neglected underlings; What (say
they) have any of the Rulers of the Pharisees believed on him? Alas no, they
were so blinded with the opinion of their devout, and deeper Learning, so puffed
up, with the pride of their high places, so swollen with selfe-conceitednesse of
their own form, and false glosses, and so possessed with prejudice of
Christianity, that even the Publicans, and Harlots, go to Heaven before them,
viz. when they go not.

And what lively Emblemes, them Scribes, and Pharisees, (against Scribes and
Pharisees, lively emblemes of our Priests, and Lawyers.
whom for their pride, dissimulation, and cheating of the people our Savior
pronounced eight woes,) were, of our Magistrates, Lawyers, and Ministers, in
their now condition, I appeal to all Christians, and therefore all contentious
people (who desire to be freed from such corrupt men, and means,) are hereby
invited to relinquish them, and to join themselves to that society of Saints,
who are congregated together, according to that rule, which Christ, and his
Apostles prescribed, and are the nearest representation of that Church, (in the
primative purity,) which is now in the whole world; for otherwise, to expect
redress of grievances, from such p^rties, in their now condition, is as much
as to imagine that Grapes may be gathered of Thorns, or Figgs of Brambles; for
a Black-a-Moore to be made white, or for Hell to become Heaven.

CHAP. X. Treats of Nobility, and Learning, etc.
SECT. 1.
Objection. IS not Nobility, and Learning, excellent ornaments for a
Commonwealth?

Ans. Yea, but when the Nobles will not put The fruits of abused learning.
their necks to the work of the Lord, Nehem. 3. 5. and when Learning is spent
upon private, and pernicious ends, it becomes the foulest fiend the Devil
has upon earth, and his mightiest Agent to do mischief; for no corruption is
worse then that, which is best, mis-imployed, being of woeful consequence,
proportionable to its native worth, such men for the most part, having the most
worldliest ends; complying exactly with the world, hunting, and aspiring
toward it, as their utmost aims; and so by the abuse, and mis-applying of it,
they put their great engine (very powerful, either for excellency of good, or
excess of ill, as it takes) in the Devils hands, for the enlarging, and
advancing of his Kingdom, and so turns the edge of it, to the dangerous hurt
of others, and so by consequent, and accident, it proves a mighty bar, to keep
Christ and his Kingdom out of their hearts; and thus do they bend their
abilities of Learning, closing with the corruption of the times, to raise and
enrich themselves, as is most apparent in many, yea most of our present
Magistrates, Ministers, and Lawyers in these covetous, and ambitious days.

SECT. 2.
NOw Gods principle and path is to be, Good, then Great; Gods principle and
path.
Religious, then rich; he would have his Ministers like burning, and shining
Lamps, to the illumination, and salvation of his people; but the Devil tells*
them, this is a sour, strict, and precise way, and it is not meet that such
admired eminency of Noble, or learned parts, should be confined to such
obscuri^y; that such rare gifts, and depth of knowledge, should intermixe
amongst a number of rude, ignorant, and incapable Clownes; and therefore he
labors, yea and prevails with almost all of them, to raise their spirits to
higher hopes, and to plunge presently into the current of the times, and be
made some body in the The worlds principle.
world. And hereupon their hearts being ravished with the pleasing
apprehensions of worldly glory, and humane greatness, represented by Satan, in
the most illustring forms, to their ambitious imaginations, they resolve
fearfully against their own souls, to follow the streams, and to plot all
means, and ways of preferment, disclaiming all occasions, that tend to
preciseness, studying only to understand the world, and to negotiate for
advancement.

And upon this very score it was, that the boon Ath^^ian-like The practice of
our A^ be^i^n blades.
blades of the times, derided Doctrine, and use in Sermons, as poor, and
beggarly; edifying plainness, foolishness of Preaching, knowing that by so
doing, they should ingratiate themselves into the times, and please those great
ones, who had rather have their ears tickled, then their Consciences touched;
to have pillowes sowed under their arms, that they might lie more soft upon
their beds of security, then to have the keen arrows of Righteousness, and
Truth, fastened in their sides, by the faithful Ministers, of Jesus Christ, to
drive them to sincerity. And thus have those daubers made shipwreck of their
Consciences, by their base, flattering, and depending on such great ones, who
have also been made hereby enemies to Professors, and their own Souls.

SECT. 3.
Obj. Well, but to proceed where we left, what shall follow in case the
Offender be dampnified by the Church, to pay a certain sum, and he refuse?

Ans. The party so refusing to be ordered by the Church, does thereby declare
his contempt to the power given to it by Christ, upon which, he is to be
ejected the Church, and so reduced to the state, and condition of a Heathen
man, and a Publican.

Obj. But must the Plaintiff then lose his money?

Ans. He has then no other means to obtain it, then by the Wherein the
Ma^istra^e is c^ncerned.
Laws of the Nation, by which the Civil Magistrate rules.

Obj. Wherein consists the power of the Magistrate?

Ans. He has to do in all things of a civil Cognizance, or that go out of
their Spiritual condition, into a Moral offense; as injustice, evil
transgression, into tumult, or disturbance of public, and private peace,
actually, or expressly, and not interpretatively, for so the Nations interpreted
the Jews, as troublers of the State, and the Jews Christ, and his Disciples,
as movers of sedition.

The Papists, and Prelates, interpreted the Non-conformists, or reproached
Puri^ans, as factious, and tumultuous, so as in any thing of a Moral, or
Secular Cognizance, which the Magistrate has clear rule for to walk by from
the Word of God, and not otherwise, and in so doing he ought to act, because he
is the best Legislater, and Interpreter, and can best resolve in things
touching public liberty; but otherwise all manner of differences whatsoever,
which may happen in the Church, without the limits of a Moral offense, may and
ought to be decided in, and by the Church it self, as has been fully proved.

Obj. Ought not Church businesses to be determined by voices?

Ans. We never read of any such conclusion made, by any How Church ^usine^^ss^
may be concluded.
Church mentioned in Scripture, as that every particular member was asked
apart, touching his nilling, or willing in such controsie; neither is it
probable, that any such course was used by them, but rather the matter being
fully debated, by some eminent persons, (as it is usual in Courts of
Parliament, etc. As also it was by Peter, and James, Act. 15.) that then all
the real body, will willingly condescend, to ratify and confirm it.

Obj. It cannot be imagined, that every case will be made so clear, as that
the Church will condescend, as you would have them, and if so, how would you
have the peoples thoughts expressed in such cases?

Ans. It may be done by lifting up the hand, or dividing themselves into two
bodies, or by I, or no, as it is usual, in Parliaments, or Committees.

Obj. But what if there be an equality of parts, as many for, as against what
will ensue?

Ans. What will ensue in the Court of Parliament, in the like case, or in your
Assembly of Divines; and therefore the same course you would take, in such
courses aforesaid, we will take the same in this; and thus have I stopped your
mo^th with your own morsel.

SECT. 4.
Obj. MAy not every Member present, at such a meeting, speak to the point in
question if he please?

Ans. Yea he may do so, as in like case may be done by any Member of
Parliament* or other Couns^ll; but it ought to be done according to the
Apostles rule, vi^ with d^cency, and order, and to avoid con^usion as much as
may be.

Obj. I have observed at some of your meetings, an horrible confusion.

Ans. Such disorders I hope will speedily be reformed, in our An example of the
Apostles for deci^ing controversi^s
Brethren; to which purpose we have a notable example in that Dispute be^wixt
the Apostles, ^lders, and Brethren at Jerusalem, concerning the matter of
Circ^mcision, Act. 15. who at the first did as you say of our Brethren, Dispute
confusedly; but whilst they did so, they had much Dispute to little purpose, as
appears by the seventh verse of that Chapter, until way was given, that they
might speak by course; whereupon Peter being commonly the first in such
matters, began to open the case apart by himself, the rest of the Apostles,
and Elders being silent, as may appear by the same verse; and yet we may
perceive, that the multitude termed the Brethren, ceased not to speak
confusedly, until Peter had ended his speech; and that they gave audience to
Paul, and Barnabas, until which time the text does not render them silent; by
which passage is really demonstrated unto us, the fruitless issues of confused
discourse, as also the fruitful effects of decency and order; for we read, as
soon as Paul, and Barnabas, had delivered themselves, (to whom the Brethren is
said to give audience) the Apostle James being the next which spoke, did in few
words g^ve the multitude satisfaction.

And from hence we are taught the order and method, which Who ought (...) made
use of in Church (...).
we ought to use upon any occasion of business, which may concern the Church;
as first, to make choice of them whom we conceive, is the most judicious, and
that by the example of the Church at Antioch, who made choy^e of Bar^^b^s, and
Paul, and the other Brethren, which no doubt was the most able men amongst them
in that Church. As also of the Church at Jerusalem, in permitting Peter, and
James, to speak first, being the most grave in the Assembly; as also in that
Churches making choice of Judas, and Silas, who was men of eminence amongst
them, (as may appear by the 26. verse.) to send in their behalfes to Antioch.

SECT. 5.
2. THat Messengers being so sent, ought to behave themselves wisely, not
making any tumult, or disturbance in the Church, to which they are sent, but
only to speak as occasion shall serve, and that by the example of Paul, and
Barnabas, who did not interupt Peter, but waited their opportunity.

Obj. Then every one that has judgment may, and ought to speak?

Ans. They may speak if they will, as the rest of the Apostles, Who ought to
(...) in the* ^hurc^.
and Elders, and the rest of the Brethren might have done, but we do not read,
that they did speak, after that Peter, ^^d James had opened the case, but
given their judgments (...) it, being thereby satisfied, did aquiesse in the
judgment of James.

Obj. But what if Peter and James had not ended the controversy?

Ans. Then they were to have gone on, in the same order, and method, until
they were satisfied; for if order will not do it, I am certain that confusion
cannot. And it likely that the Apostle Paul gained this experience at that
meeting, which he exhorts the Corinthians to observe, (and so consequently
all Churches) in all their enterprises whatsoever, viz. that all things might
be done with decency and order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. for God being the God of order,
1 Cor. 14. 33. will doubtlesly require order in his Church, 1 Cor. 11. 34. and
therefore we are to conform unto it.

SECT. 6.
THe Apostle also exhorts, that if any man speak in the Church, it ought to
be as an Oracle of God, and we know that the manner of speaking by Oracle was
gravely, and sententiously, delivering much matter, in few words; therefore
this ought also to be a president unto our Brethren, that though they may
speak, yet if that they cannot express themselves, in such a manner as
aforesaid, they both offend against the exhortation of the Apostle, as ^lso
make a noise, and disturb the Church, to small, or no purpose.

Again, as each particular Member of the Church, has liberty to speak in the
Church, concerning the affairs belonging to the Members of the Church, so have
they likewise power to Prophecy, as clearly appears from that text, 1 Cor.
14. 31. where the Apostle says, Ye may all prophecy one by one, etc. and yet
we are not hereby to understand, that every of the Members of a Church ought to
do so, not being able to divide the word aright, for in this especially, he
ought to speak as an Oracle of God.

The Apostle therefore writes these sayings to the Churches Wherefore the
Apostle exhorts to prophecy.
to excite, and stir up the Members of each particular Church, to covit these
excellent gifts, and that they should strive to go one before another, by a
godly emulation; giving them thereby to understand, that if the very meanest
(in quality, or condition) of the Members of the Church of Christ, can by
acting the part of a Noble Berean, viz. by their study, and industry, in the
Scriptures) attain to the measure of such a gift, as to speak as he ought to
speak, that then he may, and ought to employ his tallent, as any of the rest
whatsoever; doubtless it being, the very means, by which Barnabas, Simeon
called Niger, Lutius of Cyrene, Manaen, Aquilla, Prisilla, etc. attained the
gifts which they exercised in the Church of Antioch, Act. 13. 1, etc.

SECT. 7.
ANd therefore by this president also, our brethren of the present It is
dangerous meddling ^ith edge tools.
Churches ought to be very cautations how they meddle with such Edge-tooles, for
fear of the scandal that many arise from such actions, whereof there is
doubtless great cause of complaint, in that by so doing, the Church does not
receive edifying, as also, in that it administreth cause, to the enemies of God
to blasphem; who many times comes on purpose to such meetings, to procure
themselves Mi^ch, by glorying in our shame.

Obj. I commend you in that you are no Countenancer of disorder in your
brethren, for in very deed, the boldness, and rudeness of such members, has
made your Churches evi^ spoken of, and disesteemed more then otherwise they
would have been, but yet if a member of your Church have but one tallant, will
you have him employ it?

Ans. Yea without all question, but not in public meetings; How spiritual
(...) a^e to be ^^actised.
for there the most powerful means ought to be used, in regard, that the
unbelievers have liberty to come to the public Ordnance of preaching as well
as any member of the Church (And that by our Saviors commands, Mat. 28. 19,
20. Mark 16, 16.) who as I have said, come (for the most part) to carpe at the
doctrine delivered, but in private meetings, they ought to employ their
particular tallants, for in so doing, they may in time become such exspert
Proficients in Theology, as to teach publicly, being called thereunto.

SECT. 8.
Obj. SVppose the Magistrate should not condescend, that either the Popish
Clergy should be silenced, or that such should be sent forth, to gather
Churches, as you would have employed, how would you have the work carried on?

Ans. I confess if the Magistrate should be refractory, the wheel would be
much longer in turning over; but yet notwithstanding, we are encouraged (by the
example of the Apostles) The work ought to be carried on though the Magistrate
oppose it.
to employ such instruments in the work, as are fit for such a purpose, viz.
for gathering of Churches; for albeit that Herod, with the Scribes, Pharisees,
and Saduces, bent their utmost power to oppose them, and their Doctrine, yet
did they with an undaunted courage, vindicate the truth, albeit to the hazard
of their lives, yea and rejoiced that they were thought worthy to suffer for
the testimonies thereof; as does evidently appear by that Book titled their
Acts, which doubtless was written as a president to such as shall labor in
the restoring of their decayed Churches, by extracting them out of the world,
and Antichristianisme, as the Apostles did out of Judisme, and Heathenisme; and
therefore every one that is so fitted, and satisfied in the truth of this
assertion, ought to apply himself to the Apostles presidents, in all things to
that purpose; yea albeit the Heredians, Scribes, Pharisees, and Saduces of
these times, shall oppose the work, yet ought they be like valient as the
Apostles were, remembering always, that it is better to obey God then men, Act.
4. 19.

But I hope better things from our present Magistrates, then The duty of
Magistrates.
that they will fight against God, by opposing his design; but rather that
they will animate, and encourage, all such, as shall practice the gathering of
Churches, by suppressing Christ's, and their enemies, as that the power of the
Word may have its free progress in their Dominions, it being solely to that
purpose, that they have their own power given them; which when they have
accomplished, their work is ended, and their power cease.

CHAP. XI. Treats of the period of Magistracy.
SECT. 1.
Objection. Do you think that temporal powers will have their periods in
this Age?

Ans. Yea as sure as the Scriptures are true, which The office of Magistrates
to be desolved.
do verify it, witness the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 24. who says, that
Christ shall put down all rule, and all authority, and power, etc. in which
words, if temporal power be not included, I desire to know what is meant
thereby.

Obj. I confess it would puzzle me to contradict it, but the Prophet Isaiah
speaking of the times of the Gospel, says, that then, Kings should be nursing
Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers to the Church.

Ans. I presume you know the property of Nurses, they being only to nourish
Children in their minority; but when they be grown to capacity, their Parents
takes them home, and then the Nurse is out of employment, and so consequently
her office cease. So likewise so soon as them Prophesies of Daniel, and
John, are fulfilled, viz. as soon as the God of Heaven shall set up his
Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, Dan. 2. 44. as also, that the
Kingdom of this world shall become the Kingdom of our Lord, and his Christ,
Rev.. 11. 15. then shall them Nursing Fathers, and Nursing Mothers you speak
of, be also put out of office, viz. Their Kingdoms shall be broken in pieces,
and consumed, Dan. 2. 24. and so consequently the power, and authority
exercised in them; for the cause being taken away, the effect must needs cease.

SECT. 2.
Obj. But when will these things come to pass?

Ans. I may reply with our Saviors words, viz. This day is this Prophecy
fulfilled in your ears, this being the very time for that purpose.

Obj. But by what means shall it be accomplished?

Ans. Even by means of this Treatice, for I doubt not but all By what means
the po^er of the civil Magistrate shall cease.
such, as bear the face of godliness, will comply with the Government therein
discovered, which is the very means to reduce the Kingdoms of the world, to
the obedience of our Lord, and his Christ, Rev. 11. 15. as also to put down
all other rule and authority, and power, in Civil and Antichristian States, 1
Cor. 15. 24. as also to break in pieces, and consume that great Image, spoken
of by Daniel, Chap. 2. 34, 35, 36. which without doubt is meant, of the powers
of Magistrates, and of the present Clergy, so that the Iron, the Clay, the
Brass, the Silver, and Gold, shall be broken in pieces together (viz. All
Empires, Kings, and Princes, with their Antichristian Feet, composed of Divine,
and prudentiall materials, which the Antichristian Government consists of, as
they themselves very well know) yea they shall be so pounded by means of this
Government, as that they shall become like the chafe of the summer
threshing-floores, which the wind carries away, so that no place shall be
found for them; which being effected, then shall this Government (which most
fitly may be compared with that stone spoken of by Daniel, to be cut out of the
mount, without hands, and that for these ensuing reasons) became a great
mountain, even to the filling of the whole earth, viz.

1. In that the Government, termed by the name of Anabaptism, is in this
Treatice proved to be hewn out of the Mountain or Rock Christ, viz. that it
is the same, with the Apostolical, or primative purity.

2. In that there is also a people in this Nation, which are so pealled, and
governed.

3. Albeit, it is so extant amongst us, as also hewed out of the Rock
aforesaid, etc. yet by reason of its being so long hid in obscurity to the
world, viz. 1260. years, (during which time, it it has bin as it were in a
Trance) has now (in its reviving condition) quite forgot, how it has bin so
long preserved, or from whom it has bin suckered, during its wilderness
condition (as in relation to its succession, from the time it was taken up unto
God, and to his Throne, Rev. 12. 5) only this it has to comfort it (after its
so long persecution) that its Geneology is found in the ancient Register, viz.
that it is the same Government, practiced by the Apostles in the primative
purity.

In all which respects it may very fitly be ^resembled as aforesaid, yea
doubtless this very description of it, will set an edge of all (that desire to
practice, according to the primative purity) to become obedient unto it.

SECT. 3.
NOw when Christ has by this means drawn all the King: When there will be
no need of the Civil Magistrate.
domes of the world, unto his Spiritual government, what need will there be of
a temporal power and authority? As also when he has subdued Antichrist, root
and branch, what will become of their power, and maintenance? Yea it is very
evident, that they all fall together, for proof of which; we have had diverse
instances in this Nation; as of Monks, Friars, Abbots, etc. as also of
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. which when the chief of them was once taken off,
all their Courts, and Offices, fell of themselves. As also for Civil Powers, we
have an instance in the late King, and so consequently as soon as the
Magistrates of this Nation, shall submit to the government of Christ, in his
Church, and become members thereof, they will quickly pull down all
Tyranicall, and Arbitrary powers, which shall oppose that Government, and
until then we may as well expect a Devil to become a Saint, as for them to
destroy their own powers; and so consequently deprive themselves of the
honor, and profit, which redoundeth unto them thereby.

Obj. Whom shall carry on this great work intended?

Ans. The Saints, for so the Scriptures does clearly demonstrate, By whom the
design must be c^r^^ed on.
witness the Prophet Daniel Chap. 7. 18. where he says, that the Saints of
the most high God shall take the Kingdom, and possess it for ever, even for
ever and ever. As also ver. 2^. And Judgment was given to the Saints of the
most high, and the time came that they possessed the Kingdom. As also ver. 27.
where it is also said, that the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of
the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints
of the most high, etc. The Apostle Paul also affirms as much, 1 Cor. 6. 2. in
these words, Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the world. It is also
confirmed, Rev. 12. 7. where Michael and his Angels, are said to fight against
the Dragon and his Angels, and shall overcome them, with Rev. 17. 14.

SECT. 4.
Obj. What course shall they take to effect it?

Ans. The same which our Savior has prescribed How (...) shall be effected.
for that very purpose, Rev. 18. 6, 7. viz. by doubling to them double
according to their works, etc.

Obj. The plagues mentioned there are Spiritual, therefore the Saints are not
to kill their bodies, with material swords, or to double to them double
killing, and persecution, in that case we are to do them good.

Ans. That injunction of our Savior is, to reward them even Antichrist is to
be rewarded with a double punishment.
as they have done to the Saints, viz. in the same nature and quality, viz. as
well by the material, as Spiritual sword; their Doctrines ought to be
destroyed by the sword of the Spirit, proceeding out of the Lambs mouth, Rev.
19. 15. which is, the Word of God, and their persons by the material Sword;
for we are commanded to double unto them, according to their works or actions,
as in them verses forementioned; he does not say, double unto her double,
according to the corruption of her Doctrine, as to teach them two errors for
one, but according to her works, viz. according to the bloody Massacres, and
Persecutions, which they have inflicted upon the Saints; for other^ise, I
cannot conceive how the Saints shall fulfill the will of Christ, for if it be
taken in a Spiritual sense, it must needs b^, by enforcing them to double
errors, which I am confident no Christian will allow of.

Obj. Neither will any Christians allow of the other, as to kill two for one,
etc.

Ans. It is evident, that the praise of the Saints, consists in that Wherein
the praise of the Saints consist
the Lord has avenged the blood of the Saints, upon the Antichristians, as in
chap. 19. 2. where it is said, that the Lord did not only judge the Whore, but
also, that he did avenge the blood of his Martyred Saints; so that he will not
only judge them, by discovering their notorious Blasphemies, but will also
avenge the blood of the Murderers* Genesis 9. 6. for he that sheds man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed; so in revenge of the Spiritual wrong offered by
them, to the Saints (viz. by their Doctrines) they shall be destroyed by the
sword of the Spirit, etc. and, 2. As in relation to the wrongs and injuries
they have offered to the persons of the Saints, Christ has also given a charge
to requite them, even with a like temporal punishment, and that in a double
nature; which words seem to be spoken by him, as being full of wrath and
indignation against them; yea it is to the same effect, as if he had said, Go
burn and destroy two of them for every one they have kided of your fellow
Saints; as also to show the full resolution, which the Lord has to destroy
them, and their damnable Doctrines.

SECT. 5.
Obj. IF his blood must be shed, who sheedeth man's blood, then the Saints ought
to be used accordingly.

Ans. The Command of Christ, as I have formerly showed you, Christ's command
makes the lawful, which i^ it s^l^e (...) unlawful.
makes that lawful, which otherwise in it self is unlawful, as instance in
the Israelites robbing the Egyptians, the slaughtering of the Cananites, man,
woman and child. The Prophet Hosea taking A Strumpet to wife, etc. which being
commanded by God was lawful, yea, and was to be accomplished, and that upon
pain of punishment. Instance in Saul's ^p^ring of Agag, etc. Therefore this
being a Command of Christ, ought also to be accomplished.

Obj. They ought first to be called out of Babylon as in the fourth verse
before they are to be punished, as in the sixth verse, as also to show them the
heinousnes of their abomination, that they may be thereby the easier drawn
out of her.

Ans. To that purpose I have writ this Treatise, which I am To what purpose
this Treatise was written.
confident will persuade many of her Customers to renounce her, which indeed
ought to be dispersed even to Rome it self, to the end the Pope himself may
be put in mind of his presumptuous Blasphemies; as also (being acquainted with
Christ's present design) may be altogether found inexcusable, when the Armies
of the Saints shall face him in his own Palace, and destroy both him and it,
with all that appertain unto them, which withour doubt will shortly come to
pass. Let them beware of Let Rome beware (...) Hugh Peter's.
Nol Crumwels Army, lest Hugh Peter come to preach in Peter's Chair; if he do
--

Obj. Would you have all the Antichristian Clergy so destroyed; that will not
come out of Babylon, by their relinquishing their call, which originally came
from him; as the Prelates, Pr^sbiters, etc.

Ans. We are only to punish according to the Fact, but their Fact is not so
great, they being but Merchants, at the second, and third hand; and therefore
for them to lose the benefits of their present Trading, and to Confiscate their
Wares, will be punishment sufficient, their persons being kept under a sharp
Authority, as in Chapter nineteen, verse. 5.

The Epilogue.
I Am confident, this my attempt will be,
Judged an act of downright foolery
By most that read it; yea I do confess,
The Method, and the Style, express no less;
But for the Matter, (which I wish thereby
Might clearly be deserned) I deny
It wholly, or in part, against any he
That shall oppose it; yea although it be
Grand Cerberus himself; I mean the Pope,
Or any of his sublime Horriscope;
And so by consequence, against any he,
That stands for Pope, Prelates, or Presbitery,
Or any other faction, which I have
Convinced in my Book; how e're they rave
Against me by such terms, as Bedlam-wise,
Their madded Brains shall dictate, or devise.
And having framed my speech, to each degree,
In this our new built Arrastocracy,
I shall reduce them to that threefold state,
Of Layicke, Clergy, and the Magistrate.
To the Magistrate.
And first to you, the last in nomination,
Whose ayrie pomp, remains yet in fashion;
You that have seen bright Lucifers downe-fall,
With his retinue, House of Lords, and all
That has opposed the work you have in hand;
To wit, the reformation of the Land,
In Church, and State; to you I thus begin:
Remember first the state that you are in,
Next how it was attained, then for what;
For be you well assured, 'twas not that
You should be imitaters of their ways,
Or merely for to crown you with their Bays;
No, 'twas because the Lord of Hosts will bring,
A desolation upon every thing
That stands in opposition to his Will,
Which in this very age he will fulfill.
And therefore be ye wise, and circumspect,
Do not confront him, by the like neglect,
As did your Predecessors; sure you will say,
What would you have us do, which is the way,
That he would have us walk in? I reply,
The first thing you're to do, is to deny
Your selves; that is, that you would condescend,
To take Christ's yoke upon you, that is the end,
For which he has exalted you; but I,
Much fear, your answer will be, to deny
To wear that yoke, or bear that burden light,
Unless with Nichodemus in the night;
They Are yet too mean for you, what, such as ye
Turn Tub-preachers, tush, fie, it cannot be;
You that are Steerers at the Helm of State,
Is It fitting such as you, should congregate
Your selves, with poor, base, and Mechanic men,
As Tailors, Millers, Weavers, Cobblers, when
You may be honored, as to your degree,
Amongst the Churches of the Presbitry.
Reply
Do but confess your selves, to be but Men,
Worms, Earth, and Ashes, Dust, and Clay, and then
Boast out your fills of your great Birth,
High honors, riches, wisdom, here on earth,
And see what they amount unto; or what,
Christ will respect you more, for this, or that.
Again, what is so done to you, by such,
Which at the present, is not very much;
Is merely for to draw you to their lure,
For well they know, applauses must procure
The station of their present Hierarchy,
Or else it falls even to eternity;
And therefore it is they warble out such notes,
(Even to the straining of their very throats)
For the continuance of Magistrates,
And Ministry; but the o're-powring Fates
Has otherwise decreed, that you, or they,
Shall reign as formerly, henceforth for aye.
I do confess in reference to the Law,
Of Nature, and Nations, there is an Ave-
Full fear reflects on you, from such as do
Transgress them Laws, in that you are a foe
To such like Agents, causing them to be
Punished according unto that degree
By which they do offend. But as for such
As keep without your verge, you cannot touch,
At least you ought not; you're no more to those,
Then Herod was to Christ, who did oppose
Him both by word, and action; as likewise
The Apostles did the Scribes, and Pharisees;
Yea all their Acts, does plainly show, how they
Did slight their threats, rather then disobey
The heavenly pleasure; yea although it were
To loss of life, yet would they not forbear.
But now the Church of Christ has hopes to see,
You condescend to their Fraternity;
And not henceforth, to curb them by that power,
Ordained to protect them, not devour.
And therefore hear O Kings, and Rulers all,
Hark with attention, listen to the call,
Which now invites you, for to entertain
Christ for your King, who is resolved to reign
Over you, and yours, either by love, or awe,
But rather does desire that love may draw
our hearts, for to comply to bear his yoke;
If not, then know, there is a heavy stroke
To be laid on you, with an Iron Rod,
Even by the hands of a provoked God;
The which will crush your powers, and make you know,
That as in things above, so here below,
He has the Kingly power, and will direct
All such whom he vouchsafes to protect.
Relinquish therefore all your powers, whereby
You hitherto have ruled by Tyranny,
Over that little Flock, which Christ does own
As his peculiar Sheep, and now made known
Unto this present age, that thereby ye
May have communion, with their unity.
Refuse not therefore those his invitations,
As you intend the glory of your Nations;
Do not excuse your selves, or make delay,
For it is dangerous; now is the day
Of exaltation, and of such renown,
As far excels that your Kingly Crown
Affords; O then yield a free consent,
Unto his now declared Government:
For thereby will be added to your Graces,
A Priest, and Prophet-ship in heavenly places;
For thereby will your pomp, now transitory,
Be changed into everlasting glory;
For thereby will your frail, and fleshly nature,
Be made Divine, and of a Christ-like stature:
Yield, yield obedience then, that when ye dye,
Ye may be crowned with immortality.
To the present Clergy.
The next I have to deal withal, are those,
Of the Sasardoll Tribe, who yet oppose
That Gospel method, which our Savior left
To regulate his Church, and has bereft
It of that glory, which it once enjoyed,
Yea have attempted even to have destroyed
It, root, and branch; witness that beast-like man
Of Rome, who through his pride of heart began
The grand Apostasy; as also all,
That have officiated by his call,
Since that revolt, as you proud Prelates, and
You Presbiterian Priests, who yet withstand
It, to your utmost power; but all is in vain,
You strive against the stream, for Christ will reign
Above you, if not over you; therefore
Forbear your proud attempts, you can no more(...)
Now if it be the great Lawgivers mind,
To furnish me with light, and strike them blind,
Will you gaine-say't? Or say he has done ill
By doing so? Dare you oppose his Will?
For ought you know, he has ordained me,
As a forerunner of him for to be,
Against his second coming; and how can
You know a Prophet, from another man,
But by his speech, or writing? It Is well known.
I am no Atheist, neither have I shown
My self a friend to any other Sect;
Nor have I gone about for to erect
A newfound fantasy, in this my Book
To trifle time away; nor do I look
For popular applause, of any he
Who in opinion is the nearest me.
But God's my witness, before whom I stand,
The very cause I took this task in hand,
Was for to purge Christ's floor, and so to sift
The chafe out of the wheat, and so to lift
The Pope out of his Throne; all which may be
Done easily, if that you thus agree
As I have written; But if you refuse,
To take that course set down, and think to use
Some other means, to bring the work about,
To cross the way which I have here found out,
Being the old true way; I do declare,
You seek to ruin, and not to repair.
The Church of Christ, which in the end will bring
Destruction to you all, in every thing:
Consider therefore, and the Lord grant skill,
To every one of you to do his will.
The Authors Petition, to the Supreme Power of the Nation, (by Divine
Providence) now residing in the Commons of England, assembled (by their
Representatives) in the Grand Court of PARLIAMENT.
In the Names and behalfes of all such Christians, as are* or desire to be
separated from the world, and Antichristianisme, to practice Religion, in
Doctrine Worship, and D^cipline, acco^d^^g (...) h^ will and appointment of
Jesus Christ, in his Word.
I. THat all such of the Clergy, as have disclaimed their call to that office
of Bis^ops, etc. and have already practiced according to the precepts of
Christ, and his Apostles, in gathering of Churches, by way os Baptizing
Believers, may have the freedom to persist in that Method publicly, without
the let, or molestation, of the men of the world, (behaving themselves in their
Ministry, as becomes Christians,) and that they may have the protection of
the Soldiery, if need require to that purpose; as also that such course may be
taken with their opposers, as your wisdoms shall think^ meet.

II. That the Churches which shall be gathered by such, may be freed from
paying any wages to the Antichristian Clergy of the times.

III. That so soon as a computent number is gathered together in Church
Fellowship, by the aforesaid Rule, or Method, that they may have the freedom^,
to make choice of a Pastor, whether out of themselves, or elsewhere, as God
shall move them.

IV. That Churches so modelled, may he permitted to end all manner of
Controversies, which arise amongst themselves (not running into a Moral
offense) by the real Body of the Church, to whom the parties do belong; or by
some Members set apart, and empowered by them, to that purpose.

Right Honorable,
These things we desire of you, not as you are Magistrates, or great men of the
world (for as you are such, we know you are like so many Ga^^io^s, not caring
for any of these things; neither Act. 18. 17.
was it ever the practice of Christ or his Apostles, to request such favors
from the Civil Magistrate, for well they knew, they were as averse to such
actions, as darkness to light, or Hell to Heaven) but we desire these things
may be done of you, as you profess your selves to be Saints, and Subjects to
Christ, (and so consequently our Brethren) who have exalted you to the places
you are in (above us) to this very purpose. Which request (of Christ by us) if
you refuse to grant, know, he has yet the same power in his hands, as
formerly, and can as well pluck you down, as he has done your Predecessors;
thus having authority from God, for what we request, we are bold to speak unto
you, not after the manner of the Scribes.

A Postscript, to the Brethren of the Independants, Antinomians, Seekers, and
all that reject and despile Ordinances.
I Am confident it is the hearty desire of you all, that the new Jerusalem may
have its descention from God out of Heaven, that Religion may now be
established, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, according to the will and
appointment of Jesus Christ, who has now likewise another thrice noble Cirus,
published his Proclamation, for the rebuilding of the Spiritual Jerusalem, as
also to restore the vessels of the Sanctuary, which Antichrist, that
Nabuchadnezzar-like King of Spiritual Babylon, had taken away, and polluted,
in the houses of his God, Ezra, 1. 7. viz. in his Hirarchies of Papacy, Prelac,
and Presbitery, in which places they have given them holy ^^ings unto Dogs, by
admitting all sorts of people, to drink Wine out of them Bowls of the
Sanctuary, and to be incorpora^ed as Members of that divine Society, which the
Church of Christ ought to consist of. Dear friends, mistake me not in this
Treatice which I have published, as that I intend thereby, to place the shadow,
for the substance; the sign, for the thing signified; the twilight, for the
noonday; the shell, for the kernel; the form of Religion, for the power of
it; for I do ingeniously confess, that there is no more compare betwixt this
form of Government I have published (in relation to outward Ordinances) and
the inward Spiritual worship of a Christian, then betwixt a Body, and its
Soul; the letter of the Scriptures, and the spirituality thereof; betwixt the
Alphabeticall letters, and the most learned Oration; betwixt a Gam-ut, and
the most melodious consort of Voices, or Instruments; betwixt the Temple, and
him that dwells in it: yet let me tell you, that Christ has his militant
Church, as well as his triumphant, his visible Church, as his invisible. And
albeit that Solomon's Temple, and so consequently all other material ones,
(consisting of Wood, Stone, etc.) are abolished, (as also the Leviticall
Ceremonies belonging thereunto) in regard that Christ (the substance thereof)
has manifested himself, and so consumated them; yet know that he requires a
Tabernacle, or Temple now amongst us, as he did then, and therefore I may fitly
use the Apostles expression unto you, viz. Know ye not that your bodies are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, unless ye be reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. and 6. 16.
19. he also terms our bodies fleshly tabernacles, 2 Pet. 1. 14. our Savior
also affirms as much, where he says, that where two, or three, are met
together in his name, he will be in the midst of them, Mat. 18. 20. intimating
thereby, that they are his Temple; in reference to which the Apostle also
terms us, living stones, built up to a spiritual house, or holy Priesthood,
to offer spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable unto God, by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.
5. the foundation of which building, is also said to be, Christ himself, ver.
4, 5. the Apostle Paul also affirms as much, 1 Cor. 3. 11. saying, that other
foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. In which
workmanship, he professes himself to be a Labourer, or Workman, ver. 10. as
also, Ephe. where he does fully describe the foundation, materials, and
building; as in ver. 19. etc. viz. Ye are no more strangers, and forrainers,
but fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, and are built
upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief corner stone, in whom all the building, fitly framed together,
grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord, in whom ye are also builded together,
for an habitation of God, through the Spirit. Again, 1 Cor. 3. 16. Know ye
not, that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit dwells in you.
Again, ver. 17. If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy;
for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. Christian friends, I
presume these Scriptures forementioned, will clearly convince you, that Christ
has a Temple upon earth, consisting of the fleshly tabernacle of his Saints,
who are as living stones, built up thereunto. Now the Saints being such
materials, cannot (in a dislocated condition) be said to be built up
altogether, therefore upon necessity, there must be gathering of such materials
together, before they can be completed into such a structure, as Christ will
have residence in by his Spirit, which being but one, cannot be divided into
many bodies, contrary one to another;) as also, conglutaniz'd, by some
external, or visible union, and communion one with another; and therefore our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, in their divine wisdom, has
to this very purpose, left us a president to accomplish the same, viz. by
Doctrine, Baptism, and the Lords Supper; the first being to call, the second
to admit, and the third to unite, or knit together; which is prefigured unto
us, by the Bread and Wine, which are composed of many Grains, and Grapes, 1
Cor. 10. 17. 1 Cor. 12, etc. And being thus completed in union, and communion,
we have also further directions from them, how this Temple, or Fabric, may be
kept from pollution within, or ruin without (viz. how it may be preserved from
corruptions in Doctrine, or outward behavior) as by Pastors, Elders, etc. who
are to teach, and over-see, 1 Timothy 5. 17. yea all Paul's Epistles does chiefly
tend to that purpose. Now Christian friends, I beseech you consider seriously
in what a condition you are now in, for to destroy this Temple, is really to
destroy your selves, both in Body, and Sovle; for if you disclaim your bodies
to be materials of that forementioned Fabric, or Temple, it most of
consequence follow, that you also disclaim Christ, who has his residence
there; for as the Spirit of a Saint is included in his natural body, so is
Christ included in that Spirit, by which they are made one; but you by
disclaiming your bodies, to be of that Temple, do thereby deprive your
spirits, of the Spirit of Christ; and he that has not the Spirit of Christ is
none of his, Romans 8. 9, etc. And if not Christ's, who do you belong unto, if
not to Satan? True, I do acknowledge most of your bodies to be Temple proof,
fit stones to be put into the fabric; but know, that so long as you lie in
such distinct ^eapes, out of the building, (as you do) and not put into the
work, so long you cannot be possessed of the Temple Spirit. And hence it is,
that there are such diversities of spirits amongst you.

Again, I do also acknowledge that many of you are so excellent (...) in
^^^^logy, that you stand (...) ^^re in need of external (...) man o^ M^ke,
(...) Accademian of an Accidence, or (...), or a skillful Musician of a Gam-ut,
in regard the one could subsist, and the other practice; if there were of none
of them to be had (they being so practical in the Theory, as that they are
become naturalized unto them) yet go to any of these parties, and inquire of
them, by what means they came to these abilities, and experiments; and the
Accademian will tell you, it was first by learning his A. B. C. and so on by
gradations, as to his Accidence, Grammar, etc. The Song-man, and Musician, will
tell you, it was first by learning their Gam-ut, and so on to other Musical
proportions; the strong man, will you, it was first by breast Milk, etc. by
which he gained his strength. But yet none of these before mentioned, will
despise their small beginnings, or are so ignorant, as to think any other can
come to the like knowledge, or strength, by any other means; however they will
acknowledge them to be the natural, or most useful means to attain such
knowledge, or strength. Therefore albeit you think your selves strong men in
Christ, and can digest the strong meat of the Word, and have the Spiritual, or
Logical knowledge of the Scriptures, of the hidden or deep secreets of God in
Christ Jesus, and are able to comprehend the height, and depth of the
Scriptures, yet doubtless you are not ignorant that there are also babes in
Christ, which stand in need of the Word, that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.
2. and that you your selves were sometimes such. Despise not therefore the
means, by which you have attained to your present knowledge, and by which you
have been nourished up to your present stature in Christ. Reject not therefore
the letter of the Scriptures, or the Ordinances of hearing the Word, or
receiving the Sacraments; experienced Paul could tell you, that he had not
known sin but by the letter of the Law. And Christ admonishes us, to search
the Scriptures, and says, they testify of him, Joh. 5. 39. The Author to the
Hebrews also says, that he that comes to God, must first know that God is,
Heb. 6. 1. etc. we are also taught, that the Scriptures were written for our
instruction, Romans 15. 4. yea we are admonished to be mindful of those sayings
which the Prophets and Apostles have written, as to a sure word of truth, 2
Pet. 1. 19. etc. Now whereunto tends all these exhortations, if the letter of
the Scriptures be of no use? The like may be also said of the Word preached,
and of the Sacraments; Wherefore was it that the Apostles used such means to
build up Saints in the holy faith, or why are such presidents of their left
upon record, unless we should receive them, as presidents to imitate?

Again, why did they exhort us to be followers of them, as they were of
Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. unless it be to practice what Christ and they did? But
they did preach, and exercised the Sacraments, as by baptizing Believers, and
of that of the Lords Supper, witness the Acts of the Apostles; and 1 Cor. 10.
1^. and. 11. 20. as also Christ's own practice, and imitation, Mat. 26. 26. and
28. 12. I say, if these Ordinances be not to be practiced by the now
Christians, who are they prescribed, you will reply, they were requisite for
them times, which were only shadows of these, but now God will burn up all
such dross in his Church.

To which I answer, though the Lord has promised to burn up all the dross in
his Church, yet has he not therefore promised to burn up his Church with
them. Again, every shadow has its substance, and every substance its shadow;
and albeit these Ordinances be as the shell to the kernel, yet must the kernel
have its shell to ripen in, or it will never increase to its maturity. If you
can deny Christ a Church Militant, you may also deny the use of Ordinances; but
the Holy Ghost has, and does manifest, that the fleshly tabernacles of the
Saints, are his Temple, (as I have showed;) therefore so long as there shall be
Saints upon earth, so long will Christ have a Church Militant; which Militant
Church can no more subsist without Ordinances, then a spirit in a dead body.
You will reply, we are not attained to perfection, and therefore for us to make
use of Ordinances, were again today the foundation of Repentance from dead
works, and of faith toward God. My answer is, Albeit you have much knowledge
in the secrets of God, yet are you not composed all of Spirit, you have as well
a carnal part, as a Spiritual part. The Apostle Paul found in himself, as
well the Law of the Flesh, as of the Spirit, Romans 7. 33. etc. which fleshly
substance you are to conform to such Ordinances, which Christ has instituted
in his Church Militant, whilst you are Members thereof. True it is, Antichrist
has polluted them (as much as lay in him) both in the doctrinall, and
traditionall pa^^ of them; which by Gods assistance I have much, if not
altogether purged, and cleared, from their Antichristian dross, and reduced
them to their primative purity, (out of that mass of corruption they were
involved in.) To which Laws, and Ordinances of your Master Christ, I hope you
will yield a willing subjection, by incorporating your selves into Bodies
Politic, by that rule which Christ has prescribed for that purpose, viz. by
the gate of Baptism, it being the external means to inisiate you into the
external profession of Christ in his Church Militant, your persons being as
well to conform to the outward Government thereof, as your Spirits to the
inward.

Again, as in humane learning, he that would be made complete, must first
attain to three degrees of knowledge, viz. a good Gramarian, a Rethorissian,
and a Logissian. so is it in Spiritual knowledge, to which there are also three
degrees to be attained, before one can be formed a complete Christian, viz. the
knowledge of the old testament and the new testament, and the Spiritual
interpretation thereof. And it is worthy of our best observation, to consider
the Mutual Harmony of the Scriptures, to attain this Spiritual knowledge as
aforesaid. For in relation to this threefold knowledge, we have a Trinity of
persons in the Diety, which co-opperate with them, and are agreeable, and
proportionable to them. Answerable to which, there is also a threefold faith.
viz. A Fundamental faith, an historical faith, and a Justifying faith; the
first agreeing with God the Father (as the Creator) made known in the old
Testament, the second to the Son as a Redeemer, in the new Testament, and the
third to the Holy Ghost, in the Spiritualitie of the Letter in both of them.
The first aluding to the knowledge of God, as he is in himself. The 2. as he is
in his Son, and 3. as he is a Trinity in unity and an unity in Trinity, the 1.
describing the Kingdom and government of God the father, with his Angellicall
Ministers, the 2. the government of the Son with his Apostollicall Ministers.
And the 3. The Kingdom or government of the holyghost, with his ministering
Saints, which is now approaching. It is also worthy our observation, what
Sacraments of union, and Correspondencie, there we^^ ^^longing to those
distinct Kingdoms, and governments, from ^^ch as did not belong unto them. As
in the first, under the law, they had Circumcision as a badg of their
profession, under the Gospel, or new Testament, a baptism of water, in
relation to Christ, the 2. person, as also a baptism of the spirit, in
referrence to the third person, the water baptism, being a badg of their
outward profession, as they were a Church millitant, or an external Church,
and the Spiritual baptism, in relation to their internal, or Spiritual
society, that of water baptism, being as it were a gate, or inlet to the
other, there beiug also now as much reason, why the Saints should be separated,
and distinguished from the world, and Antichristianisme, as there was either
before, under, or after the Law. viz. in the Apostle, time Again, the new
Jerusalem which is now to descend, is said to be adorned, as a Bride adorned
for her Husband, which without all controversy, cannot alude to any other
thing, then the primative purity of Gospel Ordinances; yea the whole
description of it does evidence as much, which to parallel in each particular,
would be too tedious, I shall only hint some few observations of it, viz. in
that it is described to have walls, and gates, with its longitude, latitude,
and altitude, does prefiguring a comeliness, decency, and order, to be admitted
into it. 3. In that there is said to be no Temple in it, is meant, that there
shall not be a material one, consisting of wood, stone, and gold, as was in
that of Jerusalem, built by Solomon, and the reason thereof follows; viz.
because the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it; that is, it
does consist of Saints, in whom the Lamb Christ is ever present; as also in
that he has opened Heaven in every place to faithful Believers. 4. In that it
is said to need no light of the Sun, or Moon, to shine in it, is meant, of
Ecclesiastical, or civil Government, as now practiced; having its proper
power, and adornment in it self, viz. from Christ; and his Apostles. 5. In
that the Nations which are saved, is said to walk in the light of it, is
meant, that all such who are ordained to eternal life, shall be conformable to
the government of it, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline. 6. In that the
Nations are said to bring their glory, and honor unto it, is meant, that the
Kings, and Rulers of the earth, shall hate Antichrist, in each of his
Hierarchies, and destroy it in their dominions; as also willingly lay down
their own powers, and become loyal subjects to Jesus Christ. 7. In that the
gates of the City, are not said to be shut, either by day, or by night, and yet
none is to enter therein, that is unclean, etc. but such as are written in the
Lambs Book of Life, is meant, that all manner of people may have recourse to
the Churches of the Saints, to hear the Word. As Countrymen may have leave to
come into a* City for Merchandise, which admission into the City, does not make
them Freemen, in regard they are not enrolled in their Records; so in like
manner albeit the men of the world, may have liberty to hear the Word preached
amongst the Saints, yet they are not thereby made members of their Society, not
being entered, or enrolled a Saint in the Churches Records, viz. not being
incorporated by Baptism into their Society, or Body Politic. 8. In that a
clear and pure River of water is said to proceed out of the Throne of God, and
of the Lamb, is meant of the Spirit of Prophecy, which shall be poured upon
the Saints, who shall be taught of God. 9. In that it is said to run through
the midest of the streets of the City, is meant, that the aforesaid Spirit
shall be free for each Member of the Church to make use of, as well one as
other. 10. In that on each side of the River, is said to grow a tree of Life,
bearing twelve manner of fruits, and yielding her fruit every month, and the
leaves being for the healing of the Nations, is meant, that the Gospel shall
flourish, and spread it self, into all Countries, by virtue whereof they shall
be healed of the leprosy of Antichristianisme, Judisme and Heathenism: Thus
have I briefly discovered unto you, the new, or Spiritual Jerusalem, hoping
you will be willing in this day of Christ's power, to give up your selves as a
free will offering unto him, by submitting unto his Kingly Government; but I
must tell you, that at the present there is very small hopes of it, in regard
of your now condition, which if I be not mistaken in (as sure I am not) may
fitly be paralleld with these places of Scripture; I shall first instance in
that of Mark 14. 38. where our Savior told his Disciples, that their spirits
was willing, but their flesh was weak; even so it is with you, for you are
awake in the Spirit, but asleep in the body; you are awake in the spiritual
worship of Christ, viz. you have the spirit of Prayer, and Prophecy, but you
are asleep in the body, or formal part of it. 2. I shall parallel you with
that text of Mat. 12. 43, etc. where it is said, that when the unclean spirit
is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places, seeking rest, but finds
none, etc. and this also is your very condition; yea doubtless that parable
was then delivered in relation to you, yea I appeal to your selves, if it do
not hit you in each particular. Is not your spirits out of the body
aforementioned? have you not walked through dry places, viz. out of all forms
of Gospel Fellowship? have you not sought rest, and find none? viz. Have you
not labored to settle your selves in several forms, witness the great
Disputes that have been about Church Government; and have you found rest in any
of them? Again, has not that spirit of yours, (being out of the body) taken
unto it self seven Spirits, worse then it self, since it departed out of the
true Body of the primative Church? witness Papacy, Prelacy, Presbitery,
Independancy, Antinomians, Universalians, Seekers, etc. and in so doing, has
not your last estate, been worse then your first? Again, you may also be fitly
paralleld with that Parable of our Savior, Matthew 25. from ver. the 11. to ver.
25. upon which, there is now extant, an* eligant, and divine Paraphrase,
published by Mr. John Branie, titled, Babels fall in the foolish Virgins
sleep, etc. worthy your best observations, by reason of which I shall only
give you some few (of mine) thereon; in which Simily, I shall acknowledge you
to be the wise Virgins there spoken of.

My first observation is, in relation of your going forth to meet the
Bridegroom, which implies that you were (once,) both of one Family, or
Church Fellowship together (if you could have kept you so) in the Primative, or
Apostolical times; see therefore what you have got by your gadding. You could
not have kept you within doors, you must (with Dinah) go to see the Daughters
of the Land, though in the attempt you be ravished by the Antichristian Shechem.

2. In relation to their slumbering and sleeping, in which respect I find you
also as deeply engaged as the foolish; for like as they do place Religion in
the external form thereof, as in the very use of the Ordinances, or due
observation of them, as to hear the Word preached, and to receive the
Sacraments; the performance of which duties, they conceive is as much as God
requires of them, in his worship and service. In reference to which I say, ye
are wise, for that ye know that such things are but the outside of Religion,
and that it is a spiritual worship which Christ requires of the Saints; yet
nevertheless in this particular, you are slumbring, and sleeping, as well as
they, viz. by your dispitefull contempt of the external ordinances, of the
external, or militant Church, it being with you in that particular, as it is
with such sorts of people, who because Papists give Alms in a plentiful
measure, supposing they merit thereby, therefore they will give none at all,
because they will not incu^re that aspertion; the application I leave to your
selves.

3. In this your slumbring, and sleeping condition, you are said to be out of
the Marriage Chamber, both of you lying before the door, as may be gathered
from the tenth verse, which is as much as plainly to tell you, that you are
both out of the payle of the Church.

4. In that you are said to take oil in your vessels, with your Lamps, and not
the other, is meant that you have a Spiritual principle residing in you, viz.
of Prayer and Prophecy, which the other want, they relying meery upon humane
Learning, (as does appear by their preaching, set forms of Prayer, and their
other Ceremonies) in their worship, and service of God.

3. In that it was said at midnight, there was a cry made, Behold, the
Bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him, (you being already out before, as
in ver. 1.) is meant of this present speech unto you, which is to call you out
of your selves; as also the other, in regard I have also done the like to them,
in the former part of the Book.

6. In that upon the aforesaid cry, they are all said to arise, and trim their
Lamps, I refer you to Mr. Brains description, only this I shall say, viz.
That you will hereby be put in mind of your present condition, as also by the
Apostles exhortations, viz. that God is the God of order, and not of confusion,
1 Cor. (...) 33. as also that all things in the Church ought to be do^^ (...),
^^d in order, ver. 40. for which things sake, the Apost^e (...) rejoice, Col.
2. 5. As also, that Jerusalem is (...) unity in it self; by which Spiritual
pri^^^ (...) of grace in you* your Lamp of faith will be kep^ (...) the others
wanting (relying merely upon the (...) ^f worship (in their sense of them)
being by this Treatice proved rediculous, shall burn it self out of the
affections of the Disciples of such Teachers, viz. of the Papal, Prelaticall,
and Presbiterian Clergy. As for the rest of that Parable before, or after, I
refer you to the interpretation of the aforesaid Mr. Brain, unto whom the
Lord has been pleased to reveal more of his secrets, then to any of the now
Clergy in the whole world; witness his several Evangelicall predictions, of
what is now apparently made manifest, to the eyes of all men. I shall only
instance in one particular more, wherein you are prefigured, Rev. 12. 14. where
it is said, that the Woman had two wings of a great Eagle given unto her, that
she might fly into the wilderness, into her place; where she is nourished, for
a time, times, and half a time, from the face of the Serpent; the meaning of
which I take to be this. By the Woman I understand the Church of Christ, by the
Serpent Antichrist; the wings there said to be given to the Woman, (whereby she
fled into the wilderness) I take to be the two Sacraments of Baptism, and the
Lords Supper, by which she has been supported, as upon the wings of that great
Eagle Christ Jesus; and in that she is said to be preserved in the wilderness,
for a time, and times, and half a time, I take it to be this. That the
Annabaptisticall Church (which I take to be the Church there spoke of) has,
and shall have its abode, in its now wilderness condition, until Papacy shall
be abolished, (which I refer unto the word time) as also until Prelacy, and
Presbitery, shall be also exterpated (which I apply to the word times) as also
until such as you, shall relinquish your gross errors, and backslidings,
(which I take to be intimated, by the half times) Now the reason why I so
alude them is this, viz. Papacy I compare to time, because of its long
residence in this Nation, Prelacy, and Presbitery, to times, in regard that
they both (as it were) made up a time, (viz. as long a continuance as Papacy
had) amongst us. And your time, to the half time, there mentioned, in regard,
it (as it were) makes up half so long a time (as one of the former times)
since you first began to slight or reject Ordinances; now I say, during this
time, times, and half time, viz. until you all return to your fathers house,
and recover your first love, you are no better then part of that Serpent, which
pursues and persecuteth the Church, and so consequently, an enemy to Christ
himself.

Now to conclude with a word of exhortation, Dear friends, consider of what
spirit ye are of; you are not ignorant that slumbring and sleeping spirits,
are wandering, and distempered spispirits, such as conceive themselves to be,
what they are not, and where they are not, full of imaginary fancies, arising
from the humor, which is predominant in the body, in which such spirits have
their recedence; and has it not been clearly proved, that you are one, and the
same with such, have not each of your societies fancied your selves, to be of
the true Millitant church of Christ, and does it now appear you are so; can
you be a free Denizon of a City, and not intol'd in their Records to that
purpose, can you be free of the new Jerusalem, and your name not recorded in
the Lambs book of life; have you not also conceived your selves, to be
incorporated materials with which that Temple is composed and does it not now
appear, that you are only a company of ^ude heaps, out of the building; and
has it not been proved that your fantastic spirits also have had many
strange and unheard of dreams, and fancies dureing this your slumbering and
sleeping conditions. Be not therefore (I humbly entreat you) any longer
deceived, or deluded, by such spiritts; but try each of your spirits by the
touchstone of truth, and withal be you well assured that Christ is not
divided, either in body, or spirit. Ephe. 4. 4. And therefore of necessity,
you must first become members of that one body, (I have discovered unto you)
before you can have that onenes of spirit with it, for the body of necessity
must first be, before it can retain a spirit, therefore so long as you are
separated from communion, and fellowship with the true body, you cannot be
possessed by the true spirit. And from hence has been the rice of all the
diversities of spirits now amongst you, namely, in that you are not
incorporated into one body; for every contrary body, or fellowship, has also a
contrary spirit, peculier unto it, for such as is the body, such is the spirit,
and the spirit of true discipline, does loath to inhabit in a poluted body.
Consider therefore, how you are yet dislocated from that body, to which
properly you do belong; and strive to accomplish that prophecy
forementioned, which relates to your own particular) by uniting and
incorporating your selves, with the yet reproachful, and scandalous society
of Annabaptists, who are really members of that true body, whereof Christ Jesus
is the head, and by so doing, you will bocome a fit receptacle for that spirit,
which is peculierly conversant with, and in that body, yea so you will become
one with Christ, both in body and spirit. And being such, ye shall enter with
him into the marriage chamber. viz. be incorporated free Denizens of the
spiritual Jerusalem, by being inrol'd in the Lambs book of life. Whereas the
other before mentioned, shall be shut out, and put to cry; Lord, Lord open
unto us. etc* as it is discoursed at larg by that worthy man before mentioned,
to whom I have referred you. Thus leaving your thoughts to the guidance of the
spirit of truth, which is able to direct you into all truth, as also that the
serious consideration thereof, will so undeceive the hearts of you, and all
other (ordained to eternal life) as to set them free from such delusive
spirits, which has; and does yet inslave them, (even to the hight of impiety,)
as also to make you, them, and us, one in Christ Jesus, who is the head of his
Church, is the hearty desire of him, who has thus earnestly contended for
your eternal felicity in the heaven of heavens. And does now devote himself

Your Servant in the Lord, J. S.

Rev. 20. 5. 6. This is the first Resurrection.

BLessed and holy is he, that has a part in the first Resurrection; on such
the second death has no power, but they shall be Priests of God and of Christ;
and shall Reign with him a thousand years

Rev. 22. 14, 15. Blesed are they that do his Commandments, that they may
have right to the Tree of Life; and may enter in through the gates of the City;
for without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whore-mongers, and murderers, and
Idollaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie. He that has an ear, let
him hear, etc.

FINIS.

