A discourse briefly showing the true State and Title of the Comptroller, or
Postmaster general of England, the Lord Stanhopes right to it, and
consequently to the foreign and Inland Letter Offices, as incident thereunto,
and more plainly appears by a Report of Sir Robert Heath, then his Majesty's
Attorney general: By a Verdict or Jury of 12. men in the Kings Bench, and a
Report in the Commons House of Parliament, in the 4. of our Gracious Sovereign.
12. Novembris, 37. Henrici Octavi.

THe King granted unto Sir William Paget, principal Secretary of State, and
John Mason French Secretary, and the longer liver of them, an Office called,
Officium Magistri Nunciorum Cursorum five Postarum tam infra Regnum nostrum
Angliae, quam in quibuscunque alijs partibus transmarinis in nostro dominio
existentibus, with a Pension of 66. li. 13. s. 4 d. per annum, To hold,
occupy, and enjoy, by themselves, or their sufficient Deputy, or Deputies,
during their own lives, or the life of the longer liver of them, with all
profits, commodities, and advantages belonging to the said Office, in such
ample and large manner and form, as Sir Brian Tuke Knight, or any other
person, or persons in the said Office, had received or enjoyed for the
execution of it.

4 May, 9. Elizabethae. The Queen grants unto Thomas Randolph the same Office
in these words, Officium Magistri nunciorum and cursorum communiter vocatum
Postarum nostrarum tam Infra Regnum nostrum Angliae, quam in quibuscunque alijs
partibus transmarinis in Nostro Dominio existentibus, with the same Pension of
66. li. 13. s. 4. d. per annum, to ho^ ^s aforesaid, in as ample manner and
form as John Mason, or any other that enjoyed the said Office, etc.

14. Septembris 1569. Thomas Randolph in virtue of the aforesaid Grant, makes a
Deputation to Rafaell Vandeput to be the Merchant Strangers Post within the
city of London, to enjoy it with all the profits and privileges that
Christian Susling enjoyed.

21. Junii. 22. Elizabethae, the Queen made a Grant of the same office unto
John Lord Stanhope, in the same words of Officium Magistri nunciorum and
cursorum communiter vocatum Postarum nostrarum tam infra Regnum nostrum
Angliae, quam in quibuscunque aliis partibus transmarinis in nostro dominio
existentibus, with the same Pension, and with all the profits, commodities, and
advantages in as ample manner and form, as Sir John Mason, Thomas Randalph, or
any body else who had formerly enjoyed the said Office.

18. Decembris. 1. Jacobi and Anno Domini, 1603. John Lord Stanhope, In virtue
of the former Grant makes a Deputation unto Matthew Dequester for his life, to
be the Merchant strangers Post-within the city of London, to enjoy it with all
profits and privileges in as ample manner as Rafaell Vandeput had done before
him.

25. Julii 5. Jacobi, John Lord Stanhope having surrendered his former Grant,
the King makes a new Grant of the same Office, unto the said John Lord
Stanhope, and Charles his Son, in the very same words, to hold and enjoy
during both their lives, and the longer liver of them by themselves, or their
sufficient Deputy or Deputies with the same Pension, and all other profits,
regards, diet, commodities, and advantages belonging or pertaining unto the
said Office, in as ample manner and form as Sir John Mason, Thomas Randolph,
or the same John Lord Stanhope himself or any body else in the said Office had
formerly enjoyed.

13. April, 17. Jacobi, The King (as is alleged) erects a new Office of
Postmaster of England for foreign parts, out of his Majesty's Dominions,
conferring it upon Matthew Dequester, the father, and Matthew Dequester the
Son, for their lives, or the longer liver of them, with power and authotitie
to themselves, sufficient deputy or Deputies, servant, or servants, to have
the sole taking up, sending, or conveying of all packets and letters concerning
the service of us, our heirs, and successors, and of all other packets and
letters, to have the nominating and appointing of Posts and Cariers necessary
and convenient, as well within the Realm of England, as in any foreign parts,
for the conveying, exporting, and importing such letters and packets, as
aforesaid, and from time to time demand and take for the execution of the said
Office for their pains of the parties that should employ them, all and every
the like sum and sums of money, rewards, Rates, and emolluments,
respectively as then were, and afterward should be lawfully, or usually taken,
for, or in respect of doing or performing of the same or the like business,
etc.

15. Martii 7. Caroli, The King reciting the former Patent, and taking notice
that Matthew Dequester the son was dead, and M. Dequester the father still
living, grants a Reversion of the said Office unto William Frizell, and M.
Thomas Witherings for both their lives, or the longer liver of them, to begin
immediately after the death of Matthew Dequester the father, and to receive the
same benefits, Emollumants and rewards specified in Dequesters Patent
aforegoing, etc.

25. Aprilis 13. Caroli, Charles Lord Stanhope was commanded to bring his
Letters Patents to the Council Table.

22. Junii, 13. Caroli, Patent of Mr. Witherings a Monopoly, prohibiting all
others to carry Letters but himself.
The King (as is alleged) creates, and erects a new Office, to be called The
Letter Office of England, declaring there should be one Officer from time to
time appointed to receive, and send all Letters to and fro within his Majesty's
Dominions of England, Scotland, and Ireland, where the said Officer shall
settle Posts, except such Letters as shall be sent by common known Carriers,
along with their Carts, Wagons, or Pack-horses, and a letter or more sent by a
Messenger on purpose, or by a friend, to have and take for Postage and
conveyance thereof certain rates therein specified: and this Office the King
grants unto Master Thomas Witherings during his natural life to be exercised
by himself, his Deputies or Assigns, and the said Master Witherings at the
same time covenanting to pay unto certain Postmasters of the four principal
Rodes of England, certain sums of money amounting to 2053. li. 11. s. 4. d.
according to a Schedule thereto annexed, for which sums of money they were
bound to run in post, and carry once a week both inwards and outward the
Maile or Mailes of Letters without further charge and allowance.

1. Julii. 13. Caroli, The King grants unto Sir John Cook, and Sir Francis
Wind bank, Knights, principal Secretaries of State, Officium Magistri
Nunciorum, and cursorum communiter vocatum Postarum, nostrarum infra dominica
nostra, with a Pension of 66. li. 13. s. 4. d. per annum, and all other
profits, Rights, Regards, Diets, Commodities, and advantages belonging or
appertaining unto the said Office, to hold and enjoy the premises by
themselves, or by their Deputy or Deputies during their lives, or the longer
liver of them in the said Office of principal Secretaries of State, in as
ample manner and form as Sir John Mason, Thomas Randolph, John Lord Stanhope,
or any other that formerly had or enjoyed the said Office: and further
declares, that for the future, the said Office shall be joined and annexed unto
the Office or place of chiese Secretaries of State for the time being
successively, etc.

Lord Stanhope and his predecessors Postmasters general of England for 80.
years.
By the fore-recited Patents, it appears how Charles Lord Stanhope and his
predecessors in the Office were Controllers or Postmasters general of England,
from the 37. of Henry the 8. until the 17. of King James, which is about
fourscore years, and the deceased Lord Stanhope did not only by himself and
deputies enjoy the said Office without disturbance for thirty years together,
but by virtue thereof in December 1603. makes a Deputation unto Matthew
Dequester for his life, Mr. Dequester, Lord Stanhopes Deputy.
to be the Merchant Strangers Post within the city of London, under whom in
subordination to the L. Stanhope were nine other, called the foreign Posts or
Curriers, who by turns went to and fro into France, Flanders, and Holland,
with all packets, and letters, both of the State, and particular Merchants, and
Matthew Dequester continually by his place reciding at the Office in London, at
the arrival of each foreign Post or Currier, Nine Curriers or Foreign
Posts.
received the Letters, and distributed them abroad unto Merchants, and likewise
collecting the Merchants letters, delivered them to the Curriers to be
exported, and for this labor and pains of his, had a noble a voyage of each
Currier inwards, Dequester had only one tenth part of the fruits outward, and
a noble each voyage inwards.
and the tenth part of all the profits outward, the Curriers enjoying the rest
themselves, and this appears by sundry Proclamations, the original Deputation
unto Matthew Dequester under John Lord Stanhops hand, 18. December. 1603. Matthew
Dequesters own hand writing, and the deposition of thousands still living if
it were needful. Matthew Dequester having thus managed the Office for the
foreign Letters, as deputy to the Lord Stanhope about 20. years, Dequester
betraying the Lord Stanhope whose servant he had been for 20. years.
either out of vaineglory, covetousnes, or some sinister respects, or other,
finds means to inform the King how the Lord Stanhops Patent was only for
services to be done in foreign parts within the Kings Dominions; and hereupon
under 13. April 17. Iacobi the King makes a Grant unto Mat. Dequester the
father, and Mat. Dequester the son, for their lives, or the longer liver of
them to be Postmasters of England for services to be done in forreinparts being
out of his Majesty's Dominions, and by virtue thereof pretended to settle Posts
and Carriers within his Majesty's Dominions of England, and began effectually
to carry to and fro within the Kingdom, all such Letters and Packets, as were
to go out or come from abroad, by force and virtue of the aforesaid Grant:
about which time John Lord Stanhope dying, Charles Lord Stanhope having notice
hereof, made opposition, whereupon on the 19. of December 21. Iacobi, the King
by his Letters Patents declares, that sithence the making of the said Letters
Patents the 17 Iacobi. Charles Lord Stanhope of Harington made complaint that
the said Grant unto Dequester did trench into the office which the said Charles
Lord Stanhope held of Postmaster general, as well within the Kingdom of
England, as in whatsoever parts beyond the seas within his Majesty's Dominions;
his Majesty was pleased to refer the said complaint unto William late Earl
of Penbrooke, Sir George Calvert, principal Secretary of State, Sir Thomas
Coventry his Majesty's Attorney General, and Sir Robert Heath his Majesty's
Soliciter General, who certified under their hands, that the said Lord
Stanhopes Grant of Master of his Majesty's Posts did extend but to such
services as were to be done in the Realm of England, Lord Stanhopes Grant
extend to all services to be done within his Majesty's Domions.
and others his said Majesty's Dominions, and that Dequesters Patent extended
only to services to be done out of his Majesty's Dominions; Master Dequester
notwithstanding continuing to incroach upon the privileges of Charles Lord
Stanhope Postmaster General of England, Dequesters Patent extended only to
services to be done out of his Majesty's Dominions.
and other his Majesty's Dominions, the said Lord petitions King James of happy
memory for leave to try his title at Law, and having commenced a suit, after
along Evidence obtaines a Verdict in Hillary Term, 22. Iacobi for the
validity of his own Patent against Dequesters, A Verdict in the Kings Bence
for the Lord Stanhopes Patent against Dequester.
but the said Charles Lord Stanhope being still deluded, was constrained to
petition our gracious Sovereign that now is; Copies of which Petitions,
together with his Majesty's Reference, and the Report thereupon, extracted from
the Original, hereafter follow.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of Charles Lord Stanhope of Harington.
Most humbly showing unto your most gracious Majesty,
Lord Stanhops Petition to the Parliament, 4. Caroli.
THat whereas it pleased your Majesty's late Father of worthy memory, King
James, to invest upon your Petitioner, and his deceased Father, John Lord
Stanhope of Harington, the Office of Postmaster general of all his Majesty's
Dominions whatsoever, as well within the Realm of England, as in whatsoever
place beyond the seas. And whereas your Petitioners Father did in his life time
appoint one Matthew Dequester a Dutch man to be his Deputy for transporting
and importing of letters from London, into, and from foreign parts,
Dequesters fraudulent dealing toward his old Master.
which Matthew Dequester (taking advantage of such defects as he supposed to be
in your Petitioners Patent) did fraudulently and cunningly procure a Patent
from your Highnesses Father, for transporting and importing of Letters out of
your Highness Dominions, into, and from foreign parts, thereby supposing to
deceive your Petitioner of a great part of his Office, to your Petitioners
great dishonor and disgrace.

The Title of your Petitioners Patent, It pleased your Father of famous memory,
to give leave to try at Law, as by the Petition annexed appears: And for as
much as your Petitioner has tried his Title at Law accordingly, and recovered
his right thereby, Dequesters Patent declared void by Law,
by which the Patent of Dequester appears to be void by a Jury and Verdict of
twelve men, although the Judges for matter of words in the Declaration, and not
for any thing in substance, have stayed Judgment. May it therefore please your
gracious Majesty, (notwithstanding the Verdict so passed against Matthew
Dequester his Patent) for your Highness better satisfaction, that the Office
is truly belonging to your Petitioner, to call before your Majesty your
Atturny General, who can (by the Verdict recovered and recorded, and being
fully acquainted in all the proceeding) truly inform your Majesty, And that
two of the Judges of your Highness Bench, namely Justice Dodridge, and Justice
Whitlocke may deliver likewise their opinions unto your Majesty for the
clearing thereof; which being done, that your gracious Majesty would be
pleased to give Order to your Solliciter General to draw a Pro^ation ready for
your Majesty's Signature, thereby commanding the said Dequester, and all others
whom soever (except your Petitioner, and his deputies and servants under his
Hand and Seal already authorized) to surcease the execution of transporting
and importing of any Merchants, Tradsmen, or others your Majesty's subjects
Letters, from, or into the City of London, into, or from foreign parts,
according to such Proclamations formerly in the like kind, and under such
pains and penalties as heretofore have been set down in the same
Proclamation,

And your Petitioner, etc.
His Majesty's Reference on the said Petition.
At the Court at Whitehall, the 4. Feb. 1625.
Sir Robert Heath his Majesty's Arturney General, ordered to report.
HIs Majesty is graciously pleased, that Master Atturny General examine the
proceedings mentioned in this Petition, and certisie his Majesty concerning
the same, with his opinion of the Petitioners right, and if the Patent of
Dequesters be void by Jury and Verdict of twelve men, and the true cause why
the Judges have forborne to give Judgment, and then his Majesty will further
signify his royal pleasure.

Thomas Aylesbury.

Report of Sir Robert Heath his Majesty's Atturny General.
Office of Postmaster general of England an ancient Office, and Dequester the
Lord Stanhops Deputy.
ACcording to your Majesty's command, I have examined the proceedings mentioned
in that Petition, and do find it true, That the Office of Postmastership of
England is an ancient Office, that Dequester was for diverse years Deputy
under John Lord Stanhope (who had this Office) for the foreign service.

Dequesters false suggestions.
That Dequester afterward found the means to obtain a Patent to himself of
all the foreign service, suggesting that the Lord Stanhopes Grants was but
for all Packets of Letters within this Realm, and that your Majesty might
grant another for those which should be carried out of the Realm.

Dequesters Patent condemned by a Verdict at Law.
That Charles Lord Stanhope now the Postmaster, brought his Action and upon a
long evidence, Had a verdict for himself against Dequesters Patent, but the
Judges have not given judgment according to the verdict, for some default in
the Declaration of the Plaintiff, but not for any dislike of the verdict.

That above fifty Merchants trading for the Neatherlands, did certify under
their hands, the prejudice they suffer by Dequesters partiality, in delivering
Merchant Strangers Letters (which being the intelligence of their trade) before
the Letters of the English.

Lord Stanhopes right to the foreign business as Postmaster general.
Upon which I conceive my Lord Stanhope had right to this employment, as
incident to the place of Postmaster General.

And it is the more convenient, because your Merchants desire to have a mere
Englishman whom they know and trust: and if it be settled with the Lord Stanhope
and his Deputy, Matthew Dequester, if he shall find encouragement, may
nevertheless bring his action, and make an experience, if upon a new trial
he can procure a verdict for him and his title.

To: Heath.

NOtwithstanding this benign Reference from his Majesty, and so ample and just
a Report made by so many Honorable Personages, the power and subtilty of
Matthew Dequester was such, as the Lord Stanhope was still deluded by him;
Whereupon Henry Billingsley, Deputy to the said Lord Stanhope, was forced
several times to have recourse unto the Parliament, quarto Caroli, Copy of his
second Petition being this that follows; together with an Order of the Commons
House thereupon, and Report of the Committee appointed in that behalf.

To the Honorable Assembly in the Commons House of Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Merchants of London in general, and of Henry
Billingsley in particular.
Shows,
Pitition of Mr. Hen. Billingsley, Deputy to the Lord Stanhope. 4. Caroli.
THat whereas your Petitioners having heretofore exhibited a Petition to the
grand Committee for grievances against one Matthew Dequester, concerning the
Postmasters office in conveighing Letters beyond the Seas; wherein is set forth
the great abuse offered to your Petitioners by the said Dequester in the
execution of the said office, a time now long since past was appointed by the
Honorable Committee to hear the said cause, but by reason of many other
urgent and weighty occasions, and other Petitions of grievances which had
priority in the exhibition; your Petitioners complaint has not as yet been
heard, but your Petitioner Billingsley ever since detained a prisoner in the
Marshallsea concerning that business.

Your Petitioners humbly pray this Honorable Assembly will vouchsafe a
special Committee to hear their said agrievances, whereby some speedy order
may be taken for the relief of your Petitioners; and the discharge of the
said Billingsley out of prison, as to your wisdom shall seem meet.
And they shall daily pray for the prosperous success of this Honorable
Assembly, HENRY BILLINGSLEY.

Order of the Commons House upon the said Petition.
Sabat. 14. Junii quarto Caroli.
Order of the Commons House, 4. Caroli.
A Petition was this day read in the Commons House of Parliament; Exhibited in
the name of Merchants of London in general, and of Henry Billingsley in
particular; Showing that upon a Petition formerly exhibited to the said House
against one Matthew Dequester, concerning the Postmasters office, in
conveighing Letters beyond the Seas, and other matters in the said former
Petition mentioned, a time now long since past was appointed by the grand
Committee, for grievances for the hearing of the said cause, which by reason of
many other weighty occasions interceding, has not yet been heard, but the said
Billingsley still detained a prisoner concerning the said business. And
therefore it was humbly prayed by the said Petitioner, That a special
Committee might be appointed by the said House, to hear the said complaint;
whereupon it is ordered by the said House, that Mr. Alderman Molson. Mr.
Alderman Cl^therow. Mr. William Cunstable. Mr. Roydon. Mr. Edward Basse. Mr.
Rolls the Lawyer. Mr. Earl Mr. Matthewes. Mr. Ginn^r. Mr. Barker. Mr.
Sherwell. Mr. Oldsworth. Mr. Strode. Mr. Kerkeham. Mr. Waller. Mr. Bunch. Mr.
Rolls. Sir Tho: Heat. Sir Tho. Steward. Mr. Lawley. Sir Edward Giles. Mr.
Doughtie.
shall take consideration of the cause contained in the said Petitions, and for
that purpose are to meet on Monday next, at two of the Clock in the afternoon,
in the Exchequer Chamber, and Matthew Dequester, and all other persons whom
this business concerns, are to have notice given of the said time and place,
and the said Matthew Dequester is then to bring with him his Letters Patents
concerning the said office, and the said parties may be then heard with their
Counsel if they think fit.

This Committee having taken information of the business, declared how
Dequester procured his Patent from the King by untrue suggestions, and that the
imprisonment of Billin sley by Dequester was unjust, the rather in regard a
verdict at Law had passed against the said Dequester therein, as more at large
in the Report it self, which follows.

Martis 24. Junii 4. Caroli.
Report of the Committee, 4. Caroli. Declare Dequester to have been the Lord
Starhops Deputy procures a Patent upon untrue suggestions.
REport was this day made from the Committee appointed to consider of the
Petition exhibited unto this House by Henry Billingsley, against a Patent
lately obtained by Matthew Dequester, for the sole carrying of all Letters
beyond the Seas, and from thence into this Kingdom; upon which Report it
appeared, that the said Matthew Dequester had for many years together carried
Letters beyond the Seas, and from thence hither, by virtue of a deputation to
him therein made by the Lord Stanhope, Postmaster of England, and having so
done, did larely upon some untrue suggestions procure to himself the said
Patent from his Majesty, and then opposed the Patent of Postmaster granted to
the said Lord Stanhope, by force whereof himself had long time taken upon him
the carriage of such Letters. And it further appeared that the said Dequester
had abused his said Patent in the execution thereof, to the great prejudice of
the English Me chants, who being by him restrained from sending or receiving
their Letters by any other Post but himself, and having cut up some Packets of
Letters sent by the Merchants by other Post, did himself, being an Alien
borne, deliver the Letters of the merchant Strangers before the English, to
their great damage, and likewise exacted money from the English merchants,
besides the dae fee, before they could get their Letters. And that the said
Dequester procured he said Petitioner Billingsley, deputed by the said Lord
Stanhope to carry the said Letters to be imprisoned for carrying thereof; which
imprisonment the Commit^ee conceived to be unjust; Again ^ster
the rather because a verdict at Law has passed against the said Dequrster
therein. Whereupon it is declared and adjudged by the said House of Commons,
that the said Patent so gran^ed to the said Dequester is a grievan^e in the
execution. And it is further ordered, that he said Commi^ee shall frame and
tender to the House a Petition to be presented to his Majesty, for the
enlargement of the said Billingsl^y out of prison, where he has been
imprisoned by the space of thirteen weeks. And are to meet at seven of the
Clock to morrow morning in the Court of Wards.

Po. E. Brighte.

THus was the Patent of Dequester on all sides found unjust, and the Honour^ble
House of Commons having then daclared and adjudged the same a grievance, would
no doubt have put the Lord Stanhope again in possession, had not that
Parliament been unhappily dissolved within two days after the said Report was
made.

But Dequester, though incessantly opposed by so much right and reason, did so
often imp^ison Billingsley, and perplexe him otherwise, as was his utter
undoing in the end, and by that means continued by himself the execution of
his unduly got Patent, till the 20. of Febr. 1631. which was twelve years: and
it is remarkable, that Dequester during all the time, did neither more nor
less about Services to be done out of his Majesty's Dominions, which was the
Tenure of the Kings immediate Grant unto himself, than what he did before as
Deputy to the Lord Stanhope for twenty years together.

But now under the 20. of Febr. 1631. as afores^id, Matthew Dequester makes a
deputation of his forrame Postmastership concerning services to be done out of
his Majesty's Dominions unto Mr. Thomas Witherings, with all rights and
privileges thereunto belonging, and then Covenants, that if he the said Mr
Thomas Witherings, or his Assigns or any other, shall obtain a new Patent
(...) foreign Posts and Curriers shall be co^ and the said Mr. Witherings
thereby also promises, that the number of the said nine Curriers shall not be
increased, but by him continued as then they were, with all the privileges and
benefits they then usually enjoyed.

^gs (...)
Mr. Witherings by virtue of this deputation from Dequester, and the reversion
granted Frizell and himself, the 15. of March following, 7. Coroli, being in
possession and exercise of the foreign business, continued to make use of
these nine foreign Posts or Curriers some few months only, and then turned
them all out of their employment and office which they had purchased for their
lives, and Mr. Witherings himself covenanted with Dequester as aforesaid, to
keep them in, by which device of his, he comes to enjoy the whole fruits of the
foreign office himself, who before was to have had not above the twentieth
part, the other nineteen parts being divided betwixt these nine Curriers, who
by this project may have suffered already about twenty thousand pounds sterling.

And if it be alleged, as it may truly, that the said foreign Letters go now
more speedily and orderly by this way of Stasfetta then formerly; yet it is as
easily replied, that though the good of the weal public be in no kind to be
omitted, nor advancement of the office neglected, that in such case the
improvement of the office should be alike to all the interessed, and not some
all, some none at all, especially in this case of the foreign Curriers, who
equally with Mr. Witherings had their offices for their lives, and better title
derived from the Lord Stanhope; Whereas Mr. Witherings his was only from
Matthew Dequester by deputation, or what Dequester had in reversion.

The Lord Stanhope and his Deputies being thus outed of their profits and
employment about foreign services which their Predecessors Postmasters
general of England had for above fourscore years together enjoyed
uncontrollably, did still continue to carry to and fro within the Kingdoms,
all packets of letters both of State and Subjects which were brought unto them
for such rates and benefits as was agreed between the parties, every man being
free to send his Letters by whom he would, and to pay as little as he could;
and thus it continued till a little before 1637. 22. Junii, 13. Caroli, at
which time Mr. Witherings upon misinformation obtaines a grant from the King,
whereby he since pretends to carry all Letters himself, which how far it
entrenches upon the freemans liberty, will no doubt be duly weighed and
considered of by the Parliament.

Matthew Dequester 17. of King James, upon the obtaining to be Postmaster of
England, for services to be done out of his Majesty's Dominions, al^eadged in
his own Patent, that the Lord Stanhopes grant was of service to be done within
his Majesty's Dominions only, and so was content to let the Lord Stanhope have
the inland business, which showed at least he had some consci^nce, and would
tell truth, though not the whole truth (...) business, by the same Law, and
with as much equity, did Mr. Witherings turn his officers and his deputies out
of the inland business, and yet both by Dequester and Mr. Witherings
acknowledged to be postmaster general of England, and all other his Majesty's
Dominions.

The Lord Stanhope thus known to be postmaster of England, besides the
continual practice and prescription of his predecessors, for fourscore years
together, the very title and sound of postmaster general of England is
sufficient to tell every one, that he and his deputies are they that should
likely take charge and carry the Letters to and fro, so long as they are in
England: Dequesters ^fession of Lord Sta^ Patent.
And Matthew Dequester in his second Patent, 17. Jacobi, confessed himself to
be Postmaster for services only to be done out of England, and that the Lord
Stanhopes grant and his Were of distinct places, one within his Majesty's
Dominions, the other without his Majesty's Dominions, and yet he by virtue of
this Patent for foreign services, and those to be done out of his Majesty's
Dominions, where the King had no power to grant a privilege, did totally
abridge the Lord Stanhope and his deputies from meddling within the Kings
Dominions with any packets of Letters either of King or Subject, which came
from abroad into England, or went out of England into foreign parts.

Again Mr. Witherings will not deny the Lord Stanhope to be postmaster
general of England, and the Posts of England to be his deputies, at least he
pretends not to be such himself, and yet constrained the posts upon all the
Rodes to carry his Mailes of Letters, suffering no body else to carry Letters
but these posts deputies to the Lord Stanhope, Mr. Wither^ oppression (...) the
inland Posts.
and appropriated the whole benefit unto himself, without the least
acknowledgement unto the Lord Stanhope, or notice of the posts his deputies,
unless it were to turn some of them out of their places, make others pay a
second fine, and reduce the wages of the rest from above 4000. li. per annum,
to 2053. li. besides the want of their arreares, being many thousand pounds, to
the utter undoing of many families, as in their own Remonstrance more at large
appears.

But besides the invalidity of Mr. Witherings his patent derived from
Dequester, which so plainly trenches upon the Lord Stanhope, who by that means
was illegally put out of his possession, Mr. Wither^ several misdemeanour^
Mr. Witherings was further accused of ^undry misdemeanors; as first, opening
of packets and letters: 2. Not ad^ising the Kings Ministers the receipt of
their letters in due time. 3. Exaction ^f greater postage of letters. 4.
Exportation, or conniving at exportation of ^old and goods unaccustomed, under
color of his office. 5. Not suffering ^e officers to search his passage boat.
6. Not holding correspondency with ^rraine postmasters for want of languages.
7. Not payment of duties to for^ine postmasters. 8. Misdemenours of his
deputies and servants in both of^ (...) Mailes for nothing. 13. Detaining some
men's Letters longer then others. 14. Refusing to send away the Kings packets.
15. In making a Monopoly of his patent, by the ill execution of it. And last,
of his not discharging of the trust the King reposed in him for execution of
the said offices, and although all these reasons were not specified in ^he
sequestration, together with the nullity of Dequester and Master Witherings his
patent, by a verdict in the Kings Bench, and the Committees Report to the
Commons House of Parliament, 4. Caroli, a reference to two Honorable
personages, and his Majesty's Attorney, and Soliciter general, the oppression
of the 9. foreign posts, oppression of all the inland posts. Carriers, Wagons,
foot-posts, and others imprisoned and undone by Mr. Witherings, yet his
Majesty, his privy Counsel, and the Secretaries of State were mad^ therewith
acquainted, as does appear by the original petitions, and sundry passages at
Counsel Table, how these were jointly a means with those declared therein, to
bring on the sequestration, which could not well have been deferred any longer:
1. Because the objections against Mr. Witherings were many. 2. Of a high and
heinous nature. 3. In regard that offices of this kind have a tacit condition
and obligation annexed unto them of the officers good behavior, and due
performance, the failing wherein becomes a forfeiture, Ipso facto, and 4.
Because the King was then upon departure for the North, and for good government
of his own affairs, and better usage of his subjects, both which were more
liable to suffer in his Majesty's absence, yet was it not intended that Mr.
Witherings should be outed quite without a fair and legal trial, for at the
same time the King gave order (as appears) for a Bill to be put against him in
Starchamber, the fruits of the offices being only retained in de posito for
him, till he make good his Titile and clear himself of the misdemeanors he
was accused of, some whereof are justified in the House of Commons, and at a
Committee, and others, too tedious for this discourse, will likewise be made
appear when the Committee pleases but to give leave; Yet since Mr. Whitherings
is on a sudden so importunate of dispatch, to give a touch hereof in brief may
perhaps, being suddenly dispersed, more speedily inform the Honorable Court
of Parliament, and save them many a tedious and troublesome sitting.

That Letters have been opened, quite miscarried, and some men's longe^
detained than others, is proved in the House, partly viva voce, and partly by
several Letters, and a Petition from the English Merchants living in Italy*
Now since, all this and much more may be done by M. Witherings in suc^ manner,
as will be impossible to be proved against him, that is, when there i^ no
witness by, in like cases to prevent inconveniences, such proofs are accepted
of, as can be had which in this case must be by obliging Mr. Withering^ (...)

(...) Witherings should have writ to the Postmaster of Antwerpe, Venice,
Mantua, or from whence they came, Mr. Wit^ chargea^ all lett^ ^livered
and that said Postmaster was to clear himself for sending letters open,
which diligence if Mr. Witherings cannot prove to have done so often as letters
came open, he is to be charged with the opening of them himself, otherwise he
may open them all, and as often as he please, and say he received them so from
the Postmaster of Antwerp, and the Postmaster of Anwerp may open them at
Antwerpe, and say it was the Postmaster of England, and so the whole world be
continually abused by a couple of Postmasters, there being no other possibility
of redress.

In like manner total concealing, or detaining some men's letters longer then
other some, falls flat upon Mr. Witherings, thus; Mr. W^ charga^ all lett^
^tained
All Letters directed from London to Venice, Mantua, Antwerp, or any other
place, should be made up together by themselves in a bundle, and sealed with
the Postmasters known seal, and from thence to London reciprocally; and if
the several bundles come thus to h^nd, sealed up, then will all letters of one
date come together, and not miscarry, or be delaied; but if they come open, or
sealed with a strange seal, then is Mr. Witherings to make the several
Postmasters respectively to clear themselves; which diligence since Mr.
Witherings proves not to have used, nor made a Role or Inventory of all
letters, as he was commanded by his Majesty and privy Counsel, and practiced
by his predecessors, all miscarriage, and detaining some men's letters longer
then others, must light upon Mr. Witherings, otherwise he and such Postmasters
may delude the whole world, in quite concealing or longer withholding of their
letters, just as in opening them at his pleasure, as aforesaid. But it is
proved in the House, and acknowledged that Mr. Witherings did not seal up the
Portmantle according to order of his Majesty, and Counsel Table, but left it
open, by which means gold was conveied out of the Kingdom, Gold ^ed ou^
kingd^ Maste^ ^rings maile^
as it is proved in the Honorable House of Commons, and the leaving open the
Mailes, flatly signifies some such ill intent, or a most notorious
carelessness, and neglect, in that the portmantle being open, as Mr. Witherings
used to send it, every rascal postilion boy, or other, that had the said
portmantle in his power, might be invited or inveigled to convey away his
Majesty's packets, or fill his pockets with letters worth five or ten pounds,
or what he pleased, and deliver them to any Mariner or passenger in the packet
Boat which went to Callis or Dunkerke, whether the said letters were directed,
Carel^ of Man ^thering^
the said Mariners or passenger might deliver them as well as the postmaster
himself, and receive the ready money for them; now were it not that Mr.
Witherings was contented to endanger his Majesty's packets and affairs, and
run an imminent hazard of his own loss, contrary to his Majesty's command,
through the expectation of a far greater unlawful gain by transportation of
gold, and other prohibited and unaccustomed goods, which is as well proved
against him, as such deeds of darkensse can well be, then (...) be so far
called in question* as make him altogether incapable to execute an Office of
such trust and consequence.

Besides Mr. Witherings his refusal to send his Majesty's packets, was so
evident, as being but considered of, may chance make it a lesser evil, that
Mr. Witherings his Offices (if his they be) be deposited (though otherwise
illigally) in such hands as know better how to manage them for him then
himself, rather then his Majesty's packets should not be sent away, till Mr.
Witherings had been convicted by a two or three terms suit at Law, in which
interim the affairs of King and State might have suffered irreparably.

It is then humbly motioned unto the Honorable Committee, that though all the
reasons here mentioned, with some others, were not specified in the
sequestration, since really they were motives thereunto, and well hoped by such
as it concerns, that it will be found both just and equitable, especially with
this supreme Court of equity, that those together with the rest be all examined
before the sequestration be removed.

But if Mr. Witherings do still persist declining the trial of his Patent,
and the examination of his misdemeanors, exagerating his illegal putting out,
and importuning for a repossession, in case this Honorable Committee should be
inclined thereto, may they please only to reflect upon, ^nhope ^ed out
how the Lord Stanhope (whose predecessors enjoyed these Offices for
fourscore years, as is notorious to all the world) had the Broad Seal of
England likewise, was put out of possession illegally, and that the same Law
which M. Witherings, implores to put him in again, may be thought inclinable to
repossesse the Lord Stanhope first, the rather in regard, that if the Lord
Stanhope had not been first turned out illegally Mr. Witherings had never come
in at all, ^se ^erings ^r ^t all.
as also because there is no Petition besides the Lord Stanhopes before this
Honorable Court, which lays claim to either foreign or Inland Office, unless
the Earl of Warwicks, a Copy of whose Deputation, in such case we humbly
crave, and a competent time to answer to it, since the Lord Stanhops, and the
Postmasters petitions have been put in these twelve months, and the Earl of
Warwicks not full twelve days since, which being but once taken notice of, we
do not only hope, but rest assured it may stand with the Justice and Equity
of this Supreme Assembly, to grant us our request, whereunto we must submit our
selves howsoever.

FINIS.

