The first ADDRESSES TO His EXCELLENCY the Lord General, with the ASSEMBLY of
ELDERS elected by him and his Council for the management of the affairs of this
COMMONWEALTH; As also, to all the cordial Officers and Soldiers under his
command. CONTAINING Certain RULES and DIRECTIONS how to advance the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ over the face of the whole earth. By John Spittlehouse, a late
Member of the Army, and a servant to the Saints of the most high God, whose
Kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and whom all dominions shall serve and obey,
Dan. 7. 27.

woodcut printer's device for Richard Moon in the form of a rebus (not in
McKerrow) Richard

depiction of a man in the moon In Paul's Church Yard At The

depiction of seven stars

London, Printed by J. C. for himself and Richard Moon, at the seven stars in
Paul's Churchyard, near the great North-door. 1653.

To his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell.
My Lord,
IT has not been out of a fantastic humor, as some think, that I did in my
late warning piece, etc. compare you to Moses, or that I went about in the
least to claw you, but that I was assured, that as the Lord had decreed that
his people in these latter days should have judges as at the first, so likewise
Rulers as at the beginning, which doubtless had reference, as well unto Moses
his power and authority, whom it is evident, did in Gods stead select Judges
for the people of Israel, which Judges did not in the least empower Moses, or
add any authority unto him, but contrariwise, he unto them, as he was the
immediate Minister of God: and therefore beware how you receive any Commission
from this present Assembly, either as to your relation as a soldier, or upon
any other account whatsoever; for in so doing, you clearly deny Jesus Christ to
be King of this Nation: so that you are to make no further use of them, then to
appoint them to destroy Antichrist in his Dragonical and Priestly power, with
their appendancies, and to advance the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, with his Laws
and Ordinances (to which purpose the whole scope of this Treatise tends)
which when you have once put in an orderly posture, that then you would in like
manner order them their several stations in the Commonwealth, for Moses did not
keep the Elders of Israel continually together in a lump, but dispersed them as
occasion was offered, making the same Elders he had chosen, heads over the
people, etc. Exodus 18. 25, etc. reserving the chief management of affairs to
himself, which certainly was not barely to himself alone, but with the
assistance of his faithful Officers of war about him, of which I hope you may
be plentifully supplied, so that the Church or kingdom of Jesus Christ may
appear in its now proper posture (viz. terrible as an Army with Banners, unto
all the Nations upon the face of the whole earth. And therefore your and their
posture will not now be to sit still, and sing a Requiem unto your souls,
saying, Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry, thou have goods laid
up for many years; but to persevere in the work of the Lord, in foreign parts,
and not to make peace with the Gibeonites, or any other Nation which the Lord
has a controversy withal, and who are designed to destruction, to the end you
may rest quietly upon your beds of Ivory. For if you do, know assuredly, that
as you have been paralleled with Moses in your acts of valor, so you shall
likewise die in Mount-Nebo, which the form or Model of the house you live in,
is not much unlike: but I hope the Lord has not only intended to show you the
Land of Canaan, but will also lead you over the flood Jordan, into the Land of
the Canaanites, etc. (viz. over the Narrow Seas, into Holland, France, and so
to Rome it self, to the end you may pluck up all Antichristian power whatsoever
does oppose Jesus Christ in the least, which is the earnest expectation of
Truths, and

Your honors servant, J. S.

The first ADDRESSES, to his Excellency the Lord General, etc.
Right Honorable and well-beloved,
IT is a saying not so ancient as true, That the right beginning of an action,
extends to the half accomplishment thereof. And therefore in as much as
Providence has elected you servants in his present design, it will be very
requisite that you know beforehand what your work is, to the end you may not be
ensnared by ignorance to your infamy, as many of your predecessors have been.

Knowledge (says one) is that understanding which we have of our Creator, as
also of his works and will; and likewise of our selves: in reference to the
last of which, it is reported, that over the Temple of Apollo the God of the
Paynims, there was this inscription engraven in letters of Gold, Nosce teipsum;
Signifying, that he that would have admittance there, must first learn to know
himself, and could not otherwise be received. Yea such excellency was ascribed
by the Athenians to such knowledge, as that they presented Pompey the Great
with this Motto, viz.

Thou art so much a God, as thou know thy self to be a Man.

And doubtless the Spirit of God did not in vain record Moses to be found in an
Ark of Bull-rushes, and after that to keep sheep, as also Joshua to be Moses
servant, Gideon a Thrasher, Jephtah the son of an Harlot, David a Shepherd,
etc. but that he did foresee it as requisite to put them in mind of their once
low condition, as of their valiant achievements, tending to their Exaltations.
Yea so willing was the Virgin Mary to have such shamefac't things made
manifest, as that she becomes her own Herald, to blaze the same to all
posterities, as where she says,

My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior,
for he has regarded the Low Estate of his handmaid, etc. for he that is
mighty, has done to me great things, and holy is his Name, and his Mercy is on
them that fear him from generation to generation: he has showed strength with
his Arm, he has scattered the proud in the imaginations of their hearts, he
has put down the Mighty from their seats, and exalted them Of Low Degree. He
has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty away.
He has helped his servant Israel, in remembrance of his Mercies, as he spoke
to our forefathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever.

And therefore think not much with me, that I put you in mind how the like
Mercies are now conferred upon many of you, when you were in as low a condition,
as the aforesaid Mary; Even whilst you were Brewers, and Brewers servants,
Shoo-makers, Tailors, and such other Mechanic men. Yea, I am very confident,
that many of you thirteen or fourteen years ago, did little think you should
ever have attained to such honor and wealth, as you are now by Providence
dignified withal.

Gentlemen, Mistake me not, as that by these expressions I should in the least
go about to blast any of your reputations, my intent herein being only that I
might present my self here unto you, as the Egyptian serviter, of whom it is
reported, that in the midst of all their jollity in their feasts, he was
accustomed to present amongst them a dead man's Scull, whereby they might be
made sensible, what their end should be. Yea the Scripture it self presents
the Kingly Prophet with the like Motto, to all persons dignified with honor,
where he says, I said ye are Gods, but ye shall die like men, and become as
one of the Princes; as also where he says, Man that is in honor, and
understands not, is like the beasts that perish.

And without controverse, certain it is, that prosperity does generally prove
no better then an honyed poison sweet and pleasant, but exceeding dangerous: it
is a slippery passage, wherein Men ought to take sure foot-hold, there being no
time wherein men do more frequently forget God, as precedent examples have
plentifully taught, and daily experience does yet teach; instance the late
King, and the Nobility which were his favorites; as as also your late
predecessors in Parliament, as yet fresh in your memories; besides which, we
have a most remarkable president of Israel that Ancient people of God, who
albeit they were the Lords portion, and the lot of his inheritance, yea albeit
he had found them in a desert land, and in a waste howling wilderness; though
he had led them about, and instructed them, and had kept them as the apple of
his eye, and had born them up as upon the wings of an Eagle, and had made them
to ride upon the high places of the field, so that they did eat the increase of
the field, as also to suck honey out of the Rock, and oil out of the flinty
Rock; as also to eat Butter of Kine, and milk of sheep, with the fat of lambs
and Rams of the breed of Bashan; of Goats, with the fat of kidneys, and with
the finest of the wheat, as also to drink the pure blood of the Grape: yea,
albeit he had reproved Kings for their sakes, and slain mighty Kings; Yet we
see, the event of all these mercies produced only a wanton carriage from the
aforesaid people, to the Donet thereof: for the Text says, that when they were
so made fat, then, even then, did Jesurun kick up the heel; then, even then did
they forsake God that made them, and lightly esteemed the Rock of their
salvation.

And therefore, dear friends, inasmuch as these things are written for
instruction, I humbly desire you would set this president continually before
your eyes, inasmuch as many amongst you have received as great and ample
favors from God, as them Israelites.

Take heed therefore, I entreat you, and be very circumspect over your actions,
whilst the like radiant beams of Providence shine so gloriously upon you;
Whilst the illustrious beauty of your present condition has such an influence
upon your vassals; whilst the Lord has furnished you with all things, even to
the utmost desires of your hearts.

As by giving you Houses to live in which you built not, Gardens and Orchards
which you planted not, with vast treasures got by the sweat of other men's
brows, with gorgeous apparel and titles of honor, which formerly you would
have been ashamed of, etc. take heed therefore, I humbly entreat you; for now,
even now, are you carried up to the very highest pinnacle of temptation, and
therefore your condition is so much the more dangerous, by how much the tallest
Cedar is more subject to a storm then the lowest shrub: and doubtless it was
out of some such consideration, that Agur desired neither poverty nor riches.

Stand therefore valiantly upon your guard, by bridling your affections, and
composing all your actions according to the rule and square of Gods Word; and
that as well in things of civil concernment, as of spiritual; you having there
as plain directions for the one as for the other (viz. in point of civil Laws,
as in public worship, which this following Treatise will fully evidence) and
therefore be well assured, that by how much you digress therefrom, either to
the right hand or to the left, by so much will the Lord disovvn you, by so much
will he extirpate your memorials from under heaven, by so much will your very
name rot upon the face of the earth, as has been manifested in your late
predecessors; which the Lord in much mercy prevent, by giving you an absolute
and cordial resolution to keep close to all his holy Laws and Commandments,
which he has given in charge to be observed and put in execution. But to the
thing intended.

Gentlemen, I presume you are not ignorant for what you are here assembled. I
hope it is to accomplish the grand design of your professed Lord and Master
Jesus Christ, in these Overturning, Overturning, Overturning days, and that
with all exactness, according to the rules of direction prescribed in his
sacred word, viz.

That to the utmost of your power you will endeavor the erecting of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ to the uttermost parts of the earth, viz. until he has
taken the same into his possession, until he has broken all the heathen and
Antichristian Nations with a rod of iron, and dashed them in pieces like a
Potters vessel, Psalm. 2. 8, 9. until the Saints of the most high God have taken
the Kingdom and Dominion, and greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven
into their possession. Yea, until all the kingdoms and dominions, upon the
face of the earth, do serve and obey him, Dan. 7. until he has put down all
Rule, and all Authority and Power under his feet (but what is properly his own)
1 Cor. 15. 24, etc. until all the Kings of the earth be bound in chains, and
their Nobles with linkes of iron; until he has made all his foes his
footstool, Heb. 1. 13. until God the Father has put all things in subjection
under him; yea, until he has left nothing to put under him, Heb. 2. 9. until
he has executed the judgment upon the great Red Dragon the beast, with the
old strumpet termed Mystery Babylon the Great, the mother of harlots and
abomination of the earth; who is said to be drunk with the blood of the Saints,
and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, Revel. cap. 12. and 17. (viz.)
until you have avenged the blood of them that lie slain under the Altar;
until you have destroyed them which destroyed the Saints; until you have
rewarded Babylon as she has rewarded you; until you have doubled unto her
double according to her works; until the cup that she and her daughter-harlots
has filled, be filled to them double; until by how much they have glorified
themselves, and lived deliciously, that so much torment and sorrow be given
unto them, as in the book of the Revelations is clearly commanded, Rev. 18. 6,
7, etc.

Gentlemen, If these be your intentions, then ride on and prosper; but if
otherwise, then sudden destruction shall come upon you unawares, as it did upon
your late predecessors; but I hope better things of you, though I thus speak:
but nevertheless, inasmuch as the Lord has been pleased to call out this our
Nation as a Theater to act a president of what he intends to do in all the
Nations under the cope of heaven, it behooves you therefore, before you set
your selves in the seat of judicature in relation to other Nations, to begin at
home. And that according to the Apostles directions, Romans 2. 1, 3. where he
says, Thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge, for
wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge
do the same thing. Again, think thou this, O man, which judge them that
do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God?

Which that you may do, I shall take upon me, by Divine assistance, to set
before you the grand obstructions which interpose the will of God herein; which
until removed, I do hereby aver, that the Lord of hosts will never desist his
dreadful breaking in pieces of this and all other powers whatsoever, that shall
in the least contradict the same.

That then which the Lord Christ expects from you at this your Convention, is,

1. That you would make his foes his footstool: which, certain I am can be no
otherwise effected, then by plucking up all those plants which the heavenly
Father has not planted, (and that as well root as branch) which I do affirm to
be the Priests and Lawyers of this Nation, or otherwise the devouring locusts
and caterpillars of this Nation: viz. all such Priests (under what name or
title soever digfied or distinguished) as shall be found in Babylon, viz. all
such as have not disclaimed their Rantism and Ordination, which they have
received from the Popes of Rome and their successors, inasmuch as they are of
the same lineage and offspring of the grand harlot of Rome, mentioned Rev. 17.
5. where she is termed The mother of harlots.

And therefore I earnestly desire that you would without partiality consider
(and that most seriously) whether the present Priesthood of this Nation be Jure
Divino: and if they be not, that then you would deal with them as you and your
predecessors have done with the old Harlot, and her eldest daughter Prelacie;
which you must either conclude to be of the offspring of the aforesaid Whore,
or otherwise it must consequently follow, that you have done the Priests of
that Judgment much injury.

But if you and your predecessors did include prelacy as Antichristian, and so
not jure divino, and therefore did pass your sentence upon her, then it will
follow in the next place to consider, in what respect you so adjudged her, as
whether in point of constitution (as by rantizing of Infants, and thereby
erecting National Churches, in imitation of her aforesaid Mother) or in point
of ordination, derived in like manner as aforesaid; or in point of maintenance,
or persecuting principle; or in point of doctrine, or ceremonies.

Now if you judged her for some or all of these, which you must unavoidably do,
then it will follow, that whosoever is found guilty of the like crime, must
incur the like punishment: and therefore if I shall prove that the
Presbyterian Priests of this Nation are so guilty, as aforesaid, they must
consequently be judged accordingly.

Which that they are, is proved, (1.) In that all men know, it is their daily
practice to rantize Infants to all ends and purposes as did the prelates. (2.)
In that their ordination is also unvoidably derived from the Bishops, who
received it from the Popes of Rome. (3.) In that Tithes are of the same lineage
with Monkeries, Abbeys, and Frieries, as also with Bishoprics, and the like
Popish maintenance. (4.) In that they are likewise of the same persecuting
Principle, witness that Ordinance which they procured of the late Parliament
made in Anno not yet repealed. (5.) In point of Doctrine: I appeal to any
knowing man, whether the Presbyterian Priests are not as orthodox as they: so
that there remains nothing wherein they differ from the Prelates, unless in a
few ceremonies, as the wearing of the surpliss, cross in Rantisme, or
Sprinkling of Infants, Pictures in glass windows, or Common Prayer Book, etc.

So that the issue will be, whether you or your predecessors did extirpate
prelacy for the essential, or circumstantiall part thereof: if for the
circumstantiall part only (viz) for the aforesaid ceremonies, then I desire to
know why all, or many of you do not affect Presbytery, seeing they use no such
ceremony as aforesaid; yea doubtless you are exceedingly much to blame for
opposing that Church Government: so that you can no otherwise excuse your
selves of matter of fact against that government, but by applying the
antichristian part of Presbytery to its essentials, (viz their constituting of
National Churches by rantizing of Infants.) (2.) Their Popish Ordination
received from Bishops, and their Babylonish maintenance by Tithes, (which very
maintenance does as fully prove them to be the Offspring of the Romish Harlot,
as the aforesaid Bishoprics, Frieries, Abbeys, and Monkeries, does declare the
said parties that possess them to be descended from Rome as aforesaid,) and if
so, then I would gladly know of any of you, whether antichristianism ought to
be supported in its essentials, and punished in its circumstantials; and if it
ought not to be so supported, then I would know wherefore a Presbyterian Priest
should be continued more then the Bishops and their generation.

And if not, then will not Tithes of course fall into your hands to dispose of,
as well as the aforesaid Munkeries, Abbeys, and Frieries fell into the hands of
Henry the eighth, and other the Kings of this Nation, as being things dedicated
to superstitious uses, or at least in that capacity, as Bishops, Deans and
Chapters Lands was seized on by the late Parliament, the one being every way as
much forfeited as the other, if you will judge of the intentionall desire they
have had of a long time to see you ruined, as I am well assured you are not
ignorant of: but my desire is not, that you would so deal with them, as they
are enemies to your selves, but as it is an apparent support of antichrist in
this Nation; in which sense you are every whit as much bound in duty and
service to Jesus Christ, to deal by the present Presbyterian Priests, as you
have done with the prelatical; which I hope your predecessors did more out of
conscience, because they appear Antichristians, then any ways out of private
revenge of any injury received by them; albeit, had they so done, it had been
justifiable in the fight of God, in that both they and you were and are
authorized and commanded so to do, as in the aforementioned texts of Scripture,
of Rev. 18. 6, 7. viz. by a duplified retaliation of injury offered by
suchlike antichristian brats; as also inasmuch as the Lord has so evidently
declared his detestation against the Presbyterian Priests, as ever he did
against the prelatical, witness Scotland in general, if that which has been
done in England, be not sufficient to prove the same.

So that it will not be only a manifest declaring of your selves to be
antagonists to Jesus Christ in his work now before you, but it will be every
way as dangerous to this Commonwealth, to continue such Priests to preach
therein, as it would be for you to permit the conquered enemy to bear arms
again amongst you.

Gentlemen,

Obj. I know these will be accounted hard sayings by many of you, yea so hard,
as that ye are not able to bear them: I know also, your reply will be, that
they are men of a Godly life and conversation, and therefore it would be a
cruel thing to deal so hardly by them, inasmuch as many of them have great
families, as also in that they have no other way to subsist on for a livelihood.

Resp. I agree with you in all these, as to a seemingly-hard measure: but
inasmuch as the people of God are in Babylon, Rev. 18. 4. and inasmuch as they
have been so earnestly solicited by the Messengers of God to depart or come
out thereof, but will not, it is not the will of God that they should be spared
for their godly life and conversation, or for that they have great families,
and no other way of livelihood, but that in case they shall refuse to come when
called, that then they shall be punished even as Babylonians, as in the same
verse. Again, what respect has been made to the prelates, and their Brood?

Obj. But you will say, The Bishops had great estates left them, but these have
but from hand to mouth.

Resp. That is because many of them have lived as in Rev. 18. 7. viz. more like
Knights then Corridons, and their wives like Ladies then Phillida's, and so
consequently their Children, with their serving-man and waiting-maid; it is
because with her Sister prelacy, and the old baud her mother, they have fared
deliciously, thinking they should sit as queens for ever, without control,
feeling no sorrow. But some may say,

Obj. Many Cavalier Priests are yet continued, albeit they have formerly been
in actual arms against the Parliament.

Resp. That was either a manifest miscarryage of the Parliament, or otherwise
because they made Friends, or that Cameleon-like, by changing themselves into
every judgment that retains Tithes. And hence it is that many Papists have
formerly pretended themselves to be Prelaticants, many Prelaticants to become
pretended Presbyterians, and many Presbyterians pretended Independants: for
what are such now under the notion of Independants, etc. that yet justify the
Antichristian essential of rantizing of Infants, when they seem to condemn
national Churches by their gathered congregations? can any rational man then
imagine but that such persons are either Papists, Prelaticants, or
Presbyterians; or that they do it merely to creep into the favor of the
Magistrate, by closing with his opinion, to the end they might be yet
maintained by such Romish provisions? witness many Independents in and about
London, who to keeep up Tithes, will lecture it to them they account the world;
and to keep in with the Magistrate, will also have a private Congregation,
halting downright betwixt Christ and Antichrist in a shameless manner.

Yea I am confident that suchlike Parsons or Lecturers, will as much gnaw
their tongues, and cast dust upon their heads, yea cry, weep, and wail, for
the loss of Tithes, as any Presbyterian Priest whatsoever.

Object. But you will say, Some mercy would be extended, in respect of wives
and children.

Resp. Inasmuch as there is a general mercy to be extended to all, you may in
charity give something, according as your wisdoms shall think meet; but not in
the least, as the aforesaid Priests are either Jewish or Popish Harpers, or
Prelatical Musicians, or Scotch Bagpipers, or the aforesaid Independent
Trumpeters, Rev. 18. 22. neither as they are Saylors, Craftsmen, Factors or
Merchants of Romish wares, as in the said Chapter.

Object. But I am confident that some of you will yet reply, and say, What will
become of the Colleges, and Lands appertaining thereunto?

Resp. If you can find no employment for them, then you may sell them.

Object. But you will reply, That by so doing, Learning will be utterly
extinguished in this Commonwealth.

Resp. What need is there of it? 1. In that the present Laws are to be no more
in the Latin tongue. 2. In that Popish Latin Service is now out of dare; as
also Spiritual, alias Baudy Courts. So that I know no need any English man has
to speak Latin to another, and so consequently Greek or Hebrew.

Object. But some of you will reply, That the Apostles of Jesus Christ were
immediately taught by God, and therefore such teaching cannot be expected from
the illiterate men of the times. So that such places of learning and education
are very requisite for fitting men for such an employment; as also, that humane
learning is very necessary for men of such employments, in that the gift of
tongues is not now given in such a manner as in the Apostles time. As also, for
the better understanding of the Original texts of Scripture.

Resp. Gentlemen, I know these are the grand objections that you or any can
make in defense of the present Priesthood; which if I give you satisfaction in,
I hope you will not any longer defer the work of God in your hands.

And first, In relation to the gift of tongues mentioned in Acts 4. 13. where
it is remarkable, that after the Apostles had received the same, they were
notwithstanding reputed by Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and
Alexander, with the Rulers, Elders, and Scribes of Jerusalem, to be no other
then unlearned and ignorant men; so that this their marvelling was not at their
gift of tongues, which they any wise saw in Peter and John; but merely at their
rustical boldness, and rudeness of speech (as by miscalling words, or the like)
as is usual with suchlike persons, as daily experience teaches; whereas
certainly had Peter and John retained their quondam gift of tongues, they would
no doubt have used better expressions, then such as did so render them to be
ignorant and unlearned (especially being received in so extraordinary a way:)
which very passage is an argument sufficient of it self to satisfy all
rational men, that the said Peter and John had not at that time any
extraordinary gift of the Spirit upon them: And if so, then it must
consequently have left them. Again, such persons as have the gift of tongues,
in such an extraordinary manner, cannot rationally be esteemed ignorant and
unlearned persons, which they were.

Again, suppose I should grant that they did ever retain the aforesaid
donation of the gift of tongues, so that they could speak all languages (which
is as much as possibly you can desire to be granted you in your friends
behalf,) yet certainly you will grant me that they used such language no
otherwise then to edification; as in 1 Cor. 14. where the Apostle plentifully
discovers the vanity of speaking with tongues, unless to edification. And if
so, what need is there of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, here in England, where the
whole Nation is bred up in the English tongue? And therefore why may not
Englishmen edify one another in the English tongue, albeit they are ignorant
in the aforesaid languages of Latin, Greek and Hebrew? Yea albeit they may be
as justly termed unlearned and ignorant men in their English or mother tongue,
as the aforesaid Peter and John was in theirs.

Again, have not the people of God in this Nation, the same immediate teachings
of the Spirit, as had the Prophets and Apostles of Jesus Christ? are the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament any other then the dictates of the
Spirit of God? 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, 21. Are they not the same in print, as they
were in the Apostles writings; and the same in their writings, as they were in
their words; and the same in their words, as they were in their thoughts; and
the same in their thoughts, as they were in their conceptions; and the same in
their conceptions, as in the infusion; and the same in the infusion, as they
were in the Infusor? (viz, the Holy Ghost) and therefore as Jesus Christ says
in another case unto his Apostles, He that despises you, despises me; and he
that despises me, despises him that sent me. So may I say of the printed word
of God, which whosoever despises, despises not only that, but also the
Apostles that writ the same, as also the Holy Ghost it self, who infused the
same into their minds and thoughts; as also Jesus Christ, and GOD the Father,
from whom the said Holy Ghost did proceed; they being a manifestation each to
other: as printing is a manifestation of writing, writing of a word, and a word
of a thought; so is the Holy Ghost of Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ of God;
and therefore to speak evil of the printed Bible, is to speak evil even of God
himself, who was the Original Author thereof.

Again, are not the said Scriptures appointed to that very purpose of
edification; as also of instruction, and direction, as to the management of
such an office, yea, and that to every particular thereof? as in the Epistles
of Timothy, and Titus, and particularly in 2 Timothy 3. 16. (viz.)

1. In that they are given by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and therefore
a far more excellent way of teaching the mind and will of God, then to read
the conceits of heathen and Antichristian Rhetoric, Logic, Philosophy, and
the rest of the rabble of suchlike trumpery, whereof the Apostle exhorts the
people of God to beware. In which very things the students in Universities do
spend the greatest part of their time they can spare out of the Taverus and
Alehouses.

2. In that the Scriptures of themselves are profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in Righteousness, and that in such a
measure as to make the man of God, (whether teacher or hearer,) perfect, and
thoroughly furnished to all goods works, viz. a complete teacher and hearer, and
that to all ends and purposes; instance Timothy, whose very breeding in
Theology was solely from that School-book, being trained up therein from his
childhood, and not in vain Philosophy as aforesaid. As also in Apollos, who is
likewise applauded by the Apostle, in that he was mighty in the Scriptures,
which is able to make men wise unto salvation; and I I know no greater thing to
be aimed at.

3. In that the Scriptures are the very means which Jesus Christ himself has
appointed for that very purpose, as in John 5. 39. where he inviteth all men
thereunto, as the chief testimony of him. Yea I challenge the whole tribe of
the Priesthood in this nation, to prove either by precept or practice of Jesus
Christ and his Apostles, that ever there was any other course prescribed, or
practiced by them, to fit or prepare laborers for Christ's Vineyard, or work
of the holy Ministry for succeeding times.

4. I would gladly know what fruits of the Spirit are to be obtained in
Colleges, that may not be obtained out of them; or rather, what vices are
there in all the Nation, that are not practiced there? Yea, are they not the
very fountains of Atheism, and Antihristianism, and nests to breed such
ravenous Rooks in, as pester the whole Nation by their forcing Tithes from such
as know it is a sin to pay the same, and that by means of your predecessors
acts yet in force to that purpose, yea, and that under pain of treble damages:
for which things sake, with other their unjust actions, their glory has gone
out like the snuff of a tallow Candle.

5. What are the Authors which their Libraries are stuffed withal, other then
Heathenish and Antichristian? Again, is there any promise annexed to the
practice of reading them? Yea, does not experience teach, that most, if not all
such Commentaries, Expositions, etc. which have been composed by such Heathens
and Antichristians, are found to be light as vanity? instance the voluminous
Volumes of Philosophers, and ancient Fathers (as they call them;) yea, so
light, as that they are of no esteem at all, amongst the people of God that are
come out of Babylon; which I hope you very well know: whereas, he that reads
the book of the Psalms, will find that godly David became wiser then his
teachers, by reading and meditating in the Law and Prophets: And if so, then
what need have we of other teaching then is expressed in the Old and New
Testament? Certainly, he that puts in practice what is there prescribed,
will find it sufficient to bring him to the port of heaven: whereas, as I said
before, the other are even rejected to be cited by the people of God as a
testimony to the Truth. All which does evidently demonstrate the teachings of
men (quatenus men) to be invalid, in comparison to the teaching of the
Scriptures. And if so, what need is there of Universities to breed Divines,
since the holy Scripture alone is sufficient to complete a practitioner in that
Profession as aforesaid; as also, inasmuch as he, whosoever of the people of
God, that is able to speak to the edification, exhortation, and comfort of
their brethren, are complete Prophets of God; what need have we of such
devouring Wolves as aforesaid?

Object. But I know some amongst you will yet say, How shall illiterate,
ignorant, and unlearned men, know the Original? which if they do not, then they
must of necessity take the Translation upon trust; which Scholars do not.

Answ. In answer to which, I deny the conclusion: for he that can read the
Bible in English, takes it no more upon trust, then he that can read the same
in Hebrew, Greek, etc. For unless such persons as the later can produce the
very copy which Moses writ, and have also compared the same with his present
Translation, as also of the Prophets and Apostles, they must of necessity be
said to take the present Hebrew and Greek Translation upon trust, as the
English man does his English Translation: for who can aver the present Hebrew
and Greek copies to be the very same with the aforesaid Original copies, unless
they had exactly compared them with the said Originals?

But you will say, The Gospel cannot be propagated in other Countries by the
people of this Nation, if humane learning be extinguished.

Resp. My answer to this, is, That it is no part of my thought to blast humane
learning, should such an use be made thereof (which as yet there has been very
little or none at all that ever I heard of) but merely as I see it made use of
to cozen and cheat the Country (as in my former instances to that purpose) and
not in the least to its proper edificable use, as intended by God as aforesaid:
for my earnest desire is that these following particulars may be prosecuted by
you that are Members of this present Representative, viz.

1 That such course may be taken for the future in the aforesaid Colleges or
Halls in the two Universities, as that godly able men may be enquired after,
and made use of, that are able to teach foreign tongues or languages.

2 That the aforesaid Colleges and Halls may be set apart to that purpose.

3 That the said Tutor be ordered in the first place to translate the Old and
New Testament into the language or tongue that they purpose to teach.

4 That after each Tutor has so done, he may likewise read the same
translation in English, for the trial of the truth thereof, before such as
shall be appointed for that purpose.

5 That there may be several impressions printed of the said translations.

6 That no persons may be admitted as Students in the said Colleges or Halls,
but such as the Congregational Churches shall approve and present as faithful
and willing to propagate the Gospel in such Countries as use the language or
tongue which he desires to study (if God shall permit him life and health^)

7 That to the aforesaid purpose, every College and Hall in the said
University may be titled or nominated according to the tongue or language that
is taught therein, as, The Hebrew College, (...) College, etc:

8 That the annual Revenues belonging to each of the said Colleges or Halls,
may be employed to the use aforesaid, if there occasion; or if too much, that
then it may be disposed of at your discretion.

9 That such Tutors, so soon as they have made their scholars good proficients,
that then they may be ordered by you to present them to the Churches which
presented them, who are likewise to make what possible speed they can to send
them as aforesaid.

10 That the persons so sent may have a competent salary conveyed unto them
where Providence shall dispose of them, out of the said Colledge-Land, or
otherwise as your wisdom shall think meet.

Which course if taken, I think is as probable a way as may be to propagate the
Gospel even unto the ends of the earth, and answerable to the intended kingdom
of Jesus Christ as aforesad.

Object. But methinks I hear some of you yet quaery, how men may be fitted to
preach the Gospel in this Nation, if the Universities be employed as aforesaid.

Resp. I think every English man is fitted to speak English by his mother, and
daily converse with English men, so that it is no better then a mere cheat, to
send English men to the Universities to learn to speak to English men; for to
what other purpose do the present Students in the said Universities learn
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, but to preach English Sermons? And therefore I shall
humbly desire that such as have a mind to learn such languages for the future
(upon any other account then to propagate the Gospel) may do it at their own
charge; and as for the Tutors, there will be no fear of want, inasmuch as the
aforesaid locusts and caterpillars of this Nation will have little else to do
then to teach such persons.

But to the end that Simeon may suffer as well as Levi, being brethren in evil,
(viz. the Lawyers of this Nation, as the Priests) I shall in the next place set
before you, the dragonical, heathenish, or Kingly power of Nations over the
people of God, which whilst you likewise intend to continue in being, you do
also clearly declare your selves Antagonists to the kingly government of Jesus
Christ; for what are the national Laws of Kings other then the decrees of
tyrants, and corrupt men, whose foundation and institution had their being from
the corrupt reason of the heathen, whose proceedings, laws, and punishments, do
infinitely differ from the laws and punishments imposed by God? Yea, what are
they more then a mere compound of reason and convenience, then such as have the
very image of lightness and corruption engraven upon them? what are they other
then things full of uncertainties, and changeableness, then such as stand in
competition with the divine laws of God; such as take no more notice of the
moral and judicial laws of God, then to be a a color for the gross absurdities
and corruptions of the proficients therein, who cannot define the law they
practice?

Consider therefore, I beseech you, what a shame it will be unto you, if you
henceforth countenance such laws and lawyers in the least, seeing they are the
very brood or offspring of the heathenish Dragon mentioned, Revel. 12. as also
inasmuch as your selves and predecessors have so manifestly declared your
selves in the highest nature against the Original Authors and promoters
thereof; as also in that they are so diametrically opposite to the aforesaid
Sacred and Divine Laws instituted by the everlasting God himself, whose
servants you profess your selves to be in point of Obedience to the same.

As also in as much as the Apostle James affirms, that there is but one
Lawgiver to the people of God, Jam. 4. 12. which the Prophet Isaiah rendereth
to be the Lord Jehovah, where speaking of the exaltation of the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, and the spoiling and ruinating of the adversaries thereof, he
says, Woe unto thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled, and dealest
treacherously, and they did not deal treacherously with thee: (therefore, says
he) when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled; when thou shall
make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee;
(viz. when the limited time appointed for their so doing is accomplished: not
that they would otherwise willingly cease, either to spoil or deal
treacherously with the Saints of the most High God:) a Chapter worthy your most
serious reading and meditation, (as also the precedent and following) where, in
verse. 22. the Prophet declares, that at the accomplishment of the aforesaid
judgments, that Then the Lord himself will become judge unto his people, as
also their Lawgiver, and their King, and their Savior. And if so, then there
ought not to be two Lawmakers, muchless a compound of the Law of God, and the
corrupt reason of William the Conqueror, or any either before or after him, who
have dealt with the moral and judicial law of God, even as Antichrist, or that
whore of Rome has dealt with the injunctions of Jesus Christ in the Gospel,
scruing them to suite with their Dragon-like, and whorish pleasures in all
things; the one setting up corrupt reason in stead of that reason which was
incorrupt; and the other an abolished Priesthood, with the appendances
thereunto belonging, in stead of that which then was, and is as permanent as
Mount Sion, which cannot be removed: by which Tyrannical and subtle practice of
the aforesaid Dragon or Beast, on which the aforesaid whore is said to sit,
they have been the death of many millions of the Saints of the Most High.
Whereas I affirm, that the life of no man ought to be taken away by any other
Law, then of the aforesaid Lawgiver, who alone is able to save and to destroy,
as in James 4. 12. as aforesaid.

Again, Reason it self teaches, that he that gave the life, has only the
power to take it away by his own laws; and if so, then not by the laws of any
the aforesaid persons whatsoever. Consider then what judgment and punishment
have our Judges incurred to themselves by taking away the lives of men for
simple theft! whereas, according to the Laws of God, they ought not to have
dyed, but to have made restitution; and therefore without controversy, a
dreadful woe will light upon you, if you repeal not that law before you send the
(otherwise merciless) Judges to sit in judicature upon such persons; no man's
life being to be taken away otherwise then by the direct law of the aforesaid
only Lawgiver, and that by particular precept, or General Rule.

For if you be Christians, then are you no other then Gods Ministers; and if
so, then are you bound in duty and conscience to execute justice only according
to the will of God, and not according to any different laws made by the
aforesaid persons, that have only usurped that Sovereign power unto
themselves, to take away the lives of men at their pleasure, or lusts, or
malice of their own hearts, or any private revenge of their own or others. For
as the Apostle says in another case, It is requisite in Stewards, that they be
found faithful, 1 Cor. 4. 2. but the will of God in point of judicature,
appears not otherwise then in his word. And therefore inasmuch as that which
is not of Faith (viz. firm persuasion) is sin, Romans 14. 23. As also, inasmuch
as faith ought to be grounded upon the word of God, as being wrought thereby,
Romans 10. 17. how can such Acts of justice be either approved in the sight of
God, or good men, as are not warranted by the said word? And therefore by how
much you permit any laws, that differed from the aforesaid precepts or
presidents in Scripture, by so much you do absolutely declare your selves to be
the brood of the aforesaid Pagan or tyrannical Dragon, which is said to
persecute the Church or people of God, Rev. 12. and that as much as if you your
selves had contrived the same. Yea, I appeal to impudence it self, whether the
aforesaid judicial laws of God be not the best expositors of the moral law. And
if so, what is there wanting in the moral law, that is requisite to a
Commonwealth, either in the Negative or Affirmative part thereof?

Again, inasmuch as the said judicial Law is not in the least repealed, why
ought it not to be in the like repute with you, as it was to the ancient people
of God, unto whom it was first delivered (viz. the Jews) seeing that it cannot
be denied, that believing Gentiles, are as well the seed of Abraham (which the
Apostle affirms, Gal. 3. 9. 23.) and so consequently Jews as well as they; yea,
and that in a far more transcendent relation, by how much the unbelieving Jews
are esteemed no Jews, in comparison of the other, as the same Apostle likewise
affirms. And therefore according to Captain Norwoods rule, though quite
contrary to his opinion, (in that he claims the aforesaid laws of corrupt
reason as his fathers patrimony, and therefore sets an invaluable esteem of
them in his late book, etc.) I say, in the behalf of the aforesaid moral and
judicial laws of God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, that we will have
no other laws then them, inasmuch as they are our birthright and patrimony; as
also in that it is our heavenly Fathers will that we should be obedient
thereunto, even as it was the will of Jonadab the son of Rechab' that his sons
should drink no wine; as also in that they are as well now the mark of
distinction betwixt the people of God and heathens, as they were betwixt the
Jews and the Gentiles, at the time of the giving thereof; and therefore you are
bound in duty and service to propagate the same, and annihilate the other,
which Captain Norwood would so gladly have preserved, bidding defiance even to
God himself to alter them (in a most impious manner) whereas there is not one
text of Scripture that gives liberty to any Magistrate whatsoever, either to
add or detract from the aforesaid Laws, or anywise to alter them, as to fit
them with their humor, either as to point of time, or manner of the Country
where they live. And if not, then does it not argue a gross presumption in
those that do so? yea do they not by such means take upon them to be wiser then
God himself, by such their altering and leaving those directions and rules of
justice, which he has set down as irrevocably unalterable, in respect to man,
in the least Iota or tittle thereof, Mat. 5. 17, 18, 19. and that upon pain of
incurring the displeasure of the great God of heaven and earth? As also,
inasmuch as the foolishness of God is wiser then the wisdom of men, 1 Cor. 1.
25. yea surpassing the deepest subtilties or State-policies in the world.

Again, Is it not the boasting of the supporters and practitioners of our
present Heathenish Laws, that they are founded upon the laws of God? and if so,
I would gladly know of them what laws of God they mean, if not the aforesaid
laws. Yea, certainly every of them will be ready to confess the same, and
think they much honor the present laws by so saying: And if so, then how dare
any of them to slight any one tittle of them Laws, which they have hitherto so
much magnified for their own advantage?

Judge therefore I pray you, wherefore it is that they have not made use of the
Original it self, from whence they say the present laws are derived (viz.
whether it be because the laws of God are less politic, or less profitable,
less tedious, or less chargable, less inconsistent with the mind and will of
God, or the mind and will of the aforesaid supporters or practitioners therein.

Again, Did not the judicial law of Moses serve to decide all controversies
tending to the violation of the moral law? and is it not now as able to serve
us to the like purpose? But put the case it should not be able so to do, are we
therefore left at liberty to cut and choose, to punish that fault with death,
which is appointed by God to be healed by restitution; and that crime with
purse-punishment, for the which death was to be inflicted, and so to add and
diminish at pleasure?

No certainly, in such cases we are in no wise permitted by God to diminish one
tittle thereof, but rather to supply what is defective therein. But there is no
ground for any such jealousy to arise amongst the people of God, as to think
the said law to be deficient in the least, it having the character of
perfection stamped upon it, Psalm. 19. 7. yea to be holy, just, and good, Romans
7. 12. Yea doubtless such a law, as if put in practice by you, (which I do
hereby in the name of God adjure you to do) would doubtless be a chief means
under God to convert his ancient people the Jews, we receiving their law, they
our Gospel; we their Moses, they our Christ: which happy conjunction was
certainly predicted at the transfiguration of Jesus Christ in the mount, where
Moses and Elias (viz. the Law and the Prophets) are said to associate, and bear
testimony of him, as well as the word or voice from heaven (or his Church.)
Yea, even in that his glorified condition, which doubtless did typifie his rule
and government in his Monarchical kingdom as aforesaid; at which time there
should be a sweet concurrence and harmony betwixt the Gentile Saints and Jews a
fitter obligation then which to unite them together, I think cannot be
imagined; and which once effected, would be the greatest earthly glory to the
Saints of God in General that ever was yet attained; as also to the Angels in
heaven, who doubtless would also very much rejoice thereat.

Now for the better understanding of my meaning, touching the aforesaid
judicial Law, It is to be observed, that in the writings of Moses, there are
diverse sorts of laws, as the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws; which Ceremonial Law
is wholly abolished by Christ, they being only types and shadows of his bodily
substance, which when once come, the other was to be done away by gradations,
until he gave up the Ghost, saying, It is finished; at which time it was wholly
accomplished and abrogated, with all its appendancies.

Again, the judicials are of three sorts, viz. 1. Such as are annexed to the
moral Law, as the punishment of Adultery and murder, and disobedience to
Parents with death, and such like. 2 Or such as were appendant to the
Ceremonial Law, as the punishment of those that touched any dead thing, or that
came near a woman in her monthly courses, and suchlike. 3 Or such as belonged
to that peculiar policy and State of that Commonweath, as concerning the year
of Jubilee, the raising up seed to the brother departed, in marrying his wife,
and the like.

Of which two latter there is no doubt, but the first is abrogated, together
with the Ceremonies whereon they attended; the other, as proper to that
Government, is also now determined: for otherwise the like course must be now
taken for raising of seed as was then; which Law Jesus Christ affirms that
Moses made merely because of the hardness of the Jews hearts; as in the case of
the woman that had seven husbands, which (says he) from the beginning was not
so; there being then but one woman to one man, and one man to one woman; and so
doubtless most, if not all the Laws of that tenure.

So that the third kind of Judicial remains only to be put in practice,
about which this following Quaery does arise, viz.

Quaere. Whether the punishment inflicted by Moses for the breach of the moral
Law, together with the moral Law is imposed by God upon all Christian
Magistrates, so that they are obliged to the same.

1 In that by such a practice, it would quite overthrow the policy and
institution of this present Commonwealth, which for a long time has continued.

2 In that our Savior commanded to give tribute to Caesar, by which act he did
enjoin obedience to those higher powers, which did at that time bear the sword,
albeit they were Heathens.

3 Inasmuch as our Savior himself observed not the judicials belonging to the
Moral Law: for where he that gathered sticks on the Sabbath Day, was stoned to
death by Moses; Our Savior excuses and defends his Apostles, who did as
much as in effect, by plucking up ears of corn on the Sabbath day, and rubbing
them in their hand for their sustenance, Mat. 12.

4 In that he gives a rule that it was not lawful for a man to put away his
wife, except for the cause of Fornication and Adultery; Mat. 19. which
exception needed not, if either in fact then, or in right afterward,
Adulterers and Adulteresses were then to be put to death.

5 In that he also suffered the woman taken in the very act of Adultery to
escape without punishment of death, Joh. 8.

6 In that the continual practice shows that there was no Law in force at
that time to put such like malefactors to death, instance also the incestuous
person, 1 Cor. 5. which the Apostle wills only to be excommunicated.

Resp. Touching the imposition of the aforesaid Laws, in relation to the
essential parts thereof, that they are not left to the liberty of a Christian
Magistrate to add any thing thereunto, or to take from it, or in the least to
alter it (so as shall be thought meet for the present time or manner of the
Country) I think I have formerly said enough to satisfy any rational man, as
that by giving way thereunto, they would not only grapple with God himself in
point of wisdom, but that they would also thereby put themselves into such a
condition, as that they might altogether leave those divine Laws, Commandments
and rules of Justice (and that at pleasure) which the Lord God of heaven and
earth has set down for a rule and direction to observe, and contrary whereunto
they cannot be approved in the sight of God or godly men.

2 As concerning the practice thereof, whereas it is alleged that the putting
in execution of the aforesaid judicials, would quite overturn all the policy
and institution of the present Commonwealth; I answer, that it is to that very
end and purpose, that I do propound the same, to be put in execution by you.

For by how much you retain the present policy and institution of this
Commonwealth, by so much you bid defiance to the aforesaid Laws of God himself,
as I have plentifully proved.

3 Whereas it is alleged that neither Jesus Christ or his Disciples or
successors did ever yet assume the power to put the aforesaid Laws in
execution; I answer, that the aforesaid persons have ever been under restraint,
as captives or sojourners, and therefore were always under the Laws of them
that were Lords over them, (viz. heathenish Magistrates) and therefore were in
no wise permitted to make use of the aforesaid Laws of God. As in the time of
Jesus Christ his abode upon earth, does clearly appear, by the Answer which the
people of the Jews, (whom the aforesaid Laws properly concerned) gave unto
Pilate (at the arraignment of Jesus Christ before him in point of blasphemy)
where they tell him, that by their Law they could put no man to death; No not
for that very crime of blasphemy, which they accused him of: which does clearly
import, that the Scepter was then departed from Judah, and a Lawgiver from
betwixt his feet, the promised Messiah being then come and amongst them, albeit
they were ignorant thereof, and yet are to this present day.

4 Whereas it is alleged that Jesus Christ himself did not practice according
to the said Laws, etc. I Reply, That it was because, as a man, he was under
restraint as the rest of the Nation of the Jews, and therefore had no more
power then they to null or make void the then present Laws of Caesar, 2 in that
his kingdom was not of that present world, he being at that time in a suffering
condition, his then appearing in the flesh being only as an example of
patience to all his Disciples.

So that all the former objections do not in the least prove that the aforesaid
Laws are in the least abolished: and if not the Laws, then consequently not the
aforesaid judicial punishments; for by how much the Law of God was then
restrained, by so much the said punishment was not put in practice: but this
restraint was to continue but its appointed season, viz. until such times as
Jesus Christ's world should be made apparent, in which he should reign as King
over the face of the whole earth, according to the before mentioned prophesies:
which kingdom I judge took place, as soon as the fatal blow was given to the
late King; which being done, immediately the late Parliament did utterly
renounce the Government of this Nation by Kings as Tyrants, as appears in the
Old Exchange, where over the place where the late Kings Portraicture was fixed,
is engraven, Exit Tyrannus. Which does clearly import a change of the
government from such Kings as the Israelites defired to be governed by, in 1 Samuel 8. 5. unto that Government which they were formerly governed by, as by
Judges, etc. and so consequently of the Laws, according to the saying, New
Lords, New Laws: which did also clearly appear by the late Act of Adultery,
where they made the sin punishable by death: which does clearly manifest that
the late late Parliament was carried on, though in darkness, to put in
execution the aforesaid Laws of God: instance the also the late Act of the Lord
General (if as reported) in not permitting Simple Theft to be punished by
death. Which are two evident testimonies that the Lord is steadfastly purposed
to promote his own Laws in stead of the present Laws of the Nation.

And therefore if you will set your selves with all your might to prosecute the
same, you will thereby be made famous to all posterity: for thereby you will
not only be made Conquerors over the whole earth, as in the aforesaid
Prophecies, but will also be instrumental to the conversion of the ancient
people of God, (viz. the Jews.)

Yea, I dare aver, that if you will set your selves to the aforesaid work with
a cordial resolution to erect the aforesaid Laws of God, and Ordinances of
Jesus Christ, you will strike as great a terror into all the Nations about, as
the Israelites did to the Canaanites, or David to Nabal, when he marched
against him. For, indeed, what flesh dares oppose the Laws of their Maker, and
the Ordinances of their Redeemer?

And therefore I beseech you deal uprightly, and with a sincere heart, in the
great work of God before you, even as in the presence of God: and be not like
your predecessors, with a heart and a heart; one for Christ, and another for
Antichrist; with a heart to abolish Prelacie, and not Presbytery; to take away
Bishops, Deans and Chapters lands, etc. and yet to retain Presbytery and their
Tithes; with a heart to punish the seventh Commandment according to the
punishment appointed by God, and not all the rest of the said Commands. For be
you well assured, that if you halt (as did your predecessors) betwixt light and
darkness, Christ and Antichrist, God and Mammon, like the lukewarm Laodicean,
and that either through the corruption of your own hearts, or the subtle,
politic, and Jesuitical designs, instigations, or allurements of any your
nearest and dearest friends or alliance in the whole world; the Lord will as
well spue you out, as he did your predecessors, of whom it is reported, That
they were Sermon-proof.

If it be expected by any, that I should have drawn the aforesaid Laws and
Punishments into a method, I answer, that I have forborne the same, in that they
will very shortly be published in print by an able man, who has extracted the
same, and is now ready for the Press.

I desire therefore, that that which I have here written may not be slighted,
because it does not proceed from one that is eminent, or adorned with Titles of
Honor, or in a great place of Trust; for Solomon tells you of a poor wise
man, that did every way equalize the greatest Magistrates in the City where he
lived, in point of wisdom, albeit they were too stately to take any notice of
it; which he esteems as one of the evils which he perceived under the sun,
and that a great one, Eccles. 9. 13, etc.

Again, peradventure some of you will think I have been too bold with you, as
you are the Supreme power of the Nation. And if so, I must reply with David's
words, The righteous are as bold as lions, and will not fear what man can do
unto them. Besides, it is not the first time that I have put Magistrates in
mind of their duty, as will appear by my book titled Rome ruined by
White Hall, etc.

In the Preface to which Book, I told the late Parliament that they were like
to Martha, cumbred with much business, (by reason of the clamours of the
people, whose chief affections were taken up in obtaining a flourishing state,
with the appurtenances thereunto, viz. a full trade, etc.) but that there was
but one thing necessary, which was far from the peoples thoughts, and (I
feared) not very near theirs, viz. the erecting of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
which I said ought to be their chief object, in that the other would fall of
course, as our blessed Savior affirms, Matthew. 6. 33. a Chapter worthy your
serious meditations, in this your present employment: for doubtless Providence
does as well extend it self over the whole Nation, as over one particular
person, or sparrow, or hair of a man's head. But such is the frail condition of
our natures, that we dare not trust God with our temporals.

I did also, in minding them of the Clergy of the Nation, use these following
expressions, viz. Sure it is, you have found that Tribe as much averse to your
proceedings, as, had you not been valiant, might have utterly obstructed the
work of God in your hands. And withal told them, that so long as they permitted
such Judas 's, it was impossible that the State should ever be in quiet: so
that they must either resolve to suppress them, or to be suppressed by them.

To which purpose, I did also at that time admonish them to bestir themselves
like men of valor, by giving them a full overturn, and that both root and
branch; as also by giving way to such gatherers of Churches, as did practice
according to the rule prescribed in Gods word, So that the true Churches and
Ministers of Jesus Christ might be distinguished from them of Aarons order; and
withal told them, that in so doing we should be put into the like condition as
were the people of God at Antioch, where the Disciples were first called
Christians; and thereby not only bring glory to the Nation, but also
immortalize their names to all posterities; as also that Jesus Christ had been
so pleased to make them the first tender of honor to restore his Church to the
Primitive purity thereof, which was a thing they had very often engaged
themselves to perform. Whereupon in the Epilogue to the said book, I
admonished them in these following verses, saying,

And therefore hear, O Kings and Rulers all;
Hark with attendance, listen to the call
That does invite you for to entertain
Christ for your King, who is resolved to reign
'Ore you and yours, either by love, or aw,
But rather does desire that love may draw
Your hearts for to comply to bear his yoke:
If not, then know, there is a heavy stroke
To be laid on you, with an iron rod,
Even by the hand of a provoked God,
The which will crush your power, and make you know,
That as in things above, so here below,
He has the Kingly power, and will direct
All such as he intends to protect.
And has not the same been completely fulfilled upon them, for their
negligence therein? And therefore I desire once more, that you would learn by
their harms to beware, least the same punishment befall you, as it has done
them; which the Lord, in much mercy prevent, by making you such persons as is
mentioned in my Epistle to the Reader, viz. such as are clothed with the white
robes of the Lamb Christ Jesus, to the end the prediction at the close of that
Epistle may be accomplished by you, viz.

Take notice Rome, even in the same White Hall,
Where here thou had thy Rise, thou have thy fall.
Postscript.
IF any desire the Book, they may have it at Giles Calverts Shop at the
Black-spread Eagle, at the West end of Paul's.



FINIS.

