A SERMON Preached before His MAJESTY AT CHRIST-CHVRCH IN OXFORD. On the 18.
of April 1643.

By WILLIAM STAMP Vicar of Stepney in the County of Middlesex.

OXFORD, Printed in the year 1643.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE, CHARLES PRINCE OF WALES, DVKE OF CORNWALL, and
Earl of CHESTER.
SIR,
IT has pleased your Highness to command this Sermon to the Press, and me
to be your servant: what you have observed from either, that might incline you
to so much grace and favor, I know not; unless it were my plain dealing with
the Times. This (indeed) your Highness mentioned with a deep sense and relish.
Would God the mad world knew it. Certainly it were enough to stop the foul
mouths of some: enough to warm the honest hearts of others. God Almighty so
compose the present troubles of this State, that the Government thereof may
stand the surer for this shaking; and continue and increase his graces in you
for the glorious support thereof, when it shall please him to lay it upon your
shoulders.

Thus prays Your Highnesses most obliged humble servant, WILLIAM STAMP.

A SERMON PREACHED before His Majesty at Christchurch in Oxford on Tuesday,
the 18 of April, 1643.
ESAIAS 59. 1, 2. 1 Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save,
neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear.

2 But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your
sins have hid his face from you that he will not hear.


IN the precedent Chapter, we have the difference stated between a religious,
true fast; and that which is merely fictitious and Hypocritical. In this, we
have the true ground why our fastings at some times become fruitless, and our
prayers unsuccessefull: Both common theames; yet neither of them unseasonable
as our times now are. Never did any age produce more fasting, more preaching,
more praying. Never did these holy exercises produce less fruit. Look we well
upon the fruits, and we must be driven to conclude (by an argument a
posteriori) that sure some where or other, there has been fasting for strife,
and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness: Esaias 48. 4.
for of these bitter and accursed fruits have we abundantly tasted, witness
every Cranny and Corner of two miserable distressed Kingdoms: So that our
devotion has neither prevented Gods Judgments: nor (which is worse) Gods
Judgments prevented our sins. What between the Atheist in heart (the
schismatic, factious, and dissembling Hypocrite;) and the Atheist in
profession (the licentious, daring, and resolved sinner) we are yet to fast,
and yet to pray, and yet to prosper, and prevail with God: we are (at best)
but under the throes and pangs of our deliverance; not, but that God is as
easily entreated at this day as ever he was since the Creation; his power and
propensitie to relieve England, and Ireland, is as great (at this day) as ever
it was to relieve his own peculiar Israel. The great incapacity we labor
under, is from our selves. Gods Controversy for sin, Hos 4. 1.
is the Cause of all our Controversies among our selves; his Mercy and Justice
are as immutable as himself, and therefore if we are not relieved, we must
not blame him, but thank our selves. For Behold the Lords hand is not
shortened, etc. This Text is delivered by the Prophet, to prevent a mistake
which Commonly arises in the hearts of men, in their conceits of God, and
themselves. For if we want what we would have, or feel what we would want, we
rave and storm, and impute the troubles of Israel sometimes, to Ahab the
King, sometime to Elijah the Prophet, nay sometimes we pin them on God
himself; and instead of humbling our selves under his mighty hand, 1 Pet 5. 6.
we behave our selves very frowardly in his covenant Psalm. 44. 17.
.

For the prevention of which, this text has a double aspect, with one eye it
looks upwards upon Almighty God, and there takes notice of an omnipotent hand,
an attentive Ear, both pointed at with an Ecce, Bebold the Lords hand is not
shortened that it cannot save: neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear, with
the other eye it looks downward, upon man: upon man at distance from his
maker, upon man divorceing himself from his God, and (by a self
Excommunication) delivering himself up into the power and government of Satan.
So that we have here Aliquid Dei, and Aliquid nostri: that which belongs to
God, described in the Negative, his hand is not shortened, his ear is not
heavy, etc. (that is) he is always one and the same God: That which belongs to
us, (and which indeed we can only call our own) are our sins; and not barely
sins but Iniquities too; and these with two desperate Consequences following
close at the heels; one is, they obscure the light of Gods favorable
Countenance: Lu^. 16. 26.
the other is, they make a (...) between God and us; they make us (that which
is so odious in the very name) Seperatists; and of all Seperatists the worst,
Seperatists from God. These are the natural parts of the text, wherein I shall
breifely discover Gods power and propensity to relieve his people, and
afterward enquire into these 3 particulars. 1. What it is that seperates from
God 2ly. Wherein God seperates from us, 3ly. (which results from both) in what
condition we are when God is depated from us.

Behold the Lords hand is not shortened, etc. The words are a large proposal of
mercy offered to all that will but make themselves capable of it, namely, that
God has always an attentive ear, and a ready hand, to relieve those that
shall address themselves unto him. Not that God has either Hand or Ear in
strictnes of speech, in both Humanum dicit, he speaks to us (as the nourse to
the child) in that language, wherein we are best able to understand him. Nor is
it a single mercy that is here proposed, but mercy ingeminated; not hand alone,
or ear alone, but hand and ear both: not an Hand Shortened, or an Ear heavy:
but an hand stretched out, an ear always attentive. So that we can no sooner
present a prayer, but God immediately meets it with his ear, and whilst the
prayer is even entering into his ears, he meets and embraces with his hand of
mercy.

Again, the mercies here proposed are of two sorts, either Spiritual mercies,
such as concern the inward man; or Temporal, such as concern the
preservation of the outward: in both these respects the hand of the Lord is not
shortened. As for spiritual mercies, I shall only say thus much in brief,
that God (in that Covenant of Grace which he is pleased to make with his
Creature) freely offers unto us his son, and in him all the Treasures of
inexhaustible mercy: No otherwise then a King by his Proclamation Royal,
offers his mercy to those rebels, that will but throw away their Arms, and
come in and submit themselves to him, and his Government. But as those
Proclamations are seldom without the Proviso of a limited time: so Gods
mercies have their dates upon them; which if once expired, they are no longer
mercies, but the heavy doomes of wrath and Judgment; like the same exhalation
which distills at one time in a sweet; softning shower; and at another time, by
being detained too long, is hardened into a thunderbolt. To the old world he
gave a time of 120 years Gen: 6: 3: To the City of Nineve a time of 40 days,
Jonah 3. 4. To Jezabell a certain space to repent of Her Fornication, Revel:
2: 21: To every soul Horam prafixam, a certain limited time Heb. 4. 7. And as
he gives his word of Command to the sea, Psalm. 104. 9.
thus far thou shall come and noe farther: so his word is gone out concerning
every one of of us here present: Thus long my hand shall not be shortened unto
you, Thus long ye have the Scepter of my mercy held out unto you: Thus long I
am content to wait, and listen, to hear but so much as a Quid feci, come from
you: Ier. 8. 6.
But not a minute longer then the limited time, the glass is turned upon you,
and there is no reversing the sentence after it is once pronounced. We know they
were all virgins in the parable, and all of them alike slumbered and slept,
Mat. 25. 1.
only the foolish ones, stayed a little beyond their limited time. The time is,
when God may and will be found: Esaias. 55. 6.
The time will be, when God cannot, will not be found; Prove. 1. 28.
when his hand will be shortened and his ear heavy etc. and then he that is
filthy shall be filthy still, Revel. 22. 11.
and he that is unjust shall be unjust for ever. 14. 13.
And because Non est nostrum, etc. It is not for us to know when this time
shall be. How thrifty should we be of those hours, which are but given us to
prepare for that hour which neither Men, nor Angels know of? How seasonable
and welcome should that hand of mercy be: which (like our Saviors unto Saint
Peter) offers at this instant to save me from an eternal drowning? How
precious and invaluable that moment, that gives me either a Been or a Male
Discessit to all eternity? That part of time which is past, will never wheel
about again, that which we think and presume is yet to come, may peradventure
never come, the only time we can call our own is the present, as yet his Hand
is not shortened, neither his ear heavy: It shall be our wisdom therefore, to
make Gods time, our time, the time of his Grace: the time of our
Reconciliation: and let this be thought upon at all times: That he that
neglects the present time, in hopes of future, does for the present forsake his
own mercy: and shall sensibly find himself for the time to come, more
hardened, more unworthy, if not incapable of that mercy he has slighted.

2ly In regard of Temporal preservations his Hand is not shortened, etc. The
same hand of mercy which was a Convoy to the Israelites in the Sea Exodus: 14. 2.
, a Crane to Joseph in the pit Genesis 37. 28.
: to Jeremy in the Dungeon Ier. 38. 13.
, A protection to Daniell in the Den Dan: 6. 23.
, to the three children in the furnace Dan: 3 27:
: The same hand that had the winds in his fist Pro: 30. 4.
in 88: The same Digitus Dei, that pointed out that horrid, (though now we
cannot say unparrallelled) Conspiracy November. 5: The same hand that saved a
Crown, The Battle at Edgehill.
and sheltered the Royal blood October. 23. (at the apprehension of which hazard
our Trembling will be, (and our praises should be) as strong and lasting as our
memories.) The same Canopy of good providence and protection does as yet hang
over us, if we do not run away from under it.

And as it is with the Hand: so is it likewise with the Ear; Certainly the
Ear of the Almighty was very free, and open to our forefathers: that Joshuah
and Hezechiah could command the Sun to stand still or go back Josh 110. 12.
as they should direct: That Elijah had so much power over Israel and the
Elements, 2 King. 20 10.
that there could be neither rain nor dew for three years, but only at his
word: 1 King: 17 1.
And that Moses had so much power in prevailing with God, Numb: 16.
that he is entreated of God, not to entreat for the people. And yet Saint
James will tell ye these were but men: ^am: 5 17.
men, subject to the very same passions, and infirmities with any of us. Our
sins have made all the difference that is between us. Behold his ear is not
yet heavy, etc. The Sun is always of the same strength, and influence,
notwithstanding an Eclipse, or interposition of a Cloud: The needle of the
Compass leanes always to the same point, be the weather never so foul, or
the distance never so far. Gods power is like the Sun, allwaies in full
strength, there is nothing hid from the heat thereof: Psalm 119 6.
his propensitie to help, like the needle of the Compass, leanes always one
and the same way: But we mistake our God, because we mistake our selves; and
(with the giddy apprehensions of those that put to Sea) we think the Land goes
away from us, when the truth is we go away from it.

God is an Eternal, and Immutable essence, the two arms of his Mercy and
Justice, of equal dimension and extent: never so strict in Justice, but
always merciful: never so Gracious in mercy but always Just. Nor is it
possible he should be otherwise at any time, then what he has been from all
Eternity. Behold the hand of the Lord is not shortened, etc.

This Doctrine of Gods immutability, lays a strict charge upon the pulpit and
the press, to be faithful and impartial in those messages that come from
God. Our doctrine should not be like the water in the weather-glasse, that
rises and falls according as the wind sits. If God be always the same, why
should not his word be so too? There is not under heaven, a more ugly and
deformed creature then a changeling in the pulpit; And what ever men may hope
to gain, or save, in desperate, and unsteady times; by wresting that which was
never made to bow, The Scripture.
yet, sure I am there is one text in Saint John's Revel. will not be wrested;
That to the bold usurper on Gods word, (either by Addition or Diminution) God
shall add all the plagues that are written in that book, and shall take away
his part out of the book of life. Revel 22, 18.

And (in the second place) it would be no shame for the zealous Sectarie to
reform the desperate error of his way; who is now Jesuit enough to contract,
or dilate the Hand of Gods mercy, according as he sees the purse open, and
shut, to the cause and himself. He makes great use of the Devils perspective;
whereof he has one end for the Pulpit, and another end for the Chamber. This
in the Pulpit shall present mercy contracted, or (like the character he writes
in) in short hand; That in the chamber shall present it both vaste, and near;
and under the pretense of Christian Liberty, or something that must go for
zeal, shall instruct ye to swallow any kind of wickedness whatsoever. Thus by
his subtle arguments drawn from the paucitie of the Elect, the difficulty of
being saved, at one time, and the Cheapnesse of mercy at another, he fills his
purse by the sale of his Spiritual Comforts, and Saints with more confidence
and freedom, then that Church he so much declaimes against.

Lastly, Let the dejected drooping penitent lift up his eyes unto the hills
from whence comes his help; Psalm. 121. 1.
and from this text take a fair prospect of mercy to his saving Comfort:
Behold the Lords hand is not shortened, etc. He has given thee all the
assurances of mercy thou can propose unto thy self: he has given thee his
Royal word, his Covenant under hand and seal, his many sacred protestations:
nay, he has bound himself by Oath, to be reconciled, at what time soever thou
shall turn and repent. Away then with those fears and Jealousies, that make
thee incapable of thy makers mercy. The Majesty of a King is never so deeply
wounded, as when Royal intentions, and Declarations become blasted by
distrust. And it is just with God, that they should forsake their own mercy,
that dare not trust it. The truth is, The weakness of our faith, proceeds
commonly from the foulness of our guilt, and the reason why we stand in our
own light, and turn our backs upon Gods favorable countenance, is because
our works are the works of darkness, Joh. 3. 19.
and therefore we hate that ^ight that will discover them.

Beware then of shortning the good hand of God; Remember Moses at the rock;
Number. 20. 10.
and that great favorite that perished at the gate of Samaria, 2 King. 7. 2.
17.
by the weight of that mercy he would not believe. Though more miscarry by
presumption, yet the more desperate are they that ruin themselves by their own
despair. If therefore thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus Christ,
and believe with thine heart that God has raised him from the dead; (and
steer thy course according to this belief) thou have the Apostles warrant,
thou shall be saved, Romans 10 9.

In the mean time (for the great extremities we labor under) the same Apostle
assures, that God is able to do exceeding abundantly for us, above all that we
can ask or think. Ephesians. 3. 20.
It may seem strange: what? above all that we can ask or think? Sure that
must be a vast circumference of mercy, that extends it self beyond our
thoughts; and if deliverances would come with thinking, we could soon think
our selves into a better condition. But mistake not; This hand of mercy is not
held out to every idle, squandring thought, every extemporary, indigested
prayer: but confined to prayers qualified with faith; thoughts regulated by
obedience; fasting governed by sincerity. It Is expected all these should move
from a pure heart, a good Conscience, and from faith un^ained. Ephesians. 1. 5.
We ask and receive not, and St James gives the reason, Jam. 4. 3.
because we ask amiss; we think high, and think in vain, because (indeed)
we do little else but think: we fast often, and miscarrie when all is done;
and the reason follows in the text, because the obstruction continues
unremoved; Behold the Lords hand is not shortened, neither his ear heavy: but
your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins etc.

First then, what it is that separates. Saint Paul makes the Quoere Romans 8. 35.
Who shall separate from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? If these would
separate, we were but in a very ill condition, as our times now are; by these
(indeed) faith may seem at some time stupefied, or as it were strangled for
the time, it cannot be extinguished. (as there be many things that will cast
into a trance, that do not separate the soul from the body) Nothing from
without can make this separation, the Enemies that must do it, must be of our
own house, of our own cabinet and familiar acquaintance: the text calls them
here by two names, Sins, and Iniquities: (that is) they are several sorts of
sins, and several degrees in sin: what these Iniquities were, and what a
mischeivous influence they had upon the Commonwealth of Israel, may be seen
in the verses immediately following the text; Their hands were defiled with
innocent blood: their lips black with lies: their tongues furred with
murmuring, their hearts so mischeivous that they hatched Cockatrice eggs: they
weaved the Spiders web, their feet swift to shed blood, the way of peace they
knew not, they made themselves crooked paths, that whosoever went along with
them might not know peace: this the extract of their Sin; and therefore their
punishment follows, They groaped as men without Eyes, and stumbled at noone
day, they roared all like Lions, and mourned like Doves, and sat in desolate
places like dead men, etc. In the seventh of Ier. 12. God commands his people
to take notice what he had done to Shiloh ( the place of his name, the dearly
beloved of his soul) Deuteronomy. 12. 11. Jer. 12. 7.
only for the wickedness of those that dwelt there; and the Judgment we read
of in the first of Sam. namely, the Ark of God (which had continued among them
almost 300 years) was taken by the Philistines, their Priests slain, and
their people miserably discomfited; 1. Sam. 4. 11.

The time will not give me leave to present ye with observations taken from
Gods dealing with the old world, with Sodom, and Gomorrha, with Egypt, Ninive,
Jerusalem, with some neighboring Kingdoms of late years; or to compare our
peace and plenty, with that of Samaria, and Jerusalem; The light of our
knowledge, with that of Chorazin and Bethsaida; The sins of our nation, with
the villainy of Gibeah, when there fell by the sword threescore and five
thousand; Jud. 10.
The pride of our nation, with David's ambition, when there fell by the
pestilence seventy thousand; 2 Samuel 24. 25.
The rebellion of our nation, with that of Corah and his company, when there
fell by the same plague 14 thousand and 7 hundred, besides those which the fire
and a strange death devoured. Number. 16.
I shall only add a double aggravation of our sins, wherein we have
out-stripped all that ever were before us.

First (as if in all the mire of our forefathers there had, not been room
enough for us to wallow) we have fulfilled that of the Apostle, and have
approved our selves exquisite inventors of evil things, Romans 1. 30. Witness
our new inventions to find out strange sins, Peccata aliena naturae, aliena
Gratiae, monsters in nature, prodigies in Christianity; witness our new
devised excesses in diet and apparel, and our new minted oaths and
execrations, banded without blushing in every corner of our streets.

And secondly, I find it recorded by the Psalmist (though with no great honor
to the Israelites) Psalm. 78. 34.
that when God slew them, then they sought him, though before they did not;
'Twere well if but so much could be said of us; God has slain us, now almost
a twelvemonth together, every day brings in the report of a new slaughter some
where or other, nay very probable it is, that God is slaying even whilst I am
speaking; Reading, Lichfield. Leedes, Manchester, all besieged at that time.
and yet, I fear, we are yet to seek our God: At first (indeed) he only held
the rod of his indignation over us, and threatened a long time to strike, that
he might not strike at all; and when he did begin to draw blood, he did it
rather like a physician, then an executioner. But now, that we have provoked
him to draw more blood, then the body can well spare; and some of the best
blood too; now that the axe is laid to the root of all that is dear unto us
(our Sovereign, our religion, our laws, liberties and lives being all in
danger) Is there an adulterer the less Prove. 7. 9.
walking in the twilight? Is there an oath the less, darted against the
Majesty of heaven? Is there any abatement of sin, any improvement of grace
under all our stripes? Sure, I may rather conclude, that the tides of sin are
far more high, and overflowing under Judgment, then ever they were under
mercy: Romans 2. 4.
his mercy did not lead us before, nor do his Judgments as yet drive us to
amendment. And therefore what can we conclude, but that without infinite mercy
(the way whereof we cannot see in Gods revealed will) our sins are ripe, and
we are hardened to a swift destruction. I know this is harsh, and unpleasing;
but I know also, that these are no times for the pulpit to present fine-spun
opinions, as ornaments to be worn only in the ear; Ezekiel. 3. 17.
It Is the watchmans duty to give timely warning, and there is a woe reserved
for that spiritual physician that skins over the wounds of Gods people to
their hurt, saying, Peace, peace, whilst iniquities do separate. Jer 6. 14.
For when the sword has done his command, pestilence and famine shall be
called in to perform theirs: nay (as if all the written wrath of God were not
enough to startle us) the 28 of Deuteronomy. speaks of unwritten plagues. Deuteronomy. 28.
61.
So that there shall never want a plague to find out that people that stand out
in rebellion against God; And it is little less then Atheistical to believe,
that God will give over punishing till we give over sinning.

So that, as (in the mystery of our Redemption) it was not the malice of the
chief priests; nor the blindness of the people; nor the iniquity of Pilate;
nor the treachery of Judas; but our sins that drew our Savior into that
dreadful Agony of his passion: so in the mystery of that providence which
hangs over us at this day, it is neither the error, nor treachery of counsels;
nor the destructive factions and divisions among themselves; nor the ignorance
of a seduced people, and infatuated nation; nor the wildfire of sedition,
thrown abroad with so much art and industry; at all which we so much storm
and rave; no, Gods messenger must bid you look some other way, into your
selves, into your own bosoms: they are your own iniquities, that have
unhinged our goodly frames of Government, and drawn the Church and State into
that dreadful Agony under which it now labors: But your iniquities have
separated, etc.

Secondly, wherein God separates. First God withdrawes from a people in the
general, by withholding all good things from them, Ier: 5. 25. Such is the
nastie stench of sin, that it turns Allmighty God clean out of his way of
mercy, (just as a man changes his walk, when he sees a stinking carrion
thrown in his way) God will walk with us no longer then we walk with him,
and if we forsake him, he also will forsake us, 2. Chron: 15. 2.

Secondly, God withdrawes, by withholding the presence of his protection, and
Except the Lord keep the City the watchman waketh but in vain. Psalm: 127. ^:
When God is so highly displeased with his people as to put them out of his
protection, see what follows; A Lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a
Woolfe of the wilderness shall destroy them, a Leopard shall watch over their
Cities, because their trespasses are many, and their rebellions are increased,
Ier: 5. 6. Of so great esteem was this presence of God in Moses his time, that
the Israelites durst not march one foot without it; If thy presence go not
with us, carry us not from hence, Exodus, 33: 15.

Thirdly, God may very properly be said to withdraw, when he takes away his
Deputies, the men of his right hand, Psalm: 80: 17:
those visible Gods to whom he has entrusted the government of his people. And
however, some have (more then) thought, that those may well enough be spared,
(and are at this day acting their opinions) yet sure I am they are not guided
by that spirit, who has left it upon record, for the transgressions of a land
many are the Princes thereof. Prove. 28. 2. And of those four things which Agur
observes to breed the greatest disquiet in a State, the first and chief is a
Servant when he reigns, Prove: 30. 22.

Fourthly; God withdrawes, by withholding the presence of his Truth. His
Gospel, and his ordinances are continued, but according as they are used. in
the Prophet Jeremies time, The Prophets prophesied lies, and the Priests bare
rule by the sword, and the people were very well content, nay they loved to
have it so, Jer. 5. last; And though Jeremy were Israells prophet at that time,
whose office was to pray for them, yet God gives him an express command to the
contrary, Thou shall not pray for this people, nor lift up a cry, or prayer
for them. Ier: 7 16. God has not so entaild his Gospel, or perpetuated his
Church, to any one place, or people, but that he can remove it when he pleases.
It Is an herb will grow in any part of the world under the blessing of him that
plants it; And when he has just cause given him, it is very likely he will
transplant it to a soil that will answer the husbandry he bestows upon it.
And why not India as well as England? I dare not say, the viciousness of our
lives will totally excuse their want of faith: yet sure I am, the natural
square of the very Indians, is enough to condemn our want of obedience; He
that said Lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the world; Mat: 28: 20:
says also in another place, Remember from whence thou art fallen. and Repent,
and do thy first work, or else I will come quickly, and remove thy
candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. Rev. 2. 5.

Lastly (and which includes all the rest) God withdrawes, by divorcing himself
from his people; the phrase ye have Ier: 3. 8. I gave her a bill of Divorcement
(says God of rebellious Israel) an expression borrowed from those, who by
matrimonial contract, have lived a long time together, with mutual joy and
comfort, till some high misdemeanour breaks out, which has noe other remedy
but a divorcement. And this should be a word of terror and amazement; for the
covenant once dissolved between God and us, our jointure is all forfeited, all
the pledges of his love to be returned, his silver and gold, and the fair
jewels Ezech: 16: 17:
of his wisdom, grace, and mercy, to be delivered up; A Divorce at once
casheires us of all relations to God; If any man draw back, my soul shall
have no pleasure in him. Heb: 10. 38.

And it is not prateritio (a passing by) but separatio, a word that speaks a
far worse condition. Better we had never met under the same roof, then to be
parted afterward; Better we had never tasted the good word of God, never
known the way of righteousness, Heb: 6: 5: 2 Pet: 2: 21:
then after the knowledge thereof, to turn away, and forsake it. A Divorce
proves ever scandalous, to one side or other; the memory of a better, doubleth
the misery of a worse estate, and the highest aggravation of hels torment lies
in poena Damni, the remembrance of what we once were, the contemplation of what
we might have been.

We have seen how God withdrawes; It were well we would consider when he
withdrawes too: but herein is our blindness, that God is often with us, by the
visible hand of his mercy and protection, whilst with slumbring Jacob and
Samuel, Gen: 2^ 16: 1 Samuel 3: 7:
we are not aware of it: And so at other times, God withdrawes and will not go
forth with us, nor have any thing to do with our designs, and yet with
infatuated Sampson, Jud. 16: 20:
we are ignorant that God and our strength are both departed. that we may
therefore be thoroughly awakened to this danger, we are to consider in the last
place what condition we are in, when God is departed from us.

Whenever God departs from a people, or a City, or a soul, he leaves sin,
and guilt allwaies behind him; If thou do well shall thou not be accepted?
Gen: 4: 7:
but if otherwise Sin lies at the door. and if Sin lie at the door, we know
what to expect from such a porter, namely, That every mercy shall be excluded,
and every Judgment shall be let in upon us.

The Prophet Esayes Judgment shall be let in: I will take away the hedge of my
vineyard, and it shall be eaten up, and I will break down the wall thereof,
and it shall be trodden down; I will lay it waste, it shall not be cut nor
dug, but briers and thorns shall grow up, and I will command the clouds
that they shall not rain upon it, Esaias. 5. 5.

The Prophet Ieremies Judgment shall be let in, Ier. 13. 13. I will fill the
inhabitants of Jerusalem with drunkenness, and I will dash them one against
another, even the fathers against the sons, (the just character of our
unhappy times) brother against brother, City against City, County against
County, and yet the delusion so strong, and bewitching, that (with Demetrius
his rout) Acts 19: 32:
the major part (in many places) know not wherefore they are come together.

The Prophet Malachies Judgment shall be let in, I will not only power out my
Judgments, but I will curse even your Blessings, yea I have cursed them
already, Mal: 2. 2. Your Invocations shall become provocations. Your Sacraments
shall return ye charged with more guilt: Your Pulpits instead of teaching you
to lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy: 2: 2:
shall train you up into rebellion against God and your King: And that meeting
(so long thirsted after to have clinched and fastened religion and government)
shall prove a Petar (an engine of mischeife) to tear all in pieces. In short,
when once our iniquities have driven away our God; that long roll of
judgments, that stands upon record Deuteronomy: 28, will (as so many writs) be served
upon us: every mischeife will have his full blow at us; and in all this
extremity that which should be our shelter, will prove our snare.

To shut up all; what has been thus declared in the general, must now be
applied to every man in his own particular. When God is driven out of the
heart by sin, the devil is at that very instant invited to come and take
possession; this earthly tabernacle of ours will not be long without a tenant.
1 Samuel: 16: 14:
Saul is not sooner dispossessed of the good, then possessed of the evil
spirit; and whither that evil spirit will lead we may guess if we look
after the herd of swine, Mar: 5: 13:
or rather indeed to a more dangerous lake then that wherein they perished, a
lake of fire and brimstone, where the worm never dies, nor the fire shall
ever be quenched. Revel: 19: 20: Mar: 9: 43:


How much then does it concern us, to separate from that betimes, which
otherwise, will make an eternal separation between God and us? especially in
times of hazard, and perplexity; with what confidence might we advance against
the enemy, were but our drunkenness, our profaneness, and the poison of the
whorish woman banished our quarters? (besides the scandal given to the cause)
sure, our strength would not be the less; without question, our success would
be every day more visible and apparent; when thou go out with an army, be
sure to keep thee then from all wickedness, says Moses, Deuteronomy: 23: 9. The
meaning is not that wickedness may be dispensed with at another time; it is
spiritual advise tending immediately to thine own preservation; for when thou
go into the field, thou go between the jaws of death, within the reach
of the Cannon, thou art likely enough to take leave of this world; Let not thy
mind then be so much upon thine honor, or thine enemy, as to forget what
spiritual arms thou have on, to preserve thy soul from eternal ruin. Thou will not march out, without thine arms: and will thou leave thy God behind
thee? He that can so easily want his God, gives just cause to suspect, he was
never yet thoroughly acquainted with him.

'Twas wont to be a proverb; Let him that cannot pray go to sea and learn;
and why not into the field and learn? And yet are the hazards of war so far
from startling the military man, that as if (together with his commission) he
had a dispensation to be more desperate, and daring in his sins, then any other
man; he makes Lust, and Rapine, essential to his profession; the most
prodigious oaths, but as so many necessary accents of passion belonging to the
duty of his place; as if indeed he were resolved on Hell, and were practiceing
aforehand to curse and blaspheme. Believe it, the weight of Damnation is no
whit lessened, by dandling the name of it upon the tongue; nor can I see how
they can hope to be preserved of God who wish themselves confounded of him
every hour. Though God will not hear the prayers of wicked men, yet it is
likely enough he will hear their curses, and bring them home too, like water
into their bowels, and like oil into their bones; nay it is past being likely;
it is most certain he will, there is a text for it, Psalm. 109: 18. I know not
whether we shall more admire, or pity those bold (not valiant) amongst us,
that dare go forth to meet their eternal condition, with hearts more hardened,
then the Arms that cover them. The cause (indeed) requires our lives, it does
not require our souls, it is no honor to venture them. Nay little do we think
how much our evil lives destroy, what with our lives we offer to maintain.
It Is said in the first Psalm: That whatsoever the godly man does it shall
prosper. Psalm: 1: 3:
Methinkes that should be of great esteem (as our times are) that would make
every thing to prosper in our hand. Sure it has more virtue, then the
Philosophers stone, that will turn every thing we touch into a blessing: and
let no man think to prosper otherwise; for he that may seem to prosper in his
wickedness, may do well to take notice that he lies under the greatest
judgment that can be named on this side hell: as having no sense of judgment
till it cannot be reversed, nor ever awakened till the fire be all about his
ears. And therefore whilst ye are engaged in war, be sure ye make your
peace with God; and take heed of giving your selves that deadly wound, that
will never be cured unto all eternity: give no cause to the enemies of the Lord
to blaspheme, 2 Samuel: 12: 14:
and let not your good be evil spoken of, Rom: 14: 16:
the goodness of your cause be suspected and sullied with the foulness of
your sins: lest whilst you appear for your Sovereign (and in him for your
selves) by your purses, and your persons, ye plat thorns in his crown some
other secret way, and (unwittingly) wound that righteous cause, which cannot,
will not thrive, but by holy addresses unto Almighty God.

It has been showed, what it is that separates from God: wherein God separates
from us: and how miserable we are when God is departed from us. What remains
then? but that we so demean our selves in the presence of God, whilst his
hand is not shortened, neither his ear heavy, that upon all occasions we may
have free and open access unto his ear: and may find that hand of mercy,
(which has hitherto been enlarged almost to a miracle) constant, and
propitious, to us and our designs. That God may always own us for his
servants here in this life, and acknowledge us for his Saints in that which is
to come. Which God of his infinite mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.

