Vindiciae Redemptionis.

IN THE FANNING AND SIFTING OF SAMVEL OATS His Exposition upon Mat. 13. 44.
WITH A faithful search after our LORDS meaning in his two Parables of the
TREASURE and the PEARL.

Endeavored in several Sermons upon Mat. 13. 44, 45.

Where in the former part, UNIVERSAL REDEMPTION is discovered to be a
particular Error.

(Something here is inserted in answer to PAULUS TESTARDUS, touching that
Tenet.)

And in the later Part, CHRIST the peculiar TREASURE and PEARL of GODS Elect is
laid as the sole Foundation; and the Christians faith and joy in him, and
self-denial for him, is raised as a sweet and sure superstructure.

By John Stalham, Pastor of the Church at Terling in Essex.

2 Timothy 2. 10. (...).

Fideles vero minime decet Reproborum in gratiam Ecclesiam turbare.

Testard. The. 2 v4. 1 John 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try
the spirits whether they are of God, because many false prophets are gone out
into the world.

London, Printed by A. M. for Christopher Meredith, at the Sign of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard, 1647.

TO MY BELOVED BRETHREN AND NEIGHBOVRS in TERLING.
Beloved,
YOu are the people, among whom my lot has fallen, for these fourteen years
and upwards; unto whom I came, and with whom I have been, in weakness, and in
fear, and in much trembling. Yet in regard of Gods presence and indulgence of
Preaching-liberties (with some success) all the Prelates times, and since,
with his protection in these times of war, I may say, The lines are fallen
unto me in pleasant places; yea (in God, the portion of my cup) I have a goodly
heritage. And for you, I cannot but remember (to Gods honor) that inviting
report which was given of you, that you were a fasting and a praying people;
which I found true, among the best of you, who gave me a call hither. I do not
forget what example of Nonconformity to Prelaticall injunctions you held out
to me; nor what forbearance you allowed me for a time, in the use of the
Ceremonies, which M. T. Weld.
my Reverend and godly Predecessor had refused, and I through inconsiderate
timidity and temerity had introduced, till God convinced me of my folly. I must
needs acknowledge with thankfulness to God and you, that some competent number
of you have fallen in with me in a time of Public Reformation, to witness
against Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Schism, Heresy, Profaneness and
Formality, and have helped toward their Extirpation according to Covenant.

But in this, I question how the rest of you are, or will be approved to
Christ, and your consciences: Some, for leading, others, for following and
persisting in a way of Needless separation from me and your Brethren, and that
privately, as publicly; and that after you had (upon conferences and debates)
granted a true Church here in being, and have seen it come forth more visibly,
in the way to further purity; after our renouncing all dependency upon Prelacy,
our casting out of Ceremonies, and Service Book, as a menstruous cloth, with a
Get thee hence; our seeking after, with joynt-consent, all Christ's own
Institutions and our choosing of his Officers: this is an un-Saint-like
separation, not to be justified, scarce to be paralleled. Some for running to
another Baptism, or disclaiming my Ministry, and the above mentioned first
Call, which other of your Brethren have stuck to, avouched and renewed: by
these, as other evidences (which might be produced, but that I spare you) it
appears, the more Christ has whistled and wooed you in, the more you have fled
from the fold; the more I, his poor servant have been yours, the less you have
been mine, and with a clear conscience I may write and publish it, the more I
have endeavored to love you abundantly, the less I am loved of you.

But that which Christ has most against You (the ignorant and profane
multitude I mean not, but Professors) is, that some have taken upon you the
office of teaching, and re-baptizing; others, have hearkened after you, and you
with them after false teachers, who have drawn disciples after them, not only
to another Baptism, but to another Gospel (never fancied, but ever abhorred in
this place, since I knew it, and before, in my Orthodox Predecessors time)
which yet is not another; for the Gospel of Christ is but one eternal Truth;
but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Everlasting Gospel,
by preaching an universal (and when all comes to all but temporary) Redemption
by the death of Christ (as they say) for all. He that started this first among
you, stirred my spirit, least this leven should speedily spread through the
whole lump, with all instancy and constancy, on Lectures and Lords days,
publicly to witness (in these following Sermons) against that which was too
publicly and boldly vented, though in a private house.

And as at that time I acquainted you with some reasons or causes, why I
conceived God sent in that subtle seducer, so now I will re-minde you of them.
1. For your countenancing the way of Anabaptisme, and compliance with what they
(who run that course) say and do; as if all they said were Gospel, and all
they did were godliness. 2. For your want of love to the truth, and of this
truth, That Christ died but for some, which is a truth, or Christ died in vain
for the most of men, for what shall it profit if any of Christ's purchased ones
should win the world, and not win Christ, but lose their souls? and all grant,
most men will lose their souls, and, that it is a blasphemy to say, Christ died
in vain. 3. For your Trial, Deuteronomy. 13. 2, 3. whether you do soundly love God,
and sincerely profess Christ crucified. There must be such heresies among you,
that they which are approved may be made manifest, 1 Cor. 11. 19.
in their solidity of judgment, sincerity of heart, and steadfastness of
conversation, among you. 4. For your caution, lest contending for
circumstances, above the substance, you lose the substance, while you catch at
the shadow. For Satan (by Gods permission) has set Pioneers, while you are
seeking to set up the Roof, on work to undermine and raze the Foundation. 5. To
quicken up your diligence in the search of the Scriptures. And lastly, To make
you more careful in holding fast of all Gospel Truth, lest you be plundered of
it.

Now, if any of you have been plundered, it is possible Brethren to recover this
(with other truths) out of the hands of spoilers. Bestir you therefore, and
quit your selves as living stones of the spiritual Temple, of the living God,
the Pillar and ground of truth. Do not only regain, hold fast, but as you hold
out any colors of a visible Church, hold forth the truths that appertain to
the Head of the Church, visibly, gloriously.

And I do now more solemnly call you out to witness with me against this Error
of Universal Redemption (let it be qualified how it will) it has an ill
savor and report. I wish you were all of you, as I hope most (for the present
I know not any one who joins in visible, public Communion, but are) free of
this leven. Some in the Town are yet nibling at the bait, which the Fisher
brought, near a twelve-moneth since; whom I looked upon, as one of our common
vagrants, who scatters vermin upon the bench or place, where he nestleth for
an hour or two; and still I do look upon this and other errors (with every
Sermon that broacheth them) as very like to the river Nilus, which after the
overflow leaves a world of mud behind, that breeds nothing but venomous
creatures. Such muddy minds had many after M. Oats his Sermon (as it was
imagined of free grace) which have engendered to strange conceits of their
Redeemer, free will, falling away, etc. which makes me think, some are very
near to falling indeed, from that they have imagined to be in them, and from
the true doctrine of free grace, which we are sure is yet retained in this, of
many other public Congregations.

My counsel and request further is, that you do not only witness against
errors and heresies, but love the truth. Beware of subtle spiritual pride;
keep close to fellowship; help to reduce seduced ones; follow peace with
holiness. Beware of scattering opinions, ungrounded jealousies; make no
needless, and so, sinful separations; Come in to your Brethren, you that are
wilfully or weakly at a distance; you that do not hear us, read us, and recover
your hearing; you that hear, redeem sometime for reading these poor Labors,
which I present to you. Read, and pray, read and meditate. You have here not
only the substance, but words, for the most part, as I preached them; a few
enlargements, which I then penned not down, are wanting; you have in recompense
thereof some enlargement added to our Answer of the Question, about Christ's
purchase of common benefits for wicked men: And all that which is inserted
against Testardus his tenet, of Christ's dying for all, to procure a present
freedom from perishing, for want of a satisfaction to justice, which he shores
up by his assertions, of a general intention, Covenant, Calling and Grace.
Which discourse I have made the more familiar for your Countrey-understandings,
and did insert it here, the rather, because since Oats his Sermon, much noise
there has been in Town and Country, of a Call that all men have by the
creatures, and that Nature is Grace, etc.

Mind I beseech you what is practical, as what is controversall; and if you
that have been misled and blinded by others, and of your selves have cooled and
decayed, recover any heat with light; or if you that have been steadfast,
preserve what you have, Let God have the glory, let me have your prayers; and I
shall rejoice that I have not run in vain. Only show the power of all, in the
purity and beauty of a Gospel-becomming conversation, and I am, for Jesus sake,
my Pearl and Treasure,

Yours to love and serve you in the Gospel, John Stalham.

TO MY Christian Reader in general: More particularly, To my Countryman
Samuel Oats.
Christian Reader,
BE pleased to take notice, that when I heard of this man my Countryman, come
with a resolution to sow his seed at the corner of a Corn-field in our Town:
being jealous least it might prove as wild, as that which he had scattered up
and down in other parts of Essex; As God guided my thoughts, I desired a
faithful brother to go take his Sermon by Characters from his mouth, which he
did most faithfully: And having read and compared these Notes, with another
also, who wrote at that time; and receiving certain intelligence what
impressions were left upon the minds of his hearers: I had no rest in my
spirit, till (having laid all other studies aside) I had publicly examined and
answered the materials of his two hours Discourse. But never intended such
sudden meditations for the Press, till pressed hereunto by the desires of the
stronger, by the necessities of the weaker Christian, and by the Adversaries
provocations for half a year together, who, finding a resentment of the new
Doctrine among silly women, and weak-headed men, gave out, that ere long, one
that had never a hair on his face (and it may be, as little wit in his head, or
grace in his heart) should come and confirm what M. Oats had delivered, and
confute my confutations. And according to their threats and brags, such an one,
or one like him, skipt into the same Corn-field, near a well, acted his part,
did his best, and his worst, and vanished: This youngster, stole in when we were
not aware of him, so as for want of a Notary, we received but various reports
of his work, such as I could neither make head nor foot of; only I am
certified he wanted no railing rhetorique against our Ministers, who teach not
Universal Redemption, and a will in all to believe, as Priests that have lost
their light. It seems he has lived under some Prelaticall Ministers, who
affected that title; and instilled some drops of Arminianisme into the
Catechism they taught him, whereupon he imagines all Orthodox and godly
Ministers, who had ever any thing to do with Prelates, were of the same
judgment with our Innovatours; but the Lord rebuke such Railers, and stop the
mouths of such Liers.

This was the last occasion given me to fall upon transcribing (out of my
Characters, which to me is a tedious work) what I had preached against Oats;
and having proceeded so far, as to the Vindication of the Parable from his
corrupt gloss, false collection, and suitable application; in that very
juncture of time, Testardus came to my hands (an Author who has been extant
these thirteen years, that I never saw before) whom I read (as he desires of
his Reader in his Epistle) a capite ad calcem, from the beginning to the end,
yea over and over again, in straights of spirit and time. And having all along
sought to the Father of lights for more clear discoveries of truth and
falsehood; I had as little rest in reference to Testardus, as to Oats, till I
drew up the discourse, upon his tenet of universal Redemption; which is here
inserted and affixed to that I had preached and wrote before, about the same
controversy. The rather, because I find the Universalists of this time have
lighted their candle (after Arminius was stinking in the snuff and socket) from
this Testardus, and by comparing the Scriptures which Oats produced for his
point, with this Author; my Reader, and his, I think will conclude with me,
that Samuel Oats was one of the disciples (or discipulus discipulorum) of
Paulus Testardus. I have a jealousy also, I think godly, that some of our
young Academicks (who when challenged of Arminianisme, do apologize, they
never read nor saw Arminius) are Pupils to this their Tutour, and are soldiers
fighting under his banner, whose Colors are the Colors of grace, while he
fights for nature, and of a Covenant of grace, while he fights for a Covenant
of works and nature all along, as he speaks of the non-elect, or reprobate, as
Fideles vero minime decet Reproborum in gratiam Ecclesiam turbare. inquit ipse.
Test. The. 294, 295.
himself calls them. Now I leave it to others to ravel his bottom, and to
exauthorize this Author from the number of Classick and Orthodox. Truth is not
afraid to enter errors den, because, though it be dark, truth carries a light
with it, to search it out. I shall desire my Countrey-Reader, to peruse all
that I commend to him in the controversy with a Bible in his hand, and with
humility and self-denial in his heart. My learned Reader, I entreat may have
Testardus in his left hand, and the two Testaments in his right. What is
practical will serve for all who have spiritual palats, and can relish
spiritual nourishment.

Let Jesus Christ be thy Pearl and Treasure, and thou will not make him common.
Jesus Christ, in his Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Session,
Intercession at Gods right hand, is not ordinary, nor for all; but for the man
and Merchant that finds him, hides him, joyeth in him, and sells all, to
make sure of him. So we preach, so ye have believed, and so we shall, and must
still believe that we may be saved.

And for you M. Oats, my Countryman, as I have, acquainted my Reader in
general, so I must charge it upon you (as the principal stickler in these
parts, with your new Gospel and Baptism) that you provoked me, both to the
preaching and printing of what here follows, in reference chiefly to the
Parables, and your Exposition. First, You preached in the town, and to some of
my ordinary hearers, and Fellow Members, without my leave; then you defended
what you had preached, to him that noted from your mouth. You returned me word
from Colchester goal (whither and when, as thinking it a fit time and place for
reflection, I sent for your Recantation) that you would fain see me in print.
And you seconded it at Chelmsford-Assizes to my face in the Marketplace, that
if I came forth, if you did not answer me, you would procure one that would.

You may remember I then admonisht you, as a Christian, to forbear the
spreading of your error. You told me, you took it to be a truth; but if you
have no surer props to uphold it, then you gave me at that time and place,
Actum est de tua causa. For then and there you informed me, you learnt this
Doctrine of the Church of England, and to my answer, you were an apter Scholar
then I, who never sucked such milk from her breasts, and to my question, where?
your Reply was, Does not the Catechism in the Service Book teach it? Where, in
Answer to the Question, What do thou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy
belief? It is said, First, I believe in God the Father, etc. Secondly, I
believe in God the Son, who has redeemed me, and all mankind; But remember
what I left with you at a present parting upon those words (partly out of your
desire, lest the people should flock about us, partly out of my respect, to
what the holy Ghost says, Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou
perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge.) That Book nor Catechism, never
went for the Doctrine of the Church of England, but as Prelaticall spirits
might have framed those words, or as you with them have wrested the sense, so
you did act the Prelates part. For as I since find, in the Title of that
Catechism, it was to be learned of every child before he be brought to be
confirmed by the Bishop; It seems you learnt it from your childehood, and it
may be the Bishops hands have been upon you at Confirmation, though not at
Ordination. You are a true son by this Confirmation, it may be; I am sure by
your Doctrine of the Prelaticall Church; and an Apocryphal text, is good
enough, for Apocryphal doctr^ne. A plainer text it was for your darling point,
That Christ died for the bulk of mankind, then the man's buying of the field,
in the Parable, you wot of; from which you have, as it were, made your appeal
to the Church of England. To that you shall go: But first we must agree, What
is the Church of England? Dare you say the Prelaticall company? or the profane
multitude? This were to speak against light. Turn you rather to the 19. of the
39. Articles, put out, an. 1562. and you w^ll find, what a visible Church is,
viz. A Congregation of faithful men, etc. A Congregation of faithful men in
England, is a Church in or of England. Now what Church or company of faithful
men will you select, as a pillar (of your supposed truth) that has held out
your doctrine of universal Redemption? I shall call forth three witnesses as a
sufficient enumeration. 1. The company that agreed to the 39. Articles, They
Art. 2.
acknowledge, That Christ suffered, was crucified, dead and buried, to
reconcile his Father to us, and to be a sacrifice, not only for original
guilt, but also for all actual sins of men. But it is one thing, for Christ to
be a sacrifice for all sins of men, original, actual; another thing, for him
to die for all men's sins; or, to d^e for the expiating of the sins of every
singular man.

2. The company of Confession of the faith of 7 Anabaptist Churches in London.
7. Congregations of your own way of Anabaptisme, who though they be distinct
in respect of their particular bodies for convenience sake, yet are all one in
Communion, They Sect. 5.
acknowledge, The elect which God has loved with an everlasting love, are
receemed, etc. And that Sect 17 See also Sect. 21
Christ being consecrated, etc. has fully performed and suff^red all those
things, by which God, through the blood of that his Cross, in an acceptable
Sacrifice might reconcile his Elect only.

3. The company or companies of faithful men, who differ only, or chiefly in
point of Baptism, from you, and those forenamed in London, but are with
joynt-consent, united and knit together in fellowship of the Apostles doctrine,
breaking of bread and prayers. Produce me any of them, who for these 100. years
and upwards, have in England, held forth your doctrine of universal Redemption,
as the Doctrine of the Church of England, or of the Churches in England. No,
they have ever been more pure in Doctrine, whatever pollutions, too many we
have had (the Lord humble us and make us ashamed for them) in Discipline.

I hope by this time, you will be ashamed, with a shame and sorrow that brings
forth repentance, not to be repented of. And my hearts desire to God for you,
and the rest of my seduced Contrymen, in Norfolk, Norwich, Lin, is, that
they may be reduced with you and saved with you: For I bear you record, that
you have a zeal for Christ, but not according to knowledge. If you think to be
saved, and to help to save others, by the doctrine of universal Redemption,
and by the particular act of rebaptizing, and of being rebaptized, you will
still deceive, and be deceived.

Perpend therefore and weigh with your self, or rather, out of your self, with
the mind of God, in the Scriptures (as here, and in others more elaborate and
spiritual dissertations is) cleared and vindicated. Had you sold your self
wit, fancy and conceit (in Gods matters for Christ and Gospel Truth) you would
never have so abused the Parable of selling all, and of buying the field and
treasure, as you did, when you opened your pack of wares in our Town. I know
it is incident to us all to err, but where self-denial prevails, error shall
not prevail to heresy. Error is a serpent with a long tail, full of knots: if
unwary, self-confident persons meet with it, it will wind in and enwrap, in
it is endless train, a thousand of them, with which they cannot but be
strangled, that do not strangle it.

I am afraid my old friend, T. More. sometimes of Wels, was thus ensnarled by
doubtful disputations, with the erroneous Doctors of the times, who has
pleaded your cause (of general atonement) in print. A book I could never meet
with to this day; but the other day, when I had finished this By M. Whitfield.
Piece, there was presented to my view, a godly, learned, friendly and
faithful Answer to that his book. I shall hope, by humility and self-denial,
he will recover himself upon the reading of it, and I shall pray you may
prevent him, or join, or follow in a Palinodia. Then will you see and say, it
had been better for you both, to have kept to your looms, then to have spun
such a thread, which will not make a web, and that a garment to cover your
nakedness withal. Repent, or you have much to answer, a heavy account to give
up. For such, as have had a better name for piety, then ever Prelates had, to
make a more dangerous narrow bridge to Popery (then they did) by a more refined
Pelagianisme; For you, who have pretended to more sanctity, then ever Arminian
Doctors have done in familiar communion with Gods people, to be more
efficacious in deceiving and mis-leading unstable souls; O, I tremble to think
of the account. Repent therefore, and your error of errors, yet will not be
your ruin.

But if the Lord leaves you to your free will, and you be hardened from his
fear, let him that you will procure to answer me (if you cannot your self)
reconcile these contradictions, between your universality of Redemption, and
your Anti-paedo-baptisme.

Vniversalist. Anti-paedo-baptist. Christ died to redeem all of mankind,
whereof Infants are a part. As for Infants, we know nothing of them. Or thus,
Christ took away the curse from all men, for sins against the Covenant of
works. Infants have no visible grace. Again, All of mankind are under a
Covenant of Grace. Infants of the best believing Parents, are not under a
Promise. Again, The guilt of Adams sin is taken off from all; and by
consequence there are no Pagans, nor ever were. No Infants are faederally holy;
They are all but young Pagans.

Now the good Lord, the Spirit of truth, deliver his chosen people from both
these extremes, and from all such interfeering and shackling opinions, in whom
I am, theirs, and

Yours to read, as to write, to learn, as to teach, John Stalham.

To the Christian Reader.
Christian and Beloved Reader,
Under the favorable allowance of the Author of these ensuing labors (my
very loving Friend, and vigilant Pastor) I am crept into thy view: not
arrogating so much repute, as to incline thee to a more venerable esteem of any
thing in them, because attested in an Epistle of mine. For I am not of Classick
authority to do any competent service of that kind. My scope rather is, to
witness to what I have heard, and received from the undoubted word of truth,
made known to me by the spirit of truth, which has wrought effectually (as in
other means, so) by the Ministry of this Author, to confirm and establish me
in truth received before my acquaintance with him, and to deliver me out of the
snare of some errors, in which I began to be entangled about that very time,
in which I began to know him. And though I know him too well, to go about to
wind into his better esteem, by painting and tickling encomions (who lives
upon a purer, and more heavenly air then the vapor of man's breath, exhaled by
a corrupt fancy, from a muddy heart) yet I deem it some encouragement to him
that is set over me in the Lord (to watch for my soul) to be acknowledged in
his work and success: and in so doing, I do only discharge a debt. Some of the
strong supporters of the rotten fabric of Arminius, thou may see him batter
and raze in this Discourse: into which (since I was a waifaring man to heaven)
I never turned in, to lodge for a night, finding it inconsistent with that
foundation against which the gates of hell shall never prevail: Especially that
of Saints apostasy.
And for Paulus Testardus (his friend and neighbor) I cannot but issue my
thoughts, that he is here so fully enervated, and enfeebled, that when I read
that passage in the book which concerned him, if I had been a woman, and in
Elizabeth's condition, when Mary came from the hill country to salnte her, the
babe would have leapt within me for joy. Another error occasionally touched
upon, I must crave thy patience to speak a little to, and that is the opinion
of Anti-poedobaptisme, in the lime-twigs whereof I my self was once taken, and
held, till by the Lords blessing upon the judicious, meek, and divine
reasonings of this Author, I was enabled to discern, the Arminian results that
naturally, and therefore necessarily arise from Anti-poedobaptisticall grounds,
while they both make the Covenant of grace dependent upon some spiritual
qualification in the creature. And this I blush not to publish to the world,
hoping that it may be for thy benefit. I am not ignorant that there are
irreconcilable contradictions between the opinions of him, who is both
Anti-pedobaptist and Arminian, a taste whereof thou shall meet with, in the
close of the Authors Epistle to the Reader: and no wonder, for error is often
so divided and engaged in battles and feuds, that thou may meet with one
corrupt opinion triumphing upon the neck of another, like Tamerlane upon
Bajazet: unity and consent being the honorable titles, and inseparable
attendants of nothing but truth. Nor yet do I insert this, as if I would
insinuate that every Antipoedobaptist, is an actual Arminian, it being quite
against my principles to represent any man in a worse shape, then his own
digested opinions put him into. And indeed, I have so charitable assurance of
some of their sincerities in saving truths, as if their eyes were clear enough
to discern the fine-spun threads, by which those opinions are sown together, I
believe they would reject them both, for their contiguity sake. Much less do
I by any, or all of this invite a secular arm with it is iron mace, to crush and
subdue the one or the other. For my part I shall call for neither Hammer,
Sword, nor Fire against them, but the sacred Scripture, which is compared to
all these: Let him cry Murder, Jer. 23. 29. Apoc. 2. 1^. Ephesians. 6. 17.
and call for a Constable to keep the peace at a dispute, who is impatient of
contradiction, and accounts his own principles ruined, by another man's
dissenting from him. Meek and innocent truth, sufficiently contenteth him in
whom it dwells, though it meets with opposition from him that knows it not. And
I would expect to see his flesh come, like the flesh of a young child, that is
once baptized in the Jordan thereof, when he that is seven times dipped in the
Pharpar of corporal punishment, shall go away in his error, a leper as white
as snow. And much more should I rejoice, to rescue one poor soul (in
gentleness and love) out of the prison of a corrupt opinion, then keep all the
heretics under heaven, in the ward where Pharaohs prisoners are bound, till
their feet are hurt in the stocks, and the iron enter into their soul. I have
but a little to add concerning him M. Oats.
whose Sermon at Terling occasioned this confutation, and I have done. The
small acquaintance I have of him, enables me to describe him under this
character. He is a man of many lovely and desirable parts, naturally fitted to
do much good, but through dangerous misapprehensions of the satisfaction, which
Christ has made to his Father on the behalf of sinners, so desperately
corrupted, and (in a way as smooth as butter and oil) able to convey the same
to others, as he is thereby apt to deceive and delude all the silly souls he
meets with, and with such (together with those that are unstable) our County,
and (I fear) the Kingdom abounds, as the natural effect of the brooding, and
warmth of the feathers of implicit faith, and blind obedience, scarce yet out
of fashion, though much plucked off by the hand of light and truth, eminently
encouraged, by our prosperous and pious Parliament. If my love to, and pity of
wandering souls, did not exact from me these expressions (so contrary do I
find them to the constitution of my mind, as) I should be ashamed to see them
under my Name. The Apology that I make for my self in this case, is, That he
that would avoid sharp rebuke, must learn to be sound in the faith. I hope I
have wrote out of the eye of envy and disdain, unless some Pharisee should
take offense, for whom I take no care, because every plant that my heavenly
Father has not planted, shall be rooted up. I would not willingly tread upon
one good flower, but I care not how many briers and thorns I walk over, so as
my feet be but well shod, with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. Let him
that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches: And that God
would give us understanding in all things, is the prayer of

Thy Brother and Companion in tribulation, and in the patience and Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, John Maidstone.

The Contents.
PART. I. Anasceuastique and Polemicall.
1. SAmuel Oats, A Seminary-seducer, p. 1, 2. 1. His Interpretation, of the
man's selling all to buy the field, to be Christ's parting with all, for the
Redemption of the whole bulk of mankind, detected and rejected, p. 2. 2. His
Observations upon the Parable of the Treasure, observed as impertinent, p. 5.
3. His main Doctrine examined and found false, p. 6, etc. 4. His Reasons [so
called] disproved, p. 21. And his Arguments [so called] disarmed, p. 25. 5.
Other Passages in his Sermon stopped, p. 27. 6. His Uses despoiled and rendered
useless, p. 29. In particular 1. His Consequences tried and cut off, Ib. 2.
His Comfort to carnal men found a carnal comfort, p. 35. 3. His Exhortation
examined and condemned, 37


2. Antidotes or Counter-poison, wrought up with ten Ingredients. p. 38. 3. A
Doubt, whether Christ by his blood did not purchase the world of creatures, and
common benefits, for all men, answered three ways, p. 42. And resolved
negatively by six Demonstrations, p. 44. 4. An Objection about the threatening,
Genesis 2. 17. not executed, answered seven ways, p. 45. See more, p. 69. 5. That
from the simile of the Chafe, bought with the Wheat answered, p. 51. 6. Paulus
Testardus his darling Tenet related, p. 52 And refuted by the discovery of His
1 Inconsistencies, 1. With the Scripture, in his four shores (whereby he would
support universal Redemption) as 1. General Intention of Christ's death, not
the Scripture-intention, showed five ways, p. 54. 2. General-Covenant, not the
Scripture Covenant of grace, evidenced 5 ways, 58 3. Universal Calling to
Christ and grace by the creatures, opposed by Scripture, and 4 reasons. p. 61,
62 His Scriptures produced for it, answered, p. 64. His 7 pleas for its
agreement with the call of the Word (which I bring in as Objections) enervated,
p. 68. Objection, from the calling of men by the Word, answered three ways, p.
76. 4. Universal grace, not the Scripture grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
evinced by two main Reasons, p. 78. The Result drawn up, p. 80.
2. With himself, showed in 8 instances, p. 83.
2. Conspiracy with Arminius in three main heterodoxies against the truth, p. 91
7. The close of the controversall part with a few positive Arguments,
Demonstrating 1. That the Decree of Election is, in order of nature, before the
decree of Redemption, 93 2. That Redemption by the death of Christ, is solely
and only of, and for the elect, as a fruit of their Election, p. 94.


PART. II. Catasceuastique and Practical.
1. The true Scope and Orthodox sense of the two Parables of the Treasure and
the Pearl, p. 98. 2. The Doctrines raised, according to the scope (opened also,
confirmed and applied) are seven. Doct. 1. Christ and his Gospel Grace is a
precious hidden Treasure, p. 104. Doct. 2. Even Gods elect (as others) for a
time they wander after some or other imaginary mediums and ways of
soul-enrichment and contentment, p. 117 Doct. 3. In Gods good time, his elect,
prevented with his love and light, are drawn te believe the certain
attainablenesse of Christ and his grace for themselves, p. 123. Doct 4. The
true believer, having found Christ in a promise, does, in a gracious manner,
hide him, and lay him up, p. 132. Doct. 5. The true Christian has some joy
(yea, the conceptions of great joy) in his finding of the Lord Jesus Christ, p.
141. Doct. 6. The joy of a true believer works him to utmost self-denial, p.
149. Doct. 7. Through self-denial brings forth such diligence, as whereby the
true Christian grows up to a firm assurance and clear evidence of the
Kingdoms-treasure, and of heavens-pearl, as his own for ever. p. 166.


Errata.
Page 5. of ep. ded. l 23. for of, r and. ep. read. p. 5. l. 14. insert a comma
after Doctrine. p. 11 l. 2. to ingraffed into him, add, do partake of
righteousness and life. p. 31. l. 31. r. can ever. p. 49. mar blot out Demon. 6.
p. 51. l. 22. for or, r our. p. 53. mar. r. d The. 80. p 55. mar. r. Art. 2.
and disp priv These. 38. p. 61. l. 32. r he i would. p. 65. mar. r. Paral. p.
69. mar. r. p. 46, 47. etc. p 76. l. ult. for any, r. his. p. 78. l. 32. r.
Hic. p. 83. l. 2. blot out witnesses. p. 88. l. 18. r (...). p. 90. mar. r.
disp. priv. p 92. for The. 80. r. The. 280. and for The. 87. r. 287. p. 92. l.
24. r. Lamb. p. 93. l. 14. r. for us. p. 95. mar. r. p. 42. p. 99. l. 7 r. and
6. 21. p. 104. mar. r. Mat. 6. 21. 19. 21. p. 105. mar. r. pretij. p. 121. l.
14 r. say, all these, p. 141. l. 1. r. but let. p 146. l. 12. r price. p. 151.
l. 5. r. of Christ's death. p. 165. l. 11. for with joy, r. has joy.

Imprimatur

Charles Herle.

SCRIPTVRE-REDEMPTION VINDICATED.
MATH. 13. 44, 45, 46. The Kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a
field; the which when a man has found, he hides, and for joy thereof goes
and sells all that he has, and buyeth that field.

Again, The Kingdom of heaven is like unto a Merchant-man seeking goodly pearls:

Who when he had found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he
had, and bought it.


I Am occasionally diverted (Beloved in the Part. 1.
Lord) from my settled text in John, to this in Matthew, upon which there has
one M. Oats, Feb. 16. The Monday before our Lecture, Feb. 19.
lately, in a private Lecture, given a new Exposition, and left it among some
here present, others absent, to be tried by the Scriptures, whether it were so,
or no; and a public trial it shall have, by the spirits of the Prophets, lest
heresy, that eats like a Canker, and spreads like a Gangrene, prevail and get
a predominant head in this Church or village, as it does elsewhere.

The words read, contain two Parables, which have (as most agree) but one
scope; but that one scope is diversely, and in a contrary way construed and made
out; One (if not one hundred of Interpreters) says, it is to set out the
effect of Gospel-doctrine, viz, The love of a believing Christian to Christ,
and his Gospel Grace. Another, and but one that yet Since the preaching hereof
I hear of an old Postiller or two, who give the like Gloss
I have heard of, viz. the late Expositour says, in these words Christ does
show his great love to his, in dying for all the world.

I shall first vindicate the Text from his corrupt Glosses, impertinent
Observations, and false Doctrine; and then give you the true scope and sense of
the Parables, and not only true, but genuine and proper Observations and
Doctrines, as God shall assist, and Christ who spoke these Parables shall
declare unto us his mind herein, by his holy Spirit of truth. And

First, Of the corrupt Gloss. Corrupt I call it, because 1. His corrupt Gloss^.
1. besides the true scope; 2. with a corrupt end imagined and framed; although
here and there a truth came in, yet the whole frame of it was molded to no
other end, but to lay a weak foundation for a rotten building; from the man's
buying the field, to infer Christ's universal Redemption; for, propounding his
Question

1. What is meant by the Kingdom of heaven? The Church of God (says he) as
Mat. 5. 19. But although in that place, it may be so taken, and from thence it
was well inferred, That such as break out to preach false doctrine, are least
to be esteemed, and there is great reason for it, said he, that himself (add
I) should drink of the Ale he has brewed: yet does it not follow that here the
Lord means by the Kingdom, etc. the Church, as there: for there is intended
the Church visible, here is mentioned an hidden treasure; besides, this
Exposition contradicts his own after-interpretation of Christ's purchasing the
field, that is, the world, unless he will make the world and the Church The
reprobate and elect.
to be all one purchase, which none but irrational and heterodox men will
affirm.

2. By treasure is meant (as he delivered it) the people of God. Now, what
though they are in Mal. 3. called Gods jewels? yet not the Treasure of the Text
in hand, for

1. These Parables speak of a Treasure more eminent then all treasures, and of
a Pearl of greater price, more precious then all other: If the people of God be
his Treasure, yet Christ is a greater; and if a Christian be a Pearl in Christ's
eye, yet, I hope, the Lord Jesus with his Gospel Grace, is a greater Pearl in a
Christians eye.

2. If a Christian be hidden in the rubbish of this world, yet that is not
intended here, but the hiding and obscurity of that which is much more
spiritual, Christ himself and his Gospel.

3. By field ('it is said) is meant the world, or whole company of mankind,
among whom the people of God are hid. A truth it is, they are hid, etc. but not
the truth of the Text, nor is it clear and certain, that by field is understood
all mankind: For,

1. Even where in the former Parable of the good seed and tares, verse. 38. the
field is the world, yet the world there, is not the world of mankind, but the
fabrique of this earth and visible heavens, and the habitable part of the
earth, wherein the good seed, the children of the Kingdom, and the tares, the
children of the wicked one dwell together.

2. It is not [the field] as v. 36. nor [his field] as v. 24. but a field,
where the treasure of the Text is hid; a field by it self, not a common field,
but some special enclosed field, like unto the treasure, a treasure not hid,
nor to be found in every field.

3. Field and Pearl (it seems) he made equivalent, and so confounded Church and
world, in his sense; But how can this hold, that all the field should be
bought, and yet but one pearl, when other pearls there were in the world, which
the Merchant-man left unbought? Or, if all the world (of mankind) was bought,
then all the goodly pearls in it? and yet the Parable says, in effect, the
Merchant bought but that one of great price.

And again, The Pearl here bought is of great price. Now all the world is not
of any price to one soul, For what shall a man give? etc. nor are the souls of
that worth, as Christ and his Gospel; He cannot, we see, temper the Text and
his Exposition thus far together, but with untempered mortar.

In the next place, Who is the man that found the Treasure etc. Was it the Lord
Christ? (as he affirmed) What though God be said to find his people, and
Christ came to seek and to save the lost sheep, groat, and Prodigal? Those
Parables, Luke 15. are of one scope, these of another; The man thought (it may
be) he had been opening, Luke 15. 3, etc. not Math. 13. 44, etc. and so lost
himself and the true sense of this present Text, which holds forth (as you will
perceive more afterward) the joys and privileges of a Christian, finding
Christ in the Gospel, not Christ's privileges and joys finding a Christian in
the rubbish of the world of mankind.

Lastly, By selling all (says our new Expositour) is understood, Christ's
selling all he had, his parting with his glory, his riches of this world, his
life, and the sweet beams of his Fathers love, to purchase the whole world, and
his people therein. These words are fair and specious, and will take with the
fancies of weak men and silly women, because of some truth therein, as if they
were the truth of the Text; but (as before) upon one absurdity presumed, as the
proper sense, he swalloweth many more: And though he thinks he has found the
life and marrow of this parabolicall speech, yet it is but the marrow of his
own fancy, That Gods people are like treasure hid in the field, which when
Christ has found, he parted with all he had to buy this field: for if it has
appeared already, that 1. By the Kingdom is not meant the Church: nor 2. By the
Treasure here spoken of, is meant the Christian: nor 3. By the field, the world
of men: nor 4. By the Pearl, either the world or Church: nor 5. By the man or
merchant finding, etc. Christ Jesus: then cannot the selling of all, be Christ's
purchase of his people, by the parting with all he had to that end: But


Secondly, Let us examine his Observations, and see how 2. His impertinent
observations.
impertinent they were: Were the Exposition right, most of the observations
would be right and proper enough, but that foundation being false, the building
falls to the ground, As

1. The peculiar people of God, are Gods treasure and jewels. A truth, but not
here to be found.

2. God is found of those that sought him not. A truth, but not here primarily
intended, only presupposed; the Parables speak of man's finding of God in
Christ, and of Christ in the Gospel, and only presupposes that God comes in
the Gospel of the Kingdom, and finds him first by the preventing light of his
Spirit.

3, The providence of God is a strong Tower. But this tower, not built upon
this Text.

4. Gods love is abundantly put forth toward his elect. We grant it, but not
as the man intended it here, to obscure, set by, and take no notice of the
abundant love of Gods elect toward Christ, which he speaks to in this place.

5. Christ parted with all his glory for the good of his elect. The Observation
is good and pious, but not proper to the place; but in that Christ did part
with all (as we find it in other Scriptures) and that only for the elect: This
indeed makes the Lord Jesus a Pearl and Treasure to every true believer, for
obtaining of which treasure, the believer parts with all his baseness and
glory too, in himself or in the world.

6. The Lord Christ did give himself for the world, that is, the whole world,
or number of men in the world. This is the Observation, which the Observatour
called a Doctrine hardly born, and that which I called at first a false
Doctrine (added to his impertinent Observation) And which is the

Third thing to be ex^mined by the Scriptures; to which 3. His false Doctrine.
touchstone as soon as it is brought, we shall find it has neither true
footing in the Text, nor foundation elsewhere in the written Word, rightly
understood.

1. Not in these Parables of the Text: For,

1. If we cannot find it in the Exposition or meaning of the words, we cannot
draw out a Conclusion where there are no premises.

2. Parabolicall Texts prove nothing beyond their scope.

2. Not in other Scriptures, although the late Interpreters light (as he said)
gave him, that Christ did die for the whole world, yet when we come to the Law
and to the testimony, if he (or any man) speaks not according to the Word, in
the sound sense thereof, it is, because there is no light in him, but upon
proof and trial, his light will be found darkness, and how great that
darkness is, we shall judge better with the Candle in our hands; or the Sun
beams of Truth before our eyes.

In the search after the falsehood of this his Doctrine, That the Lord did give
himself for all the world of mankind, though with a principal eye to his
elect;

We will follow the Authors method: first, examine his positive Scriptures (as
he termed them) and then such as are like them, and favor the Doctrine, which
he produced for proofs;

And first, as touching his positive Scriptures, we will not forget his
Caution, Take this by the way, that positive Scriptures must not be overthrown
by man's reason or consequence, Heb. 2. 9. vindicated. (...), ubi annotandum
partic^lam universalem non complecti singulos homines, sed omnia Christi membra
in unum corpas conjungere. Bez. ann in loc.
a Caution, that if himself had remembered, he might then have been silent, or
since that, have recanted his rash reasonings and collections.

His first Scripture was that in Heb. 2 9. where Christ is said to taste death
for every man. I answer, This universal particle reaches not to every
individuum, or singular man, but to every member of Christ's body; not to every
man, as a man, but as a member of Christ, which appears, 1. From that precedent
clause, by the grace of God; to every man that Gods grace extends unto, Christ's
death extends. 2. That all, or every man is expounded by, and confined to many,
v. 10. 3. Those many, or all, are sons adopted, and to be adopted. 4. Those
adopted sons shall all come to glory, whom Christ is there said to taste death
for. 5. Christ is the Captain of their salvation, for whom he died, all this in
verse 10. 6. They are the sanctified, and to be sanctified, v. 11. 7. They are
his Brethren, v. 11. and 12. 8. They are all the children of Gods election and
regeneration, v. 13, 14.


Besides, In how many places of Scripture do we find the particle all, or
every one, or every man, taken not for a simple and absolute universal, but a
mere indefinite expression, or note, of so many men, or of so many of mankind,
as are of that stamp and spirit, which that Scripture speaks of: as for
instance, in one place for many, Luke 16. 16. it is affirmed by our Lord, Every
man presses into the Kingdom, which, compared with Mat. 11. 12. you will find
but to be equivalent with the indefinite, the violent, or so many as are
violent; not every singular man and woman, for it was but from John's time,
there was such crouding; and even then many of the Pharisees and Scribes gave
way, stood at a distance, were far from pressing in; for they despised, etc.
Luke 7. 30. but numbers, and all those, and only those numbers of the violent
(who by faith offered violence to their carnal reasonings and corrupt hearts,
and took hold of the promise of the Kingdom) pressed into it; and yet the
expression is every man; So here, Christ tasted death, or died for every man;
that is, every one, of the number of those many, whom God bears a special
favor unto, and in due time endueth with his special grace of Sonneship and
sanctification, unto whom God is, and will be a father, Christ a Captain and
Elder brother. Now judge ye who have any enlightened reasons and consciences,
whether this his first positive Scripture speaks positively, and peremptorily
of Christ's dying for all the world; and not rather respectively of every one
whom God intends salvation unto; and of those only, who are very many in
themselves, and peculiar ones by themselves.

A second Scripture follows, 1 John 2. 2. He is the propitiation 1 John 2. 2.
opened by the scope.
for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole
world, that is, said the Expositour, for the whole bulk of men. For answer
whereunto, And context,


1. The Apostle writes not, of no more then to, every singular man, in the
world, but of and to all believers among the Jews, as is demonstrable from v.
7. where he says, Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but an old
commandment, which ye had from the beginning, and have heard from the
beginning. Now, though the Gentiles had something of the Commandment written in
their hearts (before Christ's coming) yet only the Jew had it written in books,
and had heard of it by teachers sent of God.

2. Lest it should be thought that Christ died only for the believing Jews. The
Apostle enlarges his assertion, as far as Christ himself enlarges it, Joh.
10. 15, 16. to the Gentiles, spread all over the world far and near; or as
Calvin (whose Exposition you may take as soon as a Catabaptists) the death of
Christ belongs not to Jews only a part of the Church, but toti Ecclesiae, to
the whole Church, or the Church in the whole world, in all ages, Nations, etc.
And I shall prove it to be the true sense of the words, and the Arminian sense
a false one, by these four Reasons. And vindicated by reasons.


1. From a parallel acception of the word world, Romans 11. 12. where the phrase
Gentiles in the later clause, explains the phrase world in the former: If the
fall of them (the Jews) be the riches of the world, viz. of Gentiles; and yet
when S. Paul calls the Gentiles the world, he does not mean every singular
Gentile, much less every singular man and woman, what or wheresoever, no more
does S. John here in the place we are opening and vindicating, but he means
that Christ is a propitiation for the sins of all that did, or should believe,
or were of Gods number among the world of Gentiles, as also the phrase is used
in the same sense, 1 Timothy 3. 16. preached unto verse. 1.
the Gentiles, believed on in the world.

2. The Apostle speaks here of that world for which Christ is an Advocate, as
well as a Propitiation. Now he is not an Advocate for all the world, or the
whole bulk of men, but for those that shall believe, Joh. 17. 20. and that come
unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25. Nay, he prayed not for the world at all, being
contradistinct to those that God had given him, Joh. 17 9.

3. As the whole world in some places is taken for the worser Cum mundus totus
pejorem hominum partem solam denotat. 1 John 5. 19. Apoc. 12. 9. Cur non ad
potiorem etiam applicari possit, ego quidem nullus video Ames Cor. p. 139.
part of men alone by themselves, 1 John 5. 19. Revel. 12. 9. why may it not?
why ought it not be applied (in this and other Scriptures) to the better part
or sort of men alone by themselves?

4. The immediate scope of the Apostle is to comfort believers, falling into
sin, which comfort is peculiar to them, not of one Nation only, but of every
Nation under heaven, If any man sin, verse. 1. We have an Advocate, for whom?
for all? no, for any man of us, the children of God, begotten by the Apostles
Ministry, who is our, and all others propitiation and Advocate, that are come
in by the Ministry of the Gospel, as we are. Thus you see that this Scripture,
which seems to be most positive and point blank for the Arminian-Anabaptist,
is a blank, and says nothing in true interpretation, but what is destructive
to their error of universal Redemption.

A third witness must be heard speak, and that is, 2 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15
vindicated.
14. 15. Because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead,
and that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again. This Scripture
was set upon the rack, the other day, and made to speak for that which it does
not intend; by putting a new scope upon the words, as if they came in to answer
such a question as this; Whether all were dead or no? A new fancy! where finds
he it, that the Corinthians were in such mistakes? But in his own fancy-full
opinion, that all were not dead in sins by Adam, even the elect, as well as
others: The Arminian says, all did not die in Adam, nor are they dead in sins,
etc. The Apostle says, All were dead, and his scope is (from verse. 9.) to
excite others with himself to be ambitious of pleasing God, though it be with
the displeasing of our selves, one reason hereof is drawn from the general
judgment, ver. 10, 11. A second from the special constraining love of Christ,
who died for those that were as dead as others; even all of them that Christ
died for were dead (that is not questioned, but taken for granted) what then?
shall Christ's death for any that he died for be fruitless? No, a twofold
fruit comes forth,

1. They live, a new life.

2. That life is no more to themselves, but unto him which died for them: They
must needs deny themselves and the carnal applause of men (as we do, says the
Apostle) and study to be pleasing to God. So that if you take the scope of the
words along with you, it is not to hold forth a general atonement, but
special mortification, or dying to a man's self, and living unto Christ, who
died for him; and I add, what the Apostle adds, and rose again: implying, he
has no purpose to extend Christ's death for any, further then he does his
resurrection; the fruit whereof goes along with the fruit of his death; the
proper and immediate fruit of his death being to kill and crucify self-esteem,
and to die unto creature-applause, verse. 12. 16. And the proper and immediate
fruit of his resurrection (in all that he died for) being to make them
non-Creatures, and to live to him which died, and rose again for them.

A fourth Scripture-witnesse called in, was, Romans 5. 14. Who (viz. Adam) is the
figure of him that was to come. Now Romans 5. 14. vindicated.
Adam was an universal person, and all died in him, therefore the second Adam,
Christ, redeemed all, else the type was greater then the substance.

Answ. 1. Every man and woman sinned and died in Adam, because they were all in
him, as in a common root and stock, and accordingly all and every one who are
in Christ, the common root and stock of branches truly ingraffed into him: and
so you must understand, verse. 18. The free gift comes upon all (who are in
Christ the second Adam) to justification of life.

2. In this true sense of the Apostle, The figure is not greater ver. 20.
then the substance; for take the Apostle not only as he means, but as he
speaks; and it is a sure truth, That where sin abounded, grace did much
more abound: though it abounds not to more persons, nor reaches to half so
many, yet in this Christ redeemed as much, and more then Adam lost, that Adam
lost but the righteousness of the Law, and of a mere man, Christ restores his
own righteousness, the Gospel-righteousnesse of him that is God; we are
condemned by the sin of man, but justified by the obedience and bloodshed of
God, Act. 20. 20. And all who are in Christ receive this abounding grace, Romans
5. 17.

Thus you see these four positive Scriptures, called in as witnesses, speak
nothing for, but rather much against universal Redemption. It is a strange
boldness to call forth Scripture to witness against it self; may any man take
that boldness? No, let their mouths first be stopped and silenced for ever,
who are such false criers and intelligencers, as to bring an evil report upon
the Scriptures.

Now let us examine those which are like the former, and seem, as he said, to
favor that which he calls truth, and we error and heresy too.

First, That in John 3. 14, 15, 16. The Question was, whether Moses did lift up
the serpent to all, or not; if to all, then Joh. 3 14, etc.
Christ not dying for all, the type will be more then the substance, therefore
it cannot be, but he must die for all.

Answ. 1. The scope of that type is given by the Lord himself; the Serpent was
lifted up, to hold out Christ lifted up vindicated.
on the cross, and in the Gospel; and as the Serpent was lifted up to all who
should lift up their eyes, and look upon it to be healed: So Christ is lifted
up to, and for all, which shall lift up the eyes of their faith, that they may
be saved; we here agree, that as none are healed, but those that looked up, so
none are saved, but such as believe (still, as in all such Scriptures, take it
for the adul^i, or those of years) and in this respect the type is not more
then the substance.

2. What gets he by saying, The Serpent was lifted up to all in the
wilderness? Were not all in the wilderness the Church typical? And who
denies that Christ gave himself for the Church, or his whole body mystical,
Ephesians. 5. 23, 26? Act. 7. 38.
This text then in John, favors believers, and Christ's dying for them, not the
etc. of all the world. But to v. 16. what do we say? even what we have said
before unto 1 John 22. that the world of Jews and Gentiles, are so loved, that
whosoever he be, Jew or Gentile, and believes, he shall not perish, etc.

Suppose it so, will some say, as our adversary said in his discourse, in
granting that, there is nothing lost: Yes, but there is, on his part; 1. In
that he gets nothing for the upholding of his opinion by such an Exposition, he
loses: 2. He loses by being convinced, this is an Exposition stands with good
sense; the Noun partitive [whosoever] strengthening and attending the
distributive sense of the word [world] into Jew and Gentile, whosoever, viz. of
the world, be he Jew, or be he Gentile, and believes: And if this be good
sense, and most agreeable to other Scriptures; neither he, nor any man is
forced (for the avoiding of nonsense) to run to the Arminian interpretation of
[world] for every singular man, of every kind or sort of men; for it is
neither said, nor meant that God loved every man, and gave his son for him, but
God [so] loved the world (or common nature and kind of men, or mankind
indefinitely taken, and found among Jews and Gentiles) that he gave his Son,
that every believer, or every one that believes (so the Greek strictly) in him
should not perish, etc. Observe it, Gods love (...).
is in order and reference to the gift of Christ, and the gift of Christ in
order and reference to the gift of faith: and that in reference to salvation,
there is no separating of these links of the golden chain; which they do, who
would make Gods love, and the gift of Christ common to those, to whom faith and
salvation is not common.

A second favorable Scripture, which the man imagined to smile upon his
opinion, is in Ioh. 1. 29. Behold the lamb of Joh. 1. 29. vindicated.
God, which takes away the sin of the world: Yet this is a place of as great
fears to him, as hopes; for putting forth the Question, What is meant here by
the world, he answered himself thus, If not as we expressed before, that is, for
the whole bulk of men, we are left in the briars.

Now to examine and answer to it a little; first, take notice, John Baptist
speaks not of Christ's death expressly, but of the fruit thereof, Taking away
sin. So that if any will prove Christ's dying for all from hence, he must hold
with all, that by that death of his, the sin of all men is expiated and
satisfied for; and here indeed the man has brought himself into the briars,
get out how he can; for he did peremptorily affirm, That though Christ did not
bear the unbelief of any, but of the elect Nor is he steadfast in that faith,
but is of opinion (unles he be changed since he was here) that all the
satisfaction the father demands and accepts for the elects sins against the
Gospel, is the sense of his wrath upon their consciences.
, yet he bare the curse of the Law for such as are not elect: which if he did
hold according to Scripture, he must proceed with St Paul, and affirm that
which is peculiar to the elect; Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ, Gal. 3. 13, 14. Behold here, a Gospel-blessing comes upon all those,
who are freed from the Legall-curse, and if then the non-elected, by this man's
doctrine have the one; he must yield the other also; if freed from the curse,
they are blessed, justified and saved ones, this is worse then nonsense, even
impure blasphemy against the truth.

That world is here meant, from whom sin in the latitude viz. Sin original,
sin actual, sin in the guilt, and sin in the power; and who shall
certainly be saved perfectly, as inchoatively: But all men never had, nor shall
have their sin original and actual, in the guilt and power, and in all it is
dimensions and damnable consequences taken away, therefore not all and every
singular person in the world is here understood.

Take the true meaning of the words, thus, as I conceive,

1. That which is the common sin of the world (so it be not the sin of the
holy Ghost, total and final apostasy, and the sin of the devils and damned,
total and final despair) Christ takes away; from whom? from those to whom he
is a lamb, and for whom he was sacrificed: And he totally and finally gives
out this virtue of his death to any one in the world, who takes hold of him as
an All-sufficient expiation.

2. And again, there is not any one sin taken away, but by him (there much of
the emphasis lies) nor any one sinner in the world pardoned, but by his
satisfaction to the Father. Look not upon me (as if John Baptist should have
said) nor upon the water of Baptism; as if the Minister or sacramental sign,
did or could take away sin, but behold, and behold him with the eye of faith,
as of sense, who takes away the sin of all, who have their sins taken away in
the whole world.

Object. It may be replied, it is of the world, not in the world.

Answ. And why? because in themselves, they are exceeding many, whose sin
Christ takes away (reckon them up, if you can, in all ages and countries,
etc.) so the world is used, Ioh. 12. 19.

Obj. It may be argued and urged further, the Greek word is, (...), who
bears, and so Christ bare all the worlds sin, though all be not saved by
him.

Answ. 1. Christ so bare the sins of men, as he takes them away from them, by
pardon, mortification, salvation, and that is the full signification of the
word, he so bears sin as a Surety another man's debt, which he takes off the
debtours shoulders, and sets him at liberty: Christ so bare the sin of men upon
the Cross, as to abolish guilt and enmity, and to obtain eternal redemption
for us, Heb. 9. 12.

2. His bearing of the worlds sin mentioned here in John, is limited to the sin
of many, Isa. 53. ult. though being very many in themselves, they are called
the world here and elsewhere. This Scripture we see, favors not the error of
universal atonement, but the truth of Christ's bearing away the sins only of
his people, and of no more.

A third follows, Joh. 4 42. We know that this is indeed Joh. 4 42. answered
and cleared.
the Christ, the Savior of the world; what say you to that?

Answ. Beloved, the light we have given you into the forecited Texts might
suffice for answer here, and save me a further labor; but that the Expositour
bestowed much pains to pull down the truth, and it were a shame, if I should
not work as long and longer then two hours, to build up the breaches, which
this plunderer of the Scripture has made amongst you. I observe also that some
are staggered at his glosses upon one Scripture, some upon another.

First then, Consider who spoke these words; Samaritans we Samaritans of the
Gentiles have heard him, and do know that this is indeed the Christ, the
Savior of Jews and Gentiles all over the world.

Secondly, The Savior they call him: what, an imperfect, imperfect Savior,
yea, but a titular Savior, not so in truth? For thus I argue: Either he saves
in truth and perfectly, and that is but some, or all in title and show, and
that is, not at all; and so in making him a general Savior, they make him
none at all.

Thirdly, I cannot see (though I desire to be as charitable Salvation to Jews
and Samaritans, and to any other of the world, who shall hear and believe as
they did.

A fourth place, Luke 2. 10. Fear not, for behold, I bring you tidings of great
joy, which shall be to all people, that Luke 2 10. vindicated.
a Savior is borne, etc. How could it be great joy to hear that Christ was
come, and yet not dye for all people?

Answ. 1. To the shepherds of Bethlem (being Jews) is Act. 10. 36. The word
which God sent to the children of Israel, and sent and spoke it first to them,
Act. 13. 46. Yet not only to them, but to all people, or to all Nations
afterward, in Asia, Africa, Europe, France, Spain, England. As Saint John
enlarges Caiaphas Joh. 11. 51, 52.
speech, when he prophesied that one man should die for that Nation, viz. of
the Jews, and not for that Nation only, etc. Where I beseech you observe his
limitation, with his enlargement; his enlargement in these words, Not for that
Nation only, but that also he should gather together in one; his restriction or
limitation in these, the children of God that were scattered abroad. Whence a
second answer,

Though the Gospel, or good tidings comes to all people, intentionally and only
for the children of Gods election scattered in all Nations.

Whosoever, of any Nation, hearing this Gospel shall believe, it will be matter
of great joy, and because there will be Treasure and precious Pearl, it shall
and will be matter of great joy to all people, or as it is in the Greek (...),
to all the people; or, to all that people, that is, all the people of God, or
flock of Christ, whom, and whom only he came to save, Mat. 1. 21.

The false gloss would make it matter of joy to men, and to Treasure and
Pearl, not as another first, but as he before another finds it; or, not as all
find the pearl, for all never did, or will find it, but as himself finds it.
So that this Scripture favors believers, and the people and children of God,
but not an unbeleever, any further then that he is of such a Nation, where God
has some people of his own, and where he is called outwardly, and commanded to
believe; it says not, That Christ died for all and every singular man, but
that he is a Savior to Jews and Gentiles, and that he died for the people of
Gods love, in all Nations.

A fifth Scripture was the Parable recorded, Math. 22. The Parable, Mat. 22.
abused
from v. 1. to 10. the contents whereof (as he laid them out) were these four,
1. Here is a feast of fat things prepared, as Prove. 9. Isa. 25. The fatling
killed, is Christ alone. 2. Those sent are the Ministers of the Gospel, who
first invited the Jews, and from thence went to the Gentiles. 3. The persons
they are sent to invite, all the whole world, good and bad, which he ranck't
into three sorts, Wicked men, Hypocrites, and true believers. 4. The end; Now
to what end is it to preach to all, if Christ did not die for all, though with
a special eye to the elect. Thus far our new Expositour.


Ans. 1. Neither the scope of Christ's Parable in this place, and vindicated.
nor of his true Ministers preaching of it, or of the invitation many are
called, and few are chosen, as our Lord himself gives forth his own mind, v.
14. If God will call more then he has chosen, or does manifest that he has
chosen, shall any man (as this man) be so bold as to ask, to what end is it to
preach to all? But

Secondly, If he would know, it is for the elects sake, that save the elect, he
dies for them, and them only. And let no man, nor this man talk of Christ's
special eye to the elect, if it be not a single eye fixed upon the elect, and
the elect only; he does as much as he can (by this doctrine of universal
Redemption) to put out that eye of Christ, but before he shall do it, his
right eye shall be utterly darkened.

Obj. But if Christ died not for all, the man who had not the wedding garment
might have said; why, Christ died not for me.

Answ. 1. In that he was speechless, he had more ingenuity (it seems) then
such as make this objection.

2. Christ's call, and man's hypocritical answer (when it is given) leaves men
without excuse or plea.

It was sixthly argued from all the Scriptures which hold forth types, Me
thinks (said he) they do all of them Typical Scriptures.
something hold out this truth; And how? Because a Sacrifice did type out for
all Israel, and if Christ do not redeem all, the type is greater then the thing
typed.

Answered. Answ. This is the third time that he has harped upon this string,
about the type and the substance: Now to what I have said before, touching the
brazen Serpent and Adam; I add,

1. What loose we, or the truth, and what gets he, and his error if we say,
that in some respect the types were more then the substance (did you never
observe the shadow greater or longer then your body; when you walk in the
Sunshine morning or evening?) And especially if we reckon up the types by
number, many were the types and shadows of one Christ; yet one Christ is
greater for spiritual truth and substance, then all shadows.

2. He did very unhappily instance in the sacrifice for all Israel; for all
Israel was typical, as well as the Sacrifice: As all the sacrifices typed out
one Christ, so all Israel typed out, whom? Not all the world, but the only Dove
and Spouse of Christ, the Church Catholic, consisting not of every man and
woman, but of the elect of God, whether men of years or infants, in all ages
and places; and this substance sure is as great as the type, even for number
also, Rev. 5. 9. compared with cap. 7. 9. and Genesis 15. 5. compared with Romans 4.
18. Let him that reads understand.

A seventh place produced, as in favor of his opinion, was, 1 Timothy 2. 6. He
gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified 1 Timothy 2. 6. vindicated.
in due time. And when was that time Christ gave his father satisfaction for
all? From the time that Adam fell, when men were in the loins of Adam, and
whole Adam, else if his surety had not then died, he had died, and all in him?

Answ. 1. We grant in the Apostles sense, not the Arminians, that Christ gave
himself a ransom for all, It is a testimony in it is proper season (...).
, as in the Greek, to be held forth; but what the Apostles sense is, you may
easily gather by looking back to ver. 1, 2, etc. Some of all sorts, Kings, and
men of Authority Christ gave himself a ransom for, as well as for meaner
persons, therefore pray them in to the truth, etc.

2. Who denies, what the Scripture elsewhere affirms, That Christ was a Lamb
slain from the beginning of the world, being promised and prophesied of from
the beginning that he should be slain, and vertually his blood was shed, and
his grace was effectual to the ransoming of all sorts of believers from the
first, but here, Latet anguis in herba, under this green grass lies hid a
biting Serpent; for when Christ is revealed upon Adams fall, whole Adam, as he
expressed it, or all mankind is interpreted to be ransomed with Adams person,
that day wherein he fell; which I will disprove by these evidences.

1. As soon as Christ is revealed, and with the first Gospel that ever was
preached, a difference is made and declared by God himself, between one part of
mankind and another, Genesis 3. 15.

2. Adam as soon as fallen, is no longer a public person, nor does Christ (by
that promise) undertake for Adam, and all his posterity; it is well if Adam (now
in a private capacity) can escape for one; the Covenant of Redemption is not
founded in him, but in the seed of the woman, the Lord Jesus; nor is Adams
enmity with Satan, and reconciliation with God there mentioned, but only the
woman's, and her seed, partly expressed, partly implied.

3. All died, as they sinned in Adam, before this promise, but the promise is
not made of, or to all mankind who died vertually in him, only of and to the
woman is it spoken, and her seed, the principal whereof should be the
redeemer, and the rest of her seed, the redeemed ones of the Lord, between whom
and the old Serpent, Satan and his seed, there should be irreconcilable enmity.

4. If you would know who, and who only, and what number they are, for whom (if
you speak of the certain individuals) the Lamb was a ransom from the
beginning, you must wait till the Lambs book of life be opened, of which we
read, Revel. 13. 8. and 17. 8. where plainly you may learn; That

1. He was not slain for any, first or last, but for such whose names are in
his book.

2. Comparing those Texts with Rev. 13. 3. there are a world of people, whose
names are not written in his book, therefore not slain (in the Arminian sense)
for all the world; nor must this last place in Timothy, nor any of the former
be so understood.

We have now done with the Scriptures alleged and abused by him, and
vindicated by us, which I desire you to hold fast in the true sense, not in a
perverted interpretation; these were his outworks, which we have taken, and
possess we them for the Truth: Come we at length to batter down the enemies
Forts and strongholds of his carnall-reasonings, and confident arguments.

Two Reasons, and two Arguments were brought to prove his Doctrine, That Christ
gave himself for the whole world: Now such as have studied Logic, or
artificial reasoning, know no difference between Reasons and Arguments; for it
they be Reasons, and do not argue, they are irrational Reasons; and if they be
Arguments without reason, they are unreasonable Arguments. But to follow him in
his own method, and to deal with him at his own weapon; If we have taken the
Scriptures out of his mouth, we shall not doubt but to take his weapon^ of
Reason and Argument out of his hand; or leave him a bare Sceleton of reason,
without flesh or substance, much less having any soul or life of faith, or
divine truth in his assertions.

And first of the two Reasons;

Reason 1. Reasons disproved.
The whole harmony of the Scriptures (such as he had proved his point withal)
are they not enough, and do they not sound all one way?

Answ. 1. Call to mind every of those Scriptures, but remember their sense, as
well as their sound; He is a foolish man who thinks, as the bell tinks. Nor
yet do the Scriptures give an uncertain sound, but in opening and examining of
them, with the context and scope, and with other Scriptures, you hear with one
consent, they speak not absolutely of Christ's dying for all, but of, and for
such an all, and such a world, as is the all, and the whole world of believers,
elect, Gods people, his true Israel, some of all sorts of people, out of all
Nations some.

2. Search and consult with other Scriptures, which neither he, nor I have yet
mentioned, and you will be more fully convinced, that we have the truth with
us, and that this Doctrine of Christ's dying for the whole bulk of men, is
another Gospel from that which Christ and his Apostles, or we from them have
ever preached.

I shall instance but in three places, the first in

Joh. 15. 10. Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends; and presently to show whom he laid down his life for, he
adds, v. 11. Ye are my friends, etc. It is most true what the Apostle says,
Romans 5. 10. When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of
his Son; But

1. What [We] means he there? Not all men, but such as are justified by
faith, and have peace with God, by faith, v. 1.

2. Though the elect of God are enemies, as considered in themselves, and in
their natural estate, yet being loved of God from eternity, with the love of
good pleasure, they have a price laid down for them by Christ's death, to bring
them under the love of friendship; and when they do actually believe, they are
actually reconciled, and of enemies are made friends: so that Christ laid down
his life for such, as were in Gods choice and love, his friends; and by Christ's
death, and the fruits of it, brought into a state of actual friendship. A
second follows,

John 10. 15. And I lay down my life for the sheep, whom in the verse
precedent, he had called, his sheep. See here, I beseech you, ye that love the
truth, and love not to be seduced (though that is a weak property of sheep, to
wander) yet if you be Christ's sheep, hear the voice of the good shepherd, and
not of strangers; for whom does Christ himself say that he died? he best knows,
and is only able to resolve this doubt; why, if you will believe him, who is
truth it self, I lay down my life for my sheep, he does not say for goats at
all, but for the sheep; behold and hearken after the harmony 'tween this and
the fore-alleadged Scriptures; certainly, where Christ or his Apostles speak in
larger terms of all, and world, and whole world, must not these terms be
limited to Christ's sheep? It was a subtle counsel your new Lecturer gave you,
that other Scriptures, which he cited in the second place, as but favoring his
opinion, should be expounded by the positive Scriptures; but be you as wise, as
he was subtle, and learn to reduce all his positive Scriptures (which yet had
Synecdoches in them, of the whole for a part, or of the general for the
special) to and by this main Position of our Lord, a fundamental truth. Let
this be first laid down, I lay down my life for my sheep; and whosoever shall
(after so plain a foundation laid by Christ himself in his Word, and by his
Spirit in your hearts) teach universal Redemption, or Christ's dying for the
bulk of mankind, tell him he does nothing else, but build hay and stubble upon
the foundation; nay, he does yet more wickedly, even lay another foundation
with Christ, or besides his purpose. A third and last, is in these words,

Ioh. 17. 19. For their sakes I sanctify my self. Christ's sanctifying himself,
is his preparation for death, setting himself apart to die; for whom? for their
sakes, his eleven Apostles, not Judas, v. 12. and for those which should and
shall believe on him through the Apostles doctrine; this is not for the sake of
all men, that he so much as prepares to die, much less that he died for them,
for whom he fitted not himself to die in their behalf.

So as you see to make up the harmony and consent in Scripture, you must (as on
a musical instrument) not put on great strings only, but the smaller also, and
in a Consort, take the Tenor and Counter-tenour with the Base: You must not
only hearken to the loud noise of the world, and the sound of all, all, etc.
but take in the smaller sounds of sheep and friends, and believers, and then,
when we have the Scriptures in a complete harmony set together, they do all
unanimously make against universal Redemption, not for it.

Behold the first Reason, is without an Argument.

Reason 2. If Christ did not die for all, every one could not have a ground of
believing the report of the Gospel.

Answ. What, is there no ground of believing, but upon a false Alarm and
Report, as this man has brought amongst you?

1. This Reason is the voice of unbelief; The Arminian Doctrine helps a lame
Dog over the style, viz. An unbeleeving heart to reason against the truth,
because all men are not bought and redeemed by Christ, therefore I must not
believe. I say again, this is nothing else but the language of unbelief,
beware of it.

2. I retort it; To lay forth this Doctrine before carnal men, That Christ
died for all, is to lay a stumbling block before the blind, and to throw dust
in the eyes of faith, the faith of Gods elect, that it shall not see at all,
but live by sense, and not by it is own principles, or not see by it is own
eyes. Beloved, in true believing there is a mystery: When Christ dying for
sinners, is preached to the world, it is a self-denying act to believe in him,
before I know I am of Gods secret number of the names in the Lambs book, for
whom Christ died, but it is no self-denial, when I hear Christ died for all, to
believe I am one. This Doctrine then is an enemy to true believing, and indeed,
a false Doctrine (as I called it at first, and have so proved it) can beget but
a false faith, that which is but temporary, not to be nourished or cherished by
any true teacher or dispenser of the word.

3. Is there no ground of believing, except Christ died for all? I will name
you a few (without this) and sufficient, I suppose to convince and draw a soul
to believing.

1. That Proposition, or true and faithful saying, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

2. The Command, Believe, God bids thee believe; faith is obedience to the
Command, Romans 16. 26.

3. The Promise; He that believes shall not perish, Joh. 3. 16. but he has
everlasting life; Joh. 6. 47. and shall certainly be saved, Act. 16. 31.

4. Gods act of justifying the ungodly, Romans 4. 5.

5. Gods raising Christ from the dead, Romans 4. 24. 1 Pet. 1. 20, 21. consult
and ponder the places.

6. This very Proposition, That Christ died but for some, namely, for his
sheep, has been a ground of believing, as Joh. 10. 15, etc. after much
discourse about his sheep, and dying for them, the result and close is, v. ult.
And many believed on him there.

7. Christ himself held forth (indefinitely) as a sufficient, necessary, and
only mean of salvation, which, who so believes Ames. Anti. Synodatia. 188.
in, chooses and relieth upon (under that notion) may be sure, that Christ has
an effectual intention and purpose of saving him. So the Apostle Paul, and
others held forth Christ: We preach Christ crucified unto the Jews indeed (who
will not see sufficiency) a stumbling block; and unto the Greeks 1 Cor. 1. 23,
24.
(who will not see the necessary determinations of Gods wisdom this way)
foolishness; But unto them which are called, persuaded to hearken after a
crucified Savior, the sufficiency, necessity, and sole-soveraignty of his
soul-saving blood and palsion, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God;
so we preach, so Gods elect do believe, though they know not at the first,
whether they be of the number for whom Christ was crucified; Hence,

Fourthly and lastly, I answer, The first act of thy faith is not to believe
Christ died for all, or for thee in particular (the one is not true, the other
is not certain to thee, till thou beleevest) but this is that thou art called
unto, to believe in Christ, as dying for sinners, and able and willing to save
thee believing; then when thou come to reflect upon thy faith, thou shall
find Christ died for thee; not one man or person (of years) more then other is
included or excluded, but by his faith or unbelief.

Behold again, his second Reason without an Argument, viz. without nerves or
sinews of truth, to argue for this tenet of his, and of all unbeleevers in a
practical way: Let none then go away from such a Lecture, and say, We were led
into, and kept in error all this time (for we were taught, that we must first
know we were elected, before we should believe; but now, that we hear Christ
died for all, we see ground for believing) for it is as much as your souls are
worth, to miscarry here, you may be lost for ever upon this vertical point:
For I deny, that Christ's dying for all, or Gods electing of some, and the
particular knowledge of it, is the foundation that we lay for men's believing;
not the first, because false; not the later, because though it be most true,
that God gave his Son for none but his elect; yet that thou should know
thy self of the number before thou believe, who but ignorant men will teach
so? who but ignorant hearts will think so? Election is a cause of believing,
and so many as are ordained to life, have and shall believe, Act. 13. 48. And
if men do finally persist in unbelief, it is a sign they are not of Christ's
sheep, Joh. 10 26. He that would know his election or redemption before he
believes, is never like to know it.

2. Come we to his Arguments (as he calls them)

Arg. 1. Arguments disarmed. The. 1.
From the text, Math. 22. 14. Many are called, but few are chosen; It was thus
argued;

If Christ died for all that are called, he died for more then the elect, but
he died for all that are called, else they should not have been called, or
being called they are bound to believe that which is false, if Christ did not
die for them.

Answ. I deny the Assumption, and the two proofs of it.

The Assumption to be denied of you, beloved, as of my self, is this, That
Christ died for all that are called, it is a presumption without any found proof:
for

1. The first proof, Else they should not have been called, is a non sequitur,
or a false consequence, for many are called, because among the many, God has
his choice number, and will one day more distinguish them (before all the
world) then yet he does, as in verse. 47. The Parable following these of the
Text.

2. The second proof proves not that it is brought for, Being called they are
bound to believe that which is true or false, and if Christ did not die for
them and for all, they are bound to believe that which is false; thus he
argued. And thus I answer, as to the second of his Reasons before; Every man
that is called is bound to believe that which is true, viz. That Christ died
for sinners. Again, he is bound to believe in Christ for himself, though not
for all others, The just shall live by his faith: And again, all that are
called hearing Christ died for some (even all comers) that is enough, though he
knows not who are the particulars, it is his duty to yield obedience to Gods
call; seeing he knows he is called, and when he has obeyed that call, he may
and shall know he is chosen, and that Christ died for him, so as this Argument,
which has a flourish from Scripture, and a show of Reason, yet has no
solidity or truth of reason in it.

His second Argument was from 2 Pet. 2. 2. There is mention made of some that
denied the Lord that bought them: now The. 2.
sure it was none of the elect that denied their Lord, therefore Christ bought
more then the elect; thus he argued, and thus I disarm his Argument.

Answ. 1. It is possible for a time, and in some act or word, or doctrine, even
for the elect to deny their Lord; in a degree, did not Peter once, twice or
thrice?

2. It does not follow, that though the Apostle may and does speak of some
not-elected, Christ our Lord had bought more then the elect. No, you will say,
it is affirmed expressly, the Lord had bought them, upon whom was to come swift
destruction, yea, but how were they bought, or are said to be bought? not
really and intentionally by the Lord, but in opinion of themselves, or of
others, by that profession which they made for a time, as if Christ had died
for them, when indeed he did not.

It is a rule whereby you may understand other Scriptures as well as this, That
is said to be done, which is so reputed in a man's own, or others account or
profession, as Heb. 10. 29. He that falls away from his whole profession, is
said, to count the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy
thing, sanctified, that is, professionally, and in opinion: So here.

Hence I conclude this Argument also to be without truth of Scripture or
strength of Reason to make it good; and if it be said, That such as hold Christ
died for none but the elect, deny the Lord that bought them and all the world,
I shall pay them back in their own coin, and positively state it, that such as
teach, Christ died for more sinners, then God eternally elected, Deny the Lord
that chose them, and so make a jarre between the sweet strings of Election and
Redemption.

I have now followed him in his method, of Scriptures, Reasons and Arguments,
all invalid to prove what he desired; The Scriptures alleged as witnesses,
but falsely; the Reasons without Argument, the Arguments without Reason; there
were other Reasons or Arguments scattered here and there, to amplify his
discourse (before he came to the Uses of his Doctrine) which I will briefly
wipe away.

1. One passage was this,

It is for his glory that reprobates may be ashamed when they Passages, 1.
Wiped away.
come before Gods judgment seat, that Christ shed his blood for them.

Answ. 1. Is it for his glory, that he should die for those he does not save?
Or is it for his glory, that he should die at random, and upon uncertainties,
leaving men but in a possibility of being saved?

2. It is for his glory that reprobates should be left to bring damnation upon
themselves, though Christ never shed his blood for them, in that shame will
befall them for wilful refusing of a Savior offered to them, who, for ought
they knew died for them, amongst many other sinners.

A second Passage was this; The ground of comfort is Second Passage answered.
taken away from poor distressed sinners; and what comfort to a soul in
distress, if there be not a full and a free offer?

Answ. 1. A false ground of comfort is taken away, which peace, peace to the
wicked, to whom the Lord says, There is no peace. The truly sensible sinner
loses no ground of comfort upon his believing, although the soft pillow (which
the doctrine of universal Redemption sows under all elbows) be plucked quite
away.

Answ, 2. Although we teach not, Christ died for all, yet without money, or
money's price: 2. Full, in two respects,

1. We offer whole Christ, and the death of Christ, with all the effects of his
death, which the Arminians cannot do upon their doctrine.

2. We exclude in the first, yea frequent offers, not a sinner, who by unbelief
excludes not himself.

Answ. 3. From this full and free offer, there is no comfort,

A third Passage. It is against all Gods Attributes, and in Third Passage taken
off.
particular his justice, making God a Tyrant to condemn men, and not in
refirence to sin.

Answ. 1. What impudence is here? to cast such an aspersion

2. But to answer that in particular about Gods justice, what destroy them that
have not, or shall not believe, consult with Jude v. 4, 5.

Now we shall examine his Uses.

Uses despoiled
The first was, To show the vain conceit of such as deny the death of Christ,
for the whole world, but upon trial, we shall discover this man's, and all the
Arminians vain deceit in affirming his death for all.

1. He argued thus, Such a Doctrine as does not lay a sure ground for faith, is
contrary to the Gospel, this is so, and therefore not a true Doctrine.

Answ. This Argument, in the Use, was his second Reason, in the Doctrine, and
thither you may look back for our answer.

2. Thus, That Doctrine which has so many dangerous Consequences, cannot be
true, but this (of denying Christ's death for the whole world) has many
dangerous consequences, therefore not true.

Answ. Let us hear them, and let the Scripture-Logick judge whether they be
Consequences? If so, whether and how dangerous?

Cons. 1. If we preach to the world, we must dissemble and Consequences tried
and cut off.
preach a lie, telling them that Christ died for them, when he did not.

Answ. 1. When we (according to Scripture) preach Christ crucified to the world
(not yet believing) we do not, we dare not say, that Christ died for them; but
that Christ died for sinners that they might believe in him. And do we here
dissemble, or is this a lie? Is it not a true and faithful saying, etc. 1 Timothy
1. 15. And has it not worth and weight in it?

2. If upon our preaching and men's hearing, faith be wrought, we say to such,
and of such, Christ died for them, and do we here dissemble, or is this a lie?
to say Christ died for thee and me believing in him.

3. Is not the dissimulation and lie, the result of such stuff as this, Christ
died for all, and every singular person, when by the event, it plainly appears,
he did not? let Deuteronomy. 18. 2^* be the judge.

Cons. 2. If we deny Christ died for all the world, we may as well say, God
made a people on purpose to damn them, as if you or I should marry a wife on
purpose (by the blessing of God) to have children, and then when God has
bestowed them, you or I should go and cut the throat of one, and hang another
up by the tongue, and throw a third at the fires back, were it not a woeful
thing? then much more that a merciful, tenderhearted God should deal thus
with the workmanship of his own hands.

Ans. What have we here, but great swelling words of vanity, and the foam of a
distempered fancy? yea, daring and desperate words against the truth.

1. Let us examine the Consequence; Does it follow at all that because we say
the one, Christ died not for all, therefore we may say the other, that God made
a people to damn them? He would indeed teach us to blaspheme, but we will not
learn of him. The Scripture tells us, Eccles. 7. ult. God made man upright, but
they have sought out many inventions; ways enough to damn themselves; yea,
that one invention of eating the forbidden fruit, was sufficient to have damned
the elect of God (with all the rest of mankind) but that Christ stepped in for
them; the devil shall not swallow all. Again, the Scripture tells us, Prove. 16.
4. The Lord has made all things for himself; yea even the wicked for the day
of evil. He made them not wicked, but if men make themselves wicked, God (who
would not permit the evil, but for a greater good, his own glory, etc.) makes
or orders these wicked ones, to suffer their just punishment on the execution
day.

2. Because God will not lose his elect, but purchase them at a dear rate, Is
he bound to do as much for others, as he freely does for them? Who art thou
that reply thus against God? as if because man takes delight in sinning, God
should take delight in mere damning; no, no, It Is the sinner cuts his own
throat, and throws himself into the fire; and when upon offers and entreaties,
the sinner will not return and live, but sin and die, the merciful God will
show no mercy; He that made them will show them no favor, Isa. 27. after his
patience is abused, his mercy slighted, and his tender bowels grieved;
justice breaks forth, and fury cease upon the poor sinner.

3. Here is nothing but juggling and delusion in this pretended Consequence and
plea; for even they that plead Christ died for all, do not, dare not say, he
died on purpose to save all, or to take away from all sinners, their purpose of
sinning; And if notwithstanding such universal grace and Redemption, as the
Adversaries boast of, men will and do go on with their purpose of sinning,
shall not God go on with his purpose of punishing the works of the devil in his
own workmanship?

Cons. 3. It implies and concludes as true believers under condemnation, as
any that are saved, for the truest believer does but believe what is reported
to him; and if it be reported to some, that Christ died not for them, they
believe it, and so perish.

Ans. 1. None that believes, and comes under condemnation, can never be said
to be a true believer, in a true Theological, but only metaphysicall sense; as
copper is true copper, but standing for gold, it is not gold e're the more, or
true gold; so the faith of a temporary believer is a right copper-faith, not
faith of Gods elect, or a golden faith.

2. A true believer indeed, receives the whole testimony of God about his Son,
not a part only.

3. In all the report of the Doctrine, there is no such Doctrine as this
taught; Christ died not for these particulars, or, Christ died for every
singular person. He therefore who believes upon this ground, Christ died for
every one, therefore for me, believes a false Proposition, and his faith is
false. And he that believes, Christ died not for him, because he is told ^o
without book, believes without book; and so if he perishes, he perishes, by,
and for believing his own heart (or Satan a lying spirit in the mouth of his
heart) not for believing truly.

This is a mere scandal they would cast upon the true Gospel, with the rest.

Cons. 4. The grace of Christ is straightened, for they speak of free grace, and
upstart nothing, but a plea for one of a hundred, or one of a thousand.

Answ. 1. Is it nothing to have one of a hundred, or one of a thousand written
in the Lambs book of life? (Though who taught him, or any other this
Arithmetic? The Lord only knows who, and how many, are his) he is an upstart
nothing, who puts this reproach upon Gods diminutives, and his little flock.

2. The freeness of grace is magnified and manifested the more, by Christ's
dying for a certain number, given to him of his Father, whom he thanketh, and
praises, Math. 11. 25 6, 7. for this free reservation of grace to a few.
Contracted beams of the Sun have the greater strength in a burning Glass, to
warm and fire; and so have the rays of divine favor, contracted into a
narrow compass, Romans 9. 28.

3. Our plea for Gods elect, will hold, and come to something in the end; none
of the Lords people, but shall obtain the fruit of Christ's death; when as their
plea, for all the world (besides the elect) will fail them in the experimental
issue, and come to nothing.

Cons. 5. God will damn men (they hold) because he will damn them, and so they
make damnation Gods Ordinance, not man's sin, the cause of it: And in this, we
may go so far as to justify the devil, who taught Cain, and Julian, and
Spira to despair, and Judas to hang himself; Now you will conclude the devil to
be a lier from the beginning, and that he cannot teach a truth, and on the
contrary you will conclude, none ought to despair, etc.

Ans. 1. It is a double reproach, either that this follows upon Christ's dying
for sinners prae-elected; or that we hold, God will damn, because he will damn;
God can send his Son to die for, and save whom he pleases, and yet does not
damn any but for sin.

2. If men sin against the Gospel, and sin with that disobedience, as to
stumble, and fall too, into despair; it is of themselves; not from Christ, or
the Gospel; but by accident. God ordains the Gospel for salvation, and
Christ's death, for salvation; if man and devil agree to pervert the Scripture,
to their damnation, it is the devils invention, and man's ordinance, not Gods.

3. Yet this we say; That no devil shall teach a man to despair (note by the
way it is the devils doctrine, not ours) nor shall man voluntarily damn himself,
against Gods overruling will and power, but with it, for the Scripture, so
attributes the cause of damnation and despair to the creature, as yet it
subordinates all this to the fore-appointment of God, to order 1 Pet. 2. 8.
Jude v. 4.
and suffer it so to be.

And so you may conclude, That although none ought to despair, nor has any
warrant for it, from Christ's dying but for some, or from any other
Scripture-truth; yet if they do despair (upon fleshly, worldly and satanicall
motions) God will order it to his glory.

And what vanity now appears in our opposing that error of Christ's dying for
all the world? (or rather, what impiety and impudence does not appear in his
exclaiming against the Truth?) as having many dingerous consequences attending
upon it. Were they consequences, they were dangerous enough, but we have
discovered them not to be consequences, and the Adversarie's challenges to be
but flourishes and bravadoe's, fighting all this time in the air, and with his
own shadow, to amuse the people, his Auditors, and ensnare your souls, which
is the only dangerous consequence of his, not our Doctrine, that I am for the
present afraid of.

But lest he should want an Adversary, he calls forth one Objection, which he
said, comes out as the Forlorn Hope from us.

Object. Christ died not for all, because he prayed not for all, Joh. 17. 9.

Answ. His answer was twofold; 1. Although he prayed not there for all, he
might elsewhere. 2. He did pray for his enemies (when upon the Cross) and let
any prove, there were none but the elect.


Reply, Reply to the first Answer.
This Argument from Scripture, he calls our forlorn Hope, and strong enough for
him to encounter withal, nor shall he find it so forlorn, but that it will
make good it is line and ground; For

1. Whereas he says, Although Christ prayed not for the world, in that place,
he might elsewhere; Himself loses ground; for such as Christ leaves, but once
out of his prayer (by way of exception and caution) he never takes in; nay,
it is a sign he never took them in.

2. Again, To show the Lords meaning (whom he prayed for here and elsewhere) he
gives his own limitation, verse. 9. But for those that thou have given me; and
his enlargement or extent, ver. 20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for
them also which shall believe on me through their word; these are but a few to
all the world.

1. When he prayed for his enemies, they were to be considered To the second
Answer.
under a double notion,

1. As those whom he died for, and converted soon after, Act. 2. and 3. and 4.
Chapters. Or,

2. As his personal enemies (whether elect, or others) and so he did but set
us an example, what we should do when hated and persecuted; what? forgive them,
and pray as he did, Luke 23. 24. Father, forgive them, etc. either as being
those he should die for, for whom he would, and did make satisfaction, and so
to be forgiven eternally and absolutely; or such as should be forgiven,
respectively (as doing injury Numb. 14. 19.
to his person) and temporarily; as many in the wilderness are said to be
forgiven, who were not presently cut off; which as a godly man may obtain of
God for a reprobate; so Christ, for such, as did ignorantly crucify him,
though God did afterward visit the sins of the fathers upon the children
(who went on to crucify Christ, in his members) at Jerusalems destruction.

2. What ever Christ prayed for (when he prayed for his enemies) in order to
this life, he had; viz. a temporal forbearance; or keeping off a temporal
punishment, etc. But what he prayed for in order to eternal life, he received
much more, and had it been for any more then the elect, that man, had been both
a reprobate, and yet eternally forgiven; which things are inconsistent, and
cannot hold together; that either Christ should so pray, or praying not be
heard, or being heard, the person or persons prayed for, should be eternally
reprobated, and yet eternally pardoned.

You see then we make good the pass here, and shall maintain the fight; our
Forlorn Hope (as he called it, I wisse, not in derision) not receiving so much
as one wound.

His next Use was To comfort men's consciences in the consideration Examination
and dissipation of the second Use.
of Gods love; and this general love from which none are excluded; much more
this comfort was for the elect, and Christ's friends; for if Christ died for his
enemies, then surely there is abundance of love for those that be his friends.

Answ. 1. He should not need to have taken this fetch and compass to raise
comfort for Christ's friends; for they have enough from the Doctrine of Christ's
dying but for some, and more comfort thence, then if he had died for all; for

1. They have the comfort of Gods special love, and that is more then what
arises but from a general love, which is no more then a reprobate may have.

2. They have this comfort, that being sometimes enemies, they are made
friends, Romans 5. 9, 10. which is not the privilege of all: grant, that Christ
died for his enemies, and that all are his enemies; yet he died not for all his
enemies, but for such, as were in Gods special love, his Favorites, from all
eternity; in time made enemies, by the first Adam, and in the fullness of time
made friends, by him the second Adam.

this is implied; because Christ died for all, from a general love; my
Beloved; observe the fallacy; Though God bears a general love to that kind of
his creatures, Mankind (and not such a love to Angel-kinde) as to appoint a
Redeemer in that nature for men, of the common kind, and those as bad, and as
forlorn as any, of their kind, his elect while enemies; yet this does not
administer one dram of comfort, to any individual person of mankind, while
an enemy; but when comfort comes in, it is to his elect, called home, and to
them only; not as uncalled, or outwardly and ineffectually called, but as
called, and that effectually; and according to purpose.

And so this Heretic is forced (being (...), convinced and condemned in
himself, as I gather by this Use) to apply his comfort to the elect alone; and
to that end quoted the 2. of Col. 2. The Apostles prayer for them, that they
might have the full assurance of understanding; which he interpreted to be,
That they might see their particular assurance of life, in a general promise;
and not their general assurance in a particular promise: for we desire no more
then a particular and personal assurance, in and from a general promise, such
as Paul's, 1. Tim. 1. 15. and yet this general, is not so universal, as that
Christ died for all the world of men.

But not hurting us, in all this Use of Comfort hitherto, at last he thought he
would strike home, and wound us deeply, with this blow; A man may preach seven
years of particular Redemption, and not comfort a distressed conscience; to
which I say two things;

1. What means he by a distressed conscience? a child of light, walking in
darkness, or a child of darkness blowing up the sparks of his own
fire-sticks, but almost smothered and stifled with the smoke thereof?

2. We preach a choice and special Redemption, in a general offer, to what
sinner soever, that is distressed, and will be directed; As Paul, Believe, and
thou shall be saved; and Act. 16.
immediately the Jailor is comforted, he stayed not seven years for it.

His third Use was, To teach us abundance of love to Examination of his third
U^e
Christ.

Answ. I demand whom he means by [us] if the people of God, and the elect, and
believers; how is this a direct inference, from Christ's buying the whole world?
if all men, be meant by us, how shall they love, who do not believe? but if he
understood Gods peculiar people; because he mentioned the Spouse afterward [no
wonder her love is so carried after her espoused husband Christ] let him know
that the hearts of the Saints are touched and taken with the special love of
Christ; it is that which constrains them to love him in a special manner, and
that the more abundantly, because they know in part, and shall yet further
know, Christ died for them, not only out of a general love which he bears to
man's nature; but out of a special and singular love, which he bears to their
persons, and to theirs only.

Thus have we followed his Counsel to search the Scriptures, and we find them
of weight, for special Redemption, and love, but weighing the man, and his
Doctrine, and Uses too, of universal Redemption, we have found them too light.

Let me but add a few Arguments, as Antidotes (against the poison, which some
of you, may have sucked in of late) and preservatives from the infection of
this heretical tenet, of Christ's buying the world of men, and dying for them
all; and we have done with the Anasceuastique part of our discourse, which
tends to the weakening, ruin and destruction, Antidotes or Counter poison
of so grand an error.

First, Gods Attributes are hereby wronged and scandalized, as

1. Gods power is called into Question; as if a general benefit were merited
by Christ, which by reason of man's wickedness he cannot apply.

2. His wisdom is eclipsed, for it puts upon him such an intention, as yet by
proper and direct means he attains not unto.

3. His justice is rendered unjust; for he receives a full satisfaction, of
his Son, for all men; and yet neither first nor last, receives them into the
favor of communion and friendship.

4. His highest love is undervalued; for it holds forth Gods love to give his
Son, but not so, as to give them faith, for whom he gave his Son; and it
speaks of Christ's sweating and dying for them, whom yet he lets die and perish
in their sins.

Secondly, If he died for all, then he died in their stead, and as their surety
he discharged the whole debt, and so, it is not only unjust, but impossible,
that any should perish; here the Remonstrants (Arminians so calling themselves)
at the Hague conference, had a subtle distinction of Christ's dying, Non loco
and vice omnium, not in the room and stead of all, sed bono tantum; but for
their good only, whereas the Scriptures (which own not such a distinction) hold
out Christ as dying in the room and stead of sinners, that they might not die
eternally, but live for ever, so is, (...)
Romans 5. 6. (...), where (...) is as much as (...), and so rendered, Philem. v.
13 (...); that in t^y stead, in another case; and about the Question in hand,
the word in 1 Timothy 2. 6 is (...); a ransom in the room and stead of all; or
pro onnis ordinis electis; which compared with Mat 20 28. is, (...) for many,
and but for many indivduals; or, in stead of many singulars (chosen of God) one
choice-singular-Jesus suffered.
1 Pet. 3. 18. and other places to be understood; Christ died for the wicked,
that is, in their stead, The just in the room of the unjust; The good, the all,
or any of the benefits that comes from Christ's death, flows from this that he
suffered in the room of those, who have that good and benefit by his death; and
if, as themselves acknowledge, he died not in the room and stead of all; they
weave but a spiders web, to say, it was for their good; how can the surety do
the debtour any good; if he neither be bound in his stead, nor paies the debt,
in his room?

Thirdly, If he died for all, he rose again for all, ascended, sits at Gods
right hand, and makes intercession for all; for the Scriptures join his death
and resurrection together, Romans 4. ult. and his death, ascension, sitting,
interceding with the Father, all together, Romans 8. 34. and more particularly
with his intercession, 1 John 2. 1, 2. and if so; that he rises, ascends,
sits and pleads for all; he is, either heard, or not heard for all; if heard
for all, then all must be saved; if not heard for all, then Christ intercedeth
in vain; and the Father does not hear him always, cross to Scripture, Joh.
11. 42.

Fourthly, This loose opinion, puts all that hold it, upon such distinctions,
as have no ground from Scripture, but are contrary to it; as

1. That (but even now named, or refuted) of loco and bono, not in stead of
all, but for the good of all.

2. That of impetration and application; which the Gospel holds forth as
inseparable acts of Christ's mediation; to whom Christ's death is or shall be
applied for them, he obtained remission of sins, and for whom he did
impetrate, to them he applies, Isa. 53. 11. Joh. 10. 15, 28. Heb. 9. 12, 15.
Yea the Apostle infers the application, and that by gift, of all other good
things; from the gift of Redemption, and of the Redeemer himself, Romans 8. 32.

3. That of Christ's satisfaction for all men, and obtaining the pardon of all
sins against the Covenant of works for all them, and his satisfaction for,
and pardon of the sins against the Covenant of Grace, only for the elect;
whereas all men originally and actually hanging upon a Covenant of works, for
life, and yet continually breaking that Covenant, are actually in all ages, and
in this present age (as in the Apostles age) under the curse, Gal. 3. 10. And
they who have any sin forgiven, have all sins forgiven them, Col. 2. 13. Zach.
13. 1. which are the elect only; Christ's peculiar people, Mat. 1. 21. Tit. 2,
14.

4. That of the Gospel, and of the promise of life; the former being (as our
new teacher said After his Lecture to a brother of ours.
) for all, the promise of life for believers only: Whereas at the first dawning
of the Gospel, the promise of life and immortality comes to light, 2 Timothy 1.
10. whoever have the Gospel preached to them, that they might believe, have the
promise of life also preached to them, that they might believe, and before a
man does believe he has no more interest in the Gospel, or in Christ's death
then in the promise of life, Joh. 3. ult.

5. It makes Christ's death not at all the execution of Gods election; or if at
all; but of a conditional election, producing but a conditional Redemption
for all, not absolute for any; hence

6. It frames Gods intention after man's fancy, and Christ's love to be no more
to Peter, then to Judas, as some have confessed it.

7. It imagines the grace of God to be for all, or none, and Christ's death to
be for none certainly, but contingently.

8. It shuts out Infants from any benefit by Christ's death, but what (say they)
is common to Reprobates, as freedom from original sin; bodily life and
Resurrection: The first we deny that any Reprobate has, or shall have; As for
present life, and future Resurrection, if Infants have no more advantage by
Christ's death; then have they not so much; either, as a benefit, or not, as by
his death; if they have more; why do the Assertours of such grace, deny them
the seal thereof in Baptism?

9. It leads to other errors, as pernicious and pestilent; I Will instance in
three,

1. That of free will; for Christ's death for all, obtains but of God (by their
Doctrine) a possibility that men may be saved, converted, etc. If they will;
and that will left in their common Nature, is Grace; Gospel Grace they must
make it, or they make nothing of it; a Gospel-will let it be then, contributing
to man's conversion; what? just nothing says the Scripture, Ioh. 5. 40. and 6.
44. All, say they, in effect; for let all operations of grace be put, that may
be put, into the balance, will must cast the scales, and determine the case,
whether the man shall be converted, or no, saved, or no. And what the vote of
the will is, in that case, read Psalm 81. 11, 12. Jeremy 44. 17. Oh slavish
will, as Luther called thee; and Oh Legal will may I call thee, continually in
bondage! What is the pride of that opinion, which would exalt thee, such a
bond-slave, above a promise, above the Spirit, above God, and his decrees, etc?

2. That of falling away from Grace; for if Christ died for all, and that to
obtain remission of sins for all, and, a will for all to be converted; then
all men, are not only fallen in the first Adam, but are and shall fall, in
Christ the second Adam, from a pardoned state, and a state of free will, and of
free grace (in their sense) who are not elected; yea, but when the Scripture
Luke 1. 77. Joh. 6. 44, 45.
attributes remission of sins, and a will to be regenerate, or a will set at
liberty for the receiving and acting of grace, only to the Elect; such falling
away from such grace, is an imputation, by Arminian Doctrine cast upon the
Elect of God; such Doctrine and Doctors therefore to be abandoned.

3. That (which issues from both the former) denial of the Spirits efficacy,
first, and last; They that teach Christ died for all, do grant he gives his
Spirit but to some; here they plainly separate Christ's death, and the Spirit of
his death; and when the Spirit is given, he works but at the courtesy of the
will, how far, and how long it wills, and pleases; Can that Doctrine be
for Christ's honor, that tends to the dishonor of his Spirit?

10. And lastly, It engenders unto that conceit, That the damned may in time be
saved As since these Sermons were preached, I have met with a Pamphlet not
worthy confutation, entitled, Divins Light (per antiphrasin, it should be
diabolical darkness) manifesting (it should be, smoking out of the
bottomless pit) the love of God unto the whole world, and to his Church;
wherein six times at least that place in Zach. 9. 11. As for thee also, by the
blood of thy Covenant. I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein
there is no water, is applied (beyond some of the old Doctors expolitions to
Limbus patrum, or of Bellarmines to Purgatory a part of hell, as he dreams)
even to the deepest place of the damned, men and devils too; who shall (says
the namelesse, notelesse Author) by virtue of the Covenant of General
Redemption be delivered from thence, and rewarded too for all their torments
and losses, in grace and glory. Much Atheism and blasphemy there is in such an
heretical assertion, and this contradiction (in adjecto) that eternity of
hell-tormenting fire (as is expressly threatened, Math. 25 ult. Mark 9 45.) shall
have an end, does alone, call aloud, to have that Pamphlet condemned to, and
consumed in, some Cheap Side, or kitchen fire.
, or if not so, yet as Arminius and Vorstius dreamed, it promises, Levamen
aliquod, some easement and mitigation of their pains for ever in hell.

I should now proceed to the true Exposition, pertinent Observations, and
Applications of the Text, but there lies a rub and remora or two in my way,
which I shall endeavor to remove, viz.

Quest. May not the former Exposition stand in some founder sense then that of
this Seducer? viz. Although Christ did not redeem all men's souls, yet he did
buy the world of creatures for the common good of all men.

Answ. 1. Suppose he did buy the world of creatures, for

2. Our late Expositour took not the Field, for the structure,

3. Grant that he, or any man should draw the Parable, or viz. That Christ did
buy the creature for all men, our Vniversalists will not rest there; give them
but an inch of this or other texts to hold out Christ's temporal purchase for
every man, and they will take an ell of his spiritual purchase in with it:
witness the Texts Joh. 4. 42. 1 Timothy 24. 6, etc.
fore-alleadged and vindicated; all which do speak expressly of spiritual
and saving benefits, and so far, does our new Expositour carry it, beyond a
temporal, common good, even to a Redemption from all sins against the
Covenant of works; which indeed is but that one first sin of Adam (before the
promise) by the tenor of his Doctrine; for all having sinned in Adam, and a
Covenant of grace entered with those all, after his sin; it must needs
follow, that all sins of Adam, and of all his posterity, afterward, are
sins against the Covenant of grace only; and Christ being the Mediator of
this Covenant, he mediates for all, that all may have Adams sin forgiven;
which is beyond all temporal benefits; for it puts them into a blessed state
of Justification and life; which the Apostle, Romans 5. sets in opposition to the
state of guilt and death, wherein all are involved by Adams sin: And it may
be, some over-indulgent expressions of some reverend and godly learned Teachers
in our Churches, have encouraged our Adversaries, by what they have preached,
or written, to this effect; That some common benefit comes in to all men by
Christ; and that Christ as a Lord, has bought and purchased all wicked men
their lives, and their reprievall, all that time that here they live; and all
the blessings and dispensations of goodness which here they do enjoy; That
which is indulgent, is for Christ as a Lord to allow wicked men common
benefits, etc. That which I think over-indulgent is, that Christ has bought
and purchased these men, and the world for them; And the stretching inferences,
which our Arminian-Novellists do wier-draw from hence, are; That such acts of
Gods mercy are effects of Christ's Mediatour-ship; And if Christ does it as a
Lord, think they, yea, and as a Jesus too; and if God has given them their
lives, etc. for a time; Christ has purchased these lives of theirs; and if he
has purchased them; it is upon some satisfaction which Christ has made to his
Father, and from some general pardon, which he has obtained of his Father for
Adam's, and all men's first fault in Adam.

But that the world, and the lives of wicked men, and the blessings of this
life (though the earth be given to the sons of men, even into the hands of the
wicked, Job 9. 24.) come not in to them by Christ's purchase, I think I may
evince by these Demonstrations,

1. Either such a purchase is by some satisfaction to Gods Demonstratio^s
against Christ's purchase of all men for the world of creatures, or of the
creatures for all mankind.
justice, or not: If not by any satisfaction, then something Christ does, and
offers to God, is a price unsatisfactory, or no (...), or price of redemption
at all; which is the dotage and madness of Socinus, and his followers. If by
some satisfaction; where Christ satisfies in part, he satisfies wholly, where
he obtains one mercy, he obtains all; and wicked men, even reprobates must have
the rest of the purchase; or God gives not Christ what he has purchased; we
may safely conclude therefore, he purchased nothing for them at all, neither
spirituals, nor temporals; but all, and only for them, for whom he obtained an
eternal Redemption, as it is called, Heb 9. 13.

2. Then would Gods love and favor be known by outward Demon. 2.
benefits at the first view, and by good events of providence, without any
other consideration; it is enough Christ purchased the world for them, and them
for the world: God loves them, nor is there any hatred to be taken notice of,
from other notions; contrary to Ecclesiastes, chap. 9. 1.

3. Then all are under Grace, and Gospel Grace, and Gospel Covenant; Demon. 3.
Nature is grace, even natural reason and will; or nature endued with reason
and will (as Pelagius fancied) for this was part of the purchase.

4. Grant but all temporal things (even of men excommunicate, Demon. 4.
and of Heathens) to be founded in grace (I mean Gospel-purchase, and Gods free
favor in Christ) and you Daven deter. q. 30.
lay a foundation for the Popes Supremacy, and his deposing of Princes; for
that being granted, it is founded in grace, and many Princes denying Romes grace
and faith, they conclude such are to be deprived of their temporal dominions
and dignities.

5. This confounds the Kingdom of Power, and the Kingdom Demon. 5.
of Grace, and brings all humane Powers and Magistrates, States and
Commonwealths, immediately under Christ's mediatory Kingdom; and that as they
are Magistrates, and civil States; As Mr Hussy Plea for Christian Magist. 36
would have Christ by his mediation obtain of the Father, that he shall not
judge any man according to rigor, but as they are in or out of Christ; all
deferring of judgment from the wicked, is in and for Christ, which otherwise
the justice of God would not allow. Mr Gillespy Male audis, 29.
well infers, Then Christ dies for them, and did thus far make satisfaction
in the behalf of the wicked, that judgment might be deferred from them; and
thus far he has performed acts of mediation for Savages and Mahumetans, who
never heard of the Gospel; and thereby has obtained that they shall be judged,
not according to rigor, but by the Gospel, which intimates, That Christ has
taken away all their sins against the Law; so that all men shall now go upon
a new score, etc. being all of them immediately upon Adams fall, under a new
Covenant, and in a Kingdom of grace; which suits well, and jumps in with Mr
Oats's opinion, not as good wits use to do, but as bad counselors and
conspiratours against a good cause or two, as well that of Church Government,
confounded with the civil, as that of a Covenant of grace, confounded with a
Covenant of works: But I ask M. Hussy, or any rational Doctor, Cannot Gods
power be exercised, where his grace in Christ is denied; and cannot God be just
and patient too? why should we set one Attribute of God against the other, when
none of them do interfere?

Genesis 2. 17.
It will be said, The threatening was full and peremptory; In the day that thou
eatest thereof, thou shall die the death: Except Christ steps in, Justice
proceeds upon him immediately; God shows not a drop of mercy, but for his Son.

I answer, 1. Justice did proceed upon Adam, at the instant of his sinning he
begins to die the death; his body becomes mortal and obnoxious to death (in
which sense the Apostle says, The body is dead, Romans 8. 10.) his soul and
spirit is void of the life of God, and of the sense of Gods love, he is under
the power and regiment of sin and Satan, disabled to all spiritual good:
This spiritual death is the harbinger of eternal death to him; an hell upon
earth it was, when God arraigned him; he had no other, I conceive, then the
sentence of death and hell in his conscience, till the promise comes, Genesis 3.
15. but observe it, before that promise is revealed, God is just and patient
also; just in bringing the degrees and pains of death upon Adam; patient in
forbearing the immediate and full execution; even as God was, and is just to
the Angels that sinned, 2 Pet. 2. 4. yet patient in that he reserveth them to a
further judgment, and gives them not all their torment before their time,
Math. 8. 29. and yet this patience is exercised to devils, without a purchase
or death of a Mediator; so God might defer from Adam, and does from his
posterity keep off judgment, though not in, and for Christ, qua Mediator; And
what though Gods dispensations toward Angels, is not a rule in all cases, for
us to collect his transaction, about man fallen, and his dispensations toward
him? yet in this case the Apostle 2 Pet. 2. 4. (...), verse. 9.
makes a clear inference, If God spared not them, but reserveth them unto
judgment; he knows (v. 9.) how to reserve the unjust to the day of
judgment; the same verb being used in ver 4, and 9. for reserving; in the
Passive and Active voice; where he speaks of Angels and men, as coming from the
same act of Gods just patience, and patient-justice. And though we know not how
this should be, he knows how to be just and patient too; how to be patient in
wrath, and justice (Romans 9. 22.) and how to be just in his patience.

2. The threatening, Genesis 2. 17. against Adam, and all men sinning in him, is
not taken off by the promise, Genesis 3. 15. which is only to the woman and her
seed: nay, that is a threatening too, in reference to the Serpent, and his seed;
which are not only evil Angels, but wicked reprobates amongst men: and that
which is threatened is irreconcilable enmity with, and conquest over, Satan and
all his serpentine brood; which necessarily infers death and damnation to them,
as to himself; it were strange then, if vertually in and for Christ, patience
should be afforded to Adam, and all in him before the promise is actually
promulged, when at and in the actual promulgation, here is nothing but wrath
and enmity between the woman and the serpent, Christ and the devil; the devils
brood, and the generation of the righteous; true; Adam stands by trembling, and
hears this, but if he gets any peace or patience, or pardon of his first sin,
it is a personal favor, only for himself, not to descend upon all his
posterity, but such as should be the woman's seed, from their interest in a
second Adam, Christ Jesus, not from any relation to him as the first Adam: All
therefore, who are yet but in the first Adam, and as branches of that root are
under the sentence of death for that first sin; Christ has not obtained
pardon nor patience, that I know, for them, one moment.

3. No man denies but all was forfeited upon Adam's fall, his very life, and
all creature-comfort and subsistence, but God takes not the forfeit, for when
Christ the promised seed, steps in for that part of mankind, who are with
Christ, the seed of the woman, the elect of God, the patience, mercy and bounty
of God steps in for the rest of mankind, even the seed of the serpent, and
reprobates, with whom yet he will carry on a Covenant of works and justice; the
foundation of which covenant Christ cannot be, as Mediator; for then he should
be the foundation of two Covenants, contradistinct; works and grace; no, a
Reprieve only comes forth for them yet under, and ever to be under a Covenant
of works and justice; this is no Redemption.

4. This Reprieve is but for a very short time to many, not at all to some of
the serpents seed; who being conceived in the guilt of the first sin, are
stifled at first conception ^^ or being born in that guilt, and the corruption
of nature succeeding in the room of Gods image, dead in sins and trespasses;
die corporally the day they are born, or soon after in tender infancy; and in
their immortal souls die eternally, as the children of the Sodomites, then in
the womb, or newly crept out; who (with their parents, or fathers of
fornication, an unclean diabolical brood, Jude v. 7.) are suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire: Others live out their time allotted them in
just-patience; but are accursed in life and death, Isa. 65 20. And die as Morte
morieris, Hebraismus est, qua verboru^ reduplicatione, vehementia and certitudo
significatur: morie morieris, i. c. certissime morieris. Paulus Fagius in Genesis
2. 17.
certainly step by step, as they that drop into hell out of their mothers womb:
And as malefactors, who are but reprieved, not redeemed and pardoned, stay
they never so long in Jail, yet they die the death, or do most surely suffer
death at the day of full execution; being dead men in law long before.

5. What Christ the Son of God does in this reprieve of the serpents seed (as
indeed he does all that is done) it is as he is God and Lord of all in the
Kingdom of his Power, which he makes subservient to the Kingdom of his Grace,
for the saving benefit of the heirs of grace and glory: As some great Lord
(intending to redeem one captive (among and out of many prisoners, in his
fathers great house) that he might marry her, and make her his beloved Spouse,
and for whom he lays down a ransom to his father) out of his generous and
noble disposition, common to him, and his father also (as a Lord and great
Prince, not as Husband or Bridegroom) should throw away little and great sums
of money, with suits of cloth upon the common prisoners, and appoint them
relief out of a common Almes-basket, all to this end, that these common
prisoners might do some service in the great family for his Spouses advantage:
So the Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ (so styled, Jude v. 4. being the
only Lord God to all men, and the Lord Jesus Christ, but to a few) he comes in
the first promise, and in the old Prophecies, types and shadows, and in the
fullness of time, in the substance of our nature, among a world of Captives to
woo his Church, his ^pouse and Bride, to redeem and save her, and her only by
the ransom of his blood, paid down to his Fathers justice; and out of his
natural pity and bounty, being God, and the Son of God, and Lord of all (like
himself, and his greatness) he casts away life and health, wealth, honor and
riches, poor Turcicum imperium quantu^ quantum est, mica tantum est. Luth.
crumbs, or if you conceit it great morsels, gobs and cantels, upon the men of
this world (Gods great house now turned into a prison) and appoints them
ordinary relief, out of the common basket of his bountiful providence (which
might lead them to repentance, or will leave them, without excuse) and all this
he does for his Spouse, the Church of the elect; for whose sake he orders all
men in the world, or these common prisoners, to be serviceable to her, whom
himself serves in, not only with grace, but with all outward merciful supplies
(how mean, or course soever) in the great silver Charger of the Covenant, as a
Brother M Tho. Case, his Model of Thankfulness, in a Ser. before the Parl. upon
Psa 107. 30, 31
expresses it. Now who may not discern a vast difference between the Newgate
prisoners common basket, and the Princes silverplates and chargers; and who
(that will not shut his eyes) sees it not one thing to be reprieved and spared
under the dominion of God's and Christ's power, which is all the Serpents seed
are capable of, and another thing to be redeemed and bought out of the hands of
sin and Satan, into the Kingdom of Christ's grace and glory; yea, and to have
all things here, come in by purchase and promise; one thing for God to be the
Savior of all men, or preserver of man and beast, in the ways of his general
providence, as Psalm. 36. 6. Another thing for God, in Christ, to provide for
believers, and his chosen ones, from special purchase, to serve them in, with
all things, out of special love; and to convey all unto them, by a special
promise, 1 Timothy 4. 10.

6. Although this reprieve of the wicked, is for the elects Demon. 6.
sake, and for Christ's sake; yet it follows not, that it is by purchase; for
all that is for Christ, and for the elect, is not by purchase; as to instance,
the creation of the world was for Christ's sake; All things were created by him,
and for him, Col. 1. 16. yet he purchased not that creation; The elect Angels
are for him, and he makes use of them for the good of elect men; yet he
purchases them not; And the Reprobate Angels (the devils) are serviceable in
the Kingdom of his power, for the good of his Church, to afflict, and try them,
yet are they far from being purchased; so God can show many drops of mercy
(to further on his Sons designs) in a common way of providence; and yet not
put his Son to shed one drop of blood, for a reprobate man's preservation, or
livelihood; that drop would make it too pure and shiere mercy, which no
serpentine seed tastes of, but has a cup of wrath and justice, with every drop
of mercy.

Lastly (which may serve for our last demonstration, and Last Demonstration and
Answer.
last answer also to the grand Objection) As Christ's Kingdom of power and grace
must not be confounded; so his Redemption by price, and his Redemption by power
may not be separated. They are only bought for whom the price is laid down, 1
Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a price; who are there distinguished from men,
as men, for whom the price is not so much as tendered; but they who are bought
with a price, are (...), Col. 1. 13.
brought out by a strong hand; from the power of darkness, and are translated
into the kingdom of love, and of the Son of Gods love; yea, and the creature
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the sons of God, Romans 8. 21. As it shall be the glorious liberty of the
sons of God to give homage and service of praise, to God, and their Father,
Redeemer and Sanctifier for ever; So it shall be the glorious liberty of the
creature, to minister matter of praise to the elect, who shall improve the
creature to its full and perfect use, and raise it up to its honor and
dignity, for which it was made, to be instrumentally helpful, to man's praising
and glorifying of his Creator; as the nurse W^llet upon Romans 8. qu. 34. out of
Chryso.
to a Kings son and heit-apparant to the Crown, when the Prince comes to his
fathers Kingdom, the is made partaker of some choice preferment with the Prince
she nursed: But what is this to Christ's purchase of the world, for the men of
the world, or of all men in the world, for worldly enjoyments? When as 1.
(...), the creature it self, Romans 8. 21. or (...), every creature, ver. 23. or
totus mundus conditus, as Beza, the whole substantial structure, and frame of
the heaven and the earth, is not there to be understood of every individuum, or
singular of every kind; nay, it is disputable, whether every species shall be
restored and continued; And 2. not one individuall-non-elected man, woman, or
child, has any part of spiritual liberty here (which they had, if they were
under the liberty of Christ's purchase) nor shall have any share in the glorious
liberty of the sons of God, and of the creature hereafter; but as they are
now in the common prison of this great house, the habitable earth; so they
shall be all shut up in the close prison of hell, their souls at death, till
the day of general judgment, and their bodies with their souls, after that
great day, for ever and ever.

No ground can I find for asserting, that Christ has purchased heaven or
earth, or any saving, or any temporal benefit at all, for any of the sons of
men, whose bodies and souls are not purchased as the elect-sonnes and daughters
of God; All is theirs (not the men^ of this world) whether things present, or
things to come, by purchase, by promise, by firm title, and everlasting
possession in Christ, or all in all, while here, and in God, our all in all, in
heaven for ever.

Object. If any offer to object yet further, The world, (1 Cor. 3. 22.) is the
Saints, and wicked men are a part of the world, and so a part of Christ's
purchase, as the chaff is purchased with the wheat, for the wheats sake, which,
when the wheat is severed from it, is burnt up, and cast into the fire; I shall
offer this

Answ. 1. Man's similitudes prove not a truth of God, but illustrate only, and
Gods similitudes, Christ's Parables (as those of our Text, or that of wheat and
chafe, Math. 3. 12.) have no such scope, and they prove nothing beyond their
scope.

2. There is no Basis by any firm proposition of the Word, to build such an
illustration upon: for all the world, and even wicked men may be the Saints for
use and benefit, and yet they are not purchased, but the benefit by them: As
death (1 Cor. 3. 22.) is said to be the Saints, i. e. at their service (by
Christ's overruling power) and for their advantage; and yet not death it self,
but that service and advantage, which death brings to them, is purchased: So
not the wicked and the reprobate of the world, but the benefit which the
truly-godly have by them, comes within the purchase; And as for any benefit,
which the wicked have themselves by life, or in life, riches, honor, etc.

1. It is a benefit in it self to live, etc. but not to them, but as they make
the better use of it.

2. What is beneficial to them, comes in (as we have showed) by a
legall-Reprieve, wherein there is justice all along predominantly mixed with
mercy and patience, and shier judgment, or most just execution intended, at
the last: not by a Gospel-Redemption, which holds out every where (especially
in our times of the new Testament) pure, complete, free mercy, and grace in
Christ, and brings in the accomplishment of an absolute free Covenant, made
with Christ for the free effectual complete salvation of all, and only God's
chosen: who being his chosen, are his only redeemed ones, his only espoused
ones, his reconciled ones, his adopted ones, his sanctified ones, his glorified
ones; Ephesians. 1. 6.
To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has accepted them in his
beloved.

I Had thought here to have taken breath, espying no enemy in the field; but
presently there meets me Paulus Testardus de Natura and Gratia.
a Champion Author, one who is for peace and sweet harmony of truth, and has
happily cleared it in many particulars; yet in this controversy of universal
Redemption, his music jars, and he holds up the weapons of an unhappy war,
and thinks to carry all before him, because he is not point blanke of Arminius
judgment, in the stating of the Question: For These. 95.
he maintains that Christ died for all, and every singular, but he will not
assert, that he died aeque or alike for every one; Christ died The 78.
(he says) for all, to prepare ^n apt and sufficient remedy, and for the
elect, to apply to them, what he had prepared for all. Nor did he die The 95.
only that God might enter a Covenant with mankind upon any condition, but
that he might most surely covenant with Christ the Surety, under the condition
of (the Elects) uniting and growing up, by faith in him; nor that salvation
might only be possible for all, but certain for some; a seed, to whom Christ's
blood should be applied; so as all are redeemed, but not alike redeemed; Christ
died pro omnibus and singulis, that every one might be redeemed from the
necessity of perishing, for the infringed legall-covenant of nature (in Adam)
and the want of satisfaction, etc. And that some certain ones, beloved, in Gods
good pleasure, above the rest, might be actually freed, etc. still for more
The. 81.
, then for the sheep of Christ, he would have Christ to die, out of a more
general intention; which he endeavors The. 81, 82, 84, 86, 87.
to prove, from the general expression [world] Joh. 3. 16. from the Parable of
the Feast, Math. 22. from 1 Timothy 2. 6. and 2 Pet. 2. 1. and 1 John 2. 2. to all
which places alleged and improved by Samuel Oats, we have given our answer
In the Sermons
long before, Paulus Testardus came to our view; what he writes in this case,
and how much wiser and more foundly he has improved those Scriptures; and what
greater strength there is in his Arguments, I shall leave to the full examen
and censure of able judgem^nts, and learned Pens: But may I pass my vote,
without offense of the weak or strong, it is this, Amicus Testardus, in his
pursuit of peace and truth, and in many excellent notions and harmonicall notes
of free effectual grace, etc. but in this plea, Magis amica veritas, for while
he pleads that Christ's death is for all, and every singular, he does, as I
understand the Scripture and him, nec sibi, nec Scripturae constare, neither
agree with himself, nor the Scripture.

And first to show how inconsistent his Tenet is with Scripture, Testardus
tenet^ inconsistent, or that which will not stand with Scripture.
he neither does, nor can maintain it, without the Assertion of such a general
intention, such a general Covenant, such an universal call, and such
universal Grace, as have no footing in all the book of God.

First, For his general intention, I conceive, it is not the 1. Not general
intention. Inte^^ere proprie, est velle per aliqui^ a^ aliud pervenire, Amesius.
Scripture intention upon these grounds,

1. All the intention of Christ's death which the Scripture holds forth, is a
proper and single intention, by such a medium, or mean to come to such an end;
viz. by Christ's death (wherein mankind or the nature of man is made
salvabilis) to save some (or many) and bring them to perfect grace, in glory;
this was the Fathers single and sole end, Heb. 2. 10. And this was Christ's,
Joh. 17. 19. Testardus The 80.
renders this intention double, by making it common to all, and every singular,
and yet special to, and for the elect.

2. The Scripture intention is absolute and strong, for the justification and
life of all those, for whom Christ was sent, and for whom he died, 1 John 4. 9.
In this was manifested, etc. that we might live through him, not a natural,
but spiritual life of justification, sanctification and glory. Testardus The.
102.
makes it partly absolute, partly conditional; a very weak intention (in
effect) and irrational; if Christ's death should be for those, who never have a
will to apply it to themselves, nor that Christ means to apply it unto.

3. The Scripture intention is so successful, as to be satisfactory to the
Father and the Son, Isa. 53. 10, 11. The pleasure of the Lord (about Christ's
death) shall prosper in his (sons) hand. He (the Lord Jesus) shall see of the
travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied. Yea, and to the some that hearkens
after the Gospel-intention, as well as invitation, Isa. 55. 2. it is and shall
be bread, and marrow, and fatness, But Testardus general intention, is not
satisfying to God himself, and the Father, or Christ; unless God and Christ be
satisfied, when they complain; and he Ibid
brings them in complaining, Isa. 5. 4. Math. 23. 37. for all this general
intention. And if God complains, and Christ mourns, this common intention
will not settle the conscience. Conscience will not be satisfied, but with what
God is satisfied. When a poor soul hears that Christ died for all by a general
intention, to prepare a remedy for all, and or the elect by a special
intention to justify and save them, he has a stumbling block laid before him,
to reason thus; I know not whether I be of the number of them, that Christ more
generally, or more specially intended, in his death: And if he comes to
Testardus for resolution of this doubt; he cannot be resolved by his Doctrine,
because Ibid.
by the more general redemption, and intention, God does not mean to bestow
actual salvation upon the sinner, but conditionally; And if you ask him, upon
what condition, he will not tell you, it is upon a faith, of Gods irresistible
working (which yet he The 243, 244.
grants to some, and ingenuously acknowledges peculiar to the elect) but in
effect The. 102.
, their own (...) velle to make use of Gods (...) pass; their natural will,
to make use of Gods common supernatural light: Is this satisfactory? or that
which somewhere The 97.
he asserteth, that God grants a faculty of salvation, to miserable sinners,
in the general redemption; but the use of that faculty, he indulgeth only to
believers, in the special redemption? It Is yet but common and unsatisfying to
the miserable sinner, I fear, I believe.

4. All the Scripture intention of Christ's death is coincident Nos mortem,
resurrectionem, ascensionem, sessionem and intercessionem aeque conjungendas
esse dicimus in fine ac intention; ac in Christi persona conjungebantur de
facto. Ames. Cor. Art. 1. de Red. c. 1. Armin. Disp. Prin. The. 40. Confess.
Pastorum Rem^n c. 8.
with that of his Resurrection and Intercession; viz. as for the beginnings, so
for the compleatings of salvation, in and upon the same persons, Romans 8. 29.
Whom he did foreknow verse. 30. Whom he has predestined, etc. read on to
the end of verse. 34. Now all that I know of Heterodox with Orthodox have agreed
in this, That Christ's resurrection and intercession are peculiar in their
intentions and fruits; for the faithful only; But Testardus Testard. The. 100.
adventures not only to make Christ's death common, but his resur^ection and
intercession; and the fruit which he would have appertain to all and every one,
is, an asking and, obtaining leave (for so I may sometime english his facultas)
of God, that they may be saved; and this leave or faculty (call it what you
will) is but a salvation by halves; nay, not half the beginnings of salvation;
for it is far short of the infusion of faith, which himself calls the first
application of salvation: As for that impertation of leave to save those, who
never shall be saved, he brings no proof from Scripture, that either it is the
fruit of Christ's resurrection, or intercession, or of his death: But to
anticipate and enervate the Argument, not more usually then truly, raised from
Christ's prayer, Ioh. 17. viz. whom Christ included only in that his prayer
(which is the canon of his intercession in heaven by Arminias own concession)
he only intended in his death, our Antagonist gives his Reader a squint-eyed
hint; that when Christ says, verse. 9. I pray not for the world, etc. he
respects not the aforesaid impetration of a leave or faculty; nor yet the
first application of salvation, by the infusion of faith, Sed custodiam in
fide, and cum Christo unione, but the Fathers keeping of the believer in faith
and union with Christ, Let us, because we seek the harmony of one truth with
another, yield it to him and others; that it is not Christ's scope all along that
prayer, nor any where else, that I know, to petition for a bare impetration of
leave or faculty, for him to save, or for all men to be saved; this is easily
proved from the Chapter, that Christ prayed for the first application of
salvation by infusion of faith; and by first union with Christ, as well as for
perseverance in faith and union.

1. His main scope is, to seek his own glory, that his Father might have glory,
v. 1. Now this is one means of his Fathers glory, as a fruit of his
glorification, the gift of eternal life, to as many as God had given him;
which eternal life begins in the knowledge of the true God, even in those
Gentiles and Heathens who had worshipped the creature, in stead of the
Creator; and never would come to the saving knowledge of God, but by the
knowledge of Christ; Christ is not to be made known to the Gentiles, till he be
glorified, he prays therefore that he be glorified, that the knowledge of God
in him, sent of God, might be disposed, verse 3. So as they who never knew God,
might know him rightly and savingly; and what is this? or how is this? but by
the infusion of faith; hence to know God in Christ, and to believe in God
through Christ, from the very first act, is one and the same, and so
understood, verse. 3.

2. He petitioneth for all that should believe, v. 20. that they might be one,
which is for their first union and entrance into communion, implicitly, as for
their perseverance more expressly.

3. He prays that, as many as God had given him, v. 2. might see his glory,
v. 24. now they are an innumerable company, besides the present Apostles, and
believing Jews, who are to see his glory; as well those who are yet to believe,
as those who were then to believe; and yet he prayed not then, nor does now
make intercession for the world, according to verse. 9. and as he included not,
nor intended the world, contradistinct to the dati and electi a patre, those
given and chosen of the Father in his prayer; but his intention and eye was
solely upon these, so was it in his death, verse. 19.

5. And lastly, All the Scripture intention of Christ's death, makes not a
separation or distinction between the sufficiency and efficiency thereof upon
the same subject; the blessed sufficiency and efficacy of Christ, as Prophet,
Priest and King go together, and are inseparably linked for ever in him, and
upon his, Psalm. 45. 2. Nor can we say (though Christ's death be sufficiens
remedium in se, a sufficient remedy in it self, for all) that he died
sufficienter for any, but for those to whom he is willing his death should be
efficacious. Testardus distinction of common and special intention holds up
the distinction of sufficiency and efficacy; nay, he will have the remedy, The.
78.
Plusquam sufficiens, more then sufficient for all, and so intended and
prepared; but The. 140, 141, 146, 147, 148.
the efficacy none, or as good as none at all; But as we find in Scripture,
that Christ's will is the chief ingredient in his sufferings, and in a true
sense, more then his act or passion, Psalm. 40. 6, 7, 8. with Heb. 10. 9, 10. So
we find not, that life is prepared and offered for any, but for whom efficacy
is prepared; I cannot for my heart, separate life and efficacy, when the
Scripture does not separate, but ever join them together, Joh. 5. 39, 40. cap.
10. 10. 1 John 5. 11, 12.

If general intention then cannot be found in Scripture, Testardus (with all
of that opinion) will be to seek for general Redemption.

Secondly, Such a general Covenant he holds forth, as agrees 2. Not a
general Covenant.
not with the Scripture-tenour; how loud soever may be the sound, it is a
jarring string, or instrument, when brought into Gods quire and consort.

1. The Scripture-Covenant of grace is founded in that seed of the woman,
Christ Jesus; and in him made with the woman, and a special rank or company,
contradistinct to the seed of the serpent, Genesis 3. 15. Gal. 3. 16, 17. But The.
54, 77, 112.
Testardus represents it, as made not only with Adam, but in Adam, with all
mankind; with Noah, and in him with all mankind. 1. How does it appear by
Scripture, that the Covenant of grace was made so much, as with Adams person?
with Eve it was expressly; enmity being put between her and the Serpent; and
therefore actual reconciliation between her and God, promised and obtained;
but grant it, that as he had the conditional offer of the Mediator, then
preached; so he had grace given him to accept it; 2. How made in Adam? who is
no more a public person representative after his fall, but as a sinner, and a
broken bankrupt, not entrusted with the new stock: All the new stock is put
into Christ's hands. 3. As for that Covenant made (rather then renewed) with
Noah, Genesis 9. it is not the Covenant Genesis 9. 9, 10.
of Grace, and that made in him again (as Testardus expressed it of Adam) with
all mankind; but a Covenant of a terrene and common benefit, made with beasts,
and every animal in the air, or upon the earth, v. 9. 10. as well as with men:
And though to believers every earthly benefit is an appendix to the promise of
Christ (and so was that blessing to Noah Dei benedictio erga Noa^hum, and
filios ejus, i. e. erga ecclesiam cujus causa mundus restitutus est. Jun. A^al.
in Gen 9. 1.
, and that for the Churches sake) yet what is this to prove the Covenant of
universal Redemption, and that in spirituals, as far as Testardus carries it?

2. The Scripture-Covenant of Grace is absolute, entire and unchangeable in all
Gods agreements and transactions with Christ, as a surety, to pay the debt,
forfeiture and principal also. And as a public person or root to provide a
new stock, and give a new nature, and to lose none of those, whom God and
Christ have agreed upon to be saved. God says, Psalm. 2. 7. Thou art my son,
this day have I begotten thee. Christ says, I will declare the decree. God
says, Thou art a Priest, Psalm. 110. 3. Thou shall be the Sacrifice, Thou shall
be my salvation, Isa. 49. 6. And I will give thee for a Covenant, a
Covenant-founder and ratifier by thy blood, Heb. 13. 20. Christ agrees, Psalm.
40. 7, 8. Lo I come, Joh. 17. 19.
I delight to do thy will, Joh. 17. 19. For their sakes I sanctify my self, I
address my self to ^uffer for them; and as it pleased the Father, that in him
all fullness should dwell, Col. 1. 19. So it pleases the Son, that all that
God has given him to die for, Be sanctified through the truth, and receive out
of his fullness, grace for grace. Joh. 1. 16. This is the Fathers will, that of
all which he gives his Son, nothing (i. e. none of the elect Jewels) be lost,
Joh. 6. 39. And this is the will of the Son, Joh. 17 24. Father, I will that
they also whom thou have given me, be where I am, etc. Thus stands the sole and
absolute agreement between God and Christ, but Testardus will have the Covenant
of Grace The. 102.
conditional, and The. 112. Mox sinens, etc.
changeable, and that The 93.
as made in Christ, with all men, or with Christ, for all men: although he
yields an absolute agreement about the elect, yet the would have another
agreement (and that between God and Christ) about the rest of mankind, Qui non
sunt Christi oves, who are not the sheep of Christ, for whom The. 75, 76, 77.
Christ is, Va^ and sponsor, a surety and undertaker (but not as for the elect)
a pledge, but no sure pledge; an undertaker, but no absolute undertaker in the
worlds behalf; which is as good, as none at all. I am sure the Scripture does
not thus disparage Christ his suretiship, but it makes him a complete righteous
person, for whom Christ is a surety: As sure as Christ was his surety, and took
the sinners debt upon himself, so the sinner is, and must be accounted
righteous, in his surety. And as much Testardus The. 56.
somewhere seemingly affirms; according to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.
ult. He has made him to be sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. But The. 65.
in his sense of these words he first wresteth and stretches the meaning of
the Apostle, and would have the sin of all the world imputed to Christ, as to a
surety, and undertaker for every man, by reason of his Sacrifice propitiatory,
and satisfaction of divine justice; And afterward straimeth the meaning of
that place, and applies it only to The. 194.
believers, who only have Christ's righteousness imputed to them; as if the
Father and his Son had agreed, that Christ should have an universal imputation
of sin, or the sins of all men charged upon him, to expiate and satisfy for;
but only some men should have the particular, or special and sole imputation
of his righteousness, which must needs make an Argument or Paralogisme of
quatuor termini, in the Apostles reason, For he has made him, etc. taking the
persons for whom he was made sin [us] in a larger sense of all mankind, and
the persons who are made righteous [we] in a stricter, of believers and elect.
But let God be true, and every man (in his own unbeleeving sense) aliar.

3. In the Scripture covenant of grace, as Gods justice is satisfied on Christ's
part, so nothing but mere mercy (without any revenging wrath,) falls to be the
portion of them that are reconciled; and for whom a price is paid, that all
their trespasses being forgiven, Col. 2. 13. they might have knowledge of their
salvation thereby, Luke 1. 77, 78. through the tender mercy of our God. But
Testardus draught of the Covenant is such, as, that notwithstanding the death
of Christ, and satisfaction for all, yet The. 150.
justice and wrath, seizes upon a world of sinners, in their just hardening to
all eternity, and that The. 280 and 294.
according to a decree of justice.

4. The Scripture covenant of grace, is altogether of grace, hangs nothing upon
works, Romans 11. 6. nothing upon the will of the creature, Romans 9. 16. Testardus
makes a mixture of grace and works, grace and will; and so confounds the
Covenant of grace and of works together; even The. 122.
there where he endeavors to distinguish them (and does in part suggest some
differences) for in the Covenant of works (he says, truly) God gives no man
(since the fall) ability to fulfill it is condition. And in that general
Covenant of grace (which he frames) with all me, God gives but posse, si
velint; ability, without a will; the will to receive and act, must come from
the poor creature himself; and what is this? but the first Covenant of works,
wherein Adam stood and fell; as himself The. 125. Quod factum fuerat infoedere
naturali ecundam ejus slatu^. Ibid.
elsewhere acknowledges, when God does but so move, that he may, if he will be
saved (and leave it at last to the creatures will) it is but according to the
tenor of the Covenant of nature; how is the world deluded then, with the title
of a Covenant of grace, which being examined, proves but that of nature? For
such as the main condition is, such is the Covenant; The condition of this
obligation or general Covenant, is nature, or the act of natural will, in
it is impotent and dead condition, whereas the condition of the
Scripture-covenant of grace, is faith, and that not of our selves; but of the
grace of God, who works to will and to do, of his own good pleasure.

5. The Scripture-covenant of grace, flows from a decree of choice, and
special love, and mercy, and is backed by it, Romans 11 29. as Testardus also
The. ^57. with The. 11.
acknowledges of that which he calls the particular Covenant; and therein
differenceth it mainly from the Covenant of nature, or works, which was not
supported by such a decree; his general Covenant then (having no more support
from any decree first or last, then had that of works) must be the same with
it; and not to be styled a Covenant of Grace with all mankind; but the old
Covenant of works held up by man's weak and wicked will, and by Gods
irresistible decree of justice.

Thirdly, There being no such general Covenant, we find 3. Not an universal
call.
The 113.
no such universal call as Testardus writes of.

For he 1. would have a call to Christ more general, then that of the word,
viz. by the creatures, and by daily providence, natural sustentation,
suspension of wrath, administration of the universe for man's good with lenity;
patience, and long-suffering; the favor of Sunshine and showers of rain, the
fruitfulness of the earth; otherwise accursed, and the indulgence of all
earthly accommodations; This is, to Testardus, a calling, this is a Testimony
of (saving) grace; And this he endeavors to prove, from Psalm. 19. Act. 14 17.
Cap. 17. 26, 27. Romans 2. 4.

To which we oppose Scripture and Reason.

That Scripture 1 Cor. 1. 21. is clear, When by the wisdom Calling to Christ
by the creatures opposed by Scripture. 1 Cor. 1. 21.
of this universe (all the wisdom of God displaied in the creatures) men by
their best light knew not, so much as God, it pleased God by the preaching of
the Gospel to give the knowledge of Christ, and to make that Gospel (which with
the preaching of it, is foolishness to a carnal judgment) a means, the means
of faith and salvation. For therein, as Romans Rom 1. 17.
1. 17. in the Gospel (not in the heavens and creatures) is Christ revealed,
and the power of God to salvation put forth; but if you will, verse. 18. The
wrath of God is revealed from heaven (not the mystery of Gods love in Christ)
and if you say, that is by accident, because men will not know his goodness;
grant it, yet what may be known is manifest in them, and God has showed it to
them; It is manifest in all the creatures, and God has showed it to the
reasonable creature, man, viz. verse. 19. The invisible things of him, from the
creation of the world, these are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made; But not a visible Mediator, God-man, or the mystery of Christ
crucified, discernable there, not a word of Christ, read or written, in all
that great volume. Hear Paul again to the Ephesians, cap. 2. 12. At that time
(before the Gospel was preached) ye were without Christ, without the knowledge
of him, or without any means of the revelation of Christ, while aliens from the
Polity, or administrations of the Church of Israel, where only Christ was made
known (and that but darkly in types) and while strangers from the Covenants of
promise, which do more clearly hold out Christ, but providence, barely taken,
and not as the fulfilling of a promise, though it holds forth something, and
much of God, yet nothing of Christ, nor of God in Christ,

Truth of reason does further evince it: By Reason.


1. That which is not aptum medium, a fit mean to discover Christ, or to hold
forth the Gospel-proposition, that Christ died for sinners, can be no mean at
all, appointed in the wisdom of God for such a purpose: In the vast fabric of
the heavens and the earth, and daily bare occurrences of providence, there is
not a proposition to make a syllogism of, or raise a conclusion upon, for
justifying faith.

2. Upon Adam's fall, matters are dispensed so, as justice is manifested all
along with free grace; If all the world, in all ages had had a calling to
Christ, where was free grace manifested? If none were denied a calling, where
was so much of strict Justice, as would manifest and execute a Decree of
Justice against whole Nations and Kingdoms of men?

3. That calling which meets with no success at all, in any one man, to bring
him to salvation, was never ordained of God (that I can find in the Word) to
bring him to such an end: for the Spirit ever accompanies his own Ordinances
of grace with efficacy to some; But this universal call by the creatures
providence, etc. is found by No^ est quod eis spem salutis a Christo partae
adimere trepidemus. The 144.
Testardus own reading, observation and judgment, unsuccessefull to every one
that had it; for seeing the Heathen in all their most moral actions, were
destitute of faith, and a sincere end, in what they did, he fears not to take
from them all, the hope of salvation obtained by Christ. Strange! that Christ
should die for all the Heathen, and God should call them all to salvation, and
yet save none of them. If he says, they sinned, not only in Adam, but
actually, and that not only against the Covenant of nature, but grace
aliquatenus: what? and no pardon for any of them, nor The. 140.
any of them be Salutis in Christo compos, partaker of salvation in the
Messiah. Let such a call be for ever called a dispensation of goodness and
justice, not a discovery of grace and Christ, when it is not so; and let such
as had but the creatures, and common providence to help them, be none of Gods
called, but rejected and neglected, not comparate, but absolute.

4. Habemus corfitentem reum, Quos non solet vocatorum nomine ins^gnire
Scriptura. The. 127.
Testardus himself, acknowledges in part, that the Scripture is not wont to
style such by the name of called ones, but he is wont every where to style them
so, and to term that a calling unto Christ, which the Scripture never so
expressed, not can we find that it has any such intention to hint it to us.

As touching the rare places, which he, and others think do Scriptures produced
for the call by the creatures answered.
favor this opinion; let us take a brief survey of them, Psalm. 19. What read
we? The heavens declare the glory of God, in creation, the firmament shows
his handy work; the old workmanship, here is nothing spoken or intended of the
new Ephesians. 2. 10. Day unto Psalm. 19. 4.
day, verse. 2. utters speech; the continual succession of day and night,
holds out something of Gods goodness and providence, nothing of a
Gospel-promise: if it did, then so many days, as there were before Adam fell,
or was created, Christ was preached by those Orators, as well as since the
fall; and all the time from Abraham to Christ, when the Gentiles had not the
Covenant (by The. 112.
Testardus confession) yet they had this call by the creatures, For there is no
speech nor language, no place or people that ever lived, as not a day goes
over their heads, where and when their (the creatures) voice is not heard,
verse. 3. But for the voice of the Gospel-mystery, if the Apostle may be
believed, Romans 16. 25, 26. it was not heard at all; all truths concerning
Christ were in all ages, among the Heathen, kept secret and silent.

And if any please to compare, Psalm. 19. 4. with Romans 10. 18. he shall find,
that the Apostle makes but an allusion to the Psalmist, and that his scope is,
not to prove this general call, among the Gentiles by the creatures; but an
outward call among the Jews, by the word, Ante verbum (...) audierunt, non
subaudio Gentes, sed Iudaeos. Bez.
Have they [the Jews] not heard? Yes, the Gospel, by the Apostles preaching,
like the Sun, has cast his beams over the whole world: the Sun and the
firmament do no more generally hold out something of the knowledge of God in
all ages, then the Apostles in their age, by preaching, did familiarly and
universally hold out much of the knowledge of Christ, and that to the Jews.
which as St Paul had illustrated, and but illustrated, v. 18. from the Psalm,
he presently proves it, and when he comes to the proof, he first begins with
Moses, v. 19. and then quotes, Esaias v. 20.

And yet, albeit the Apostle did but allude to the Psalm, his scope is the same
with David's, to illustrate Gods teaching of Christ in the Scripture, and it is
ministry, by his teaching in the great volume of the creatures; That mainly
wherein creature and Scripture-teaching are alike, is the extent of their
teaching; all people and Nations are lesson'd by both; that wherein they do
eminently differ, and wherein Scripture-teaching excels the other, is the
subject matter, end and effect of their lessons; the visible creatures give out
notes and characters of a deity, the audible word give knowledge of God
reconciled in Christ. The Recreant corpus diei and noctis vicissitudines, sed
verbum animam dicitur instaurare. Jun. l. 2. Parral 19.
creatures show how good God is to the bodies of men; the Scriptures show us
how gracious he is to the souls of men; The creatures, Sun and Moon, etc.
speak the wisdom of the workman, the goodness of a Creator; the Scripture
and it is Interpreters, speak the love and wisdom of a Redeemer. The creatures
in the common course of nature, left for men's conviction and (...), ad hoc, ut
sint inexcusabiles. Beza.
inexcusablenesse, who sin against the light of nature: The Psalm. 19. 7.
Scriptures and their preaching, instituted of God to be sufficient, and sole
means (through the Spirit) of men's conversion and salvation.

Touching that place Act. 14. 17. Pertinet hic locus ad providentiam Dei ex qua
creat, gubernat and conservat omnia creata Eras. Sar.
Act. 14. 17. I can but wonder so Lystra would be offering Sacrifice to Paul
and Barnabas, as to gods, they, abhorring such a sacrilege, vilify and
annihilate themselves in that case, and hold out God, as Creator to them, v.
15. and prove it by his Creation and Providence, v. 16. which was a testimony,
that he, and he only was, and is God; God hereby left not himself without
witness; What is this to a calling of grace, or the knowledge of a Covenant of
grace, founded upon Christ's death and satisfaction?

No more is that, which he alleges, Act. 17. 26, 27. and Act. 17. 26, 27.
it is true, that God (who is a Redeemer) is to be sought in his works, but are
these works of Creation and Providence (out of a Type or a Sacrament)
instituted means of seeking or finding him as a Redeemer? Or did God make of
one blood all Nations, to that end they might seek a Redeemer before the fall?
Or is Christ in the execution of Gods decree of election, to be brought into
our consideration before the fall? Yet the natural blood, out of which all
Nations do spring, was given Adam before the fall; and the immortal spirit
(which Adam had immediately from God, and all men in like manner since receive
it from him the father or creator of spirits) was before the fall. The
Apostles scope, is to raise up the superstitious Athenians (who forgate the
Philosophy of their natural constitutions) but so high at first; and from
verse. 23. to 29. (to that end) declares to them, who is the true God, he, whom
they ignorantly worshipped, he that created the world, and had given them
immortal spirits, as he proves out of the Poet Aratus. But when he comes to
preach an Article or two of the Gospel, he has laid aside his quotation from
Poets sure. See v. 30. and 31.

As for that in Romans 2. 4. which (says Testardus) speaks de poenitentia
salutari, of saving repentance, unto which men Romans 2. 4. The. 119, 162.
providence, wherein every man shareth more or less. Admit it, the goodness
of God does not lead any man to sin, as some thought, and still are ready to
think, but to a contrary course; Does it follow that Christ is taught in
Creation and Providence? Or though it leads to repentance, all are not of
Testardus mind, that the Apostle means it of saving repentance; but if he
does (as I rather incline to think so, because it is the most significant, and
full word for repentance (...).
used in the new Testament) how the goodness of God leads a sinner to it, is
worthy our understanding? Verily not as an ordinance instituted of purpose,
which I gather from Act. 17. 30. the times of mere goodness and patience, in
the midst of Gentilish ignorance, God winked at, but now commands; now that
his word is sent amongst the Gentiles, now the goodness of God is an
inducement to repentance; when once Christ is discovered in the Gospel (for
that (...), did not in any age of it self, reveal (...), that goodness and
bounty of God, in providence, never revealed Christ, and that which reveals
not somewhat of him, of it self, and directly by some order from God calls not
to him.) To such the Apostle speaks, whether Jew or Gentile, as had the
Gospel preached to them, even at Rome, where affluence and abundance of the
creature was conferred upon them: Now presuppose a pardon published in the
Gospel, and Christ revealed in the Word, then Gods common goodness (out of
Christ) invites to Christ, or is a great motive to a poor sinner (would he
know, would he consider it) thus to reason with himself, What have I taken? and
what have I forsaken? God has offered me the creatures in his ordinary
providence, and I have greedily fastened upon them; but he has offered Christ
among a company of lost undone sinners (whereof I am one) and I have to this
day carelessly refused him; And how have I taken the creatures? (not only meat
and drink, but husband, wife, child, friends, wealth, successes of labors,
etc.) with unclean hands, with an impure conscience, came they in never so
lawfully before men, and with outward temporal right before God, yet while my
mind and conscience is spiritually defiled through unbelief, all is unclean to
me; But did I go to Christ, I might have all clean to me, and be accepted in
all; that God who freely gives me the creature without Christ, would as freely
bestow Christ upon me, if I did take him; he that gives food and raiment for
the body, would as freely give Christ for food and raiment to the soul; he that
lets the Sun shine upon good and bad, will give the shines of his favor, to
one, to me, coming in to Christ; he that gives a reprievall to all for a time,
by common patience, does give to some, and will, if I believe the Gospel to me,
give out a pardon, under seal, by special and singular grace, Why should I not
believe? Why should I not repent? Thus, I say, occasionally, as a poor sinner
meets first with the Gospel-tidings, he may and ought to be induced to faith
and repentance, from the consideration of what common benefits he shares in,
although he cannot (nor can I tell him his warrant why he should) look upon
Gods ordinary or extraordinary bounty in the creature, as purchased by Christ,
and his death, till he believes; nor can he have any such (...), or change of
mind, which is an act and part of sanctification, till he has faith, as The.
211.
Testardus also, most rightly ranketh repentance in order after faith and
justification; so as according to his judgment (that the Apostle in this place
of Romans, intends the best and choicest repentance, and that repentance (not
to be repented of) coming in after faith) the common goodness of God must
first lead to faith, before it leads to repentance; but that it cannot without
a former discovery of the Word; the Gentiles therefore who had no word or
promise of Christ discovered, had no call to Christ, and saving repentance; by
the creatures, and a naked providence: nor can the Apostle be construed or
interpreted, as intimating such a general call by the creatures, extra verbum
without the Word (as The 121.
Testardus would have it) and that grounded upon a general Covenant; as the
Covenant is grounded upon general redemption; and that upon a general
intention; but the groundwork, and the superstructure already shakes; we go
on to weaken this frame a little more, I shall desire others that succeed, or
shall assist in this work, may not leave a stone upon a stone,

The. 119. etc.
It is pleaded for this calling universally by the creatures, that it agrees
with the call by Gods Word, and Spirit in seven particulars.

Object. 1. As the call by the Word and Spirit depends upon the merit of
Christ's most sufficient death, so the present wellbeing of the creature; for
without that death of his, there had been no place for long-suffering and
patience toward sinners (which appears from the punishment of devils, etc.)
but the present world had been (upon Adams sin) turned into a hell, in an
instant.
Ans. To what Page 32, 33.
has been answered before, I add,

1. The world was made by Christ, and for him, Col. 1. 16. and as it is kept and
upheld, Heb. 1. 3. by him, so for him, and his glorious ends, viz. to raise up
the humane nature, first, into personal union, by assumption of it into the
unity of himself the second person; and then, into mystical union, by
redemption of all their persons from sin and wrath, whom God had chosen, and
given him to redeem, Joh. 17. 2. Now that these may be redeemed, the Father and
his work of Creation and Providence must go on; nor did sin destroy the being
of the creature; the elect must have time to be and breathe; And as Sodom
should have been spared for ten righteous men's sakes, so for the elects sake
(as sometimes evil days are shortened) time is lengthened out; the Sun, and
all things in it is revolution, have natures course; the reprobate have their
being, preservation, allowance of earthly commons, etc.

2. What necessity of this worlds being turned into a hell, immediately upon
the coming in of sin? If Christ had not m^rited for all, etc? Or what necessity
of Christ's general satisfaction, that the elect might have this world to live
and breathe in? His sole and single satisfaction for the elect, will purchase
time, and all other needful creatures for them; and the world shall stand and
continue for them; while God has provided a hell in another place, for those
that Christ has not ransomed.

3. What if God, willing to show his wrath, and the more to manifest his
justice, after patience and bounty, endures with much long-suffering, the
vessels of wrath, fitted for destruction, and a world of them never called to
salvation, so much as by an outward call?

Obj. 2. But the Apostle takes away all scruple, and puts it quite out of doubt
and question; when as Romans 2. 1. with 4. charging and accusing the man endued
only with the light of natures relics, and of that most common mercy, he
reasons thus; Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, etc.
Answ. 1. We have answered before, the Apostle in that place comes to deal with
Pareus Willet Rolloc.
Jews as well as Gentiles, which appears, in that he speaks to man indefinitely
Non caret emphasi quod expressit hominis nomen, ut hominem Deo comparet. Call.
compared with God, and cited to his Tribunal, whoever he be that judges, etc.

2. The Apostle is to be understood, not of all the Gentiles he had spoken of
Chap. 1. but of the Gentiles (as the Jews) of the present age wherein he wrote;
for so he directs his charge to the man now living; therefore thou art
inexcusable, and as Non dixit Apostolus (...), i. e. deducebat, sed (...).
habens videlicet ejus quo haec scribebat temporis ratione^. Bez. Ann.
Beza further notes; he does not say, it did lead, but it leads or does
lead, God has other ends of his patience and goodness before, but now that
God suffered thee, o Gentile, as well as Jew, to live to Gospel Times, thou
have such a motive to repentance as all thy Ancestors had not; and now that
God has spared thee, o Jew, thou have a larger and stronger inducement, then
thy predecessors, to come in to Christ, etc.

3. Men living in the Apostles times, had improvements for more then the most
common light of the old Heathen; by the Apostles ministry every where, and by
their writings; together with the sacred Text of the old Testament dispersed
where the preaching of the Gospel came; And the Jews had the advantage of
former times, by the lightsome beams of wholesome Expositions of the writings of
the Prophets, read and preached by the Apostles in their Synagogues; and this
was a great part of the riches of Gods goodness (I conceive) and patience,
beyond the most common mercies afforded to the old Heathen, or to the Jew in
the old Testament times; which did Plus est (...) quam (...); ducit, i.e. manu
ducit. Pareus.
lead these men (as you will lead a child most weak and tender) to a change of
their minds and lives, if they would have followed their conduct.

4. As they had means of more light, so they are, certainly, men who did
improve nature-light and Gospel Light, better then others, whom the Apostle
deals with; for all agree, he deals with those more civilized and restrained;
with such as we call close hypocrites, not gross dissemblers, such who were,
as Calvin brands them, Sanctuli, little Saints in their own opinion, comparing
themselves with others; somewhat like the young man in the Gospel, Mar. 10. 17,
21. thinks Beza. Such, no question, who could see into the grossenes of others
open sins, and did censure them; but applauded, and flattered themselves, upon
presumption of the light they had above others; and of Gods patience extended
more to them, then to others; quite perverting the end of all the cost,
bestowed upon them, more then upon others which was to guide them to the
Gospel Grace and salvation. All this shows, that men living under
Gospel-dispensations, are led by a divine providence to look after
Gospel-repentance; but it proves not that, for which Testardus alleges the
Apostle, that the men of former ages, before the Gospel came among the Gentiles
had some call to Christ and grace, agreeable to the common call, which now men
have by the Word and Spirit.

Obj. 3. What way soever God calls, he calls seriously, and deludeth no man.
Ans. 1. This way of calling, and that to Christ by the creatures alone,
without the Word, is not found to be a way of Gods calling men to Christ; every
real act of Gods goodness and patience, is not simply and properly in Gods
intention, a call to Christ; no more then Gods legal command, Do this and
live, is a direct call to life: God is real in such a command held out to
Pharisees and self-justifiers, and yet consult with The. 164.
Testardus, in his right judgment, and he will tell you, that God thereby does
not invite men to life, Per legem atque ex lege, by the Law, and out of the
Laws earnings or labors.

2. God deludeth no man in the acts of his providence, or reciting of the
legal command; but our Universalists delude many men, while they preach
Christ's death for all, and salvation but for some. The plain Countryman
cannot tell how to understand that, and many other such distinctions.

Obj 4. The acts of divine patience and providence, agree with the calling by
Gods Word and Spirit, in the main end, which is the salvation of all that are
called, and as a means to that end, God would have them all come to the
knowledge of the truth, which truth spoken of, 1 Timothy 2. 4. Testardus The. 1^0.
in this his reason compares with Romans 1. 18. and 25. as if they were all one
and the same veritas salutaris, or saving truth.
Ans. 1. In the most general call by the creatures, Testardus himself says,
Gods end and will for all men's salvation, is but aliquatenus, in some sort or
respect it is his will and end, in some respect it is not: but in what respect
it is, and is not, he cannot make out, agreeable to Gods will of saving his
elect. Salvation is but one, God is one, Semper sibi constans, what his end is,
he attaineth, and will never be put by his end.

2. Who sees not the artifices of this Author, or rather his inartificiall
jumbling and confounding of the truth, mentioned Romans 1. 18, 25. with that in 1 Timothy 2. 4. The Apostle to the Romans 1. 18. Veritatem recte vocat Paulus quicquid
lucis ad Dei notitiam in homine relictum est: non ut hac duce in Dei gratiam
redeant (hoc enim est unius Christi opus, qui solus vera lux est, via and
veritas) sed ut suo ipsorum judicio sceloris convincantur, tum in Deum, tum in
hominet. Beza. Annot. in Romans 1. 18.
Romans meaning by truth there, the true notions and right apprehensions of the
Deity in some common way; and to Timothy mentioning (according to his meaning)
ver. 5. not only the Doctrine of one God, but Non agitur de generali
cognitione, qu^ est communis ^oti hominum ge^eri ex re^um creatarum
inspectione. Sed de cogaitione qua Patrem and Christ ^^ agnoscentes, vitae
aeternae su^^ participes. Faius in 1 Timothy 2. 4.
of one Mediator: Now though it is Gods end to bring men to salvation, by the
knowledge of a Mediator, yet it was never his end to save men by the knowledge
of one God, and by that knowledge alone; nor can Testardus (without impudence)
call it (take it alone without the knowledge of one Mediator) a saving truth;
our Savior will teach him better language, This is life eternal to know thee
to be the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

3. It being clear, that the Apostle to Timothy, means, as he expresses it,
the only saving truth of the Gospel, whereof Paul was a preacher, v. 7. in
faith and verity; And yet this Gospel of Christ, not by Paul or others,
preached to every singular man (for the calling by the Word, even by The 124.
Testardus confession, is but to many) it clearly follows, that when he
says, God will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth* He is not to be understood Cum autem talis agnitio Dei non donetur
omnibus, sed tantum nonnullis; apparet non (...) versaliter, sed distributive
esse lo^um hunc intelligendum, nempe de illis qui electi s^^t ad vitam
aeternam. Faius in locum.
univer saliter, sed distributive, not of the singulars of every rank of men,
but of such ranks and sorts of men, where the Gospel comes, out of which God
wills his chosen, high and low, rich and poor to be saved, by the
acknowledgement of that one God, reconciled by the ransom of that one
Mediator, for all them.

Ob. 5. But (says The. 1^1.
Testardus further) God gives in that general light, and way of providence to
the Heathen, that which is common to the call of the Word and Spirit, viz. a
posse illud praestare, an ability to obey their light, and salvari, and to be
saved, if they will, or ^ow could they be left without excuse, had they not
that power, et si maxim voluissent, though they were neverso willing?
Ans. 1. The light they had, called them to obey that light, so far as it
would reach, and was intended; viz. to restrain them from sinning against it,
and to own, and worship the true Deity.

2. This light not obeyed, but sinned against, leaves them culpable and liable
to condemnation, far from justification by works: If a Master shall leave a
candles end for his servants to do so much work by, as the light will reach to,
and they, mean while, play by that little light, or put it out, are they not to
be blamed?

3. All that light shining in common benefits (without the Word) shows no
Christ, as Mediator, but the true Deity; It is no light to be saved by; and
did that light give a posse allud prastare, a power to do that one thing, it
gives no power to do another; here is a confounding of a posse praestare, and
a posse salvari, a power to do more, then natural men do, which is granted,
and a power to be saved, which is denied.

4. That same et si maxim voluissent, although they were never so desirous, is
but a flourish, supposing that which is not to be found left in nature, not so
much as (...) velle in a regular way, nor given, by grace, to men destitute of
the word of grace; or who have but the common call of the Word, as Testardus
elsewhere The. 50 and 125.
acknowledges; which supposition yet he might for argument sake, better fancy,
then possitively assert, that posse salvari, to be given, which is not given.

Ob. 6 It is further The 12^.
argued for the general call by the creatures and common providence, that the
benefits thereof proceed a Dei been placito, from the good pleasure of God, as
well as the call by the Word and Spirit, and so may intend the same thing.

Ans. 1. God freely gives back to Adam's offspring many forfeited outward
favors, but not to testify and preach thereby his most free favor in Christ
to every son of Adam. Every free act of Gods goodness is not presently, The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ: nor is it to be interpreted, as flowing from
that most free favor or love of God in Christ: It is an excellent and sound
note of judicious Calvin upon Romans 2. 4. Non Romans 2 4.
^no Temper modo accipienda est ^a Dei benignitas; That same goodness of God is
not to be conceived always after one and the same way, and he clears it thus,
Serv^^ enim suos du^ in^ul. genter tractat Dominus ac terrenis benedictionihus
prosequitur, ^uam been volentiam ejusmodi symbolis declarat, ac simul ^ssu^
faci^ ad quaerendam in se uno bo^orum omnium. Transgressores legis d^m ea^e^
excipit indulgentia, sua b^^ig^itate vult quidem emo^^^e ipso^um cont^^ iciam,
non (...) se (...) propitium (...) esse (...). Calvin. in Romans 2. 4.
While the Lord indulgently uses his own servants, and follows them with
earthly blessings, he declares his good will toward them by pledges of that
nature, and with all, does train them up to seek the sum (or collection and
confluence) of all good things in him alone. But while he entertaineth the
transgressors of the law with the same indulgence, he would indeed mollify
their stubbornnes by that his goodness, and yet does not, for the present,
testify that be is propitious (or reconciled in Christ) to them. Thus far
Calvin.

2. When God by his Word and Spirit calls any of his own (which he ever does
in time, and after much patience and goodness of his misspent on their part)
he makes use of the consideration of such his goodness to induce and move, and
lets them know, all passages of providence were out of love to them; Gods
long-suffering to them, is salvation, and God is not willing that any (of them,
Beloved, 2 Pet. 3. 8, 9.) should perish, but that all (of them, who as Beza
Videatur Beza in 2 Pet. 3. 9.
has observed in two old copies, are v. 8. styled (...), brethren) should come
to repentance; and when such, and such only (for no other have the gift) are
come to repentance, they know how to prize and esteem of the patience and
goodness of God, as finding Gods beneplacitum, or good pleasure in Christ,
revealed within the compass of such a time; but till that time, if you will
believe the Preacher, Eccles. 9. 1. by all that is before them, in the bare
events of providence, no man knows either love or hatred.

Obj 7. In this, lastly, the call by the creatures, and good providence of God
agrees, Testard. The. 1^3.
says our Antagonist, with the call by the Word and Spirit, that the grace
given in it, destroieth not nature, etc.
Ans. 1. No marvel, when as it is but nature, or the common gifts and
improvements of nature.

2. If that be Grace, which does not destroy nature, or the natural faculty,
the devils have grace; for their natural faculties are not destroyed by sin,
or by Gods patience.

3. The punishments of the damned, do not, shall not destroy their natural
faculty, it will be an aggravation of torment to have wit and will, and
discursive faculty, etc. about them; therefore a mere non destruction of
nature, or natural powers in the soul is not grace, nor a call of, and unto the
grace of God in Christ.

This brings us to the fourth inconsistency of Testardus with Scripture,
touching general grace; but before I can discover it, something I find, as a
stronger string to his bow, then the call by the creatures; namely,

Object. 8.
The calling by the Word, which will surely evince Christ's death to be more
general then we make it, The. 88.
for there is none so forlorn, and far gone, whom a Minister of the Gospel
may not call, and that seriously, unto repentance and salvation by faith in
Christ, in this manner, Christ died for thee, be has prepared life for thee in
his death, Believe, Repent, and thou shall be saved, etc. And again, The 89.
there is none of whom justifying faith, is not required, both in our public
Sermons, and private exhortations, therefore Christ must needs die for more at
least, then for his sheep.

A^s. 1. A^^ poor sheep of Christ, what envying at your pecul^ar privilege,
that more must needs be redeemed then you^! As if Gods love and Christ's were
not great and infinite enough in the redemption of a little flock; what
straining? what yielding, and giving in? So that more then Christ's sheep may be
but purchased, but, 1. This is not all and every ^ingular: 2. This is asserted
but with an ira, and a saltem^, he so died, and he died at least, to procure
life, etc. take these expressions in Testardus sense, and they are extenuating;
but who taught him or any Minister to preach with such extenuations? I had
thought the Gospel should be preached fully, with a tantum dilexit, so, and so
greatly God loved the world, etc. as himself has it The. 81.
elsewhere; And indeed there is as much in these words, tatenus and ita, he so
died, and so far, as to procure life, or prepare it, as I would desire; for
s^ to die, is as Page 57.
I have urged it before, to prepare efficacy, with sufficiency of grace: And
the tenor of the Gospel is to offer and give power (where God pleases) of
justifying faith, as to command faith for justification. But

2. To enlarge this offer and call to any individuals, yea, and that
absolutely, to every singular man in Testardus words, Christ died for thee,
etc. Believe, is a preaching of his own, and makes his Argument to be no other
then Pe^titio principij, a begging of the Question; For as the Scripture speaks
to the elect themselves, but conditionally, If thou b^l^evest thou shall be
saved, and tells him not, Christ died for any individual person before he
believes ^ho it is a presumption for any preacher of the Gospel, to say he
knows not what, (...) to express himself in absolute terms, Christ died for
thee, for thee unbeleever, drunkard, adulterer, what (...)? Christ died for
thee, a fine easy cradle it is to rock the (...) asleep; but no: proper and
right evangelical^ call out of his sins.

3. It does not follow, although the Word be preached never so warily, rightly
and indefinitely, ^s in 1 Timothy 1. 15. Christ died for sinners, and all sinners,
who (...) of that proposition, are commanded to believe in Christ, who died for
sinners; that therefore Christ died for all, and every of these, no more then
it follows, that all those are chosen of God from eternity, because they have
an external call in time. God has other ends of his outward calling of men by
the Word; ^s our acute and exquisite Indagator veri^^ris, Coronis ad Col Hag.
Art. 1 de elect. c. 6.
Dr Anies, has l^id them forth. 1. For the elects sake, whose eyes are opened,
and hearts drawn by the Word, while, as the (...) are bearing upon blind men,
the same Word does but outwardly beat upon then on elected, and after a manner
i^^diate them. 2. Because the non-ele^t converse in common with the elect in
the world, and in public Assemblies. 3. That the elect and true believers
might learn (by seeing others, who partake of the same outward call, yet left
in sin) that their faith is not of themselves, or of humane strength, but of
free grace, and divine peculiar power. 4. That the non-elected by such a call,
may be rendered the more useful to humane societies, as to the Church in
external services. 5. God would hereby manifest, b^th his own grace, and man's
guilt: guilt, that he calls many but outwardly, grace, that he calls others
effectually: which me thinks, should serve for abundant satisfaction to the
minds of all elect ones, ^s for the rest, they will never be convinced of Gods
proceedings, till Christ comes with ten thousands of his Saints, as St Jude
from Enoch's prophecy, to execute judgment upon them all, and to convince all
that ^^e ungodly of all their hard speeches, which they have spoken against him.

The fourth inconsistency with Scripture follows, 4. Not universal grace.


Our Author, to shore up his tenet of universal Redemption, or to grace the
building, and make it seem very fair, does varnish it ^ver with the doctrine of
an universal Grace; which the Scripture knows not for Gospel. grace, viz.
The. ^5.
The Grace of universal satisfaction to justice; The. 125, 155, ^6^, 277.
The Grace of (...) posse; the ability given to all men, Et abundanter datum,
and abundantly given to all under the Word, to be saved, if they would, etc.
The 143.
The Grace of outward kindenesses, life, food and raiment, etc. The. 155.
The Grace of reason^ light, and of natural powers.

Ans. 1. The Scripture-grace of Christ's satisfaction to divine Justice, is, 1.
But for some of mankind, Isa. 53. ult. Heb. 9. ult. He was offered to bear the
sins of many. 2. That which obtains, or meriteth eternal Redemption, Heb 9
12. for all those, for whom he died. 3. Such a grace as is wrought out vice and
loco, in the room and stead of the sinner, Romans 5. 8. Christ died for us, that
is, in our room and stead, as v. 7. to die for a righteous man, is to die in
his stead, as when David said, Would God I had died FOR THEE, O Absalom my sin;
the meaning is, In thy place and stead, that thou might have lived. 4. Such
a satisfaction it is, as never leaves them to revenging justice, or to be
dealt with by God, in a Covenant of justice, and according to a decree of
justice; for then were the satisfaction doubled, and twice paid by Christ the
surety, and by the sinner, yet in debt, notwithstanding the sureties
engagement, and payment; no such matter, They, for whom Christ was made a
curse, are redeemed from the curse, Gal. 3. 13. The whole curse.

Yet Testardus The. 95.
will have Christ satisfy justice for all, and glories in it, Hic est
universalitas quidem and communitas gentia in done and morte Christi, here is
indeed the universality and commonnesse of grace in the gift and death of
Christ; and that The. 119.
but for some temporary redemption; not with an intention of uniting them to
Christ, as a surety, to apply what is eternal (for that The. 192, 194.
he holds peculiar to the elect and true believer) but The. 164.
leaves all these non-elect in a state subjecting them to the curse, and to
death, and to be dealt with The 150.
according to justice, and The. 194.
to a decree of justice, what Gospel grace is here?

Answ, 2. Scripture-grace, or the grace of Jesus Christ, is the promise and
gift of (...) velle, actual willing, as well as (...) posse, a power or
tendency that way, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Ezekiel. 36. 26. Jer. 31* 33. Phil 2 13. It is a
restoring of that interior liberty from vicious habits, which Testardus The.
50.
confesses by the fall is taken away (being first put away) It is a new divine
nature, which inseparably goes along with the new Covenant; It is not, that
men may believe in Christ, if they will, but that men are to believe, and shall
believe in Christ for power and will, as Christ himself averred it, Joh. 6. 44,
45. And that men are to believe in Christ, not for a common gift only, or
general grace, but by special and peculiar grace they are to believe, and
shall believe in him for that which is special and peculiar. An habitual,
actual, active, overcoming grace it is, given from Gods own free will, drawing
man's slavish will, and determining it to a free acceptance and entertainment of
what is fully purchased and promised; And finally, it is that grace which works
the condition of the Covenant, as well as promises it, as by the Scriptures
afore-cited is most evident. But Testardus his universal powers and abilities,
gifts and light, which he would have The. 277.
Grace, fit grace, and in it self sufficient, given to the non-elect, yet do
not take away the moral impotency of the will from any of them: And that grace
(so magnified by him) which is The. 155.
abundantly given to men under the Word (together with the Heathens common
benefits, and light of reason) The. 125.
leaves the whole success to ma^s arbitrament, or to the determination of the
natural man's free will: which what is it but the grace of the first Covenant of
works? wherein (...) posse, a power to will, was given, but not (...) velle:
the will to use that power at the instant of temptation, was not given; What is
it but the substance of the natural faculty and an old relic of nature a
little improved? not any renewing o^ ^e^ewed quality in that fa^^^ty: And he
that shall compare The. 155, 162 with 166, 125.
some of his Theses will easily s^e our Author makes no specificall difference
between Adam's state before the fall; and his, or any son of Adam's state
under this general grace after the f^ll: ^or there was facultas, a faculty,
ability, leave, power, what you will, but facultatis ^^us, the use of that
faculty and ability was wanting, when there was most need of it; and so here.
And what if men in the state of sin have The. 279.
a power to omit more evil, and do more good for the outward matter of the
duty, then they omit or act? this is not a posse salvari, a power to be saved,
unless in the way of works, which Testardus Nemini dat posse foederis ^ujus
(legalis, sc.) conditione^ implere. The. 122.
himself denies, that God gives to any: But, by his leave, though he gives not
^otum posse, the whole power, if he gives the ^^ posse any part or piece of it,
as it is clear he does, Romans 2. 14, 15. should he give it with an intention to
save them thereby, this were to save them in a way of works. But I have
disproved a general intention of saving, by Christ's death, or of his dying
intentionally for all; and no m^n, not Te^tardus I think, will say, if God had
^o intention to save all by Christ, that ^e has any intention to save ^ll, or
any without Christ, or by a few works without him, or by Christ and works
together. What then m^st be the result? Why, this: 1. That God freely giving
back some remnants and pieces of old created abilities to the greatest part of
mankind (as well as to others) deals with ^he^* according to works and
justice, who do hold up their works and will, ^^ indenting with God thereby ^
God will be just with them; and M. Price of Li^^^.
go along (as I learned from the lips of a precious Minister, and exper^enc'd
Saint) wi^^ every carnal man, so far as he will go with him. 2. Although
God gave to many carnal men in the Jewish Church, or (...) gives to such,
living in Christian Churches, that which we call common grace, this is not
universal, nor so to be called; nor do Orthod^x teachers ever mean by common
grace, that (...) and mort^ Christ^, which Testardus erreth up; But they
express themselves ^^ proper and plain terms; Si (...) ^ppellatur, illam
communem appellaren^, tum certe diceretur quod maxim ad rem faceret, as Bez
An. in 1 Timothy 2. 4.
Beza says of universal calling; So I, of universal grace; if in stead of
that which is falsely termed universal grace, they would term it common grace,
then would they surely speak more to the purpose, that is, to the purpose of
works; or, of setting forth the works and will of the creature, what it can do
without effectual grace; what? Joh. 15. 5.
just nothing. Either the power of believing, as Beza ibid.
Beza reasons (and so Testardus his posse salvari) is of nature, or of mere
grace; If of nature, not regenerated, thou art a plain Pelagian; If but partly
of grace, partly of nature, pass over to the tents of Popish half-Pelagians;
thou art one of them. 3. When men receive, besides the light of nature, the
light of the Scripture, and of the true Scripture-Christ and Savior, yet if
the determination be left to their will, (as I grant it is to the most in
justice) this cannot be an effect of Gods counsel and will, which goes along
with the death of Christ, or a gracious effect of his death, or a piece of his
purchase: for Christ did not purchase by his death, that God should deal with
any man (much less with most men) according to their works and will; then had
he been a Mediator of two contra-distinct Covenants; and should undertake to
save them more ways then one. 4. All that God gives short of effectual grace,
is neither in Scripture, nor agreeably to Scripture, can be called posse
salvari, a power or ability to be saved; Christ Luke 13. 24.
expressly says to the contray, Many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be
able: Nor was that, which is but common grace, given with an intention to save
any, but for other ends: As

1. For trial, as all the grace of Creation was given (with the prohibition of
eating the fruit of such a tree) for experiment and trial. Carnal men have some
remnants of Creation-grace to try, and give out experiments, what they would
do, if they had the whole abilities of Creation, with the Covenant of Creation,
and no more, but what Adam had; had they all as much as Adam, they would
transgress like Adam, Hos. 6. 7. Yea, let a Covenant of Redemption and grace
be revealed, as it was to the men and Church of Israel, and all improvements be
given them in a general way of external administration, as to them, and more
clearly to others now in the new Testament, then to the Jews, yet they will
transgress like Adam, and will not hold to a Covenant, where it is left to
their will, to keep it or break it. This has been the the issue of the trial,
from the fall of our first parents, until this present moment; and will be no
other to the end of the world. All improvements of that which men call general
Grace, has brought in, does and will bring in but general ruins. The most
able gifted-graced (in this sense) and as one says, The most able free will
men among the Jews (who were a zealous Nation improved with all outward helps
and advantages for that time) were the most able sinners, which was chiefly
seen in their killing the Lord of life.

2. To discover to Gods elect, upon the issue of such a trial, The necessity
(as Fr Rouse Esquire. His great oracle.
that learned and pious Interpreter of the Scripture-oracle shows) of a
stable seed of actuating and confirming grace, ever nourished, supplied, and
supported by union with the Deity: And to make them groan from under the common
ruins, and cry out, Lord save us by thy special effectual grace, or we all
perish, with free will general grace. For except Gods free will do save some,
man's free will will lose all. And if God had not by effectual grace left a
remnant, we had been like to Sodom and Gomorrah by free will and general grace.

3. To leave, all men without excuse who have so much, and abuse what they
have; and them most inexcusable who have greatest improvements, who hear there
is effectual grace to be given, and yet Heb. 2. 3.
neglect so great salvation, a salvation which had so great a Preacher, the
Lord Jesus Christ (with his train of Apostles and Gospel Ministers) so great a
purchase and pardon by the blood of God, Act. 20. 28. So great and precious
promises to hold it forth, 2 Pet. 1. 4. So great power to apply it, as that
whereby Christ was raised from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 19. So great privileges, as
union with Christ, Joh. 15. 5. Adoption, Ioh. 1. 12, etc. So great evidences,
and witnesses, as gift^, miracles and Apostles, witnesses, Heb. 2. 3, 4. God
himself bearing witness to them, and to the salvation from heaven; and the
Spirit bearing witness in the heart, Romans 8. 15. Yet men neglecting this great
salvation, under the greatest improvements given, and offered to them, being
left to their own wills, and free will with common grace, will but make work for
justice, and the more justify divine justice, as the oracle tells us. So that
if things may be, and use to be denominated from the predominant part;
Testardus his universal Covenant, must no longer be called a Covenant of
grace, but a Covenant of free will; and his universal calling, no longer be
phrased, Testimonium gratiae, a testimony of grace, but a trial of free will,
and a calling up of the powers of man's will, etc. And his universal grace no
longer termed so, but universal-free-will, or universal-bondage, and impotency
of nature, wherein all the non-elect are justly left: and all this according to
an intention of God to deal with them according to works, and will of their
own, which primarily, was to continue life, Romans 7. 10. but properly and truly
was not to save out of death, Adam, or his posterity fallen in him, and with
him.

I have far beyond my first thoughts expatiated upon 2. Testardus
self-inconsistencies.
Testardus his Inconsistencies with Scripture: I shall confine my self within
the more narrow compass, in the discovery of some Inconsistencies with
himself, as well as with Scripture.

1. By all his Arguments he endeavors to maintain an universal Redemption, yet
The. 96, 265.
in some place he calls it potius exemptio, rather an exemption; which is either
more then a Redemption or less: If more, then universal Redemption, was more
then to procure a faculty or natural (...) posse, with it is best improvements,
leaving men to his own velle, or turn of will (which is The. 252.
all he affirms in that case) even a freedom from the vicious habit, and
moral impotency of the will (which is that The 157, 158 etc.
he de^^ieth) And again, it was more, then to procure the acts of patience, and
common mercies, or external offers of grace, etc. If it be less, as The. 265.
he seems to mince and extenuate it, with a seu potius, or rather (and I
rather conclude it to be his meaning) what is this but a retractation of that
which he would so stiffly assert, and a yielding it to be, as I have termed it
before, a reprievall, not grounded upon a necessary satisfaction of Christ to
Gods justice for all, but for other ends, and upon other grounds? For in very
deed, properly and truly in Scripture phrase (as himself notes elsewhere The.
86.
) Christ is not said to redeem any but by his death, nor does the word (...),
signify to redeem or free any other way, but by price. Now when he phraseth
his universal Redemption rather by exemption or privilege, I conceive he
yields it, to be some other way, then by price, and short of such a price, as
the precious blood of Christ: And if there was no price paid for all and every
singular, there is no universal satisfaction and atonement. In this instance
then, we find Testardus more to agree with the truth, then with himself.

2. He The. 45, 158.
says, and that truly, sin destroyed not natural faculties, and yet these
vires Physicae those natural powers (which he explains himself The 155.
, to be potestas, and facultas salutis) Christ died to purchase, for so The 97.
he says, God is the Savior of all, Respectu prioris Redemptionis, qua
facultatem tantum salutis miseris peccatoribus facit, in respect of that
universal Redemption, whereby he grants to poor sinners a faculty only of
salvation; that is, the natural faculty and power of understanding, (which,
with the essential liberty of the will, distinguishes a man from a beast, and
a stock or stone) so it seems Christ died to purchase that which sin
destroyed not, and God restores that which was not lost; or rather Testardus
^^avels in this Argument to stifle his own conceptions.

3. No man The 53
could justly charge God of injustice, if he should have adjudged all men of
years to eternal death for The. 144.
Adams first transgression: And yet he will not have that first find, nor the
actual sins of the Heathen against nature without their sinning (as he
supposes) also, in some sort, against a Covenant of grace, to be the cause of
their eternal condemnation and punishment; and his reason is, Vt justitiae
divinae in iis puniendis habeatur ratio, that regard may be had (in our
thoughts) to divine justice, in their punishment. Is not this interfeering with
the former clause and Thesis? As if unless the Heathen had sinned, some way,
against a Covenant of grace, Gods justice might be called in question; when he
had granted before, that God had been most just, to have thrown all men into
hell for the first sin. And the like self-contradiction he has about
children, The. 53.
who dares challenge God for injustice, if he should stifle and sting with
eternal death, the offspring of sinful parents for Adams sin, in ipso vita
limine, at their first stepping into this world? And yet The. 145.
he thinks it difficult to define what became of the Heathens children, nor
does it appear (to him) how they are to be punished with the eternal torments
of hell, when as (The. 53.) he had made it evident by a similitude of the
Serpents eggs, or young ones, which if poor man may crush beri^es, for their
in bred propensity and poison, why may not the Creator, and Lord of heaven and
earth do the like to Infants, by nature prone to sin against him, before
they put it forth in act?

4. The. 113.
Sustentation of nature, suspension of divine vengeance, etc. are fruits and
testimonies (as he thinks) of a Covenant of grace, and that with all men. And
yet The. 18.
elsewhere he doubts not, but God the Creator and Preserver of Nature instained
Adam and his faculties, hi^ sight, hearing, mind, will, appetite, hand, and
teeth also, in the very act of his sinning; and as a fundamental proof thereof
he ^i^eth that in Act. 17. 28. In him we live, move, ^^e, which (to serve his
purpose at another time) he The. 162.
expounds of God as a Redeemer. God can, and did (says Testurdus) as preserver
of nature, sustain Adam, in to actu q^o peccavit, in that act wherein he
sinned; and why may he not sustain his posterity (say I) in and under the guilt
of that sin, and in the actual fruits of that sin, as Creator and Preserver of
nature? (suspending some of his own acts of highest justice for a time) And yet
that sustentation be no more a fruit of redemption then Adams was in the first
act of sinning. And so, Gods being the Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4. 10. (which
Testardus The. 97.
applies to redemption) be no more then what is in Job 7. 20. O thou preserver
of men, and what we have in Psalm. 36. 6. O Lord thou preservest man and beast;
A common act of providence.

5. Christ offered himself (he The. 55.
says) pro peccatis mundi, for the sins of the world, and quotes that in 1 John 2. 2. for it; whence, elsewhere, The. 87.
he infers that Christ died pro omnibus and singulis, for all, and every one;
and yet The. 194.
declaring and laying forth the peculiar benefit of Justification, he dare not
affirm it, as belonging to any other, but to the elect, believers, and the
sheep of Christ, who are united to Christ their surety, and professedly says,
Haec duo conjungit Apostolus, The Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 30. joyneth these two
together, union and justification. Now how can that cohere with his doctrine of
separating the imputation of sin, from the imputation of righteousness? All
men's sins are imputed to Christ; and yet Christ's righteousness (first or
last) is imputed but to some. Either he must let go the Doctrine of singular
and sole imputation of Christ's righteousness to the elect (which is a glorious
truth to be adhered unto for ever) or he must desert the opinion of universal
imputation of the sins of the non elect unto Christ, which is an error worthy
to be exploded, and abandoned for ever.

6. Man, however a sinner The. 45.
has reliquias qu^s^am primige^ia lucia, some common notions of God, naturally
Imprinted in the heart, etc. and has withal, extrinsecally, a light set
before him (and added to that imbred qu^lity of his mind) viz. Arguments of
the Godhead, his power and goodness easily to beperceived in the Creation and
administration of the world; for proof whereof he quotes, Romans 1. 19, 20. Act.
17. 26, 27. And Eaten^s tantum, etc The. 141.
the utmost power exerted, or put forth by this natural light, he holds
according to Scripture, Romans 2. 14, 15. Romans 1. 21. that having the work or
effect of the Law written in their hearts, the Heathenish Gentiles did many
things according to that Law, as to acknowledge God in part, to be powerful,
good, etc. to worship him after their manner, follow the shadow of virtue, feel
their consciences excusing, and accusing, etc. Thus far we have a fair pail
of milk, but does he not spill it within a Thesis or two, Clarum est, gratiam
Christi ipsius sub Evangelij quibusdam velut rudimentis illis aliqu^tenus
oblatam. The 143.
Where he calls these Relics of natures light, as it were certain rudiments of
the Gospel, offering and holding forth to blind Heathen, The grace of Jesus
Christ. Is not this a clashing with what he had said before, of the whole power
of nature? Is it not a disparagement to the grace of Christ? who (it seems by
this passage) begins with Adams leavings. We read of Scripture rudiments (the
ceremonies, Gods positive institutions) yet these are but beggarly in the point
of justification, Gal. 4. 7. And natures-reliques are as beggarly in the work
of faith and sanctification, but in the office of revelation, and manifestation
of Christ for righteousness and life, much more beggarly. Now if you will
believe Testardus in this place, where he says, Christ was presented and
tendered to the Heathen by those most beggarly rudiments of nature, and that
every testimony of mercy in a way of providence, is the grace of Christ (where
he speaks unsoundly) you must not believe him in another place, The. 235.
that faith depends not upon humane reason, and that the light whereby the
natural faculties are called upon and acted, is divine and supernatural, and
of the holy Ghost, where he writes most soundly, and speaks the words of God
faithfully; and what then is the chaff to the wheat? But if you will take his
word there, where The. 50. Spei ^eati in posterum statu^ nulla argumenta super
sunt in residuo lumine. Ibid.
he speaks truly again, That there are no Arguments of the hope of a blessed
state, left in the remains of naturall-light; and more of this, These. 52. And
The. 111.
that the revelation and opening of mercy by Christ, ought to be a light, by
order of divine wisdom, whereby poor sinners lying in darkness, terror and
death, may be raised up and brought home to Christ the Mediator, pro ratione
revelationis, and The. 227.
that this light whereby sinners are raised up and renewed, is not lux aliqua
physica, any natural light; then you must not believe him where The. 126.
he says, that God left no man living (among the Heathen) altogether destitute
of all help of salvation, or without some calling to Christ and grace, by the
light shining in the creatures and common meries; and The 280.
that quivis vocatus, every single man, as he means, had apt and sufficient
means to win him to faith, etc.

7. He says The. 125.
, all the grace given to the non-elect, leaves the success to their
free will, which if you take for a truth you must reject that for an error,
The. 277.
That they have grace apt and sufficient to be saved; for though they have not
effectual grace, without which he confesses none can be saved; yet he
thinks, it follows not from thence, that he, who being destitute thereof is
hardened, and does perish, (...), non recepisse, ut posset salvari, had not
simply received that which might have saved him: And what is it Testardus, by
your own confession, he had received? not (...) velle ipsum, not the moral
change of the will, but (...) posse si velit, the power, if he would; and what
power? not Ethicam potentiam, but some (imaginary) grace, apt and in it self
sufficient, whereby the Physica impotentia, or natural impotency, and The. 166.
excusable impotency is cured. But what is that natural impotency? Testardus
The. 157.
places it in three things, 1. The want of a natural faculty of
understanding; to which we answered before from this Author himself, that sin
never destroyed the being of it. 2. Want of an apprehensible object; This
object (after the fall) if saving, is Christ, and we have proved the Heathen
wanted; he was not proposed to them; they had indeed the shadow of virtue, as
The. 141.
Testardus expresses it; but no shadows of Christ, in the shadows of the
Sun, nor in the Sun it self, in the firmament, or any other creature, nor
what by positive institution for a time were in Moses Ceremonies among the
Jews. 3. The want of light to illustrate and set forth to view this object,
Christ; and that is by the preaching of the Word; the Law accidentally,
properly the Gospel and promise, Quae multo distinctior est, and
intelligibilior, quam vox Coelorum, which is a much more distinct and
intelligible voice, then that of the heavens, Testardus acknowledges, yea, say
I, the only distinct language of Heaven, and that means whereby we savingly
understand Christ. And if Testardus would once sibi constare, be his own man,
he must say so too; for if the natural understanding wants the object
Christ, and the means apt and fit to set him forth, is it not, as he says The.
157.
Impotentia sine culpa, sine crimine, poenae non obnoxia? An impotency without
blame, without crime, not liable to punishment in this respect? I ask then,
What needs a cure? or what is that cure he speaks of The. 166, 2^7.
every where? which is not by any spiritual, or moral change of qualities in
the minds and wills of the non-elect; but a saving of the natural faculties,
harmless, as it were; Is this the result of all? and shall any pious or
learned man call this apt, and in it self sufficient grace? A sufficiency
without a sufficiency rather, let it be styled.

8. Once more, and more briefly, The. 43.
In the description of man's natural state, he speaks home, that man is dead in
sin, and under the chiefest a version from the chiefest good, and neither
lives to God, nor can quicken himself, nor can do any of those things which
belong to a life in God; here he agrees with the truth, but The. 277.
afterward falls out with this truth and himself; when to exemplify how every
man, hardened and perishing, had received (...), ut posset salvari, simply that
which might have saved him; he instanceth only in this, that he might do more
good, then he does, and he might omit, more evil then he omitteth; But what is
all that good he might do, or evil he might omit by the power and principle of
nature, to his life unto God, and in God, through Jesus Christ? And what is all
a man's doing, or not doing to salvation, without knowledge of, and faith in
Jesus Christ?

More such Inconsistencies may be observed in this Author with himself, that
while he undertakes to make truth and error friends, we cannot make him
friends with himself. Were it not a fairer reconciliation, to conclude with the
Apostle, Romans 11. 6. If by grace, then is it no more of works, otherwise grace
is no more grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more grace, otherwise
work is no more work. If God would save the non-elect by grace, then would he
not leave it to their works, nor should Testardus call it, saving grace, if God
leaves it, as in truth he does, to their wills. But if it be peculiar to the
elect to be saved by grace, the grace of redemption and sanctification,
according to the grace of election, then cannot any other, Etiamsi maxiure
vellent, although they did most earnestly will and desire it (as the Jews,
Papists, and all mere natural men do) be saved another way, by works alone,
or mixed and joined with Christ and faith; which yet because men do so
earnestly will and desire, God in justice leaves them to their own thoughts,
wills and ways.

To close up all, I find in this controversy of universal Redemption, it is
a more easy work to reconcile Testardus with Arminius, then with himself, or
the truth. For although Testardus is not so gross and large, in the stating of
the question, how Christ died for all, as I noted at Page 53.
first, yet in his demonstrations he goes rather further, then I find
Arminius does, as touching the matters of this life; Armin Desp. prin The. 4^.
^. 8
Arminius reckons the Word and Spirit for the proper appointed means of faith
and salvation, Testard The 16^, ^^^, 277, 281, ^^5.
Testardus every where assigns the good things of this life, as means apt and
in themselves sufficient; where the Word and Spirit are not afforded. Arminius
with the ^ona, the good things of this life put^ in the mala, the afflictions
and corrections of Gods hand (the benefit whereof is purchased for the elect,
is the use and benefit of life and health, etc.) But Testardus reckons the good
things temporal to be testimonies of Christ and grace, by themselves; which I
do not find Arminius to aver, no more then of the mala, or evil events of
providence by themselves, but as they are elevated and sanctified beyond their
proper element and sphere, so they both shall work together, with the proper
means of salvation, for good, to those that love God, and are loved of him, and
called according to his purpose, Romans 8. 28.

But in these three particulars (above others) I find Testardus and Arminius
mainly to conspire and jump into one mind.

1. That Christ did intentionally die for every singular, make satisfaction to
justice for all.

2. They do both exceedingly set up, and magnify nature and natural parts,
which will never do the reprobate any good (for they are flesht enough in
self-conceits of will and wisdom, from their own hearts) but it has and will
do hurt unto, and among the elect of God, for a time; to lose their waking
thoughts and admirations of free grace, and to fall into a dream of free will,
as if that were the umpire of grace; and of a strange liberty (unknown to a
right-principled Christian) as if because God leaves the non-elect, in justice,
to their own wills, therefore Gods children, dealt with in rich mercy, should
have their wills and swinge also; whence many are ready to turn the Doctrine of
Grace (especially of such grace, and such a Doctrine) into wantonness. Not to
speak of that which is so obvious, trite and common, yet true; their putting of
titles upon nature, as calling it grace, and a testimony of grace, do savor
strongly Naturam gratiae titule ornare, aut velo ejus palltare Pela gianum est
Act. ^ynod. Dord. par. ^ p. 178.
of old Pelagianisme: This is a wonder to me, how Testardus could style his
book, A Synopsis de Natura and Gratia, when as all along the book he confounds
the one with the other; but my wonder cease when as I consider the title must
be, in his sense inconsistent, as well as the contents of the book.

3. They place the decree of Christ's death, in order of nature before the
decree of election; as perceiving, that if redemption by Christ's death, be
brought in, as ^ fruit of election, then as election i^ but of some, out of the
whole lump of mankind, ^o redemption must be affirmed to be, but of those
some, or that certain number, whom God had elected; only with some difference;
Arminius frames a predestination of believers: Testardus foundeth election upon
Christ, not as yet received by faith, but as given and destinated of God for
faith; Arminius gives that to the will of man in believing, which Testardus
gives to the efficacy of grace, beyond a moral swasion, and hangs not the
faith of Gods elect upon the contingency of the will, nor does he make faith an
antecedent condition of election, as Arminius. But he is (me thinks) as wide in
another notion, as Arminius in the former; That Christ being first decreed to
be given, as a common victima or sacrifice propitiatory, he represents Gods
thoughts, as waiting (not for time, but order) on the court^sie of the rest of
the world; The. 80.
Ac tandem, cum pravideret Deus, etc. and at length, or then next in order,
when God foreseeth all will not receive his Son, prepared and offered for
all, then, and not before (in Testardus thoughts) comes out Gods purpose of
saving some, and that from an absolute choice of them, to faith, and the fruits
of it, infallibly, necessarily, etc. Absolute The 87.
because not out of foreseen faith, etc. as Arminius, but not so absolute, as
to be the foundation of our Redemption, for Christ; and that, The 288. with 282.
as the immaculate Lambs, satisfying justice, is the foundation of our
election, and not only of election, but of the whole gracious predestination,
as he calls it, and so he makes Christ a foundation of so much of Gods
predestination, as, in the common Covenant, call, and grace (which we have
discovered to be inconsistent with Scripture) belongs to reprobates: Here are
new notions that may please some men's fancies, but they are very cloudy to me,
while I apprehend they cloud and eclipse the glory of election; which although
The. 286.
he says, it is purae and particularis misericordia; belongs to mere and
special mercy; yet the notion of the Scripture goes higher; for as it excludes
faith from being either cause or condition of election; and brings it in as the
effect thereof, Act. 13. 38. So it assigns not Christ, as the fundamental
cause of election, when we speak or read of him, as a Redeemer offering up
himself a Sacrifice, but as that gift of God, Joh. 4. 10. sent as Gods great
love-token, for manifestation of his mercy, and love to those, who are the
chosen people of God, Math. 1. 21. and the children of Gods election, whom he
should by his death gather together, Joh. 11. 52. And when the Scripture says,
We are chosen in him, Ephesians. 1. 4. It is neither to be understood with
Arminius, That he chose us as foreseen believers on him, nor with Testardus,
as redeemed first to God by Christ his sacrifice, and upon foresight of what
all the world (the elect as others) would do, left to themselves, reject
Christ; and of what himself would do for some (for this is to build election
upon works, though they be Christ's works partly for us) partly in us) But as
blessed Baines upon that place, in him as a Head; The grace of election
begins first with Christ our head, and descends to us in him; And Christ
being primarily chosen as an head of men (and Angels too) then such men, as are
chosen in him, being fallen as others (when as none of the elect Angels fell
with the rest) by force of that former choice of a head, to the end appointed,
The glory of free grace, he is secondarily chosen upon the coming in of sin,
unto the means of bringing many sons unto glory, viz. his death; and as these
sons and heirs of glory were chosen in Christ to that end, without a first
consideration of the fall: So upon a second consideration (as we may so speak)
of their fall, they are chosen in Christ to the means, viz. Vocation,
Justification, etc.

I shall add as a Corollary a few Arguments for the due order of election
before redemption, and for the sole redemption of the elect, as a fruit of
their election.

That the decree of election, is in order of nature before the decree of
redemption.
1. The Father has the first right, as he is first in order of subsistence;
The Son has it given him from the Father, Joh. 17. 6. Thine they were, in the
first purpose and choice, and thou gave them me, to own as mine, and being
lost (not fallen out of election, but into a state of non-communion) to redeem,
and bring to God.

2. Election is first to glory, and election to glory is before the fall; and
therefore before redemption, which comes in after sin, as a means to b^ing to
glory, by such grace; to the praise of the glory of Gods most free grace, Ephesians.
1. 4, 5 6.

3. Creation was for Christ, Col. 1. 16. and therefore Christ first thought
upon as a head, of elect Angels and men; and as he is before all created
things, in the counsel of God; all things are made for his glorious ends, upon
his elect, had there been no fall; but for the further manifestation of Gods
love, the fall is permitted and ordered to bring in, not only God-incarnate,
but God crucified.

3. Love is in order before mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. The decree of election is an act
of mere love: That of redemption an act of pure mercy, and consequentiall upon
love in the decree; And in the execution, all the tender mercies of redemption,
are fruits of that love which gave being to election, as election gives a
Redeemer and redemption.

2. That Redemption by Christ's death, is solely and only of, and for the elect,
as a fruit of their election.
1. Christ died for them, and them only, whom he represented, whose names were
in the bond of agreement, or in the Covenant of his Suretiship, and that were
virtually in him upon the cross. Some were virtually in him upon the cross,
for he was there as a public person; all were not virtually in him, but such
as are in due time spiritually and powerfully united to him; if any more but
they, then Christ's death and cross loses some of its virtue, and Christ's
power is less then Adams (for as all sinned in Adam, the imputation of his sin
is put upon all their persons, whom he represented) Now not any but true
believers, and the elect seed are in time spiritually and powerfully united to
Christ (even by Testardus doctrine The 192, 194.
) nor do any but such partake of Christ's satisfactory righteousness, by
spiritual propagation, or union and bond of the Spirit and faith, as they that
are in Adam by natural propagation, and bond of nature, are partakers of his
condemning guilt (which Testardus pro^eth, from Romans 5. 16, etc. as we use to
prove it) By proportion of the first and second Adam, virtuall and actual
union and imputation go together. Now who will say Christ represented more
then the elect, etc?

3. If Christ died for more then the elect, more then the elect must believe in
him, as an effectual Savior, or he must be believed on, as an ineffectuall
Savior by some or other; Now not Testardus, nor any such Vniversalist will
say, that his death is, or was ever intended to be savingly efficacious to all
(only such a gross Atheist or distracted brain, as he that put out A pamphlet
sentenced before, p. 30. as unworthy of any light, but the light fire
Divine Light.) And that which is not nor was intended, is not to be believed.
Nor will, or dare any bid men believe in Christ for half, or half a quarter of
salvation, who are in their found minds. But believe (we say) in Christ for
all or nothing, when we take the Scripture-scope along with our preaching.

3. Christ died for those, and those only, who shall find their election by
believing in his death; none can find their Act. 13. 38.
election, who first had it not in Gods counsel. That representation therefore
of Christ's death, which Testardus makes in some respects, common to more then
Gods elect, does weaken the hands and hearts of true believers, shake the faith
of Gods elect, and obscure Gods election, as well as the reasonings of Sam.
Oats; and I hope (with Gods elect at last) the doctrine of the one will be
received for Orthodox, no more then the other, but both be rejected as
Heterodox.

Let those who preach, hear, write, read of Christ's death and Redemption,
believe in him for all actual union and effieacy of communion, and the
assurance of their election thereby, as the cause is known and assured by the
effect, and you shall find the Treasure and the Pearl, for which the Christian
man, and merchant, sold all he had, and bought it.

As it follows in the Parables.

CHRIST, THE Gospel-Treasure AND PEARL.
MATH. 13. 44, 45. ^^ain, The Kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a
field, the which when a man has found, he hides, and for joy thereof goes
and sells all that he has, and buyeth that field.

^gain, The Kingdom of heaven is like unto a Merchant man seeking goodly
pearls: etc.


IT is high time that we come (in the wisdom and Part. 2.
strength of Christ) to set out the right and genuine Scope, Explication and
Use of these Parables, (...), for the repairing and edifying of your
judgments, which have been shaken and staggered by the perverting abuses of
the late novel The true scope of these two Parables.
Exposition.

The Scope for the doctrinall part, is to teach and set forth the worth and
excellency of Christ and Grace, and the Gospel of Grace, with a Christians
affectionatenesse strongly carried out to him, and it; And for the Use, it is
to advise and excite all that read and hear hereof to be like unto this man and
merchant in the Text, in affection and action.

The particular and punctual Exposition (according to this The sense and
meaning,
general scope) is as follows.

In these two Parables (as in all similitudes) there are two parts, 1. The
Proposition, holding forth the resemblance. 2. The Reddition, applying the
thing resembled, to the resemblance.


1. The Proposition or resemblance is drawn forth two ways.

First, of a Treasure hid and found, and hid again, rejoiced in, and purchased
by him that found it, with all that he had.

Secondly, Of a Pearl, found by a Merchant man, etc.

2. The Reddition, so is the Kingdom of heaven, as is a Treasure and Pearl in
the discovery and purchase of it; so is the Kingdom; or the Kingdom of heaven
is like unto, etc. that is, there is that worth in it, and that transaction and
management of affairs about it, as if a man should find a treasure in a field,
or seeking many pearls, he should find one of great price, and having found
this Treasure, this Pearl, he goes and sells all that he has, and buyeth it.

By the Kingdom of heaven, I understand, the State and Treasure of it, with
the affairs and dealings about it; or Christ and his grace preached and set
forth in the Gospel of grace, and in Gospel dispensations; Christ and his
Gospel grace and dispensations, were set out in the four foregoing Parables;
by their nature, force and efficacy; here, by their worth and state of
excellency with the Christians affairs and dealings for his enjoyments of all
the worth and treasure of the Kingdom, as his own.

First, The worth and riches of the Kingdom resembled to hidden treasure, and a
precious pearl; what else is it, but Christ and his Gospel Grace? as may appear,

1. By parallel expressions and descriptions of him and his grace in Scripture;
Such as you read of in Col. 3. 1. Things above, where Christ sits, etc.
Treasure in heaven, Math. 19. 21. and 5. 21. This treasure, 2 Cor. 4. 7. viz.
of Christ and the Gospel-knowledge of him, v. 6. The people of God are the
children of the Kingdom, Mat. 13. 38. and the subjects of the Kingdom, yea
heirs and coheirs with Christ, that is enough for them, but they are not the
treasure of the Kingdom, Christ is that treasure.

2. By the Characters given to this treasure of the Kingdom, in the Parables of
the Text, as

1. We hear here of a hidden Treasure, Christ is most like to a hidden
Treasure, as being furthest off from the knowledge of men; you may know a
visible Church, sooner then the invisible God and Savior.

2. Hid in a field, that is, a field by it self, and a large field, yet
distinctly and particularly bounded, within the Word and Ordinances of grace;
there is Christ hid and wrapped up, in precious promises, the preaching and
substance whereof, is called, verse. 19. The word of the Kingdom; for where the
Treasure is found, there it was first hidden; in Gospel promises, Ordinances
and dispensations, Christ and his grace is found.

3. Here is mention of a Pearl, and one of great price; Christ is that Pearl,
with the grace of the Gospel; of singular, invaluable price; it will impoverish
every man that goes about to buy it, but when he has sold all, to his shirt
and skin for it, it enricheth him for ever.

4. One Pearl, which can agree to none but Christ, and the unsearchable worth
of his grace and Gospel, set in opposition to all the goodly pearls, in men's
esteem, the supposed mediums of salvation.

Thus you see what the state and worth of the Kingdom of heaven is, and to
what it is like; it is Christ, and all he is worth, like to a Treasure, and one
Pearl, of great price.

Secondly, We are to consider the Kingdom of heaven, in it is affairs; and the
Christians dealings about it, like to a man that finds, etc. Who is he that
finds? he that seeks, and who is he that seeks? the merchant man, a man
of no small dealings in the world.

The merchant man is every elect-vessel of mercy; represented here under a
double notion. 1, As seeking that which he finds not. 2. As finding that which
he seeks not.


1. As seeking what he finds not, and that is (...).
goodly Pearls; some fair and specious commodities to make him rich and happy;
Every one of Gods elect, while natural, is seeking his happiness, his life,
his heaven, his God, in some one thing or other here below; the mind of man is
active, and as busy as Ants on a molehill, about worldly contentments,
riches, honors, pleasures, profits, common gifts of learning, knowledge, etc.
to make a life of, an heaven, a God of, this he seeks, but (if he belong to
God, as the Parable speaks of such) he finds it not.

2. As finding what he sought not for: A Treasure, a Pearl, an only Pearl of
price; the only Treasure of Christ, and Gospel Grace which will make a man for
ever. This finding is nothing but Gods preventing Isa 65. 1.
light, and Joh. 6. 44, 45.
love, and Gods drawing of a soul to faith in Christ; And of this finding there
are four effects mentioned in the Text. Hiding. Joying. Selling. Buying.


1. Hiding, when he had found the treasure he hides it; which is not only
emblematicall, and for ornament of speech, (...) abscondit est emblematicum.
Cor. a Lap.
as some conceive; but such an expression as holds forth the carriage of a true
believer, at his first believing in the several acts of humility, of hope and
love, of his high esteem, and holy purposes about this Treasure and Pearl to
make it his own; for as there is a sinful hiding of Christ, and of
Gospel Grace and truths, when they are not acknowledged, nor others called, to
come and partake with us; against which David and Christ too, do protest, Psalm.
40. 10. So we find the phrase used in a good sense in Scripture; As

1. Sometimes for an act of modest humility, in opposition to boasting, as 1
Pet. 3. 4. the hidden man of the heart, is an expression of humility in women,
contrary to outward ostentation, and shows and flant-tant dresses; so Nisi
forte dicamus id tantum pollere quantum si ^u di^as, Dissimulavit, non
jactavit. Bull. in locum.
Bullinger inclines to think we may safely here understand, an act of a
Christians modesty, who when he finds Christ in the Gospel, has many a secret
thought, of the worth of such a Treasure, and of his own unworthiness, yet
cordial, and inward in his believing, with the hidden man of his heart.

2, Sometime for an act of Hope, Prove. 22. 3. The prudent man foreseeing the
evil, hides himself, i. e. humbly and hopefully betaketh himself to the Lord;
so the believer hopefully, as humbly cheweth upon the promise in his heart.

3. Sometime for an act of dear love, as Job 20. 12. it is an expression of a
sinners love to his darling sin, he is said to hide it under his tongue, as a
man or child does suggar candy in his mouth; which is seemingly a good hiding
to a sinner, and here the real and dear love of a Christian to Christ, holds
him and keeps him close.

4. Sometime for an act or effect of high esteem; for so the riches, which
Cyrus should meet with in Babylon; and which he and all natural men prize so
much, are called, Isa. 45. 3. Hidden riches of secret places; that which men
prize most, they hide most closely.

5. Sometime for an act of resolution to keep safe, and make sure of any thing,
as Prove. 2. 1. If thou hide my commandments with thee, that is, resolvest to
keep them, and Psalm. 119. 11. So the man, the merchant man in my Text, Lest any
man beguile him of the treasure, he takes care that he be not deprived of it,
etc. Annot. last upon the place.
he does holily take up a resolution to make out for Christ, and to make sure
of him, as his own.

2. Ioying, which is nothing else but the joy of faith, in the knowledge and
apprehension of what is certainly attainable in the Gospel, and precious
promises.

3. Selling, and selling all, his selling is, 1. His consent to part with what
he has; he goes to that end. 2. His actual parting with what is his, as, and
when God calls, and enableth.


All] That is, all that he has of his own, that may be truly called his; what
ever stands in competition with, or opposition to Christ, and his Gospel Grace.
As 1. His sins and sinfull-self; the body of sin, and earthly members. 2. His
common gifts, natural and moral, of understanding, reason, wit, usual
competitours with, and opposers of grace. 3. His own righteousness of outward
duties, civil, religious frames of heart. 4. His worldly profits, pleasures,
honors, preferments, friends, etc. 5. His self ends in profession. dependency,
or confidence of strength to mortify a lust. 6. All his external
Church Priviledges, in point of dependence. 7. Life it self; Though skin for
skin, etc. yet he consents to the parting with this also, and does it actually,
when called to lay it down for Christ and the Gospel Truth, and grace.


4. Buying the field, and treasure, and pearl; this is the last effect of
finding, whereby he gets firm assurance, and clear evidences written and
sealed; which is more then the first act of believing; even a giving diligence
to make his calling and election sure, heaven, Christ and grace, sure to his
person, and clear to his spirit and conscience; Of such a buying the Scripture
speaks, Isa. 55. 1. Revel. 3. 18. and alibi.

Thus then take up the sum of all;

Christ and the Gospel Grace, in the preaching and administration of it, is a
most rich treasure, and precious pearl, hidden in a field of promises, and
Gospel-dispensations, which when any of Gods elect (at the time of their
effectual calling minding other things) is prevented with, by Gods light and
love and drawn to believe it attainable for himself, he does humbly, hopefully
and highly esteem of it, and in love and holiness, purposes to make sure of
it, And from the joy, that he has, and conceives to have in a further
enjoyment, sets upon the work of extreme self-denial, and poverty of spirit,
consents to part with all his sins, all his pride of parts and gifts, all his
self-justifying righteousness; all his shackles and snares in the creature,
his self ends, dependencies on his own strength or Church Priviledges, lets go
life and all (as called to it) and thereby gives diligence, to get full
assurance, and firm evidence of Christ, and all heavenly treasure, as his own.

According to, and out of which Paraphrase, we shall have (contract them as I
can) seven pertinent and useful Doctrines.

1. Christ and Gospel Grace is a precious treasure, hidden in Gospel-promises
and dispensations.

2. Every one of Gods elect (as others) they wander up and down in their minds
and endeavors after imaginary mediums, and ways of happiness.

3. In Gods good time, his elect are prevented with his light and love, and
drawn to believe the attainablenes of this treasure for themselves.

4. There is in every true believers heart, an humble, hopeful, loving, high
esteem of Christ and his grace; and a holy purpose to make out, for assurance
of him, and it.

5. The Christian who finds Christ, rejoices in him.

6. The joy of a believer works him to utmost self-denial.

7. Extreme poverty of spirit, and through self-denial will so possess a soul
of Christ, and of the treasure of his Kingdom; as he shall have full assurance
and firm evidence that Christ is his, and he is Christ's; that heaven is
reserved for him, and he for heaven.

Doct. 1. Christ and Gospel grace, is a precious hidden Treasure; Which
Doctrine brancheth it self out into three Christ a precious hidden treasure.
Propositions. 1. He is a treasure. 2. Precious treasure. 3. Hidden treasure.


Branch 1. Christ and his Gospel Grace is a Christians treasure; Branch 1.
The Col. 3. 1. Mat 5 21. 19, 20.
Scriptures quoted in the Explication and margent prove it; for

1. That which a Christian must seek and set his heart upon, must needs be his
treasure; this is Christ and his Kingdom.

2. That which is brought in earthen vessels (Paul, and the despised frail
Ministers of the Gospel) that is our treasure: which is Christ, and his riches,
2 Cor. 4. 7. I add,

3. That which has abundance and enough to enrich, and Copia sacultatum.
supply all that find it, with all that their hearts do, or can desire, is
surely our treasure: In Christ there is abundance, of all good, of all the
fullness of the Godhead, which dwells in him bodily, Col. 2. 9. If he gives
life, he gives it in abundance, Joh. 10. 10. If righteousness, it is given and
received too in abundance, Romans 5. 17. If grace and the Spirit, he sheds it
forth abundantly, Tit. 3. 6. And the Gospel has a fullness of blessing in it,
Romans 15. 29.

Branch 2. It is not abundance of dirt or dross, but all Branch 2.
precious, And in that respect Christ and Gospel Grace is as well set out here
by a Pearl, as by a Treasure; a Treasure for quantity, a Pearl for quality, one
Pearl for the single, sole compleatnesse of his grace.

The preciousnesse is evident by two properties in the Text.

1. The value and price not ordinary, but great.

2. The rarity, and peculiar one-nesse; but one such in all the world.

First, The value and price, great and dear Pretiosissimi praetij, according to
the Syriack. Trem.
; we may take the estimate hereof in three weighty considerations.

(1.) Of what price Christ is with the Father; of highest esteem with his
Father no question; his elect servant, in whom Gods soul delights, Isa. 42.
1. His beloved Son in whom he is well pleased, Mat. 3. ult. The Son of his
dearest love, Col. 1. 13. Amongst many demonstrations, these are convincingly
set before us in Scripture,

1. It pleased not the Father that any, or all men and Angels should be the
storehouse of grace, but that in him all fullness Col. 1. 19.
should dwell.

2. The Father has given all into his hands; All dispensations Joh 3. 35.
of the Fathers love, from election to glorification, are through Jesus Christ.

3. The Father has set him at his own right hand, of Heb. 1. 13.
Majesty and Glory, till he has made all his enemies his footstool.

(2.) Of what price considered in himself? his Person.

(2.) Of what price considered in himself? his Offices.

1. In his Person, The Son of God, co-essentiall with the Verbum in carne
margarita in concha.
Father and Spirit; Emmanuel, the Word made flesh; What a pearl is here? God
and man united in one person of the Son of God: That mystery which the Angels
desire to gaze upon, as men gaze upon a jewel or pearl; and which they stoop
to pry into, as men pry into a curious piece of workmanship.

2. In his offices, as he is,

1. A Prophet, teaching the whole will of God, the Messiah teaching all things,
Joh. 4. 25. In whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

2. A Priest, 1. Making full and perfect satisfaction, by his obedience and
sufferings; his life, and the complete obedience to all his Fathers commands,
how precious? of more value then all the lives of the Saints; His death, and
every drop of his blood shed for satisfaction and atonement, how precious? One
drop of more merit, then all the blood of Martyrs. 2. Making perpetual
intercession in the heavens; an able Advocate, and a righteous one; able to
prevail with a just, as a merciful God, by his righteous pleadings, merciful,
and faithful in all cases committed to his plea; And a most free Advocate,
does all for nothing, in the behalf of every one, who comes to God by him, in
forma p^^peris.

3. A King, declared so to be, by his glorious resurrection, ascension and
exaltation at Gods right hand; And by his gathering and governing his Saints,
and the Churches of the Saints, inwardly by his Spirit, and outwardly by his
Word and Gospel Order and Discipline; unknown worth is here; of great price is
he in every of these respects, as might be amplified and cleared at large.

(3.) Of what price and great value is Christ to us in that Principium
culmenque omnium rerum pretij margaritae tene^t Plin. lib. 9 c. 35
Gospel Grace, which he communicates first and last? such as it makes every
choice grace flowing from him, to be a pearl, enriching a Christian with
enough. 1. To live and spend upon for the present. 2. To lay up for the future.


1. For the present, How precious that which is given to live upon?

1. The Spirit of grace, and prayer, and purity, and liberty.

2. Faith, the precious faith of Gods elect, the (...), 1 Pet. 1. 7.
trial of it more precious then gold, much more in it is self, most precious.

3. Union with Christ; there is a pearl indeed; Pearls me called union^s, say
some, because but one or two are found together; and why not, because they
unite the heart in love and high esteem of such as find them, to themselves? I
am sure, this is an uniting pearl, the pearl of union with Christ, which brings
in 1 John 1. 3.
fellowship with the Father, and his Spirit, and his Saints, and Ephesians. 4. 16.
whole Churches of them.

4. Justification, in which there are four things of great price.

1. The Righteousness of Christ, imputed.

2. The non-imputation or plenary remission of all sin, in the guilt and
punishment.

3. The acceptance of our persons as righteous.

4. The title to eternal life thereby.

5. Reconciliation, a precious fruit of our Justification and pardon, whereby
of enemies to God, we are accepted, as his friends, and are in terms of peace
with him.

6. Redemption, a precious benefit, whereby of bondslaves to sin and Satan,
we are accepted as Gods-Covenant servants, and Christ's freemen, the more
precious being purchased by such a price, as the precious blood of Christ.

7. Adoption, a precious free-enlarged act of Gods love, whereby of children of
wrath, we are accepted as his own sons and daughters, Behold, what manner of
love is this! 1 Ioh. 3. 1. Declare it who can, when the Apostle is at a stand
about it.

8. Sanctification, in the parts. 1. The quickening of a new divine nature, and
in particular the habit of love Lyra makes charity the choice pearl among and
with other virtues.
. 2. The mortifying of an old corrupt nature (how precious therestoring of Gods
image, and the destroying of the devils likeness) And in the first general
acts and fruits, Repentance and a broken heart, a precious jewel and pearl.
All these as they are Christs-grace, and Gospel Grace, may have the
denomination to far as they have the precious nature of Pearls, which, as
Pliny Not. Hist l. 9. c. 35.
writes, are begotten of the dew of heaven, which at a certain time of the
year, the shellfish draws in; and as they are specious to sight, so for use
are very medicinal, to heal the palpitation or beating of the heart, to
comfort the vital spirits, and drive away the dizzinesse of the head: of far
choicer use is Christ, and this grace which flows from his divine distilling
influences; but I follow not the metaphor, as some do, who reading in Pliny
and other Authors, of what Margaritaru^ omnis dos (says Pliny) consistit in
candore, magnitudine, orb, laevere, pondere. See Cor. a lapide in loc,
Dos and due proportion of whiteness, greatness, ^o^idnesse, smoothness and
weight, a pearl consists, lay out the resemblance unto Christ's being
conceived of the Virgins substance, by the over-shadowing dew of the Spirit,
coming forth most-white, by his innocence, little by his humility, bright by
his wisdom, most round by his complete perfection, weighty in conscience,
smooth in mildness, full of the price of blessedness; it is enough and
agreeable enough to the scope of our Lords own Parables, that we take notice of
the great value and worth of Christ and his grace, moving every one that truly
understands it, to make out in a purchase for the possession of it.

2. For the future, the full growth of grace, comfortable evidences of it, and
of Gods love the root of it; Perseverance and victory over sin, world, Satan,
Antichrist and death, a joyful, glorious resurrection and redemption of the
body, boldness at Christ's coming, with eternal life, in the beatificall
vision of God for ever and ever. Here is as much as ever I heard of, or knew
any Christian desired, and how great is the price hereof, no man can tell me.

Secondly, The rarity and peculiar one-nesse of this Pearl, all is summed up in
one Jesus Christ, In him you are complete, Col. 2. 9. If he be the Son of
God, he is the only jewel of the Crown of heaven; if he be a King, head and
husband of the Church, he is but one, etc. Act. 4. 12. and 15. 11. if we take
in every grace of the Gospel to be a Pearl; and if we take in the Gospel too,
with Gospel Grace; and every promise of the Gospel, with the knowledge thereof
The knowledge of Christ is the pearl, which ^^^re exceeds all other sciences
Annot. upon the Bible. Branch 3. 1 How hid.
, yet all these are bound up in one Volume of Jesus Christ, which when a
Christian has well read through, and studied, he desires to know, and enjoy
nothing else, 1 Cor. ^. 2. Phil. 3. 8.

Branch 3. Christ and Gospel Grace is a hidden treasure, where two things are
worth our enquiry; how and where this Treasure is hid. In it self and it is
worth it is hid, thus,

1. As not known to natural men at all, by any capacity or principle they have
to discern Christ, or the things of Christ, The 1 Cor. 2. 14.
natural man ((...)) is not capable of them ((...)) nor is he able to know the
things of the Gospel, and of the Spirit, because as the Apostle says, They are
spiritually discerned.

2. Not commonly known, or but known of a few (in every age) that are Gods
elect (at what time God makes out the discovery in the Gospel) insomuch as the
Prophet admireth their paucity, and complains of their slender company, Isa.
53. 1.
Lord, who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed?

3. Never known of reprobates: Gospel-treasure is ever hid to them, though
Apostles open and unfold it: 2 Cor. 4. 3.
If (grant it) our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.

4. Known of the elect (Preachers and believers) but 1 Cor. 13 9.
in part, though their knowledge is a growing knowledge, yet as something is
more made known, something is ever hidden.

5. Known but in a 1 Cor. 2. 7. 1 Cor 13. 12.
mystery (while here) and through a Glass, and in a Riddle, in comparison of
what shall be seen face to face, and understood plainly as speech is, when it
is uttered in proper and plain expressions; Then shall the riches of Christ be
told over, cast, and summed up, and we shall know the perfect value, that it
amounts unto; but here, while we preach, and you hear of this riches, all is
Ephesians 3. 8. (...).
unsearchable, beyond the search and reach of all humane learning, natural
wit, or spiritual understanding to trace or find out.

Christ and Gospel-treasure is hid in the Scripture-field; or 2 Where hid.
in that part of the Word, which is called the Gospel, or the Covenant of
grace, and the many great and precious promises, which are as a field.

1. For the large and spacious ground; the Gospel Tit. 1. 2, 3. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
promises are capacious, and carty in the womb of them all the excellency and
worth of Christ; all the precious pardons, and graces, all the hopes, comforts,
and assurances of a Christians heaven upon earth, and in heaven.

2. For the limiting hedge and boundary; the promises were first made to
Christ, and all of them are Gal. 3. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 20.
yea and Amen in him, to them that are Christ's, and are in Christ; Christ and
all his grace, is wrapped up in promises; a promise cannot be had without Christ,
nor Christ out of a promise: Now Christ and all his worth is hid in the
Gospel-promises in a twofold consideration.

1. Till they be opened, therefore Luke 24. 27.
the Lord began at Moses, and all the Prophets, and expounded to the two
Disciples in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself; And the Apostle
Romans 16. 25, 26.
tells the Romans and us, that mystery was kept secret in the Scriptures of the
Prophets, which now by the preaching of Jesus Christ, is made manifest for the
obedience of faith.

2. Till our understandings be opened; which our Lord Luke 14. 45, 46.
did for the Disciples many of them together, Then opened he their
understandings, says the Text, that they might understand the Scriptures. The
Scriptures about Christ may be opened long enough, and clear enough, and yet he
lies there unseen, till men's eyes be opened and cleared, but there he is, and
precious is that field of Scripture-promises which hides, and holds such a
treasure.

Let this Doctrine of the full Treasure, and fair Pearl of rich price; hid and
wrapped up in full and precious promises, 1 Use of instruction and conviction.
serve for the full conviction of those who question the fullness of Christ and
Gospel Grace; or when they are told of it, prize it not, and slight the Word
and Ministry, where it is to be found.

Three sorts are here to be informed and convinced, about the weakness of
their judgments and affections; and o^ that they might be cured, as discovered.

First, Such who doubt of the all sufficiency of Christ and Gospel Grace for
their poorsouls; they acknowledge not, nay, they see not enough in that which
is preached and offered to them, for their justification and pardon, or for
their sanctification and qualification for heaven: Now what is that you have
heard of in these Parables? was it not of a treasure, and a treasure that has
all the fullness of God, and of his Spirit, above measure, in him? and is not
here enough for thee, and the filling up of thy empty soul?

1. In the want of a justifying righteousness, to take off thy guilt and fears
of death, be convinced there is more righteousness in one Lord Jesus Christ,
then guilt in all the sinful sons of Adam; if thou had sinned from Adam, to
this day (above 5500. years sinning) for length of time; and besides the guilt
of that first sin, had the guilt of the greatest sins upon thee that ever
were committed; and in every act of sin had come near the sin against the
holy Ghost (that sin excepted which yet thou art not fallen into) there is
fullness of righteousness and forgiveness for thee, or any sinner that does
or shall believe; which cannot but overcome and break an heart full of
unbelief, for and from it; were it seriously weighed and considered.

2. In the want of sanctification, and good frame of heart and life; All
treasures of wisdom, holiness, strength, are in this one Treasure, to supply
thy emptiness, and enrich thy poverty. Yea, there is that in Christ which will
enable thee to sell all thou have, to buy himself, the pearl and
Gospel-treasure with; Christ will put money in thy purse, if thou will accept
him and it; to make sure of him for thine; for he is the Author and finisher
of faith, and of all that appertain to faith, not believing therefore of
Christ's sufficiency, will be inexcusable.

Secondly, Such as do not prize this Gospel-treasure and Pearl of great price;
I believe, let Arminians old and new, ^e^ch what they will, by a policy and
stratagem of Satan, to draw off men's eyes from looking upon Christ our
treasure, in this Text: yet so brightly has the light shined, by the true
Application of it unto Christ, and his grace, that even many a natural
conscience is enlightened and convinced that it is meant of him, as the treasure
of treasures, and the pearl of pearls: but here now is the sin of these
persons, that their wills and affections are not carried after Christ; nay,
something yet in their judgments is better then Christ, for them* and preferred
before him in their fancies: Is it not so with many here and every where? As
the Romans 1.
Gentiles of old; withheld the light of nature, and truths of God in
unrighteousness; imprisoned and ^nother'd it; and did not glorify God
according to the knowledge they had of him: So the Gentiles or Nations still
(differing but a little from Heathen in Gospel Baptism, and some Gospel light
of Christ) do withold, or forcibly imprison and enslave this light of the
Gospel, and truths of Christ in unrighteousness; they smother and suppress
the knowledge of Christ, from their Baptism; see and will not see; see, but
are not affected at the sight of a Savior, and his riches and worth.

Now tell me, let me put the Question to any rational man enlightened; what is
it that you have and still do lay in the balance with Christ? Is it a base
lust, or a carnal contentment? Some profitable bargain in the world, or
pleasurable enjoyment of this earth? Dare you say, that Christ weighs not
down all the world? Worth you see in Christ, nothing but unworthiness in sin;
no merit or worth in the creature, why consider Christ is of more worth then
all his benefits and graces (conferred on us) and yet any of his graces and
spiritual benefits are of more worth (as they have the love of God, and the
stamp of Christ upon them) then all the world, and all wordly accommodations,
not to be named the same day with the least of Christ's graces, much less to be
weighed in the same balance with Christ himself. On the great sin of those then
who prefer their swinish lusts, and carnal profits, before this treasure; and
the brutishnes of those, who prefer the trash on this worldly dunghill, before
a Pearl, this Pearl of great price.

Thirdly, Such as seem to make some account of Christ and grace, but the
Gospel, and Gospel-ministery, and the field of promises they esteem not; either
there are promises enough, or rather there are too many for them, they are
clo^ed with them, and with the preaching of them; Nay, the old Gospel, the
Revel. 14 6.
everlasting Gospel (preached and to be preached to all Nations, kindreds,
tongues and languages, at and upon Antichrists ruinous downfall) a part
whereof is Gods free election but of some, Christ's Redemption but of some: Gods
Covenant with believers, and their seed, etc. this will not down with many
young, and old professors, and hearers of the Word; I have thought of some
reasons hereof, all rotten and corrupt, in the minds of those who are swaied
by them. 1. Some have lately hearkened after new-teachers, of a new Gospel of
universal Redemption, and Remission of sins for all men, so far as they have
sinned against a Covenant of works. Now, as for faith, men hope they have heard
enough, and believed enough already; they shall need to hear no more, but what
will nourish them up in assurance of a pardon before they have any faith at
all. 2. Others, they place all the Gospel in a new baptizing; and make that act
or work of baptism, the foundation of all their hopes and comforts, and
therefore desire but to hear more of that, and they need no more Gospel. 3.
Some rest in the bare name of Christ, and notion of a Treasure, and noise of a
Pearl; it founds sweetly in their ears, and pleases their fancies very much,
but mean while are careless whether they find and possess it for their own,
or no. 4. Others have been wont to make the Lords Supper only (in their bodily
attendance upon it) their Treasure and Feast; not Christ himself, and because
they cannot have that Sacrament, they slight the Word, and will not attend upon
it with their wonted diligence; it may be on the Lord's Day they will afford
their presence all, or part of the day; but on the week-daies, they will not
hear at all, or will sooner hear a Joh. 10. 10.
stranger, and a thief, who comes not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to
destroy, then their constant Teachers, who would as Pastors and faithful
Shepherds fold them in, and feed them with knowledge and understanding. Now woe
be to such strangers as scatter sheep from the right fold, and to such blind;
guides as lead people from the Word (the diligent hearing and the right
understanding of it) and woe be to such blind people, who are led and carried
from this Gospel field, and Ministry, where Gospel-treasure is hid, and to be
found. Accursed be that Doctrine or way, or person, which carries you off from
Christ, and the Gospel of your salvation, to any other Gospel, which takes all
mankind into Covenant, and yet shuts out little Infants from any one promise
of grace; as if they were no part of mankind, or are far from having any
part in Christ, till they actually believe; that is (in the Arminian sense)
till they act some of their own power, and till free will does it is part, and
determines all the controversies of the parties salvation. The Lord strike home
some arrows of conviction to the very heart of Christ our Kings enemies, that
people may fall under the power of his Word, and all high thoughts against free
grace indeed, may be captivated and brought into the obedience of Christ.

Use 2. This should exhort, and provoke us to several 2 Use of Exhortation.
duties.

First, Believe we this fullness of Christ, and Gospel Grace, Treasure, though
you have not experimentally found it. The Report hereof must be bleeved, or the
arm of God will not be revealed to bring you in, to the Treasure, or the
Treasure to you. Consider who said, The kingdom of heaven is like unto a
treasure, a pearl, etc. The Truth it self Jesus Christ, who sent Paul, and
others, according to his Gospel, to preach among us Gentiles, The unsearchable
riches of this Treasure. 2. Believe in it. No earthly treasure is to be rested
upon, but this is a Treasure that you may lay your life upon, your faith upon,
and trust unto it for all-sufficient supplies to make you happy for ever; And
if such riches increase, you may and must set your heart upon them.

Secondly, Esteem we this Treasure and Pearl at it is full Joseph's abundance
drew his brethren highly to prize him, whom before they had slighted; Solomon's
treasures of wisdom, as of riches, raised his fame in all parts, brought over
the Queen of Sheba to see and admire, till she had no more spirit in her;
Behold a greater then Solomon is here, to be valued for his wisdom and wealth
above ten thousand Solomon's. 2. Here is the Kings treasure; a Kings treasure is
(and it is fit it should be) greater then that of any particular Subject; and
the treasure of the King of Kings (to whom all earthly Kings must vale and
stoop, and should willingly swear homage and subjection) must needs be
infinitely above the wealth of any of his Subjects, though they be Kings and
Monarchs here below. 3. The Kingdoms treasure is of greater worth, then the
particular revenues of the King: for as the King is, so is his treasure, though
singulis major, over and above all individuals, yet universis minor, less then
the public: Behold, the Kingdoms treasure is here for you, yea, the King
himself is his Kingdoms treasure, and his Subjects Pearl. 4. What Kingdom but
that of heaven? What treasure is it but an heavenly? To be prized above all the
treasures of the earth, and earthly Kingdoms put together; take the Persian and
Turkish treasures, the wealth of all the Princes and states of Europe, Asia,
Africa, and America; with all the Indian gold and jewels: Sum all up, they
are all but Ciphers, without a figure, they come all to nothing, nothing but
vanity and wind; all earthly treasure is but trash and dirt from beneath; the
treasure of our text is from above, that may be lost, stolen, this no thief can
break through and steal; that is but corruptible at the best, this incorruptible
and fades not away. 5. It Is an hidden Thesaurus (...), aurum repositum, Isid.
orig.
treasure; the more hid, the more precious; wise men, much more the most wise
God lays up only things of worth, and hides them from the notice of all. There
is more then yet can be found, and that which is found, is more then can be
told over; it is the love of Christ that passes knowledge, and the merit of
Christ, that passes all price and worth in the creature; and surpasses all
the valuation and esteem you can give it; set it as high ^s you can, Christ and
his grace cannot of any mortal, of any Saint, be too high-prized. 6. All this
treasure is made up in one Pearl of great price, and that with God, why should
it not be so with us? The richest Pearl that ever I read of, was that which
Cleopatra dissolved and drunk in a health to Antonius her friend, worth a
hundred thousand gold pieces; What if the price had been a hundred millions, or
a million of millions? this is but man's price, and in man's market, who value
things, especially jewels and pearls, more according to fancy, then true worth;
but God himself here sets the price, beyond what you can reckon it at; yet if
you like it, you shall have it at an under-rate; have but these thoughts of it;
it is surely worth all that I have, or that any man has of his own; and that
the merchant man was no fool to go and sell all that he had to buy it; of which
in it is due place.

Thirdly, Pity we those who know nothing of it, and it is worth, and make we the
best discovery of it we can: Let the Ministers of the Lord, and people of God;
let all Christ's factours, who have any trading and commerce with heaven, set
forth the excellency and the worth hereof (after Paul's pattern in every Epistle
of his) to the life, and to the luster and glory of it, that poor earth worms,
and ignorant souls may may be taken with it is commendations, and drawn to dig
and search for it, where it is to be found.

Fourthly, Seek we for it, and more of it, where it is hidden, in
Scripture-promises, and Gospel-Sermons; give that choice field its due account,
and wait for the opening of the field, the treasure, and your hearts together;
to understand more of the mystery of Jesus Christ; Suspect those who would lead
you from the Field, where you may find the Treasure; yea, conclude they are
deceivers, who call into Question the whole written text of Scripture. And take
but this Antidote or two along with you, when you are tempted to sip of such a
cup of poison.

1. Those are the Scriptures, and written Word of God, where Christ and his
grace is to be sought and found, Joh. 5. 39. in the present Scriptures Christ
is found, and eternal life is found in his words, by us Gentiles, and when the
Jew shall turn to the Lord, the vail shall be taken away (which now is upon
their heart in the reading of the old Testament) and they shall find this
treasure also with us.

2. They are the true Expositours of Scripture, and the right Expositions,
which hold forth Christ and Gods free grace in him, Yesterday, to day, and for
ever, so as they give nothing to nature, or the creature at all; which they
do, who lay all the ground of Baptism upon man's act, not Gods promise, and
who by preaching Christ's death for all, leave it to the contingency of the
creatures slippery-slavish will, to vote it, whether this or that man, or any
man shall be saved or no?

I come to a second observation,

2. Even Gods elect (as others) for a time, they wander after some or other
imaginary mediums, and ways of soul-enrichment Gods elect are but common
seekers for a time.
and contentment.

So much, I conceive is taught us by our Lord, in that he says, the merchant
man who at last finds the true pearl of the Kingdom, is in his first seekings
busied (with other men) Proved.
about supposed specious pearls, which men may set a price upon, but here is no
price put upon them by Christ. Psalm. 4. 6.
Many (even the elect a while, with others, till their hearts be touched, as
David's was) are enquiring, Who will show us any good? If it be but a show of
good, it shall they think, content them. Mat. 6. 32.
After these things do the Gentiles (even every one in natural state) seek.
Luke 14. 18.
One follows his form, and seeks a pearl there, another his merchandise, etc.
and seeks a pearl or two there.

I shall further make out the truth hereof in a few Demonstrations, that it is
so, and why it is so.

First, that it is so, is evident three ways: First, That it is so.


1. All men have a natural aim at happiness; and they who live under the
preaching of the Word, they aim at such a place as is called heaven; for the
will naturally has good for its object, and enclines to choose a sum^um bonum,
some chief good; to make the soul happy by; And when any conscience is a
wakened, it presently asks, What shall I do to be saved? Miserable it would
not be.

2. Mediums and ways men have (though false) as so many pearls in their eye,
fair and goodly possibilities to keep them from misery, and to make them happy:
such a carnal pleasure, as the Epicure, or such a portion of estate, as the
rich fool in the Gospel; such honor at Court, or preferment at, or by the
Parliament; some are for profound learning, and travels in the writings of the
Ancients; others for common parts, or trades and imploiments in the City or
Country; some for Philosophy and physic, others for Rhetoric or music; some
for common graces, others for religious duties and offices in the Church, by
some or any of these, men take their aim at a blessed state for present and
future too.

3. These and such like mediums and ways not attaining their end proposed;
they are ever seeking, and never finding; they are ever at a loss, and in a
wilderness, and Isa. 57. 10.
are wearied in the greatness of their way, would fain set down, and meet with
something suitable to the vastness of their desires, but cannot, nor will they
be taken off the pursuit, by a bare proposal of what may (not more probably,
but) most certainly give them better satisfaction, and content, if they would
close with it.

The Reasons hereof are these that follow, Secondly, Why so?


1. The gross ignorance of the true medium, (the treasure and pearl indeed) of
all true happiness, and soul-enriching contentment, the Lord Jesus Christ.
Plato of all the wise Heathens came nearest the knowledge of God, as the chief
good; for he placed the summum bonum, in that which he called the Idea boni,
and ipsa (...), the Alpha and Omega of all good; and yet was at a loss,
through his ignorance of the right medium and way unto God, Christ Jesus;
Though he judged well of happiness, that it consisted in a mixture of wisdom
and pleasure, which men had from their communicating with the absolute chief
good, which was God himself, yet how to come to this God, or to communion with
the chief and absolute good, he knew not. The wisest Philosophers at Athens
(that famous Heathen University) might happily feel and grope after God, as men
in the dark, but higher and nearer they could not come, then to dedicate an
Altar, Act. 17. 23.
To the unknown God; And why was God unknown? because Christ was unknown; Now
while the elect at Athens (as elsewhere) are ignorant of Christ, they seek, but
find not; something they would have (like children) but they know not what, or
by what way and mean to compass their desires.

2. The deceit of men's understandings which represent an apparent and seeming
good for the will to fasten upon; any thing rather then the right mean and way
of happiness; pleasures, lusts, rather then Christ. The Ephesians. 4. 22.
old man is full of deceitful lusts, and the old man's reasonings are very
subtle and crafty, which, for a long time (and if God be not merciful, for
ever) do keep the soul in pursuit of that which is imaginary.

3. The pride of the will is such, that every one would be happy in himself,
Men are naturally poor and proud; every one will be a Merchant (without a
stock) trading and dealing, and doing (a supposed) something to contribute to
his own happiness. As it was an ingredient in the first sin, that we would
be as Gods; to when Christ is discovered (as well, yea more, as when he is not)
we would be as Christ's: We would find that in self and creature, which is not
to be found, but in Christ; And if Christ be a Pearl, we will have a pearl or
two besides him, or with him; As very Papists, we would have our goodly
Saviors and Mediators, besides, and with him, and so we miss of him
altogether at the last, and find him not savingly at all, while we are of that
mind, and be determined by the casting vote of our own will.

4. The vanity of the creature, which affords nothing but restless
disappointments; when one pearl is needful and sufficient, the vain mind of
man, not content with one thing, desirous of many, runs out upon the creature,
flutters here there, finds unsatisfactorinesse in all things here below, is
baffled and confounded; still is seeking, but cannot find a happiness where
it is not to be had. Solomon is a famous instance of making this search, and
his whole book of Ecclesiastas, gives full demonstration of the sequel and
issue; that the soul which seeks for satisfaction in and from the creature,
does not only shoot at rovers, but when he pricks down his whites, he ever
misseth, and never hit the mark.

For Application.

Pearls they might be, but nothing to the purpose; all counterfeits and
trifles, in comparison of what now thou have lit upon; what a fool had thou
been, if God had left thee to thy old ignorance, self, deceit, and pride, thou
were, and had been lost and wilder'd in the vanity of thy own mind, and of
creature-ensnarements.

true treasure? A Pearl, many a fair pearl, but it is not the only one of my
Text, is it? Every one as his fancy leads him, and as his mind gives him, that
he seeks. Had he that, and to other accommodation, he were well and happy.
All the goodly pearls in men's natural eye, may be reduced to three heads, the
goods of estate, of body, of mind. Bona fortunae, corporis, animi.


1. There are the goods of estate (which have in the worlds language and notion
carried away the name from the two other; for they call wealth and riches,
money and household stuff, goods, not health, knowledge so) Is this thy pearl? a
goodly farm, and some competent purchase for the yeoman, a goodly inheritance
for the Gentleman, a goodly cottage for the poor man with such and such
conveniences, some goodly gardens, lands and fields, without doors, and warm
provision within, and Peace; A goodly pearl all men conclude, and very
desirable all over the countries and Kingdoms of the world; be it little or
much, so thou may peaceably enjoy it, that is it thou seek after, is it?

2. Of the body, health, comeliness, beauty, strength, and ornament for that,
yea children and posterity (more lovely pearls then riches and large
possessions) are these in thy desires and aims daily?

3. Of the mind, wisdom, knowledge (the choicest pearls the world can afford)
such a goodly library, variety of learning in Arts, Tongues, and History, seek
you these above the former? Yea, Are you among the seekers of the times, and
fly higher, looking for miracles, extraordinary gifts of prophesying and
singing? Or do you hunt after some For the essence and being, I mean, not the
beauty and well-being which we all seek, who seek the Lord in his Temple, Mat.
1. 1.
new Baptism, Church and Ministry? why, you will say all, these are goodly,
amiable, desirable things; wherein now lies men's folly and weakness? I answer,
in seeking after these true, or imaginary good things, but as natural men, and
with a natural mind and fancy.

How shall that appear? Thus,

1. In that you aim at a happiness, and souls rest (if but temporal) and
could wish such a condition were lengthened out to eternity, riches must not be
lost, children must not die, parts of mind must not decay, you are undone then.

2. In that you rest in these things, ^s the sole and only mediums and ways to
a complete and full happiness, looking no further, but for more of such goodly
pearls, and for more content in them: Christ is not in all men's thoughts, all
this time, or if he be,

3. These things are thought to be, and so sought after, as of equal necessity
with Jesus Christ, if not more necessary: I have heard many a natural man say,
why, we must have food and raiment, and accommodations to our estate, place and
rank amongst them, when I never heard him say, we must have Christ. Whereas
there is no absolute necessity of food and raiment, much less is it necessary
that we have more. It is not necessary that I have such accommodations as
another Minister, for estate, maintenance, books, portion or provision for wise
and children; it is not necessary that you do vie with other Gentlemen and
Farmers, and have, in every respect, what they have: no man is to seek great
things for himself, but the great things of Christ and heaven.

4. When Christ is not a Pearl in thy eye, in comparison of these, Thou make
a tush of Christ, and art angry, that we hold forth heavenly treasure before
you, or art sad and mesancholy (as the young man, Matthew. 19.) when we chalk out
the way to happiness by Christ alone, or by self-denial, and denial of all the
world for Christ; this evidence (with the former) discovers sufficiently the
carnality and natural temper of men's hearts; and know you may of what strain,
you are of, if you will suffer the Word to divide between the joint and the
marrow, and to discover the thoughts and in^^ts of the heart.

5. See the necessity, the absolute necessity of higher light, medium and way
of happiness, then what is left in men, or given back (upon Adams forfei^) to
the most of mankind (for some are born Idiots) yea, then all common
supernatural light, given as an overplus to natural light. By the re^nan^s of
the first light of creation, forfeited and given back, (...) have Romans 1. 19.
(...), That which may be known of God, in the heavens and the earth, as
touching his eter^^^ wisdom, goodness, etc. But have they (...)? Indeed it is
not there to be had, neither in the natural ^ans (...), n^^ in the natural man's
book (the great (...) of (...)) Th^^ which is knowable of Christ, is not found
in the wisdom of the world (no not the saving knowledge^ ^f God) (...) these
be had* but 1 Cor. 1 21.
in the foolishness of (...); in the field of Gospel-ministery, there is the
doctrine and discovery of the Lord Jesus; yet, lead men over all this field,
and that with Scripture Light; except the Spirit co^eth and convince^^, and
opens men's eyes, and gives a light and dis^er^ing, beyond his own common
workings, we shall but grope after Christ, nay, miss o^ him; catch at shadows
of a Pearl, in stead of the substance, and be ever learning, never coming to
the right knowledge of him.

The third Observation fellows.

In Gods (...) his elect prev^^ted with his love and light, (...) drawn to
believe the certain attainablenes of Christ Gods elect better finders then
seekers.
and his grace for themselves.

The treasure is not so hid, but found it is, nor the Pearl so fine off, but
found it is of the man, the merchant man, no other but the elect of God: And
that at some certain time, when he had found; even upon Gods preventing or
finding of the man, and the merchant, he finds the treasure and pearl.

For the further illustration and confirmation of which truth, 1. I shall show
what the finding of this treasure is? that it is a Christians believing, etc.
2. Where Christ is found, even in the field of Scripture promises, Sermons,
etc. 3. When this treasure and pearl is found, at Gods time of effectual
calling. 4. Why some find Christ, not others; even Gods free preventing love,
and powerful discovery and drawing of the soul upon that discovery, etc.


First, The finding of the treasure and pearl, is nothing else 1. How finders?
but believing; Christ is found by the light and apprehension of faith; for
what is faith but a persuasion or apprehension of Christ, to be certainly
attainable, by him that receives him, and rests upon him?

1. In faith, there is a light and sight of Christ, in his fulness, and
^^tablenesse for the souls necessities, brought home to the mind and
understanding; the Father teaches and reveals Christ to the heart; and Joh.
4. 45.
every one that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes to Christ:
Mar. 16. 17.
Flesh and blood makes not such a discovery, as the Lord said to Peter, but God
himself, and that not only to a soul, but in the soul, Gal. 1. 16.
(...) says St Paul, He revealed his son in me; he brings the light into the
heart, and gives the eye of faith, to see and behold the treasure, within the
mines, etc.

2. The soul is convinced that he may have it, if he will take it, or make out
for it. Christ is offered to every soul, and to his, to thy, to my particular;
Act. 16. 31.
Believe and thou shall be saved, and thy house. Romans 10. 9.
If thou shall believe with, or in thine heart, etc. he is thine, his, mine;
whereof, upon such a conviction, the Prodigal makes no Question, but that in
his Luke 15. 17.
Fathers house there was bread enough; and that if he went to his father he
might get in among the hired servants, etc.

3. When the mind apprehends what is discovered, and the conscience is
convinced, that it is for him, as for others, the will is drawn to receive and
rest upon it for his; He has found it, why should it not be his? The heart is
concluded by faith, that he will seek no where else for treasure, but pitch and
rest, live and die there; whither? To whom should we go? Here are the Joh. 6.
48, 49.
words, here is the Treasure of eternal life: The clear knowledge of Christ
draws the heart to believe, as it follows, And we believe that thou art
Christ, etc. And the heart believing this, believes in him, there the soul
rests, and will not away, nor look any where else, but there; nor any way else,
but by believing; which further appears by these three Demonstrations.

1. Faith is the first seeking grace, and therefore the first Faith the great
finding grace.
finding grace: They that seek by works before faith, lose the Treasure, as the
Jews did Romans 9. 31.
, Israel which followed after the law of righteousness, has not attained to the
law of righteousness: wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it
were by the works of the law.

2. Christ being had in a mystery, Faith is the only grace that can deal with
mysteries, and discover them, and understand them, being the Heb. 11. 1. verse.
3.
evidence of things not seen, and through faith we understand that the worlds
were framed by the word of God, etc. so through faith we understand that there
is a treasure, in such a field, etc.

3. Faith is the grace, which lays a ground for interest and propriety, as
finding of the treasure and pearl does: He that believes gets something in
hand, as 1 Cor. 1. 30.
to be united to the treasure, to be partaker of Christ's righteousness, with
friendship, liberty, adoption, and the spirit of adoption and sanctification;
and the rest in hopes, and Joh. 6. 47. with Tit. 3. 7, 8
hopes he could not have, but by believing; therefore the Apostle to Titus
having made mention of hope, presently speaks of such who have that hope of
eternal life, as of those who have believed in God. 2. Where? In Scripture*
promises.


Secondly, Where Christ the treasure is found? even where hid: In the field,
which we have interpreted to be the holy Scripture, Scripture-promises In
quibus reposita est notitia salvatoris. Hier.
and Evangelizing, or Gospel-tidings: In a word, The Word of God in it is
several Gospel-dispensations, is the place where the treasure and pearl is
found; Romans 16. 25, 26.
The mystery of Christ (in whom are hid the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
Col. 2. 3.) kept secret (from us Gentiles) since the world begaen, is (from the
Apostles times) made manifest there where it was hid, in the Scriptures of the
Prophets; and to us, since the Apostles times, in their Scriptures, or writings
and openings of the Gospel (in old and new Testament) promises. Life and
immortality 2 Timothy 1. 10, 11.
(says Paul) is brought to light by the Gospel, whereunto he was appointed a
Preacher, and an Apostle and teacher of the Gentiles; in and by whose preaching
the Gentiles did indeed find all Gospel-treasure. For the Gospel is the
Covenant and bundle of the Promises of Christ and his grace, and in every
promise something or other of Christ is found, so as when the Gospel and
Promise is believed, Christ is believed and obtained; for Romans 10 17.
faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God (preached in the
Promises.) When Jesus walked by John Baptist, Joh 11. 36, 37
John Baptist said in the hearing of two of his Disciples, Behold the lamb of
God; they knew him not before then; when John has by a Gospel word and finger,
pointed him out, they find and follow him. verse. 40.
Andrew being one of the two, he finds his brother Peter, and verse. 45.
Philip found of Christ, finds Nathaneel, and discovers him to be the Messiah,
out of the Scriptures, We have found him, of whom Moses and the Prophets did
write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. So, my beloved, we tell you of
this Treasure and Pearl, where? in this Bible, in our Sermons upon
Gospel-texts; and that the Word of the Gospel, is the field, where Christ and
his grace is found, appears further, by these three Demonstrations,

1. That is the true Treasure, he is the true Jesus, that the Word discovers:
as it contains him, so he is found there; if any say, ^^t. 24. 23, 24
Lo here is Christ, or there, and holds him not forth in Scripture, and as the
Scripture describes him, Believe him not, says Christ, for there shall arise
false Christ's, and false Prophets, etc.

2. When Christ and grace is lost, to sense and feeling, he is found in the
Scripture-field again, and no where else; and where he is found at last, he is
found at first.

3. Where the Gospel never was preached, and the Scriptures concerning him,
never opened; in that corner or quarter of the world, Christ was never known
and believed on; Romans 10. 24.
How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? Where the Gospel
comes, there some or other do find him.

Thirdly, The time when this treasure is found, is Gods 3. When?
own time; Gal. 1. 15, 16.
When it pleased God (says Paul) to reveal his Son in me: So when it
pleases God to call a sinner from his wanderings, and fancies of finding
pearls of happiness elsewhere; when is that? you will say still:

1. Sometimes, when the soul is in a full career^ of sinning against Christ, as
Paul was called, and he found the Treasure, when he did ignorantly persecute
all those that had found it.

2. Sometimes, when men are far off from such a treasure or happy tidings;
and their minds employed only about worldly matters; as Matthew, at the receipt
of custom, Chap. 9. 9.

3. Sometimes, When a man has some common, or curious thoughts of seeing and
knowing Christ; Zaccheus, but carnal in such thoughts, yet carnally-curious and
solicitous* see he must Christ's outside, or shadow, as he passes by, and then
is he caught; Luke 19. 5, 6.
Make haste and come down (says Christ) for to day I must abide at thy house,
etc.

4. Sometimes, when men hear the Word, but with a common, carnally-curious ear:
so some at Athens, Act. 17. 19. with 34.
May we know what this new Doctrine whereof thou speak is? yet afterward
certain clave unto Paul, and believed that new Doctrine.

Various is the Lord in his calls, for manner and time, it is enough, that he
takes his own way, and time to present Christ to the ^oul; and to prevent the
soul with light enough to find him.

General, Why some find Christ; others not?
Fourthly, Why? The main reason, why some find Christ, not others; a man, a
merchant or two, not many, but here and there one, is,

Gods free-love and favor, to give the clear light, and eye of faith for
discovery of Christ the treasure, and of a treasure in Christ; a lively
apprehension to fasten upon Christ, ^s, and when he is set forth in the
promises, it is the gift of Gods special love, Ephesians. 2. 8.

Which is a preventing love two ways;

1. As it is everlasting; in, and from his free choice of such a soul, I have
loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore have I drawn thee, Jer. 31. 3.
or I have extended loving kindness unto thee. And as Gods temporal
prevention comes from this eternal prevention, Romans 9. 20.
I am found of those that sought me not; I was made manifest to those that
asked not after me; so

2. Gods prevention, before, and in time, is the cause of man's invention or
finding: they, so many (and no more) as were ordained to eternal life,
believed, Act. 13. 48. And therefore, Tit. 1. 1. saving faith, which finds
Christ, is called, The faith of Gods elect. And Joh. 6. 37.
all that God gives Christ (in his preventing love and call) shall come to
Christ; observe it in John, they are given before they come, as well as when
they come; and because given before all time, they shall come in time unto him.

Reasons special
And that faith is a fruit of election, and finding this treasure a fruit of
Gods special love, appears by two Reasons among many.

1. The treasure of and in Christ is a great secret, it is for Gods friends,
and children, that he loves to find it; and to have the special grace of
faith, to apprehend it for theirs; it is the childrens bread and portion, To
you it is given, to know the mysteries of the Kingdom, etc.

2. God who elects to the end, elects to the means; he did not elect all to the
end, therefore not to the means: some are left to a losing faith, others chosen
to salvation, have a finding, and a saving faith given them, as the proper and
choice means of getting an interest in Christ, and all that they are chosen to
in him, before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 1. to the 4. the
faithful in Christ Jesus are blessed with all spiritual blessings, according
as God has chosen, etc.

For Application; and first to your understandings;

First, From hence, see the necessity of true faith; if it be 1. Use of
Instruction three ways.
necessary thou find this treasure; and truly that is needful enough, for
thou art a merchant-bankrupt in Adam; till Christ stocks thee, and sets thee
up, by Gospel-riches and wealth; and except thou beleevest, thou will never
see, not understand any thing of this mystery of Christ, and of Gods love;
Christ will never have any dealings with thee, he will not trust thee; nay,
unless thou beleevest sincerely, he will not commit himself unto thee, nor
trust thee with this true treasure.

Secondly, See what effectual faith is, that which is the ^ffect and fruit of
Gods free, everlastin, ever-preventing love; that which brings home a discovery
of Christ in a promise, to the soul, with some certainty of apprehension for a
man's self, that it is the will of God, Christ should be his, mine, thine; Have
thou by the light and conviction of the Gospel, been drawn to this apprehension
of a possibility, yea a certaincy of attaining to true treasure? surely, thou
have been prevented by the love of God, and have found, that which thou
beleevest; and may know thy faith and believing is no^ in vain, when as by
the very first act of it, thou have hold of a Treasure, a Pearl, which will
make thee for ever.

Thirdly, See the riches of a believer, and his happiness; by faith he finds
a treasure, that make him, what? a man of this world? a merchant of small
wares? No, but a Merchant-venturer for heaven, a venturer, said I, no a
merchant finder and possessour; he finds all at once; by faith, that ever any
Saint was or shall be worth; he finds the treasure of the Kingdom of heaven,
and all that the King and Kingdom of heaven is worth, this he finds by
believing, o that you would believe how great his findings are, th^^ you may
grow great by believing also with him.

Exhortation three ways.
Secondly, To come to what is yet more practical; let ^^ caution and counsel
you about the great work of believing.

First, Bewere of an evil heart of unbelief; thou will ever be ^t ^ less (for
Christ) till thou beleevest: thou will lose Christ; and lose thy soul by
unbelief.

Consid. 1. Unbelief is a sin against Gospel light, which brings condemnation
with a witness, Ioh. 3. 19. The sinfulnes of unbelief.


2. It Is a same against Gospel-love, it hinders the ex^^^tion of Gods-election
(in these that are chosen) then may be among the chosen of God; believe and
thou shall below it.

3. It Is a sin against the person, offices, worth, efficacy of Jesus Christ; he
will not, he cannot do, what he would (...) he in thee, because of thy
unbelief.

4. It has more evil in it then all the sins against the (...) called (by a
more eminent disparagement) an p Heb. 3. 12.
an (...) of unbelief; a proud heart is (...) heart, is an evil heart, and an
unclean heart, an evil heart, yet not (...), in Scripture (that I remember) as
an unbeleeving (...); in (...) that ^ame, more then all other (...) of spirit
(which yet are bad enough) upon these grounds.

1. (...) are in this virtually and actually: pride is in all unbelief, and
acted with it; and the worst pride of all; exaltings and liftings up of the
heart against God; pollution and uncleanness is in and with unbelief; they are
never separated; hypocrisy and unbelief, unthankfulness and unbelief, are
linked inseparably together.

2. It brings more mischief to the soul then all other sins, more griefs,
cares, vexations, despairs, and deeper damnation for ever.

3. It keeps the heart under the guilt and power of all sin whatsoever; thy
heart will never be better, but worse and worse while unbeleeving.

Secondly, Would find Christ, get rid of this evil heart of unbelief:
Believe, and thou have found Christ righteousness, and a treasure of all grace
in him: Have found thy self empty? By faith thou shall see and share in Christ's
fullness. Have found thy self bankrupt? Believe, and thou shall have riches,
and stock enough in Christ. Have found thy self foolish? in Christ are
treasures of wisdom and knowledge: Believe, and thou shall find thy self
Gods, by election, Christ's, by redemption and purchase, and the Spirits by his
in d^velling, sanctifying presence. Say, and conclude it, if God has
discovered Christ, it is that I should believe, it is for obedience of faith; I
believe, I believe, then m^st thou say, I have found, I have found; What? The
Gospel-treasure, and the Gospel-pearl.

Thirdly, Would you believe, walk up and down the field where the Treasure is
hidden, and revealed; read and search the Scriptures, hearken after the
promises, attend to the Sermons of Christ, to the Word of the Kingdom; and to
this end,

1. Give not over hearing, and hearing again (upon all occasions) of those that
preach Jesus Christ purely and sincerely.

2. Meditate, turn over Christ and the promises, in thy thoughts, often in a day;
and as often, or oftener in the night season.

3. Enquire, and make out for knowledge, more light into the mystery of the
unsearchable riches of Christ.

And you that have believed, and found something, hear, meditate, pray, and
pray in faith for more understanding: they use to dig for hid treasures, Jo^ 3.
21. Prove. 2. 2, 3, etc.
If thou incline thine ear, and apply thy heart, criest and liftest up thy
voice for wisdom, if thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for
hid treasures then shall thou understand, and find the knowledge of God, of
God in Christ, of Christ in a promise and Covenant of grace; Amen.

We have dispatched three of the Doctrines, the other four (drawn from the
effects of finding Christ by faith) do follow; and the fourth in order, is
from the first of the general effects here mentioned, Hiding, Which when a man
has found, he hides. Some, as I told you (in the breaking up of the true and
full sense of the Parables) think it respects only the elegancy of the Parable,
and is not necessarily to be applied to any part of the mystery hidden, or
illustrated in these Parables. For the mere necessity I will not plead; and I
remember Calvin's rule; we must not weigh every scruple Non semper singula per
se in in parabolis consideranda sunt, Call.
in a Parable, by it self: I desire to observe it here, and elsewhere, and not
take the words as they sound: But the reason why that most learned Interpreter
(as Beza every where styles him) (...) Exposition upon, or observation from
this passage, (...), was (as we may, pace tanti viri, collect) beca^^^ ^t that
time, when he commented upon these words, he had no other abscontion or hiding
in his eye, then a sinful hiding, or what is unsuitable to such as are called
by the Gospel; who ought not (as he says truly) to hide (I add so to hide)
the treasure found, but to call others into the fellowship of it. And, keeping
my self to the scope Quod autem abscondit, non de invidia facit, sed more
servantis, and ^olentis perdere abscondit in cord. Hien
of the Parables, I conceive as faith is the finding grace, so there are
gracious hidings, or hiding graces (the effects of faith) as humility, hope,
etc. Let him therefore who has heard remember (and he that reads let him
understand) and to that end look back to the Exposition of the words; and I
hope with the consent of the spirits of the Prophets, we shall have warrant and
encouragement to open and apply that which follows in order,

4. Every true believer (having found Christ in a promise) does in a gracious
manner hide him and lay him up: True b^leevers in a gracious manner hide Christ.
That is,

He does humbly, hopefully, and with loving and high esteem, resolve to keep
safe, and make sure of Christ, and of all his riches and treasure. Here are
several gracious acts (as so many effects and characters of a true believers
finding of Christ) worthy our consideration; in the opening whereof we shall
clear, and confirm the truth of the Doctrine.

1. An act of humility; the believer does neither simply 1. By humility.
conceal, nor proudly boast of what he has found, but humbly entertains
Christ, and all that is Christ's, in the promises, in the hidden man of his
heart; he has many humble thoughts and meditations of what is discovered to
him in the Gospel, with the Prodigal Luke 15. ver. 17. and 11.
, he considers that in his fathers house there is bread enough, yea, and with
him also, he addresseth himself to the throne of grace, in all humble
confessions; Father, I have sinned, etc. Thus the Act. 1^. 18.
Ephesians, who had believed, they came and confessed, and showed their deeds.
And what humble expressions find we i^ that woman, Luke 7. There is one, who
had found Christ (...) verse. ult. she comes to the house where the Lord (...)
s^te down to meat Luke 7. 37, 38.
; she there upbraids not the Phar^^^, that invited Christ or others, with what
they wanted, and she had obtained, but she stands at Christ's feet, not at his
side, as boldly (...) with him; behind him, not per^ly before him; weeping,
not ^ondly laughing, and began to wash his feet with tears, o gracious hiding*
and did wipe them with the hair^ of her head; she does not show her self in
proud dresses and addresses upon her believing, but rather in the humblest
posture, vesture and gesture, she demeans her self, and takes revenge of her
self, for abuse of her hair, in the former (...) of it No doubt she thought
basely of her self, and her hair, (...). Trial and triumph of faith, p. 1^6.
. So the woman of Canaan Mat. 15. 27.
, Truth Lord, she puts up the name of a dog, and a despised Gentile, so she be
one of Christ's dogs she c^res not, so she may but have crumbs and the meanest
share in the Pearl and Treasure, she is humbly contented. The special Reasons
hereof are two among other.

1. Grace is free, the treasure is free; therefore in such who are partakers of
it, no room left for boasting or vain ostentation, but cause of hiding a man's
self, and his grace also from being boasted of: A borrowed garment (as one * of
high and Rutherf. ibid.
holy learning hinteth) will make a wise man humble; and he that by faith
finds the garment of Christ's imputed righteousness to cover his nakedness;
being justified freely by Gods grace, cannot but be humble, to think that God
should borrow his own Sons Garments to cover and beauti^^e; yea, beatifie,
make rich and happy his poor soul for ever.

2. The more worth and excellency a believer sees in the Treasure, the more
the soul is humbled in it self. When that blessed Apostle called to mind, what
he was before calling, a persecutour of the Church of God 1 Cor. 15. ^, 20.
; and what now, by the grace of God, he is that he is, no better, no higher, in
his own thoughts; what ever he did, or labored, it was not he, but the grace
of God with him. And when he is preaching and writing about the unsearchable
riches of Christ, at that instant, he reckons himself Ephesians. 3 8. Psalm: 8.
, Less then the least of all Saints. When David looks upon Gods excellency in
his works of Creation, Providence, Redemption especially by God-man, What is
man? or the son of man? that is the next part of the Song: So when a poor
creature finds, and views again and again, The rich treasure in Christ; What
am I? that is the next thought; What am I, Lord? to be prevented with such love,
to have a share in such riches?

^. An act of hope; There is an hiding of the treasure that 2. By hope.
way; When a soul finds Christ in the promise by faith, he does hope fully
hold the promise, and reckons upon it; he does not despair that he shall never
have it, or make it his own; but he lives in expectation to have the possession
and good of it. Faith is Heb. 11. 1.
the (...), or subsistence of things hoped for: And (as the Apostle Romans 8. 24.
) we are saved by hope; the completing of our salvation (after by faith it is
begun) is laid up in hope: But hope that is seen is not hope, for what a man
sees, why does he hope for it? But if we hope for that we see not, then do we
with patience wait for it: A Christians treasure you see is much hidden, and
laid up in hope; hence Christ is called, our hope 1 Timothy 1. 1.
, not only as he is the ground and foundation of it, but the further and full
enjoyment of Christ, is yet to come; and Gal. 5. 5. We through the Spirit do
wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. Your life is hid with Christ in
God, Col. 3 3. that is, a Believers glorious life is hid in hope. And therefore
they are said, to look for that blessed hope, Tit. 2. 13. The act of hope, set
upon the object of hope, keeps all close to a Christian, as if he were really
possessed of all.

A believer hides up all in hopes, upon these grounds,

1. The sufficiency of the treasure and worth of the Pearl, affords enough for
the future expenses, as for a present stock, Psalm. 31. 19.
Oh how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee? If God has laid it up in promises, the believer will lay it up in hopes,
that the Lord is his shepherd, his treasure, and he shall not want.

2. The firm faithfulness of the promise: There are no boggs, nor marshes, no
quicksands, nor quagmires in the field, or ground of promises; they are the
promises Tit. 1. 2.
of God that cannot lie; hence sure ground for hope, and assurance of hope,
Heb. 6. 11. to 19.

3. The riches, worth and wealth of a Christian, does not 3. By love.
yet appear, 1 John 3. 2, 3. But he is an heir, according to the hope of
eternal life, Tit. 3. 8. He is the richest man (in hidden hopes) of any under
heaven.

3. An act of love. Believing, he loves, and as that which men love, they will
keep close to them; so from faith working by love, Gal. 5. 6. Love to Christ,
and to his word in special, he hides what he loves; How sweet were the words
of God, to David's palate, sweeter then honey to his ^^st^, therefore he hid
them in his heart, Psalm. 119. 103. with 11. sweet meats, preserves of fruits,
etc. are locked up in boxes and closets: and the believer finding such
sweetness in Christ, cannot but hide it, in the closet of his dearest love; for

1. The treasure comes in love, he is prevented with the Cos amoris amor; and
magnes amoris amor.
love of God, in the discovery of it; which is both the whetstone and loadstone
to love again; We love him, because he loved us first, 1 John 4. 19.

2. It is peculiar and choice love, wherewith God preventeth and draws a
sinner to believe, and find the Pearl: where one finds the Pearl, God knows
how many thousands mi^le of it; which constrains the soul to set a special and
peculiar affection upon it.

3. Love (though it is communicative, yet) it begins at home, and looks to one
(though it has no thoughts but to walk abroad, and discover-Gospel-provision
to others, yet) it will be wise for it is self; as the 2 King. 7. 8.
Lepers were, Who came to the uttermost part of the camp; and went into one
tent, and did eat and drink, and carried thence silver and gold, and raiment,
and went and hid it, and came again, and went into another tent, and carried
thence also, and went and hid it; And then they gave out the report, for others
supply and succor: Love has it is wise concealements, as well as merciful
revealings.

4. An act of high esteem; it is the property of every true 4. By high
estimations.
believer to carry secretly in his bosom, more high thoughts of Christ, then
he is able to utter. St Paul expresses something of these high-prizings, Phil.
3. 7, 8. What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ; yea
doubtless, and I count all things but less, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, etc. Yet when he cries out, Oh the depth!
and when he calls the riches of Christ unsearchable; and when he prays,
that the faithful in Ephesus, might be able to comprehend, with all Saints,
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height: and might know the love
of Christ, which passes knowledge; it plainly argues, that his esteem of
Christ was beyond his expression; yet his expressions are as high about the
Gospel-treasure; as the holy Ghost ever furnished any earthen vessel withal;
since Solomon's song was penned: And when every ordinary believer comes short of
such expressions, he must needs hide Christ in many a silent admiration.

And why is Christ more admired and hidden, in silent wonderings, yea, the
heart filled with admiration at the knowledge of him?

1. Nothing can be found worthy, meet or sit to be laid in the balance with
him; not men, not Princes; he is Psalm. 45. 2.
fairer then the children of men; not money, not wealth; Rev. 3. 17, 18.
all riches is poverty, miserable poverty without him; not learning and
knowledge; all knowledge is ignorance, and all learning is duncery, without the
knowledge of him, and his heights, and depths of wisdom, etc.

2. With worth and excellency, a believer has a certain propriety in this
hoped for possession; this always raises the price of any small matter,
house, child, or what else (...) below; it is thy house, if but a cortage,
therefore pri^ed, it is my child, therefore esteemed and looked after; it is my
promise, thinks the Christian, therefore I will lay it up; Christ is mine, and
shall be mine, if I look well to it.

5. An act of holy purpose: to keep the treasure safe, and 5. By holy
resolutions.
make ^^^e of it; I found him (says the Spouse) I hold him, and would not let
him go, until I had brought him in i^ my p Cant. 3. 4.
mothers house, and into the chamber of her that conceived (...). None shall
take away Christ, or a Christians treasure from him. He is resolved of that:
And such a secret resolution he carries; and cherishes in his bosom daily;
Phil. 3. 12.
I follow after (says Paul) if that I may approhend that for which also I am
approhended of Christ Jesus. So the believes holds to his resolution, as Christ
has prevented him, and he has found the Pearl, he will not lose it, but study
the nature and virtue of it, enquire more into the mystery of it; this is his
purpose, to know, and make sure of it; for himself; and well may it be so: For

1. He never me with the like Treasure before; all other pe^i^^ (...) di^^ and
dogs meat to this; as now he (...) very well, and can make a vaste difference
'tween this and them.

2. He will never meet with the like again, if he miss of this; there is but
one of these Pearls to be found in all the earth, and the Heavens; and this is
that only-one.

3. There are those that would beguile him of it; Satan and the cheating heart,
and false teachers, juggling sophisters and base companions, therefore he takes
care, that he may not be deprived of it; he hides it, and holds it close, in
renewed resolutions never to part with it; but to make it more his own by all
means possible.

Of trial.
1. This hiding carriage of a believing soul, will give certain evidence for or
against men, whether they have truly found the treasure of the Gospel, yea, or
no: Whether they have truly believed and apprehended Christ in the
Gospel-promises, to be discovered, as theirs, and for them and their salvation.

First, It will make against all those, who say they believe the Gospel, and
have found, etc. but 1. are never the more humble, nay, they are proud of their
knowledge, and look who should extol and commend them for it: if none will,
they can make a shift with the Pharisee, to commend themselves; they thank God,
they are not so, and so bad as the Minister and others would make them: And so
proud are many, upon profession of faith, that they will not be admonished,
must not be reproved, need not be humbled, need no more repentance, after they
have tasted of the promise, and the sweetness of mercy held out to sinners;
this is an ill sign I Pride of opinion, pride of parts and gifts, and
privileges with Gods people, do usually follow a misapprehension of Christ,
and mis-application of the promises. 2. If upon apprehension of Christ, and
Gospel-promises, the soul falls into a despondency, and a kind of despair, ever
to have it made sure unto it is self; if there be no hope, there is certainly no
faith. As hope before faith is a presumptuous carriage of a man's spirit, so
despairing after faith is an odd and cross evidence, a contradiction indeed
unto the Gospel, and all Gospel-beleeving. 3. If no love be stirring and
working toward Christ, what faith or finding of Christ is there, in that
heart? Now God knows many talk and dream of faith, but the love of Christ and
his Word, is not in them. 4. If men believe (as they think) and yet have as
mean and undervaluing thoughts of Christ as ever, and prize the Gospel at as
low a rate as ever; they can see no beauty in Christ, nor excellency in the
treasure and pearl, not they, I wonder how they can see their faith, and
themselves believers; men of God cannot, God himself does not. 5. If such be
loose and slippery in their purposes of making out for Christ, where is thy
faith? There is no faith in that heart, where there is not a desire of more; no
finding of Christ where you are not resolved to buy, and get him in for your
own, more certainly and comfortably, then at the first.

Secondly, On the contrary, by the light of this truth, as the Spirit of God
assisteth, evidence may be given in for thee, who art a true believer; If 1.
Upon believing, sense of thy unworthiness does not weaken thy confidence; but
thy apprehensions of Christ (as discovered for thee) does more abase and humble
thy soul, and melt and break thy heart; and when thou fallest a believing, thou
fallest a mourning for sin, and confessing of thy sins; and thy faith is hidden
and drencht in tears; oh blessed art thou, etc. 2. This evidenceth for thee,
that thy hopes are bred and built upon Gospel-apprehensions, that though the
things promised appear not to sense, yet they are certainly and partiently
waited for. 3. This also, that a first-love comes forth, from and with a
first-faith, and Christ is entertained and welcomed in the heart, by the one,
as by the other, so as thou can say with Peter, Lord, thou know that I
love thee. 4. If thou carriest in thy bosom those high thoughts of Christ and
his grace daily; which the world knows not of, and are strangers unto, till it
come to the trial; and then it shall, and does appear what a price thou setst
upon him, whom thou have found, that nothing, nothing shall be thought too dear
or costly for him. 5. If thou art firm and settled in resolutions to keep what
thou know and beleevest, and to give diligence to know and believe further,
and to have more discoveries and assurances of all Christ's wealth and worth, as
thine, and for thy salvation; In a word, by the secret workings of humility and
hope, of love and high esteem of Christ, and holy purposes to make sure of
Christ, thou may (by the fortifying evidence of the Spirit, shining upon his
own graces) know the secret workings of faith in, and after this hidden and
secret treasure, which no man knows, saving he that finds, and hides it.

Of caution.
For Caution and Counsel; to all true believers,

1. Beware of a bad hiding of Christ (while you take care to express your
faith in this humble, hopeful, loving and wise way of hiding him) take heed of
smoothering or concealing what God has discovered to you of Christ and his
promises, and free grace, for so you may dishonor God, and wrong your soul,
and quench and hinder that good in others, which you are bound to seek, when
you have found the treasure; when the Disciples Joh. 1 41, 43, 45.
had found Christ, they went and told it one another; when the woman of Samaria
Joh. 4. 28, 29.
had found Christ, she went and told it her neighbors; when Zacheus Luke 19. 8.
had found Christ, he stood forth, in the profession of his faith and
repentance, and in the proof of that profession; when Paul Act. 9. 20.
had found Christ, he went and preached him to others (as he was called to it)
so let every one, as he has been prevented by grace, prevent others, and tell
them what God has taught him; but in thy knowledge or discovery of Christ,

2. Beware of boasting in thy self, or of being lifted up in desires of thy own
glory or worth; beware of a proud profession, or of proud exceptions against
Christ; take heed, when Christ's worth is discovered to thee, thou do not look
out for worth in thy self, to apply the promises, as too many weak souls do,
and will not, dare not believe, because of unworthiness; they are not rich
enough to buy the pearl, nor good enough to purchasers of the treasure: what
pride is here under a beggars coat? Cherish thou should all mean and low
thoughts of thy self, the more freely God does manifest his grace unto thee;
but attribute all the worth to the treasure; there is worth enough in that,
thou shall need none of thy own, God requires it not.

3. Beware of entertaining doubts and questions, whether you may have Christ,
after you have found him. Wherefore did God discover him? was it not that you
should believe? and believe yet further in his name, upon new discoveries? Let
not the subtle serpent, and the deceitful heart together, cherish a
subtle-humble-pride, in questioning and complaining, to weaken thy hopes of
obtaining that which is revealed in the promise to thee.

4. Beware of losing your first-love of the Gospel; and your first esteem of
this Treasure and Pearl, with the field of precious promises: it is not so
easily recovered again, when but left, or decayed. Why should not our loves and
esteems be more now, then at first, seeing more of Christ's worth and and
sufficiency is discovered daily? And yet thou nor I did ever hear or know of
half his worth, which is further to be revealed. Get we therefore more high and
capacious apprehensions of his excellency, and hide we him in our bosom, with
dearer affections then ever; he is worthy of all our love, of all our
estimations and highest value, we can prize him at; he is above all we can
love, or believe, or esteem, or think of him: Get we an estimation of him, and
affection to him, beyond expression, that still there may be more hidden in our
hearts, then can be uttered by our tongues, or published by our pens.

5. Having found Christ, hold him fast; hide him in your purposes, yet more
closely and strongly; it was Barnabas exhortation Act. 1^. 23.
, and it shall be mine, that you would all with purpose of heart cleave unto
the Lord. Christ knows from the beginning, who have, who have not believed; who
sticks to him, who departs from him, by an evil heart of unbelief; an heart
that purposes not to live and die believing; beware of it, it is the first
step of Apostasy; be not fickle, for fits and moods of believing, let but there
be the hidden frame of believing, set and resolved to keep the heart close to
Christ, and Christ close to the heart, daily, hourly, constantly. Lay him and
the promises up in the heart for use; for a treasure of such worth, a pearl of
such price, is much more worthy and precious to the soul, as it is used and
improved for it is spiritual advantage. It follows,

And for joy thereof, etc.

These words have a twofold connection and dependence, on the words before,
When he had found; and on those that follow, goes and sells, etc. From the
first connection arises our

5. Observation, Every true believer has some joy (yea great joy) in the
finding of the Lord Jesus A believer is a joyful man.
Christ.

What man ever found a treasure, and hid it for himself, and as his own, and
joyed not at the very thoughts of it? Believing thoughts are joyous thoughts,
and acts of believing, bring in habits of joy, or joyful impressions, at
least; till they break forth in gladsome expressions. There be instances, not a
few, to clear this truth.

When Christ has prevented Zacheus, and Zacheus at that instant is called
effectually to believe in the Lord, He receives Christ joyfully (says the
Text Luke 19. 6.
) both into his heart, and into his house. The converts (at Peter's Sermon Act.
2. 41.
) gladly receive the Word of salvation, and of the promise to them and theirs.
A treasure, a pearl in the field of the promise, for them and their children,
this they rejoiced in, and this do believers (that have right evangelicall
apprehensions in our days) rejoice in also. When this Treasure is discovered
to the people of Samaria Act. 8. 8. and 12
, and many believed what Philip preached of the Kingdom of God, and the name
of Jesus Christ, there was great joy in that City: so was there in the Jailours
heart and house Act 16. 31, 34
. The Apostle Paul tells the Philippians, for his part, and Timothies Phil. 3. 3.
(whom he joins with himself in the inscription of the Epistle, cap. 1. 1.) We
rejoice in Jesus Christ; and he speaks in the name of all believers, if not
there, I am sure in his Epistle to the Romans Rom, 5. 11.
, We joy in God (reconciled) through our Lord Jesus Christ. Saint Peter also
tells the Christians he writes to, that believing, they do rejoice (in Christ)
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.

Pearl, this Treasure) he finds that in Christ his righteousness, which
satisfies Gods justice, and justifies his person, discharges him of all debts
and trespasses, and that, in Christ's spiritual graces, which affords him a
sufficient stock, to be trading with heaven, and to fit him for commerce and
communion with Saints, and with the King of Saints in earth and heaven. Has
not he cause to be glad, who finds a pearl, that affords a rich dowry for the
soul, and prefers him to a marriage with the King of heaven? That which brings
him into sonship presently to God, and heirship to a Kingdom, and which gives
him title to the crown of heaven; and stores him with money to maintain wars
against the spiritual enemies of his soul, sin, world, Satan, Antichrist
(who would deprive him of his inheritance, and take away his Crown, Title and
Dignity) over whom the Christian combitant, is made more then Conqueror,
through him that loved us?

2. As the worth so the propriety, which comes by finding of it, joys the
heart: a man may find that which he must go cry in the marketplace, and part
with it, when the right owner is found out; which brings but little recompense
and comfort to the finder: But here is a treasure, who so finds it, has it
for the finding; Who so finds me, finds life, says the wisdom of God
Prove. 8. 35.
, He that believes in me (says Christ Joh 6. 47.
) has everlasting life; He that has the Son (says the holy Ghost in John 1 John 5. 12.
) has life. He has it for his own, for his use, for his comfort, for his
rejoicing: Joy cannot but rise out of faith, which instrumentally does bring
home all Gospel-treasure to the soul; therefore called the joy of faith Phil.
1. 25.
, being the proper right-bred child of faith, conceived and brought forth by
faith, nursed and maintained by faith, till faith ends in vision, and hope in
fruition of what is found.

3. The believer has hope, or certain expectation, of the sure and full
possession, and of the pleasure that he shall have in such a purchase and
possession; and in hope of all this, and of the glory of God, he does and will
rejoice. Men of great and sure hopes, cannot but be men of great joys; and
this treasure and pearl, bringing so much in hand at present, and reaching
forth so much in hopes for the future (as we heard in the first Doctrine) gives
out withal no little ground of joy and rejoicing to a Christians heart.

Obj. But he hid his treasure, and that partly (as was opened in the 4.
Doctrine) under mourning and tears: How comes he to rejoice withal?

Answ. 1. The Gospel-treasure is a secret, and the finding of it by faith, and
hiding of it by repentance, humility, etc. are secrets to the world, and so is
joy, The heart knows his own bitterness, and a stranger does not intermeddle
with his joy Prove. 14 10.
. If he sees the outward expression, he knows not the inward impression.

2. A believers tears are tears of joy, or the seed of joy, Light is sown for
the righteous Psalm. 97. 11.
(in tears and troubles) and joy for the upright in heart.

3. Hiding of the treasure under humble tears, was not all the hiding, we spoke
of; there is (as we heard) an hiding of hope, and there is joy hidden under
hope; We rejoice in hope of the glory of God Romans 5. 2.
; and there is a hiding of love, and joy is hidden with love, Whom having not
seen, ye love, ye rejoice, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 8.


Which in the Use may serve,

Of reproof.
1. To reprove those that bring an evil report upon Christ, and Gospel Grace,
that no sooner, think some (and others speak it out) shall a man be converted,
but farewell joy, you must bid adieu to all mirth and chearfulnes, and
entertain nothing but mopish melancholy, and dumpish sadness; which is a clamor
both false and impossible.

1. False, for you hear (if you will believe what you hear from Christ's mouth)
he is a joyful man that finds the treasure. Finding the treasure of the
Kingdom, he finds that joy, and sweetness, as he never felt, or had experience
of before. Oh the sweet taste of every promise, and delicious dainties that he
daily does, or may feed upon at the Gospel feast!

2. Impossible, for the faculties of the soul do act and put forth according
to their represented object; Now a Treasure and Pearl, is the object, a present
good, and a future good, as sure as present; And where there is an apprehension
of a present good, yea, and a hopeful, assured, future good, there is, and
cannot but be joy; and the greater that good, the greater that joy; the higher
and richer that good, the higher and richer that joy. Now here is the summum
bonum, the chiefest good, and it cannot but produce in the heart, a summum
gaudium, the chiefest joy; and it being bonum aeternum, an eternal good, here
is gaudium aeternum, Everlasting joy upon their heads Isa. 35. 10.
The Kingdom of God consists in it, Romans 14. 17. it is true the poor sinner
upon his finding of Christ, bids farewell to joy in sin, but that proceeds
from this true and greater joy, which banisheth and puts out the false
appearances of sinful joys; of which in the next point. Let none therefore
belie the Scripture, and blaspheme or speak evil of Christ and his grace, or of
a true Christians estate. What though the believers joy makes not such a noise
as the carnal man's, in the ears of the world? A fire of thorns will make a
louder noise and crackling, then a fire of the best wood; and carnal mirth
will sooner be heard of then spiritual joy* which is better apprehended in the
heart, then outwardly expressed; when the countenance is sober and humble, does
it follow he is melancholy and sullen? Alas, poor blind worldlings, who cannot
judge of loo^s and colors, much less of hearts, and the frame of a believers
heart especially, which so far as it is believing, it is cheerful, etc.

Of Examination.
For trial; it is an evidence against such as say they have faith, and have
found Christ, and yet never took any pleasure in him, in thoughts or speeches
of him; rather are ever and anon excepting against those who rejoice in him;
such murmuring and grumbling at the Gospel pearl, is an evident note of
unbelief; Behold this pearl is tr^mpled upon by Swinish Gadarens; and it puts a
poor, rich worldling into a fit of melancholy. That poor young man (rich enough
in the world) Matthew. 19. When he is offered treasure in heaven, be a sad at
that saying; if he cannot have it upon better terms, then were propounded; had
the Word taken place in his heart, as it did in Zacheus, he had presently
rejoiced, and not gone away sorrowful, but where Christ is not believed on, he
is not rejoiced in; and upon this very reason, because Christ comes to take
away the pleasures of sin that last but for a season, although he would give
eternal pleasures in exchange, the heart will neither rejoice, nor believe in
him.

Ob. But there are those who believe but for a time, and yet rejoice, as the
stony ground, Mat. 13. 20.

Answ. Such a faith, such a joy; God will go on with carnal men, as far as
they will go with him, where faith is temporary, there joy will be a flash and
^way; it continues not when trial comes, no more than their faith; nor does
that joy ever produce right self-denial; of which anon.

2. On the contrary, Have truly believed? Thou do and will joy in the Lord,
in whom thou have believed: Have found the first discovery of Christ to bring
in some sweetness, the second more, etc. It Is a true issue of a right-bred
faith, (...) you may know it to be so (through the assisting light of (...)
Spirit) by this, 1. It is pure joy, merely arising from (...) sight of the
treasure. 2. It will hold out in trial and tentation; And though joy be but an
accessory grace, it comes and goes, ebbs and flows, yet it radically
continues, of ^^ideth in the root, and cause of it; and all objects of faith
are objects of joy; what feeds the one, will cherish the (...); and if thou
find it so with thee, happy thou?

Object, But some poor soul will say, I dare not deny but I have found the
pearl, yet cannot rejoice.

Answ. 1. Is it not thy desire? and do not price a little joy in the Lord,
above all worldly joy?

2. What is that which upholds thee against despair: in some promise or
Gospel Truth, thou have some secret joy, ^r sin would press thee down, and
swallow thee up with sorrow.

3. Measures of joy will increase upon believing; study but to grow in faith,
and thou will increase in joy.

3. Phil. 4. 4.
For Exhortation to the true believer; Rejoice in the Lord, and again I say,
not I but the Apostle, not the Apostle, but the Lord himself, rejoice thou
Christian, that have found the pearl and treasure; rejoice in thy treasure; be
glad and joyful all thy days, for this pearl of great price. Earthly
affections, worldly sorrows, carnal joys will come alone, of themselves,
unsent for, unsought; but we must send for; and call for, and provoke these
heavenly affections, and glad when we can have them active, and coming; and
especially this of joy; Let me stir up my self and you to joy in the Lord our
treasure, and in the knowledge of Christ, our Pearl, by these following
considerations;

Motives to joy.
1. There is joy in heaven, when a lost sinner is found, and should there hot
be so in thy heart, when the hidden treasure is found? they both are found
together, heaven finds the sinner, and the believing sinner finds the Pearl
o^ heaven, at one and the same time; Why should not heaven and earth meet in
their rejoycings, as in their findings.

2. Thou may rejoice, It Is thy portion, not allowed to others, but to thee,
Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, etc. Psalm. 97. 12.
The wicked and unbeleeving are never welcomed to the feast of joy, if invited;
nor shall they taste of this supper of joy, while they refuse to come to the
dinner of grace. If God says to the young man in the heat of his lusts,
Rejoice, Eccles. 11. it is but ironically spoken, with a salt check and serious
threatening; in plain English it is, Repent; and his message to secure sinners
is, Be afflicted, mourn and weep; or, Woe to them that have their consolation
here, for they shall weep, but blessed are they that weep now, for they shall
laugh and leap for joy.

3. Thou art not wise, no more then obedient (in this) if thou do not take
thy fill of joy; nay, it is a sin not to rejoice upon believing, as, not to
believe upon a discovery of Christ.

4. How many pass over the field, and stumble at the Word, where the Treasure
is hid, and find it not; thou have it discovered before others, while others
are left in their blindness, and given up to their blind and wilful
stumblings.

5. God loves a cheerful believer, and receiver of his Son, and a cheerful
giver of the heart to his Son; and how can thou give thy heart acceptably,
if not cheerfully? Take Christ therefore and be thankful, receive him and be
joyful.

How shall I joy, says the weak heart?

Ans. 1. Give not way to doubting whether the treasure be Means of joy.
in the field, or no; or whether the Pearl be of such great worth or no, or
whether it ^as hid, and is now revealed for thee or no, believe that God has
discovered it, and that for thee; take it for thy own, and rejoice: it is
nothing but this unbelief that hinders thy joy.

2. Walk in this field of the Gospel; take a turn or two every morning, and at
best leisure, in the meditation of the promises; it is a very pleasant field and
walk, you have none such in all your grounds, orchards, or gardens: the
poor-rich peny-father; comforts himself in telling over, and but looking upon
his bags of gold in his hutch, or coffer: C^^st Nummos contemplor in arca, etc.
not thou be as wise to muse and think upon these hidden riches of Christ? The
devil, an old enemy of man's continued comfort, will interrupt thee, and scare
thee, it may be off the ground; but regard him not, resist him, steadfast in a
believing meditation, in the strength of a promise, and he will flee, and thou
may keep the field; and keep but the field, the Treasure is there, it is
thine, it will glad thy heart but to think it is there, and there for thee.

3. Quench not the Spirit of faith and hope, and the Spirit of joy will come,
and will not depart; apply thy self in prayer upon the promise of joy; there is
a filling up of the soul to the brim, with joy and peace in believing, to be
obtained; neglect not the ordinances of comfort, Word, Sacraments, conference;
sin not against the light of a promise, no more then of a precept; live by
faith, without, beyond feelings; and he that shall come, will come, and will
not tarry beyond the fittest season, wherein he will speak peace, and quicken
thee with joyful consolation.

Of Admonition.
For admonition, in a word, to them that be yet in unbelief, strangers to true
joy, because strangers to true faith. I do not wonder you are so sad and
melancholy in these times, these have been losing times, and yet they are
reforming times, both these considerations damp the carnal man's heart, and
almost strike him dead. The world goes away from them they see, and men's goodly
pearls that they have sought after can give them no content; and comfort they
think there is none in a work of Reformation: Amidst such kind of thoughts,
my word of warning is, that men would be wise, come to themselves (with the
Prodigal) look after this Treasure in the Gospel, it is very good Treasure in
these chargeable times to stock you, and enrich you, and bear your charges to
heaven, yea, and make you cheerfully fruitful in all good works; my counsel
is, you would get among believers, they can (though their commons fall short)
eat their bread with singleness, and gladness of heart, with leaping joys,
as the word (...).
imports, Act. 2. 46.

Would you believe, upon the credit of my Text, and the merchants experience,
that there are joys upon joys coming in with the adventures and merchandise
of faith, you would perhaps embrace the profer of Christ in the Gospel, and
come in to him, who will be a Pearl of invaluable price to you: till then, we
cannot speak a word of peace to you; for you have nothing to rejoice in, till
you have found what the merchant here found, a Pearl, his joy was the joy
thereof,

Now take these words in, with those that follow, he goes and sells all that
he has. And thence arises our

The joy of a believer, it works him to utmost self-denial; or, A joyful
Christian indeed, will part Joy breeds self-denial.
with all he has for Gospel-treasure. We have the Doctrine and Reason both in
the point; the Doctrine by it self is this, Christ-finders are self-losers. And
the Reason is this, Gospel joys do bring a soul to utter self-denial, and
extreme poverty of spirit.

First, We shall open this affair of the Kingdom, a Christians selling all.

Secondly, Discover the strength of the Reason, for joy.

For the first, in the kingdom of heaven, or Gospel-state, there is that done,
which amongst men, you call trading, buying, selling, and here is a selling
first, and buying afterward.

In selling, two things are considerable; 1. The sale it self. 2. The matters
vendible, and to be sold.


1. The sale it self, and there we have consent to part with. 1. A Christian
sale. (...), aliq^id amplius videtur significare, quam (...). Beza in locum.
actual putting off.

First, Here is the believers consent to part with what should be parted with
for Christ; implied in the man's going, he goes, verse. 44. And verse. 46. in
that it is said of the merchant, he went. The word in v. 44. is (...), subducit
sese, he withdrew himself, Clam discedit, as Beza notes, he went away
secretly, which can hold forth nothing better, nothing else then the tacit
consent of the mind and will, to be at any (...) for the purchase of what was
found; he goes, he is not thrust on, and forced, he went of his own accord, he
is not driven ^ Such an expression we have at Zacheus conversion, He stood
forth Luke 19. 8.
, which showed his consent and willingness, before he fell upon action: And St
Paul no sooner has Christ met with him, and he with Christ (upon the way to
Damascus) but he is at that point of consent, Act. 9. 6.
Lord, what will thou have me to do?

Secondly, This consent is brought into act, the man and the Christian Merchant
here, he revoketh not his consent, or steps back when a going, but he gooth and
sells, viz. ^^^ally p^^teth with (as God calls and enableth) what is to be
parted with. This actual sale, is actual self-denial, and
soul-impoverishing, or soul-emptying; and the liberty and limits, or the free
bounds of this mart, is as God proclaims it, and calls to it, and strengthens in
it; which in some things that a Christian has is presently done, and in other
things, at certain times, and by certain steps and degrees, as opportunity is
offered; which better will be understood by opening.

Secondly, The matters vendible, or things here to be sold; ^. Matters
vendible, or, to be sold.
that a man has, and all that a man has, He went and sold all that he had;
all that a man has, is either that which is his own, from his own workings and
earnings; and that is sin and the effects of it; or that which is given him
of God, which is no part of the Treasure or Pearl; or if it be, it is but by
way of evidence and sign, which he lets go, in some respe^^ for the thing it
self; especially, when that which he has, ^^ but in supposition, he put's off
all for Christ, for whom I have suffered ( Phil. 3. 8.
says Paul) the loss of all things, etc. that is, all things, which stand in
direct opposition to, or comparative competition with the Lord Jesus Christ; So
the merchant here sets upon selling.

1. All his sins, he consents to let them go, would be rid of original,
inherent corruption, and is willing to part with all actual iniquity, whether
open or secret, of thought, word, or deed; and he does endeavor hereunto
(because God presently calls for it.)

1. By inward mortification of the old man, from the power or Christ's death,
through faith applied; and by grief, hatred, and self-judging improved.

2. By outward cestation and forsaking of those sinful ways and courses,
wherein formerly he lived and traded; as ^^ clear in Paul, who was a
persecutour is no more so, 1 Timothy 1. and in the Corinthians, they were so and
so 1 Cor. 6 9, 11
, but are washed sanctified, etc. And in the Colossians, who had put off the
body of the sins of the flesh Col. 2. 11.
inward habits in their regency and strength, and for outward acts, they
sometimes had walked Col. 3. 7. with
in fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concuplscence and
covetousness verse. ^. and
; But now you verse. 8. and 9.
also put off all these (says the Apostle) anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy,
filthy communication, lying, seeing ye have put off the old man with his deeds;
what they had done already in part, about some sins more eminently, he
exhorts them to go on in this work of repentance, as touching all sin
whatsoever; yea, and they are resolved upon it, For they have put on the new
man verse. 10.
, which being acted and set on work, will further mortify and disable the old
man. In every true Christian, the purpose, love, and practice of sin is laid
a side, he trades not in it, but by putting off, off, as last as he can; he
lays not in provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it, as his consent
holds on, so his endeavors hold out to be selling, selling, all this old
lumber to his dying day.

3. All his gifts of nature and morality; wit and parts, learning and
knowledge, in nature, civil, or humane affairs; yea, whatsoever is beneath the
knowledge of Christ.

1. From these his heart it removed, in case of love, confidence, or high
esteem; he do^es not upon them, affects them not, confides not in them, for one
piece of his happiness, or that which will contribute in the least to help to
Christ, or his knowledge, but as denied and subordinated to him, and it.

2. He is far from using them against the Lord, or against his Scripture, and
the understanding thereof; nay,

3. He is willing that their property and use should be ^ltered and converted
from himself to the Lord, and for the Lord; and the best service he can do
him; with such parts and gifts as he has, now receiving a new stamp, by
sanctifying grace. St Paul is a most eminent example for us; He was brought up
at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect manner of the law
of the fathers, employed before his conversion (as a man of parts) against
Christ; but after he has found that Pearl, he fels all his parts and abilities
to, and for Christ, denies his wisdom and learning, where it opposes the
knowledge and spreading of the Gospel: When be came to the Corinthians, He came
not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom 1 Cor. 2. 1.
, His speech and his preaching was not with the entising words of man^ wisdom,
but in demonstration of the Spirit, and power verse. 4.
He preached Christ crucified in a crucified phrase; he preached, not to show
himself, but the Spirit: Although when there was some fruitful and necessary
use of it, he could and did (to convince the ignorant, erring and gainsaying
hearer, or inform the teachable) produce the testimonies of foreign Authors;
as of Aratus Act. 17. ^8.
, Menander 1 Cor. 15. 33.
, and Epimenid^s Tit. 1. 12.
; yet he is very rare in such quotations; and when any other way men would set
up their humane parts and abilities in competition with the plain preaching of
the Gospel, he did wholly cry them down, 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20. Yea, and as touching
spiritual gifts of tongues and miracles, etc. when among the Corinthians some
used their knowledge, and gift of tongues, in an unedifying way, he reproves
them for it, 1 Cor. 14, 26. And when some with their working of miracles among
the Galatians, would being in another Gospel (then that of justification by
faith) he speaks of the man and his miracles with a holy disdain, He that
ministers, etc. Gal. 3. 5.
as not owning the man, nor his gifts: For his part, he would have all common
gifts to vale and stoop to the exalting and lifting up of the knowledge of
Christ, and him crucified.

3. All his own righteousness; which men have an opinion of, and confidence
in, for their acceptance before God, either as it lies in outward conformity
to the commands of first or second Table, or in the inward frame of the heart,
by inherent qualifications, before, or after faith: All these (when God calls a
man to believe in Christ alone, for justification and life) a true believer
(finding this treasure in Christ) renounceth and disclaimeth as any piece of
his justifying righteousness before the Lord. St Paul was most eminent in this
also, Touching the righteousness of the Law, he was blameless Phil. 3. 6.
, before men; and for his inward conscience, he did not sin against the common
light of it Act. 23. 1.
* what he did against Christ, he did it ignorantly 1 Timothy 1. 13.
: And after his conversion, he walked in his calling of the Ministry, most
innocently and uprightly, and was not conscious to himself of base ends, etc.
yet did he sell away and suffer the loss of all his Pharisaicall blameless
life, and renounced his innocent conscience, yea and sanctified conversation,
and gracious frame of heart, in the point of his justification; I know nothing
by my self, yet am I not hereby justified 1 Cor. 4. 4.
, I have suffered the loss of all, and do count them but dung, that I may win
Christ; and be found in him, not having on mine own righteousness, which is of
the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith Phil. 3. 8, 9.
. From which Scriptures you may observe, he did not throw away his blameless
civility, but the Pharisaicall pride of it; nor did he pack up his
sanctification, and send it beyond sea, as a commodity he would (in no case)
have any dealings with; but in comparison of Christ's inherent righteousness
(imputed to him by faith to his sole and perfect justification) he will own
none of his own adherent moralities, or inherent graces; nor, in the least
confide therein, or admit thereof as a co-partner with Christ, etc. The best
frame of heart or life, is but for evidence to a soul, that he is justified,
not any ground of believing, as in any piece of the cause, why he is justified.

4. All worldly comforts and advantages, and creature-engagements; they are
likewise by consent put away, sit loose from, and as God calls parted with, to
instance

1. In worldly profits; no sooner does the Lord call Matthew, (not only to a
Christian estate, but to the Ministry of the Gospel) but he rises up from the
receipt of custom, where he had sweet gains and comings in, and follows
Christ Mat. 9 9.
. No sooner does Christ call Simon, and Andrew his brother, with this promise,
to make them fishers of men, but straightway they forsook their nets and
followed him Mar. 1. 17, 18
. The like did James and John, Mark 1. 16, 20. Not that all who find Christ,
must presently forsake their particular lawful vocations and imploiments, but
when such a vocation and imploiment will be a distraction, let, and hinderance
to Christianity, and much more to the service and work of the Ministry; then
all such shackling profits, and profitable imploiments are laid aside. If Peter
or any of the Apostles did afterward go a fishing upon the sea, it was not as
their particular calling, but upon the by (as we say) and but occasionally.
Take another instance or two of parting with worldly advantages, upon the
finding of the Gospel-treasure. Zacheus you know gave away half of his goods to
the poor, and if he had taken any thing from any man, by false accusation, he
restored him fourfold Luke 19. 8.
: here is but half, you will say, of his estate, but that half is freely
offered, and given before an explicit call; And again, a fourfold restitution
of what was snatched by forged cavillation (if he had much played the Sycophant)
would take away a good share of the other half of his estate; and for the
remainder, he that prevented the poor before they asked a part, to give the
half, and those he had wronged, to offer so fair and full a restitution, was
prepared to let go all the rest of his estate, when God called for it. As the
members of the prime Church at Jerusalem, came up to this fale of worldly
estates and profits in the very letter, by the power of the Spirit Act. 2. 44,
45. 4, 34, 35.
; they gave, as if others had interest and right in their goods with
themselves, and sold to that end, that they might put the propriety out of
their hands to the common stock, for the Church it is maintenance; which upon
such a special call, and extraordinary occasion, by the grace of self-denial,
the true Christian merchant consents still unto, and would bring into act.

2. As for pleasures of the world, and even lawful recreations, he sels them
away also; consents to none which prove a bait and a snare to sin, and uses
none, but with an indifferent mind, as the Apostle exhorts Cor. 7. 30.
, He rejoices, as if he rejoiced not.

3. As for honor, credit, favor; this also with Moses Heb. 11. 25, 26.
, is lightly set by; and the afflictions with Gods people, and the reproach of
Christ, esteemed and chosen before it. When both these, Christ's favor and the
worlds; Gods honor, and esteem with the creature, cannot actually be held
together; the later is both actually and affectionately forsaken, and the
former cleaved unto.

4. As for relative engagements to friends, parents, children, wives, husbands,
kindred, house and family; these are set by, and not known in Christ's cause;
yea, there is a kind of comparative hatred of them, in respect of the Pearl
and Treasure. It Is remarkable, that when John and James were called by Christ
to follow him, and to take up a new profession; They left their father Zebedee
in the ship with the hired servants Mar. 1. 20.
: Yea, Paul, though of the stock of Israel, and of the tribe of Benjamin Phil.
3. 5.
, yet forsakes his kindred and fathers tribe and family, where they forsook
Christ and the Gospel. Eminent is the story of that noble Marquess of France,
Galeacius Caracciolus, who did dis-engage himself from estate, friends, wife,
children, and all for the Gospel sake; and how many such self-denying Merchants
(some of them noble and great) have we among the Martyrs? In the Martyrology M.
Fox, vol. 2. p. 178.
, there is mention of one Galeazius Trecius, who was bound to a stake, and
stood as a gazing stock for half the day, during which time, many came and
persuaded him to recant the truth, and if he regarded not life and country,
goods nor possessions, yet he should somewhat respect his wife, that he loved
so well, and his young children, but nothing could stir his settled mind, he
knew he was not to know, nor own a wife in Christ's cause, nor children smiling
or crying; all is one, when the creature is laid in one scale, and Christ in
the other; which, think you, must weigh down the judgment, and sway the
affections of a Christian? He can, with Mr Rogers his self-denial, M. Fox.
vol. 3. 131.
pass by his wife, and eleven children (one whereof was sucking on the mothers
breast) and be more unmovable then the stake to which he was fastened, till
consumed to ashes.

5. All self-sufficiency and strength for service or sufferings. When once God
has enlightened a soul where his strength lies, not in himself, but in Christ;
and as habits are infused, so acts of grace must be had from him alone; and
that strength enough there is in Christ; away then with conceits of
self-strength; for duty, or against since: When he is weak, he is strong (as
Paul 2 Cor. 12. 10, 11.
) and a very nothing he is in, and of himself; I labored, yet not I 1 Cor. 15.
10
, I live, yet not I Gal. 2. 20.
, but Christ; this is his language, and this is the account he has of himself,
even as it was prophesied of one and another, of all the seed of Israel; who
should shame themselves and glory in the Lord; Surely, in the Lord is all
righteousness and strength Isa. 15. 24.
, and in him I have what I have, and am what I am, in point of strength, as
righteousness.

6. All external Church Priviledges, as Paul's being circumcised the eighth
day, an Hebrew of the Hebrews Phil. 3. 7.
; and in his zeal for the Jewish-Nationall-Church (persecuting the Christian)
he was, and might have been more advantaged; but what was gain (in that as
other cases) and might have been gain to him, he counted loss for Christ. So,
if descent from religious parents, and birth-priviledge, as the seed of
believers, has been rested on, when Christ is discovered, all confidence in
this and any other Church-priviledge, is rejected and put away; And if a man
has upon such relations, thought himself to be somebody, he comes now in his
ownesteem to be a nobody, a nothing.

7. All self ends and aims, in profession of Christ and the Gospel, in duties
and undertakings; these are denied and laid aside; yea, abhorred, when they
offer to step into Gods place, and would put by his glory, and the public
good, and are ever made underlings to what is for God, and the public. A
believer now seeks himself no further, nor any other way then God allows it,
that is (as one sweetly expresses it M. Reynolds Sermon. of self-denial.
) seeking our selves out of our selves in Christ, and in the prosecution of his
(not our own) glorious designs; Paul was excellent at this, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4, 5,
6. 1 Cor. 9. 22, 23. and chap. 10. ult. And such a self-denying spirit he found
and discovered to the Philippians to be in Timothy (his natural, true born
Son in mortification, as in the faith) For I have no man like-minded, who
will naturally care for your state Phil. 2. 20.
. While every man was seeking himself and his own things to compass his own
ends, Timothy, is caring for the public, and seeking the things of Jesus
Christ, and his Masters honor and advancement; And the Apostle to the
Corinthians 2 Cor. 5. 14, 25.
professes there is a principle for it, in all true Christians; Christ's death
(for us that were as dead, as others) will teach us to die to self, and
self ends, that we may live to him which died to us. All a believers ends (when
he comes rightly to know Christ) are, that he may be to the praise of the glory
of free grace.

8. Life and all, etc. That is not esteemed, or thought dear Act. 10. 24.
, even that a Christian is prepared, with some free consent to lay down for
Christ and Gospel-treasure: I am ready (said that eminent pattern of
self-denial) not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name
of the Lord Jesus. How many thousands and millions, I may say, of the Martyrs
of Jesus have (not only consented, but) actually parted with their lives for
the treasure of the Kingdom of heaven; Christ and eternal life? Besides all
that suffered in the Apostles times, and in the nine first persecutions; in the
10th persecution, Martyr-book vol. 1. p. 10^.
there were certain thousands burnt together in one Church; a hundred in one
day, seventeen thousand in one month; three hundred at another time in
Alexandria, And p. 104.
six thousand six hundred sixty six at another time; a hundred and twenty at
another; three hundred sixty at another time; when as the tormentours were
wearied, and the persecutours tired out; And Christians with more greedy
desire, pressed and sought for martyrdom, then others did for Bishoprics; And
what a cloud of such Witnesses have been in the firmament of the Church, since
Antichrist acted his Tragedies, the Histories of the German, French, Spanish,
Italian and English Martyrs, do sufficiently evidence; that all such
merchants, have not loved, but sold away their lives, unto the death.

Reason general.
Reason, In general; is that in the Text, and Observation, for joy thereof;
the joy of finding the treasure, and of the Treasure found, and the joy of the
Pearl of great price, once truly found, this brings the man and merchant, to
consent to the selling of all, and this brings his consent into act; For joy,
he parts with his sins, one and another, one as another, in an absolute-hatred
of them, never to have to do with them again. For joy of the treasure, he
parts with his parts and gifts, so, as they shall be new molded and cast, and
have a new stamp out of the mint and treasury of Christ's holiness; For joy of
the riches of Christ's righteousness, he lets go his own; and for joy of
greater profits, sweeter pleasures, higher honors, and better friends, which
come in by the Gospel-pearl; he fits loose from all worldly advantages, and
creature-engagements; and for joy of inward spiritual privileges, he lets go
confidence in outward. For joy of Christ the root of all spiritual life,
strength and activenesse, he renounceth his own supposed sufficiencies: For joy
of the glory of free grace, he hates his own ends, and for joy of an eternal
life (which is begun in the right knowledge of God in Christ) he gives up this
temporal life. Observe it in Paul, if upon rejoicing in Jesus Christ, he does
not renounce confidence in the flesh Phil, 3. 3.
, and in the Ephesians, when the name of the Lord was magnified Act. 19. 17.
(with joyful admiration of free grace) what followed? They came and confessed
their deeds ver. 18.
, and parted with their curious gainful arts; and though they counted the
price of their books worth fifty thousand pieces of silver ver. 19,
, yet that was no price to the Pearl and Treasure of the Gospel; their joy of
that, which was so transcendently above any reckoning or arithmeticall accounts
among men, constrains them to undervalue their old profession and magical
practices, and burn all their books to ashes.

Reasons special.
Now the joy of the treasure, etc. constrains to self-selling three ways.

First, From it is strength; The joy of the Lord is his servants strength; to
deny their sins, to mortify their lusts, to cashiere their corruptions, and
abandon all wicked inclinations and acts; Spiritual joy, as it is a
preservative from false, carnal, sinful pleasures; so it has a purgative and
expulsive faculty, to banish that which will damp and hinder it is exercise;
where joy of the Gospel and a sinful lust meet together in one heart, there
will be a conflict; in which conflict spiritual joy will be too hard for
carnal corruption, and must give way to it. I protest (says Paul) that by the
rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus, I die daily; that is (as worthy Dr
Preston opens the place Preston of mortif. p. 41.
) "That spiritual joy which he had in Christ, of justification and remission
of sins, and that sight of glory which he saw by faith, mortified sin in him,
made him basely to esteem of his corruptions. He that finds the Treasure and
Pearl, joyeth so, in the excellency and worth thereof, that he gathers and
grows in a strong hatred of what would deprive him of it; what ever, in self,
or creature, of parts, profits, honors, etc. would stand as competitour for a
room in his heart, therewith; this heart the more rises up against it, and is
alienated and weaned the more from it; for nothing (it knows) does or can
minister that joy, that peace, that comfort to the soul, which Gospel-treasure
does; it must needs therefore bid farewell to all which shall hinder, or
interrupt this joy; In a word, there is strength from this joy to do the will
of God in all points of self-denial, if there were a 1000 lives to part with
for Christ's sake, or would the soul go through a 1000 deaths to enter into more
joy.

Secondly, From it is free and royal nature; when the treasure is found, and
rejoiced in, the man is truly enabled, and elevated to a holy magnanimity, or
greatness of spirit, whereby he is carried above, not only base lusts, but all
the royalties in the world, which he esteemed out of a pure judgment, and now
from a pure joy much more reckons, but as dross and dung, and can most
willingly resign up for this one pearl; you heard of Zacheus free and noble
spirit before, whence came it? from his joyful Luke 19. 6, 8.
entertainment of Christ. The Primitive Christians were full of joy, this made
them empty their purses, and sell their lands; and the Primitive Martyrs, yea,
all of them, for these sixteen hundred years, have out of their royal spirits
(filled with joy) parted with husbands, wives, children, lives and all. As the
Jews when they rejoiced they could offer up more then Hecatombes, even
multiplied Myriads (in Solomon's 1 King 8. 63.
, Hezekiah's 2 Chronicles. 30. 24.
, and Josiahs and 35. 7, 8.
time) so Christians feasted with the joy of the Lord, can willingly sacrifice
up multiplied and dear contentments; as God calls for them, he shall be honored
with wit, learning, goods and privileges; and with whatsoever is naturally,
morally, spiritually dear; it is all dedicated to him, and set apart for him.

Thirdly, From it is sincerity, purity and holiness; which Treasure it is,
whose Kingdom and pearl it is originally, Gods and Christ's. The soul who
finds Christ has faith and hope to have the treasure sure his own, upon
agreement with the owner of the field, the God and Father of Christ, who sets
out this treasure in precious promises, yea and amen in Christ, to such as come
up to his terms of assuring it further to the soul; Joy, I say, would please
him that has pleased the soul. God has discovered that which gives the
believer full content, and the believer being contented, would give God the
owner of the treasure and field content; and that is, by coming into the
possession lawfully: steal he must not this treasure, the field is not his, but
the Lords of the Manor; And this Lord of the Manor is well pleased, if he
will but sell all that stands in opposition to, or competition with this
purchase, he shall have it: Why (says the soul) if that be all, I agree and
consent; all that I have, or can have as mine, what is it to the worth of this
Pearl, this Treasure and field? All my sins are worse then nothing; all my
duties and qualifications (be they for duties and qualifications never so good
and useful) in relation to a sinners justifying righteousness they are just
nothing; all my parts and gifts, they will stand me in no stead at all, but as
refined and spiritualized; All my advantages in the world, so far as they are
hindrances to Christ, or baits to sin, they are vanity and vexation; All my
privileges in profession are (without Christ) empty things; my glory with men
vainglory; my strength is weakness, my wisdom folly, my end and self an
idol, and I know that an idol is nothing; my life is but a vapor, a breath, a
shadow; I surrender up Non quod ta^tum valet, sed quod plus dare non possumus.
Aug.
all to thy dispose and use, O Lord; I am willing thou should take my sins,
to kill and destroy them; Do justice upon them with all speed, and for all
supposed worth or excellency, it is none at all; I have found Christ, and desire
only to be found in his righteousness, in his strength, wisdom, humility,
etc. If any doubts arise; why, but is this all? God requires that a man deny
himself, and take up his cross, sell all, and follow Jesus Christ? It Is
answered, All, All; why then it is done, the bargain is concluded, as from the
strength and liberty; so the sincerity and purity of a Christians joy; I will
be nothing, that Christ may be all; I will be poor, that Christ's riches may
appear in me; I will be foolish, that Christ's wisdom may shine in me; I will
be weak, that Christ's strength may be perfected in me; I will lose in
temporals, that I may gain in spirituals and eternals.

Use 1. Of Instruction two ways.
For information two ways;

First, See from hence one reason, why Satan is such an enemy to true joy: He
knows well enough it would put thee upon mortification, and
heavenly-mindednesse, and holy-reformation, and poverty of spirit; he keeps
Christians therefore, what he can, and as long as he can, from rejoicing in
Jesus Christ, and from taking out the sweet of that they have found, because he
would keep their corruptions the stronger, and stave them off from a more
assured purchase of the pearl and treasure the longer time.

Secondly, we may hence learn in what order mortification and full self-denial
comes forth, and is acted and increased, upon, and after the joy of faith;
after a soul has found Christ, and conceived some sweetness in him, by
believing: There are many who think, they must first sell all, mortify their
lusts, etc. and then come to Christ by faith: no warrant have they to believe,
no ground of applying a promise, till they have got such mastery, and victory
over their lusts, as they desire. And it may be, this is the ground and reason
why some have put forth such an ignorant Question as this, what have we (even
we believers) to sell? as if all were done before faith, not after; whereas all
is done (in true self-denial) with, and after the first believing; nothing
before.

Of trial
For Examination, and discovery of the truth or falsenesse of men's joys at the
hearing of the Gospel, and upon any discovery made of the Pearl and Treasure,

First, Let me give the true Christian his portion; it is more comfort to find
thy joy to be true joy, then to find thy heart merely joyful. Now then it is
true, when it has such strength as to bring in universal self-denial; when
it has that free royal nature, as to deny God nothing that he calls for; when
it has that purity, as to make thee studious and careful to please God, and
come up to terms of agreement and commerce with him; If it be a means to
mortify sin, to crucify thee to the world, and the world to thee (as it was
to Paul Gal 6. 14.
, his glorying and rejoicing in the cross of Christ, brought him to such a
frame) then is it a true joy, and a sanctified fruit of the Spirit; The fruit
of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, etc. And when goodness, meekness,
temperance, and other gracious acts, are the results of joy, it cannot be
questioned, but thy joy is sound, and thy says sound, and thou have truly
found the Treasure; the Treasure is thine, the Pearl thine, Christ, and all his
excellencies are for thee, etc. But

Secondly, If thy joys and enlargements of heart, have no other fruit, but
self-indulgence, and favor to thy lust, and base yielding to the next
temptation; they are too weak to be the birth and offspring of the Spirit;
Self-seeking joy is too low and too base, to be born from on high; now to be
sure, all a worldlings joy is no other, all a carnal and formal professors
joy is no other. Herod heard John Baptist gladly, but could not deny himself in
his Herodias; the temporary believer, set out by the stony ground, heard with
joy, but when it came to the point of self and world-denial, he falls away.

Thirdly, If self-denial be but small, it is a sign a Christians joy is small,
and faith is but weak, at the best; yea, it witnesses against some
professors, that they have lost their first joy, and their first love; time
was when they consented to sell a husband, a wife, a child, etc. Now such
self-relations are too near, too dear; Oh, the troubles of a wives or husbands
loss must not be spoken of, nor the parting with a child thought of; what is
the reason? The creature is a Pearl in their eye, above and before Christ, and
his truth.

Fourthly, If thy joy be in thy parts and gifts, and outward duties, thy
enlargements and privileges among Gods people, as matter of justification and
righteousness before God; this joy would be turned into sorrow and
humiliation; repentance for such a joy, will be a better evidence for thee (in
it is proper place) then the cherishing of that, which is but a Pharisees, and a
carnal mars joy: And although there is a proper comfort which flows from true
sanctification, or inherent graces and duties of new obedience (as evidences of
justification, and union with Christ) yet no further do they comfort, or are
they evidences, but as fruits of faith, and influences from the life and
strength of Christ. Look to it, that thy joy in duties, etc. be not a joy in
thy self; but a joy of the Pearl and Treasure, and the faith thereof; Joy in
self, and joy in Christ, are heterogeneall, and of a contrary root and
principle; And the later will and must (if the heart be upright) eat out, and
consume the former.

Of Exhortation.
3. For Exhortation, Labor to find, cherish and maintain such a joyful
finding of the Treasure, as may work thee to utter self-denial,
soul-emptyings, and creaturerenouncings in Christ's cause, and upon Gods call;
to encourage whereunto, take along with thee these three Considerations.

First, It is most straightly commanded that you do fell all, hate all (for
Christ) under pain of Christ's high displeasure, Mat. 16. 24. Luke 14. 26. As
you would not be cashiered from his soldiers and followers, as you would be
meet to be accounted one of his: Do it you must, and yet do it you will not
freely, thoroughly, except you make much of the joy of the Lord.

Secondly, In this thou shall be conformable to Christ, who denied all, parted
with all (though that be not the selling in the Text) he emptied himself Phil.
2. 7. (...)
of glory, of comfort; denied his fame, his friends, his wealth, his honor,
life and all, and that out of joy, or, For the joy set before him he endured
the cross, despising the shame, etc. And indeed the joy of faith is more the
joy set before a Christian, then that which is in him for the present: If the
little joy thou have, puts thee upon sorrow for sin, mortification,
self-abhorring, subjection to the cross; more will come in; which may be a

Third consideration, the comfort of a cheerful, self-denying Christian, is
doubled and trebled, after acts of self-denial, Consult the Scriptures and
experiences of the Saints; and you will find it a truth, made good to all that
ever acted the part of wise Merchants; The Apostles suffering blows and
stripes, come off rejoicing Act. 5. 40, 41.
; Paul and Barnabas persecuted and expelled the coasts of Pisidia, are filled
with joy, and with the holy Ghost Act. 13 50, 51
; Paul and Silas shut up in the prison and stocks are singing praises at
midnight Cap. 16. 25.
; such was this grace, and high favor of God bestowed on the Churches of
Macedonia 2 Cor. 8. 1, 2.
; that in a great trial of affliction, the abundance of their joy, and their
deep poverty abounded to the riches of their liberality; hereis precious and
choice checkwork, joy and self-denial, self-denial and joy, egging on, and
backing each other: And St Paul in his sufferings will not rejoice alone, but
will have the Philippians joy and rejoice with him Phil 2. 18.
; If self-denial with joy for it is antecedent, it shall have it, for it is
concomitant and consequent: The Thessalonians 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6.
, and the Hebrews Heb. 10. 34.
had abundant experience of joy for their companion and attendant, in all that
they sold away for Christ and the Gospel; so many Martyrs of Jesus (as we read
of) so many Witnesses to this truth. Call we to mind, but that one instance M.
Fox vol. 3 71^.
of John Careless, who was resolved to cast all care away upon the Lord; had
his water turned into wine, and that of the best, filled out by the master of
the feast, that he was become drunken in the joy of the Spirit, etc. And that
other of Pomponius Algerius (an Italian Martyr Vol. 3. 181, 182, 183.
) who styled his Leonine prison, a delectable Orchard; where dropped the
delectable dew, where flowed the pleasant Nectar, where was milk of
consolation, and plenty of all good things; And how does he (from the joy which
himself felt and believed) call upon his dear brethren and fellow servants, to
rejoicing, rejoicing, in the midst of their falls into diverse tentations
(according to that of the Apostle Iam. 1. 2. Let us take up his resolution) I
will not set more by my life, then by my soul; deny we our selves to the
utmost, and we shall have joy to the utmost, lay down the price, and you shall
have a joyful possession; as it follows in the next and last Doctrine.

But a word of Direction, for the close of this,

Would we cherish our joy of the Treasure, and denial of Means of self-denying
joy.
our trash;

1. Be much in believing; strength on faith (as one of our Worthies in the
faith M. Ward, Life of faith.
) and strengthen joy; and joy strengthened will fortify the spirit against
fears, or loves inordinate, will more carry us off from self and creature.

2. Pray, and pray earnestly for that joy which will strengthen us in the inner
man; and for that Almighty, glorious power, which will strengthen unto all
patience and long suffering with joyfulnesse, as the Apostle, for the Ephesians. 3.
16. and for the Col. 1. 9, 11.

3. Attend upon your sealing days; we have every Sacrament, Sabbath enough
assured, to make us say with the Disciple, Let us also go that we may die with
him; or with that heroic Saint, Volemus in Coelum, Let us flee into heaven: or
with the Apostle, Let us live to him that died for us, and be no more our own,
but his, living, dying, And with that Italian preacher, Let Montalchin die, and
live thou, O Lord Jesus.

7. Through self-denial brings forth such diligence, ^^ whereby the true
Christian grows up to a firm assurance Self-denial brings diligence and
assurance.
and clear evidence of the Kingdom-treasure, and pearl of heaven, Christ and
Gospel Grace.

For the clearing and proving whereof, how it is grounded and raised upon these
Parables of selling and buying, and how consonant to the truth of Scripture and
reason; I shall open the similitude that does illustrate this truth, and so
far as it is the scope of the Parables, prove it; and then by demonstrations
show and confirm that it is so, and why it must needs be so.

In the metaphor of buying, we have Cleared from the metaphor of buying.
considerable, 1. The act. 2. The object.

First, In the act of buying there are four things obvious, whereby it will
appear, that as the merchant man's buying is here set forth as a consequent of
his selling, so diligence unto more full assurance, and clear evidence of
Christ, is a consequent and fruit of self-denial.

1. In buying, men lay out with cost of money, much pains and diligence; it
cost the former and tradesman many a trudging journey to fairs and markets;
and the merchant many a walk up and down the City, and riding from town to town
in the Country, yea, many a hazardable voyage by, and beyond the Seas: So the
self-denying Christian, he lays out much cost of pains and diligence to make
his calling and his election sure. A sure interest is that the earthly and
heavenly merchant labors for. There is a twofold interest in, and to the
Kingdom of heaven.

1. That which comes in by calling, this is the finding of the treasure and
pearl.

2. That which was given the elect from all eternity, the knowledge whereof is
the effect of calling, according to purpose; Now by thorow-self-denial a soul
is put to diligence, and by diligence seeks the knowledge of both these
interests. But here is the difference between worldly and spiritual
merchandising; the more money a man has, the more he can carry on his trade,
and merchandise in the world; but the less worth a Christian man has, the
more rich the merchant; when he comes without money or moneys price, he lays
out the more cost: The more self-denial in the heart, and the more empty the
purse of the soul is, the more diligence the Christian gives to attain what he
believes and hops for. And that a self-denying soul, is such a painful
diligent soul, is implied in that precept, Isa. 55. 1. compared with ver. 2, 3.
and 6. Buying with an empty purse, is laboring, using the means, seeking in
the Ordinances, by faith, hope, humility, etc. in the sense of our
nothingnesse, to trust into God, and wait upon him for all in Christ. And it is
so expressly found true in the practice of believers, Matthew. 19. 27. Behold,
we have forsaken all, and have followed thee; here is diligent following of
Christ, after negligent forsaking of a man's self, and of all he has; So St
Paul having suffered the loss of all to win Christ, what are his desires?
Phil. 3. 10. That I may know him more experimentally; and his diligence, what
is it? verse. 11. If by any means I might attain, etc. And ver. 12. I follow
after, and verse. 13. reaching forwards, and verse. 14. I press toward the mark;
the like diligence he exhorts the Philippians unto, v. 17. Brethren, be
followers together of me, as in selling, so in buying, as in parting with your
selves, and own righteousness, etc. So in the endeavors of a more sure, and
full possession of Christ, and what is his.

2. The Merchant by his buying and trafficking, obtains what he lays out his
cost for: He that buyeth land, takes up land: He that buyeth a house takes
livery and seisin; it is delivered up to him by ways of strong assurance; he
that buyeth a commodity at market, carries it away with him from the shop, and
brings it home: So he that by self denial gives diligence, in the way of
diligence, obtains what he seeks for, the Treasure, the Pearl Christ and
Gospel Grace; he gets sure hold of it, and surer hopes of the enjoyment of it;
in a graduall way, or by certain degrees; now some assurance, anon more, Matthew.
19. 29. Every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my names sake, shall
receive a hundred fold, of heavenly assurance, and shall inherit, what he is
assured of, everlasting life, Heb. 6. 12. with 10. and 11. v. They that
labored with faith and patience inherit the promises, and such as are
followers of them, in the same diligence come to the same full assurance of
hope, that they shall have the same inheritance.

3. When the field, treasure and pearl is bought, there is a knowledge of the
man's and merchants propriety, and title to be good, having bought it in a
legal way: So the self-denying diligent Christian, obtaining in a Gospel-way
of assurance, what he gives diligence for, can say, this is mine, for I bought
it upon such and such lawful terms. St Paul is able to say, upon crucifying
himself with Christ, Gal. 2. 20. and denying a life in himself, for the life of
Christ in him, that Christ loved him, and gave himself for him.

4. What is lawfully bought, may be, and is lawfully held, kept, and for ever
possessed, against all the cheats and challenges of others: So the Christian
merchant, has, by this his self-denying diligence, such a strong and firm
title given him, that none shall cheat him, or deprive him of it. Thus the holy
Ghost exhorts, Revel. 3. 11. Hold that fast which thou have, that no man take
thy crown; and thus he assures, 1 Pet. 1 3. and 5. They that are begotten to a
lively hope, are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation; and
verse. 4. The inheritance is reserved in heaven for them.

Secondly, In respect of the Object, what is bought, the field and treasure in
it, the same with the Pearl; you will have an illustration and evidence, that
self-denial brings in assurance.

1. The field being bought (which is the sum of all Gospel-promises, set
forth in Gospel-ministery, and sealed up in Gospel-Sacraments) all the treasure
hid in that field, is a man's own, and by self-denying diligence made sure to
him: Having the promises, he is so far sure of what is promised, as he is
sure the promises are his, Heb. 11. 33. through faith in sufferings, they
obtained promises, that is, in some good accomplishment. And 2 Pet. 1. 4. By
great and precious promises, participation of the divine nature comes in, and
all things (ver. 3.) that pertain to life and godliness. And 2 Cor. 1. 20. all
the promises, yea and amen in Christ; we are established and sealed by the
spirit given, as an earnest of that which is behind, ver. 22. Nothing is more
clear in Scripture then this, that a believing, self-denying Christian is in
Covenant with God, and in constant dealings and transactions between heaven and
his soul, who taking all upon Gods Word of promise, he has all made sure to
him, upon Gods Word and seal.

2. The Treasure and Pearl being bought with the field, as what the man and
merchant buyeth he makes use of, so the Christian has the use of that grace,
made over to him in the promise, and by the use of it, he comes to be more sure
of it; and has further evidence of Christ as his, by the experience of the
workings of God upon his soul, according to promise; hence after much
self-denial and sufferings, he comes with Paul, Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. to glory in
tribulation, knowing and finding, that tribulation works patience, and
patience more experience, and experience still more hope, and hope makes not
ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in the heart, etc. Assurance,
at last, comes to be a great part of the treasure and pearl; And the Christian
buying all of Christ, as he sold all of himself, he must needs have all.

Which yet will further be confirmed by these Demonstrations. Proved: 1 That it
is so.


First, That it is so,

1. That which clears a man's right, assures it, amongst men, by the
confession and experience of all; so that which clears the right of a
Christian to Christ, does assure his right unto him: Now this self denial and
diligence therein, cleares his right, Matthew. 5. 3. Poverty of spirit is a clear
evidence of a blessed state, and of our right to the Kingdom of heaven, and so
to all the treasure in it; and being such an evidence, it is a means of great
assurance.

2. Additions of grace to grace in their diligent acts and exercises, bring
forth assurance, as is plain, 2 Pet. 1. from ver. 5. to 10. Now self-denying
acts, bring on these additions, and steps of grace; when a Christian comes off
to soul-emptyings, he has the more fillings from God, Luke 1. 53. He has
filled the hungry with good things, when the rich he sends empty away; He that
labors to see himself, and all he does to be a Cipher; Christ will be to him
a figure: and the more such Ciphers we make, the more will be our value and
treasure, when Christ puts to himself, as our figure; as to three Ciphers
prefix but a figure of one, and it is one thousand, to four it is ten thousand,
to five it is a hundred thousand: He that shall more annihilate himself, shall
find more the creatures all in Christ; Christ's all in him, for him, to him; If
we be Sceletons, he will put flesh and substance upon us, when naked, he will
clothe us, when blind he will give eye salve, when poor, he will put money in
our purse, very good gold tried in the fire, and stamped with his own image and
superscription.

Secondly, Why it must needs be so; 2. Why so.


Buying, according Emere quod nunc est mer^^ri, antiqui accipiebant pro sumere.
Fest de verb. signif.
to an old acception of the Word in the Latin Authors, is nothing else but
receiving, and diligent self-denial does but make the heart capacious to
receive the glorious fillings of heaven; and if the Christian Merchant be free
and bountiful to part with all, God assuredly will be as free and infinitely
more free and liberal to give him all again, upon a blessed and glorious
exchange, of eternals for temporals, Ioh. 12. 25, 26. He that hates his life
in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal; And if any man serve me, him
will my Father honor.

2. God is faithful and just in his promises and dealings, when men come up to
his price, to let them have what is worth their money, that is, to recompense
all their diligence with full assurance of hope unto the end, Heb. 6. 11.

The Heathen could say, That the gods sold all for sweat; and we can say most
truly of our God, That when a Christian sweats in self-denial, mortification,
sufferings, etc. he shall have from him (as sure as he is just and faithful)
what he sweats for.

3. God is able to put a soul into possession, and that everlastingly, of what
it lays out pains and diligence for, Ioh. 10. 28, 29, 30. Christ's and his
Fathers power is united for the assurance of life to his sheep, and for their
preservation unto life.

Aword of confutation.
Hence we infer the certainty of salvation by Christ and Gospel Grace, against
all that doubting Doctors, or doubting hearts can say to the contrary; for it
is as sure, as any thing here can be made sure, and more sure then any earthly
purchase; there being more in the substance of this parabolicall merchandise
then in the shadow: yet every expression in the shadowy resemblance, speaks
assurance; a treasure found, a treasure hidden, a treasure joyed in, and a
treasure bought; a pearl found and bought. That the treasure was found hidden
by God, and is hidden by God, and is hidden again by the finder, and joyed in;
all this makes toward assurance; but when that field for the treasures sake,
and the treasure with the field, and the pearl and all is bought, and all sold,
that all might be bought; here is assurance upon assurance. Then is Christ
surely a man's own, the propriety known, enjoyed and used. Are not you sure of
that which you have bought and purchased, and have deeds and evidences to show
for it, after the true title is tried and proved, and the false claim
disproved? The true believer you see is a great purchaser; he has deeds and
evidences in the promises to show, and he has the witness in himself: Our
Gospel 1 John 5. 10.
(says the Apostle to the Thessalonians) came not unto you in word only, but
in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in ^ Thessalonians. 1. 5.
much assurance; And when the tempter came to tempt them (though cap. 3. 10.
there was something lacking in their faith, in regard of degrees) yet sensible
they were, and sure of what they had, as of what they lacked and wanted. The
same Apostle to the Romans speaks of a double witness; Romans 8. 15.
Gods Spirit, witnessing with the Spirit, or renewed conscience of a believer.
Yea, the Apostle John makes report of ^ Joh. 5. 7, 8.
three Witnesses in heaven, and of three upon earth, in the heart: The Spirit
equal with the Father and Son in heaven, and above blood and water on earth;
ratifying the acts and reflections of faith about our justification shining
upon his own work, of sanctification, and ever teaching the soul, in and after
self-denying diligence to be assured (never to doubt) of what they have found,
as theirs.



us, in Gospel Grace, Gods free-love, giving Christ, etc.

2. Faith finding assurance in it is object, more then in it is own acts and
reflections; by closing with a sure word of promise, an unchangable Covenant,
becomes sure in it is acts and reflections, through the Spirit.

3. More firm and full assurance comes daily in, by this Christian selling and
buying; As the experience of thousands speak it. By self-denial and diligent
use of the ordinances and means of salvation, they have ordinarily obtained
sure hold, possession, and use of Christ; have known they have had him, and
shall be saved eternally by him. But with the tenets of Rome, the Doctrine of
doubting agrees well enough, viz. That a man is not justified by imputation of
Christ's righteousness, but by inherent holiness. That a man must make some
temporal satisfaction to Gods justice here, and the rest in Purgatory. That his
general faith, resolved into the testimony of the Church virtuall the Popes
breast, is enough to salvation. That by the power of free will and nature he may
and must concur with Gods grace in conversion, etc. The Roman faith of these
and such like tenets, will never assure a man, that he is in the state of
grace, or shall be in the state of glory. Nor will Arminian grounds bring home
assurance, viz. That Christ died for all, as for one. That God has not
absolutely elected any. That all things put into the balance, which may be
considered in Christ's death, yet none may be saved. That all operations put,
which may be put in, as ingredients to conversion, yet grace may be resisted,
and if gotten, yet lost it may be at last, and put away.

But from the true Gospel-faith preached, and the true Gospel-treasure in
Christ discovered, infallible and absolute promises, Christ's righteousness
imputed to justification; Faith and holiness wrought irresistably by the
Spirit, who is given to discover and seal up grace given, and glory promised,
and who carries on the believer in the means and ordinances, keeps him to
them, and makes them effectual for the obtaining of what he seeks after,
Assurance and evidence unquestionable, may be, is, and shall be had and
enjoyed, for ever.





2. The heart, so far as believing a faithful promise; Conscience, as
justified by Christ's blood, and sanctified by the Spirit, is not deceitful,
The Spirit is truth, and too holy to deceive, 1 John 5. 6,
and too wise to be deceived in this great point of a Christians assurance,
when he certifieth Gods love, and love tokens to the soul.

3. It is, and will be more sure then any earthly purchase; if that may be
wrangled away, this cannot, if an heir may be cheated of his inheritance in his
minority, the child of God cannot. He who sells all, sels all his deceitful
heart away, and all false evidences and dictates, to consult with the Word and
Spirit of truth, to hearken to Gods bargain, to read his writings, to view, and
hold out to view his seal; And when he sees all is current and good, to buy
the truth of the Gospel-doctrine and promises, and of the Spirits evidences; by
which he and his brethren come to know within themselves, that they have in
heaven an enduring substance. Plundered Heb. 10. 34.
and spoiled they may be of what they buy in this world, or of all purchased
treasures here they may be cheated, disappointed; but as for the treasure in
our Text, it can neither be taken from them, being in Gods keeping and Christ's
keeping, not they be taken from it, because when they die, they go to it,
where it is reserved for them. As they have Christ, and Gospel Grace here, they
go thither to enjoy Christ and Gospel-glory.

A note of discovery, why some want assurance
2. See the reason why some want evidence and assurance, because with
self-denial and diligence they do not seek it.

Of those that are uncertain of the Gospel-treasure, of Christ the pearl of the
Kingdom, and the promises, as theirs, there be two sorts.

First, Some who want evidence, and will never have it, nor come by it, because
they will not buy it, with that wherewith they should buy it, all they have set
to sale: they will not so much as consent to the letting go of
self-righteousnesse, sin, or the creature, etc. Now such as will not yield to a
parting with what stands in opposition to, or in competition with the Lord
Jesus, neither will agree to an absolute hatred of sin, nor a comparative
hatred of the creature for him, are not worthy, meet, or fit, to have any
Christ or heaven assured to them.

Secondly, Others, who want evidence, and will want it a while, because they
hickle and dally, and do not set roundly to the work, either they are not
faithful in selling, or not diligent in buying.

1. Not faithful in self-sale: 1. Some lust is indulged, and that keeps the
soul in the dark; it is deservedly haunted with doubtings, whether Christ be
theirs, while there is a favoring of any sin. Or, 2. Some parts and common
gifts are preferred before sanctification, and a mortified, crucified use of
them; the pin-dust before the writing, the varnish before the picture or post;
beware there of a rotten post, which may be varnish't over as well as a sound.
Or, 3. The man seeks his comfort in his duties and enlargements, or in some
frames of heart, and will only then believe, and be confident, when the heart
is in such a frame. Many weak souls would make poverty of spirit, hungring and
mourning, the cause and ground of their faith, and not the evidence and fruit
of it. Or, 4. The creature steals away their affection; some profits, pleasures
or advancements, relations and respects, this and that way take up the room,
that comfortable assurance cannot dwell there, scarce lodge a night in such a
common Inn. Or, 5. The privileges in and with the Church visible, are built
upon more then promises to the Church-mysticall, and true members of Christ the
head of the Church. Or, 6. The man's ends are not only stickling with Gods, but
indulged very far, and his own things sought, not Christ's, or before the
things of Christ. Or, 7. The poor soul goes about self-denial in
self-strength, and would mortify and sell all by his own power; This is as
main a let to assurance, as the rest.

2. Not diligent in buying of treasure. Ordinances and means of assurance are
neglected, graces are not acted; assurance is not prized; the man rests in
the finding of the treasure, is bidding and cheapning, and endeavoring to draw
it down to a lower price, then God has propounded; he is tempted to repent of
the full bargain; and so God will not let him have it, as yet, but upon the
just, free and honorable terms, as was at first agreed. Hence, hence so many
doubting, staggering Christians, because so much slothfulness, and
indifferency in the matter of further and stronger assurance.

A word of Exhortation.
Now let me address my self to such, and such only who have believed, and
prized Christ and Gospel Grace, and had some joy therein, and have begun to
deny something, ye^ consented to let go all for Christ; here is, I may say, as
the Apostle to the Hebrews, That which accompanies Heb. 6. 9, 11.
salvation, but we desire that every one of you may show the same diligence to
the full assurance of hope unto the end. 1. Be diligent from first to last. 2.
Show it as well as use it.


First, Be diligent in all acts of selling, that you may buy and come in to the
evidence and assured possession of Christ, and all Gospel-treasure, and here
let me present most needful helps, and ways of diligence before you,

1. Let there be diligence in the meditation of promises, and remembrance of
Scripture-grounds of Assurance; is God free, bountiful, willing, able,
faithful and unchangeable? Is Christ's intercession, and the spirits presence
perpetual? Let your thoughts be frequently fixed hereupon; think not how able
you are to keep your selves in his love, but how able God is to keep you, not
how willing you are to be Christ's, but how willing he is to be yours; not how
faithful you are, but how faithful he is, etc.

2. Let there be diligence in actings of Faith, and renouncings of
self-righteousnesse, and all privileges (short of Christ, and him crucified)
which the heart would build and rest upon for acceptance; that Christ for your
justification may be your sure, your only treasure and pearl, your all in all.
By faith 2 Cor. 1. ult. Phil. 4 1
ye stand, Stand fast in the Lord.

3. Let there be diligence in all departure from iniquity. You must not think
to be as the women, Isa. 4. 1. to be called by Christ's name, and eat your own
bread, wear your own apparel, still live upon your lusts, and go in your rags,
2 Timothy 2. 19. Let him that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. God
will have his people stand at a distance from the ways of sin, who would be
sealed as his; God can endure no Hab 1. 13. Tit. 1. 14.
iniquity. Christ came to redeem us from all iniquity. It is his will we should
be holy. He has a privy seal, a seal of secrecy, He knows who are his; but
this is his open seal, impressions of holiness upon the hearts and foreheads
of all professors of faith. If you would have your assurance of Christ, and
hold it to the end, beware of sins against light, and sins against profession.
Let careless Christians think or boast what they will of assurance. He that
shall fall, and fall again into sin carelessly: So many acts of sin, so many
steps down to hell, so many degrees of Apostasy, all which will weaken and
darken assurance; for, 1. Though sin will not weaken Gods grounds, yet it will
weaken our apprehension of those grounds. 2. Though the light be clear in the
Word, yet there is something before our eye, the mist of sin, that we cannot
see the Sunbeams of assurance. 3. Although these Sunbeams can, and will
dispell these mists, yet God has not promised to let them break forth, but as
the heart breaks for and from iniquity.

4. Let there be diligent circumspection and watchfulness against creature
ensnarements, baits and traps of profits, pleasures, honors, interests, and
relations here below: these are no part of the Gospel-treasure or Pearl. Keep
up and maintain a weaned affection from the creature. Let them that 1 Cor. 7.
29, 30, 31.
have wives, be as though they had none, and they that weep (for the loss of
wife, husband, child, estate, friend) be as though they wept not; and they
that rejoice (in any earthly comfort) as though they rejoiced not, and they
that buy (any thing but the Gospel-treasure and pearl) as though they possessed
not; And they that use this world, as not abusing it, to hinder them of the
enjoyments of the world to come. If ye be risen with Christ, by the faith of
the operation of God, Set your affection Col 3. 1, 2.
on things above, not on things on the earth.

5. Let there be diligence in all acts of grace, or in the actings of every
grace, and in all good works, which are the 2 P^t. 1. 5, etc.
fruits of faith and forerunners of glory. The more acts and actings of every
grace, the more fruitfulness, and the more fruitfulness, the more evidence;
And he that wants these things (through carelessenesse) is blind, and cannot
see afar off, so far as heaven; nay, says the Apostle, He has (...). 9.
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins; he has lost his old
evidences, of a share in Gospel-treasure; and he that is not assured for what
is past and present, cannot in that condition, be assured for the future; But
if you give diligence to hold fast what you have already, Revel. 3. 3, 11. and
to know your calling and election, for what is past and present, you shall be
sure for the future (in the same endeavors) never verse. 10.
to fall, nor lose what you have and hope for, but heaven stands open for you,
an abundant entrance shall be ministered unto you, into the everlasting kingdom
of our Lord and Savior verse. 11.
Jesus Christ, no bar, nor obstacle, nor cloud in your way.

6. Let there be diligence in heart-examination and hearty trial, and that in,
and about these three things, 1. What you have of Christ, whereto you have
attained. 2. What you have sold, and are yet to sell, of self and creature. 3.
What you are yet to buy; what cost to lay out for more assurance, evidence and
peace.

Secondly, Show your diligence, as well as use it. The word there in Heb. 6.
11. is emphatical; display your banner, your colors; let your diligence be
such as may break out and manifest it self; and according to the metaphor in
the Text, Do as buyers, go to the owner, go to the Market.

1. Go to the owner, own the owner of the field, treasure and pearl
professedly; the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Jeweller, and Master of the
Jewel-house in heaven; who deals, who sells for himself and his Father too;
Stand forth, as Zacheus did; take him into your Families, speak, act for him.

2. Go to the mart and market of ordinances, private, public. Your most
common markets for buying more of the treasure and pearl, will be prayer, the
Word, Sacraments, converse and traffic with the Saints, those that are known
merchants, experimental Christians; Begging of assurance is good buying with
God, and of him, so you be fervent and instant in it; Hearing, reading and
other exercises of the Word, will deliver over more knowledge and power of
Christ; The Sacraments for believers and their seed, will to them (and to such
I now speak) minister strong evidence and consolation, the immutable things of
God (his counsel and oath) are there; See Heb. 6. 17, 18.
and experimental Saints will tell you they never repented of their bargain,
God never falsified his oath, or promise with them; Frequent, forsake not your
assemblings together, as the manner of some (too many) Christians now adays is,

I shall leave with you some quickening spurs to diligence, after more assurance
of Christ, and so wind up my work, for this Quickening spurs to Christian
diligence.
time and text.

1. You may make your eyes your chapmen; you have found a treasure, a pearl;
you have seen it choice and precious, you have joyed in it; as being well worth
all the price that is called for; with the eye of faith you found it, and with
that, in the acts and operations of it, you may buy in all the possession. O
stir up the gift that is in you.

2. You have to deal with a faithful God, who will not, cannot deceive; with a
merciful and bountiful God, who, if you seek his Kingdom and righteousness,
will cast in brown paper and thread, all outward necessaries, and when ever
these things shall be taken from you, or you from them, you shall have your
stock entire, your treasure sure.

3. The more cost you lay out, the more you will buy. The more you deny, lose
of self, sin, creature, and life for Christ, the more you will gain of him,
and from him. It is incredible, but to those to whom it is experimental, what
comings in they have, who are selling, and selling every day, and in full
trading. They who do honestly but turn the penny, make a shift to live, but
great merchants are enriched to thousands, and ten thousands of pounds. Nothing
venture ('it is most true here) nothing have; and yet in a true sense I may say,
you that are selling all, with the greatest diligence, you venture but just
nothing, you have, and shall have all for it.

4. Consider it is no adventure beyond sea (though above sea) but a sure
exchange, and a certain return, between heaven and earth: when you first found
the Gospel-treasure in the field of promises, it may be you ventured upon the
promise, as upon ice; but I have told you often, and now tell you it again,
there is good and sure footing, and no slippery ground in a promise of Jesus
Christ: it is sure to all the seed. And now is your salvation nearer, and (to
every Christian merchant, who holds on his commerce with heaven) surer, then
when you first believed. Romans 4. 16. and 13. 11.


5. Diligence is as commendable as gainful; slothfulness and selfishnesse
shameful. See thou a man diligent in his business (says Solomon) he shall
stand before Kings: he shall not stand before mean men. If diligence raises a
man to assured preferment amongst men, what honor, what entertainment,
preferment shall the diligent Christian have with God? Does he not, shall he
not stand before the King of heaven, the King of Kings? be known as his
favorite, have more testimonies of his love? whereas on the contrary? what
folly and shame in remissness? Are ye so foolish? having Gal. 3. 3.
begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh? And again says the
Apostle, Ye did run well, who did hinder you? So as to drive you backwards.
Slothfulness makes up the mouths of Papists and Arminians, who cast shame upon
the doctrine of assurance, because of some lazy Christians.

6. Do something the more for example sake. Buy you, and others will be bidding
and buying too; Sell you, and others Phil. 1. 14. 2 Cor. 9. 2.
will be selling also. Many of the Brethren in the Lord, waxed confident by
Paul's bonds. And the zeal of the Corinthians, provoked very many. So have the
zeal of the Martyrs without number.

7. How many have gotten the start of you? are assured, and assuredly
possessed, while you are cast behind? Be provoked by others forwardness and
steadfastness, if you will not provoke others by yours. And in that so many
have made sure of Christ, still the more sure, as they have sit loose from the
creature, and stuck to a promise of a purchased possession: faint not in your
minds, flag not in your hopes, fall not off from your endeavors; double
rather and treble your diligence; So run, that ye may obtain. And if you run
but so as 1 Cor. 9. 24.
Paul, as primitive Christians, as late Martyrs and Confessors of the truth,
you shall obtain; and what greater encouragement, then to have such
forerunners and companions, and to be sure of the prize.

8. Remember it is for a treasure, a pearl of great price, a Crown, a Kingdom.
Be faithful unto death, and I will Revel. 3. 10. 1 Cor. 15. ult.
give thee a crown of life. Be steadfast in faith, and unmovable, in
self-denial, always abounding in good works, and diligent use of Ordinances,
your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord; you know it shall not be in vain,
you have evidence before hand, that you shall have a plentiful reward of all
your pains.

9. To close up all, You are called to do nothing, but in the strength of him,
who is a treasure of strength to you. By Gospel Grace, we come to get
Gospel-treasure. By Gospel Grace we come to Gospel-glory. All the money is put
into our purse to buy with, to deny with, to live, to die with. Our selling is
an act of grace, and our buying is a fruit of grace, and the fullness of glory
attends it. There is enough in this Gospel-treasure and pearl to stock us, to
trade with, and to spend upon to all eternity.

Tibi Domine Gloria.
Besides the Text it self, these other Scriptures are vindicated, and cleared.
Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 17. 45 3. 15. 46 9. 9, 10. 58

Psalms.
Psalm. Verse. Page 19. 1. to 4. 64

Proverbs.
16. 4. 30

Ecclesiastes.
9. 1. 75

Isaiah.
53. 10, 11. 54

Matthew.
Chap. Verse. Page 22. 1. to 9. 17 14. 25

Luke.
2. 10. 16

John.
1. 29. 13 3. 14. 11 15. 12 16. Ibid. 4. 42. 15 6. 37. 127 10. 15. 22 11. 52.
16 15. 10. 21 17. 9. 34 56 19. 22 per totum 56

Acts.
14. 17. 65 17. 23. 119 26. 66 27. Ibid.

Romans.
Chap. Verse. Page 1. 17. 62 18. 72 19. 62 25. 72 2. 4. 66 70 74 5. 6. 38 8. 78
10. 21 14. 10 18. 11 20. Ibid 10. 18. 64 16. 25, 26. 125

1 Corinthians.
1. 21. 62 122 23, 24. 24 3. 22. 52 7. 23. 50

2 Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page 5. 14, 15. 9 ult. 60

Galatians.
3. 13. 78

Ephesians.
1. 4. 93 2. 12. 62

Colossians.
1. 13. 50

1 Timothy.
Chap. Verse. Page 2. 4. 72 6. 19 4. 10. 49

Hebrews.
2. 3. 82 9. 6

1 Peter.
3. 18. 38

2 Peter.
2. 2. 26 4. 46 9. Ibid. 3. 8. 75 9. Ib.

1 John.
2. 2. 8 4. 9. 54

Jude.
Verse. Page 4. 48

Revelation.
13. 8. 20 14. 6. 112

FINIS.

