Die Mercurii 25. October. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Master
Poole and Master Rous do from this House give thanks unto Master Wilkinson,
and Master Salwey, for the great pains they took in the Sermons they preached
this day at the entreaty of this House at St. Margarets in the City of
Westminster, it being the day of public Humiliation, and to desire them to
Print their Sermons. And it is Ordered that none presume to Print their
Sermons, but such as shall be authorized under their hands writing.

H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Authorize Christopher Meredith or his Assigns to print my Sermon
abovenamed, and no man else.

ARTHUR SALVVEY.

These Sermons are entered according to Order.

Henry Walley.

HALTING STIGMATIZED IN A SERMON PREACHED TO THE HONORABLE House of Commons on
the monthly Fast day, October. 25. 1643. at Margarets Westminster.

By ARTHUR SALVVEY, Pastor of Severne-stoake in the County of Worcester.

Published by Order of the said House.

I would thou were either hot, or cold, but because thou art lukewarm, and
neither hot, nor cold, I will spue thee out of my mouth, Revel. 15.16.

He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers not, scatters,
Matthew. 12.30.

LONDON, Printed for CHRISTOPHER MEREDITH at the Crane in Paul's Churchyard.
1644.

TO THE HONORABLE the House of COMMONS now Assembled in Parliament.
THE Israelites being sore pinched by reason of the three years drought, and
the famine ensuing upon it under Ahab, had yet a promising message of rain,
and plenty sent to them from heaven, before they sought unto the God of heaven
for it: It seems their Idolatries, and Apostasies were grown so connaturall
unto them that they were not sensible of their miscarriages. I wish that it
were not so in England. The Sword has been feeding upon flesh, and glutting it
self with blood for a long time: and yet there is cause to complain with
Salvian, Plectimur a Deo, nec flectimur tamen; corripimur, sed non corrigimur.
Though the Lord has made us sick in smiting, yet few there are that repent of
their wickedness, saying, what have I done? but every one rusheth into sin, as
the Horse rusheth into the battle. Ier. 8.6. And no marvel, for unless the
Lord give a mind as well as means, sight as well as light, and irradiate the
Organ as well as present the Object, we cannot but err: neither is our
natural blindness, the only cause hereof; but Satan also puts his black hand
before our eyes, that we may not see the dangerous paths wherein we walk. The
world also by laying forth her two fair breasts, of profit and pleasure, has
cast down many wounded, yea many strong men have been slain by her, as it is
said of the whorish woman, Prove. 7.26. These are the principal causes (I
conceive) why so many halters in Religion are to be found among us, after so
long enjoyment of so clear light, and so many smart rods, wherewith the Lord
has chastened us. How often have we been taught from God, that we must serve
him truly, and totally, without halting, or halving? and yet how many thousands
are in this Kingdom which still continue in their sins, and even hate to be
reformed? The multitudes of carnal Gospellers, formal Protestants, combining,
and complying with the Papists, to whom Satan has lent his seven heads to
plot, his ten horns to push at the Saints of God, do sufficiently demonstrate
the truth hereof. But our comfort is that the Lord will disappoint the crafty
in their devises, so that their hands cannot perform their works, Job. 5.12.
The Lord will raise up Carpenters to cut off those horns (as you were
learnedly, reasonably, and plentifully instructed in the morning Sermon;) And
our hope is, that as the Lord has (in great mercy both to our Church, and
State) miraculously preserved your persons, supported your spirits, and carried
you on thus far in repairing our breaches, so he that has begun this great
work by you, will in his own gracious time perfect the same, whereby the
purity of Gods ordinances being settled among us, we may be freed from halting,
and halving in Religion. And how ever though in the mean time you cannot be
wholly free from the aspersions of black mouthed instruments of Satan, who by
their manifold calumnies, and reproaches seek to retard the work of God: yet
I doubt not but you will remember what was the usual saying af that holy
Martyr Master Bradford; Do well, and hear ill, is written upon heaven gates.
You do causam posteritatis agere: The Lord make you faithful, and always
bless you with his gracious presence, guiding you by his counsels, and
afterward bringing you to his glory, which is the daily, and hearty prayer of

Your servant in the Lord, ARTHUR SALVVEY.

A SERMON PREACHED AT a late Fast, October. 25. 1643. before the Honorable House
of Commons.
1 KINGS 18.21. And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye
between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow
him: and the people answered him not a word.


NOw was the time when the spiritual estate of Israel was so exceedingly
corrupted, that it required a speedy, and thorough reformation, and the spirit
of an Elijah to be employed therein. For the ten Tribes had most grievously
provoked the most High by their abominable Idolatries, and (which was a great
aggravation of their iniquity) they added unto their sin, impenitencie: and
their impenitencie was not a little heightened by their long continuance
therein, notwithstanding all the means which the Lord had used for their
reformation, who had instructed them by his faithful messengers, and corrected
them with the smart rod of a three years drought; endeavoring by an
Epidemicall Judgment, to cure an Epidemicall sin; of which punishment Elijah
had prophesied at the first verse of the precedent Chapter, which was
accordingly fulfilled, as appears in the ensuing part of the same. But the
Lord (in the midst of judgment remembering mercy) resolves to remove that sore
rod, acquaints Elijah with his purpose, and withal commands him to show
himself unto Ahab, as you may read at the first verse of this eighteenth
Chapter. Whereupon the Prophet undertakes the journey, verse. 2. And in the way
meets Obadiah, verse. 7.

This Obadiah was governor of Ahabs house, and one that feared the Lord
greatly, verse. 3. A rare thing to find so godly a man in such a wicked Family.
Elijah wills Obadiah to tell his Lord Ahab that Elijah would speak with him,
verse. 8. Obadiah refuses to deliver the message, and gives several reasons
for the justification of his denial, verse. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

But when Elijah had discovered his peremptory resolution of showing himself
to Ahab, verse. 15. Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and Ahab went to meet Elijah,
verse. 16. Ahab had no sooner set his eye upon Elijah but he charge the good
Prophet with the troubles of Israel, verse. 17.

It has ever been the property of wicked men to accuse the servants of God, as
the causes of public calamities. Thus the Heathens dealt with the Christians
in the Primitive times: If there was either the plague, or the sword, or the
famine, or the like judgments upon the Land, then Christianos ad Leones, they
haled the poor Christians to the Lions to be tormented. But observe the
Prophets answer, he deals faithfully with the King, and by way of retortion
charge the troubles of Israel upon him, and upon his Fathers house, verse. 18.
And withal requires him to summon all Israel to Mount Carmel, with the
Prophets of Baal, four hundred, and fifty, together with the four hundred
Prophets of the Groves, which did eat at Iezabels table, verse. 19. This was
done accordingly, verse. 20. The people being thus convened in a full Assembly,
the Prophet speaks unto them in the words of my Text.

And Elijah came unto all the people, and said: How long halt ye between two
opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him: and the
people answered him not a word.

Observe the Prophets courage: he feared neither Ahabs greatness, nor the
peoples number: but he came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye,
etc. Why are you thus irresolute, and inconstant? Why do ye fluctuate and
waver thus? The Hebrew word that is here translated halt, signifies (as some
observe) a lamenesse on both feet, and it is the same that is used 2 Samuel 4.4.
to express Mephibosheth his lamenesse, who was lame on both feet. Jacob had
but one side lame, and another word is used to signify his lamenesse, Genesis
32.31. These Idolaters were lame on both feet. Hereunto the Septuagint agrees.
They had never a good foot, they divided between God, and Baal, they served
neither cordially. They halted between two opinions, as it is expressed in the
Text, or between two thoughts, as it may be read; probably the false Prophets
had corrupted their judgments by their false Doctrine. Error in opinion
causes halting in practice. It is evident that they halted practically. How
long halt ye? they had for a long time continued in their halting, which made
their sin the greater, and the cure the more difficult. Frustra medicina
paratur, etc. If the Lord be God. The word Jehovah in the Hebrew, which is here
translated [Lord] signifies (as Divines observe) three things, which are proper
only to the Divine Essence.

First, Gods eternal, immutable, and independent being.

Secondly, his giving of being to the creature, and therefore the name
(Jehovah) is not mentioned till the Creation was perfect, and then we read
Jehovah Elohim, Genesis 2.4.

Thirdly, this name (Jehovah) signifies Gods faithful giving of being unto
his word and promises; and in this sense God says, that his name Jehovah was
not known to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Exodus 6.3. that is, they found not the
experimental significancy of it in the performance of the promise. If Jehovah
be God, follow him, i. e. serve him, worship him. But if Baal, then follow him.
Baal signifies a Lord or Patron; the Heathens called the Sun by that name,
which is the King or chief of the Planets. The Phoenicians worshipped the
Sun under the name of Baal-samen, the same with Jupiter Olympicus, which they
called the Lord of heaven; as they termed the Moon the Queen of heaven, which
was the Diana so much magnified by the Ephesian Idolaters. Some take Moloc, and
Baal to be one, and the same Idol, comparing Ier. 9.5. with Ier. 32.35. The
Prophet Hosea in detestation of this Idol calls him Shame: They went to
Baal-Peor and separated themselves to that Shame, Hose. 9.10. and the Greek
Interpreters translate Baal, Shame, 1 King. 18.35.

Baal-Peor (in the judgment of many) is thought to be that obscoen Idol upon
which the Heathens so much doted. Indeed corporal, and spiritual whoredom
are almost inseparable companions; the Scripture notes a like violence, and
insatiablenesse, in the pursuit of both. They were all like fed horses, every
one neighing after his neighbors wife, Ier. 5.8. And they were mad upon their
Idols, Ier. 50.38. Some are of opinion that Solomon in his book of Proverbs
rebukes spiritual, as well as corporal uncleanness: possibly the Prophets
that did eat at Iezebels table were as adulterous, as idolatrous. This Iezebel
was the daughter of Eth-Baal King of the Zidonians, 1 King. 16.31. And it is
more then probable that by her counsel her husband served Baal, and caused an
Altar to be reared up unto him, 1 King. 16.31.32. 1 King. 21.25. And herein
Ahab exceeded Jeroboam who set up the Calves in Dan, and Bethel, 1 King.
12.28.29. This wicked, whorish, painting Iezebel caused King Ahab (who was the
too uxorious husband of a most imperious wife) to murder his good subject,
Naboth the Iezreelite.

The Prophet in the words of my Text seems to reason thus. If Jehovah be an
eternal, immutable, and independent being; if he give being to every creature,
and to his word, and promises, keeping covenant with his people for ever; then
serve him: But if Baal be your Creator, if he can preserve you, if he can give
you food, and rain, etc. then serve him. And the people answered him not a
word. Whether they were convinced by the Prophets speech that Jehovah was the
true God, but were afraid to confess him, lest they should offend Ahab much,
and Iezebel more: or whether they waited for some miraculous, and visible
discovery of the true God, having experience of the Prophets prevalencie with
God, and in the mean time thought it convenient to suspend their confession.
For when they saw the fire descend from heaven, and consume the sacrifice, then
they brake out into an open acknowledgement, and said, The Lord he is the God,
The Lord he is the God, 1 King. 18.38.39. Or whether they were so astonished
with the Prophets Dilemma, that they knew not what to answer; I determine not.

In the Prophets speech we may observe,

First, his complaint: Secondly, his counsel. His complaint in these words,
How long halt ye between two opinions? His counsel in these, If the Lord be
God, then follow him: but if Baal, then follow him.

The complaint is reprehensory: it is a chiding complaint, he rebukes them
sharply for their halting in Religion: The acrimony, or tartness of the
reproof appears by the interrogative expression of it, and he aggravateth
their sin by their long continuance therein: How long halt ye? I begin with
the complaint, or reprehension, and thence I propound this Doctrine, viz.

Neuter, or an Vterque, or a Waverer in Religion. Neutralitie, without
controversy, is not to be endured. The Prophet in his Dilemma takes it for
granted, that there is no colorable plea for neutralitie. If the Lord be God,
follow him, etc. he takes it for granted, that one of them must be worshipped;
otherwise his reasoning had not been cogent: for they might have replied, Nay,
but we will suspend, we perceive that we are in a snare. If we Serve Jehovah,
we shall displease Ahab; and if we worship Baal, we shall offend you: it will
be our wisdom to serve neither.

Honorable, and Beloved, in matters civil we have sometimes a latitude, and
liberty of suspension: but in Religion there is a necessity of determination,
and resolution.

The Scripture speaks out: Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him,
Deuteronomy. 6.13. As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, Isa. 45.23.
As the Neuter is abominable, so the halting Vterque is not to be endured, that
divides between God, and Baal: God will not allow of any dividing either in
the Object, or Terminus of worship: as he will be worshipped; so he will be
worshipped solely. Thou shall have no other Gods but me. The Lord is a jealous
God, and will endure no corrivall. Jealousy is the rage of a man, and he will
not spare in the day of his wrath, Prove. 6.34.35. God looks upon divided
worship, as no worship. It is said of those Idolaters spoken of, 2 King. 17. in
one verse. that they feared God, and worshipped their Idols: and in the verse.
immediately following, That they feared not God, 2 King. 17.33.34. and 1 Zeph.
5. The Lord severely threatened such as did swear by the Lord, and by Malcham.
As the Lord cannot endure dividing in the Terminus of worship, so he hates
dividing in the rule of worship, and the worship it self. The halting Vterque
that makes the Scripture a partial rule of worship, that worshippeth God
partly after the prescript of the word, and partly according to the Dictates of
his own carnal reason, cannot perform any acceptable service to Almighty
God. See thou do all things according to the pattern, was the command of God
unto Moses, Heb. 8.5. Will Worship is vain worship. In vain do they worship
me, teaching for doctrines, the commandments of men, Matthew. 15.9. This corrupt
mingling in Gods worship was prohibited, Levit. 19.19.

As God will be worshipped solely, and wholly, so he will be worshipped
constantly: as he hates a Neuter, and Vterque, so he cannot endure a Waverer.
The Lord commands us to hold fast our profession without wavering, Heb. 10.23.
When we have proved all things, we must hold fast that which is good, 1 These.
5.21. Inconstancy in Religion is a very evil thing, whether you consider the
sin of it, or the punishment which is due to it. It comes from evil, it
tends to evil. It comes from evil, as from the general fountain of all
actual sins; original corruption: so particularly from that evil heart of
unbelief whereby we depart from the living God, Heb. 3.12. It tends to evil
both in respect of sin, and punishment. It is dishonorable unto God. It is a
high impeachment of his glorious attributes. It wrongs God in his wisdom,
justice, mercy, power, goodness, faithfulness, as if God were not worthy of
our firmest resolutions, and most constant adherence; in a word, of our poor
All; or, as if he were either unable, or unwilling to revenge himself upon
inconstant halters. As it dishonours God, so it discredits Religion, it brings
an ill report upon the holy ways of God, as those Spies brought an ill report
upon the good Land of Canaan, as if the ways of God were unpleasant, or his
service unprofitable. As it is dishonorable unto God, and unto Religion, so it
is hurtful unto themselves. It hurts the Wavering Christian in his conscience,
if conscience be ^ot in a dead sleep, it will speak bitter things unto the
backslider: it will say unto him. If the Lord be not God, why do thou serve
him at all? and if he be God, and worthy of thy service, why do thou not
serve him always? The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways,
Prove. 14.14. When (I say) conscience is thoroughly awakened, it will fill the
soul with most exquisite torments. It hurts us in our credits; what greater
ignominy, then the brand of inconstancy? There goes a shifter, a turncoate, an
Apostatizing hypocrite: what can render a man more stigmatically odious? what
makes the devil so black, but his Apostasy? In a word, it hurts us
temporally, and eternally: It subjects us to a thousand miseries in this life,
and to everlasting punishment in the world to come. What are the causes of so
many sad changes in our present outward condition? surely, this is not the
least, even our changeableness in Religion: When they chose new Gods, then was
war in the gates, Judge. 5.8. It subjects the soul, and body unto everlasting
perdition in hell, there to endure the punishments both of loss, and sense. It
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, who is a jealous
God, and a consuming fire: such as draw back to unbelief, they do it to the
perdition of their souls, Heb. 10.23.26.27.39. Nothing is more just then that
Jesus Christ should deny us before God his Father, and all his holy Angels, and
blessed Saints; if we deny him before men. The fearful and unbelieving shall
be cast into the lake which burns with fire, and brimstone, which is the second
death, Revel. 21.8.

I proceed unto Application.

First, Baal in their Image Worship, Saint-worship, Bread-worship, in their
monstrous doctrine asserting the Popes infallibility: some of them
blasphemously affirming that of the man of sin, which the Israelites (spoken
of in my text) after conviction, did righly acknowledge concerning the true
God, The Lord he is the God: the Lord he is the God. 1 King. 18.39. So some of
them have called the Bishop of Rome: Dominus Deus noster Papa, Our Lord God the
Pope: Blush ye heavens at this prodigious blasphemy! Are there not also titular
Protestants among us who divide between God, and Baal in their presence at the
Idolatrous Mass, and marrying with Idolatrous Papists? are there not
multitudes in this Land that worship God after the traditions of men, or that
are formal, and lukewarm in the use of Gods ordinances: or that are
miserably inconstant in Religion, and the high concernments thereof? I wish
that I had not just cause to take up a very sad complaint against the
generality of the people of this Land: how much forwardness did they profess
in the beginning of this Parliament in their Petitions, and Protestations for
the maintenance of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, opposition of Popery,
and superstition, defense of the Laws of the Land, Liberties of the Subject,
and Privileges of Parliament: but I may now say of them as the Apostle spoke
of his Galatians in another case: Where is the blessedness you spoke of? Gal.
4.15. When the Lycaonians saw the miracle that Paul wrought in curing the
Creeple, then they cried out, The Gods are come down amongst us, in the
likeness of men, Acts 14.8, 9, 10, 11. But when the Barbarians saw the Viper
upon his hand, then they cried out he was a Murderer, Act. 28.4. Thus have many
behaved themselves toward you (Honorable Senators) when you cured the
Creeples, I mean such as were Creeples in their estates, and liberties; when
you took away Ship Money, Monopolies, and the like burdens: when you made the
lame to walk, opening the Prison doors unto such as were in bonds: when you
made the dumb to speak, opening the mouths of many silenced Ministers; then
they could say, Oh this is a blessed Parliament! We had been undone if it had
not been for this Parliament: but when they saw the viperous brood of malignant
Adversaries unto our Religion, and Laws, in Arms against you; then what
multitude of Creeples did presently appear? Most were (I wish I could not say,
are) lame on one foot; yea, of too many I may say, utroque poplite, they are
lame on feet. And what are the motives that prevalle with these men? Are they
not such as swayed these Israelites; peace, peace, peace upon any terms;
Court-favour and the like. And may not I take in the Quousque also? How long
halt ye? What? halt still? after so many satisfactory Declarations from the
Parliament, I may add so many visible declarations from heaven, the Almighty
Lord of Hoasts most convincingly discovering his owning of the Cause (wherein
poor servants have so freely engaged themselves) in wonderful preservations,
gracious deliverances, glorious victories.

Honorable Senators, Has there not been halting within your walls? Have not
many of your members unworthily forsaken you, and miserably deserted the
glorious cause of God? The Lord open their eyes, and heal their backslidings.

Ieremies Patheticall wish, Ier. 9.1. Oh that my head were waters, and mine
eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day, and night, Shall I say, for
the slain of the Daughter of Gods people? Indeed there is cause enough to
weep abundantly, for the precious blood that has been shed, by the hands of
Malignant, and bloodthirsty men: But I may add for the halting, the general
halting of the Nation there is abundant cause of bitter mourning. Oh that the
serious and sad consideration hereof might make deep furrows upon our hearts
this day! If the Lord should come to set a mark upon such as mourn for all
the abominations that are done in the Land, as once he commanded in the
Prophecy of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 9. I fear that but a few of us should receive it.
And may I not take in the Quousque also? the How long mentioned in my Text, for
a sad aggravation of our iniquity; and a powerful motive unto deepest
humiliation? In our petitions unto God we sometimes use very earnest, and
importunate expostulations: then we double, and treble our Quousques. How long,
O Lord, will thou be angry with the prayers of thy people? How long will thou
forget me, O Lord? How long, O Lord, holy, and true? Shall we not consider how
often we have put the Lord to his Quousques also? How long ye simple ones will
ye love simplicity? O Jerusalem wash thy heart from wickedness: How long
shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem, will thou
not be made clean? When shall it once be? Shall not we put the Quousque into
our confessions also, and judge ourselves this day for our long continuance in
our sins, and rebellions against God? Does it not become us to say, Lord, how
long have we halted? How long have we continued in a Laodicean temper? May not
I take up the Lords complaint, uttered by the Prophet Amos in the fourth
Chapter of his Prophecy, and press that aggravating, [Yet,] mentioned four
times in that Chapter. And make use of the like complaint delivered by the
Prophet Micah. Chap. 6. verse. 9. and 10. The Lords voice cries unto the City,
and the man of wisdom will see thy name, hear the rod, and who has appointed
it: Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and
the scant measure that is abominable? So may I say; Are there yet Neuters,
Vterques, Waverers? Are there yet halting Malignants notwithstanding the long
continuance of so many heavy Judgments upon this Land?

If the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him? The Prophet
speaks thus hypothetically, not as if he doubted whether Jehovah or Baal were
the true God: but he secretly checks their fluctuating, and wavering, and
presses them to resolution, zeal, and constancy. We must not follow God a
far off, as Peter followed Christ, and when we are espied, deny him, as he
did: nor trembling, as the people followed Saul: not for a time only, as
Demas, who forsook Paul, and clave unto this present world: but we must follow
him in truth, as Samuel counsels, 1 Samuel 12.24. and cleave unto him with
purpose of heart, as Barnabas exhorts, Act. 11.23. We must follow him fully
as Caleb did, Number. 14.24. We must cleave unto him, and not depart from
following him; as it is registered of Hezekiah unto his everlasting praise, 2
King. 18.6. We must grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. And our last works should be
more then our first, which was Thyatira's commendation, Revel. 2.19. Let us
resolve to follow him in worship, and manners, worshipping him according to his
revealed will, and ordering our conversation according to his holy word: And
that we may be thus entire, and constant, let us take into our most serious
consideration these ensuing Directions.



Phil. 4.13.

Cor. 5.14. For as reward has an attractive, and punishment an impulsive: so
love has a compulsive faculty. Reward draws: punishment drives: but love is
most efficacious in the persuading of us unto the discharge of our duty.

Lastly, fix your faith upon the promises, study Moses his optics, eye him
that is invisible, Heb. 11.27. And eye the threats also: Look upon that good
which God promises, as the greatest good, and upon the evil which he
threatens, as the greatest evil.

And (Honorable Patriots) I beseech you suffer the word of exhortation: let it
be your chiefest care to follow God, in your personal holiness, and in the
promoting of a national Reformation; Follow him personally. It will be your
greatest honor to be his servants: You are very high in your civil
privileges, but there is a privilege of which Saint John speaks that
infinitely out-shines all earthly splendor; It is the privilege of our
spiritual Adoption. To as many as received him, he gave the power or
privilege to become the sons of God: even to those that believe on his name,
Ioh. 1.12. For there is a Nobility which is divine, and supernatural, whereof
God is the top of the kin, and Religion, the Root, in regard of which all other
Nobility is but a mere shadow: It would be a sad thing (Noble Senators) if
after the hearing of so many soul searching Sermons out of this place, if
after so much good done by you unto the Kingdom in the work of Reformation,
any of you should remain in an unregenerate condition, if any of you should be
like the builders of the Arc, who provided for the safety of others, but
could not save themselves from perishing by the Deluge. Consider I beseech you
(worthy Christians) that the Vows of God are upon you, you have abjured
Neutralitie in your late Solemn Covenant, far be it from any of you to glory
in a lukewarm indifferency, as if it were a piece of singular policy. They
who thus glory in their shame, shall one day be ashamed of this their glory.
You have with your tongues renounced this Neutralitie, and indifferency as
detestable. Follow the Lord in promoting a National Reformation. You have an
admirable pattern, the zealous Prophet Elijah, a man of such transcendent
zeal, that toheighten the expression thereof, some have legendred of him, that
when he drew his mothers breasts, he was seen to suck in fire: I wish from my
soul that a double portion of his spirit, may be given unto you, that you may
act in his power, and spirit: Elijah opposed Idolatry and oppression, so do
ye, down with Baals altars, down with Baals priests: do not (I beseech you)
consent unto a toleration of Baals worship in this Kingdom upon any politic
consideration whatsoever; I have heard that you have already Voted that you
will never give your consent to the toleration of the Romish Mass in this
Kingdom. I will take up the words of David's prayer, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. O Lord God
of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel our Father, keep this for ever in the
imagination of the thoughts of your hearts. Follow God (I beseech you) in the
speedy, and impartial execution of Justice: Give me leave (I beseech you) to
be your humble Remembrancer: The mouths of your Adversaries are opened against
you, the hearts of your true friends are grieved, That so many Delinquents are
in prison, and yet but very few of them brought to their trial: I know that
your occasions are many, and pressing, but I beseech you lay hold upon the next
opportunity for the doing of it. Remember your late Covenant: When Elijah had
done execution upon Baals priests; there was rain enough, 1 Kings 18. Who
knows how soon the Lord may bless us with an holy peace, and blessed
Reformation, if Justice were more fully executed? Let us follow on to know the
Lord, his going forth is prepared as the Morning, and he shall come unto us as
the latter, and former rain, Hos. 6.3. Twice in the year there fell store of
rain in Israel, in the beginning of the year about September, or October, and
half a year after. The first rain fell after the sowing of their corn, that
it might take rooting in the earth: the latter rain was a little before the
harvest, that the ear might be full. We have had the former rain in the
calling of this Parliament, we hope that the Lord will give us the latter rain
also in the continuance of his blessing upon it in perfecting the work of
Reformation. God has raised you up to be the repairers of the breaches,
consider (I beseech you) that from the first service in the Temple when it was
built, and the time of Elijahs Reformation, was about an hundred years: and
from the Reformation in Edward the sixth his days until this present is much
about the same proportion of time: Is not this the very time for which God has
reserved, and for which he has so admirably prepared you? Make the word of God
your Rule in the Reformation of Religion: Shortly (I hope) a plat-forme of
worship, discipline, and government, will be presented unto you, by those whom
you have employed for that purpose. I beseech you bring all unto the
Touchstone of the word. Believe it (Worthies) that Form of Government will be
best for the State, which is most agreeable unto the word: It has been often
said by the Bishops of the Government of the Reformed Churches (and they did
commonly instance in Presbytery) that it was no friend to Monarchy. But I am
sure that Prelacy is no enemy unto Tyranny. The Lord guide you in the managing
hereof, that what you shall do herein, may tend unto the glory of God, and the
good and peace of his CHURCH.

FINIS.

