THE WELS OF Salvation OPENED: OR, A TREATISE Discovering The nature,
preciousnesse, usefulness of Gospel-Promises, and Rules for the right
application of them.

By William Spurstowe, D. D. Pastor of Hackney near London.

(...). Isod. Pel. ep. 1. 141. Imprimatur, Edm. Calamy.

London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange. 1655.

Dr. SPURSTOWE, on the PROMISES.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Edward, Earl of MANCHESTER, Vicount Mandeville, Baron
of KIMBOLTON.
Right Honorablt,
THere are two ranks of men extremely differing in regard of their estate and
condition, that use for the most part to go with staves in their hands; but not
to the same end, or purpose. The Nobleman carries his as a badge and emblem of
his office, and high honor. It being an ancient custom for Princes to give
the investiture into places of dignity and eminency, per traditionem baculi, by
the delivering of a staff. The common traveller takes up his, the better to
support him in the length of his journey, and to ease him in the difficulty and
roughness of the way. But these staves of Honor God has cut asunder, as he
did those of beauty, and bands, Zach. 11. 7. having had for these late years a
sharp contest with the Cedars of the Land. And which is a lamentation, and
shall be for a lamentation; has dried up the roots from whence they sprang.

That which I presume to put into your Honors hand, is the staff of a
traveller, yet not of such an one, as beats the common rode and path of the
world; but of such who professing themselves strangers and sojourners on earth,
both seek, and mind an heavenly country. And to be amongst the number of
those (I am persuaded) you do not only count it your duty; but also make it
your work, esteeming it a greater glory to be one of Zions Pilgrims, then of
Englands Peers. Now how expedient and necessary a staff is in this journey, I
would the times themselves did not abundantly speak; the difficulties of which
have been such; as that to many Religion it self has become a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense. Others as dejected, have fainted in their
profession, and have cast away their confidence, for want of looking up unto
the promises, which in such seasons are the belevers only support and
assurance, that though the way, of the Lamb, be a way of blood, yet the end is
a throne of glory, and a crown of life. That I may therefore strengthen your
hands in God, and be serviceable to your faith, I have) made bold to dedicate
this small Treatise of the Promises to your Honor, which I wish might prove in
your hands as the rod of Myrtle* in the hand of the traveller, which as
Historians report, does keep him from growing weary. And that it might so tend
to the increase of spiritual strength, as that when the youths shall faint, and
the young men urterly fall; you may be as those that wait upon God, that run
and are not weary, and walk, and are not faint, Esaias 40. 31. However, though I
can communicate no virtue unto it; yet I shall not cease to follow it with my
prayers, beseeching God, that both it, and all other means which through his
grace you may enjoy for the welfare of your soul, may prove so successeful by
his blessings, as that you may reap the rich fruit of all the Promises in the
everlasting fruition of life, and glory; And that your Noble posterity may be
heirs also together with your self, of the same mercies. So I test,

October. 26. 1654. Your Honors in all Christian Observance WILLIAM SPURSTOWE.

Christian Reader.
THere is a Vanity with which Prefaces are tainted, not much unlike that
predominant folly in these days of wantonness of spotting of faces; For as
some do industriously place artificial spots here and there, which by their
contrariety may serve as a foil to their beauty, and heighten it to the lust
and fancy of others, beyond what it is in truth: So others by a severe
observance and calculation of the omissions and failings of such who have
treated on the same or like subject with themselves, do by presenting of them
to the Readers view, make use of their defects, as so many Beauty spots to
inamour him the more with the absolute compleatnesse of their Books. But far
be it from me to make the profitable pains of those who have employed their
time, and busied their thoughts on such a Noble subject as the Promises are, to
serve as a dark shadow to set off this small Treatise concerning them, which I
now put into thy hands. I have reaped both light and profit from them, and
therefore cannot but thankfully acknowledge it. Nor do I conceive that I have
comprised the great worth of the Promises, in this Manual, as he of old did
Homers Iliads in a Nut-shell; or to have done ought that may be a bar to the
labors of others whose abilities are greater, and more fit to come under a
public view then mine are. The Promises are a large field in which the wise
Merchant may find more pearls hidden, then are yet espied: A rich mine in
which the diligent labourer may dig forth more fine gold, then any yet have
taken from them: They are the Churches storehouse, while it is on this side
heaven, from whence Believers in all ages may be filled with comfort, as every
eye is with new light that beholds the Sun. So rhat there is still a great
opportunity for the Ministers of God to put their sickle into this harvest; and
an encouragement also to Believers to take hold of all helps and advantages
that may be afforded them for the clearing of their knowledge, and the
quickening of their affections, in the daily use and application of the
Promises. And if to either, or both of these ends, this small Tractate (which
is the substance of sundry Sermons preached diverse years past) may in the least
conduce, I shall seek no other recompense from thee then that I may have an
interest in thy prayers, both for an increase of grace, and of abilities,
whereby I may be made more serviceable to the glory of his Name unto whom all
ought to live. So I rest,

Hackney, October. 26. 1654. Thine to serve thee in Christ, William Spurstowe.

ERRATA.
Courteous Reader.
THere are more faults then this Index will punctually discover both in the
pointing, and words, yet these that are most obvious thus correct.

Page 28. Line 21. for husbands, read husband. p. 83. l. 5. for diminuition, r.
diminution. p. 108. l. 4. for such light, r. sweet light. p. 136. l. 23. for
stops, r. steps. p. 192. l. ult. for wowne r. swown. p. 250. l. 4. for styled,
r. styles. p. 140. l. ult. add Secondly, p. 141. l. 24. put the comma at see
with, p. 154. l. 5. For and flesh, r. his flesh.

Scriptures Expounded.
Chap. Verse Page Exodus 34 6, 7 91 1 Chronicles. 25 6 99 Psalm 34 10 95 37 16 134
66 16 273 73 16 147 94 19 42 103 1 266 105 19 136 Esaias 1 18 96 7 3 200 25 6, 7,
8 14 38 13, 14 207 43 2 94 44 22 192 Hosea 14 4 97 5, 6, 7 93 Micah 7 19 192
Matthew. 11 28 121 15 23, 24, 25 151 Mark 10 17 165 14 72 182 Luke 5 31 122 15
18 183 John 6 37 179 Romans 1 18 55 Hebrews 4 14 5 7 229 9 10 218 11 19 56 1
John 3 2 30

THE Contents.
Chap. I. Page 1. IN which the words of the Text are opened, and the chief
particulars to be handled, proposed. Chap. II. Page. 8. In which is declared
what a Promise is, and how it differs both from a Precept and a Command.
Chap. III. Page 14. In which the excellency and preciousnesse of the promises
is set forth in several particulars. 1. Christ the root of them. 2. The
Promises are the root of Faith. 3. The things promised are precious.
Chap. IV. Page 22. In which is discovered the noble effects of the Promises,
and in what sense by them we are made partakers of the divine nature. Chap. V.
Page 30. The Promises grounds of matchless consolation in four particulars.
Comforts from the Promises are 1. Pure. 2. Full. 3. Sure. 4. Universal. Chap.
VI. Page 43. Containing positive rules directing to the right use of the
Promises. 1. Eye God in the Promises. 2. Eye the free grace of God in making
them. 3. Gods power in performing them. 4. The unchangeablenesse of his purpose
to effect them. 5. His wisdom to fulfill them in the best time.
Chap. VII. page 65. Contains the 2, 3, 4, 5. positive Rules for the right
application of the Promises. Rule. 2. How the Promises are in their performance
conditional. p. 66 Rule. 3. There is a dependency of one promise on another,
which must not be broken nor inverted. p. 73 Rule. 4. A serious and frequent
meditation on the Promises. p. 77 Rule. 5. To be much in the application of the
Promises. p. 81
Chap. VIII. Containing five other positive Rules. Rule 6. Continue in holy
waiting upon God. p. 86 Rule 7. Make choice of some special Promise to resort
unto in extremity. p. 90 Rule 8. To eye such examples to whom promises have
been fulfilled. p. 96 Kule 9. To preserve our communion with the holy Spirit
entire, who is the great applier of promises. p. 101 Rule 10. Be truly thankful
for the least dawnings of mercy. p. 105
Chap. IX. Page 111. Cautionary Rules for the application of the Promises Rule
1. Rest not in general faith. Rule 2. Pore not on the measure of humiliation,
which is in some more, in some less. p. 121
Chap. X. Contains the 3, 4, 5. cautionary Rules. Rule 3. Take heed of
looking to Providence more then Promises, which are more clear, more certain.
p. 129 Rule 4. Take heed of affectation and curiosity in selecting Promises. p.
138 Rule 5. Take heed of carnal reasoning, which is dangerous, as may appear in
several particulars. p. 143.
Chap. XI. Containing seven cautionary Rules. Rule 6. Take heed of groundless
fancies concerning the manner of receiving comfort from the promises. p. 153
Rule 7. Let not the heart out after worldly objects, the danger showed in
several particulars. p. 162
Chap. XII. In which diverse Queries are resolved. Sect. 1. Faith is not
Assurance proved by sundry demonstrations. p. 170
Chap. XIII. What use a Believer may make of the Promises of pardon after
relapses. p. 18 Sect. 1. How far a Believer may charge upon himself Atrocious
sins. p. 181 Sect. 2. How far a Believer ought not to charge upon himself
Atrocious sins and backslidings. p. 188
Chap. XIV. Page 196. Showing what use may be made of such Promises as we
cannot expect to see the performance of. 1. They are useful to support under
present troubles of the Church. p. 168 2. They are useful as a firm rock to
bottom prayer upon. 3. They are useful to try the sincerity of a Believers
affection and love to Gods glory. p. 202 4. They are useful to comfort
Believers in regard of their posterity. p. 204
Chap. XV. Page 205. Whether a Believer always enjoyes the comfort of assurance
in death; who is diligent in making use of the Promises. In answer four
conclusions set down. 1. A Believer may meet with many conflicts in his death.
p. 206 2. That our diligence to clear up our interest in the Promises is the
ordinary and regular way to obtain comfort. p. 207 3. That the improvement of
Promises does usually procure comfort in death; unless in four cases. First,
When sickness and distempers are violent. Secondly, When temptations and
assaults of Satan are vehement. Thirdly, When Christians have intermitted their
wanted care and circumspection. Fourthly, When their graces and comforts have
been manifested to themselves and others in their life, God may withdraw: 1. To
manifest the strength of their Faith. 2. To show that comfort in death is not
so necessary as Grace. 3. In judgment to others, who getting no good by their
life, shall not be gainers by their death.


Chap. XVI. Page 216. Showing what use is to be made of temporal Promises.
Sect. 1. Why God has made such various Promimises of temporal mercies to his
people under the Law. p. 218 Sect. 2. Four benefits come to Believers by
looking to temporal promises. p. 220 Sect. 3. Five Assertions directing to the
right understanding of temporal promises. p. 226 1. Gods Declaration of giving
temporal blessings, is not absolute. 2. The fulfilling of temporal promises is
disjunctive. 3. Temporal promises are to be expounded with the reservation of
the Cross. 4. Temporal mercies in the Promises are only to be obtained by well
regulated prayer. 5. The blessing of temporary promises are to be sought
secondarily, and not primarily.

Chap. XVI Page 235. Shows it is a horrible sin to neglect or abuse the
Promises: aggravated in five particulars. Sect. 1. From the universality of the
sin. p. 237 Sect. 2. From the vanity and emptiness of those things which most
men set their hearts upon. p. 239 Sect. 3. From the mutability and uncertainty
of those things which do take off most men from valuing the Promises. p. 242
Sect. 4. From the facility of being made partaker of the Promises. p. 245 Sect.
5. From the command of God and Christ.
Chap. XVIII. Page 246. Four differences betwixt the Promises of God and Satan.
1. Difference is betwixt the persons that made them. p. 248 2. Difference is in
the matter of the Promises. p. 249 3. Difference is in the ground of the
Promises. p. 251 4. Difference is in the accomplishment.
Chap XIX. Page 255. Shows that the worst estate of a Believer is better then
the best estate of an unbeliever. Chap. 20. Page 265. Grounds of thankfulness
to God for precious Promises to his people. 1. The end of Gods goodness to his
is his glory. p. 267 2. It is all the return we can make. p. 268 3. It is the
work of the Saints in heaven. p. 269 Thankfulness is to be expressed in three
particulars. 1. When it makes us more holy. p. 271 2. When we proclaim and
make known Gods mercy unto others. p. 272 3. In affectionate blessing of God
for Christ, by whom all that is wrapped in them, is given unto us. 4. In a
vehement desire after a plenary possession of that felicity, of which they are
pledges.


Chap. XXI. Page 277. Motives to act Faith in the Promises. 1. Life of Faith,
is that life that God would have Believers to live. 2. It is the most contented
life, and fullest of real sweetness. First, The Promises are the matter of
the purchase of the blood of Christ. Secondly, They are the matter of the
intercession of Christ.


FINIS.
THE WELLS OF Salvation OPENED.
2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby [ or by whom] are given unto us exceeding great and
precious promises* that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature,
having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.


CHAP. 1. In which the words of the Text are opened, and the Principal
particulars to be handled, proposed.
THE natural life of man is usually divided into the three states of Childhood,
Youth and Old age: unto which St John aptly alluding, makes the same
distinction of the spiritual life of believers; whom he ranks into Children,
Young men, and Fathers. Into Children for their tenderness and weakness, into
Young men for their strength and confidence, into Fathers for their knoweledge
and experience in the high mysteries of the Gospel. All which though differing
in regard of their condition, do yet agree in the principle from whence their
life is derived, and in the means by which it is carried on and preserved. The
principle of every believers life is Christ, and the means of its preservation
are the promises; whose virtue and efficacy is such, as happily suites it self
with the several age and condition of believers. The promises are the babes
milk by which they are nourished, the full breasts from whence they suck both
grace and comfort: they are the young men's evidences, by which they are
animated to combat with the wicked one, and assured of being crowned with
victory over him: they are the old men's staff, upon the top of which like aged
Jacob they may safely lean, and worship God; it being a staff for power like
Moses rod, and for flourishing like Aarons, budding, blossoming, and yielding
precious fruit. So that it is of more then ordinary concernment unto every one
of them that look upon themselves as believers (whatsoever pitch and stature
they have arrived unto) not to be supine and careless in the frequent use, and
due application of the promises; which from their implantation into Christ to
their full enjoyment of him, are the chief aides and support, both of life and
growth. Nor to be like unskilful Lapidaries little valuing the worth of such
oriental pearls, which are the only riches and treasure of every heir of glory
on this side heaven. Concerning which this verse holds forth sundry weighty
particulars; branching it self out into as many parts, as that river which went
out of Eden to water the garden, from whence it was parted and became into
four heads, Genesis 2. 10.

The first is the fountain from whence the promises flow; to which (if we read
the words per quem, by whom) the relative particle fairly guides us; as a
standing Mercury does the doubtful traveller. Expositors about the reading of
the words do somewhat differ, but n^ jarre, which the variety of lections both
in the Greek and Latin copies has chiefly occasioned. Some read (...),
whereby; and so connecting this verse with the former, would have the sense to
run thus: Through the knowledge of him that has called us by glory and
virtue, whereby are given unto us, etc. Prosper, as also Bid read per quam,
by which, viz. knowledge of God are given unto us exceeding great and precious
promises: from whence he makes this collection, Quo quis perfectius Deum
cognoscit, tanto altius promissorum ejus magnitudinem sentiat: The more
perfectly any man knows God, the more fully sensible he is of the transcendent
worth of his promises Others again conceive the most genuine lection of the
verse (though happily the less frequent) to be (...), by whom, rather then
(...), whereby. And that because as Estius observes, praebet sensum maxim
Evangelicum, it renders the sense most Evangelical and Gospel-like; in regard
it points out Christ unto us, who is the Alpha, and Omega of all the promises,
the only Original from whence they spring, and the center in which they meet.
To him they were all first made, and ratified on our behalf; in him they are
all fulfilled and accomplished unto us. As the rivers have their efflux from
the sea, and their reflux into the sea; so have the promises their emanation
from Christ, their revolution into Christ; they flow freely from him, they lead
sweetly to him.

The second branch is the tenure, and manner of interest that believers have in
the promises: They are given unto us. In propriety of language, promises are
rather made then given; but by a Metonymy usual in Scripture they are put for
the things promised, the blessings both of grace and glory. All which though
purchased by Christ with the price of his blood; are yet conferred, and freely
bestowed upon believers by his mercy. The hidden Manna, a type of our heavenly
consolations, the White stone, the emblem of our perfect justification, the
New name, the earnest of our adoption in glory, they are favors not set to
sale, but given, Rev. 2. 17. Out of the full heap Christ invites not to buy,
but to take, and the pennilesse are the most welcome, Isa. 55. 1. Gratia gratis
datur, etiam cum emitur, gratis emitur: Grace (says Bernard) is freely given,
yea when it is bought, it is bought freely and without price.

The third is the goodness, and worth of the promises, set forth by a double
character: Exceeding great, and precious. Greatness and goodness are then
most refulgent when they meet in the same subject, and are joined by natural
couples and connexions; like to the curtains of the Tabernacle, that were
looped one to another; but such a conjunction as it is glorious, so it is rare,
and seldom found either in persons, or in things, in persons they are so
dissociated, as if they were of lineages altogether distinct, and had small or
no affinity. Rarely are great men good, or good men great. And as in persons,
so in things they are not often linked, and chained together. Pibbles are
great, but not precious; Pearls are precious, but not great; water in the sea
is abundant, but not pure; in the brook pure, but not abundant. But in the
promises there is a full and happy concurrence of both, they are made up of
things wherein greatness and worth do vie with each other* everlasting life is
as sweet, as long; heaven is as glorious in its beauty, as vast in its
dimensions; the crown of righteousness that is laid up is as rich as weighty.
There is no one promise of the Gospel, but is of that extent for its latitude,
and of that value for its preciousnesse, that he deserves to be eternally
poor, who having that for his subsistence, looks upon any man who has an
interest in none, greater or richer then himself though the gravel of the river
were turned into pearls, and every shower of rain from the clouds into a
shower of silver and gold for to supply his wants.

The fourth particular is, The high and noble end of the donation of the
promises. That by them we might be partakers of the divine nature, etc.
Painters when they picture Angels, do not intend similitude, but beauty: Nor
does the Apostle in this expression aim at any essential change, and
conversion of our substance into the nature of God, and Christ; but only at the
elevation and dignifying of our nature by Christ. Our near union with him does
restore us to an higher similitude and likeness of God, then ever we attained
in our primitive perfection; but it does not introduce any real transmutation
either of our bodies or souls into the divine nature. For if that stupendous
union of the two natures in one person the Lord Christ, does not effect an
essential change in either; but that both natures do conserve, and retain
their distinct properties without mixture, or confusion: much less can the
Union between Christ and believers, which is not a personal Union, but an Union
of persons, made by the Spirit, and by faith, cause any such alteration; as
that our nature losing its own subsistence, should wholly pass into the
divine, and be swallowed up in the Abyss of it; as a drop when it falls into
the wide Ocean. Pithily does Cyprian express this truth, when he affirms,
Nostra and ipsius conjunctio nec miscet personas, nec unit substantias; sed
affectus consociat, and confoederat voluntates: Our and Christ's conjunction
does neither mingle persons, nor unite substances; but does conjoyne our
affections, and bring into a league of amity our wills. Suitable to that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 17. They that are joined to the Lord, are made one spirit.

CHAP. II. In which is declared what a promise is.
IT is not designed by me as the subject of my present task to undertake a
distinct and full prosecution of all these four particulars in the text, every
one of which like gold in the beating, would easily diffuse and spread
themselves into a large compass; but occasionally to glance at them, as they
conduce to the illustration of that head, and branch which I shall single and
cull out from the rest, as the present subject upon which I shall pitch and fix
my thoughts, and that is the matchless worth and goodness of the promises of
the Gospel. A truth it is of much weight, and sweetness to every believer; but
yet as it lies contracted in a proposition, discovers not so much of it; as
when drawn forth into a full explication: like to colors that are less
beautiful and pleasing, while they lie on the palate of the painter, then when
placed and spread on the picture by the pencil of the artificer. I shall
therefore in the unfolding of it endeavor these five things.

First, to show what a promise is. Secondly, in what respects they are great
and precious Thirdly, give rules about the due application of them. Fourthly,
resolve some useful Queries and cases concerning them. Fifthly, close and shut
up all with some practical inferences and genuine applications, such as flow
from the doctrine of the promises; The honey, which drops from the comb is of
all the best* and sweetest.
First, what a promise is. It is a declaration of Gods will, wherein he
signifies what particular good things he will freely bestow, and the evils that
he will remove. This description like the box of spiknard in the Gospel may be
more useful when it is broken, then whole: I shall therefore take it into
pieces, and give an account of it in the several parcels.

First, a promise is a declaration of Gods will: it being a kind of middle
thing between his purpose, and performance, his intendment of good, and the
execution of it upon those whom he loves. And as wicked Jezabel, 1 King. 19.
2.* could not satisfy her hatred of Elijah the Prophet, in intending evil unto
him, and effecting it upon him in time, as she could; but withal she lets fall
an heavy threatening against him, strengthened with a bitter imprecation upon
her self, as an obliging tie to put in execution the designed evil: So let the
gods do to me, and more also; if I make not thy life, as the life of one of
them by to morrow about this time. So much less can the love of God satisfy
it self in a gracious decree, and purpose of good toward his elect shut up in
his own breast, and the actual performance of it in the fullness of time;
unless withal he discover it unto them beforehand, both as a ground of
present comfort in the knowledge thereof, and of hope and expectation in the
certain enjoyment of the good things promised hereafter: God also confirming
the word of his truth by an oath; not for any necessity or weakness in its
self; but out of superabundant love unto the heirs of promise; That by two
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, they might have a
strong consolation, Heb. 6. 18.

Secondly, it is a declaration concerning good. And thereby a promise is
differenced from the threatenings of God, which in diverse respects have a near
affinity with his promises. For they, as things of a middle nature do intervene
between the decree of his wrath, and the execution of it: they are let fall in
the Word as so many discoveries of Gods anger against sin, and set as
powerful stops to check and bound the lusts of sinners, who are apt to dash
themselves against the rock of divine displeasure: they are sealed with the
same oath of God, with which the promises are ratified; that so they might be
as full of dread to sinners, in the expectation of the fulfilling of them; as
the promises are of comfort to Believers.

Thirdly, it is concerning good things freely bestowed. And thereby it is
distinguished from the commands, which are also significations of Gods will
concerning good; but it is of the good of duty enjoined to be done, not of the
good of mercy to be received. The precepts of God, and the promises of God,
they always go together in the Word, as the veins and the arteries do in the
body; wherever there goes a vein that carries blood, there also accompanies it
an artery that carries spirits: so wherever there is a precept in the Word that
enjoynes duty, there also is an answerable promise that assures comfort: the
one holding forth the good to be done, the other the good to be received.

Fourthly, it is of particular good things. And this may serve to hint, and
point out one considerable difference between the Covenant of grace, and the
promises. The Covenant, that is as the entire Vintage of the heavenly Canaan;
And the promises they are as the several clusters of blessing: that is, as a
glorious constellation of many celestial bodies in the firmament of the
Scriptures; and they are as so many single stars shining in their proper orbs:
that is, as the total sum in the Inventory of a believers estate; and they
are as the distinct particulars which make it up. All the sweetness, beauty,
worth that are diffused throughout the promises, are collected in the Covenant;
as the scattered light in the creation was into the body of the Sun. Gods
Stipulation of becoming ours, and of making us to be his, Jer. 31. 33.
comprizeth every thing that is desirable, from the first of goods, to the last:
and is both the basis and the spire: the cornerstone and the top-stone of
every Christians happiness.

Fifthly, and lastly, is added [ the evils that he will remove.] And this takes
in all the privative mercies and blessings, which the promises of the Gospel do
hold forth to believers: which though they be not the resplendent part of their
happiness; are yet of so necessary a concurrence unto it; as that without
them, it can never be absolute or entire. True happiness consists of a double
branch, of an immunity, or freedom from evils, and the enjoyment of good; both
which are tacitly couched in every promise; but in many most expressly and fully
set down, Psalm. 84. 11. to them that walk uprightly, the Lord God is a Sun, and
a shield, etc. A Sun to give life, and a shield to preserve life given. A Sun
to make fruitful in all good, and a shield to protect from all danger. Isa. 25.
6, 7 8. the felicity of the Church is described by a feast of fat things full
of marrow of wines on the lees well refined, that the Lord will make unto his
people in mount Zion: but to render these dainties the more pleasing, he
promises also; To take away the face of the covering, to swallow up death in
victory, to wipe away all tears from their eyes. Blindness that may hinder the
clear knowledge, death that may interrupt the perpetuity, sorrow that may
diminish the sweetness of this blessed estate, shall all by a powerful hand be
removed, and done away.

CHAP. III. In which the excellency, and preciousnesse of the promises is
demonstrated in three particulars.
HAving showed what a promise is, the second thing that falls under
consideration is, The great worth and excellency of the promises: which in
diverse respects will appear to be such, as if compared with the choicest of
earthly comforts; the one will be as a sovereigne elixir full of spirits; and
the other as the unactive and saplesse dregs. Or if with the richest treasures
of the world, the one will be as so much refined gold; and the other as so much
impure dross. What Job says concerning the power of God, If I speak of
strength, lo, he is strong; may truly also be said of the riches of the
promises: if ye speak of worth, lo, they are precious indeed.

SECT. 1. Christ the root of the promises.
First, the promises do derive a preciousness from the root and principle from
whence they spring: They are as so many beams of Christ the Sun of
righteousness, and do impart a light, which discovers his excellency,
evidenceth our propriety, and effects in us a blessed purity. They are the
desirable fruit of the tree of life; not of that tree of life in the beginning
of the Bible, which stood in Adams Paradise on earth* but of that in the end of
the Bible, in Saint John's Paradise in heaven; not of that which was guarded
with Cherubims, and a flaming sword, that it might not be touched; but of that
in the midst of the City of God, free for every believer to put forth the hand
of faith, and to take and eat of the fruit of it, both as food and medicine.
They are the crystal streams of that* river of life which proceeded out of the
Throne of God, and the Lamb, Revel 22. 1. Whose waters in time of drought never
fail; but with their overflowing plenty satisfy the thirsty, with their
cooling virtue allay the heat of the wearied, and with their sweetness cheer,
and revive the drooping and dejected spirits. And now methinks, I cannot but
make a pause, and stand a while admiring both a believers happiness, and
Christ's bounty; each of which are of such transcendency; as that they better
suit with an holy wonderment, then with the most lively and full expressions.
Oh! how happy is every believer, whose light is the love of Christ shining in
the rays of the promises; whose food is the tree of life, that continually
yields fruit both new and various! whose cordials are the waters of life, not
sparingly given to a bare sustentation, but freely flowing to a delightful
satiety! Well might David in a rapture say, Lord! What is man that thou art
mindful of him! and the son of man that thou visitest him! for thou have made
him a little lower then the Angels, Psalm. 8* 4, 5. And well also might Paul as
one standing upon the shore, and fathoming the sea of Gods mercy cry out, O
the depth of the* riches of God! Romans 11. 35. And most joyfully may every heir
of the promise say, My lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have
a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16. 6. to whom such precious promises are given, as
exceed both in glory, and certainty all earthly performances whatever, being in
Christ from whom they all come, Yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20.

SECT. 2. The promises the root of Faith.
Secondly, the promises may be said to be great and precious, in respect of
that proximity, and peculiar relation which they have to the most excellent and
noble grace of faith, above all other graces whatsoever. They are the precious
objects of precious faith, as the Apostle styles it, 2 Pet. 1. 1. True it is,
that the quickening influence and virtue of the promises does reach every grace
of the Spirit, whereby they are both facilitated and strengthened in their
several motions and operations: by them hope is kept alive in its expectation
of Good, patience is supported under difficulties, holiness is perfected, love
is inflamed, and a blessed fear of God is preserved. But yet all this is not
done by the immediate intercourse which these graces have with the promises;
but by the intervention of faith, which first feeds upon them as the Manna of
the Gospel, and then communicates the sweetness and virtue that it draws and
receives from them in a suitable manner to every other grace. As the root first
sucks the juice and sap from the earth of which it makes a concoction, and then
sends forth a digested nourishment unto the several branches, and fruit that
hangs upon the tree: so does the radical grace of faith distribute to other
graces that strength and life, which it is partaker of from Christ and his
promises. And as the concoction that faith makes, is more or less perfect; so
are the operations of every grace the more or less vigorous. Faith is a kind
of mediator between Christ and all our graces, as Christ is between us and
God. As we have nothing from God, but we receive by and through Christ: So no
grace is partaker of any virtue and influence from Christ, but by the
mediation, and intervention of faith.

SECT. 3. The things promised precious.
Thirdly, the promises are exceeding great and precious, in respect of the
remarkable worth and value of those things, in which they interest believers,
and give them a right unto by an unquestionable claim and title. It is a full
and weighty observation (of which Grotius has afforded two parts) that there
are three things which do clearly demonstrate and highly also commend the
doctrine of the Gospel above any other Religion whatever. The certainty of
principles of trust, the sanctity of precepts, and the transcendency of
rewards. What religion is there amongst that multiplicity which have found
entertainment in the world, wherein God is represented to the soul so meet and
fit an object of trust, as in the Gospel? Majesty being there made accessible
by the condescension of goodness; and God and man who were at a distance, so
nearly united together in one, as that it is impossible to be determined
whether be the greater wonder, the mystery or the mercy. Where are there in any
religion such exact precepts of holiness enjoined, as in the Gospel? which lay
a law upon every motion of the soul, and become either a rule to guide it, or a
Judge to censure it. Or where by search do we find such ample and full
rewards, as may match and parallel the rewards of the Gospel to believers?
There we read of the bread of life for food, of the waters of life for pleasure
and delight, of a crown of life for honor, of an inheritance in life for
riches, of a weight of glory for clothing and beauty. All which are not
mentioned in the Word, as in a bare and naked declaratory, which conveighs
nothing of title or interest, and speaks rather the perfection of heaven, then
the happiness of believers; but are set down and specified in the promises,
which as they declare a goodness and excellency in things, do also give a
right and propriety unto persons in them: they being in the matters of God, as
deeds and evidences are in the matters of men; which when they are signed,
sealed, witnessed, and delivered, do invest men in a just and legal right of
whatever is mentioned, and contained in them. All that a believer has to
plead, or to show for that estate of glory of which he is an heir, is the
promise. Eternal life is by promise, 1 John 2. 25. This is the promise that he
has promised us, even eternal life. The crown is by promise, Jam. 1. 12. He
shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him. The kingdom, where for love all shall be sons, for birthright heirs,
for dignity Kings, is only by promise, Jam. 2. 5. God has chosen the poor of
this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised to
them that love him. The bounty laid up, and the bounty laid out, the good that
a believer expects, and the good that he enjoyes, both flow from the promise,
without which no present thing could be sweet, nor no future thing would be
certain; which by the stability of the promise are now made (...) gifts without
repentance, Romans 11. 29. Or as Austin expounds it, dona sine mutatione
stabiliter fixa, gifts firmly fixed without change: Every promise being
ratified by Gods oath, then which nothing is more immutable* sealed by the
blood of Christ, then which, nothing is more precious; testified by the Spirit,
then whom nothing is more true; delivered by the hand of mercy, then which
nothing is more free; and received by the hand of faith, then which nothing is
more sure.

CHAP. IV. In which is discovered the noble effect of the Promises.
FOurthly, the promises of the Gospel are exceeding great and precious, in
regard of that high and noble effect which they work in believers; who by the
energie and powerful operation of the promises, are raised to the utmost pitch
both of perfection, and blessedness in their being and estate, being by them
made partakers of the divine nature, as the Apostle tells us: Not by having a
share, and partnership in the substance and essence of God, and thereby to
become drops, beams, particles of the Deity, as some have most fondly dreamed:
But by a participation of divine qualities and excellencies, whereby believers
are made conformable unto God; having those perfections which are in the holy
nature of God, and Christ by way of eminency, to be formally, or secundum modum
creaturae, imprinted and stamped on their souls, so far as the image of his
infinite holiness is expressible in a limited, and restrained being. As the
wax when it does receive an impression from the seal, does not participate of
the essence of the seal, but only receives a signature and stamp made upon it:
so when God leaves a character and print of his holiness or other excellencies
upon the soul, he does not communicate any thing of his substance or essence,
but effects only a resemblance in the creature of those perfections that are
truly in himself, which being originally, and totally derived from him, may in
some sort be said to be the divine nature. In the Painters table that is called
a face, or hand, which is only the lively image or representation of such
things to the eye: and so those divine lineaments of beauty and holiness which
are drawn by the finger of God upon the soul of believers, may be called the
divine nature, as they are shadowy representations of his own glorious being:
but not as they are any particles or traduction of it. The highest honor that
any creature can attain unto, is to be a living picture of God; to show forth
as the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2. 9. the virtues of God, and Christ: and he that
raises it any higher, must have swelling and lofty thoughts of the creature,
and low and dishonorable thoughts of God. Now this likeness to God, or this
Deiformitas, Christiformitas, as the pious Ancients were wont to style it, is
wrought by the promises.

SECT. 1. The Promises the Word of life.
First, as they are the words of Spirit and life, John 6. 63. As they are the
immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. whereby a man is begotten again and made partaker
of a second birth, in which he bears the image of the second Adam, the Lord
from heaven; as in the other he did bear the similitude of the first Adam who
was of the earth earthy, 1 Cor. 15. 47. The promises they have in them a vim
(...), a formative virtue and power to mould and fashion the heart to
holiness, and to introduce the Image of Christ into it, in regard of that
native purity which dwells in them, and is above gold that has been seven times
tried in the fire, Psalm. 12. 6. therefore our Savior tells his Disciples, that
they were clean through the Word that he had spoken unto them, John 15. 3. and
when he prayed unto God to sanctify them; his prayer is, Sanctify them
through thy truth, thy Word is truth, Joh. 17. 17.

Secondly, believers may be said to be partakers of the divine nature by the
promises, as they are the Objects of Faith and Hope. Both which are graces that
have in them a wonderful aptitude to cleanse and purify the Subjects in which
they dwell, and to introduce true holiness in which the lively image and
resemblance of God does chiefly consist.

First, Faith it believes the truth of those things which God has promised,
and apprehends also the worth and excellency of them to be such as that thereby
it is made firm and constant in its adherence, vigorous and active in its
endeavors to use all means for the obtaining a conformity to God and Christ,
and the escaping of the corruption that is in the world through lust. For till
a man come to be a believer he is by the temptations of Satan, and the specious
promises with which they usually come attended, drawn aside to the commission
of the worst of sins, in which though he weary himself to find what first
was seemingly promised, yet he meets with nothing but delusions and
disappointments of his expectation. Balaam has an edge set upon his spirit to
curse the people of God by a promise of preferment made unto him and he tires
himself in going from place to place to effect it* but God hinders him from
doing of the one, and Balack denies the giving unto him the other. So Judas by
a bait that suits his covetousness undertakes to sell his Lord* but when he
has accomplished his wickedness, and received his wages, he throws it away,
and dares not keep what before he so earnestly thirsted after: the blood of his
Master makes every piece of the silver look ghastly, so that now he sees another
image upon it then Cesars, and cries out that he had sinned in betraying
innocent blood. Now faith it enables a believer to discern a snare, a
defilement under all the gilded aldurements of Satan and the world: And
therefore he rejects with scorn those temptations with which others are
miserably captivated, and resists with resolution all the courtings and
solicitations of the flesh, to which others yield, beholding only a stability
and preciousnesse in those promises which have the oath of God to make them
sure, and his love to make them sweet. And these only have a prevailing power
with him, to cause him so to order his conversation in all manner of holiness,
that he may walk as it becomes an heir of heaven, and an adopted son of the
most high God to walk.

Secondly, as Faith by believing the promises does purify the heart; so also
does hope which expects the performance of what faith believes, work and
produce the same effects. He that has this hope in him, purifieth himself,
even as God is pure, 1 John 3. 3. The expectation which believers have by the
promises, is not a supine oscitancy, whereby they look to be possessed of life
and glory without any care or endeavors of theirs for to obtain it: like to
callow and unfeathered birds, that lie in the nest, and have all their food
brought to them, gaping only for to receive it: But it is an expectation
accompanied with diligence and industry for the fruition of what they do
expect. The grace of God (says Paul,) teaches us to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world, Tit. 2. 11, 12. And the ground of this he subjoyneth, Verse. 13. Looking
for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. He that truly expects glory, earnestly pursues grace,
Heb. 12. 14. He that hopes to be with God in heaven, uses all means to be
like God on earth. An heavenly conversation is the natural fruit of an heavenly
expectation, Phil. 3. 20. Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we
look for the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ. The Heathen could say that labor
was the husband of hope. There is hope the harlot, and hope the wife. Hope the
married woman is known from hope the harlot by this, that she always
accompanies with her husbands labor. True hope looks to enjoy nothing but
what is gotten by travel and pains, and therefore uses all means to obtain
that good which faith apprehends in the promise: It seeks glory by grace, it
endeavors after communion with God in heaven, by working a conformity to God
in a believer while he is on earth.

Thirdly, believers are made partakers of the divine nature by the promises as
they are the irreversible obsignations and declarations of God, which he has
freely made unto them of his taking them unto himself in an everlasting
communion of life and glory. Heaven is (as Prosper calls it,) Regio
beatitudinis, the only climate where blessedness dwells in its perfection.
While we are here below, we are but as Kings in the cradle: the throne on which
we must sit, the robes with which we must be clothed, the crown which must be
set upon our heads, are all reserved for heaven. In this life there is only a
taste of celestial delights, and in the other there is a perpetual feast. Here
we see through a glass darkly; but then face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Grace
does as Cameron expresses it, adsignificare infirmitatem, connotate a
weakness and imperfection; and glory that signifies an abolition, and doing
away whatsoever is weak or imperfect. But all this absolute perfection of
happiness which is laid up in heaven for believers, is ratified and made sure
unto them in the promises; and therefore they are said to be heirs of the
promise, Heb. 6. 17. Yea, by the promises, they have the pledges and
firstfruits of all that happiness which they shall enjoy in heaven, given unto
them in this life. We are now the sons of God, (says the Apostle) though it
does not yet appear what we shall be, 1 John 3. 2. That is, we now bear his
image and likeness, though in a more dark and imperfect character. Our
knowledge, our grace, our comforts are all incomplete: But when he shall
appear, we shall be like him. That is, when Christ shall come to receive us
unto himself, we shall bear upon us his resemblance in a full and absolute
manner, being made one with him in an everlasting fellowship of bliss and
glory. Deservedly therefore may the promises that seal heaven to believers in
the other life, and begin it in this life, be said to make them partakers of
the divine nature.

CHAP. V. The promises grounds of matchless consolations in four particulars.
FIfthly, the promises of the Gospel are truly great and precious, in regard of
those superlative and matchless consolations which they derive unto believers
amidst the changes and vicissitudes that they are subjected unto, while they
are in the body, and bear about them both the remainders of sin, and of
death: In the sad Winter of desertion when the verdure of all other comforts
wither, and drop like leaves that are bitten with the frost; the promises, they
are Rosae in hyeme, Roses that blow in the Winter, and do with their beauty
delight, and with their fragrancy revive the drooping and dejected soul. Thy
Word is my comfort in my affliction, says David, for it has quickened me,
Psalm. 119. 50. In the apprehensions of Gods displeasure, with which many times
the best of Saints are afflicted, even to the drying up of all their moisture,
they are Aestivae nives, the only summersnowes that cool and allay the
scorching heat, and make that Christian that was like a parched Wilderness to
become like a watered Garden. As cold waters to a thirsty soul, (faith Solomon)
so is good news from a far country, Prove. 25. 25. Good tidings from heaven by
the Gospel-promises are most welcome in such a condition. In the tempestuous
seasons of trouble and affliction, they are the sacrae anchorae, sacred and
sure anchors to stay and fix believers amidst all tossings, and to make them
ride safely without touching upon the sands, so as to be swallowed up in
despair; or dashing against the rocks, so as to be shipwrackt by presumption.
Therefore the Apostle calls them a sure refuge to such as lay hold upon them,
Heb. 6. 18. In the calm and serene times of peace, they are Vela candida, the
only white spread sails, which filled with the sweet breathings of the
Spirit, do triumphantly carry on believers to the fair havens of everlasting
happiness. Therefore Paul as within Ken of the shore after the custom of the
Mariners gives a joyful and triumphant celeusma or shout, O death, where is thy
sting? O grave, where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15. 55. And can all or any of
these things be affirmed of the best of earthly comforts? Surely if we should
compare the one with the other, we might quickly find as vast a difference, as
between a noisome laystal, and a precious bed of spices; or between a reviving
cordial, and a dangerous poison. Forestus in his Treatise De venenis,
concerning poisons, reports of a woman that had accustomed her body to poisons,
by making them her usual food, that she had brought her self and her whole
constitution, to be of the same power as the poison it self was; but yet
retained so much beauty, as that she allured Princes to her embracements, and
by that means killed and poisoned them. Not much unlike this harlot is the
world; whose delights and pleasures retain so much of a seeming beauty, as to
entice many to be enamoured with them; but when they are enjoyed by those that
eagerly thirst after them, they do by their deceitful embracements destroy and
kill their lovers. There is a poysonful and contagious breath that comes from
them, which lays the foundation of a lingering and certain death: And who is
there that has inordinately let out his heart unto them, that has not
experienced the deadly poison which abounds in them? But that we may the better
see how far the comforts of the promises do excel the comforts of the world,
let us weigh them in the balance together, and we shall quickly find how
greatly they fall short, of yielding such real consolations as freely flow from
the promises, by a due consideration of these four particulars.

SECT. 1. Comforts of the Promises.
1. Pure.
First, the consolations that are derived from the promises do excel in purity
the most delightful comforts that are drawn and sucked from the breasts of the
world. The promises are Mulctralia Evangelica, the receptacles of the most
sincere milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2. 2. they are coelestes utres, bottles
filled with the choicest and most refined wines: they are spirituales
aurifodinae, the golden mines that are without dross. The milk, the wine, the
gold that the promises do abound with to the nourishing, chearing and enriching
of believers, they are most pure, and free from any alloie that might debase
them. The commendations that Plutarch gives of the Spartans short and weighty
speaking, (...), The Laconick speech has no bark; is most true of the
seven-times tried and refined words of the Gospel, they have neither skin nor
husk, they are all pith and substance. But it is far otherwise with the best
of earthly comforts which when sublimated and clarified to the very utmost that
art and skill can reach, are yet accompanied with an unseparable mixture of
dregs and lees which do minorate their virtue, and taint their sweetness. What
Crates in Laertius affirms of the Pomgranate, (...), In the fairest
Pomegranate, there are corrupt and unsavory kernels; may justly be applied to
all sublunary contentments and delights whatever; there are some impurities
cleaving unto them, by which they cloy as well as feed; there is a weft and
tang in their farewell, that renders them unpleasing, as well as a sweetness
that makes them desirable.

2. Full.
Secondly, the comforts of the promises as they are pure, so are they full and
satisfactory; when the best that the world yields, serve rather to provoke an
appetite then to fill it, to inflame the thirst of desires rather then to
quench them, to express an indigency in a restless motion, rather then a
complacency in a perfect rest. If we could suppose the apple of a man's eye to
be as big as the body of the Sun, and as piercing as the beams and heat thereof
from which nothing is hid; yet among those innumerable objects that such an eye
would behold, it could not spy out anything, which might be an adequate and
proportionable good unto the capacity of the soul The good that is satisfactory
unto it, must have two properties; it must be bonum optimum, the best and
chiefest of goods, that it may sistere appetitum, fix the appetite, there being
nothing desirable beyond it: and it must be bonum maximum, the greatest good,
that it may implere appetitum, fill the appetite, and so free it from the
vexation of hunger and want. Now the top and cream of all worldly comforts are
exceeding deficient in satisfying the sensitive faculties, and inferior part
of the soul, much less can they fill with a grateful satiety and contentment
the mind, which is the noble and supreme part of man, and by its creation
fitted for communion with an infinite good. When (says Plutarch) did Epicurus
cry out (...), I have fed, with so much joy and delight, as Archimedes in his
Mathematical contemplations did (...), I have found? And when did both they or
the whole sect of Epicures and Philosophers in the enjoyment of their sensual
and intellectual pleasures, cry out with such strong ravishments of soul, they
had either fed or found, as a believer does when he has tasted and found the
goodness of God in one promise? Listen but a little, and you shall hear in
how loud and patheticall a tone David expresses himself, when he had but
tasted these divine consolations: Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is
none upon earth that I desire beside thee. My flesh and my heart fails; but
God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever, Psalm. 73. 25, 26. And
Bellarmine tells of a pious old man that was wont to rise from prayer with these
words always in his mouth, Claudimini oculi mei, claudimini; nihil enim
pulchrius jam videbitis, Be shut, be shut O mine eyes; for now ye shall never
see any thing more desirable.

3. Sure.
Thirdly, the comforts of the promises are abiding and sure mercies, Act. 13.
34. such which are the crystal streams of a living fountain, and not the
impure overflowings of an unruly torrent, which sometimes with its swellings
puts the traveller in fear of his life, and at other times shames his
expectations of being refreshed by it, Job 6. 15. Geographers in their
description of America report, that in Peru, there is a river called the
Diurnal or day-river, because it runs with a great current in the day, but is
wholly dry at night; which is occasioned, as they say, by the heat of the sun,
that in the daytime melts the snow that lies on the mountains thereabouts:
but when the Sun goes down, and the cold night approaches, the snow
congealeth, which only fed it, and the channel is quite dried up: Not much
unlike this river, are all wordly contentments, which are only day-comforts,
but not night-comforts: In the sunshine of peace and prosperity, they flow
with some pleasing streams; but in the night season of affliction they vanish
and come to nothing: Then the rich man, as Cyprian says, vigilat in pluma,
suspirat licet bibat gemmas, lies restless upon a bed of down, and fetches
deep groans though he drink pearls, and Saphires: But it is far otherwise
with the promises, whose streams of comfort in the time of trouble do usually
run most plentifully, and refresh most powerfully the weary and afflicted soul;
so as to preserve it from dying and fainting away under the pressure of any
evil. This was it which made Hezekiah under a sentence of death to revive, and
to cry out, O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things is the
life of my spirit, Isa. 38. 16. But if at any time these divine consolations do
run in a more shallow and spare channel, and vary from their wonted fullness;
yet do they never prove like waters that fail, or streams that are quite
dried up. A believer may at sometime be drawn low, but he can never be drawn
dry: while Christ is a full fountain, faith will never be an empty
conduit-pipe. His comforts may be like the Widows oil in the cruse, where
only a little remains, 1 King. 17. 12. but never like the water in Hagars
bottle that was quite spent, Genesis 21. 15. The widow thought her store of meal
and oil to be brought to so low an ebb, as that it would serve but for one
cake, which two sticks would be fuel enough to bake, and then both she and her
son must expect to die; but then the Lord did put forth his power, though not
in making the oil and meal to overflow to the feeding of others therewith;
but in keeping it from wasting, so as to be a constant supply unto her, and the
Prophets necessities in the extremity of the famine. The like apprehensions
have the dear and beloved ones of God frequently in their afflictions, and
temptations which befall them; they think they have scarce faith enough to last
one day more, scarce strength enough for one prayer more, scarce courage enough
for one conflict more, and then* they and their hopes must die, and give up the
ghost for ever: But in the midst of all these fears and misgivings which arise
from their hearts, there issues out such a measure of comfort from the
promises, which if it gives not deliverance from their temptations, does effect
their preservation in them; if it overflow not to make them glad, it fails not
to make them patient, and to wait, till God send forth judgment unto victory,
Mat. 12. 20.

4. Universal.
Fourthly, the comforts of the promises are universal, such as agree with every
estate, and suite every malady: they are the strong man's meat, and the sick
man's cordial, the condemned sinners pardon, and the justified persons evidence;
but the best of the worlds comforts are only applicable to some particular
conditions, and serve as salves for some few sores. Riches are a remedy against
the pressing evils of want and poverty, but they cannot purchase ease to the
pained. Armor of proof is a defense against the sword and bullet, but can no
way serve to keep off the stings of piercing cares; oiles and balsames are
useful for bruises and broken bones, but they are needless to an hungry man
that seeks not after medicines but food. As the hurting power in creatures is
stinted and bounded, fire can burn but not drown, water can drown but not
wound, serpents and vipers can put forth a poisonful sting, but cannot like
beasts of prey tear and rend in pieces: so the faculty of doing good which is
in any creature is confined to a narrow scantling, and reaches no further then
the supply of some particular defect: but the comforts and virtue of the
promises are in their operations and efficacy of an unlimited extent; they flow
immediately from the* Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3.
and are therefore meet to revive and establish how disconsolate in any kind
whatsoever the condition of a believer be. In the multitude of my thoughts
within me, thy comforts delight my soul, says holy David, Psalm. 94. 19. When
disquieting thoughts did swarm within his breast, as thick as motes in the
Sunbeams, and did continually ascend like sparks from a flaming furnace,
which the Crown upon his head could not charm, which the Scepter in his hand
could not allay, which the delights and pleasures of his Court could not
sweeten: then did the comforts of God in his promises, as so many fresh springs
in the midst of all his estuations both glad and calm his unquiet and
perplexed spirit. One sun, when overcast with thick clouds which threaten to
blot it out of its orb, does then enlighten the earth far more, then
multitudes of stars that shine bright in the clearest night: and so one promise
in armies of changes that befall believers, fills their souls with more
serenity and peace, then the confluence of all outward contentments can produce
under one small and petty cross. A Christian many times walks more cheerfully
under sore fiery trials, then others in the sunshine of worldly prosperity.
The three children walked to and fro with more joy in the furnace then
Nebuchadnezzar in his stately Palace.

CHAP. VI. Containing positive rules directing to the right use of the promises.
HAving showed what a promise is, and the sundry respects wherein the promises
of the Gospel are precious by way of eminency and excess: I pass on to the
third general head, which is made up of several rules and directions that
concern the due application of them; which are by so much the more necessary,
by how much the promises above all other parts of the sacred Oracles of God are
most apt to be deeply injured by the two sinful extremes of distrust, and
presumption. The infirm believer whose jealousies and misgivings are too
strong for his faith, puts away from him the consolations of the promises as
small, and looks upon them as cordials not strong enough to heal and remove
his distempers. The over-secure and self-confident person, places his fond
presumptions in the room of Gods promise; and thereby draws as certain a
ruin upon himself, as he who ventures to go over a deep river without any
other bridge then what his shadow makes.

I shall therefore branch the rules which concern the right use of them, into
rules positive and cautionary: the one pointing out several duties which every
one must exercise himself in, that would willingly reap any real fruit and
advantage from the promises: the other forewarning the many errors and
mistakes, which are as stones of stumbling to weak Christians, or as stones
that lie upon the mouth of the wells of salvation which must be removed before
the water of comfort can be drawn from them. I shall begin with the positive
rules, which are many.

SECT. 1. Eye God in the promises.
First, in the applying of any promise, fix the eye of your faith upon God, and
Christ in it. Promises are not the primary object of faith, but the secondary:
or they are rather the means by which we believe, then the things on which we
are to rest. As in the Sacraments the elements of bread and wine serve as
outward signs to bring Christ and a believer together; but that which faith
closes with and feeds upon, is Christ in the Ordinance, and not the naked
elements themselves. So the promises are instrumental in the coming of Christ
and the soul together; they are the warrant by which faith is imboldned to
come* to him, and to take hold of him; but the union which faith makes, is not
between a believer and the promise, but between a believer and Christ. And
therefore those Divines who in their Catechetical Systems have made the formal
object of faith to be the promise, rather then the person of Christ, have
failed in their expressions, if not in their intentions, and have spoken rather
popularly then accurately. For the object of faith is not ens complexum, an
Evangelical maxim or proposition; but ens incomplexum, the person of Christ, as
the whole current of Scripture-expressions do abundantly testify, wherein
faith is described by receiving of Christ, Joh. 1. 12. by believing on him,
Joh. 3. 16. by coming to him, Joh. 6. 36. As we cannot come to Christ without
the aid of a promise; so may we not rest in the promise without closing with
Christ. The promises they are but as the field, and Christ is the hidden pearl
which is to be sought in them; they are as the golden candlesticks, and he is
both as the Olive Tree which drops fatness into them, and as the light which
shines in them; they are as the Alabaster-box, and he is as the precious
spicknard which sends forth the delightful savor; they are as the the golden
pot, and he is the Mannah which is treasured and laid up in them; they are as
the glass, and he is the beautiful face which is to be seen in them. We all
beholding with open face as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into
the same image from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. But in looking unto God and
Christ in the promise, let the eye of faith be directed especially to these
four attributes and perfections of God, the freeness of his grace in making
them, the absoluteness of his power to effect them, the unhangeablenesse of
his counsel not to revoke, or disannull the least iota of them, the greatness
of his wisdom to perform all which he has spoken in the best season and
joint of time. These are four such pillars upon* which faith may safely lean,
and which the strength of the most violent temptations can never shake, much
less overturne, as Sampson did the pillars of the house against which he
leaned, Judge. 16. 30.

SECT. 2. Eye free grace.
First, view with the eye of faith the freeness of Gods grace in making so
many rich promises: they are all patents of grace, not bills of debt;
expressions of love, not rewards of services; gifts, not wages: He that made
many out of mercy, might without the least umbrage of injustice have made none.
Though his truth do tie him to the performance of them, yet his love and mercy
only did move him to the making of them: his promise has made him a debtour,
but free grace made him a promiser. And here the assertion of the School may be
judged sound: Divina voluntas, licet simpiciter libera sit ad extra, ex
suppositione tamen unius actus liberi, potest necessitari ad alterum: Though
the will of God be most entirely free in all his manifestations toward the
creature, yet upon the voluntary and free precedence of one supposed act we may
justly conceive him to be necessarily obliged to a second. Thus God was most
absolutely free in the making of his promises; but having made them, he is
necessitated to the fulfilling of them by his truth. According to that of the
Apostle, Tit. 1. 2. God who cannot lie has promised, before the world began.
And that of the Prophet, Thou will perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy
to Abraham, Mich. 7. 20. The making of the promise unto Abraham was free mercy,
the fulfilling of it to Jacob was justice and truth.

This direction touching the freeness of Gods grace in the promises is
exceeding useful to succor and relieve the perplexing fears of the weak and
tempted Christian, who though he have eyes to see the unspeakable worth and
excellency of the promises, yet has not the confidence to put forth the hand
of faith and to apply them to his necessities. He wants forgiveness of sins,
but doubts the promise of blotting out iniquities belongs not unto him: He is
naked, and gladly would that Christ might spread the skirt of his
righteousness over him to hide his deformities: But alas! what has a leper to
do with a royal robe? He is sick and diseased, but the Physic that must cure
him, the least drop of it is more worth then a world, and he is more vile then
the dust; How then can he expect, that he should ever be the patient of such a
Physician, who will be both at the cost to buy the Physic, and at the pains
to administer it? If he had an heart to love God as David, if talents to
glorify God as Paul, if he were but an Israelite without guile as Nathanael,
then he might have hopes together with them, to have his person accepted, his
services rewarded, and his imperfections pardoned. But his heart with which he
should love God, is carnal, and not spiritual; his talents and abilities with
which he should glorify God, are few or none; his sincerity which should be
the Evangelical perfection of all his duties, has more then an ordinary
tincture of hypocrisy and self ends mixed with it. With what confidence
therefore can such an one draw near to Christ, or ever expect to be welcomed by
him? Now to put to silence these reasonings; and to allay these fears, which
unless checked and bounded, do oftentimes terminate in the blackness of
despair; there is not a more effectual remedy, then the consideration of the
freeness of the grace of God and Christ in the promises, which are not made to
such as deserve mercy, but to such as want it; not to righteous persons, but to
sinners; not to the whole, but to the sick. And therefore such who through the
weakness of faith, or the violence of temptations find it difficult to lay
hold on the promises of God touching the pardon of sin, and the obtaining of
life and salvation, let them resolve the promises into the first root and
principle from whence they spring, which is not from any good within us, but
wholly from grace without us; and they will readily find that by eying the
ground and original of the promise, they will sooner be encouraged and drawn to
believe and to lay hold upon it, then by looking only to the promise it self.
Of all the ways and experiments to bear up a sinking spirit, there is no
consideration like this, that from the beginning to the end of our salvation
nothing is primarily active but free grace. This is a firm bottom of comfort
against the guilt of the most bloody and crimson sins, because free grace is
not tied to any rules, it may do what it pleases. Some body that goes to
heaven must be the greatest sinner, and what if thou be he, whom God will
make the everlasting monument of the riches of his love and mercy in Christ?
This is an impenetrable shield against the constant accusations of Satan drawn
from unworthiness, unprofitablenesse, backwardness to holy duties, and
distractions in them. It Is true, may a believer say, I am unworthy, and that
which Satan makes the matter of his accusation, is the daily matter of my
confessions, and self-judgings before God; the sins which he pleads against
me with delight, I bemoane with tears of bitterness: And were the way which
leads to heaven, a ladder of duties, and not a golden chain of free grace, I
could not but fear, that the higher I climb, the greater would my fall prove
to be; every service being like a brittle round that can bear no weight; and
the whole frame and series of duties at the best, far short of the ladder in
Jacobs vision, which had its foot standing upon the earth, and its top reaching
to heaven. But the whole way of salvation from first to last, is all of mere
grace, that the promise might be sure, Romans 4. 16. Every link of the golden
chain is made up of free mercy, Election is free, Ephesians. 1. 5. Vocation free, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Justification free, Romans 5. 24. Sanctification free, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
Glorification free, Romans 6. 23. And therefore though I can challenge nothing of
right, yet I may ask every thing of mercy; especially being invited by him, who
seeds not his people with empty promises; but gives liberally unto every one
that asks, and upbraides not either with former sins, or present failings,
Jam. 1. 5.

SECT. 3. Eye Gods Power.
Secondly, in the applying of every promise look with the eye of faith upon the
greatness of Gods power, which is able to fulfill to the least iota whatever
he has spoken, and to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or
think, Ephesians. 3. 20. The confining of Gods power according to the narrow
apprehensions, and dwarfish thoughts that men naturally have of him in their
hearts, the Scripture points out as the chief root of all that unbelief and
distrust which is put forth in their lives: Thus the Israelites in the
wilderness were seldom in any exigency which they looked upon beyond the
possibility of second causes to deliver them from; but they straightways called
also into question the power of God, Psalm 78. 19, 20. They spoke against God,
they said, Can God furnish a table in the Wilderness? Behold, he smote the
rock that the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed; but can he give
bread also? can he provide flesh for his people? So when they were in the long
captivity of Babylon, they had many clear and express promises of being
restored, and brought back again into their own inheritance; yet measuring the
truth of Gods Word, not by the strength of his power, but by the
improbabilities and impossibilities which did appear to their reason; they
look upon themselves not as prisoners of hope, but as free among the dead, and
as far from any expectation of deliverance, as dead and dry bones are from
reviving. Our bones (say they) are dried up, and our hopes are lost, and we are
cut off for our parts, Ezekiel. 37. 11. Thus the Sadduces denied and divided the
great doctrine of the resurrection, as being full of irreconcilable
difficulties and inconsistencies. How a body and a soul separated should be
reunited; how a body not only separated from the soul, but dissolved into dust
should be recompacted; how dust scattered and blown up and down should be
recollected, was altogether beyond the line of their reason for to fathom or
compass. Our Savior therefore points out the ground of their error to arise,
not only from their ignorance of the Scripture which had foretold it, but also
of the power of God which was able to effect it: Ye do err, not knowing the
Scrptures, nor the power of God, Mat. 22. 29. Necessary therefore it is in the
making use of any promise, that a believer have such conceptions of the power
of God, as that whatever lets and impediments do arise between the promise and
the fulfilling of it, though as high as mountains, and as strong as the gates
of hell, be yet by faith looked upon as difficulties which cannot check the
power of God, but only magnify it: For else, if once we come to have jealous
thoughts of the divine arm in which we trust, or to fear that it might be
incountred by some insuperable opposition; the hopes and expectations that we
have of any good from the promise, must needs be weak and uncertain. When God
had promised to make Abraham the father of a seed, as numerous as the Stars of
heaven, or the dust of the earth, though reason could not but suggest unto him
how unlikely he was to be a father and Sarah to be a mother, when age had dried
up his body, and deaded the womb of Sarah, yet says the Apostle, Against hope
he believed in hope, that he might become the father of many Nations, Romans 4.
18. That is, when nature afforded no ground of hope or encouragement to
confirm his expectation in the fulfilling of the promise, but suggested many
posing arguments to impleade and gainsay the truth of it, and to make his faith
as feeble as his body; yet then he exercised the fullness of assurance in
believing and of hope in expecting the accomplishment of all that God had
spoken. He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong
in faith, giving glory to God, being fully persuaded that what he had promised,
he was able also to perform, verse 21, 22. So when afterward God called him
to that signal trial of his faith and obedience in the offering up of his only
son, and appointed himself to be the Priest as well as Isaac to be the
sacrifice* and though the stroke which Abraham's hand was stretched forth to
give, would not only have ended the life of his son; but have cut off also
the promise at the very root because in Isaac his seed was to be called: yet by
the same eye of faith, by which before he looked through a dead womb, he now
looks through a bleeding sword unto the power of God, accounting that he was
able to raise him up even from the dead, Heb. 11. 19. That is* he believed that
rather then the promise of God should not be certain, the resurrection of
Isaac should be more miraculous then his birth* and that God would magnify his
power in raising him out of the ashes of a consumed sacrifice to be the heir
of the promise* rather then let one tittle of his Word fall to the ground
unfulfilled. And thus should every believer as a true child of Abraham
endeavor to do, in looking from themselves unto the power of God, for the
making good of any promise which they in prayer do earnestly seek, in faith do
really believe, in hope do patiently wait for and expect. And though
difficulties and temptations should arise, which their reason cannot answer,
their strength cannot repel; yet not to cast away their confidence, but to
cast themselves upon him who is both the strength and wisdom of his people,
with whom things that are utterly impossible with men, are not only possible,
but easy for him to bring to pass and to effect. Oh the happy peace and
serenity that a believer enjoyes, in every estate and condition which befalls
him, that can thus rest and stay himself, upon the promise and power of God!
No valley of trouble will be to him without a door of hope, no barren
wilderness without Manna, no dry rock without water, no dungeon without
light, no fiery trial without comfort, because be has the same Word and the
same God to trust unto, whose power opened the sea as a door to be a passage
from Egypt to Canaan, who fed Israel in the desert with bread from heaven, and
water from the rock, who filled Peter's prison with a shining light, who made
the three children to walk to and fro amidst the fiery furnace with joy and
safety.

SECT. 4. The unchangeablenesse of the promiser confirms Faith.
Thirdly, to sweeten the application of every promise, exercise your thoughts
and faith on the unchangeablenesse of the purpose and counsel of God, to
fulfill whatever his promises do declare. The promises of men, though they be
the expressions of an intended and resolved good unto that person to whom they
are made, yet they are subject to a deficiency from a double principle:
sometimes through a want of power to give a being and existency unto what they
have spoken; they prove rather the fruitless wishes of a friend that means
well, then the performances of one that has ability to turn his words into
deeds: But that which most frequently makes the promises of men to be as
abortive conceptions, and not as full births, is the mutability and inconstancy
of their wills, whereby they are not only apt to recall and suspend the
fulfilling of what they promised, but also to change their love into hatred,
and their promises into menaces. The tree that in the summer is much esteemed
and set by for the grateful shade which it affords, in the cold winter is often
cut down for fuel: and so the same person, which in the heat of affection is
made the object of many favors, in the keen blasts of jealousy becomes the
subject of revenge and ruin. But it is far otherwise with the promises of God,
whose power no lets or impediments can arise to hinder, whose will no
contingencies or emergencies can fall out to alter. All his promises are in
Christ not yea and nay, but in him, Yea, and* in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. He is
not a man that he should repent, 1 Samuel 15. 29. He is the Lord that changes
not, Mal. 3. 6. The Father of lights with whom there is no variableness or
shadow of change, Jam. 1. 17. And that the heirs of promise might yet be more
abundantly confirmed in the immutability of Gods counsel, he has added to his
Word his oath, wherein he pawnes his being, life, righteousness, truth, mercy,
power to perform all that he has spoken, that so by two immutable things, in
which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation, Heb.
6. 17. This consideration therefore of looking unto the unchangeablenesse of
God in the constant use and application of his promises; as it serves to point
out the wide difference between the promises of God, and the promises of men,
the one being as frail and uncertain as bubbles, no sooner made then broken*
like breath on steel* as soon off as on; the other like firm rocks of adamant,
which can neither be broken or moved: So also is it exceeding useful to
preserve and keep believers from being injurious to their own comforts, or Gods
honor, who from the frequent changes which they find in themselves, are apt
to apprehend the like to be in God: they recedefrom God, and then complain
that God departs, and withdrawes his presence from them: not unlike to those
who in a constant motion upon the waters move from the land* and then fancy
the land and trees to move from them, when as God still retains the
steadfastnesse of his purpose and will, without any variation, or difference by
all the mutations that are in the creature: the failings in our vows, the
unevenness in our duties, the waverings in our faith, they produce no
alterations in him who is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb.
13. 8. If we (says the Apostle) believe not, yet he abides faithful, and
(...) den^e himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. This was all holy David's salvation and
desire, all that his heart had to build upon, and to satisfy it self with,
that though his house were not so with God, that is, did fail much of that
exactness and purity which therein God required, which he had solemnly vowed,
and therefore did justly deserve to be cast off; yet God had made with him an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure, 1 Samuel 23. 5. Oh! how sad
would the condition of every believer prove, if the cornerstone of their
salvation should be laid upon no other foundation, then their own frail and
mutable wills; if as often as they are wanting to themselves, God should be
wanting to them; if as often as they provoke his justice, he should presently
revoke his mercy; if as often as they break their vows with God, he should cancel
his Covenant with them* Bu^ for ever blessed be the God and Father of mercies,
who has not made our life to be in our own keeping, nor founded the bottom of
our happiness and comfort upon any strength, ability, freedom, or inherent
grace already received, which we are apt to waste, and to betray into the hands
of every temptation, but has wholly fixed it upon an irreversible Covenant of
grace transacted between him and Christ, upon promises of mercy ratified and
confirmed to us by the broad seal of heaven, the oath of God, unto which we
may daily fly for refuge as the only sanctuary, when pursued with the guilt of
any sin, upon which we may lay hold with both hands as upon a sure anchor,
when assaulted, and buffered with the fury of Satan's temptations.

SECT. 5. The consideration of the wisdom of the Promiser establishes faith.
Fourthly, in making use of the promises, direct the eye of your faith to the
wisdom of God, by which the various blessings that are held forth in them, are
dispensed and given to believers in the fittest and best season; and thereby
become both the more remarkable, and the more useful. The works of Gods
providence have a beauty and luster set upon them, from the appointed time and
season which he has allotted unto them; the light of the day becomes more
desirable by the interposition of the night, the rest and darkness of the
night is rendered more grateful by the labors and toiles of the day. The
former and the latter rain he gives in season, Jer. 5. 24. the one to bring
forth and cherish the new sown seed, the other to ripen and make fruitful the
harvest. The summer and winter by an inviolable ordinance he has made to
succeed each other, the one to be as a key to open the womb of the earth, that
it might discharge it self of its many births; the other as a key to shut it,
that so it might not languish and grow barren by an unintermitted travel. Now
if the wisdom of God has to these common mercies wherein his enemies have a
share (as well as others,) set such appointed times, as may make them more
useful and beneficial to his creatures: certainly he will not fail to perform
to his people the promises of his free grace in that season and fullness of
time, which may best suite with their welfare and his glory. Promises are not
made and fulfilled at the same time, no more then sowing and reaping are on the
same day. God has in his Word recorded them, as so many discoveries of his
immutable counsel and purpose, that thereby faith might have a sure ground to
rely upon him in all exigencies, and to expect a relief from him; but the
season and time of performance, God has reserved to himself, as best knowing
not only what to give, but when to give: so that believers though they may
plead to God his promise, must yet be careful not to confine and limit him to
times which they judge fittest; but wholly to resign themselves to his wise
dispose, to whom every creature looks, and receive their meat in due season,
Psalm. 145. 15. If he feeds the ravens when they cry, much more will he
satisfy his children when they pray; if to the one he opens his hand and gives
liberally, to the other he will open his bowels, and give above what they can
ask or think.

This consideration of the wisdom of God in the timing of his promises to the
fittest season, is exceeding useful to correct the hasty and impetuous desires
of many Christians, who if their mouths be not filled as soon as they be
opened, if Gods promises be not fulfilled, as soon as they be pleaded, if they
have not when they ask, do straightways like Rachel cry out they die, or like
Jonah, That it is better for them to die then to live, Jonah 4. 3. because they
do not obtain, not what Gods will, but what their own will suggests to be
best. Watches that go fastest do not always go truest; no more are desires
that are most hasty, most regular. It is good in prayer to have the desires
winged with affection, and to be like an arrow drawn with full strength, but
yet there must be a submission exercised unto the holy and wise will of God,
that so it may appear that we seek to him in a way of begging, and not by a way
of contest; that we make him not the object only of our duties and our selves
the end, but him to be both the object and the end of every service which we
give unto him.

CHAP. VII. Containing the 2, 3, 4, 5. positive rules for the right application
of the promises.
THe first direction has much exceeded the bounds which at first were allotted
unto it in my thoughts, who did not intend to make so great a disparity between
it and the ensuing directions, as to make the one to have the dimensions of a
large building, and the rest to be after the model of a small cottage. I shall
therefore so far censure it my self, as to acknowledge that more has been
done, then the laws of a just symmetry and proportion can either defend or
excuse, and so leave it:

SECT. 1. Rule 2. Promises in their performance conditional.
The second direction is, that though the promises be absolutely free in the
making of them, having no other cause then Gods will, no other motive then his
love and mercy; yet in their performance they are conditional, and have a
dependency upon duties in us: they are fulfilled not only in us, but by us. To
a clear explication of this rule, I shall propound an ordinary, but yet a
necessary distinction concerning the promises, which is this: There are
promises of grace, and there are promises which are made to grace. The one are
so absolute, as that they do not depend upon any grace in us foregoing, or
suppose any good qualifications in us to be partakers of them; such are the
promises of conversion and regeneration, in which grace makes way for it self,
and works all the initial preparations, without any concurrence or activity on
our part, we being as fully passive in our second birth as we are in our first
birth, in our regeneration as in our generation. The other promises made to
grace are conditonal, not as supposing any thing to be performed by our
strength and power, or as if the conditions were causes meriting the grace
promised; but they are conditional in regard of a precedent qualification and
fitness in the subject that is to partake of them, without which they cannot
be fulfilled, grace being made the condition of grace. Thus pardon of sin is
promised to him that repents, justification to them that believes, glory to him
that is sanctified, a crown to him that persevereth, and increase in grace to
him that improveth grace received. But the absolute promise of conversion, and
giving of spiritual life, though it have a kind of opposition unto conditional
promises, in not requiring that aptitude and qualification of the subject by
grace for the fulfilling of it, as the other do for the performance of them;
yet is it not absolute in opposition to the use of external means, which God
has appointed as a necessary way to obtain converting grace. For as the
decrees of God, though peremptory and unchangeable, do not exclude the
endeavors of the creature, and the working of second causes; no more does the
absoluteness of Gods promise in conversion shut out, but rather include the
use and exercise of all means that lead to the end. True it is, that to hear
savingly, to mingle faith with the Word, men cannot by any natural power or
ability in the least measure do; but yet God has commanded that they should
attend upon the Ordinances, and afford their presence to hear the Word, when
preached and delivered unto them: And though these be such actions which have
no immediate influence to the begetting or working of grace, yet are they so
far necessary, as that no man can promise unto himself that ever he shall be
converted, who does either neglect or refuse the using of those means, in
which God is pleased to dispense his free and undeserved grace.

This Direction is very useful in a double respect, to which it fitly serves,

First, to silence the profane cavils of those who make no other use of their
naural impotency to good, and of the power of God in conversion, then to exempt
themselves from all attendance upon Ordinances, God being able by a powerful
voice to bid them arise from the dead, when like Lazarus they lie in the grave
of their sins; as well as heal them, when like the Creeple they lie at the
poole of the Sanctuary, expecting the moving of the Spirit upon the waters, no
impediment being able to cross or frustrate the purpose of the Almighty. But
as in other works of God, so in conversion not his power only, but his will
which is commensurable to his power, and does modifie it in the working, is to
be observed and heeded. Some things he effects without means, not because
his power is infinite and stands not in need of any other assistance; but
because his will is it should so work: other things though as immediately
wrought by himself, are accomplished in the use of means; not that either his
will or power are unable to give an existence unto them without any secondary
helps, but that his pleasure is to have them so wrought and perfected. Such is
the work of making a new heart, of infusing spiritual life where it is wanting,
which though it be wholly and only from God himself, is yet ordered by him to
be effected in the use of means. As Physicians put their physic in certain
syrups and liquors, which are vehicula medicinae, not at all of themselves
operative, but serviceable to the medicine that works the cure: so does God by
his Ordinances which are canales gratiae, channels and conduit-pipes designed
for grace to run in, convey and dispense the precious blessing of a new and
spiritual life to those upon whom he is pleased to bestow it. And therefore as
the plea of those is both weak and impious, who contemptuously turn their
backs upon the preaching of the Word, and other external helps, as needless
and unnecessary to conversion, it being Gods sole work: so their expectation in
the close will be both sad and fruitless, ending rather in a just turning into
hell by God, then in a saving and effectual turning through grace unto God.

Secondly, it serves to excite and quicken believers to an unwearied diligence
in holy duties; as being the ready and expedite way to obtain their desires in
the fulfilling of any promise which they stand in need of. The penny was given
to the labourer in the vineyard, not to the loiterer in the marketplace, Mat.
20. And the reward in the promise is not to him that sits still, and expects
salvation to drop into his lap, but to him that seeks and pursues after it;
making Gods promise not a ground for his idleness, but a spur and motive to his
diligence. The promises are wells of salvation flowing with the waters of life,
but yet the strong Christian that expects to be refreshed by them, must be at
pains to draw water out of them, Isa. 12. 3. They are full breasts of
consolation; but yet the weak Christian, who is as the newborn babe, or
new-yeaned lamb, must suck these breasts, Isa. 66. 11. if he will be satisfied
with their aliment. Etsi infirmus, etsi parvulus, (says Austin) exige a Deo
misericordiam. Non vides perbreves agnos, capitibus pulsantes ubera matrum, ut
lacte satientur? Though thou be weak and little, yet seek and exact with
importunity mercy from God. Do you not see how the young lambs do with their
heads force down the milk from their damme, that they may be filled therewith?
To wrestle and strive with God like Jacob for the gaining of a blessing, is not
superfluous, because God has promised it, but necessary, because he has
commanded it, Ezekiel. 36. 37. I will yet for this be inquired of by the house of
Israel, to do it for them. So, Jer. 29. 11, 12, I know the thoughts that I
think toward you, thoughts of peace* and not of evil, yet shall ye call upon
me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you. Calling on
God is not for his information, but for the exercise of believers obedience and
submission. He will have faith as an hand to work, as well as an hand to
receive. It was a scandal that Pharaoh brought upon the religion of the
Israelites, that it made them idle, Exodus 5. 8. And it is a wrong done to the
promises of the Gospel by carnal Libertines, who make use only of them to
countenance their sloth, and not to quicken their obedience. None that ever I
have heard of have held marriage vain, or unnecessary for the propagation of
mankind, who have yet been of opinion that the soul is not generated, but
immediately created and infused by God: no more can any man rationally
conclude, that, because the promises of God are the declarations of his
unchangeable purpose and will, therefore duties and endeavors are superfluous
to the effecting of any good which he has promised to confer upon us.

SECT. 2. Rule. 3. There is a dependency of one Promise on another, which must
not be broken, nor inverted.
The third Rule or Direction is, that there is a sacred concatenation and
dependency of one promise to another, which may not be violated, and a fixed
order which may not be inverted.

First, the mutual tie that is between the promises, in the application of them
must not be broken: As the duties of the law are copulative, and may not in the
obedience that is yielded unto it, be disjoined, James 2. 20. So are the
blessings of the promises, which may not be made use of, as severed from each
other, like loose and unstringed pearls; but as collected and made into one
entire chain. God has linked the promises of pardon and repentance together,
and no man may presume that God will ever hearken unto him who begges the one,
and neglects to seek the other. When he pacifies the conscience, he melts the
heart, and works repentance, as well as seals forgiveness: So likewise has
God inseparably knit grace and glory together, as that none can lay a just
claim to the one, who is not first made partaker of the other; no man can
expect to be an heir of heaven, that is not first a Saint on earth. Holiness
leads to happiness, as the rivulet to the sea, as the way to the end: the one
is as the foot of the ladder, and the other as the top. Summitas scalae
attingitur, non volando, sed ascendendo, says Bernard: Glory which is the
highest round, is not attained by flying, but by an orderly ascending unto it;
the intermediate steps must not be skipt, but trodden. Oh! how vain then are
those men's hopes, and how sinful are their practices, who stand upon the
battlements of hell, and sport themselves with all the sensual delights of the
flesh, trampling under their impure feet with scorn the precious promises of
holiness, by which they should be molded unto all obedience! and yet at the
same time stretch forth an hand of presumption to lay hold on the promises of
life and eternal glory, as if they were the true heirs and proprietaries
thereof. But their forlorn condition which they would not see by the light of
the Word, they shall read by the flames of hell, being infinitely* more
pressed down under the weight of Gods displeasure, and endless despair, then
ever they were lifted up with the transient hopes of happiness, by a carnal
and ungrounded presumption.

Secondly, in the applying of the promises the order and method of them is not
to be inverted, but to be observed. The promises which God has made, are a
full storehouse of all kind of blessings; they include in them both the upper
and the nether springs, the mercies of this life and of that which is to come:
there is no good that can present it self as an object to our desires or
thoughts, of which the promises are not a ground for faith to believe and hope
to expect the enjoyment of. But yet our use and application of them must be
regular, and such as suites both the pattern and precept which Christ has
given us. The pattern we have in that most absolute prayer of his, Mat. 6. 9,
10. wherein he shows what is chiefly to be desired by us; the Sanctification of
his Name in our hearts, the coming of his kingdom into our souls, the doing
of his will in our lives, are to be sought for before, and above our daily
bread. We may not be more anxious for food, then for grace. The precept we have
in his most heavenly Sermon, Mat. 6. 33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and
his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. Promises are
to be improved in prayer and other duties, primarily for holiness, and
secondarily for other outward comforts. The soul is more worth then body, as
the body is more worth then the raiment, and therefore the principal care of
every one ought to be to secure the welfare of his soul, by interesting
himself in the promises of life and eternal happiness: but yet even here also
a Method must be observed, and the Law of the Scripture must be exactly
followed, which tells us that God first gives grace; and then glory, Psalm. 84.
11. As it is a sin to divide grace from glory, and to seek the one without the
other; so is it also a sin to be preposterous in our seeking, to look first
after happiness, and then after holiness: no man can rightly be solicitous
about the crown, but he must first be careful about the race; nor can any be
truly thoughtful about his interest in the promises of glory, that does not
first make good his title to the promises of grace. Salvation, endless life,
fellowship with Angels, and the firstborn of heaven; they (are as Austin
calls them) promissum finale, the last things in order that God has to give,
or that we have to ask; and therefore we may not anticipate the order of them,
but wait upon God in his own way. What the Apostle says concerning the
resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 22, 23. That in Christ all shall be made alive, but
every man in his own order; may be truly spoken concerning the promises of the
Gospel, that in Christ all shall be fulfilled, but every promise in its own
order.

SECT. 3. Rule. 4. Meditate seriously, frequently on the Promises.
The fourth Direction is to meditate thoroughly and frequently upon the
promises, and to deal with them as the Virgin Mary did with the things that
were spoken concerning Christ, she kept and pondered them in her heart, Luke 2.
19. The limbeck does not put any virtue into the herbs, but it distills and
extracts whatever is efficacious and useful from them. The Be does not derive
any sweetness to the flower, but by its industry it sucks the latent honey
from it: so meditation conveyeth nothing of worth unto the promise, but it
draws forth the sweetness, and discovers the beauty of it, which else without
it would be little tasted or discerned. I have sometimes thought that a
believers looking upon a promise, is not unlike a man's beholding of the heavens
in a still and serene evening, who when he first casts up his eye, sees happily a
star or two only to peep, and with difficulty to put forth a feeble and
disappearing light, by and by he looks up again, and then both their number and
luster are increased, a while after he views the heavens again, and then the
whole firmament, from every quarter, with a numberless multitude of stars, is
richly enamelled, as with so many golden studs: So when a Christian first
turns his thoughts toward the promises, the appearances of light and comfort
which shine from them, do oft-times seem to be as weak and imperfect rays
which neither scatter fears nor darkness; when again he sets himself to ripen
and improve his thoughts upon them, then the evidence and comfort which they
yield to the soul, is both more clear and distinct: but when the heart and
affections are fully fixed in the meditation of a promise, Oh! what a bright
mirror is the promise then to the eye of faith? What legions of beauties do
then appear from every part of it, which both ravish and fill the soul of a
believer with delight? How does he sometimes admire free grace, whereby God
becomes a debtour, not by taking any thing from us, but by promising great
things unto us? How does he triumph in the fullness of mercy which overflows in
it, as being enough to fill the widest capacity, and to supply the greatest
necessity? How does he stay himself upon the stability of the promise, it being
founded upon strength it self, The strength of Israel, who cannot lie? One
promise thoroughly ruminated and meditated upon, is like to a morsel of meat
well chewed and digested, which distributeth more nourishment and strength to
the body, then great quantities taken down whole. Samson when he had made a
great slaughter of his enemies, and laid them heaps upon heaps, yet he
complains that though God had given him so mighty a deliverance, he was ready
to die for thirst, Judges 15. 18. So many Christians who make it their work to
heap promise upon promise, may yet be sorely distressed for want of comfort, if
by meditation they do not dive into the depths of the promise. The water
wherewith Samson was refreshed, came forth out of an hollow place which the
Lord clave in the jaw; and the springs of comfort which believers drink of,
come out of the clifts of the promise, which faith and meditation makes in it.
Let me therefore persuade such as are desirous and willing to make the utmost
of every promise, to put in practice this much neglected duty, without which
every Ordinance is of little fruit. The Word as it must have preparation before
it, which like the plough fits the ground for the reception of the seed; so
must it have meditation to follow after, which is as the harrow to cover and
hide the new-sown seed, or else the fowls of the air will pick it up. The
Sacrament as it is food to be received with an appetite; so is it to be
digested with meditation, else the nourishment will be little. The promises as
they must be read in the Scripture with diligence; so must they be called to
remembrance by many serious musings and actings of our thoughts upon them; else
they will never prove strengthening and reviving cordials. Roses are sweeter in
the still then on the stalk; and promises are more fragrant in the heart then
in the book. The grapes hanging on the vine, do not make the wine that cheares
the heart of man; but the grapes that are squeised and trodden in the
wine press; no more do the promises as they stand in the Bible work joy and
gladness; but as they are pondered in the mind, and like pressed grapes have
their juice and virtue drawn from them, which by a percolation in the thoughts
turns into a most sovereign and precious liquor.

SECT. 4. Rule 5. Be much in the application of the Promises.
The fifth direction is, to be much in the use and application of promises,
though we do not find such visible effects either of grace or comfort issuing
from them, as we expect or desire. Elijah when he went up to the top of mount
Carmel, and fell upon his face before the Lord to pray for rain, he sent his
servant seven times to look toward the sea, before he saw so much as the
appearance of a cloud of an hand-breadth, yet was he not discouraged, 1. King.
18. 43. So believers though they have been much in musing upon the promises in
their thoughts, frequent in pleading and spreading them before the Lord in
prayer, and after all their lookings toward heaven, say as the servant of
Elijah when he looked toward the sea, non est quicquam, there is nothing; yet
must they not cast away their confidence in them; or neglect the daily use of
them; because the promise, and the word that goes forth out of Gods mouth,
shall not return unto him void, but shall accomplish that which he pleases,
and it shall prosper in the thing whereunto he sent it, Isa. 55. 11. The manner
of the fulfilling of it may be various, but the performance of it is most
certain. The blessing of the promise descends sometimes like rain in visible
showers, producing the sensible effects of joy, and peace in the soul;
sometimes it falls like dew in a silent and imperceptible way; without making
any discernable alteration in the heart of a believer: the virtue which it puts
forth is real, but yet withal hidden and secret. As gold put and boiled in
broth, helps to make it strengthening and cordial, which if weighed afterward
in the scale, is found to lose little or nothing of its former weight, or to
suffer any dimiunition of its substance: so the promise when much meditated on,
when frequently applied by a believer to his present straits, yields a secret
influence and support, though to his apprehension no virtue or quickening does
appear to have issued from it. Then it is as the cork to the net to keep it
floating in a sea of difficulties, when every moment we look for nothing else
but a dismal and irrecoverable perishing amidst those many rolling waves and
billows that pass over us.

This direction I propound the rather, because that Christians lying under
fears, darkness, and temptations; are not seldom like hasty patients under
diseases and infirmities, who if they find not a present benefit in the use of
Physic, either in the removal, or in the abatement of their distempers, do
straightways conclude, that it were better for them to bear the pain of the
disease, then to trouble themselves with the daily applications of fruitless
remedies and prescripts; not considering that Physic may be useful to prevent
the danger of the disease, when it does not work the cure; to keep them from
growing worse, though it do not make them better: So believers when by the use
of promises and other Ordinances they find no sensible alteration for the
better in respect of their present condition, are apt to throw off the use of
means, as things that stand them in little or no stead. Though they use the
precepts of the Word, as a lamp to guide their feet, yet they stumble; though
they use the promises as a staff to support them, yet they fall; though they
beg and pray for strength, yet they are feeble; to what end therefore should
they be much in the use of such helps, as they cannot find either to relieve
them, or better them? Such expostulations and complaints I shall only answer,
with a suitable story related in the lives of the ancient Fathers, which is
this: One of the fraternity came to the old Father; and complained, Father, I
do often desire of the ancient Fathers some instructions for the good of my
soul, and whatsoever they tell me, I forget all. The old man had two empty
vessels, and bid him bring the one, and pour water into it, and wash it
clean, and then pour out the water, and set it up clean in its place. Which
when the young man had accordingly done, he demanded, Which now of the two
vessels is the more clean? The young man answered, That into which I poured
water, and washed it. Then replied the old Father, So is the soul which
oftentimes hears Gods Word, though it remember not what it has heard, yet it
is more cleansed from sin then that soul that never comes to hear. And so may
I say to them that complain, they ruminate often upon the promises in their
thoughts, plead them in their prayers, read them in the Word, but yet find no
benefit or fruit from them; that in so doing, they are not only more holy and
free from lusts then others who neglect them; but far better then otherwise
themselves would be, should they not be employed in such spiritual and blessed
services.

CHAP. VIII. Contains five other positive Rules for the right application of
the Promises.
SECT. 1. Rule. 6. Continue in a holy waiting upon God.
THe sixth Rule or direction is, to abide and continue in a holy waiting upon
God, until he who is the maker of the promises, become the fulfiller of them.
Our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, (says the Psalmist) until that he have
mercy upon us, Ps. 123. 2. Some promises are like unto the Almondtree which
puts out upon the first approach of the spring, and brings forth an early
fruit: they are not long pleaded, ere they be fulfilled; and have their
blessings like ripe fruit to drop into the mouth of the eater. Others are like
to the Mulberrytree, which is slow and backward in the imparting of its sap
unto the branches: they are long before they bud forth into any appearances
which may discover any step and progress to be made in order to their future
accomplishment: so that they who are the inheriters of them, though they need
not to fear their failing the appointed time, yet they need patience to expect
and wait their fulfilling. The great promise which God made to Abraham of
multiplying his seed like the stars of heaven* Genesis 15. 5. did for two hundred
and fifteen years continue its motion like to a slow-paced planet, having in
all that tract of time gone little of that course which it was to finish: for
Abraham was seventy five years old when the promise was made, and an hundred
years old when Isaac who was the first blossom of that promise was born: Isaac
was threescore years old before Jacob was borne, Jacob was an hundred and
thirty years old when he went into Egypt, and then there were no more then
seventy souls that had issued from the loins of Abraham. But yet in the latter
two hundred and fifteen years, When the time of the promise drew nigh which God
had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt, Act. 7. 17.
They that were but seventy at their going into Egypt, were at their coming
forth six hundred thousand three thousand five hundred and fifty, the males
only being numbered from twenty years old and upward, besides the tribe of Levi
which was forbidden to be counted, Number. 1. 46, 47. Seeing therefore that there
is oft-times a long intervall between the seedtime and the harvest of the
promise, between its making and its fulfilling, it is necessary for believers
to wait upon God, who is optimus opportunitatis arbiter, one that can best
date and time his own promises; and to expect with patience the appointed time
of the promise, which at the end shall speak and not lie: Though it tarry,
wait for it, Hab. 2. 3.

Now if you ask, what waiting is: It is not any particular grace, as varnish
is not a particular color; but it is the companion well-nigh of all graces,
and therefore in Scripture we shall find it to be joined to the chief of
graces, so as by its conjunction with them, to add a perfection and luster to
them. It is joined with faith, Isa. 28. 16. He that believes, shall not make
haste. With hope, Lam. 3. 26. It is good that a man should both hope, and
quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. With patience, Jam. 5. 7. The
husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience
for it. With submission and contentment, Isal. 37. 7. Rest in the Lord, [or be
silent to the Lord] and wait patiently for him. With perseverance, Hos. 12. 6.
Keep mercy and judgment, and wait on thy God continually. All these graces
thus coupled with waiting, is a believer to exercise in his pleading before God
the performance of any promise, and to take heed that he let not his faith to
end in diffidence, his hope to languish into despair, his submission and
patience to turn into murmurings, his perseverance to expire in backsliding,
and to say as that wicked King, This evil is of the Lord, why should I wait
upon him any longer? 2 King. 6. 33. A good heart, though it will not let God
wait long, no not at all for its obedience, yet it will wait as long as God
sees good for his promise, saying only with David, Remember the word unto thy
servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope, Psalm. 119. 49.

SECT. 2. Rule. 7. Make choice of some special promises to resort to in
extremity.
The seventh direction is, To single and cull out of the many promises which
God has made for pardon, holiness, protection, provision, some one or two of
every kind, which we may resort unto with speed in any extremity. Weak and
infirm persons, besides the many Physical herbs, distilled waters, magisterial
powders, costly electuaries with which their closets are plentifully furnished,
have usually some peculiar cordial which in the day they carry about them, and
at night set at their beds head to prevent and repel fainting sits* so should
believers besides those promises of all sorts with which they are to store
themselves, have in a constant readiness some few special promises, which upon
every occasion that may befall them, they may quickly have recourse unto, both
for support and comfort. And here though I shall not prescribe and limit any in
their choice, but leave them to the free use of such Scriptures and promises,
as themselves by experience have found to be full of life and sweetness, yet
it will not be amiss to recommend the use of some few eminent promises of
diverse kinds out of the full storehouse of the Word, which may serve as so
many meet cordials to revive the spirit of drooping Christians amidst the
several kinds of necessities that may afflict them. Are any burdened with the
guilt of sin, so as that their soul draws nigh unto the pit of despair?
What more joyful tidings can ever their ears hear, then a proclamation of
free mercy made by the Lord himself unto believing and repenting sinners? What
more glorious and blessed sight can their eyes ever behold* then the Name of
God written in sundry of his choice attributes, as in so many golden letters
for them to read? The Lord, the Lord God, merciful, and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression and sin, Exodus 34. 6, 7. He
is the Lord, who only has jus vitae and necis, the absolute power of life and
death in his hands; but he is the Lord God merciful, who far more willingly
scatters his pardons in forgiving, then executes his justice in condemning;
like the Be that gathers honey with delight, but stings not once unless she be
much provoked. He is gracious, not incited to mercy by deserts in the object,
but moved by goodness in himself; his love springs not from delight in our
beauty, but from pity to our deformity. He is long-suffering, bearing with
patience renewed and often repeated injuries, which he might by power revenge
upon him who is the doer. He is abundant in goodness; grace overfloweth more
in him then sin can do in any. Sin in the creature is but a vicious quality,
but goodness in him is his nature. He is abundant in truth; as he is good in
making the promises, so is he true in performing them; when men deal
unfaithfully with him, he breaks not his Covenant with them; He keeps mercy for
thousands; former ages have not exhausted the treasures of his mercy, so as
that succeeding generations can find none: there are still fresh reserves of
mercy, and that not for a few, but for thousands. He forgives iniquity,
transgression and sin; not pence, but talents are forgiven by him; not sins
of the least sise are only pardoned, but sins of the greatest dimensions*
And as this promise in which the Name of God is so richly described, does fully
answer the hesitancies, doubts and perplexities of such who fear their
iniquities for number to be so many, for aggravation to be so great, as that
sometimes they question, Can God pardon? sometimes, Will he ever show mercy to
such a wretched Prodigal? So likewise may that blessed promise made unto
believers, Hos. 14. 5, 6, 7. exceedingly support such who mourn under their
want of holiness, and complain of the weakness of their grace, fearing that
the little which they have attained unto, goes rather backwards then forwards:
God himself having promised that he will be as a dew unto them which shall make
them to put forth in all kinds of growth. They shall grow as the lilly, and
cast forth their roots as Lebanon, their branches shall spread, and their
beauty shall be as the Olive Tree, they shall revive as the corn, and grow as
the vine. What more comprehensive summary can there be either of Gods
goodness, or of a believers desires, then there is in this one promise? wherein
he has promised to make them grow in beauty like the lilly, in stability like
the Cedar, in usefulness like the Olive, whose fruit serves both for light and
nourishment, in spreading like the vine, and in their increase like the corn;
God himself being both the planter and waterer of all their graces. To them
who are full of fears through the approach of dangers, which they have no hope
to avoid, or power to overcome. How full of encouragement and comfort is that
promise of protection and safety? When thou passest through the waters, I will
be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou
walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame*
kindle upon thee, Isa. 43. 2. Water and fire are two evils, in which none can
be with their nearest friends without perishing with them. Who can save a Jonah
when cast into a boisterous sea, but God? And who can walk in the fiery furnace
with the three children, and not be consumed, but the Son of God? In the prison
one friend may be with another, in banishment he may accompany him in the
battle he may stand by him and assist him, but in the swelling waters, and in
the devouring flames none can be a relief to any but God: and he has promised
to believers to be with them in the midst of both these, that so in the
greatest extremities which can befall them they may fully rest assured, that
nothing can separate God from them, but that he will either give them
deliverance from troubles, or support them under troubles; Martyrs non
^ripuit, sed nunquid descruit? says Austin. He did not take the Martyrs out of
the flames, but did he forsake them in the flames? Lastly, to them, the
meannesse of whose condition may seem to expose them above others to hunger,
cold, nakedness, evils that make life it self far more bitter then death; how
full of divine sweetness is that blessed promise of provision? The young lions
do lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not lack any good
thing, Psalm. 34. 10. The Septuagint renders it the (...), the great wealthy men
of the earth, who like beasts of prey live upon spoil and rapine, who think
that in the hardest times that can come they shall be eaten up last; they shall
be bitten with hunger, and perish by famine, when they who fear the Lord shall
be in want of nothing. The widows little barrel of meal in the famine yielded
a better supply then Ahab his storehouse and granary, her cruse had oil in it,
when his Olive-yards had none. Oh! how securely and contentedly then may a
believer, who acts his faith in such promises, lay himself down in the bosom
of the Almighty in the worst of all his extremities! not much unlike the infant
that sleeps in the arms of his tender mother with the breast in his mouth,
from which as soon as ever it wakes, it draws a fresh supply that satisfies its
hunger, and prevents its unquietness.

SECT. 3. Rule. 8. Consider of the examples to whom promises have been
fulfilled.
The eighth direction is, in the making use of any promise* to parallel our
condition with such examples which may be unto us as so many clear instances of
the goodness and faithfulness of God in his giving unto others the same or
the like mercies which we seek and beg for our selves. As the promises are
useful to strengthen faith; so are examples to confirm and assure sense, which
is continually apt to implead what faith believes, and to question what God
has spoken. God has promised, that though our sins be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be white
as wool, Isa. 1. 18. But sense suggesteth, What possibility is there that ever
such a change should be? can soap* nitre* water make scarlet to be as white as
undipped wool? no more can it be that the ingrained spots and stains of sins
so often reiterated, so long persisted in, should be done away, and the sinner
be clothed with the white robe of innocence. God says, He will heal
backslidings, and love freely, Hos. 14. 4. He will love freely without respect
of persons, he will pardon freely without respect of sins; but sense that
shuts the door of hope which he has opened; Sometimes calls in question
his power, Can he work wonders among the dead? Can he raise from the
rottenness of the grave such as have lain long putrefying in it; Sometimes
disputes his mercy, Will he ever remember the chief of sinners? Will he be
gracious to the rebellious, that have both neglected and refused the tenders of
salvation which have been often made? Now when a believer beholds the pregnant
examples both of his power and love set forth in the Scriptures, in his
converting a stubborn Ma^asseh, in his translating into Paradise a bloody
robber, in his casting forth of devils out of Mary Magdalen a notorious harlot,
in his changing Paul a persecutor into an Apostle, in his compassionating and
healing Peter, that sealed his backsliding with a curse, in his bringing
salvation to Zaccheus, a hateful extortioner: then the expostulations of sense
and carnal reasonings are put to silence; then he concludes with confidence
that the promises are a sanctuary for the penitent, and lifts up his feet with
cheerfulness to run unto them; then he pleads the bounty and faithfulness
of God in the performance of his promises unto others, as a strong argument to
show the like mercy unto him. Thus David in his low condition strengthens his
faith and hope in God from this ground, Our Fathers trusted in thee, and were
not confounded, Psalm. 22. 6, 7.

This direction is always of use to believers in the ordinary and daily
application which they make of the Promises, because examples, as they are
powerful in persuading obedience to every precept which commands it; so are
they also, efficacious to strengthen and confirm faith when exercised on any
promise. But it is chiefly useful in extremities, when dangers which are
insuperable do at any time inviron us. Besides the promises which faith uses
as a support, it is good to have in our eye some such example as Daniel, whom
God preserved in the lions den, sealing up their mouths by his power that they
should not hurt him, before the King had sealed the mouth of the den with his
signet, that he might not come forth. When sad desertions and temptations do
afflict us, it is useful to call to our remembrance some such instance as
Heman, who complains that he was laid in the lowest pit, that he was afflicted
with all Gods waves, that he was ready to die from his youth up, that he was
distracted while he suffered his terrors, Psalm. 88. And yet afterward he
becomes the Kings Seer in the words of God, to lift up the horn, 1 Chronicles. 25.
5. That is, he as a Prophet is especially employed to set forth the mighty acts
of Gods power, in Psalms and Songs of praise and thanksgiving. When sore
afflictions are multiplied upon us, which for their weight are more heavy then
lead, for their bitterness more bitter then gall and wormwood, it is good to
have in our thoughts some such example as Job, that we be not wearied and faint
in our minds. Take, my brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken unto us in the
Name of the Lord, as examples of suffering affliction* and of patience, says
the Apostle James 5. 10* What a map, and spectacle of myserie is Job made
above others? How various, and how great were the afflictions with which he was
exercised? Sabeans Chaldeans destroy his substance, fire from heaven consumes
his servants, a great wind smites the four corners of the house, and
destroys all his children, ulcers, boyles break forth upon his body* keen and
unjust censures from his friends vex his soul. And yet the happy close and end
that the Lord makes with him, is as famous as his miseries were* His riches and
substance are doubled, his number in children equalled, his body healed, and
his name cleared by God himself. These and such like instances when suited with
a believers condition, do contribute much to the suppressing and keeping of
that despondency and dejection of mind, which the extremity of trials in any
kind is apt to subject the best of Christians unto, and cause them to renew
their confidence in the promises, and in hope to expect the performance of
them, because that others in the same or not unlike case with themselves have
found the faithfulness and goodness of God in his supporting them under their
burdens, and giving perfect deliverance from them according to his promise.

SECT. 4. Rule. 9. Preserve communion with the holy Spirit entire.
The ninth rule or directions is, To keep, and preserve entire our communion
with the holy Spirit. The dependency which every believer has on the Spirit is
very great, he being unto the soul, as the soul is unto the body, the original
and principle of all spiritual life and motion. What are any until he quicken
them, and by his power fashion them unto holiness, but as so many livelesse
lumps of undigested clay? And what are the best without his continual
breathings upon them, but as so many disjoynted and weak members, which have
neither constancy nor uniformity in their motions or actions? Grace in its
vigor and strength abides in the heart, as light in the house, by way of
emanation and effusion, rather then by inherency. An instrument when it has an
edge set upon it, does not at all cut any thing, till it be guided and moved by
the hand of an artificer; no more does a Christian when he has an habitual
aptitude through grace to work, yet do or perform any service without the
concurrence and assistance of the Spirit of Christ, quickening, exciting and
applying the habitual power unto particular duties. Necessary therefore it is,
that believers be circumspect in maintaining their communion with him, and not
to provoke him to stand at a distance from them, who is the fountain both of
their grace and comfort. But the necessity of it will more particularly appear,
if we consider in how much need we daily stand, of the constant assistance and
powerful operations of the holy Spirit, to make the applications of all the
promises to be effectual unto us both for support and comfort. He alone it is,
who is the mighty worker of that noble and divine grace of saving faith, by
which believers are enabled to lay hold of the promises, and by them of Christ,
in whom they all meet, as so many lines in their common center. He it is, who
opens the eyes of the understanding, and fills the heart with an heavenly
light, by which the worth and preciousnesse of those things which are given of
God in the promises, are judged and discerned. He it is, who brings to our
remembrance, the faithful sayings of the Gospel, and makes them to be as words
spoken in season to him that is weary. He it is, who teaches believers to
plead the promises in their supplications unto God, and when they know not what
to pray for as they ought, makes request for them with groanings that cannot
be uttered. He it is, who by way of obsignation does seal and ratify the
promises unto the faithful, and that in a peculiar and transcendent manner. In
the assurance and security which is given for outward things, we only have the
wax sealed, with the impression and sculpture of the seal, the signet sealing
is not at all looked after, if the one be safe, it matters not though the other
be lost: But in the confirmation of the promises, believers do possess both;
they have the holy Spirit* who is as the seal sealing, and the graces of the
Spirit, which are as the seal sealed and printed upon their hearts. The Spirit
by his special testimony does assure them of the certainty of their salvation,
and seal them up unto it, acording to that of Paul, Romans 8. 16. The Spirit it
self bears witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God, and
heirs with Christ. The graces of the Spirit which are his lively image and
impresse upon their souls, do also evidence and confirm the same thing,
according to that of the Apostle, Hereby we know that we are passed from death
unto life, because we love the brethren, 1 John 3. 14.

It is therefore a direction of great importance unto all, who would gladly
reap profit and advantage from the promises, to keep firm and to strengthen
their communion with the Spirit, who is the only Counselor to instruct them
how to manage the promises to the best improvement of them, the most powerful
Advocate to furnish them with arguments to plead at the throne of grace their
right unto them and their interest in them, the most effectual Comforter to
support their hearts with confidence, to fill them with joy, while they wait
upon God for the performance of his promises unto them. If he be grieved by our
careless demeanor toward him, it is not any promise that can make us glad;
if he be provoked to withdraw and suspend his light, there are no irradiations
from the promises that can free us from the darkness of desertion; if he be
made to turn our enemy by voluntary defections from him, none of the promises
can speak peace unto us. How vain and ungrounded then are the presumptions of
those who build their hopes of heaven and salvation upon the promises of mercy,
and yet neglect all communion with the Spirit of holiness? Who rest in the
testimony of their own spirit, misguided by false rules, and cheated by Satan's
subtilties, and look not at all after the testimony and witness of the Spirit,
without whom all the promises of the Gospel, are but as deeds and instruments
with Labels hanging at them without seals to confirm them, which do not
operate, or convey any thing of right unto those that are possessed of them.

SECT. 5. Rule. 10. Be truly thankful for the least dawnings of mercy.
The tenth direction in the right use of the promises, no less weighty then
any is, To be truly thankful for the least dawnings of mercy for the smalest
pledge and earnest of comfort which the promises at any time do afford unto us.
The Angel rebuked, and reproached those who despised the day of small things,
Zach. 4. 10. who with mournful eyes, with unbeleeving and misgiving hearts did
look upon the poor and mean beginnings of the rebuilding of the Temple, as
such which were altogether unlikely to terminate in a glorious structure, and
to have the top-stone thereof laid with shoutings and acclamations of joy. And
no less are those Christians to be reproved who esteem any of the consolations
of God to be small; who if they be not at first filled with the spiritual
suavities of the promises, take little or no notice of the support and
sustentation which they receive daily from them; who if they presently enjoy
not what they hastily desire, can neither thankfully accept of any pledges of
mercy which God has freely vouchsafed them, nor patiently wait for the sure
performance of the promises which he has made them. It is the usual method of
God to fulfill his promises by certain steps and degrees, to make his
salvation to break forth like the morning which begins in an imperfect
twilight; but cease not till it grow up into a bright day. The first
glimmerings of peace and comfort which spring from the promises, are
accompanied with great mixtures of darkness, but yet they are of a growing and
prevailing nature; and therefore are not to be despised, but to be thankfully
acknowledged and rejoiced in, as the happy earnests of an ensuing day, in which
the soul is as full of spiritual serenity and joy, as the firmament is of
light, when the Sun is in its vertical point. In the bestowing of his
favors, God deals with believers as Boaz did with Ruth, he first gave her a
liberty to gleane in his fields, then invited her to eat bread at his table,
and to dip her morsel in the vinegar, and lastly gave himself: So God first in
a sparing manner, and at some distance makes a discovery of his love and good
will unto them, then in a more familiar and friendly way he encourages them by
his promises to draw near unto him, and to taste how good the Lord is to those
that fear him: And then as the complement of all, he gives his Spirit into
their bosoms to assure them of his love, and their interest in whatever might
make them perfectly happy. After that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy
Spirit of promise, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 13. But the ready and speedy
way to obtain all this, is to be truly thankful for the least appearance of
mercy that shines forth from the promises, and to count it worthy of all
acceptance, to receive it with such joy as the morning was wont to be
anciently saluted, when the people went out, and cried, (...), Welcome such
light. To such God speaks, as our Savior did to Nathanael, Joh. 1. 50.
Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believe thou? thou
shall see greater things then these. Art thou thankful for a spark, for a
beam of light? thou shall be satisfied and filled with the fountain of light
it self. Do thou bless God* for crumbs that fall from his table? thou shall
be feasted with the marrow and fat things of life and salvation. Ingrato nihil
augetur, sed quod acceperat vertitur ei in perniciem. Fidelis autem in modico,
censetur dignus munere* ampliori, says Bernard: The ungrateful person receives
no increase, but what he has formerly received turns to his ruin. But the
grateful person is always thought worthy of more ample rewards.

This direction I gladly would that those Christians should often have in their
thoughts, who are so much in complaining what they want, as that they never
bless God for what they enjoy. When any come into their company, their ears
are continually afflicted with their mournful notes, how few their comforts
are, how little the benefit is which they reap by the promises, but their
hearts are never quickened to bless God on their behalf, by their thankful
acknowledgement of the least mercy that God has vouchsafed them; when as
indeed it is a temper most befitting a Christian not to let the smallest of his
favors to pass unobserved or unacknowledged. The swine eats the fruit that
falls from the tree, but never looks up from whence it comes; but the Dove
picks not up a grain without casting up its eye to heaven; it eats and then
looks up, then picks again, and then looks up again: And so should a believer
lift up an eye of thankfulness unto God for every beam of light and hope
which he beholds in his Word, though it shine only through a narrow cranny. I
thank God in Christ, says holy Baines, sustentation I have, but spiritual
suavities I taste none. When we do not lie rejoicing in the arms and bosom of
God as a Father, it is a mercy worthy of our thankfulness, that we may lodge
safely in his house; when we do not behold the smiles of his face, it is a
mercy that we may hear his voice in his Word; when we have not the ring put on
as an ornament, it is a favor that we have any piece of a broken ring left
with us, as a pledge and token that in our extremity he will not forsake us.

To increase the number of these positive rules, were a task not in it self
difficult, nor yet happily to many weak ones altogether unnecessary; but
because it is far easier for a Physician to write Recipes, then for a Patient
to take the many repeated and continued potions: I shall forbear to add more,
as fearing I have been already too burdensome and prolix in these; and shall
only recommend what has been spoken to the serious practice of believers
without the least infringing of their liberty to use others which either their
own or others experience may suggest as profitable. And so I pass on to the
second sort of rules which are Cautionary. The end of which chiefly serves to
discover sundry errors and mistakes, which in the application and use of the
promises are as dangerous to believers, as unseen rocks and unfounded shallows
are to mariners; and therefore are to be carefully heeded, and to be avoided by
them.

CHAP. IX. Cautionary Rules for the application of the Promises.
SECT. 1. Rest not in a general faith.
THe first cautionary Rule is, to Take heed of resting in a general faith,
which goes no further then to give a naked assent unto the promises of the
Gospel as true; but does not put forth it self to receive and embrace them as
good. True faith is not an act of the understanding only but a work of the
heart also, Romans 10. 10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness. As
it yields an assent unto the truth of the promise; so it exercises fiducial
application of it unto its self, and thereby drawing near unto Christ, wholly
throws and casts it self upon him for life and happiness, not at all looking
after any other help. Maldonate is pleased to make himself and his reader merry
with that usual distinction of our Divines, by which faith is distinguished
into an historical, miraculous, temporary, and saving faith. And playing upon
the word Fides; says, that the Protestants have Tot fides quot in Lyra. As
many faiths as there be strings upon a fiddle. But it is not his scoff and
sarcasme that can elude either the truth or the necessity of the distinction:
when as the Scripture tells us of many that believed, and yet did never embrace
Christ with their hearts, as their only Savior, or confidently rely upon the
promises of his mercy. Simon Magus is said to be a believer, Act. 8. 13. And
yet Saint Peter tells him that he is in the gall of bitterness and the bond of
iniquity, ver. 23. The multitude believe in Christ's name, but yet he would not
commit himself unto them, for he knew what was in man, John 2. 23. He did not
own them as those to whom he would impart the saving mysteries of his Gospel;
or join himself unto them in the same bond of love and friendship, as he did
with those who with an entire and sincere heart believed on him. The five
foolish Virgins went far in their waiting for the bridegroom; they took
lamps with them to meet him, and kept their lights for a season burning; but
yet at his coming the door was shut against them, Mat. 25. 11. And shall the
faith of Gods lect and sanctified ones be of no better alloy, then the faith of
hypocrites and other wicked and impenitent sinners? Yea, shall the confession
of Peter concerning Christ, Mat. 16. 16. Thou art the Son of the living God,
be no whit better then that of the devils? Mat. 8. 29. who with a loud voice
cry out, Jesus thou Son of God, etc. Shall it be distinguished from it no
more in its worth, then it is in its words? But as the palest Gold does much
exceed the most glittering Alchimy, which though it seem to outvie the gold in
its luster; yet has it not the least affinity with it in its real virtue and
worth: so the smallest grain of saving faith by which a believer closes with
Christ in the promises, is more precious and excellent then a mere assent unto
the truth of the Word, which rests in the understanding, but has no
quickening influence upon the will and desires: the one being only a bare
credence, and the other a divine affiance. This was it which put a wide
difference between Peter's confession of Christ, and the Devils acknowledgement
of him, as Austin well observes, Hoc dicebat Petrus, ut Christum fide
amplecteretur; hoc dicebant Daemones, ut Christus ab cis recederet: This spoke
Peter, that he might embrace Christ; this said the devils, that Christ might
depart from them. And this fiducial application is the distinguishing character
which the Scripture makes between the faith of true believers and others; it
being sometimes described by a rolling and staying of its self upon God, Isa.
50. 10. sometimes by a trusting in him, Isa. 26. 4. sometimes by receiving of
Christ, Colos. 2. 6. sometimes by a coming unto him, Joh. 6. 36. All which
expressions do speak the spiritual motions and affections of the heart toward
Christ in cleaving and adhering unto him, which believers only exercise and
not hypocrites or castawayes. And therefore they are said not to rely on God,
or to look toward him, Isa. 31. 1. Not to trust in him, Psalm. 78. 22. not to
receive Christ, John 1. 11. not to come unto him, John 5. 40. Their faith is a
form of faith, but it wants the power and efficacy which accompanies saving
faith.

This Cautionary Rule is with the more circumspection to be heeded, in regard
that multitude of professors do rest themselves contented in that general
acknowledgement and assent which they yield to the truths of the Gospel, though
happily the chief enducement by which they are led unto it, be no other then
custom* education, or the authority of the Church. They think that the
believing there is a God, that Christ is the Savior of the world, that he died
for sinners, is faith enough to carry them out of the wilderness into Canaan,
out of the world into heaven. But alas! this and much more may be believed, and
yet no benefit at all accrue unto them who are persuaded of the certainty of
these supernatural verities. Here the Logicians rule holds true, Medicina
curat Socratem, non hominem; Physic is not given to man's nature, to cure the
Species, but to every man in individu^, to heal his person. Christ and his
promises are not beneficial unto any, but unto them who make a particular
application of both unto themselves. What comfort is it to an insolvent debtour
to believe that there are rich mines of gold in that land into which he is fled
to shelter himself from his creditors? What relief is it to a thirsty man, that
there is a full vintage of cordial and refreshing wines growing not far from
him, if he have no hope that he shall taste the least drop of it? What
satisfaction is it to a condemned person to be assured that there is a pardon
granted and sealed for many, if there be no ground for him to conceive that his
name is included in it? No more can it advantage any man to believe that Christ
died to reconcile sinners to God, and that by a glorious resurrection from the
grave, he has ascended the throne of Majesty, and lives for ever to make
intercession for them; unless with the belief of these blessed truths, there
be conjoined a particular reliance upon Christ for salvation, and a casting of
a man's self into the arms of his free mercy for the obtaining of the
forgiveness of sins, and the justifying of his person at the tribunal of
God. Do not the devils believe a God and tremble? James 1. 19. Do they not
acknowledge Christ his Son? Luke 4. 34. And bow the knee unto him? Phil. 2.
10. Do not they know and believe that Christ died in general for sinners, and
that they which fix their confidence in him shall be saved by him? What article
of the Creed is it, which they yield not an assent unto? And shall the faith
whereby believers are justified, not exceed the faith of these infernal spirits?

But if it be said, That the assent which the devils yield is full of force and
coaction, and is commanded by the evidence and Majesty of those infallible
truths which they do not at all love or affect; but the general belief which
Christians have of the revealed truths of the Gospel, is altogether free and
voluntary, and is thereby distinguished from the faith of devils. This
difference, though it may seem at first blush somewhat specious, yet is it
both insufficient and impertinent for that end to which it is assigned; in
regard that the distinction which it makes of the one assent from the other, is
from what is merely accidental, and not from what is essential to the nature
and being of faith. For they who make faith to be an act of the understanding
only, and to consist in an assent unto the truth of those things which God
has revealed, cannot properly fetch the essential difference which is between
the faith of devils and the faith of Christians, from the voluntarinesse or
involuntarinesse of the assent, from the liking or disliking of the truths
which they believe, because those are acts of another faculty in which by them
faith is not acknowledged to be seated. Besides the assent which the good
Angels give unto the glorious truths of the Gospel, which with diligence they
look into, 1 Pet. 1. 12. is both voluntary and delightful, and yet it is most
distinct and differing from the credence and assent which believers do give
unto the same truths, it not being accompanied with a particular application
and reliance for life and salvation, as it always is in believers, who do with
a justifying faith embrace and apply the promises of the Gospel unto
themselves. A man may be called to be a witness to a Will to aver the truth
of it, though he have no legacy given unto him in it: so the Angels as so many
heavenly witnesses do affirm and assent unto the truth of those things which
Christ has declared in his Gospel as in his last Will and Testament: But
believers are as so many Legatees, which have particular blessings therein
bequeathed unto them, and therefore must not rest in a general belief of the
truth of the things, but must claim their propriety and interest in them,
before they can ever have any benefit or comfort from them.

But if it be further objected, that the Scripture does in many places
attribute salvation to a general faith, and that the Centurions faith which our
Savior so much commended, Mat. 8. 10. seems to imply no more then an
historical belief of Christ's power and divinity: that Peter's confession of
Christ, Mat. 16. 16. was but general: that Martha's faith, John. 11. 27. was of
the same stamp: that Saint John's character of the new birth, is set forth by a
general faith, Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is borne of God,
1. Joh. 5. To the solving of this doubt a double answer may be given. First,
that in those times, the difficulty lay rather upon the assent then upon the
affiance, and the question then was more about the person of Christ, then the
office of Christ. Now because it was a great matter in the first dawnings of
the Gospel to believe him to be the Messiah, whose outward appearance was so
mean and contemptible to the eye of the world; therefore does the Scripture
much magnify and heighten this act.

Secondly, though the Scripture-expressions do lay much upon this one act of
faith, yet do they not exclude, but suppose the other acts of faith to be
joined with it. To a true believing there are three acts necessary, Knowledgr,
Assent, Fiducial application; but yet the Scripture does oftentimes describe
faith by one of these acts, Joh. 17. 3. This is life eternal, that they might
know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent. In
knowledge there are couched and included the other two acts of faith, in which
the powerful reception and embracing of Christ for salvation does chiefly
consist. So when it is set forth by an assent unto the truths of the Gospel,
there is employed not only a bare persuasion of the mind, but an affectionate
cleaving and adherence of the heart unto the promises of God made in Christ, by
which the soul of a believer is fortified against despair, which the
historical belief of them does not in the least measure expel or overcome.
And therefore though the Papists do deride this special apprehension and
application of Christ, as a mere conceit, and unwarranted fancy; though formal
professors do carelessly neglect it, and take all to be well enough with them,
as long as they do not question what the Scripture reveals; yet must not any
that look after the real enjoyment of comfort and peace from the promises,
please themselves in a general assent, which is little worth; but must
endeavor to clear and evidence their peculiar interest in Christ and his
promises, by a fiducial application of them unto themselves.

SECT. 2. Rule. 2. Pore not on the measure of Humiliation.
The second Cautionary Rule is to take heed of poring too much upon the measure
and degrees of humiliation; as if there were any certain and regular standard
by which all humiliation must be measured, before ever we may justly claim an
interest in the promises, or so much as put forth an hand to touch the hem of
Christ's garment, that our bloody issues may be healed. True it is, that the
invitation which Christ makes Mat. 11. 28. is only to them that labor and are
heavy-laden, to come unto him, that he may give them rest; because they do best
taste the sweetness, and prize the happy enjoyment of an heavenly rest and
peace. But yet all whom Christ invites to come to him, are not alike burdened
with the weight and pressure of their sins, or do equally labor under the
sense of Gods wrath and displeasure. Some are not only heavy-laden with their
sins, but have their bones broken with the weight of them, so as that they
roar by reason of the continual disquietnesse of their heart. Others though
they walk mournfully under their sins, yet are not bowed down under so great a
weight, nor express themselves in such loud and passionate complaints. True it
is, that Christ as a Physician goes only to the sick, and not to the whole,
Luke 5. 31. But yet all are not afflicted with the same violence, though all be
sick of the same disease. Some are so affected as that for a season they seem
to lie under the Calenture and rage of despair it self. Others again are sick
of their sins* after a more mild and gentle manner: like to an overcharged
stomach, they loath what before they loved: the iniquities that before they
swallowed down with delight they vomit up in their confession to God, and
acknowledge them to be full of nothing but bitterness. But yet wearisome
nights through the grinding pains of a guilty and stung conscience, are not
appointed unto them: they lie down upon the bed of sorrow, but not upon the
rack of horror. Now the ground of this wide difference that is between the
children of God in their first conversion and turning unto himself, does
chiefly arise from the wisdom of God, and the liberty which he is pleased to
take unto himself in the effecting of his counsels and purposes. For God
being a most voluntary agent, does not tie himself to a like certain and
unaltered constancy in the time, measure and proportion of his working upon his
children; but being free and wise, without limit, and above measure, does much
diversifie sometimes the duration and continuance of their humiliation and
sorrow, by making the darkness in some to be shorter, and in others to be
longer. Sometimes he differenceth the measure, making the pangs and throws of
the new birth to be in some both few and easy; in others to be many and full
of extremity. Sometimes he alters the most usual manner of his working, in
proportioning sin and sorrow to each other, and does not make the terrors and
affrightments for sin to be parallel to the heinousness of the rebellions that
have been persisted in against himself. Paul a persecutor is from heaven
smitten with trembling, and astonishment, so as that for three days he sees
neither the light of the sun, nor tastes ought of any food, Act. 9. 9. But,
Zaccheus a Publican and extortioner, is not stricken from the tree upon which
he climbes to behold Christ by any rays of majesty, and dread shining from his
face upon him; but is like ripe fruit gathered by the hand, not shaken off by a
tempestuous wind. By a soft and mild voice that may allure and not affright,
he is called to come down, to entertain him who brought salvation unto his
house, Luke. 19. 5. But yet both these, though by much differing means, are
effectually brought home to Christ, and made partakers of life and happiness
by him.

This cautionary direction is given, not as an encouragement to any to slight
the necessity of humiliation, as if they might without all remorse and
brokennesse of heart for their sins interest themselves in Christ and his
precious promises, and in one moment leap out of the dregs and lees of their
natural corruption (on which they have been long settled) into an estate of
purity and blessedness; but it is chiefly for these three ends.

First, to direct such as mourn under the sense of their sins that are of a
deep and double die, to look more to the quality of their humiliation then to
the quantity, and to try it rather by the touchstone then to weigh it by the
balance, because it is not the measure, but the truth of it that makes it
saving. The Mariner in a calm may sometimes apprehend as certain ruin to
befall him, as in a storm: and so a sinner may see himself in a lost and
forlorn condition, out of Christ, though he be not broken with the fierce
tempest of Gods displeasure; but by more gentle, yet powerful convictions of
the Spirit made apprehensive of the absolute necessity of a Savior to free him
from the maledictions of the law, and to restore him to an estate of
happiness. Humiliation, as it is Gods work, so the measure of it is of his
ordering and appointing, and in it deals as a wise Physician, who does not give
the like dosis or quantity of Physic to every Patient; but what may best fit
the strength and constitution of him that is to receive it; or like the prudent
husbandman whom God has instructed to discretion, who does not use the same
threshing instrument to beat out the more tender grain, which he does to the
hard. The cartwheel is not turned about upon the cummin* but the fitches are
beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod, Isay 28. 27.

Secondly, to acquaint such whose, former wickedness of life has been full of
notoreity in many reiterated backslidings from God, and rebellions against him;
and yet have passed through the pangs of the new birth without those
extremities that usually are measured forth to great sinners, to walk humbly
with their God, and to make up what has been wanting in the intension of their
sorrow, in the extension and continuance of it; often bringing to remembrance
the foulness of those iniquities which might have made far greater rents, and
more ghastly wounds in their consciences then ever they sustained, had not God
varied his wonted way and method in which he walks toward refractorie and
obstinate sinners, making their agony and pains to be proportionable to the
hainousenesse of their pollutions. They which pay small fines, do commonly sit
at the greater rent: And those Christians who obtain their peace and
reconciliation with God upon more easy and cheap terms then others do, and
must expect that it will cost them more to preserve it, and to keep it from
suspicions and doubts about the truth of it, then usually it does those, the
foundations of whose peace have been laid in a through and most deep work of
humiliation.

Thirdly, to antidote and relieve weak and tempted Christians against their own
fears and Satan's wily suggestions, which are oftentimes mingled with those
complaints, which they pour forth concerning their unmeetness to take hold of
the promises of mercy, and to apply the salvation of Christ unto themselves.
Gladly they would that their souls might be refreshed with the least drop of
the comforts of the promises, with which others are filled, that they might but
touch the garment of Christ, into whose sides and wounds others do put their
hands, crying out with confidence, My Lord, and my God! But alas! they dare not
do it. What is in others a duty, would be in them a presumption for to do. What
others are invited to do, they apprehend they are commanded to forbear, in
regard they have not yet undergone such shakings and batterings by the law, as
they have heard, read and known to be in others far less sinners then
themselves. Now the ground of such fears and misgivings, as keep off the soul
from closing with Christ and his promises, does chiefly arise from their
heeding more the measure of their humiliation then the truth of it, and the
ascribing of the saving property in it, rather to the quantity then to the
quality. But all humiliation for sin is then saving when true; and then true,
when it drives a sinner utterly out of himself, and stirs up a vehement
thirsting after Christ, and a settled resolution to cleave wholly to him as his
Lord and Savior; as his King, to exercise his just sovereignty over him; as
his Priest, to mediate unto God for him. And for all other steps or degrees of
humiliation, which troubled souls too often look upon as necessary and due
qualifications to fit them for their drawing near unto, and embracing of Christ
and his promises; expecting after such a number of throws, such a measure,
height, and continuance of sorrow, to find themselves nearer unto him then
before. They are herein methinks not much unlike those foolish children, who
being deceived with the seeming sloaping of the heavens, do strongly fancy that
if they were but on the top of such an hill, or such a tree, then they might
play with the sun, put out the stars with their sticks, and discover what
kind of man he is that dwells in the moon; but when they have thoroughly*
tired themselves in running thither, they find the heavens to be at as great a
distance from them, and as far out of their reach as at first. So after all
their most bitter lamentations for sin, they will at length find that a
precise adequation between sin and sorrow can never be attained unto, it
being absolutely impossible sufficiently to mourn for any one sin according
to its just merit. Facilius invenies eos qui innocentiam servaverunt, quam qui
congruam egerunt poenitentiam: You may sooner (says Bernard out of Ambrose)
find those who have kept their innocence unspotted, then you can find any
that have bemoaned their sins with a meet repentance.

CHAP. X Containing the 3, 4, 5th. Cautionary, Rules for the application of the
Promises.
SECT. 1. Cau. 3. Eye not Providence more then Promises.
The third Cautionarie direction is, To take heed of observing and eying the
providence of God above his promises; so as to build the foundation of our
confidence upon them when successeful; or when cross and unpleasing, to weaken
the expectation of faith in the fulfilling of any good which the promise as a
ground of hope does hold forth unto us.

First, believers are to be cautious of making the most successful
providence the ground of their faith or hope, without looking unto the
promises which are the only firm pillar upon which every believer may safely
found his prayers in the seeking, and his confidence in the obtaining of any
good that he asks at Gods hands. This Caution is the more necessary in
regard, that in these times, multitudes of professors do highly magnify the
providence of God, and use it as the only argument to persuade both themselves
and others, that their ways and persons are both most pleasing unto God, who
by a succession of many wonderful providence does effect their untertakings
for them in the midst of many intervening difficulties. But they seldom or
never make any mention of the promises, either as the light by which their
ways are directed, or as the spring from whence their encouragments and
comforts flow and arise. Yea, oftentimes when they are at a loss in the Word,
and cannot find the least footstep in it which may allow or justify the paths
they walk in; they then shelter themselves under the covert of providentiall
successes, as that which gives a fair testimony unto the goodness and
justice of their ways. But as the providence of God are not to be neglected
or undervalued by Christians being full of deep and unsearchable wisdom; so
are they warily to be used as a single light and evidence for the putting of
men upon great undertakings, or to be the only Cynosure for their direction
and guidance in them. The starre-light of one single promise is of more use to
Christians, then a constellation of many providence, both to assure them in
their ways, and to support them under any difficulties that they may meet
with, as may appear in these three particulars.

First, the light and evidence which arises from the promise, is far more
clear then the light of providence; and therefore more meet both to direct and
comfort believers that look unto it, and seek an establishment of their ways
from it. The promise is written in fair and capital letters, which those that
are of the lowest rank in knowledge and wisdom may easily read and discern.
It makes wise the simple, and being pure enlighteneth the eyes, Psalm. 19. 7, 8.
But the providence of God are written in dark and unlegible characters, which
though they may soon be discerned to be his hand, yet to decipher the sense
and meaning of them, is a task that often times exceeds the line of humane
wisdom. They are like the handwriting upon the wall, Dan. 5. 5. where part of
the hand that wrote it Belshazzar saw, but the meaning of it neither he nor the
most learned of his Caldeans could find out. To interpret the mind of God in
his providence requires the skill and wisdom of a Daniel who was filled with
an excellent spirit of knowledge and understanding; but to know his will in his
promise, it is enough if a man be a Nathanael, an Israelite in whom there is no
guile; the path of them is plain, and wayfaring men though fools, shall not
err therein, Isa. 35. 8. Providence God uses as his Ciphers many times to
hide his secret and his counsels from the eyes of men; but the promises are
always as his Letters of love, in which he reveals himself unto believers,
and acquaints them both of his peculiar love and care to them, and of their
duty and obligation unto himself.

Secondly, the promises do exceed in certainty the most constant dispensations
of providence. *The tenure by which any blessings are given, and to which we
are entitled only by providence, is not so firm and sure, as that which is
derived unto us by the promise. By the one we are made no better then tenants
at will and at the discretion of their Lord, who though he let them enjoy rich
possessions and revenues, may yet at his own pleasure resume them, and take all
into his own hands; by the other we are made heirs of all the good things that
are given unto us, and so may plead the promise of God as our right, they being
a part of that portion which he as a Father is pleased to bestow upon us for
our more comfortable subsisstance in our present pilgrimage. Oh! how slippery
then is the foundation of those men's comforts, which is only built upon the
dispensations of providence, and not upon the stability of the promise? How
unsound are their evidences which altogether stand in the success of their
achievements, and in the prosperity that has followed them in all their
paths, which may in one moment be turned into a sad change, having the same
hand of providence which was wide opened in its bounty to them, lifted up in
its displeasure against them.

3ly. The promise exceeds providence in the purity and sweetness that it
derives and conveyes to every external mercy, which without it are not freed
from that vexation and vanity which sin has subjected every creature unto.
Providence dispenses blessings, but the promise only sanctifies them: the one
gives the possession of them, and the other the true fruition of them. This is
that which makes a wide difference between the temporal mercies which believers
enjoy, and those which wicked men do oft-times partake of in greater abundance
from the hand of God. A little that a righteous man has, is better then the
riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37. 16. His dry morsels are sweeter then their
dainties, his small pittance is more satisfactorie then their plenty. For the
wicked have all these outward, and inferior things only ex largitate donantis,
from the mere* general bounty of God, which does not remove the encumbrances,
the vacuity and vexation that are entailed upon them by sin: But the
righteous has the same things given unto him virtute promiss^, by the right of
a promise, which sanctifies the gifts of common providence, and takes away
from the creature that curse wherein it was wrapped through the sin of the first
Adam. While therefore men please themselves in the single interest and right of
providence to their earthly comforts, and look not unto the conveyance of them
by the promise; it is no wonder if they become snares, toiles and thorns unto
them* and that they complain that the streams of their abundance are like the
waters of Marah, Exodus 15. 23. so bitter as that they cannot drink of them,
seeing that they want Christ who is the only tree of life for to heal them,
and to change their unpleasing bitterness into a delicious sweetness by the
power of his Word.

Secondly, Believers are to be cautious that they weaken not the expectation of
faith in the performance of any good, which the promise does hold forth unto
them, by making the providence of God that seem to cross the fulfilling, of
it, to be moving arguments to incline them to doubting or diffidence about the
truth of it. When Jacob understood that his brother Esau was coming against him
with four hundred men, Genesis 32* 6. he does not distrust the promise that God
had made unto him, Genesis 28. 15. but he strongly pleades it as a ground for his
deliverance: Thou said I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the
sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude* Genesis 32. 12. When God
by a dream that was doubled on purpose to confirm the certainty of the thing,
had revealed unto Joseph the future honor and greatness which he would exalt
him unto above his brethren, causing their sheaves to bow to his sheaf, and the
sun, moon, and the eleven stars to make obeisance unto him, Genesis 37. 7, 9.
The means that God uses for the effecting and bringing to pass his decree,
not the concurrence of successful and smiling providence; but of such only,
which to the eye of reason seem rather to destroy the promise, then to
accomplish it. Who could ever have conceived that the casting of him into a dry
pit, the selling of him to the Ishmaelite merchants, the putting of him into
prison and fetters by Potiphar, as a shameful offender, should lead to the
advancement of Joseph, and not to his ruin? Can light spring out of darkness,
glory out of ignomie, liberty out of thraldom? And yet by such stops as these
does God raise up Joseph into the throne of honor: Until the time that his
word came, the word of the Lord tried him (says David) Psalm. 105. 19. That is,
until the very accomplishment of the promise he was tried in the expectation of
it, by many and sore afflictions, in all which he exercised such a measure of
faith and patience, as not to murmur or repine at the dispensations of God
toward him, or faint in his waiting quietly for the fulfilling of the word
which the Lord had spoken unto him. The archers sorely grieved him, and shot at
him, and hated him, but his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands
were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. Genesis 49. 23, 24
Therefore when believers do at any time find the dispensations of God to them
in his providence, to cross rather then to favor the fulfilling of such
promises as he has made to them in his Word, and which they in their prayers
do earnestly seek and expect; yet are they not to cast away their confidence,
or to take up any such sad conclusions, as that God has forgotten his promise
and that he bears no respect to them, or their sacrifices; because God does
not limit the accomplishment of his promises, to the serenity and success of
his providence, but does many times use such dispensations, which seem rather
to frustrate and make void his purpose, then to establsh and effect it. Jonah
is set on shore by a whale, when the mariners arive at their Port by the ship.
The blind man in the Gospel* John. 9* 6. Christ cures by clay and spittle, and
not by balsams. And as they that go to sea* do not obtain a firm and unmoved
state of body by the steddiness of the vessel in a calm; but by the
accustoming and inuring of themselves to the rollings and tossings of it in
several weathers: So neither do believers gain a settled peace of mind, by the
calm equality of Gods providence toward them; but by acquaintance with
vicissitudes and adverse revolutions, in the midst of which they still find
the promise to be as an anchor sure and firm, and therefore are not perplexed
or amazed at all other changes that befall them.

SECT. 2. Cau. 4. Take heed of curiosity in selecting promises.
The fourth cautionary direction to believers is, To take heed of a sinful and
affected curiosity, so as to esteem only those promises most precious, which
do stand in the Scripture like fruit ungathered and untouched by the hand of
common Christians; and are like flowers (as they imagine) not at all smelt and
blown upon by any but themselves. As there is a vain affectation in some
Ministers to decline and wave those Scriptures that have in them the greatest
pregnancy to confirm their doctrines, and to set their wits on work, and the
texts many times upon the rack to force them to speak to their purpose; that so
their notions and conceptions may be looked upon by their auditors, as neither
vulgar nor common: So is there a lust of fancy in many Christians of pleasing
and delighting themselves in the picking and selecting out such promises, as
have not come under the observation of others; or have been least used by them
in the constant daily recourse which they have had unto them. Now this vanity
and curiosity which thus prevails in many Christians, does not only spring
from pride, which often begets an affectation of singularity; but it arises
also from a false conceit and opinion taken up by them, that such promises are
more sweet when ruminated upon, and* more full when sucked on, being like unto
breasts that have had little or none of their milk drawn and taken from them.

First, they conceive them to be more sweet, and to affect the soul with a
greater of delight. But there is a twofold sweetness and delight: the one
arises from the goodness of the object; the other from the newness of the
object. The newness of the object is that with which fancy is chiefly
delighted, and by which it works upon the will to close with it, as a
convenient and suitable good. But the understanding propounds the goodness and
truth of the object to the will, and thereby draws and wins i^^o a liking and
full embracing of it. Now that which should endeare the promise unto believers,
is not any suggestion from fancy that none but themselves have either observed
or used this or that particular promise; and upon that ground to hug it in
their bosoms, as Scholars do those notions and books which none are possessed
of but themselves. But the high estimation which they have of them, should
wholly arise from that transcendent goodness and truth which is in the
promises, and makes them deservedly to be of all desired and accepted. Thus
Paul commends the Gospel, 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a faithful saying and worthy of
all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners.

They conceive (though fondly) them to be more full, as well as more sweet. But
this is one of the peculiar excellencies of the promises, that the emanations
of comfort which flow from them, are not in the least impaired, or diminished
by the common and daily use of them; no more then light is wasted in the Sun
by the multitudes of generations that have enjoyed the use and benefit of it.
Still it has as much light in the body of it, as it had in its first creation.
And so the promises which Abraham, Isaac, and all the faithful descended from
them, have successively used, and lived upon, do still retain the same vigor,
and abound with as great plenty of support and comfort unto present believers,
as ever they did unto them. As the Be does with an innocent theft, as
Parisiensis calls it, suck honey from the flowers, without the least prejudice
to their beautiful colors which delight the eye, or to the fragrant sent which
affects the smell of him that gathers them: So do believers draw from the
promises a grateful satiety both of delight and comfort, without the least
diminution either of their fullness or sweetness. He that is last in the
application of the same promise, may find it as rich in its plenty, as
effectual in its vigor, as he that came first unto it. Wells, says Basil, are
the better, and more pure, the oftener they be drawn; and so the promises
(which are the wells of salvation) do receive an improvement by the frequent
and common use of them.

The end of this Caution is no way to forbid any Christians valuing or esteem
of one particular promise above others, which God by the powerful workings of
his Spirit has in a special manner made use of for the quieting of their
souls in the time of their greatest perplexity, and the filling of them with
all joy and peace in believing; as if thereby they did derogate ought from the
just worth of other promises. For it being Gods manner not to seal and
manifest his love unto believers by one and the same promise; but to make use
of this promise to one, and of a differing promise to another, who both lie
under the same distress. It is their duty to have in a peculiar remembrance
that promise and Scripture above others, by which God was pleased first to
speak peace to their souls. But the aim of the Caution is to keep believers
from putting any disrespect upon the precious promises, by their esteeming of
them to be so much the less worth, by how much the more common and ordinary
they have been in their use. Did Manna nourish the Israelites the less,
because it was their usual food in the Wilderness, or Quails the more,
because they were a new kind of meat? The one indeed pleased their appetite
and palate more, but the other supplied their necessities as well. And so the
promises which are most obvious and common in their use, do yield to Christians
as much real and solid comfort when rightly applied; though others which they
conceive to have been less observed, or by themselves only taken notice of,
may more affect, and please the curiosity of a lustful fancy.

SECT. 3. Cau. 5. Take heed of carnal reasonings.
The fifth Cautionary direction is to take heed of carnal reasonings, which are
restless in their enmity to all matters that appertain to faith, or at the
best full of impotency and unable to yield any assistance to believers in them.

First, carnal reason is unwearied in its opposing and contradicting of faith,
which of all graces has the most immediate relation unto the promises, and is
of greatest use in the application of them. It is an enemy to the first
implantation of it, and hinders men from submitting to the righteousness of
God, by possessing their minds with unjust prejudices and cavils against his
Word. God says that his words do good to them that walk uprightly, Mich. 2. 7.
But the Language of carnal men is: It is vain to serve God, and what profit is
it that we have kept his Ordinances? Mal. 3. 14. Christ says that his yoke is
easy, and his burden light, Mat. 11. 30. But his carnal disciples cry out, It
is an hard saying, and who can hear it? Joh. 6. 60. God says, his waves are
just and equal: But the carnal Israelites are not afraid to censure his as
crooked and their own as strait, Ezekiel 33. 17. And as by the disguises, and
artifices of carnal reason men are kept from an happy change of their natural
estate by believing* So when faith is wrought, they are by the enmity of the
same principle continually disquieted, and interrupted in the comfortable
enjoyment of those many blessed privileges which they are interessed in by
faith. Sometimes it calls into question their title to what they possess, and
suggests unto them, that they are rather presumptuous intruders, then just
proprietaries; that the evidences upon which they build their hopes, are the
delusions, and selfflatteries of their own hearts and not the unerring
testimony of Gods Spirit. Sometimes it raises jealousies concerning the
promises themselves, that they are things as easily revoked, as they are made,
which though they yield present comfort, yet do not ascertaine any future
security; that though God turn not away from them, nor repent him of his love,
yet they may turn from him and so nullify the promises, and the Covenant of
his mercy unto themselves. It is therefore of great concernment unto believers
in the making use of the promises, to be cautious in admitting the pleas and
arguments of carnal reason, which being never so often answered, will never be
silent. But peremptorily to resolve to believe, notwithstanding all that sense
and reason can suggest to the contrary. To wink and believe, to shut their eyes
against all difficulties; and when they are so great as to pose their reason,
not to let them to pose their faith. Excellent is that saying of Luther:
Aperuit nobis in Paradiso oculos Satan, nunc omnis labor in eo nobis est, ut
eos iterum claudamus and obturemus. In Paradise Satan first opened our eyes,
and now it is our chief labor to shut and fast close them again, that so we
may no more be betrayed by them. Sense and reason being in the things of faith,
noxiabestia, an harmfull beast (as he calls it) to overturne, and destroy
whatever faith uses as a prop to rest it self upon.

Secondly, as Carnal reason is an enemy unto faith; so at the best it is full
of impotency, and unable to give the least assistance to believers in their
making use of the promises, or dijudication of spiritual objects, as may
appear in three particulars.

First, it is dimme-sighted, and wants a perceptive faculty. Busy and curious
it is in prying and looking into the mysteries of faith; but altogether weak
and unskilful in making any true judgment concerning them. Reason is like the
Crocodile, which is reported to be of quick-sight on the land, but of dull
sight on the water: It is sagacious in earthly things, but has no insight in
spiritual objects. Asaph attempted by the discussions of reason, to have found
out the ground of Gods differing administrations toward his people, and the
men of the world, whose bellies were filled whith hid treasure, but he was by
his own confession soon at a loss: When I thought to know this, it was too
painful for me, Ps. 73. 16. And when he did go that way to satisfy himself,
how opposite is the inference and conclusion to that which he makes upon a
second view, and looks upon the same things by the light of the lamp of the
Sanctuary? When he beholds Gods dispensations with the eye of his reason only,
what a wild and erroneous conclusion does he take up* Verily, I have cleansed
my heart in vain, and washed my hands ininnocency, ver. 13. But when he comes
to read them over again by the eye of faith, then he draws a right inference
from the premises, It is good for me to draw near to God, verse 28.

And as reason is blind in discerning spiritual objects, so is it also
unskilful in the use of those means by which faith is enabled to make a full
and perfect discovery of them. Reason is like unto a man that takes the wrong
end of the perspective glass to see, with which lesseneth the magnitude of the
object, and increases the distance. It looks upon the promises by unapt
mediums, which do not make a just representation of them, and therefore
discernes little or nothing of their reality, and existence: but faith that
looks at the right end of the glass, which being more full of light, does
multiply the species, and thereby takes away the remoteness of the objects,
and presents them as close unto the eye. Thus Abraham saw Christ's day and
rejoiced to see it, Joh. 8. 56. Great was the space of time between the making
of that promise, and the fulfilling of it unto Abraham, that in him all the
families of the earth should be blessed, Genesis 12. 3. But yet his faith eying
the power and truth of God that made it, looks upon the long intervall of many
ages that was between him and his promised seed, as upon a very small and
inconsiderable distance. Thus the holy Patriarchs did not only see the promises
afar off, but they also saluted and embraced them as near: they were in regard
of their own existence afar off; but in regard of their faith they were hard
at hand, Heb. 11. 13.

2ly. Carnal reason, as it is blind, so is it also full of impatience, and
therefore unmeet to be an assistance unto faith. The Apostle tells the believing
Hebrews, that they have need of patience that after they have done the will of
God, they might receive the promise, Heb. 10. 36. It is so necessary a grace
for Christians, as that without patience we can scarce be men, much less
Christians. The difficulties that believers are to wrestle with, are neither
few nor small; but sharp, long, and numerous; all which must be endured with
patience before they can reap the promise. Though the end be a throne of glory,
a crown of life, yet the way is a way of blood: though the reward be sure, yet
the waiting for it is long. Now carnal reason is full of impatience, it can
neither wait the time, nor endure the trials which must be undergone. It likes
well of the end, but not of the way; it affects the enjoyment of the promise;
but it cannot stay the appointed time. Thus the Israelites gladly embraced the
first ridings of their deliverance brought unto them by Moses and Aaron, and
with bowed heads worshipped the Lord, who had looked upon their afflictions,
Ex. 4. 31 yet could they not with patience for a few days quietly wait the
Lords season. Pharaoh deals more hardly with them then before, and now all
their hopes of liberty are at an end; and they complain unto Moses, that they
were so far from deliverance, as that he had made them to be abhorred in the
eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, and had put a sword in their
hands to slay them, Exodus 5. 21. And though Moses was sent to comfort them a
second time, and to assure them that the day of their deliverance was at hand;
yet for anguish of spirit they hearkened not unto him, Exodus 6. 9. Sense and
reason do make deaf the ears of believers to what ever God speaks to support
them in their trouble, and makes them as unfit to receive any impression from
the promise, as water is to take the similitude and character of the seal,
which is as soon lost as made. It looks upon a few days as so many years,
and a few years as so many ages: and is therefore most unmeet to deal in any
matters that appertain to faith.

Thirdly, carnal reason is full of groundless fears and jealousies, apt to be
discouraged by denials, ready to faint upon the appearance of the least
difficulties; and therefore unable to contribute any assistance unto faith,
whose peculiar work and art it is to look from and above those impediments
which reason stumbles at. Faith is a most venturous grace, which walks upon
those deep seas with delight, that the line of reason cannot fathom; when it
like unto a young swimmer dares go no further, then it can feel the bottom.
Faith gathers resolution from denials and repulses; like unto the wheel in the
water which being driven from it by the stream, returns upon it with the
greater violence. When reason sits down disconsolate, and says, All pleadings
and strivings are in vain. Thus the woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. from the silence
of Christ, from the denials of Christ, from his calling of her dog, finds
ground to continue her suit. When he is silent, and answers not, then there is
hope, because he denies not. When he denies her, then there is more hope,
because he speaks, and may quickly be entreated, though at present he deny.
When he calls her dog, then her hope arises higher, because though the
children only must be full fed; yet surely he will not let the dogs to starve.
Faith is a grace which in the greatest exigencies and straits that can befall a*
believer loses nothing of its courage and magnanimity, but cheerfully bears
up in the midst of all. When reason is at a loss through the multiplicity of
fears, and distractions with which it is filled; the one is like to the
timorous Passenger in a storm at sea, who makes it his only work to tell the
waves, and to shreek at the beating of every billow against the ship; the other
is like the industrious Pilot* who has manum ad clavum, et oculum ad coelum,
his hand to the helm, and his eye to heaven, and minds more his duty, then his
danger. Thus Habakkuk, When the fig tree blossoms not, nor fruit is found on
the vine: when the labor of the olive fails, and the fields yield no meat:
when the flock is cut off from the fold, and there is no herd in the stalls;
resolves in the midst of so derne a winter, and season of scarcity, not only
to exercise patience, but joy, and to rejoice in the God of his salvation,
Habak. 3. 17, 18. Thus Job is in the divine record as famous for his
confidence, as for his patience, which in his conflict with God himself he will
not let go; Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Job. 13. 15. though he
breath out his life, yet shall not his hope expire with it. Oh! therefore let
Christians, when they are to act faith in the promises, take heed of the
suggestions of carnal reason, and learn to do as they who level at a mark,
are used to do, who close one eye, that they may take aim the better with the
other: shut fast the eye of deprayed reason, that they may see the more clearly
with the eye of faith.

CHAP. XI. Containing the sixth and seventh Cautionary Rules for application of
the Promises.
SECT. 1. Cau. 6. Take heed of groundless fancies concerning the manner of
receiving Comfort.
The sixth Cautionary direction is, to take heed of groundless and wild fancies
concerning the manner of receiving comfort, and establishment from the
promises, so as to expect that the consolations which come from them, must be
administered rather by the hand of an Angel, then of a Minister, and witnessed
by some voice from heaven, then by the clear testimony of the Word: and if
they come not attended with such pomp and state, then to look upon them as
common, and ordinary comforts; but not as evidences that have a sufficiency of
glory and luster to confirm the soul in the love of God. When Naaman the
Assyrian came to the Prophet Elisha to be cured of his leprosy, he only sent
out a messenger unto him, who bade him go and wash seven times in Jordan, and
flesh should come again unto him, and he should be clean, 2 King. 5. 10. But
Naaman thought that the Prophet would have used more likely means to have
wrought the cure: that he himself would have come out unto him, that he would
strike his hand on the place, and call on the Name of the Lord his God; And
therefore departs in anger, as scorning the simplicity of the means which was
enjoined him: So many Christians when they lie under deep agonies and
perplexities of heart, and are counseled to act faith upon the promises, to
attend upon the dispensations of the Gospel in the Word, to wrestle with God in
prayer, they are ready to think that these are salves that may do well for
common sores; but their maladies are such that unless Christ touch them with
his own hand, the virtue that comes from these things, as from his garments,
can never heal them, unless God do from heaven confirm his promises by
extraordinary signs, and miracles, their breaches and ruptures will never be
healed, their comforts and peace will never prevail against their fears and
darkness. It is not the Prophets staff laid upon the face of the dead child,
that will bring life again into it, 2 King. 4. 32. he must come and stretch
himself upon the child ere the flesh of it will wax warm.

This Caution is the more necessary to be heeded, upon a double ground. First,
because of the aptness that is in troubled Christians to affect new means
above the right, means, and to build their confidence upon something that is
without the compass of the Word, rather then upon the Word it self.

Secondly, in regard of the great danger and deceit that is in those
extraordinary ways, by which many do pretend to have their comfort and
assurance to be confirmed unto them, which in the use of all other means they
could never find to be fully and satisfyingly evidenced unto them.

First, there is a pronity in Christians especially when exercised with fears,
and doubts concerning their condition, to grow weary of using such means in
which they find not their expectations speedily answered, and through an
overhasty desire of comfort to try the gaining of it in a new way, rather
then to persevere in the old* Being in this not much unlike to many weak and
crasie Patients, that are more ready to fancy* every new medicine they hear
off, and to tamper with it, then to expect a recovery* by going through a
course of Physic prescribed by the Physician. Gregory tells of a Religious
Lady of the Emperesses bedchamber, whose name was Gregoria, that being much
troubled about her salvation, did write unto him, that she would never cease
importuning him, till he had sent her word, that he had received a revelation
from heaven that she was saved. To whom he returned this answer: Rem difficilem
postulas, and inutilem, etc. That it was an hard, and altogether useless
matter which she required of him. It was difficult for him to obtain, as being
unworthy to have the secret counsels of God to be imparted unto him; and it was
unprofitable for her to know, not only for the reason which he assigns, that
such a revelation might make her too secure; but also because it was impossible
for him to demonstrate, and make known unto her, or any other the truth and
infallibility of the revelation which he had received to be from God; so that
had she afterward called into question the truth of it, as well she might, her
troubles and doubtings concerning her salvation would have been as great as
they were before. O therefore let believers that would be confirmed* in the
peace and love of God, take heed of relinquishing that more sure word of
Prophecy, which shines as a light in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1. 19. and of flying
unto visions, revelations* voices from heaven, to assure and evidence unto them
their salvation, and to be the seals of the truth of those comforts and joys,
which they are filled with. These are ways that have more external glory and
pomp in them; but the acting of faith on the promises, and the adhering of the
soul unto those truths declared in them, is the unquestionable way of
obtaining a full establishment of heart in all sound joy and peace; and
therefore Luther (though as he confesses,) he was often tempted to ask for
signs, apparitions, revelations from heaven to confirm him in his way, yet
tells how strongly he did withstand them: Pactum feci cum Domino Deo meo, ne
mihi mittat vel visiones, vel somnia, vel e^iam Angelos. Contentus enim sum hoc
dono, quod habeo Scripturam sanctam, quae abunde docet ac suppeditat omnia,
quae necessaria sunt, tum ad hanc vitam, tum ad futuram: I have (says he)
indented with the Lord my God, that he would never send me dreams, visions,
Angels; for I am well content with this gift, that I have the holy Scripture,
which does abundantly teach and supply all necessaries for this life, and that
also which is to come.

Secondly, as there is an aptness in Christians to affect such extraordinary
ways, and means of comfort, so is there also no little danger and deceit in
the ways themselves.

First, they are dangerous, in regard that they make the Word and promises to
be as things of little value and esteem, which should be as the only sacred
Oracles of truth for believers to have their recourse unto. Such who cry up
revelations, make it their practice to cry down the Word, and look upon those
that adhere to the Scriptures, and make them the touchstone to try every spirit
by, as Vocalistas, et Literatistas, Vowalists and Letterists, having little or
no acquaintance with the deep things of God. Such who affirm assurance to be
the immediate voice of the Spirit speaking in them, and saying unto them, that
their sins are forgiven them; how disdainfully do they speak of the certainty
and persuasion which believers have from the gracious operations of the Spirit,
and the blessed fruits of holiness wrought by him in their souls, which by his
enlightening they are enabled to discern, and thereby to be confidently
persuaded of Gods love unto them, and of their interest in all the promises?
This they dignify with no better or higher title then an humane faith, then a
conjectural knowledge, though the testimony be truly supernatural, both in
regard of the efficient cause, and also of the means whereby they come to be
thus persuaded. Yea, though it be the only safe way which the Scripture holds
out for believers to try their estates by, to look unto the effects and fruits
of the Spirit of God in them, and not to any immediate voices or revelations
from heaven, as the testimony of Gods love unto them; yet do such vilify this
kind of evidence as low and carnal, and altogether unmeet for Evangelical
Christians to make use of. What should they need to have a rushlight to see by,
when they may enjoy the sun which is the light of lights?

Secondly, as they are dangerous, so are they full of deceit and illusion.
Young Samuel not acquainted with any extraordinary manifestations of the
presence and power of God, took the voice of God from heaven to be the voice of
old Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 5. And so do many take the irregular motions of their own
hearts to be the divine breathings, and the powerful impulses of the Spirit of
God, whereby they are stirred up to the undertaking of sundry actions which the
Word in the least measure countenanceth not. How frequently in these times do
fanatic persons baptize the violent workings of their own distempered fancies,
with the name of the visions of God, and of the raptures of the Spirit? How
often does Satan by transforming himself into an Angel of light, endeavor the
seducement and ruin of many Christians, against whom as an Angel of darkness
he could not prevail? being in every thing Gods Ape to imitate those
extraordinary ways by which God has sometimes made known himself unto his
people. Gerson in his book de probatione spirituum, of the trial of spirits,
tells a remarkable story of Satan's appearing to an holy man in a most glorious
and beautiful manner, professing himself to be Christ, and because he for his
exemplary holiness was worthy to be honored above others, therefore he
appeared unto him; but the old man readily answered him, that he desired not to
see his Savior in this wilderness; it should suffice him to see him hereafter
in heaven, and with all added this pithy prayer, Sit in alio seculo, non in
hoc, visio tua merces mea O let thy sight be my reward; Lord, in another life,
and not in this life.

This direction therefore is of no little importance unto believers, that would
not loose and wilder themselves in uncertainties both in regard of duty and
comfort, to take heed how they leave the precept of the Word, and betake
themselves unto revelations for the guidance of their ways, or how they
neglect the application of the promises by faith for the establishing of their
hearts in the peace and love of God, and expect their assurance to flow from an
immediate voice or dictate of the Spirit; as if the Word and promises had no
activity and light in them, to evidence and declare the certainty and truth of
these things unto their souls. Such ways, though the novelty of them may
render them pleasing to many, yet it cannot (as we see) make them safe to any
that tread or walk in them. And therefore let that of Austin be every
Christians practice and prayer, Sint sacrae Scripturae tu^ deliciae meae, in
quibus nec possim fallere nec falli: Lord, let thy holy Scriptures be my pure
delights, in which I can neither deceive or ever be deceived.

SECT. 2. Cau. 7. Let not thy heart out on earthly Objects.
The seventh and last Cautionary direction is, To take beed of having the heart
let out to earthly objects, either in earnest desires after them, or in long
and frequent musings of the mind upon them. The application of the promises is
then most powerful and operative, when they lie nearest and closest unto the
soul; and the comforts that distill from them are then most sweet, when they
are received into the most inward parts of the hidden man. The softest garments
men usually wear next their skin, and the best Jewels they lay up in the most
inward cells of their Cabinets: And of such a nature are the promises, and
invitations of mercy in the Gospel; they are things of the greatest delicacy,
and therefore should be applied next unto the heart, which is of all parts the
most tender: they are of the highest worth and value, and therefore should
highest be lodged in the most retired and inward receptacles of the mind, as
their most due and proper seat. All interposition of earthly things does not
only hinder the conveyance both of grace, and comfort from the promises, but
does also according to the measure and predominancy of it make the heart as an
unmeet vessel to receive such heavenly treasure in diverse respects.

First, earthly things do fill the heart, and thereby put it into an incapacity
of receiving either divine counsel or comfort from the Word or promises. They
fill the heart with crowds of businesses, so that Christ and his Word find no
more place in it, then he and his mother did room in the Inn, where the
manger was fain to be his cradle, Luke 2. 7. They fill the heart with diversity
of cares and solicitudes; so that it cannot have any freedom to attend heavenly
duties. Martha who was troubled about many things, did not with Mary her sister
sit at Christ's feet to hear the Word, her cumber about much serving, made her
to neglect the one thing that was needful, Luke. 10. 41. They many times fill
the heart with pride and scorn, so as that the choicest things of the Gospel
are no better then foolishness. The Pharisees heard Christ preach against
earthly affections, but they derided him, Luke. 16. 14. The full soul loatheth
the honey-combe, Pro. 27. 7. and so does an earthly mind reject the Word,
which is more sweet then the dropping honey.

Secondly, earthly things defile the heart with many vile and corrupt
affections, which do unqualifie it for the reception of holy and precious
promises. They stain the heart with an adulterous and impure love, which is
enmity unto God James, 4. 4. and make it apt to prefer carnal satisfactions
before communion with Christ. They defile the heart with a false and unsound
confidence, turning it from God who is the sole object of trust, unto the
mutable and unstable creature: and therefore Paul enjoynes Timothy to charge
them that are rich in this world, that they trust not in uncertain riches, but
in the living God, 1 Timothy 6. 17. They pollute the heart with, sensual joys,
with unhallowed pleasures and delights, so that the joy of the corn, wine and
oil increasing does extinguish that complacency and tranquillity of mind that
flows from the presence and fruition of spiritual objects; as in luxurious
persons strange love does eat out and obliterate, that which is conjugall. How
then can any man expect, that the holy Spirit of promise should be both a
Counselor and Comforter unto such an one, whose love, confidence, joys, are
adulterate and sinful? Surely he who has the purity of a dove, will never
take up the lodging of a crow: he who dwells in the soul when it is a temple
of holiness, will never afforde his presence, when it is turned into a cage of
unclean birds.

Thirdly, earthly objects divide the heart, Hosea. 2. 10. and make it uncertain
in its motions toward God. As the balance has no steadfastness in it self,
but does by every breath and touch fluctuate, sometimes to the one hand,
sometimes to the other: so the earthly mind is various and inconstant in its
desires to heavenly things; sometimes for a short and sudden fit it seems to
affect them, and by and by grows cold and heartless again: Like to the
grasse-hoppers, which (as Gregory observes) give a flirt up, and make a faint
essay of flying toward heaven, and then presently fall on the earth again.
Thus the young man, Mark 10. 17. comes running to Christ, to show his fervor
and zeal; kneels to him, to testify his observance; prays to him to direct
him in the way to eternal life, to evidence his care and solicitude about it;
but when Christ bids him to sell whatsoever he had, and give to the poor, that
so he might have treasure in heaven; how soon does he who ran, and kneeled, and
prayed to Christ, turn his back upon him, and go from him? How quickly are his
desires turned into sorrow, and his prayer into a fearful apostasy? Now then,
if earthly things do make the heart thus unstedfast and unfaithful to God, how
exceedingly must they needs indispose it for the reception of grace, and
comfort from God in all his promises; to the obtaining of which nothing is more
requisite then an evenness and constancy of the desires in seeking after them,
and an entirenesse and oneness of heart in laying hold on them? For as all the
promises are one in Christ, and cannot be severed or parted, no more then lines
in their common center; so neither must the heart by which they are embraced be
divided. Whole Christ and all his promises are given to every believer, and are
no otherwise diversified then according to the exigence of men's present
conditions, which sometimes requires the application of one promise, and
sometimes of another: and therefore must the whole heart be given unto him
again, or else we cannot ever expect to have any interest in him or his blessed
promises. True it is, that in the best of Christians, there is found an
unstedfastnesse of heart and affections, but it is not an unstedfastnesse in
respect of the object, but only in degrees. It is not such as distracts the
heart, and makes it to float between two different objects; but only makes it
unequal in its motions toward one and the same thing. As the bowl when it is
first thrown out of the hand runs more swiftly toward the mark then it does
afterward; but yet the tendency of the motion is the same, though the vigor
and strength of it be not alike: so believers, when partakers of some fresh
gales of the Spirit, do then move toward Christ with more quick and lively
affections then at other times; but yet by that inward principle of holiness
that is within them, they are always carried toward him in their desires,
though not after one equal and uniforme manner.

This Caution therefore, though it be the last, yet is it not the least, which
believers are with much diligence and circumspection to observe, that would
gladly be partakers of the spiritual riches and treasures which are in the
promises. But the end of it is not, that we should abandon all care and
industry in our Callings; or that we should affect a voluntary and Monkish
poverty, as if there were an absolute inconsistency between the having the
blessings of this life, and the enjoyments of the other life: We may possess
earthly comforts; but we must not be possessed by them: We may use them as
flowers to smell on; but not as garlands to crown our selves with them: We may
in our pilgrimage walk with them as staves in our hands, seeking a country
which is above; but we may not load our selves with them, and bear them as
burdens upon our backs: We may make them our encouragements; but not our
confidence: We may mind them as our accessories; but we may not love them, as
our principal happiness. As bees, though they live in the midst of their cells
of honey and wax; yet have not their wings touched with any viscuous matter,
that may hinder their delightful flight abroad, and their nimble passing from
one flower to another: So should Christians that live in the abundance of
earthly comforts, as in an hive of sweetness, be exceeding careful that
nothing of the world do cleave to their affections, which are the wings of the
soul, that may hinder the lifting and raising up of their he arts toward
heavenly objects or abate the activity of their thoughts in their frequent
musings on the promises, and other mysteries of the Gospel, on which the mind
above all other things ought to be most exercised, and delighted.

I have now done with the third particular, that in the entrance of this task
was propounded to be handled, and have insisted longer upon every direction
both positue and cautionary, then I first intended; but my end was not to
offend any by prolixity, but to render them more useful and necessary unto all,
then otherwise they might have been if contracted into a less and narrower
compass, and made like unto the description of a pitched field or battle
wherein there are many heads and spears painted, but few or no complete and
entire bodies.

CHAP. XII. In which diverse Queries are resolved.
I Come now to the fourth particular, which does consist of diverse Queries,
together with their resolutions, the clear answering of which will much
facilitate the use and application of the promises. And the first Quere is,

Whether the essence of saving and justifying faith does lie in a prevailing
Assurance, so as that he who truly believes, does certainly know himself to
have faith, and to believe on Christ?

SECT. 1. Faith is not a full assurauce.
This question I do the rather choose to speak somewhat unto, in regard that
many of our Divines have in their writings not distinguished between Fides,
Fiducia, and Certituda, Faith, Affiance, and Assurance; but have promiscuously
treated of them, as if they were one and the same thing. Yea, sundry pious and
learned men have defined faith to be* a full persuasion of the heart grounded
on the promises of God, etc. Now that which chiefly led them to give this
definition of faith, was their zeal to maintain the certainty, and evidence
of faith against Popish doubtings. But a good intention will no more make a
truth, then a fair mark will make a good shoot: For while on the one hand
they have endeavored to vindicate faith from that languor, and uncertainty
unto which the Papists have subjected it, they have on the other hand
occasioned great fears and perplexities to arise in the hearts of many tender
and weak Christians, who are apt to use this as an argument against themselves,
that they have no faith at all, because they have no Assurance at all. To keep
therefore such bruised reeds from being broken, and the smoking flax from being
quenched under the sense of their want of Assurance: I shall by sundry
demonstrations clearly show, that the essence of saving faith does not stand in
a prevailing Assurance, that a believer may have the one, and yet want the
other.

The first shall be taken from that estate, and condition of men whom Christ
the great Judge of all the world does pronounce and declare to be blessed; and
they are such as are believers, because all blessedness under the Gospel
comes only by faith: And this blessedness stands in the forgiveness of
sins, Romans 4. 6, 7. Yet their present condition speaks nothing less then
Assurance: Blessed are the poor in spirit, says our Savior, Math. 5. 3. So
again, Blessed are they that mourn. ver. 4. And again, Blessed are they which
do hunger and thirst after righteousness, ver. 6. But spiritual poverty,
mourning, hunger, though they be Gospel-graces which do arise from faith, are
all together distinct from assurance, as may appear in their different
effects. Assurance is riches, and not poverty. Coloss. 2. 2. joy, and not
mournng. 1 John. 1. 4. satisfaction, and not hunger of want and emptiness,
Psalm. 90. 14. So in that parable of the Pharisee, and the Publican going up
into the temple to pray, Luke. 18. 10, 11. our Savior tells us that the
Pharisee was full of presumption and false confidence; but the Publican through
a sense of his unworthiness, was almost overwhelmed with fears and misgivings
of heart; he stands afar off, and dares not draw near, he is so full of shame
as that he would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven; He smites his
breast, as pointing out the fountain from whence all his misery and sin did
flow; He accuses himself in his prayer as a great sinner; In all his actions,
gestures, words there is no expression of his assurance of pardon; and yet he
went away justified, and not the other, which without faith he could not have
been.

A second demonstration is from the state of desertion into which a believer
may fall. A child of light may walk in darkness, Isa. 50. 10* and neither
behold the sun-light of Gods countenance, nor the starre-light of his own
graces for many days. He may be as a tree in winter whose sap is wholly
retired to the root, and has neither fruit nor leaves hanging on it to
evidence that it is not dead. As in the sufferings of Christ upon the cross,
there was for a time subtractio visionis, a withdrawing of the light of Gods
countenance; but not dissolutio vnionis, any breaking, or dissolution of the
Union: So in the derelictions that a believer is subject unto, there may be a
separation in regard of the comfortable manifestation, and shining forth of the
beams of Gods love; but no interruption in regard of his Union with Christ
Thus it was with David, Psalm. 51. 12. who begges the restoration of the joy of
Gods salvation, and the establishment of his free Spirit. And thus it was with
Heman, Psalm. 88. who in his own apprehension was as one free among the dead,
ver. 5. Thus it was with Jonah, when lying in the belly of the whale, as in a
grave, he said, I am cast out of thy sight, Jonah 2. 4. But yet still they were
believers, and their faith was alive at the root, neither was there any
intercision of their fellowship with Christ. Now if faith, when Assurance is
lost do continue as believers Union with Christ, it will also begin his Union
with Christ, though it be not accompanied with Assurance. Or if a believer may
lose his Assurance, and yet not wholly lose his says, then may he also have
faith before it do grow up into Assurance.

A third demonstration is taken from the differing stature and condition of
believers. As in the world there are not only aged men whose multitude of
years do teach wi^dom, and young men whose bones being moistened with marrow
are full of strength; but there are also infants which hang upon the breast of
their mother, who though they enjoy life, yet do not know that they have life,
or are able to reflect upon any action which they do: So in the Church there
are not only M^^sons that are old disciples, experienced in the mysteries of
the Gospel, and young Timothies that are trained up in the knowledge of the
Scriptures; but there are also newborn babes 1 Pet. 2. 2. who are partakers
of a spirtuall life, and yet are not able to apprehend that they have eternal
life given unto them. There are in the fold of Christ, not only sheep which he
leads forth into green pastures, but there are also lambs which he gathers
with his arm, and carries in his bosom, a place both of safety, and of warmth,
Isa. 40. 11. Now if the essence of faith did lie in Assurance, and that none
did believe but they that did know they do believe, this distinction and
difference between Christians would be of little, or no use. If all that are
believers do exercise the reflex acts of faith, as well as the direct, in what
should the babe in Christ differ from the grown man? Where in should the
bruised reed be distinguished from the established Cedar? How should the
thirsty and wearied soul that dares not deny Christ to be his, and yet cannot
say that certainly he is his, be comforted? How should the sinking and well
nigh despairing Christian that cries out he has no saving faith, because no
Assurance, have doubts and objections comfortably answered? What use would
there be of signs and marks which the Scripture gives as a staff into the
hands of weak ones, to support and stay them up, if faith do stand in a full
persuasion of Gods love to a man's self in particular? St. John's whole epistle
which was written for this end that believers might know that they had eternal
life, 1. John. 5. 13. would be to no purpose. if faith it self did consist in
the knowledge of their having it.

A fourth demonstration is taken from the object of saving and justifying
faith, which is the person of Christ, and not any Maxim or Proposition which is
the object of Assurance. That on which the chief act of justifying faith is
exercised, that is the primarie object of faith. But the maine act of faith is
to unite Christ and a believer together, for by being one with him we come to
be justified by him and not otherwise. Now that which makes this Union on the
believers part, is the adherence and cleaving of the soul unto Christ, as the
greatest and chiefest good. As the lustful and evil eye by looking upon a
woman does make such a Union with her in his heart and affections, as that
thereby he is judged by our Savior to be guilty of Adultery, Mat. 5. 28. So
the seeing of the fullness of Christ, and the true desire of enjoying him, is
such a Marriageglance, as makes a tie and Union between Christ and the soul,
that thus looks toward him for life and salvation.

But it may be objected, If faith be not Assurance, and a persuasion in
particular that Christ is mine; Wherein lies the application of faith which
Divines do so much urgeand contend for against the Papists?

To answer this Objection. It is granted that the Popish faith which stands in
a bare general assent unto the promises, and the truths which are revealed in
the Gospel, is wholly insufficient to salvation, and that there is necessarily
required to an effectual and saving faith a special and particular
application, as has been formerly showed But there is a twofold Application;
the one is Axiomaticall, and the other is Real. The Axiomaticall application
is that which Assurance makes, whereby a believer is enabled to say, Christ is
mine. The Real application faith makes, in which though a believer cannot say
that Christ is his; yet he does by an act of recumbency cast himself upon
Christ for salvation, and resolves neither to seek it, nor expect it any other
way. Thus the Prodigal, Luke. 15. 18. did cast himself upon his father when he
could not tell whether he would own him as his son, or make him so much as
an hired servant.

But secondly, it may be objected, If faith be not Assurance, wherein does lie
the certainty of faith?

To this I answer, that there is a double certainty: The one is a certainty of
sense, such as Thomas had, who seeing believed, Joh. 20. 29. And such a
certainty Assurance has, which is rather a kind of sense then faith. The other
is a certainty of event, and this faith has, though it want the former. He
that believes shall as certainly not perish as he who is assured though he does
not know it after that manner as the other does. Christ has promised, that he
who comes to him, he will in nowise cast out, John 6. 37. The words include
more then they express. He will be so far from casting out any that come to
him, as that he will embrace them in the arms of his dearest love, and
manifest the most tender compassions of his heart toward them.

But the end of all that has been spoken in answer to this Querie, is not that
any should rest in their having of faith without assurance, or lessen their
giving of all diligence to make their calling and election sure. Though a
malefactor may be pardoned and he not know of it, yet he cannot be so
comfortable, as he that carries his pardon sealed in his bosom. He whom God
loves, though he know it not, is happy; but he that knows it, knows himself
to be happy.

And therefore believers though they are not to faint under the want of
Assurance, or to conclude against themselves, that they have no faith because
they have no Assurance; yet they ought in prayer and all other Ordinances to
seek not only the having of eternal life but the knowledge of their having it
in Christ.

CHAP. XIII. In which the second Query is resolved.
THe second Query is, What use a believer may make of the promises of mercy and
pardon, after relapses and falling into gross sins, which waste the
conscience; and whether he may lay an immediate claim unto his right and
interest in them, without his being first humbled, and afflicted for his sins.

To this I answer, that though it be not with a believer under the Gospel; as
it was with the Nazarite under the Law; who if he were defiled in the time of
his consecration, lost all the former days of his separation, and was to begin
it wholly anew. Numb. 6. 12. though he do not by his present defilement lose
the virtue of his former cleansing and purifying of himself, so as to
extinguish his interest in the promises; yet his right may justly be suspended,
so as that he cannot actually enjoy the benefit and privilege of them, until
he first humble himself, and lay to heart the greatness of his defection and
Apostasy from God. But that I may give more distinct and clear satisfaction
to this Question, I shall speak to these two heads. First, I shall show how
far a believer may and ought to charge the guilt of atrocious sins that he
falls into upon himself. Secondly, I shall show how far he may not go, or
conclude any sentence against himself: there being errors oftentimes
committed in the excess, as well as in the defect.

SECT. 1. How far a believer ought to censure himself, after atrocious
sins.
First, how far a believer may and ought to judge and sentence himself for
sins that are not quotidianae incursionis, of daily incursion, and incident
to humane frailty; but are devorat^ria salutis, sins that more immediately
hazard and endanger salvation it self, as springing from more mature
deliberation, and a more full consent of will; and take it in these particulars.

First, a believer ought to acknowledge that such sins which have in them
not^rietatem facti, a notoriety of fact, do deserve notorietatem poenae, a
notoriety, and exemplarinesse in their punishment; and he is to be affected as
one who has justly merited death, though it be not inflicted; because the
desert of sin is still the same, though the sentence be revoked by a pardon.
The mercy of a Prince is richly manifested in giving unto a traitor his life;
but yet that does not disoblige him to confess that his offense* deserved
death; but lays rather a greater tie upon him to do it; that so he may
magnify the clemency of his Sovereign: So though God do keep a believer from
coming into the condemnation of sinners, by giving unto him a Royal and full
pardon for whatever he has done against him; yet this ought to be so far
from withholding him to acknowledge what the just wages of his rebellions are;
as that it ought the more to provoke him thereunto, that so he may give God the
glory of his free pardoning grace. Thus Peter bewailed the foulness of his
sin in denying his Lord and Master, Mark 14. 72. (...). We translate it, He
thought thereon, and wept. But Teophilact, and others with him interpret it,
Obvelavit se, he covered his head, and wept. Alluding to the general custom
in the Eastern Countries, where the condemned malefactors had their faces
covered. And by this ceremony Peter judged his sin to have deserved no less
then death, and as a son of death he wailed himself: He wept bitterly, Luke
22. 62.

Secondly, a believer may so far charge the guilt of gross sins, and
defections upon himself, as to acknowledge his utter unworthiness to stand in
any relation of love unto God, and that he might be so far from owning him as
a son, as that he might deny to look upon him in the number of his servants.
Thus the Prodigal (whom Divines not improbably conceive to be the emblem of a
regenerate man falling into scandalous sins) in his return to his father,
Luke 15. 19. acknowledges himself to be unworthy to be called his son.
Though he does not deny the relation of a son; yet he judges himself most
unworthy of the title of a son, and thinks it an happiness if he may but be
in his house as an hireling. And surely every child of God, who has through
loose and riotous living wasted both his grace and his comforts, and brought
sad extremities upon himself by straying from his fathers house, ought in
those resolutions and purposes of heart, which he has of returning unto God
again, to be deeply apprehensive how unworthy he is of any favorable
reception from him, how undeserving he is to lodge in his house as a servant,
much more to lie in his bosom as a son, that thereby he may the better prize
the mercy of restored love; and for the future, may the more dread the sad
effects of a voluntary departure from God, and be more watchful in preserving
his communion with him.

Thirdly, a believer falling into scandalous and vile pollutions, ought so
far to judge himself, and to charge the guilt of them upon his soul; as not
to lay hold immediately upon the promises of forgiveness, until he first
renew his repentance, and be thoroughly ashamed of the evil of his doings. When
Moses interceded for Miriam whom God had smitten with aleprosie; If her father
(says the Lord) had but spit in her face, should she not have been ashamed
seven days? Numb. 12. 44. That is, if her earthly father provoked to anger,
had expressed his displeasure by spitting upon her, should she not for a season
have been sorrowful and pensive? How much more then when her heavenly Father
is displeased by her sin, should she for a time be ashamed, and shut out from
the privileges and society of the Congregation? To be guilty of great sins,
and at the same time without remorse, and grief of heart to lay hold on the
promises of mercy; is not the acting of faith, but of presumption; because
faith always proceeds according to Gods method in the obtaining of peace, and
comfort. Now the way by which God speaks peace, and makes good the promises of
forgiveness, is by repentance. And therefore till that be renewed, the comfort
of pardon is suspended. First, God heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, Jer. 31.
18. And then he remembered him: then he manifests the bowels of a tender Father,
and says, I will surely have mercy upon him, verse. 20.

Fourthly, a believer falling into gross and peace-destroying sins, is so
far to charge the guilt of them upon his soul; as to acknowledge, That all
those temporal afflictions and chastisements, which God as a Father provoked to
anger, does lay upon him, are by his sins justly deserved, and by God
righteously inflicted. that God does make his own children to feel the smart of
his displeasure in heavy and sore afflictions, occasioned by their iniquities,
is a truth which the Scripture holds forth with so much evidence, that he that
runs may read it: They rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit, therefore he was
turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them, Isa. 63. 10. So again,
For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and
was wroth, Isa. 57. 17. What pregnant instances also were old Eli, upon whose
person and posterity God brings a most severe, and dreadful judgment? I Sam.
2. 31, 32, 33. David, who complains that his sins are a burden too heavy
for him, Psalm. 38. 4. that his wounds stink, and are corrupted because of his
foolishness, ver. 5. that he is feeble and sore broken, v. 8. Jonah, who cries
out of the belly of the whale, as out of the belly of hell, that he is forsaken
and cast out of Gods sight, Jonah 2. 2, 3. How easy were it by an addition of
examples in this kind to make the number to swell into a Catalogue? But a
taste is enough. Now what their carriage and behavior toward God is in this
condition, see it in their expressions. Old Eli when he heard of the judgment
of God denounced against him, says, It is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good, 1 Samuel 3. 18. David under all his pressures acknowledges, that in
faithfulness he had afflicted him, Psalm. 119. 75. So Jonah who had fled from
the presence of God, in the prayer that he pours out before him in his
extremity, confesses the sin, and vanity of all other dependencies save on
God alone: They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercies, Jonah
2. 8.

But it may be objected, How can it stand with the justice of God to punish
sin in his children, with any such kind of affliction; Christ having made an
absolute, and plenary satisfaction for them?

To this the answer is easy; that these temporal punishments, though they have
displeasure mixed with them, yet they do not slow from the vindictive justice
of God, as an irreconciled enemy; but are the corrections of a provoked Father,
and do wholly differ in the end from the vindictive which are not medicinal,
but destructive. The Judge who sentenceth the hand of a malefactor to be cut
off, has not the same end with the Physician that cuts of an hand when it is
incurably festred; the one commands it as a satisfaction due to justice; the
other enjoynes it, as a means to preserve the safety of the other parts: So
when God afflicts the wicked and believers with the same temporal evils; though
the smart and pain may be in both alike; yet he does it not with the same
mind, nor to the same end; the one he punishes in order to the satisfaction of
his justice, the other as a Father he corrects in order to their amendment; to
the one therefore it is properly a punishment, and to the other truly a
medicine.

SECT. 2. How far a believer ought not to charge himself with atrocious
sins.
The second head that I am to speak unto, is, to show how far believers are
not to charge the guilt of their great and most heinous sins upon themselves:
And this also take in the four following particulars,

First, believers are not to charge the guilt of such sins upon themselves,
as from thence to conclude, that there is an absolute fall from the state of
justification, and the grace of Adoption; so as that now they are no longer
sons, nor have any right to the heavenly inheritance. The love of God in
Christ is an endless, and unchangeable love, John 13. 1. and has its
perpetuity founded not upon any thing in us, but upon the firm rock of his
Will, and Counsel. His Covenant is everlasting, ordered in all things, and
sure: although we be not so with God, 1 Samuel 23. 5. True it is that the fall,
and lapses of a justified person, do so far make a breach upon his state of
justification, and adoption; as that the comforts and privileges of it are
thereby withheld and suspended; but his right thereunto is not made null, or
extinguished. He is under the power of an interdiction; but not under the power
of an ejection. He may not like Absalom see the Kings face, 1 Samuel 14. 24. but
he is not an exile. And in this condition he does abide, until he renew his
repentance, and thereby recover a fitness and aptitude to enjoy what before he
had a right unto; being like a cleansed leper who has the liberty of returning
unto his house, from which his defilement had separated him, and shut him out.
Now if any think the effects, and consequences of this spiritual sequestration
do import little, and that they are not antidotes strong enough to check the
presumption of the flesh which is in believers, and to keep them from playing
the wantons with the grace of God: To such, all that I shall say, is, that to
me they seem to be as blind men, that understaud little or nothing the wide
difference between the light of the Sun, and the darkness of the night: and
to have little experience in themselves, how sad the condition of that soul is,
from whom God hides his face, or turns his smiles into frowns: and how happy
he is in the overflowings of all joy, peace, and comfort, who has the shine of
Gods face to be the health of his countenance, Psalm. 42. 11.

Secondly, believers are not to charge the guilt of criminal sins into which
they fall upon themselves, so as thereby to apprehend or conclude that the
pardon of former sins is made void, and of none effect. The forgiveness of
sins past may aggravate and accent the iniquities that are afterward
committed, being done against the riches of mercy received; but the commission
of new sins does not revoke the pardon that was before given, or make the
guilt of such sins to return again in their full strength and power; no more
then subsequent debts do make bonds formerly cancelled and vacated to stand in
force. For God when he pardons, does not insert any conditional clauses, that
carry a respect to our future conversation, and make the efficacy of his pardon
to depend upon our well or ill doing. His gifts and graces are the fruits of
his immutable counsel and will, and therefore without all repentance It may not
be denied, but that this truth has diverse Adversaries: the Lutherans are
vehement in their opposition of it; as also the Papists and the Arminians. And
yet I say they who have skill and leisure to consult the Schoolmen who much
agitate this Question, An peccata redeant? Whether sins pardoned do ever
return, and live again in their guilt, so as to accuse and to condemn? Will
find there are more who are for the Negative then for the Affirmative. But it
is not my purpose to enter into the lists, and to take up the wasters in this
Controversy: It is enough that the Scripture-expressions concerning Gods
pardoning of sin, do clearly hold forth his forgiving of them to be full and
absolute: I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a
cloud thy sins, Isay. 44. 22. The cloud that is scattered or dissolved by the
sun, though others may succeed it, never returns to make a second
appearance; but is wholly extinguished, and therefore man's going down into the
grave, who never returns unto the land of the living again, is compared unto
it, Job. 7. 9. So Jer. 50. 20. The sins of Judah shall not be found, for I
will pardon them says the Lord. So again, Micah. 7. 19. Thou will cast all
their sins into the depths of the sea. Things that are cast into the bottom of
the sea, never come to sight again; but are more surely buried then things that
are hid in the grave and in the bowels of the earth, which may possibly be
dug out again. What more significant words can be used to declare the
absoluteness of Gods pardoning *sin then these of the Prophets?

Thirdly, beleivers falling into gross and conscience wasting sins, are not
to charge the guilt of them upon themselves, so as to conclude thereby, that
they have utterly lost all sanctifying and inherent grace. Such sins may make a
believer to be as a man in a woone who is without all motion; but not as a
carcass which is without all life. They may be in his heart, as spiders in an
hive, which spoil the honey, but do not kill the bees; they blast and wither
the precious fruits of grace and profession, but they do not wholly destroy
the root, and principle from whence they flow. Still the seed of God abides in
him, 1 John 3. 9. The Apostasy of Peter in denying out Savior was great: It
was a complicated denial; there was in it Negatio notitiae, a denial of so
much as knowing him: and Negatio consortii, a denial of all communion, and
converse with him. And yet in this reiterated defection, the faith of Peter did
not expire and give up the ghost. For Christ prayed that his faith might not
fail, Luke. 22. 32. Now the ground of this indeficiency in grace is not from
its own strength, as it is a quality in us; but from the covenant and promise
of God, who has said, that he will put his fear into our hearts, that we
shall not depart from him, Jer. 32. 40. Qui custodit nos per fidem, costodit in
nobis ipsam fidem: He that keeps us by faith, does keep faith it self in us.

This particular is very necessary for such Christians to think upon, who after
a falling into some foul sin: do not only mourn over their folly, as they
justly ought; but are apt also to complain that heretofore indeed they had
some good in them; a little faith they could by some effects discern in
themselves, a spark of love to God was once kindled in their breasts. But now
alas, all is utterly extinct. and lost! Now they are in no better condition
then in the gall of bitterness, and the bonds of iniquity: a rude and deformed
chaos of sin and folly, without any principle of grace or appearance of
beauty. And in thus doing, they do not only heighten their present darkness
and trouble, but also are injurious unto the promise and faithfulness of God,
who has fixed grace in the heart of a believer more firmly then the soul is
feated in the body, which is subject to death and dissolution.

Fourthly, believers are not so to charge the guilt of their great sins upon
themselves as from thence to infer any such sad conclusions as these: That they
never shall enjoy any day or hour of comfort again; but walk in continual
darkness, or that they shall never be used any more as instruments of service,
or be a vessel unto honor meet for the masters use; but be as the broken
shards, that are not fit to take fire from the hearth, or to take water out of
the pit, Isay. 30. 14. That they who defile themselves with voluntary and
gross sins, if we look unto the just merit of them, deserve to be so dealt
with, it cannot be denied. But that God does retaliate the sins of his
children with such dealings though they be deeply humbled for their Apostasy,
and with strong cries do beg both pardon and acceptance from himself, is
contrary not only to the promises of mercy, which he has made to penitent
sinners, Jer. 3. 12. but also to many pregnant instances of such whom he has
both comforted with his love, and highly honored with his service. With what
expressions and demonstrations of affection is the dejected Prodigal received
by his father? who peccanti filio dat oscula, non flagella, gives to his
straying son kisses, and not blows, says Chrysologus. No food is too good
to satisfy his hunger, no raiment too costly to cloth him with, no ornament
too precious to adorn him. The fatted calfe, the best robe, the ring of gold
are the sure pledges of his fathers love, Luke. 15. What a choice vessel of
honor and service was Peter after his fall, who was honored with the
dispensation of the Gospel, and had his labors crowned with the conversion of
many thousand souls? Let not therefore such who have fallen by their
iniquities, but yet return again by sincere repentance, say, that all their
days shall end in darkness, that their names shall ever be unsavory, that
themselves shall always be as barren and dry trees; but let them remember that
comfortable promise that God made to repenting Israel, Zeph. 3. 19, 20. who
tells them, that he will get them praise and fame in every land, where they
have been put to shame.

CHAP. XIV. In which the third Query is resolved, viz. What use may be made of
such promises as we cannot expect to see the performance of?
THe third Query which I shall propound, and endeavor to satisfy, is, What
use a believer may make of all those glorious and rich promises which he can
never expect to see the performance of; such as are the beauty and prosperity
of the Church in peace and holiness, when all pricking briers, and grieving
thorns shall be removed out of the midst of it: The calling and conversion of
the Jews. The downfall and ruin of Antichrist; All which seem to be as
blessings reserved for future ages, and not to be hoped for in the present
times?

To this I answer, that true it is, that the promises of God are as bonds of a
different date, and do successively take place in several ages and generations
of the Church: being so purposely ordered by the infinite wisdom of God, that
though he be continually accomplishing some one or other of his blessed
promises unto his people; there might yet be a most plentiful reserve of new
mercies unto the last ages of the world; that so it might appear that former
generations have not exhausted or diminished the treasure of his love and
bounty to the prejudice of those that should succeed them, But yet such
promises which future times, and not the present shall see to be fulfilled, are
of much use unto present believers, and by the due application of them may
yield much satisfaction and comfort unto those who like the Patriarchs can see
them afar off, and being persuaded of the truth of them, do joyfully embrace
them, as Mariners do the desired port at a distance, Heb. 11* 13. It was a
great comfort and contentment unto Moses, that though God would not let him
enter into the land of promise, yet before his death, he would from the top of
Pisgah give him a full prospect of its glory and beauty, Deuteronomy. 34. 1. And so to
a believer it must needs be a matter of much joy and delight, that though he
cannot live to partake of the future mercies that God has reserved for his
Church; yet he may by the eye of faith have a distinct view of them in the
promises, as in a lively map, and may behold the glory of that portion of
blessing and goodness which God will bestow upon his people in the ages that
are to come. But more particularly there may be a four fold use made by a
believer of all such promises, whose accomplishment do seem to be at a remote
distance and period of times.

First, they are useful to support and bear up believers under present
troubles and sore afflictions, that the Church may be exercised with, that it
shall not be ruined and undone by them. Navicula est quae turbari potest, sed
mergi non potest: The Church is as a ship, (says Austine) which may be tossed
with tempests, but cannot be sunk and shipwrackt by them. It being the only
heir of all the promises that God has made, it must live to enjoy them; else
they must become void and of no effect; or be as Bona adespota, Goods that have
no person or Lord to lay claim unto them. And if we consult the Scriptures, we
shall find, that in the times which were most dark and over-cast, God did most
frequently use such promises to confirm to his people their deliverance out of
present straits, that were not to take place till many ages after, that from
thence they might conclude their condition not to be hopeless and desperate in
regard of future blessings which God would perform to their succeeding
generations. Thus when Jacob was in Egypt, where his seed were oppressed with a
long and heavy bondage, he prophesies that the scepter should not depart from
Judah, till Shiloh came, Genesis 49. 10. So when Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah
King of Israel joined in a confederacy against Judah, and that the hearts of
the people through fear were as the trees of the wood, when moved with the
wind, Isai. 7. 3. the Lord to assure his people that they should be delivered,
and that their attempts against Jerusalem should not come to pass; gives no
other sign but this: Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and ye
shall call his name Immanuel, verse. 14. It was the land in which the Savior of
the world was to be borne, and they the tribe from which he was to descend; And
therefore they might be fully confident, that for that very promise sake, ruin
and exti^pation should not be fall them. So again in Isreal's long captivity of
seventy years, though multitudes of them in that long tract of time could
expect no other liberty then to be free among the dead; yet the Lord in the
beginning of it does by the Prophecy of Jeremiah, which was to be read unto
them, promise deliverance out of it, and comforts them with the assurance of
their freedom, and their enemies ruin, of both which he makes the casting of
the Prophets book into the midst of Euphrates to be a sign unto them, Jer. 51.
63, 64. And why then may not we in these distracted and divided times, both in
regard of opinion and practice, yet hope and believe, that those blessed
promises of Peace and Union with which God has promised to beautify his
Church, shall at length be performed: and from thence gather so much present
comfort, as not to deem our breaches incurable, and past all healing? True it
is, that Christians are like bees gone forth into so many swarms, as that to
reason it seems beyond possibility, that ever they should by the sound of the
Word (as by a golden bell) be brought under one hive. But yet that one promise
of Gods giving his people one heart, and one way, that they may fear him for
ever for the good of them and their children after them, Jer. 32. 39. is enough
to support those that are peacemakers that their labor shall not be in vain,
and to comfort those that mourn for the sad rents that are made, that there is
hope in Israel concerning this thing.

Secondly, such promises are useful to believers, as a firm rock to bottom
their prayers upon, which they make on the behalf of the Church. To pray that
Christ's Kingdom may come, and that it may spread it self unto the utmost ends
of the earth, is the duty of every Christian: But the ground of their making
such prayers, and of their confidence in obtaining them, does wholly arise from
the promises that God has made. He it is who has promised, that Christ shall
reign, till he has put all his enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25. He it
is who has said, that Zion shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck
the breasts of Kings, Isa. 60. 16. That her Horn shall be iron, and her hoofs
brass, to break in pieces many people, Micha 4. 13. And thereby are they
encouraged to seek his face, and to put him in mind of his gracious promises
unto his people. True it is, that the times and seasons when these things shall
be, are unknown unto them, neither are they to be curious and anxious about
them: God having put them in his own power, Acts 1. 7. But yet knowing that he
who has promised, is faithful, they do with delight plead them in their
prayers, and with faith embrace them in their arms.

Thirdly, such promises are useful to try the sincerity of a believers
affection and love to Gods glory, and to the welfare of the Church. Promises
wherein men's present interests a^e concerned, self-love may make them to put a
value upon them, and quicken an ardency both in their prayers and desires to
beg the performance of them, as judging themselves to be most happy in the
enjoyment of those blessings which are held forth in them. And surely from this
very principle are many stirred up to plead with much earnestness the promises
of protection, when they are under some imminent danger; the promises of
provision, when under some pinching want; the promises of comfort, when under
some sore affliction. But when a Christian can rejoice in such promises, which
speak the future happiness of the Church when he is dead and gone: When it is
sweet to him to think, that Christ's throne shall hereafter be more exalted,
his Name more known, his Spirit more plentifully poured forth, that the Church
shall triumph over its enemies, and be an habitation of peace, of love: It is
an argument of a noble frame of heart, and of a spirit that is truly affected
with the love of Gods glory. When a man can ruminate upon such promises with
delight, and can in prayer manifest that it is the desire of his soul, that
these things wherein God will be so highly honored, may be effected; it is a
comfortable evidence, that the white at which he levells, and the end which he
propounds to himself, do not terminate in his private interest, but in the
exaltation of the Name of God, which by faith he is persuaded shall be
magnified throughout all ages of the world.

Fourthly, such promises are useful to comfort believers in regard of their
posterity. It is oft-times a perplexing thought to tender parents, especially
in difficult times, to think what will become of their children if they should
be taken from them, and their seed be deprived of the benefit of that care and
counsel, which while they live they constantly partake of. And this very thing
does beget as much anxiety in their hearts, as the departure of Christ did in
his disciples it being an evil, that though foreseen, they scarce know how
satisfactorily to provide against. Now besides those general considerations
drawn from those compassions and bowels that are in God, and his faithfulness
in providing for the righteous and their seed, according to his promise: All
which may help to allay such distrustful thoughts and cares. There may also not
a little support and comfort be taken from the exercising of faith on such
eminent promises, as declare the riches of Gods goodness to the ages and times
that are to come: All which God will according to their appointed seasons
fulfill, until that grand and last promise of gathering all his elect unto
himself in glory be accomplished; So that believers may comfortably hope, that
what promises themselves do fall short of, their posterity shall in one kind or
other be partakers of. And though through the dark dispensations of present
providence, the Church may seem to be in the midst of an howling wilderness,
rather then near the borders of a Canaan: yet surely the Land of rest is not
afar off, though it may to us be out of sight.

CHAP. XV. Wherein the fourth Query is resolved, viz. Whether believers always
enjoy the comfort of assurance in death?
THe fourth Query is, Whether believers, who are most diligent in the daily
application of the promises, and in the use of all means to make their calling
and election sure, do always enjoy the comfort of assurance in death Or have,
as the Apostle expressed it, an entrance abundantly ministered unto them into
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? 2. Pet. 1. 11.

The answer that I shall give unto this Question, will consist of diverse
branches, which I shall lay down in four Propositions.

The first is, that a believer as he meets with many brunts and conflicts in
his life, so he may and often does meet with worse at his death. Christ his
agony and sufferings were sharpest toward the close and end of his life. And
then, though he complains not of God; yet in a most vehement expostulation he
complains to God, My God, my God, why have thou for saken me? Mat. 27. 46.
Lamb-like and silent deaths are not always the portion of Gods dearest
Children. The wicked may have no pains and bands in their death, Psalm. 73. 4.
when the best of Saints may be environed with terrors. The one may be as a man
in a sleep, who may have pleasant and golden dreams; and the other as a man
awake that is afflicted and disquieted with grievous and sore paroxismes. Thus
good Hezekiah in that sickness, in which he was by the Prophet summoned to
prepare for death, through the sad apprehensions of Gods displeasure, poured
forth his soul in bitter complaints, Isay. 38. he says ver. 13. I reckoned
till morning that. as a lion so will he break all my bones, And. ver. 14. Like
a Crane or swallow, so did I chatter. Grief and pain had both so filled and
wasted him, as that he could only make an indistinct and confused noise; as
those birds do when they are deprived of their young ones. And therefore
Christians are not to be discouraged as if some new thing had befallen them, if
in the close and shutting up of their lives, instead of comfortable gales, and
breathings of the Spirit, they find (contrary to their expectation) Satan to
assault them, or God to withdraw himself from them who for a moment hides his
face, but with everlasting kindness will embrace them Isay. 54. 8.

The second Proposition is, that our diligence to clear up our interest in the
promises, and the using of all means to make our calling and election sure, is
the ordinary and regular way to obtain comfort, and enlargement in death. To
expect to dye comfortably, and not to live holily, is as vain, as for a man to
look for stars on earth, and trees in heaven. To waste the oil of grace, and
yet to think to be anointed with the oil of gladness, is the fruit of
presumption, and not of faith. When servants idle out the light that their
Masters give them to work by, they may well conclude that they must go to bed
in the dark. And so when Christians do neglect in the day of their life to work
out their salvation with fear and trembling, it is no wonder if in the night of
death they want the light of comfort, and have a dark exit out of the world.

The third Proposition is, that the improvement of the promises, and the
diligent use of all means to make our calling and election sure, is not only
the ordinary and regular way, but does usually procure comfort in death,
unless it be in four particular cases.

First, when sicknesses and distempers are violent, so as to interrupt and
suspend the use of reason; it must needs be that thereby also the comforts of
grace be so far eclipsed, as to be like stars in a cloudy night, which
though they be not blotted out of their orb, yet do not shine: Who can expect
that an untuned instrument should ever make a melodious harmony? no more can
any man rationally conceive, that when the frame of nature is out of order, and
the organs of the body wholly indisposed to the acts of reason; that then the
comforts of the Spirit should appear in their beauty and luster? Now that God
oft-times puts a period unto the lives of his dearest children by such diseases
cannot be denied: For Solomon tells us; that All things come alike unto all;
there is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the good and to the
clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices
not, Eccles. 9. 2.

Secondly, when temptations and assaults from Satan are like vehement winds
which shake the tree, though they do not overturn it. A man who has a fair
estate of lands, may by vexatious suites be so put to try his title, as that he
may take little pleasure in the revenues and profits issuing from them* and so
a believer in his combating and wrestling with temptations may so far be
disquieted, as that though he question not his condition, he may yet enjoy
less satisfaction and present delight in his evidences and assurance then
formerly he had* Thus Paul after his rapture into the third heaven, 1 Cor. 12.
2. was buffeted by a messenger of Satan, whereby he was not only kept from
being exalted above measure; but also interrupted in the enjoyment of those
choice comforts and contemplations, which such revelations might minister unto
him: as may appear by his frequency and importunity in prayer to God, to be
delivered from this sad conflict, ver. 8.

Thirdly, when Christians have intermitted that wonted care and circumspection
to preserve their peace and communion with God, which formerly they used. When
they have been more forgetful of God, and less delighted with his presence
then before they were. When they have suffered the world to steal away their
thoughts, and affections from heaven, and through a distempered appetite relish
more their daily bread, then the spiritual Manna. When they grow regardlesse of
Christ's voice, and open not their hearts to him, who seeks and entreates an
admittance; then it is no wonder if their Sun set in a cloud, and that the
horror of a sad darkness do take hold upon them: that then like the Spouse in
the Canticles they complain that their Beloved has withdrawn himself and is
gone: that they seek him, but cannot find him; that they call him by all his
blessed and gracious names, and yet he answers not, Cant. 5. 8.

Fourthly, When their graces and also their comforts have been already fully
manifested, both to themselves and others, in the time of their life; God may
in the approaches of death, for sundry reasons best known unto himself,
withdraw his comfortable presence, and not fill their souls with those
exultations of joy and peace which others might expect to be mingled with their
last agonies, and expirations in death: so as that they should be carried up to
heaven in the light of a glorious Plerophory; like to the. Angel which ascended
in the flame of Man^ahs sacrifice, Judges 13. 20. God may do it,

First, to try and manifest the strength of their faith, that though their
feelings are not strong, yet their faith is not weak; that though they see not
the crown of bliss and immortality hovering as it were over them, and ready to
fall upon their heads, they yet believe that it is laid up for them, and that
they shall ere long see it, and enjoy it together. Such faith highly glorifies
God, and in some respects gives more honor unto him then Assurance, which has
a kind of sense joined with it. That, like Thomas sees and believes; but this
sees not, and yet believes that what God has promised he will perform.

Secondly, God may do it, that others may learn that comforts and
manifestations of love in death are not so necessary as grace, and therefore
not to be dismayed and dejected in their thoughts concerning themselves, if
they find not such overflowings of joy and prelibations of heaven it self as
some: others have had in the time of death. All believers though they are
heirs of the same Kingdom, yet have not the same abundant entrance ministered
unto them. To some the passage is like the going upon a clear and crystal
stream, which has flowery and aromatical bancks on each side of it: to others
it is like a calm and quiet sea on which as the fluctuations and tossings are
few or none; so the gales that carry them to the Port are not strong and quick.
As their temptations are not great; so neither are their comforts glorious.

Thirdly, God may do it in judgment to others; that such who have known and
seen the light of holiness shining in their lives, and yet have not in the
least been advantaged by it; should not get the least good by their deaths. As
they have not profited by their graces; so neither will he let them be edified
by their comforts. Carnal men are oft-times more ready to observe the dying of
holy persons, then their lives; because that then they conceive, it may be seen
what reality there is in that profession which they have made of having
communion with God, and of enjoying his peculiar presence in a differing manner
from the world. Now they think it will appear whether their faith be any thing
beyond a fancy; whether their joys be such as death will not cast a dampe
upon, as well as upon the delights and pleasures of the world. And when their
curiosity is unsatisfied in what they expected, then they spare not to censure
them as deceivers both of themselves, and others. Little considering that the
just ground of Gods causing such bright stars to set in a cloud, may be to
hide from them what might benefit them in their death, who have learned nothing
from the holy example of their lives. The obstinate Jews opposed the Doctrine
which Christ taught; and rejected the salvation which he offered unto them
whilst he was among them: And then at his death insultingly ask for miracles
that might declare him to be the Son of God, whereby they might believe on him,
Mat. 26. 42. But God then made his death a stone of stumbling for them to fall
at, who had made his life and converse among them to be the object of scorn
both to themselves and others.

The fourth Proposition is, that the judgment, and estimate which believers
and others make concerning men's spiritual estates and conditions should chiefly
be grounded upon their lives, rather then their deaths. There may many
accidents fall out in their death, which as they do not prejudice a believers
salvation; so neither should they his Christian reputation. He may through a
fever become phrenetical, through melancholy he may be lumpish and heavy,
through temptations he may be unsettled, through desertions he may speak
uncomfortable speeches, and be afflicted with despairing thoughts: His darkness
may be without the least glimmerings of light: His agonies in death without
sense of comfort: And yet he may be a dear child of God: Because (as holy
Greenham says) we shall not be judged according to that particular instant of
death; but according to the general course of our life; not according to our
deeds in that present, but according to the desires of our hearts ever before.
And therefore we are not to mistrust Gods mercy in death, be it never so
uncomfortable, if so be it has been before sealed in our vocation and
sanctification. It is sad indeed when the lives and days of those do in such a
manner determine and expire, who have wasted their time and strength in sinful
exorbitancies, and have been eaten up with the cares and thoughts of the world,
without the least minding of their eternal condition, till arrested by the
stroke of death, and summoned to appear at the tribunal of a provoked God. But
else, though the close of an holy life be most uncomfortable, and full of
darkness, it is no just ground to any, to change their apprehension and
persuasion concerning the welfare of their everlasting estate, having
beforehand seen and known such unblameablenesse of conversation, such fruits
of grace as might clearly evidence the uprightness and sincerity of their
hearts toward God and men.

CHAP. XVI. What use is to be made of temporal Promises.
THe fifth and last Query that I shall propound, is, What use is to be made of
temporal promises; such wherein preservation from outward evils, the free and
liberal donation of earthly blessings, the removal of sad and heavy pressures,
are in particular promised and undertaken for by God in his Word. After what
manner are believers to act and exercise their faith upon them, or to hope for
the performance of them; in regard that they oft-times who may best plead their
title and interest in them do most of all want the fruition of such mercies,
They (says the Apostle) of whom the world was not worthy, wandered about in
sheepskins, and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented, Heb.
11. 37, 38.

The answer to this Question I do not purpose to make as the cords of a tent
stretched out to their utmost length, or unnecessarily to enlarge as the
Pharisees did with affectation their phylacteries; but yet for the more full
and just solution of it, I conceive it will not be impertinent to speak to
three particulars.

First, to show why God under the Old Testament did make the tenor of his
promises to run so universally of his giving unto them the blessings and
enjoyments of this life; when as under the Gospel such kind of promises are
more sparingly recorded, and not so distinctly set down.

Secondly, to show the various advantage, and profit that believers may reap
to their spiritual estate, by looking unto such promises with an eye of faith,
and quietly waiting the good pleasure of God for the fulfilling of them.

Thirdly, to give rules for the right understanding of the nature of temporal
promises, and the manner of due applying them unto our particular exigencies
and conditions.

SECT. 1. Why God has made such various promises of temporal mercies to his
people under the Law.
For the first, viz. Gods making unto his people so many distinct and redoubled
promises of temporal mercies, sundry reasons might be assigned, but I shall
fix only upon this: that such away of bounty was most suitable to the winning
of their observance unto such administrations and forms of worship, as he then
gave them in command, and required their obedience unto. For until the time of
reformation came (as the Apostle expresses it, Heb. 9 10. That is, until the
time of the New Testament, when both the imperfection of the Law, and
Priesthood was to be done away by Christ, who as a more excellent Priest
offered up a most perfect sacrifice, all things were transacted after an
earthly and external manner. The Sanctuary was worldly, Heb. 9. 1. The
Ordinances imposed on them were carnal, which stood in meats, and drinks,
and diverse washings, Heb. 9. 10. Now to this paedagogie of the Church, the
promises of such outward blessings were most agreeable. As the duties, and
exercises of their religion were most conversant about the outward man; so
likewise the promises that were the encouragements to move and incite them to
an observancy of those prescribed rites, were such as did chiefly hold forth
the prosperity and welfare of their outward estate. Not that the goodness of
God to his people, or his Covenant with them did extend only to the care of
their bodies, or that this was the utmost drift of those many promises which he
had made unto them. This had been (as Peter Martyr speaks) to have made God to
have had no more regard to his Church then shepherds have to their flock, or
Herdsmen to their cattle, who look no further then to their thriving and well
liking in their pastures. But as in their sacrifices, and other ceremonies of
their worship they were trained up and instructed in the knowledge of
spiritual duties toward God, in which their hearts and thoughts were to be
employed: So also by the temporal promises were grounds laid of carrying on
their faith and hope for the obtaining of more glorious mercies then those
which at the present they enjoyed. Their Manna was a kind of Sacramental
food, and the water from the rock a Sacramental drink, the land of Canaan a
type of the true and heavenly rest, which Christ has purchased, which by him
who was the substance of all shadows they might expect. True it is, that both
the precepts of their worship and the promises of their reward, were more dark
and obscure, then the rule of our obedience, and the recompense of our service
under the Gospel; but yet both did center and terminate in one and the same
end. The State of the Church under the Law was represented (says Bright-man)
by mare aereum, a sea of brass, which is of a more thick and dark substance;
but under the Gospel by mare vitreum, a sea of glass, which is most clear and
transparent, Rev. 4. 6.

SECT. 2. Four benefits come to believers by looking to temporal promises.
The second particular is, to show the Several benefits that redound to
believers by looking unto temporal promises with an eye of faith. And here
many might be insistedon; but I shall insist only on four.

First, Faith in the promises of this life does much help to the mortification
of inordinate desires, and of distracting and anxious cares; Both which are the
genuine fruits and offspring of unbelief. Every man is conscious unto himself
both of his own wants, and of the fading condition of every creature; and
thereby he is stirred up to seek in a restless manner a supply of present
necessities, and a solicitous provision for all future contingencies. Ask many
a man why he toils so uncessantly to the breaking of his head with cares, and
his body with labor? And he will quickly tell you, that he has none to trust
unto but himself, that he knows not what hard times and changes may come:
Sickness may befall him, and waste what he has gotten: Age may overtake him,
and render him unapt for labor: Charges may multiply in his family, and it is
not the air that will feed them. He had need therefore to do what he does; if
not, he and his might starve. But now when a believer can look unto the
promise, how soon are all these tempestuous thoughts and fears calmed? how
sweetly is the heart quieted by casting all its care upon God, who cares for
us? 1 Pet. 5* 7. How quickly can be spy in the promises Gods obligation for
clothing to cover his nakedness, for meat to satisfy his hunger, for Physic
to cure his diseases, for armor to safeguard his person, for treasure to
provide for his family and posterity? How fully can he rest contented in the
things which he has, because God has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5.

Secondly, Faith exercised on the temporal promises, will much help to
strengthen our adherence to the promises of a better life, and cause us to
trust more perfectly in God for the salvation of our souls. Our Savior tells
his Disciples, Matthew. 6. 26. that if God fed the fowls, and clothed the
Lillies, he will much more provide for them which are better then they. And so
may a believer argue with himself, If God has made so many rich promises of
provision for the body, he will not be wanting to the happiness of the soul:
if he be so careful of the casket, he will not be unmindfull of the Jewel: if
he give daily bread to the one, he will surely give Manna to the other: if he
make our pilgrimage delightful, and make the paths of our feet to drop
fatness, he will make our rest and habitation with himself to be glorious. If
the feet tread on Roses here, and on the Moon and Stars hereafter, how
orient and beautiful will be that crown of life that shall be set upon our
heads? Such kind of argumentations are very helpful to a believer, who ownes
all his outward comforts to arise from Gods faithfulness in his promise,
though in the mere and naked having of them no man can know love or hatred,
Eccl. 9. 1.

Thirdly, Faith exercised on the promises of this life, sweetens the enjoyment
of every blessing, be it little, or much. There are two sources from whence all
outward mercies flow, the Providence of God, and the Promise of God: The one is
as the Nether-springs, from which every creature receives its preservation and
continuance; He opens his hand, and satisfies the desire of every living
thing, Psalm. 145. 16. The other is as the upper-springs, from which after a
peculiar manner the goodness and bounty of God is conveyed unto believers.
Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and that which is to come,
1 Timothy 4. 8. Now the streams that flow from this fountain are more pure, and
free from that vexation and vanity which the abundance that the wicked has is
subject unto; because they are sanctified by Christ, in whom all the promises
are Yea and Amen. When therefore a believer can look upon all his outward
enjoyments as the fruits of Gods especial love, and can say as Jacob did,
These are the blessings which God has graciously given his servant, Genesis 33.
5. then they become in their use more delightful, and in their taste more
sweet. A small portion of meat given by the hand of a great Personage, is more
set by and esteemed, then all the variety of his full table upon which his
other guests do feed and carve themselves; because it carries with it a
particular character and mark of favor to him on whom it is bestowed: And so
a little given by God as a Testimony of his peculiar love, and care toward
believers is more desirable and satisfactorie, then great revenues that flow
only from a common bounty.

Fourthly, Faith exercised on the temporal promises, is a powerful antidote to
preserve believers from the use of unlawful means, both in the seeking and in
the obtaining of all earthly comforts. The inordinacy of the desires puts men
oft-times upon dangerous precipices. He that makes haste to he rich, shall not
be innocent, Prove. 28. 20. So, They that will be rich, fall into temptation,
and a snare, and many hurtful lusts, 1 Timothy 6. 9. Now faith, though it do not
take off the edge of men's industry, and diligence in the pursuance of all
lawful and just means, or make them to expect to be fed as the fowls of the
air that neither sow nor reap; or to be clothed as the Lillies of the field,
that neither spin nor labor yet it does so correct and allay the vehemence of
all desires toward the things of this world, as that they dare not take any
way to gain them, which the Word does not warrant, or the promise sanctify.
Faith suggesteth to them that it is not their labor, and care that makes rich,
but Gods blessing, who gives no sorrow with it, Prove. 10. 22. That it is not
their wisdom that makes their endeavors in their calling to be successful;
but Gods fidelity and truth that crowns them with prosperity: that it is not
their sweat that feeds the Lamp of their comforts, and makes it to shine; but
the constant droppings and distillations of Gods goodness. And thereby they
are enabled to depend upon his promise, and to believe that such a dimensum,
and portion of outward blessings shall be given unto them, as that they may
truly say with the Prophet, Their lines are fallen unto them in pleasant
places; yea, they have a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16. 6.

SECT. 3. Five assertions directing to the right understanding of temporal
promises.
The third particular is the giving of rules for the right understanding of the
nature of temporal promises, and the manner of due applying them unto our
selves, which I shall set down in these five subsequent Assertions.

First, that God declaration in his promises of giving temporal blessings, is
not absolute; but carries with it a tacit condition, and limitation of
expediency. The great and utmost end of all the promises, is one and the same
with that which is the chief end of man, the fruition of God and communion with
him in everlasting blessedness. Now the means that are subservient to this
end, are either such as are of absolute necessity, and do immediately prepare
and dispose the soul for the obtaining of it* Or else such as are less
requisite, and have* only a remote and consequentiall tendency thereunto; and
that not of themselves, but as they are overruled by God, who makes Omnia
cooperari in bonum, all things to work together for good, to them that love
him. And of this kind are all temporal blessings, prosperity, riches, health,
freedom, and the like. All which do (as I conceive) come no further under the
verge of a promise, then as they conduce to the happiness of the other life;
this life being only a way and passage unto it; As the wilderness was to
Israel to bring them to Canaan: Because therefore none can know what is that
measure of these outward comforts which most tends to the furtherance of their
eternal happiness, which in and above all things ought to be eyed by them; It
being happily more for their spiritual good, to have many advantages of this
life in a less degree rather then in a greater; to want them rather then to
enjoy them: They cannot then in their supplications to God seek the absolute
performance of his promises in temporal blessings; but must refer themselves
to his wisdom and faithfulness so to order and measure out the comforts of
this life unto them, as may best stand with the welfare of their everlasting
condition, without which all earthly happiness is no other then a splendid
misery. But it is much otherwise in the blessings of grace, and holiness,
which are things so essential to a believers fruition of God, as that without
faith he cannot please God, Heb. 11. 6. without holiness he cannot see God,
Heb. 12. 14. without being born of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 3. And being therefore so intrinsecally good
in themselves, so absolutely also necessary unto salvation, they are in prayer
to be most absolutely sought, as considered in their essence; but their degrees
are arbitrary: God giving to some a less, to others a greater measure of
grace, according to his pleasure.

The second Assertion is, that the fulfilling of temporal promises is
disjunctive, God either giving the blessing it self, or that which is
equivalent unto it. The promises of God are all made in Christ, and derive
their certainty and stability from him in whom they are made, not from us to
whom they are made: they are all ratified with the same oath, and purchased by
the same blood. And though they are not equally precious in regard of the
things promised, yet they are equally true in regard of the certainty of their
performance; only the manner of their fulfilling is different. In the
spiritual promises, God gives the things in kind; for how can they be
otherwise made good? What is answerable in worth or excellency to grace, the
least drop of which is of more value then the whole creation. In temporals, God
gives the things themselves, or makes a compensation some other way; If riches
be asked of him in prayer, and yet denied, he makes it up in contentation,
which brings that satisfaction with it, that riches cannot yield. If health be
prayed for, and not granted; he gives strength to bear the cross, by putting
under his everlasting arms. If deliverance in trouble be desired, and not
obtained; he gives the divine consolations of Martyrs, which that Noble
Landgrave of Hessia said he found in his long and tedious imprisonment. And in
thus doing God does not break his promise, but change it to the better. It is
said of our Savior, Heb. 5. 7. That in the days of his flesh, he offered up
prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able
to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared. That which Christ
prayed for was deliverance: O'Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass
from me, Mat. 26. 39. Was there then any defect in Christ's faith, in that he
did not obtain the thing prayed sor? Or how was his prayer heard? did he not
die the death of the cross? was he not buried in the grave? Yes; but yet he
had from God an answer of supportation, though not of deliverance. He was
strengthened in his agony by the appearance of an Angel, Luke 22. 43. He was
assured by Gods promise of victory over death, though not of freedom from it.
He under-went the darkness of the grave, but not the corruption of it, Psalm.
16. 10.

The third assertion is, that temporal promises are to be expounded with the
reservation, and exception of the Cross. God in the Covenant of Grace (which
is the adequate measure of his obligation to believers) has kept to himself
this prerogative of chastening the delinquencies of his children with rods,
Psalm. 89. 33. of withdrawing his favors from them, when they withold their
obedience to him; of exercising the severity of a Father, as well as the
indulgency of a Mother. And therefore believers when they want the staff of
many outward comforts in their hand, and feel the smart of the rod of
affliction upon their back, they are not to suspect Gods fidelity in his
promise; but to reflect upon themselves, and by a serious disquisition to
consider from whence the suspension of any good things that he has promised
does arise. And if Christians under Gods re^ukes did make this their chief
task, they would be so far from charging him with unfaithfulness, as that
they would more wonder that God is pleased to vouchsafe them any thing, that
are Prodigals that justly deserve nothing. In the midst of their deepest trials
they would say as the Church did in her extremities, It is of the Lords mercies
that we are not consumed. Great is thy faithfulness, O Lord, Lam. 3. 22, 23.

The fourth Assertion is, that temporal mercies in the promises are only to be
obtained by a well regulated prayer, in which God is sought after a right
manner, and the mercies begged for a right end.

First the manner of seeking God must be in faith, James 1. 6. Let him ask in
faith, nothing wavering. But the faith here required, is not the faith of a
particular persuasion that God will give the very thing it self that we beg
of him; but the faith of submission by which we resolve our prayers into his
will, and believe that he will do whatever is best for our good and his glory.
We then distrust God when either we are jealous of his willingness to perform
his Word, or of his power to accomplish his Word. But when we acknowledge the
alsufficiency of his power, and resign our desires to his will, we do then
pray in faith. And this was the faith that our Lord Christ did put forth in his
prayer, when he said, Not my will, but thy will be done, Luke 22. 42. I do not
deny but that God may sometimes assure, and incline the hearts of his children
that are importunate wrestlers in prayer, to be confident of granting the
temporal blessing that they seek; but this is a confidence, that is rather
begotten by the Spirit in the height and vigor of prayer, then brought with us
unto the duty. Sometimes (I say) such a confidence may be; but it is neither
ordinary nor usual.

Secondly, temporal mercies must be asked for a right end, James 4. 3. Ye ask,
and receive not, because ye ask amiss; that ye may consume it upon your lusts.
Carnal lusts may make men eager in prayer, but not successeful. Usually wrong
ends in prayer are accompanied with disappointments. Sinister Aims turn duties
of worship into acts of self-seeking; they change the voice of prayer into a
brutish howling, Hos. 7. 14. The execution of justice it self into murder,
Hos. 1. 4. Finis in moralibus idem est, quod forma in naturalibus. The end in
moral things, is the same that the form is in natural things. The quality and
goodness of them is not discerned but by the end. It concerns therefore
believers that would in prayer obtain any outward blessing, to look unto their
ends in asking of it: though the mercy be earthly, yet their end in asking of
it, must be heavenly. Gods glory must be in the end of all prayer, as his Name
must be in the beginning of it, else it cannot be expected that it should be
owned as a sacrifice by him.

The fifth Assertion is, that the blessings of temporal promises are to be
sought secondarily, and not primarily, Mat. 6. 33. They are neither to be the
chief cares of our life, or desires of our prayers: because the soul may do
well without the body; but the body cannot do well without the soul. And yet of
this disorder the greatest part of men may be found guilty. Their estates they
carefully put into their deeds and evidences, and their souls they only put
into their wills, the last of instruments that are usually either made or
sealed. For the one they think it enough, if with a few gilded expressions of
piety, it be given and bequeathed as a legacy unto God. But for the other they
conceive no pains or toil too great to increase it; or cost too much for to
secure it. The one they make the task of the morning and day of their lives;
the other the by-work of the evening, and the approaching night of death. So
that it is no wonder if in these preposterous and irregular actings of men,
they do not find the blessing of Gods promise upon their labors; that they
toil as in the fire, and weary themselves for very vanity, Hab. 2. 13. that
they sow much, and bring in little, Hag. 1. 6. For what benefit can they
justly expect to reap from the promise, who neglect to walk by the guidance of
that rule to which the promise is made?

CHAP. XVII. It is an horrible sin to neglect or abuse the Promises;
Aggravated in five particulars.
HAving spoken enough (if not too much) to each of those four heads that in
the beginning were propounded, and laid as so many corner-stones for this small
structure to stand upon: The last head which now remains to be insisted on, is
the handling of such useful applications and inferences as do naturally flow
and arise from this Doctrinal truth of the transcendent worth, and
preciousnesse of the promises which are given unto us by Jesus Christ.

And the first Application which I shall make, is; A sad and just complaint
(which sighs and tears may better express then words,) of the great injury
and contempt that is done unto the blessed promises, both by men's careless and
overly seeking after them as things of no great worth, and by their sinful
perverting of them unto wrong ends and purposes, while they turn grace into
wantonness, and sin the more freely because of the redundancy of divine mercy
which is manifested in them. God lays it as an heavy charge against Israel,
that he had written unto them the great things of his law, but they were
counted as a strange thing, Hos. 8. 12. How much more are they blameworthy who
are guilty of despising the Magnalia Evangelii, and of setting light by the
most choice and excellent things of the Gospel, as if they were of little or no
importance for the obtaining of life and salvation. This complaint if it had no
circumstances to aggravate it, but were only laid in the general against men,
that they have forsaken the fountain of living water, and hewed them out
cisternes, broken cisternes that can hold no water, Jer. 2. 13. It would
quickly prove to be so black an indictment, as could neither admit of an excuse
to lessen the sin, nor yet of pity to mitigate the punishment that deserves to
be inflicted upon such offenders. But if we shall consider it in the several
aggravations which heighten it, we may then at this sin justly cry out, Be
astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate.
There are five particulars that make the complaint more sad, and the injury
which is done unto the promises the more exceeding sinful.

SECT. 1.
The first Aggravation is taken from the universality of this sin: they who are
transgressors in this matter are not a few. Parisiensis speaking of David's
Psalms cries out, Eheu! quot (...) habet sanctus David, vel potius Spiritus
sanctus ad suam Cytharam! Oh! how many Dullards has holy David, or rather the
holy Spirit to his harp, who are little affected with the heavenly melody that
it makes* And may it not be as truly said concerning the precious promises of
Christ, Oh! how many are there that taste little or nothing of their
sweetness? What vast numbers of men are there who see no more worth and beauty
in them, then blind persons do in the Sun? How many be there that spend and
blaze away the lamp of their time in frothy studies, and curious speculations,
but seldom or never look into the Bible to read and understand what their
interest or right is to the blessings of heaven by the promises? How ambitious
are others to be thought to know much of the mind of God concerning his
decrees, which are as a sealed book; but neglect to see and know, both his will
and love in the Gospel, and the promises, which are as a book wide open,
written in fair and legible characters for all to look into? In the one their
travel and labor is fruitless, like that of the Ants, which often climb high
trees to seek for food, but when they are at the top return empty, not being
able to bring any thing down with them. But in the other it would prove like
that of the Be, which seeks its aliment among fragrant flowers, and fails not
to return to its hive laden with honey. O! that Ministers who seem to converse
with the promises more then others* were not guilty of this great sin, while
they only read and study them as Lawyers do other men's evidences and titles of
land* without any respects of being proprietaries themselves. Or else are (as
Bernard expresses it) like the teeth, qui toti corpori masticant cibum, and
nullum inde saporem habent: Which chew meat for the whole body; but derive no
sweetness from it, that may delight or profit them. Oh! that many who look
upon themselves as true heirs of the promises, were not injurious to the worth
and dignity of them, while they make the success of Providence the warrant of
the goodness of their actions, rather then the stability of the Promises,
which in all undertakings are the surest guides for to direct, and the best
comforters for to encourage. It is the observation of Sulpicius concerning the
ancient Jews, that Semper in secundis rebus immemores coelestium beneficiorum,
idolis supplicabant, in adversis Deo: Always in prosperity being unmindfull of
heavenly blessings, they did worship idols, and in their adversity the true
God. And so it may be said concerning many professors in these present times,
that in external successes and prosperous events, they altogether adore and
extol providence; but when these frown upon them, or grow cloudy, then they
betake themselves to promises.

SECT. 2.
A second aggravation is from the vanity and emptiness of those things which
most men set their hearts upon. The mind of man is the supreme and most noble
faculty of the soul, endued by God with such abilities, and graces which do
abundantly declare that earthly things can no more satisfy it, or fill it,
then the breath of the mariners can fill the sails; And therefore God has
provided for it suitable objects, on which it may exercise both its natural
power, and the supernatural habits which by his Spirit he infuseth into it,
with fullness of delight and satisfaction. He has in his Word revealed high
mysteries which the glorious Angels do desire to pry into, 1 Pet. 1. 12. in
the contemplation of which the mind of believers may be ever fruitfully
busied; And he has also made precious promises both of grace and glory, on
which their faith may certainly rest, and from which it may derive more
sweetness and contentment in one hour, then the fruition of all earthly
perfections will ever be able to yield in a succession of ages. And yet how apt
are believers as well as others to let their thoughts to fix and dwell on these
empty things that are below; rather then to study and delight themselves in the
knowledge of these divine and Angelical objects? How often do they more
resemble in their conversation the Israelites that were scattered abroad
throughout the land of Egypt to gather straw and stubble, Exodus 5. 12. then the
wise Merchant that spent his time in seeking of goodly pearls, Mat. 13. 45.
And do they not by such preposterous and irregular actings greatly undervalue,
and highly dishonor the precious things of the Gospel? Do they not by thus
walking make themselves inhabitants of the world, rather then pilgrims and
strangers that seek and desire an heavenly country? Oh! therefore let me
prevail with you who believe that God has provided better things for you then
others, to be exceeding circumspect, and cautious, that you let nothing lie
nearer your hearts, or take up more of your thoughts, then the promises of life
and glory; the expectation of which yields at present the best comfort, and
their fruition the most absolute and perfect happiness.

SECT. 3.
A third aggravation is from the mutability, and uncertainty of all those
things which do take off the most men both from seeking after the promises and
from valuing of them according to their worth. It is a true position of Lessius
in his divine perfections, that Aeternitas efficit bonum infinite melius, and
malum infinite pejus: Duration and Aeviternity do make a good infinitely
better, and an evil infinitely worse. And in this respect the good things which
are held forth in the promises, do far excel all earthly riches or grandeur
whatever; which in their greatest ability are both short and mutable. Can any
man say that the wild foul in his grounds are his, which suddenly take their
wings and fly away, and for a while make a stay in another man's field, and
thereby give a like propriety unto the second, as they did unto the first? No
more can any man call riches truly his, which like to winged birds shift their
owners, and haste from one to another. Have not the present times furnished us
with instances in this kind even to astonishment? Have we not seen the glory
of Nobles stained with ignominy? Have not those that dwelt in stately Mansions
become as Cottagers, and they that sat in low places been invested in stately
Mansions? Have we not beheld the evil that Solomon complains of, Eccles. 10. 7.
Servants upon horses, and Princes walking as servants upon the earth? And yet
who is there that by all these changes is awakened to get evidences that will
not burn, riches that cannot be plundered, an inheritance that cannot be
shaken? Oh! how greedily do men still pursue the fleeting vanities, and neglect
the true riches that endure for ever?

SECT. 4.
A fourth aggravation is from the facility of being made partakers of the
promises: they are precious, but not difficult, the terms upon which they are
tendered serve rather to invite then to deter. We need not say in our heart,
Who shall ascend into heaven to bring down Christ from above? Or, who shall
descend into the deep, to bring up Christ again from the dead? the word is nigh
unto us, Romans 10. 6, 7. It is no wonder if pearls which lie at the bottom of
steep rocks, have but few adventurers for them, because the danger may be more
then the gain; if gold in remote countries and deep mines be not traveled for,
and dug out of the bowels of the earth: But it may be justly wondered at, and
censured as the highest folly, if men coming to a full heap of treasures be
invited to throw away the clay and dirt with which their hands are filled, and
the superfluities with which they are loaded, and to take of gold and pearl as
much as they can carry, should refuse to do the one, that they might thereby be
enabled to do the other. What is it else that God and Christ do require of men
to the receiving of the promises, but only that they would disburden themselves
of earthly encumbrances which hinder the reception of spiritual mercies, that
so with hearts emptied of worldly affections and cares they may be qualified
for the fullness of heavenly riches? When Joseph invited his father and
brethren to come down into Egypt, he bids them not to regard their stuff; for
the good of all the land of Egypt is yours, Genesis 45. 20. So the true heavenly
Joseph when he invited men to come unto him, he bids them not to set their
hearts on things on the earth; because all the riches of his Kingdom, are
before them, and by his promises made over to them. How inexcuseable then must
their neglect be who do not with answerable hearts and desires embrace such
precious offers.

SECT. 5.
A fifth aggravation is taken from the command of God and Christ. We are not
only invited to take hold of the promises; but we are commanded to believe the
excellency of them. This (says the Apostle) is his commandment that we should
believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, Joh. 3. 23. That is, we ought so
to believe his promises, his sayings, as to count them worthy of all
acceptance. As we assent unto them for their truth; so are we to embrace them
for their preciousnesse and worth. Our faith must work by love; it must put
forth it self in the strength of all affection by our esteeming and prizing of
them above the most desirable things of the world. Thus David did when he said,
Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever; for they are the
rejoycings of my heart, Psalm. 119. 111. Gods promises he made as his lands, as
his goods, as his all. They were more dear to him then all his temporal things
whatsoever. When therefore they are not thus honored both in the hearts, and
in the lives of believers, the great Commandment of the Gospel is violated, the
disobedience of which will be recompensed with more heavy and sore judgments,
then the breaches of the Law.

CHAP. XVIII. Four differences between the promises of God, and Satan.
THe second Application from this truth, That the promises of the Gospel are
precious* shall be to acquaint us with the wide differences that are between
the promises of God, and the promises of the Devil, who is the great deceiver
of the whole world, Rev. 12. 9. Sin which Satan by all his arts endeavors
to make men guilty of, that so they may be as miserable as himself; is in it
self so full of deformity and ugliness, as that if it were but seen in its
true shape, there could not be a more effectual argument to keep men from the
commission of it then its own monstrosity. There are three things say the
School that cannot be defined, Dei formositas, materiae primae informitas, and
peccati deformitas: The Amiablenesse and beauty of God, the informity of the
first matter, and the deformity of sin. Now to hide and cover this misshapen
monster Satan uses not a few devices: Sometimes he makes it to appear in the
habit and likeness of a virtue, and thus he tempts men to covetousness under
the notion of frugality; to riot and prodigality under the color of
liberality. Sometimes he varnisheth it with the specious shows of profit, and
gain, and promises large rewards to them that will but comply with his
suggestions and counsels. And this is one of the most subtle artifices that he
uses to withdraw a man from any good, to entice and win him to any sin. Thus
he tempted Balaam to venture upon the cursing of Gods people by the promise of
honor and preferment, Micha's Levite with a small augmentation of his stipend
promised unto him, he tempted both to theft and idolatry; Judas upon the
promise of thirty pieces of silver, which the instruments of the devil make
unto him, he tempts to sell the life and blood of his blessed Master, yea, by a
frank and large promise of all the kingdoms of the world; he tempts our Lord
and Savior to the highest act of idolatry that is imaginable, to fall down and
worship him: not despairing by the greatness of the offer to hide the
foulness of the sin, though it be with scorn and indignation rejected by
Christ, Mat. 4. 10. Because therefore that the most of men are ready to be
deceived by the speciousnesse of the devils promises, and to give more heed to
what he speaks, then to the good Word of God. I shall in four particulars set
forth the difference between the promises of God, and the promises of Satan.

The first is the difference between the persons that make them. Promises are
like bonds which depend altogether upon the sufficiency of the surety. If a
beggar seal to an instrument for the payment of ten thousand pounds, who
esteems it to be any better then a blank? But if a man of estate and ability do
bind himself to pay such a sum, it is looked upon as so much real estate, and
men dovalue themselves by such bills and bonds as well as by what is in their
own possession. God who has made rich promises to believers, is able to
perform what he has spoken. He is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. Abundant in
goodness and truth, Exodus 34. 6. He is the God of truth, Psalm. 31. 5. The
Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1. 3. But the devil is a Beggar, an outcast, one that
has nothing in possession, nothing in disposition. He is a liar, and the
father of it, John 8. 44. A deceiver, Revel. 12. 9. A murderer from the
beginning, who killed not one, but all in one, Joh. 8. 44. How then can his
promises be a foundation of support to any, that have no other word to build
upon but his? He has never kept his promise, and God has never broke his
promise. There has not failed one word of all his good promise, which he
promised by the hand of Moses his servant, 1 Kings 56.

A second difference is in the matter of the promises. Let us weigh the
promises of the one and of the other in the balance of truth, and we shall
find that the promises of God are gold, and the promises of the devil are
Alchimy, such which though they glitter much, have no worth or excellency in
them. Or, that they are, as Aristotle calls the Rainbowe, (...), an appearance
only, and not like the cloud, which he styled (...), a true and real substance.
God's, are substantial realities, and his, vanishing and fleeting shadows windy
and swollen bladders, which but a little pricked, do quickly fall and grow lank.
Stobaeus out of Herodotus tells a story of one Archetimus, who had deposited
moneys in the hand of Cydias his friend, who afterward requiring them again of
him; he denied the receiving any. And being thereupon cited before the Judges,
for want of other proof, it was resolved that the matter should be determined
by a solemn oath: A day for which being appointed, Cydias faining illness,
provides him an hallow staff, into which he put the gold, and while he went to
the Altar to swear, he gave his staff into the hand of Archetimus to hold;
and then swore that he had received moneys of him, but he had returned them
again, Archetimus being much incensed both by his impudence and his own loss,
flings down the staff with such violence upon the ground, that it brake into
pieces, and the money in it scattered abroad, whereby Cydias his fraud was
fully detected. And this the Historian calls (...), A lie made up of art and
subtilty, such are all Satan's promises, they are nothing but well tempered and
fine spun lies, gilded impostures, cheats framed on purpose to deceive: The
matter of them is false, as well as the end of them is deceitful.

A third difference is in the ground of the promises. Gods promises do arise
from his love and good will to those to whom they are made, and are the
powerful motives by which he winnes and draws men to the obedience of himself:
But Satan's promises do flow from his irreconcilable hatred of God, and his
envying of man's happiness which God by Christ has freely estated upon him: He
cannot bear that God should have any to worship him, or to love him, and
therefore he uses all ways that malice and envy can prompt unto him to draw
and entice men from him. As God uses his promises to oblige and tie men to
himself as by so many strong cords and bands of love: So Satan on the contrary
makes use of his promises to alienate men's hearts and affections from God, and
to bring them into bondage to himself: His great end by all these specious
artifices of promising honor, riches, pleasure, or whatsoever may be a bait to
carnal hearts, is at once to deprive God of his glory, and man of his
happiness. His promises are as the meat which fowlers set before birds, which
is not to feed them, but to take them.

A fourth difference is in the accomplishment, Gods promises are always like
unto a rich and seasonable harvest, which fully answers the hopes and
expectation of the husbandman: they who wait upon him have never their faces
covered with shame, nor their hearts dejected with disappointments. He is as
Bernard expresses it, Verax in promissione, potens in exhibitione: Faithful in
promising, powerful in performing. God who cannot lie has promised, Tit. 1. 2.
But as God is always righteous in keeping his word; so Satan is always false
in breaking his word: If he promise bread, he gives a stone; if fish, a
serpent; if riches, poverty. Remigius who was a Judge in Florence, and had many
witches under his examination, reports that diverse of them have confessed that
the seeming gold and money which they received of him, when it came to be used,
proved either leaves or sand; not above the value of three stivers, was ever
found to be current money; And indeed how can it otherwise be expected? When
such is his hatred unto all man kind, as that he continually seeks their
ruin, and not their welfare? Can any man rationally conceive that he should
deal better with him, then with our first Parents? In propounding the
temptation he makes a show of friendship; but in the close he proves a bloody
liar. What other thing did they behold by his opening of their eyes, but their
own shame, and folly in hearkening unto his deceitful words? What other
knowledge did they gain; but only the sad experience of the transitorinesse of
sinful pleasures, which vanish as soon as they are tasted, and prove to be not
food, but poison.

Seeing then that in all these respects there is so wide a difference between
Gods promises, and the Devils: Oh! then how inexcusable is their sin who by the
enchantments and effascinations of Satan are drawn aside to give more credit
unto his bare word, then to the promises of God that are ratified with his
oath, and Christ's blood. What higher contumely and scorn can any put upon God,
then by their unbelief to make him a liar; and that in such a manner, as to
have more regard to what Satan the father of lies speaks, then to what God who
is the Father of mercies swears? And yet in this kind God suffers dishonor
from more then a few. How great is the number of those who upon the appearance
of the least difficulty are apt to be jealous of his faithfulness, and through
distrust to wave the waiting upon him in his promise, for the obtaining of some
particular blessing, and betake themselves unto such ways as Satan secretly
suggests to them, to be both more compendious, and certain? And what is this
less then to be interpretatively guilty, if not formally of so foul a sin, as
the making of the most holy and righteous God a liar? Let me therefore in a few
words prevail with all those that profess to the world to have their
dependence upon God, and to derive their comforts from his promises, to be
circumspect how they comply with any way or means for the effecting of their
desires, that may be dishonorable to God and to those most sure promises which
he has made of giving them whatsoever they ask of him according to his will.
To speak well (says Isiodorus Pelutiota) is to sound like a Cymbal; but to do
well is to act like an Angel. It is not a believers work only to speak well of
the promises, but to act faith in them; and when through diffidence he steps
aside into any unwarrantable path, he then gives occasion unto worldly and
carnal men to think and speak as slightly of Gods promises, as he at other
times has spoken unto the world of the deceitfulness and inconstancy of the
promises of Satan.

CHAP. XIX. The worst estate of a believer is better then the best estate of
unbelievers.
A Third application may be this: If the promises which are by Christ are so
exceeding great and precious: Then the lowest estate that can be fall a believer
who has an interest and right unto them, is far better then the highest and
most glorious condition of any person, that can lay no claim or title to them.
So that Luther might well say, he had rather be Christianus rusticus quam
Alexander ethnicus: a poor Rustic, and a Christian, then to be great
Alexander, and an heathen. This corollary though it be a truth which all
contradiction can no more shake, then the violence of tempestuous waves can
stir the rocks against which they dash and break; yet it has so much of a
Paradox in it, that from the most part of men it may find no better
entertainment then Paul's doctrine of the resurrection did at Athens, where he
has no better title given to him by the grand Sophies of the Epicureans and
Stoics, then (...), a sower of words, a babbler, Act. 17. 18. Would it not seem
a strange opinion, if one should assert that he who lackies it before the
chariot is a better man then he that rides in it; that he who lives in a
Wilderness meanly clad and faring hardly, is more happy then they that are in
Kings houses, and wear soft raiment; that he who is poor and is bid to sit at
the footstool, is more worthy then he that has the chiefest place given unto
him in the Assembly? And can it sound less strange in the ears of the world
that the most despicable condition of a believer is far above the happiness of
him that has all the honors and delights that the earth can yield flowing in
upon him, and meeting in him, as so many lines in one point? I shall therefore
endeavor to clear the truth of this inference so fully, as that it may serve
to support and comfort afflicted Christians under all their pressures so as not
to complain, because they are in their extremities more happy then the best
worlding in his delights. And that it may likewise provoke those who have made
it their design to be rather great then good, to bethink themselves of their
folly, and to acknowledge that there is no tenure like an interest in the
Covenant and promises, and that there is no happiness like to the happiness
of a believer, which has its foundation laid in grace, and not in greatness.
To this end let us in a few particulars compare, or weigh as in a balance, the
worst of a believers estate with the best of a worldly, but yet a wicked man's
estate, and we shall quickly see that the advantage will lie on that part of
the skale in which the believer stands, and not on the other.

SECT. 1.
First, a believer happily is in the world in no better condition then a stranger
that has little or no interest in its enfranchisements, privileges and
immunities which others daily find the sweet of, in the many benefits that
they enjoy: He is frowned upon when others are courted and smiled upon by those
that have honour*s and preferments in their power to bestow. He lives like
Israel in Egypt, under hard pressures, when others rule and reign as Lords. He
is friendlesse, and finds none either to pity his wrongs, or to do him the
least right. To his words, to his sighs he finds a deaf and regardlesse ear
continually turned, when others have the Law open, where they may implead their
adversaries, and have friends that are willing to countenance them, and ready
to help them. Can he then that wants all these things, be more happy then he
who enjoyes them? Yes, for though a believer be a stranger here below* yet he
is a Citizen of the new Jerusalem which is above, to which every worldly man is
a forreigner, Ephesians. 2. 12. And from thence, he that bends his brow upon the
wicked beholds him with love, Ps. 11. 7. Though he be the worlds bondman, yet
he is the Lords freeman, 1 Cor. 7. 22. Though here he be friendlesse, yet what
near and familiar relations have the whole blessed Trinity been pleased to take
upon them, and to make known themselves by unto him? God as a Father, Christ as
a Brother, and the holy Spirit as a Comforter; All whom the men of the world
can call by no such titles. Though here his supplications and his tears avail
not; yet in heaven his prayers are registered, and his tears are botled.

SECT. 2.
Secondly, a Believer, as he is a stranger, so also may he be afflicted with
want, having little or nothing in possession to relieve his necessities. He may
want clothing for his back, and food for his belly. He may have only torum
itr amineum, and cibos graminoes, straw for his bed, grass and herbs for his
meat when others sleep upon soft down, and ^are doliciously every day. He happily
has scarce water to quench his thirst, when others have variety of choice
wines to please and delight their palates. All this and much more is
acknowledged to be the lot and portion of many Christians, such of whom the
world is not worthy. But yet let us view their condition, so as to compare it
with the men of the world, whose bellies are filled with hid treasure, and we
shall quickly see that a true judgment and estimate being made of both; that
the thorns of the one will smell sweeter, then the roses of the other: his
necessities will be more desirable, then their fullness, because wants
sanctified are better then unsanctified enjoyments. All their morsels are
rolled up in the filth of their sin, and in the bitterness of Gods
malediction: and all his wants are both sweetened and supplied with the
comforts of Gods promises. Though he has nothing for the present, yet he is
rich in hopes. Though he have nothing in possession, yet he has an
inheritance, a Kingdom, a Crown in reversion. They have all their good things
in this life, and he has his reserved for the other. Though he have no food
for his body, yet he has Manna for his soul. He has an hungry body, and they
a starved soul. Though he have here scarce a place to lay his head on, yet is
there room reserved for him in Abraham's bosom, where he shall for ever dwell
in joy, when others lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50. 10. Though his body be as a
parched wilderness for thirst, yet his soul is as a watered garden, Out of his
belly flow rivers of living water, John. 7. 38. We may truly say of a believer
what Paul speaks of himself; though he was poor, yet he had enough to make many
rich; though he had nothing, yet he possessed all things. Fideli homini totus
mundus divitiarum est, infideli autem nec obolus: To a Christian all the world
is his riches, to an unbeliever not a doit of it, says Prosper. There is no
creature which does not owe an homage unto him, and shall certainly pay it, if
his necessities do require it. The heavens shall hear the earth, and the earth
shall hear the corn and the wine and the oil in answer to Jezreel' s prayers,
Hos. 2. 21, 22. What is at further distance then the heavens, and so more
unlikely to hear then heavens? What creature more dull then earth, and so more
unmeet to be affected and moved with a cry? And yet both the heavens and the
earth shall not be deaf to Jezreel's prayers, but shall fulfill their desires,
and supply their wants.

SECT. 3.
Thirdly, a believer is not only exercised with the pressing evils of want and
poverty; but he oftentimes lies under the sore burden of reproach and
obloquie, which to an ingenuous spirit is more bitter then death itself. He is
the common mark to which all the sharp arrows of men's tongues are directed. He
is the only person that is taken up in the lips of talkers, and is the infamy
of the people, Ezekiel. 36. 3. When others are in their name as beautiful as
Absalom, who from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head, had no blemish
in him; he is as Job on the dunghill overspread with defamations that are as so
many putrid ulcers. When others are cried up as the glory of their times, he is
decried as the filth, and offscouring of the world, 1 Cor. 4. 13. When the
actions of others are blazoned as their virtues, his that are in themselves
commendable are censured as full of pride, hypocrisy, affectation and
singularity. Where is then the blessedness of his condition that you spoke of?
How can his estate that is overcast with a more pitchy darkness then that of
the night, be better then the best of theirs that has not the least shadow of
any such evil stretching out it self upon it? True it is that none are more
evil spoken of, and blasted in their names then believers; but the ground of it
springs not from their just deservings; but from the worlds malice and enmity
to God, which is derived to them for his sake. Let Nehemiah and the Jews set
upon the rebuilding of the Temple, and the repairing of the waste place of
Jerusalem, and Sanbullat upbraids them with intentions of rebellion, Neh. 6. 6.
Let Paul make known the Gospel of Christ, and the Jews that believe not, cry
out, that he is one of them that turn the world upside-down, Act. 17. 6. Let
the primitive Christians that cannot safely meet in the day, take the
opportunity of the night to worship God, and the Heathens asperse their
Assemblies to be full of uncleanness and cruelty, and that they have suppers
not much unlike that of Thiestes, as Tertullian shows in his Apology. Now in
these sufferings for God, there are such promises from God made and fulfilled
to them, as that there is more sweetness to be found in the reproaches that
they undergo for him from the world, then there can be contentment in its
smiles or favor. And therefore Moses chose rather to suffer reproaches with
Israel then to enjoy treasures in Egypt, Heb. 11. 26. The contumelies and
slanders which they undergo on Christ's behalf, serve both to make the present
comforts more sweet, and their reward hereafter more glorious. Blessed are ye
(says our Savior) when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall
speak all manner of evil against you falsely for my Names sake. Rejoice, and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, Mat. 10. 11.

And now speak, O ye worldlings, that judge happiness by as false a rule, as
they do that measure their height by their shadow. Who is in a true estimate
the better man, Elijah that runs before the chariot, or Ahab that sits in it?
John the Baptist that is clothed with camels hair, or Herod and his Courtiers
that are arrayed with robes and costly garments? the poor whom God has chosen
to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom, James 2. 5. or the man that has
the gold ring, and has the chief place in Assemblies given unto him? Which
condition is now more desirable, to be a stranger to the world, and to be the
Lords freeman* or to be an Alien to God, and the Covenant of promise, and to be
a Denizon only of the world? To be rich to God, and poor to men, or to be rich
to men, and poor to God. To be the favorite of heaven, and to be contemned on
earth, or to be the darling of earth, and the enemy of heaven? O therefore
learn to judge of happiness not by the light of sense, but by the lamp of the
Sanctuary: and in time bethink your selves, that nothing can be a foundation of
happiness unto you, that has not its stability from the promise of God.

CHAP. XX. Grounds of thankfulness for precious promises.
A Fourth application is to exhort believers that are made partakers of such
great and precious promises, to abound in all thankfulness to God and Christ,
who are the sole fountain from whence these streams of living waters do flow.
When old Isaac had eaten of his sons venison, he blessed him that had
prepared it for him: how much more should they that have tasted how good God
is, have their mouths filled with the blessing and praising of his Name, that
has poured forth his love and mercy in such rich promises, as are to the soul
more sweet then marrow and fatness? To this duty holy David does quicken and
stir up himself, Psalm. 103. when he summons all the faculties of his soul to
praise the Lord; Let all that is within me bless his holy Name, Verse. 1. And
that he may make the deeper impressions of Gods goodness upon his own heart,
he frames a short, but yet a pithy compendium of his love toward him, in his
pardoning and healing grace, Verse. 3. He forgiveth all thine iniquities, and
heals all thy diseases. In his redeeming and saving grace, Verse. 4. He
redeemeth thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with loving kindness,
and tender mercies. In his supporting and renewing mercies, Verse. 5. He
satisfies thy mouth with good things: thy youth is renewed as the eagles. And
of all these blessings are believers made partakers in the promises; it
therefore becomes them to pay unto God a tribute of thankfulness, and that
upon these grounds.

First, the end of Gods goodness to his creatures is his glory, and that which
he chiefly delights in. Trumpeters love to sound where there is an echo; and
God loves to bestow his mercies where he may hear of them again. For man to
make the end of his actions in any kind to be his own praise, does not only
taint and flie-blow his services with hypocrisy, and pride, so as to mar the
beauty of them, but also transformes them into vices that are hateful unto God
and man: For it is not meet that he who derives his being from another, should
have his actions to terminate in himself. He that gives the being, gives also
the rule and end of its working, by both which the goodness of its actions are
denominated. The rule of its working is the law and will of him who gave it a
being, and the end of all its actions is his glory. But God who is the fountain
of his own being, can have in all his works no other end then his own praise
and glory. This is his end in all his works of creation, Prove. 16. 4. The Lord
made all things for himself. And this is the great end of all his works of
grace in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 6. That we should be to the praise of the glory of
his grace. All the eternal purposes of God concerning man's salvation from the
first to the last, do ultimately resolve themselves into his glory.

Secondly, to give unto God praise, and thankful acknowledgements for his great
and precious promises, is all the return that we can make. David as a man truly
sensible of his many, and deep obligations unto God, has a great consultation
with himself, which way he should express his thankfulness unto him; What
shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? Psalm. 116. 12.
But after all musings and studyings with himself he can find no other way but
this: I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord,
Verse. 13. An Eucharistical sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving is all that
David, though a King, can find to give unto God: And this kind of payment the
poor may make as well as the rich, the young as well as the old. The children
in the Gospel can cry Hosanna, and say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name
of the Lord, Mat. 21. 15. as well as others. It is a good observation of
Nazianzen, that God has equalized all men in that ability which most
recommends or discommends them unto him, and that is the ability of the will,
to love him and to give him praise. This is that which all may do who have
tasted how good God is, and this is all that the best can do, who have been
most filled with the riches of his mercy. Seeing therefore that a thankful
recognition of Gods love and bounty in his promises, is the only recompense
that we can make; it is most meet that we should abound in it, and make it not
only the duty of our lips, but of our hearts, breathing forth our very souls in
the continual praises of him, who has manifested the gracious purposes of his
heart unto us in many rich promises of life and salvation. More then this, God
in his mercy does not desire: and less then this in all reason we cannot give.

Thirdly, the giving of God praise and glory in endless songs of thanksgiving,
is the only work of the Saints in heaven; when fully made partakers of all the
blessings that the promises do hold forth* It is now the continual blessed
exercise of all the inhabitants of those everlasting Mansions in the highest
heavens; and it shall be ours, when we shall be translated thither, and have
our faith turned into vision, and our hope into enjoyment. Requisite therefore
it is that what we know must be our eternal exercise in heaven, to make that
our frequent practice on earth. Those persons that intend to travel into remote
and foreign countries with an advantage unto themselves, do beforehand
acquaint themselves with the customs, manners, and fashions of the place to
which they go, and from others whose experience may give the best light, do
inquire what is the ingenie and disposition of the natives, that so they may
the better comply with their forms and civilities, yea, they endeavor to get
some smattering of the language, that they may not be altogether strangers to
what is done and spoken there: So should Christians, who expect to dwell with
the Lord for ever, with all diligence inure themselves to the work and services
of that innumerable company of Angels, and spirits of just men made perfect,
and to get some rudiments of their heavenly language while they are below; that
so they may the better bear a part in that celestial quire, singing with a loud
voice, Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and
power, and might be unto our God for ever and ever, Rev. 7. 12.

Now that this duty of thankfulness may run in a right channel, I shall in
some few particulars show how it may, and ought to be expressed.

First, let thankfulness appear in the fulfilling of that exhortation of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
The promises as they are causes working holiness, so also are they Arguments
inciting to it, being for the most part propounded as rewards unto the
obedience of faith, which is a purifying and cleansing grace, Acts 15. 9. In
what more genuine fruits therefore can thankfulness manifest it self, then in
holiness? Or how can a believer better evidence his high esteem of the
promises, then by his continual pressing forward to the perfection of sanctity?
Now as Aristotle tells us in the first book of his Rhetoricks, that there are
two ways by which men grow rich; either (...), by adding to their present
store; or else (...) (...), by substracting and taking away from their
expenses. So also holiness is perfected by a double means, either by the
addition of one grace unto another, which is the duty that Saint Peter calls
for, 2 Pet. 1. 5. Add to your faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to
knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience,
godliness, etc. Or else by not making provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof, which is the counsel that Saint Paul gives to believers, Romans
13. 14. And he that does not both these ways endeavor the increase of
holiness, starving the boundless desires of the flesh, and strengthening the
graces of the Spirit by renewing acts of godliness, can never be rich either in
grace or comfort.

Secondly, let thankfulness for the promises be expressed, in proclaiming that
mercy, salvation and assured peace which you have received from them. If so be
you have tasted that God is good, do as the birds, which when they come to a
full heap chirp, and invite their fellows. Tell the hungry soul what satisfying
and blessed food the promises are: the dejected, what reviving cordials: the
poor, what enduring riches: the broken, and wounded, what healing balsoms they
are; that so they may be encouraged to take hold of these promises by an hand
of faith. Criples that return with health from the Bathe, hang up their
crutches on the trees, and their rags on the hedges that are near, that thereby
they may win credit and esteem to the waters. And so to honor the Wells of
salvation should Christians make known the great things that God has done for
them, and leave in every place where they come some testimony of their
thankfulness, and Gods goodness. Come (says David) all ye that fear the
Lord, and I will tell you what he has done for my soul, Psalm. 66. 16. He does
not call them (as Austin observes) to acquaint them with speculations how wide
the earth is, how far the heavens are stretched out, what the number of the
stars is, or what is the course of the Sun; but come and I will tell you
the wonders of his grace, the faithfulness of his promises, the riches of his
mercy to my soul. Oh! that Believers would be persuaded to declare thus the
experiences that they have any time had of Gods truth and power in his Word,
and in a way of gratitude to communicate them unto others. How instrumental
might they thereby become in the comforting and establishing of others?
Experiences are like milk in the breast of the Nurse, that has received a
concoction, and is thereby made a more facil and pure nourishment to the child
that partakes of it.

Thirdly, let thankfulness for the precious promises be expressed, in a most
affectionate blessing of God, for the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all that is
wrapped up in them is given unto us. He is the first matter as it were, out of
which God has framed all our good. He is the receptacle in which all blessings
are laid up, and the Wellhead from whence they all flow. By his blood the
promises are purchased for us, and by his most powerful intercession they are
made good unto us. Alas! how little efficacy would all our prayers have, if
they were not presented to God the Father by his hand? How small acceptance
would our persons find, if God did not look upon us in him? How uncertain
would all our comforts be, if the root of them were not in him, if he were not
as the tree of life upon which they grow? Yea, how quickly should we spy an
hell that might amaze us, between heaven, and any other ground of confidence
that could possibly be imagined by us out of Christ* When therefore we do at
any time make a thankful recognition of Gods goodness to us in the particular
mercies of the promises of the Gospel, let us be sure to put the Name of Christ
to all: When we bless God for blotting out our iniquities, for pardoning
freely all our sins, let us set this crown upon the head of the mercy, that he
has done it in Christ. When we bless him for sanctifying of us, let us ever
add for his sanctifying us in Christ. When we praise him for our Adoption and
Sonship, let us bless him for doing of it in Christ. When we honor him for
the assured hopes of life and glory in heaven, let us say as the Apostle does,
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3.

Fourthly, Let thankfulness for the promises appear in strong desires, and
vehement pantings after the plenary possession, and perfect enjoyment of all
that felicity, of which they are the earnests and pledges given us by God. In
this life we are but as Kings in the Cradle, the setting of the crown upon our
heads is reserved till we come to heaven. Here we are but as espoused persons,
and not as the Bride in her best clothes; in the other life we put on the robes
of glory, which shall make our bodies shine ten thousand times brighter then
the Sun, and our souls ten thousand times brighter then our bodies. Here we are
but as invited guests to the feast, and supper of the great King; we sit not
down at his table till we come to heaven, and then Christ bids us eat, O
friends, and drink abundantly O beloved. While therefore we are absent from the
Lord, and do by the eye of faith only peep into the things that are within the
veil, and enjoy a few foretasts of glory and immortality; we should show how
highly we prize the promises, by longing after, and wishing for the final
accomplishment of all. Oh! when will it be that I shall see him in whose blood
I was washed, by whose stripes I was healed, by whose Spirit I was sanctified,
by whose merits such great things are prepared for me? How long, Lord, holy and
true, will it be ere death shall be swallowed up in victory, and mortality put
on immortality? Thus Bernard upon those words of our Savior (John 16. 16. A
little while and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while and ye shall
see me,) passionately expresses himself, Pie Domine, modicum illud vocas in
quo te non videam? O modicum, modicum longum! Good Lord, do thou call that a
little while, in which I shall not see thee? O long, long little! Such desires
as these are true evidences of a thankful heart.

CHAP. XXI. Motives to act fath in the Promises.
THE fifth and last application is, to stir up Believers to act precious faith
(as the Apostle calls it, 2 Pet. 1. 1.) upon the precious promises: without
which, what are the promises in the Word, but as sugar in the wine, that lying
unstired, does not sweeten; but as full breasts undrawn, that do not nourish;
but as beds of spices, that being unblown upon, do not lend forth their
fragrant and delightful odours? It is the exercise and skill of faith that
fetches out the virtue and sweetness which lies h^d in them* as it is the
industry of the Be that extracts the honey from the flowers. The Be would
starve notwithstanding all the flowery meadows, if it did not labor: and so
would a Christian languish and pine away notwithstanding all the precious
promises, if faith should be idle and unactive. O then that I might prevail
with Believers to cast aside every weight that hinders, and to set on work
this noble and divine grace of faith, whose glory and worth is not to be seen
in the habit; but in the acts of it. What does Samson differ from another man
while he sleeps in the lap of Dalilah? But when he awakes out of his sleep, and
breaks the withs and cords that bound him, as a thread of towe when it touches
the fire, and carries away the beam and the web in which his locks are
fastened; then his strength appears in its greatness to be matchless. And so
in what is a Believer distinguished from another man, while the habit of faith
lies asleep in his bosom, and is not actuated on the promises? But when it
stirs, and rouseth up it self to take hold of God and Christ in his Word, how
apparent is the strength of the one, and the weakness of the other made to
every eye? What burdens does the one stand under and carry away upon his
shoulders under which the other sinks? what temptations does the one overcome,
unto which the other without resistance yields? What viper does the one shake
off his hand into the fire without the least hurt, which fasten upon the other,
and sting him unto death? It is faith which makes us to rejoice in
tribulations, Romans 5. 3. It is faith which makes us to possess our souls in
patience infiery trials, Heb. 10. 36. It is faith which makes us resolute in
desertions, Jonah 2. 4. It is faith which makes every condition of life
comfortable, Hab. 2. 4.

But that I may yet more fully prosecute this exhortation which hitherto is as
a vessel upon the wheel of the Potter that has not received it perfect shape:
I shall propound some particular arguments and considerations that may animat
Believers to live the life of faith, which stands chiefly in two things. First,
in a knowledge of, and a familiar acquaintance with the Word, so as to have it
in readiness for direction. Secondly, in a right improvement and exercise of
faith on the Word and promises of God. For as faith is truly the life and guide
of the soul; so the Word is the ground, life and guide of our faith. Now the
Arguments that I shall set down, are briefly three.

First, The life of faith is that life which above all others, God would have
Believers to live: And this appears by the distance that God has put between
his promises and his performances, making their whole life to be rather a life
of hopes, then of enjoyments, and the good things that he gives to relate more
to the future, then to the present time. God was graciously pleased to open a
door of hope to fallen man in that first Gospel-promise which he himself
proclaimed, Genesis 3. 15. that the seed of the woman should break the Serpents
head. But how many generations passed away, before the fullness of time came,
in which he sent forth his Son made of a woman? He has promised to Believers
that they shall tread down the wicked, and that they shall be ashes under the
soles of their feet. Mal. 4. 3. But yet he has made their warfare to be as
long as their life. He has promised a glorious resurrection of their bodies
out of the grave: And yet for how many thousand years have his Saints lain
dissolved in their dust, as if they did seem to be altogether forgotten by
him? Now to what end has God set such long periods of time between the making
and the accomplishing of his promises? but only that he would have the heirs of
them to live by faith, yea, and to die in faith by resting on the truth of his
Word for the fulfilling of every mercy which he has undertaken for in his
promises. And indeed this glory which Believers give to God in the exercise of
their faith upon his Word, is far greater, and more noble then all that glory
which the whole universe of creatures do yield unto him. They give him the
glory of his goodness in their being, and in the comforts of it derived unto
them by him. But who gives him the glory of his faithfulness in his promises
but a Believer? Who is it that rejoices in hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.
2. but a Believer? Who glories in tribulations but a Believer? Who is it that
lets not his confidence die when his life expires, but a Believer? My flesh and
my heart fails, (says David) but God is the rock of my heart and my portion
for ever, Psalm. 73. 26.

Secondly, The life of faith is of all estates the most contented, and of all
lives the fullest of real sweetness and delight.

First, It is the most contented life* True contentment is the inseparable
companion of true faith, 1 Timothy 6. 6. A Believer is the only person that is
instructed in this sacred mystery, Phil. 4. 13. The things that others want, he
desires not: Riches which others covet with the straining of their consciences,
he throws away as snares: Pleasures which others drink down with a thirst
unsatisfied, he out of choice sparingly sips of, or else refuses so much as to
taste: Honors that others value themselves by, he looks upon as fancies, and
not realities. As Plato told the Musicians, that a Philosopher could dine and
eat his meat without them: So a Believer can live happily without the having
of any of these things. And the ground of all this is, because by faith he
lives above them, and enjoyes more high and noble delights in the very
expectation and hope of that blessedness which God has promised, then any
other can have from the fruition of an earthly Paradise, or of the whole world
it self, if turned and changed into an Eden.

Secondly, Of all lives, the life of faith is the sweetest. The delicacies that
faith feeds upon does not arise from any stagnant and impure pits or cisterns,
but from the fountain and well of life: It sucks the breasts of consolation,
Isay 66. 11. It lives upon the free favor of God, which is better then life it
self, Psalm. 63. 3. It has Christ himself for nutriment, whose flesh is meat
indeed, whose blood is drink indeed, John 6. 55. All which are food the world
knows not of: it never understood their preciousnesse, or tasted their
sweetness. There is a greater difference between the repasts of faith, and the
refreshments of the world, then there is between the Physic of the Galenists
and Paracelsians, the one giving it in the drug, and the other (as they boast)
in the quintessence, and spirits extracted from that phlegm and earthymatter
that deads and allaies their efficacy. All the comforts of faith have in them a
native purity and spiritualnesse, and need not the help of Artists to refine
them: Such they are, as that Angels themselves have neither better nor higher
to live upon. How injurious then are Believers to their own happiness, while
they neglect the living by faith, and gaze rather upon these dainties with
their eyes, then feed upon them with their mouths? How greatly do they live
below themselves, while they take up with the things of this world, and put not
forth this divine grace of faith, which can fetch every good thing out of
heaven? What dishonor do they cast on the precious promises while like the
lustful Israelites, they slight this Manna of the Gospel as dry food? O
therefore if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any excellency in the promises; be persuaded you
that are the beloved ones of God, to live the life of faith, and to exercise it
in an improvement of the promises, the use of which makes you more rich and
blessed then the having of them.

Thirdly, to move Believers to act faith upon the promises, I shall add this
Argument; that their labor and expectation will not be in vain. Faith in the
promise is like the bow of Jonathan, and the sword of Saul, which never
returned empty, 2 Samuel 1. 22. It always finds what it seeks, and enjoyes what
it desires. He that believes shall never be confounded, 1 Pet. 2. 6. that is,
he shall not be disappointed, or broken in his purposes or hopes. If the
promise be not good security to rest and build upon, What is? What bond can be
so firm as his Word, who cannot lie? Tit. 1. 9. What pledge can be more
certain, then the earnest of the Spirit, by which the inheritance of Believers
is sealed unto them? Ephesians. 1. 14. If these foundations fail, then we may well
say with the Prophet, What can the righteous do? But sooner shall the rocks be
broken into bits, and thrown as pibbles, and cockle-shels upon the shore by the
violence of the waves; sooner shall the mountains that God has set fast by his
strength, Psalm. 65. 6. be over-turned by the breath of tempestuous winds, then
the promises which are founded upon the immutable power of God, and the
never-failing goodness of Christ, be in the least iota made void, and of no
effect. For besides the infallibility of Gods Word which may abundantly
confirm unto Believers the truth of the promises, the goodness also and mercy
of Christ, are as another sacred anchor for their faith and confidence to rest
upon* if in relation to the promises, it be seriously thought on in two
particulars.

First, That the promises are the real purchase of the precious blood of
Christ, and must therefore be certainly made good, or else he must be a loser
in all his sufferings. If he like Jonathan, 1 Samuel 18. 4. should strip himself
not only of his robes, but of his life, that he might express his love to
distressed and undone persons, with whom God is angry and displeased, and yet
they receive no advantage or fruit by it; would not all these condescensions of
goodness and mercy be in vain? If he should drink of that brook and torrent of
curses that was in the way between salvation and sinners, and yet the passage
to the heavenly Canaan be no more open then it was before, should not Christ be
a greater loser then sinners themselves? They it is true, lose their souls,
each of which are of more value then so many worlds; but Christ must lose the
revenue of his glory, which is far more precious then the souls of all the
men in the world. How would sin exult and triumph, if it should ever be able
to say, there was a pardon covenanted for to be given such a person, but I have
hindered the execution of it? How would Satan reproach the death of Christ, if
he could be able to say that he has destroyed one soul for whom Christ died?
Yea, how should Paul, or any other believer be able to throw forth their
gantlet, and to challenge all the enemies of salvation to do their worst, Romans
8. 31. if any of them could make a separation between the love of Christ and
them? How quickly would tribulation, persecution, famine, nakedness say, we
will make you miserable? How soon would perils, and the sword reply, we will
conquer you? How confidently would principalities and powers say, we will pluck
you out of Christ's hand? But for ever blessed be his Name, there are none among
the whole host of enemies that dare revile the confidence of a believer, or say
as that uncircumcised Philistine to David, 1 Samuel 17. 44. I will give thy flesh
to the fowls of the air, or to the beasts of the field. There are none that
dare presume to say, that they can make void the least mercy which the promise
does hold forth to be the gift of Christ's love, and the purchase of his blood.
Let therefore believers lift up the hands which hang down, and put forth the
strength of faith in renewed acts of confidence upon the promises, being fully
persuaded in themselves of this truth, that they can no more be disappointed of
their hopes, then Christ can be disappointed of his purchase.

Secondly, That the promises are the matter of the most prevailing intercession
of Christ, who now sits on the right hand of God in glory. When he was on
earth, he purchased by the price of his blood, all that mass of treasure, and
riches both of grace and glory that are inventoried in the promises, and by his
last Will and Testament on the cross bequeathed them to believers. But all
this which was transacted here below, was only (as Divines usually term it)
medium impetrationis, the means of procurement, or obtaining it for believers;
the medium applicationis, the means of applying all this unto them, are as his
resurrection, and intercession: his resurrection that declares his conquest
over death: his intercession that shows his favor and acceptance with God. And
they are both as necessary to make his satisfaction of force unto believers; as
the image or stamp of the Prince is, to make the coin current, though it
neither add weight or value to the substance. He (says the Apostle) being
made perfect, became the Author of eternal salvation unto all that obey him,
Heb. 5. 9. Now the intercession of Christ is set forth in Scripture with all
the advantages that may be, that thereby believers may be secured of their
interest and title to the things which he has purchased. We have a great high
Priest that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us
therefore hold fast our profession, Heb. 4. 14. First, He is a great high
Priest, greater then all that were before him, both in power and favor with
God. Secondly, He is passed into the heavens, a Sanctuary which no other Priest
could ever enter into, or sit down in, all their sacrifices being imperfect,
and therefore to be daily renewed by them. Thirdly. He is Jesus the Son of
God, more near in alliance unto him, then Angels or men, and therefore most
sure to prevail for the obtaining of whatever he asks or requires of him. When
he therefore who is the only Favorite of heaven is the Believers Advocate, and
does continually solicit God to fulfill his Covenant made with him, and his
peoples prayers made unto him; What ground can therebe for jealousies, and
distrust in a Believers heart? What rational impediment can there be imagined,
to hinder, or weaken the confidence of faith, which the intercession of Christ
does not fully remove and take away? Are your prayers tainted with the
corruption and infirmities of the flesh? he perfumes them with the sweet odours
of his intercession, Rev. 8. 3. Are your sins multiplied and renewed daily? So
are the intercessions of Christ: It is his only work in heaven, to intercede
for sinners, Heb. 7. 25. Are your persons vile, and such which you fear God
will not accept? Christ who is your high Priest, is holy, harmless, and
separate from sinners, Heb. 7. 26. He has in his person a fullness of all
perfections, which may assure every Believer, that the promises which he
pleads, that the requests which he makes to God in Christ's Name, shall not be
like arrows shot at the Sun, which never reach it, or come near to it; but
that they shall pierce the heavens, and be of such power and prevalency with
God, as that what they seek, he will grant, and the promises which they plead
in faith, he will perform and make good in truth. Wherefore let me again
commend unto Believers, the great duty of exercising faith on he promises of
Christ, which cannot but fill the heart with strong and inseparable
consolations, when by the eye of faith they are looked upon as those great
things, which are both the purchase of his most precious blood, and the matter
of his most powerful intercession.

And now as Mariners, who when they come nigh the port, roll up their sails
which were before spread, they being not useful in the harbor, that were
before most necessary on the sea: So must I, being arrived at that point which
was the utmost boundary of my thoughts and intentions, draw toward a
conclusion, and wind up this whole discourse concerning the excellency and the
use of the promises of the Gospel, which has hitherto been dilated and
insisted on in the several particulars. And yet methinks I had need to wish new
sides, new lungs, and an hour new turned up, that I might begin all again; or
else to sit down, and complain with the Prophet, Isay 49 4. I have labored in
vain, I have spent my strength for naught. O where are those affectionate
expressions, acclamations and rejoycings of heart, which I expected would have
echoed from every mouth, and have appeared in every face, that had heard and
been acquainted with such glad tidings of peace and mercy, as the promises do
declare, and testify from heaven toward sinners? I had thought, that some as
full of heavenly admiration would have stood like the Cherubims with bowed
heads, and faces looking toward the mercy-seat, as being desirous to pry and
search more into these divine mysteries, which are the delightful study of
Angels. That others like Peter in the mount of transfiguration, having had some
glimpses of the glory of heaven, would have cried out, It is good being here.
Or wish as David, Psalm. 27. 4. O that I might all the days of my life behold
the beauty of the Lord! I had thought, that others at the opening of these
Wells of salvation, and a free invitation to drink of these waters, which
whosoever drinks of, shall never thirst again, would like the woman of
Samaria, John 4. 15. have said, Lord, give me this water, that I thirst not,
neither come hither to draw: That others, at the gathering of this Manna which
has been plentifully rained down upon them, and gives life beyond death,
would with most sincere hearts have made that prayer, which the Jews did in
hypocrisy, John 6. 34. Lord, evermore give us this bread. But alas! Who has
believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Methinks
still men stand altogether unaffected, as if this day salvation had not been
brought, either to their houses, or to their hearts; as if nothing had been
spoken that concerned their everlasting happiness. They are like Paul's
auditory that heard him preach of the resurrection of Christ, Acts 17. Some
scorn, others doubt, and few believe. Brethren, from whence is it, (I beseech
you) that there is so little change and alteration made either in your
countenances or in your affections? Is it because I have showed you the glory,
and preciousnesse of the promises only through a crevice, which you would
willingly have beheld with open face? Alas! who is it that can see these things
in their luster and live? You can never understand their worth, till you come
to enjoy them in heaven. Or is it because this treasure is brought unto you in
an earthen vessel that you set so low a value upon it? God it is, who has so
ordered the dispensation, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and
not of us, 2 Cor. 4. 7. Or do you expect that I should heap up more arguments
that might farther commend the promises unto you? O how easily, as well as
gladly, could I undertake this task, if that I might be but sure to endeare
the promises to you thereby? Diodorus tells of a City in Sicilia that was
called Triocala, because it had springs of water of a superlative sweetness,
Vine-yards of the choysest wines, and rocks of most impregnable strength. But
how much more truly may the Promises of the Gospel be styled not Triocala, but
Pancala, which are not only as overflowing well-springs of living water, nor as
pleasant Vineyards that abound with wine that makes glad the heart, nor as
insuperable rocks against which the gates of hell are never able to prevail,
but are also a celestial Eden, in which (as Bernard pithily) there is totum
quod velis, and nihil quod nolis, every thing that you would desire, and
nothing that you would dislike. But I may not forget my self, and instead of
casting anchor in the haven, spread the canvase, and put forth to sea again. I
shall therefore cease from speaking to you, and shall turn all my
expostulations with you, into prayers to God for you: Beseeching him who in
Paul's planting, and Apollo's watering does alone give the increase; that he
would by the mighty working of his holy Spirit, make what has been spoken, to
be a word of effectual grace unto you that have heard it, that it may build you
up, and give you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified: And that he
would vouchsafe the same blessing to all those that by his providence may now
read, what others have heard: that so his Name to whom alone all is due, may
have the whole praise and the glory.

FINIS.
Books newly printed by Ralph Smith* Viz.
Mr. Dicksons Exposition on the whole Book of the Psalms in three Books.

The Christans Charter, showing the privilege of Believers in this life, and
in the life to come: by Mr. Watson, Minister of Stephen Walbroke; the third
Edition, much enlarged.

Also Mr. Watsons Art of Divine contentment; the second Edition.

Mr. Hutchinsons Exposition on the six small Prophets, viz. Obadiah, Jonah,
Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah. Second Edition Corrected.

Mr. Hutchinsons Exposition on ^he three last Prophets, viz, Haggai, Zechariah,
Malachi.

An Exposition on the whole Book of Ecclesiastes, by that late learned and
pious Divine, Mr. John Cotton, Pastor of Bostock in New England.


