Salus Populi, Desperately ill Of a languishing Consumption: THE CAUSES
DISCOVERED, THE CURE DISCOVRSED;

By THEOPHILUS P.

If this Counsel or this Work be of men, it will come to naught:

But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest happily ye be found even to
fight against God,

ACTS 5.38,39. VIRG. Jam nova Progenies Coelo dimititur --
Printed at LONDON, 1648.

A Jove Principium. England's Genius: TO THE English Army, and to all other
true hearted Englishmen, That desire and endevor the Recovery of SALVS POPVLI.
Good General, and honest Gentlemen, my Darlings;
SALUS POPULI through the redundant humors of injustice, superstition,
oppression and hypocrisy, has been long afflicted; and undertaken by skillful
Physicians (as they were voyced and professed themselves) to recover her; but
they to increase their own benefit finding her to be opulent) have neglected,
and retarded her cure, by which her distemper is increased and a dangerous and
extreme flux of blood added to her disease for which she declines them. You
about twelve months since gave her a gentle purge, which did only move the
Malignant humors, not carry them away, which increased her disease; you have
lately set forth some bills, that makes her hopeful; she is willing to be your
Patient, trusting, you will according to your engagement, only mind her
recovery; and not your own interests. Have a care of her, for she is precious
in the eyes of the Almighty. I have sent you by her poor servant Theophilus,
such Simples as grew in her own garden; they be no Drugs from Eutopia, or the
new Atlantis, they may be of use, as your judgment shall prepare them, and
proportion the Dose.

God give a blessing to your endevors.
SALVS POPVLI Desperately ill of a languishing CONSVMPTION, etc.
ENgland, that was lately the Glory of Nations, the Refuge of her Friends, and
Terror of her Enemies, how is she become the pity of such as affect her, the
scorn and prey of her Adversaries! thy self, through thy Natives Divisions,
giving Forraigners hope to attain that which they never durst have attempted,
had thou been in some measure united. But Time that periods all Governments,
is now determining of thine, by which this Political Estate flourished: It is
now corrupted, rotten, and wasted, that little or nothing remains of it, scarce
so much as was left of Jezabel, the hands and feet. It is like a sometime
glorious Palace, that for want of suitable Inhabitants, and due repairing,
through the injury of Time, and evil disposed people continuing of spoil and
waste upon it to enrich themselves, have brought it to desolation; so that the
heirs of it (Englishmen) cannot with security live in it; but a Rafter of
Peerage, a Beam of Presbytery, or a Pillar of Independency may chance to
cripple them, if not knock out their brains; it is so disjoynted and crazed by
the winds of Faction and Division, that it were an indiscretion to think of
repairing it; it would require so great pains and charge, and yet be neither
useful nor seemly: Therefore, lest a Tempest blow it down, let judicious
workmen orderly take it in pieces, to prevent danger and loss, and save such
materials as are solid and useful; and what among them is rotten and rubbish,
let them be for the fire or the Dunghill.

To begin at the top, as it now stands: Look upon the Lords House, or House of
Peers. I dispute not what they were in their first Institution, but survey them
as they are at present. Nobility was first dispensed for a reward of Virtue: Do
but consider how they are multiplied since King James his beginning; the Duke
of Buckingham, but a younger Brother of an indifferent Family, became Minion to
the Father and the Son; and what a crowd he brought into the House of Peers! as
the Earls of Anglesea, Denbigh, Middlesex, Manchester, Newport, Portland, etc.
But Ubi latet Virtus in these men's Ancestors or themselves; Or for what cause
they were raised, I at present examine not, but behold them as they act for
Salus Populi. The Commonwealth had better have given many millions, then have
had that small distance of place between the House of Peers and House of
Commons: For within these eight years, what with Conferences, Debates, Messages
and Messengers of their own, how little have they done, and how much and many
Businesses have they congested and heaped together? that had each individual
the integrity of Job, and wisdom of Solomon, they can hardly do us right. What
tugging, pulling, and drawing diverse ways, as each faction can make its
interest strong? whereas if Salus Populi is to be considered, why may not one
room hold them without such punctilioes of Honor? where it may come to a
present conclusion, whether it be good for the Commonwealth or not; where
Prince, Peers and Commons may all at one time agree. But if they shall insist
upon their Privilege Jure Haereditario, I cannot see but that Archbishops and
Bishops had as ample and ancient a prescription Jure Divino, to their almost
eradicated Hierarchy. And though old customs keep fast roots; yet when they
prove obnoxious to Salus Populi, then malus usus abolendus: Therefore let one
room contain you for your Debates and Results, and let none be admitted, but
such whose virtue shall give assured proof, that they are worthy of so high a
calling and so great a trust; and if they shall merit from the Commonwealth,
either for Council or Action, let them according to their desert have
compensation out of the public Treasury; so that their Posterity shall fare
the better for their Ancestors virtue: But their Issue which may prove
dissolute or worthless, ought to have no claim to their Fathers seat in
Counsel; for that in time will revive the old Corruption: Let their virtue only
give them admission; if they be of a generous spirit, it will stir up in them
a glorious emulation, to outgoe, at least to imitate their Progenitors worthy
undertakings. Thus shall Salus Populi be furnished with fitting Servants able
to discharge the Trust reposed in them.

The next piece that falls in course, that may be made to serve for use or
ornament, to raise this new Fabric upon the old foundation, (and are worthy of
reserving) are such members of the Commons, as have endeavored to cherish Salus
Populi; they have been nearest related to her, and by her have had her grand
Trust reposed in them; but how performed, and by whom obstructed, the world
takes too much notice of it. But how can it be otherwise? the course of
Elections duly considered, which have the tracts of tyranny that still remain
in them: for why should freeholders or corporations only have voices in the
choice? and not also the meanest he that lives, if endued with an understanding
to distinguish between good and evil. Is it just that any should be obedient to
that Law which he never assented to? Job left a doctrine to the contrary, Chap.
31. Verse. 13, 14, 15. The next inconvenience is, the disproportionable
distribution of Burgesses, as they at present stand. What though they plead
Antiquity for their Charters? Circumstance of time and place make great
differences and alterations; for that which is necessary at one time in a
place, may be destructive at another time in the same place; it is likely at the
first, when those grants to several Corporations were made, they were then
flourishing and populous, which now lie ruined and wasted; for instance,
Dunwich sometime the Regal Seat of the East Angles, now a poor
Sea-devoured-Towne, consisting of a few fishing Cottages; Rising in Norfolk
more inconsiderable then that; there are many scores of Corporations of the
like condition. Seges est ubi Troja fuit. Therefore Sublata causa tollitur
effectus, when they cease to be what they were in their first institution,
detur digniori. The last and greatest inconvenience is the manner and way of
Electing: Tumultuary Faction and Parties bandying against each other; what
canvasing, plodding, plotting, contriving, by friends, letters, bribings,
drinkings, feastings, are commonly used and employed to obtain a Burgeship! I
have been grieved to see it, and am ashamed to speak what strong desires,
labors, and pains have been taken (in my esteem) by the best of men to gain
such places. I hope it has been to keep out a worse, that has aspired to it,
and not to satisfy their own ambition. It Is an easy matter to find a fault,
but a most difficult and intricate business to redress a mischief,
especially of this superlative nature. Here I were at a ne plus ultra, had I
not a Divine hand to uphold me, and to light and lead me through this dark
Labyrinth; all what has preceded, is man's, and may be subject to error: but
what follows, is a rule from God, and ought to be obeyed by you; for it is a
Divine, positive, absolute Institute, given, continued, approved by God and his
Christ. Take it briefly, Make your Elections by Lots; this is the way that God
divided Lands by, by these he detected Achan the Malefactor, by these he
enthroned Saul, by these he discovered the delinquent Jonah, by these he puts
ends to controversies, by these he disposed of his Sons garments, by these
after his Sons Consummatum est, when his elected Vessels the Apostles and
Disciples (after his Ascension) had proceeded in their choice for a successor
to supply Judas his Apostleship as far as true zeal and humane prudence could
direct, two Competitors stood, the Lot fell to Mathias; I know nothing left
more plain and absolute unto us, and less taken up; yet S. Paul writes, these
things were left for our Examples. The Administration of the Sacraments de
modo, we are not agreed upon; some will have the one performed by dipping,
others by sprinkling: The other, taken as our Savior at Supper, others at
dinner; some sitting, others kneeling, a third standing; but this Rule is only
used in all difficulties, both before and since our Saviors Ascension, and
therefore affords no dispute against it. The not using of it, I fear, is the
maine cause of our punishment. S. James tells we ask, and receive not because we
ask amiss; we have missed the true way all this time, therefore have we been
thus betrayed in our Elections, by Apostates and Hypocrites; and until you
submit to this president which Almighty God left you, use and employ the utmost
circumspection and reason that you can, yet you shall entertain into your
Councels Judasses, Hypocrites, Atheists, Devils incarnate, that shall enter
among you in sheeps cloathings, but as Wolves they tear, rend and crush you
into pieces. This I am confident is agreeable to Gods Spirit, and will be
acceptable unto him, and he will pour forth his blessing accordingly. I
undertake not to direct; but what apprehensions it has pleased the Lord to
give me, that am the weakest of men, I shall out of my cordial affections to
my distressed Country, lay down in persuance of this Divine Institution.

You have all gone astray, and not performed the trust according to your own
undertakings, and our expectation, but have suffered us to become much more
miserable, then you found us: Therefore before the Lords wrath break forth
against you, and you be scattered from those slippery places, where you sit,
humble your selves before him, and kiss the Son, by being obedient unto him,
in embracing his appointed Rule. In order unto which, resolve upon a
determinate time to conclude your own Sitting, and limit a set time for another
Parliament to begin, in which allow all the Natives and Denizens a free voice
in their choice of their Representatives; next distribute and alter according
to your wisdoms the number of Burgesses, as shall be most consistent with each
Counties interest throughout the whole Kingdom: Lastly, issue forth your
Summons for Members to be chosen in some course, as may be most agreeing to
Gods Rule; as for example, if you should proportion ten Divisions for the
County of Essex, two Members in each Division; after the Sheriff has your
Writ, let him issue out his Warrants to the high Constables of each Division,
of the certain day and place, then the high Counstables theirs, to the
under-Constables of every Parish, where let every man have his free voice in
choosing two Parish Electors, which are to be sent from the Parish to the
Division: Now if the Inhabitants shall be divided into several interests, so
that four Competitors stand, then let them come to the Lot, which may be
performed in some such way as this; they having proceeded as far as judgment
and reason can carry them, they ought with prayer and all humility, to resign
the Controversy to be decided by God, who is the only Searcher of hearts, who
will undoubtedly upon such an humble resignation, dispose of the Lot to his own
glory and his peoples good. In Order to which, a child of six or seven years
old, may draw the name of him out of a Box or Bag, that shall first come to the
Lot; so the second, third, and fourth; this to avoid exceptions of Priority of
calling to the Lot; the manner of the Lot it self, may be performed after
some such way as this; Let there be an Instrument made into which two silver
Bullets, and two golden Bullets are put; they being some time tumbled and
shaked together, after the boy has drawn the first name, a spring lets forth
one Bullet, which if a silver one, he is rejected, if a golden one, he stands;
these being thus chosen, repair to the Division at the appointed time, where
they Elect Members, where if they be divided, as before, the same course as
before is to be taken.

This Rule may be emproved to the satisfying of all interests, in the choice of
all Officers and Magistrates throughout the whole Kingdom. What just exception
can be taken at this way, in which as much of reason is used as can be, and
when all men according to their distinct affections shall have freedom of
Nomination, and the Party so nominated, shall have equal admittance to the
Lot? only after we poor blind mortals have according to our weak judgments
and corrupt affections preferred who best pleases us: we in our contest subm't to
God to reconcile us, by disposing of the Lot according to his only All seeing
Providence, to such a person as he judges meet for us.

Some perhaps will be ready to make empty and vain Objections; But in answer
to all that may be raised, let such but eye who assumes the dispose of the Lot
to himself only, and let them be distrustful if they can, unless they be
Pagans that make Chance or Fortune a God. To carnal and ambitious men, this
will be a great vexation; what though I make friends, and a strong Party for my
nomination, yet the Lot will not, cannot be bribed or circumvented, it
frustrates all my endeavors and designs. If thou have any part of a Christian
in thee, be contented, for it is the Lords doing, and when thou art fitted for
it, the Lord will call thee by it. This is the only way to suppress all Court
craft, all faction, avarice and ambition; this is the way that God will own us
in for his people, when our eyes are toward him, and our dependence only upon
him, if the Lord shall in his mercy to save you from destruction put it into
your hearts to walk in this way. During the time that shall intervene between
the ending of this Parliament and the beginning of another, make choice of the
uprightest and wisest Compatriots to direct and govern the people, that you may
not for the honor of Parliaments seem to do things (as you have too often
done) out of fear and forced to do it. These being performed by you, in future
provide for particular Interests, that have suffered much by Committees of
Parliament; for if a party cannot be made by friends, or faction, the number
that makes a Committee may be birds of a feather, and report the matter to the
House as they affect, or distaste the parties; the parties most injured many
times undergo censure, the House concluding them upon the Committees report;
to avoid which abuse, let the parties have a certain day set them, and an hour
allowed them to show cause why they should not be concluded according to the
Committees report, and there receive your final sentence; thus shall Justice
be uprightly executed, and no man have cause to complain.

The last acceptable work you can do for this exhausted wasted Commonwealth,
is, by Commissioners Itenerants, to call all Money-mongers to an exact account,
and there will be a considerable Sum regained from those miserable wretches
(that have defrauded us) to ease the present burden of the people, as will be
easily made to appear, if you will give a real encouragement thereunto. I had
not thus presumed to have been so free, but that in the beginning of this
Parliament, a Grandee told me it was lawful for any man to propound, it was
you only could determine.

A word to the Army, Verbum Sapienti, I will be Canis ad Nilum. Victory brings
a very short glory, where Government is imperfect. You know wars are best
overcome, either by preventing of an Enemy, or by diverting of him. Principally
consider that dangers hasty and sudden, ought not to suffer delay, sudden
mischiefs require speedy remedies; You have a necessity upon you, which is
sufficient to make you resolute.

If the Army grow distrustful,
They will cease to be successful.
Queries.
1. Whether did the State of England do well in beheading the Queen of Scots,
for privily endeavoring with Confederates in this Kingdom to disturb the
peace thereof? 2. Whether does the State of England do well in not beheading
Duke Hambleton, who actually invaded this Kingdom with homebred Traitors, and
a foreign Army, but instead thereof Vote a mulct of 100000 l. upon him when
they can get it, to put in the bottomless bag with Wallers 10000 l. when
Chaloner and Tomkins were hanged? look to him Army, for these things God
visits. 3. Whether did the State of England do well in affording Aid to the
late honest Minor Party in the Parliament of Scotland, against the major
corrupted Hambletonian Party? 4. Whether ought not all honest upright
conscientious men in Parliament and Kingdom, do the like against the Major
corrupted Party for Recovery of Salus Populi?
Jovis omnia plena.
FINIS.

