A Voice from Heaven: OR, The words of a dying Minister, Mr. Kayes, In the
County of KENT, at the Town of SUNDRAGE, Eighteen miles from LONDON, near
WESTRUM, a Market Town in the same County: Delivered before those who were then
in his Chamber severally present to the things he spoke, who dyed as he
foretold himself, the 19. of November, 1644. Master Rogers, Master Rogers his
sister, Richard Thomas Yeoman, The wife of John Overy, The wife of one Ford,
Master Pain the elder, Master Pain the younger, Mistress Kaies the sister of
Master Kaies, The brother of Master Kaies, Master Saltmarsh Minister in the
same County, Nicholas Cross, the son of Master Cross. Set forth by John
Saltmarsh, Preacher of Gods Word in Kent, at Brasteed.

LUKE 16. 31. -- Neither will they be persuaded, though one arose from the
dead. I conceive this Relation fit to be printed:

Charles Herle.

London Printed for Robert White, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert, at the
Sign of the Spred-Eagle near the West End of Paul's. 1644.

To the Ministers in this Reformation, both in the County of KENT, and
elsewhere in the Kingdom, who have not yet laid down the mixtures and
superstitious forms in the pure worship of GOD.
SIRS,
SOme of you know the meetings we have had with this deceased Brother, and the
purpose still of all our disputings, as your selves well know, ended only in
this, that you would lay by the forms in practice, and strengthen the hands of
our godly brethren in the Reformation, but we could not prevail upon you,
either our Arguments were too weak, or your corruptions too strong; my fellow
Ministers in these Arguments were Mr. Sheifield of Turnbridge in Kent, Mr.
Marshall Minister, Mr. Steed Minister in the same County, godly and faithful
men, but now you may hear an Argument stronger then ours, the words of your
dying brother, which I had concealed from the world, had not the Lord sent down
a beam from heaven into the deceased, to give testimony against these mixtures,
and corrupt forms, And what am I that I should withstand God? And here I am
sorry that you were not present to have seen and heard, you might have seen one
whom you knew well, speaking with a power more then his own, For it was not he
that spoke, but our heavenly Father which spoke in him: you might have seen the
picture of one in another world, a copy of the Resurrection, as if God had
raised him from the grave to bear witness unto the truth: you might have heard
such expressions as are not to be heard from Pulpits, words that were spirited
more then ordinary, as one having authority, and not as the Scribes, and here I
shall repeat them, but that heavenly accent they had from him, I cannot: my
prayer is, that this paper may breath out his last speeches so effectually to
the world, that all (but those, whom neither the Arguments of the living nor
dying can convince) may be persuaded to go to the fountain of living waters,
and only to him who has the words of eternal life.

His sickness at first was rather an indisposition of body, yet it weakened
him in a little time, and prevailed every day upon him, he had some better
days, which he thought to be symptoms of recovery, I did visit him sometimes,
and I found God had sanctified his sickness, and he cast out some words to me
of improving himself more in the ways of God, and the power of godliness; on
the last day of his sickness I went to see him by mere a Providence, and found
him in bed, he was slumbering, and when I spoke to him, he returned me this
answer, That he had called for a blessing, and now would apply himself to rest,
for he thought the danger of his fever was over, so I left him for that time,
but I had not been an hour from him, when word came to me that he called for
me, when I came, I found him sat up in the bed, and speaking very strongly,
his understanding clear and apprehensive, his memory firm and faithful, his
senses active and waking, his speech sounding not like a voice in this world,
and thus he spoke in the presence of diverse:

Master Kayes his several speeches.
YOu see here a dying man, I know I must die, I shall only live till morning,
you may conceive what you will, but it is all in vain, I shall continue thus as
you see me till morning, but I shall then die, oh, I shall go down to the grave
and be no more, oh, I shall die, I shall go to the earth, I am not here to
live, let me die, oh my sins are great, oh Lord Jesus receive me, Justice
says, smite, Mercy says, no; my delights and pleasures in the week day soon
wasted what I had thought on in the Lords day, and resolved; I resolved, if God
had spared me life, to have gone on in a more holy way then I have done; I have
not gone on thoroughly with the word of God, if the Lord had spared me life, I
would have showed them the grounds; I trusted too much to my own memory, I have
not used the communion of Saints here; but Lord thou have many to save, thou
may cast me off as a poor stinking Goat, but Jesus Christ is willing to
receive those that come to him, but I have no full assurance yet; but what do I
talk of conscience, a poor vile wretch as I am? Yet Christ Jesus the righteous
he is willing to receive.

I had resolved to have gone on in the power of godliness, and have laid the
foundation of godliness, but God has cut off my thread of life, and I shall
be no more: but now Satan is vanquished, the blood of Jesus Christ has drowned
my sins, and will swallow them up, God does hold in my soul yet, free grace,
nothing but Jesus Christ, my soul shall rest with the spirits of just men: I
have loved Disputes that did not profit, now the daughters of music cease, and
they that look out of the windows begin to grow dark.

Wife read the Scriptures more, (...).
I have put them off sometimes; do not use your fathers forms, go on in the
power of godliness, nothing but the power of godliness: Master Salmarsh, I
desire not the pomp of a funeral Sermon, but that you will tell my people of
the power of godliness, and stir them up, and quicken them to it: see that a
godly and faithful Pastor come after me, and that he come in the rightway.

Diverse prayers he intermingled with these speeches, and he prayed with me, and
at the last prayer made with him, he said, my soul is exceedingly comforted:
the Lord has spared my life to be comforted thus in prayer; here I left him
resting, and toward morning he drew nearer the grave, and said to some about
him, they would not let him go the right way: but would have him on the left
hand to heaven, (a good warning to some then near him, who may do well to
observe it) and come up more to the Power of godliness, then they do, and
about day he died, that very time he had told on so much, having assured both
himself and us all of his death, about that hour.

Observations.
I shall observe some few things concerning him and his speeches.

In the beginning of his weakness he left off the forms of Common prayer he
used, more then before, whence I observe, these mixtures in the worship of God
must needs be uncomfortable and unwarrantable, which dare not abide the trial
of a grave.

II. He used but little of these forms of late, for he had almost laid them by
before his sickness, and yet so much as he used was a burden, now we may
observe, that it is no dallying nor trifling in the worship of God, and the
least mixtures will be thorns and briers in the conscience of a tender
Christian, when he gives up his account, little sins will be great ones at
that day.

III. He spoke still in the assurance and full perswas^on of his death, and the
time of it, an evidence not ordinary to departing souls, as if God had raised
him up higher then others to see his grave, and to argue from heaven for the
power of godliness.

IIII. His speeches carried a strength and spirit in them more then natural,
and deeply pierced the better affected that were present, and could not but
convince the other, We may observe that the children of God the nearer they
come to Glory, the more of it they take in, and their last breathings are
purest and strongest.

V. The time of his persuasion that he should die was after the slumbers he
had: Thus God did as it were awaken him from another world, and truly all the
words that he spoke were me thought like the words of one that had engaged
himself to dye, when he had reported something he had to say from God* to the
world.

VI. In the first part of his speech he sadly and passionately spoke of his
dying, and his certain going down to the grave about the morning, or very time
he departed, we may observe that the revelations of God concerning his purposes
and decrees are unchangeable, and have their just accomplishment, in the things
he foretells.

VII. In the next passages of his speech you may see his spiritual conflict
with sin and satan, Justice says smite, mercy says no, And here his words
were like the words of one that had seen a vision of the attributes of God, of
his justice and mercy pleading for him, and his carriage was like one that had
looked onto see the issue of that glorious pleading in Heaven for a poor soul;
and here I observe further, that while we are in this body of sin, justice
will sparkle into the soul, that mercy and free grace may be more exalted, and
thouh there be no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, yet the soul
stands not always in so clear a view of this free justification, we see but in
part, and darkly as in a glass.

VIII. In his spiritual conflict we may observe by the interminglings of fears
and comforts, that God will have the souls of his to see what he could do
against sin, and what in justice they might expect, and yet in all these he
holds forth so much of Christ, as may bear up the soul, and their comforts and
faith work still higher then their fears and doubtings, as we observe in his
speeches, for the free grace of Chr^^^ ^^d his assurance in that, kept him
above all.

IX. In his reasonings he had with his own actions, he could not find in the
best of them any thing he could make up a soul cordial on, for speaking of
conscience, oh says he, but what do I speak of conscience? and thus he threw
off his own righteousness as a menstruous cloth, and nothing would hold out
to him but free grace, and Christ Jesus, there only he grasped and held, as you
may see in his expressions.

X. He was sorry that he lived not to perfect some holy resolutions in his
ministry in the Power of godliness, We may observe that when good purposes
are kept too long at home, God lets them not stir abroad when they would, it
is good performing while it is in the power of the hand to do it.

XI. He was much grieved that he sought no more the Communion of Saiats (as he
says) here below, we may see that the nearer any soul draws to the communion
above, the more they see into the precious society of the Saints below, and
the communion here, and we see it is a comfort to a soul that they can be here
in the Kingdom of grace, with those, with whom hereafter they shall be in the
Kingdom of glory, this would be well observed by those who account slightly of
godly meetings, or cast notions of Scandal, or Conventicle upon them.

XII. It grieved him that he spent time in disputes that did not profit, when
the soul is preparing for another world, no other thing can give it any
proportionable comfort, but something that has more communion with glory, the
purest and highest learning and reasonings are but vanity and vexation of
spirit, the soul that is for Heaven finds no advantage in any thing, but what
has the Power of God in it to salvation.

XIII. His speeches did much tend to the advancing the Power of godliness in
his ministry, if God did restore him, we may observe, that the emptiness of
man's inventions in the worship of God are then only discerned to be emptiness
and folly, when the soul is nearest God, and most spiritual, no wonder that
mixtures and forms of men in the ordinances of God are so little discerned by
so many Neuters and Malignants, for the more carnal they are, the darker is
their judgment in the things of God, he that is spiritual only discerns.

XIV. He spoke against the forms of his father in Law, who it seems is not
now of so pure a practice in worship; who can desire a stronger evidence next
to Scripture, then the judgment of a Divine whose learning was now more
gloriously sanctified, from the immediate light of God, to a clearer
discerning; though carnal reasons may plead strongly for mixtures and corrupt
forms, yet when Heaven opens to convince the soul, and to argue against them,
which of them or their Abettors are able to appear against such an argument,
and mighty evidence.

XV. He spoke against not coming in the right way into Benefices, which corrupt
Patrons, and Ministers, that are as easy to give, as the other to take, may do
well to observe, and all such who come in by other ways of contract, or
bargain, or marriage Symony.

I observe the several expressions in his speeches give a clear and undeniable
testimony to these Scriptures.

I. His certain persuasion of his death, and the very time, to this Scripture.
Joel 2. 28. I will power my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your
daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men
shall see visions.

II. His conflicts with sin and Satan, to this Scripture, Ephesians. 6. 12, 13.
we wrestle not against flesh and blood but against principalities and powers,
against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness in high places, wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God,
that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day.

III. His doubtings and fears, to this Scripture, Philip. 2. 12. work out your
salvation with fear and trembling.

IV. His overcoming temptations through free grace in Christ Jesus when he
thought himself vildest, to this scripture, Zach. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. And he showed
me Joshua the high Priest standing before the Angel of the Lord, and satan
standing at his right hand to resist him, and the Lord said unto satan, the
Lord rebuke the oh satan, now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and
stood before the Angel, and he answered and spoke unto those that stood before
him, saying, take away the filthy garments from him, and to him he said, behold
I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will cloth thee with
change of raiment.

V. His renouncing his own best actions as filthy and not to be rested, on to
this scripture. Romans 3. 20, 21, 22. therefore by the deeds of the Law, there
shall no flesh be justified in his sight, but now the righteousness of the Law
is made manifest even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus
Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe.

VI. His being sorry that he lived not to perfect his better resolutions in his
ministry for advancing the Power of godliness, to this scripture, Ecclesiast.
12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not, nor the ^eeres draw nigh when thou shall say, J have no
pleasure in them.

VII. His sorrow for not enjoying more the Communion of Saints here below, to
these scriptures. Act. 2. Psalm 119. 63. and they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and all that believed were together: I am a
companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy precepts.

VIII. His grief that he spent time in any disputes that did not profit, to
these scriptures, Tit. 3. 9. Coloss. 2. 8. but avoid foolish questions and
genealogies, and contentions and strivings about the Law, for they are
unprofitable, and vain, beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and
vain deceit after the traditions of men, and not after Christ.

IX. His speaking against the corrupt forms and mixtures in worship, and in
particular, by the name of one that used them formerly, to this scripture. 1 Timothy 6. 3, 5. if any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words
even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according
to godliness, from such withdraw thy self.

His speaking against not coming in the right way of coming into livings, to
this Scripture, John 10. 1. He that enters not by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.

Conclusion.
1. You have the sum of the passages of his life, in that short time of his
going to his long home, there are two circumstances most eminent in this, the
Power he spoke in, and the evidence of his death, and these two make all the
rest that he delivered more observable, the use I have made of it is this, a
revealing an heavenly Testimony against mixtures in worship, which I durst not
conceal.

2. An application of it to those who are of a judgment, that such things are
indifferent in the Ordinance of God.

3. That some soul secrets might be seen and better studied and observed.

4. That the judgment of one so enlightened and inspired, concerning these
things, might be consulted with more by those that are carnally and
superstitiously minded.

5. To justify the truth of certain Scriptures, against careless and
Atheistical souls that either regard not, or believe not.

6. To preserve the memory of a deceased brother, whose Piety and Learning were
commendable in his life, but in his death incomparable.

And to satisfy the desire of some eminent in the assembly, who presumed it of
public use, through Gods blessing.

FINIS.

