James Grahme, Esquire Appellant, Francis Stamper, Respond.

The Respondent's Case.

To be heard the 23th of January, 1693.

JAMES GRAHME, Esquire Appellant, FRANCIS STAMPER, Respondent.
The Appeal is to Reverse an Order of the High Court of Chancery, made the 18th
of December, 1693. on Re-hearing of the Cause and the Respondents Plea put in,
to the Appellants Bill.
The RESPONDENT's CASE.

THAT the Respondent is a Laceman, Trial in Michaelmas Term, 1689.
and the Appellant for many Years past has been the Respondent and his
Partners Customer; and in the year, 1688. owed them 318 l. 18 s. 9 d. for Wares
sold; and Appellant refusing to pay them, they brought their Action against him
in the Common Pleas, which was tried in Michaelmas Term, 1689. before the late
Lord Chief Justice Pollixfen; and the Appellant; in mittigation of Damages,
gave in Evidence on the Trial, that part of the Goods (in question) were for
Livery-Lace, delivered for the Use of the late King James his Hunts, and to be
paid for by him; but the Respondent, denied that he trusted King James, and
proved he only trusted the Appellant, who promised Payment thereof. At which
Trial, the Appellant produced his own Books of Accounts, and several Receipts
and Acquittances given by the Respondent; and also the Respondent produced all
his Shop-Books, which the Jury viewed and examined, and the Appellant also
produced several of his own and King James his Servants, and diverse other
Witnesses were examined on both sides; and, after a long Trial, had a Verdict
passed for the Respondent for 299 l. 18 s. 9 d. Damages [besides Costs.]

Immediately after the Trial, In the same Michaelmas Term.
the Appellant moved the Court of Common Pleas upon the Affidavits of himself
and three other Persons, for a new Trial; but all the four Judges there were
fully satisfied with the Verdict, and denied a new Trial. And the Appellant
(...) ^rought a Writ of Error returnable, in the Kings Bench, which in
Easter-Term, 1690. was argued, and Judgment was affirmed thereon for the
^^^^ondent; but just before the Court affirmed the Judgment, viz.

The Appellant exhibited his Bill in Chancery, In Easter Term, 1690.
generally, praying to be Relieved; alleging the same Matter and no oth^^
(...) he had before offered on on his Defense, at the Trial at Law; and had
urged, to the Judges, when he moved for a new Trial (as appears by comparing
the Bill in Chancery with the said Affidavits) whereto the Respondent pleaded
the said Verdict and Judgments, and therein set forth the whole Series of the
Proceedings and Evidence, given at the Trial at Law, and the motion for a new
Trial and that denied; and insisted, that after a Verdict upon full Evidence,
and a new Trial denied, and Judgment in a Writ of Error, and entire Damages
given the Chancery, ought not to Interpose, especially no new Matter being
alleged in the Bill, and therefore prayed to be dismissed.

The Plea was heard, Order of the 1st of July, 1690.
but the Court ordered the Respondent to answer (saving the benefit of the Plea
at the hearing of the Cause;) but the Respondent afterward Petitioned to have
the Plea Re-heard, which was Re heard on the 10th of December, 1690. and then
the Court Ordered the Respondent to Answer the Appellants Bill, and to produce
upon Oath, all his Books touching the Matters (in question) for the Appellant,
and his Agents, to inspect and peruse, Order of the 10th of December, on
re-hearing of the Plea.
and that the Cause should not be further proceeded on till further Order; and
the Respondent and his Partners fully answered the Appellants Bill, and set
forth the whole Proceedings at Law, and swore they only trusted the Appellant,
and not King James; and that they relied only on the Appellants Promise of
Payment, and insisted on their Verdict and Judgment recovered at Law, and
denied the whole Equity of the Appellants Bill. So that the Appellant had the
Respondents and his Partners Oaths and Denyals, and his Bill required no more.

That on the 20th of January following, Order, 20th of Jan. 1690.
the Respondent moved the Court to dissolve the Injunction, but the Court
Ordered the Respondent to produce the next day, before a Master upon Oath, all
his Books touching the Matters (in question) for the Appellant or his Agents to
look into (which was done accordingly) and the Injunction Ordered to be
dissolved, nisi Causa.

That on the 29th of January following, Order, 29th Jan. 1690.
the Appellant showed Cause, and the Court Ordered, upon the Appellants
bringing 326 l. into Court (being the Damages and Costs recovered at Law) the
Appellants Bail at Law should be discharged, and continued the Injunction until
the hearing of the Cause, and the 326 l. was accordingly paid into Court, which
was afterward moved for to be paid out of Court to the Respondents upon
Security, but was denied.

That the Cause proceeded, and the Appellant has Examined in Chancery all the
same Witnesses which he before had Examined at the Trial, and only two new
Witnesses, viz. the Countess of Dorchester and her Woman, who might have been
Examined at the Trial, and their Evidence is but circumstantial; and they say
nothing as to the particular Goods in Question, but the Respondent only
examined Witnesses to prove what Evidence was given at Law, and made no Proofs
in Chancery as to the Merit of the Cause, because it would have been a waver of
the said Plea (as advised.)

The Cause was heard, before the last Lords Commissioners, and the Court
declared it a Case of Consequence, yet delivered not their Opinions, but
ordered to be attended with the Bill, Answer and the Record of the Postea, and
then they would consider of the Matter: And afterward the Court was moved to
give Judgment; Cause Re-heard 1st June 1692.
and, on the 1st of June following, the Court re-heard the Cause, but gave no
final Judgment, only declared they had considered of the Case, which (as they
alleged) appeared to be a Matter of great consequence, and proper to be stated
upon the whole Pleadings, and ordered it to stand referred to Sir John Hoskins
and Sir Adam Otley, Knights, Two of the Masters of that Court, to look into and
state the whole Matter of the Bill, Answer, Declaration and Pleadings at Law
and in Chancery, and the Books of Account and Proofs taken, in the Cause, and
to examine and see what Goods were delivered by the Respondent on the
Appellants own Account, and what on the Public Account; and what were the
Particulars of such Goods, and how Entered in the Respondents Books of Account;
and the said Masters were to look into the Respondents Books of Account, and
see how the Entries were made therein for any Goods delivered, and paid for in
the years, 1685, 1686 and 1687. And Certify to the Court how they found the
whole Matters; Order, 1st June, 1692.
and after the Masters had made their Report therein, the Court would give
their final Judgment in the Cause, and appoint a day for such purpose (but in
the mean time the Injunction was continued.)

The Respondent being advised that such the Proceedings in the Cause, were
contrary to Law and Equity; and being aggrieved therein, On the 25th of April,
1693. 25 April, 1693. 18 December.
Petitioned the Lord Keeper to Rehear the said Plea and Cause.

That the Cause and Plea were Re-heard before the Lord Keeper and Mr. Baron
Powell, who declared their Opinions, That there was no Equity in the Appellants
Bill, it being a proper Cause at Law, and received a Trial there, upon full
Evidence on both sides, and no Fraud alleged by the Appellants Bill, they
allowed the Plea, and dismissed the Appellants Bill, with Costs to the time
only of the Respondents answering the Appellants Bill.

Wherefore the Respondent humbly insists, to have the Fruit and Benefit of the
Verdict and Judgments at Law, there being nothing but a plain Matter of Fact
four Years since tried at Law, and not any Equity in the Appellants Bill,
alleged; the Bill in Effect, being only to Arraign the Juries Verdict, and the
Opinion of the four Judges; and the Respondent having positively sworn by his
Answer, that he trusted the Appellant only; and not King James, and that the
Appellant promised him Payment; so that if any Provision should be made for
Payment of King James his Debt, the Respondent can have no benefit by it.

The Respondent Stamper has Sworn in his Answer, Nota.
That the Appellant threatened he would spend 5000 l. and not leave himself
worth a Groat, before he would pay this Debt, and has kept this poor Tradesman
above four years out of his Money since the Trial, which would have been very
useful in his Trade, and caused him to spend above 500 l. so that the
Respondent is almost undone.

The Appellant, Nota.
as Keeper of the Privy Purse to King James, might pay whom he pleased; and, as
Master of his Buck-hounds, might have taken up such Livery Lace for the use of
King James's Hunts, as the course was of the proper Tradesmen belonging to the
Wardrobe, who must have accepted of King James's Payment; Ans. fol, 9.
but the Respondent was a Tradesman at large, and only credited the Appellant
(as he has positively Sworn;) nor does it appear in the Cause, but that the
Appellant may have paid himself.

And therefore humbly hopes the Appeal shall be dismissed with Costs.


