Imprimatur,

Robertus Pory, S.T.P. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, Domino Gulielmo
Archiepiscopo Cant. Sacellanus Domesticus.

THREE SERMONS PREACHED In the Cathedral Church of WINCHESTER. The First on
Sunday, Aug. 19. 1660. at the first return of the Dean and Chapter to that
Church, after the Restoration of His Majesty. The Second on Jan. 30. 1661.
being the Anniversary of King Charles the First, of glorious memory. The Third
at the general Assize held there, Feb. 25. 1661.


By EDWARD STANLEY, D.D. Prebendary of that Church.

LONDON: Printed by J.G. for John Clark, at his Shop under St. Peter's Church in
Cornhill, 1662.

To the Right Honorable, and the Right Reverend Father in God, GEORGE, Lord
Bishop of Winchester, and one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
MY LORD,
THese Sermons were preached in your Cathedral, though before it was yours: And
you will give me leave to take this occasion to Congratulate your coming
thither. I wish your Lordship may sit long at the Helm of Government there, and
that you may find the waters untroubled. But the Church being yours now at the
Printing of them, the Sermons ought to be yours too, if they were worth your
owning, or a public Dedication.

Such as they are I present them to your Lordship, and crave your Protection
for the Author of them, for it is possible he may want it. And though they were
not designed to be public when they were preached by me, as you will find in
the Preface, yet now they are so. If there be any Errata in them, as there may
be some in Sermons of so hasty a Conception, as I assure your Lordship these
were, you will be pleased to pardon them to

Your Lordships most humble and most devoted Servant, EDWARD STANLEY.

To the Reader.
I Do not think there is any thing in these Sermons so worthy of the public
view, that they should be thus exposed, without some other Inducement for it.
Neither can I say, they are published by special command, for they were
preached far from Court. But two of them being commanded from me by a kind of
necessity, and in my own defense, I was willing the third should be cast into
the bargain, being all of them of kin, and the subject much the same. Those
which I understand my self to be charged with are the two latter, and
peradventure there was as much fault found with the former; for we live in a
Capricious Age, in which the Confines of sin must not be touched, neither must
we come near it, or tread, though never so gently, upon the utmost lines of it.
The conception of these Sermons was somewhat hasty, and without any long
preparation, therefore the more to be excused. The persons concerned are not
so, that have put me to this open Penance; who are so far from repentance for
their evil doings, that they are impatient of the most modest reproof of them.

Whether there be any thing here, that was peccant against the rules of Charity
or Sobriety, or that was unfit for me to speak, or them to hear, I make thee
the Judge.

A Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of Winchester, at the first return
of the Dean and Chapter to that Church after the Restoration of His Majesty.
PSALM. 14.11. Quis dabit ex Sion salutare Israel? Cum averterit Dominus
captivitatem plebis suae, exultabit Jacob, and laetabitur Israel.

Who shall give salvation unto Israel out of Sion? When the Lord turns the
captivity of his people, then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.


THough I never despaired of Gods mercy to this poor Church and State, yet I
durst not promise my self so much happiness to see it; and I thought rather of
writing my own Epitaph near a Pulpit, then of speaking out of it any more in
this place: Yet so the Divine Providence has ordered it, that I should out
live the Storm in which thousands have perished, that were more righteous then
my self. This is one of Christ's miracles, that he has stilled the raging of
the Sea; that though we were unworthily cast out, yet we are met again, in nave
Ecclesiae: And whether it be the Quire, or the Body of the Church, it matters
not; but here we are by Gods mercy, and the Ship it self is, we hope, secured;
though much torn and ransacked, as you see. Let God only have the glory of it,
while my first Sermon shall be a Thanksgiving; it ought to be so, not one
Thanksgiving in a year, but it should be a year of Jubilee's and Thanksgivings:
For such a Deliverance as we have had all the days in the year would be too
few.

I will devote this to it, and confine my self to that Subject; and this Text
will supply me with fit materials, for it lands us at Exultabit Jacob, and
laetabitur Israel; The rejoicing of Jacob, and the gladness of Israel.

Gladness and Rejoicing is an Argument that has been out of date with us for
many years together; our Harps have been hung upon the Trees that are therein,
Psalm. 137. nay, it is Gods mercy that we our selves have escaped it, and have
been suffered to sit weeping by the waters of Babylon; for we have been in a
Captivity also. All that we could do for you was but to remember it, and to
weep for it; and while we were unjustly charged with looking toward Babylon,
and the cry was loud in every bodies ear, to come out of her, we were carried
into her whether we would or no; at least we have had all the Temptations that
could be to drive us thither; nay, have we not been forced to it Vi and armis,
while we have been driven from our Habitations, expelled from our Houses and
lawful Possessions? And so if Conscience had not kept us back, the necessity
and wants of too many of us had been enough to fix us there. And yet, God be
thanked, the Temptation is overcome; in spite of Malice it self, and the
Calumnies of wicked men, we are where we were still at Sion, in our Judgments
the same men, as to our Religion, though forced and driven away from it in our
Persons. We have been, I say, in a kind of Captivity for a great many years,
and all we could do was to look toward Sion, and, as Daniel did in his
Chamber, the Windows being open, to pray toward it; but to come at it, and to
discharge our duties there, we were not suffered.

Well, after a long Captivity, you see, it has pleased God to bring us hither
again; and what Thanks can be enough for us to render him for this mercy? Psalm.
137.6.
If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, and him that brought me hither, then let my
tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. The People said it of Jerusalem when
they were in Babylon, and we that are returned to Sion have reason to say in
much more. Then if I prefer not Jerusalem in my mirth, as it follows there; if
I take not all occasions to do it, I were very unthankful. And here my Text
leads me to it; it is a word in season, Pro. 25.11.
Like apples of Gold in pictures of Silver: Therefore let us view these
Pictures well, and feed upon these Apples; and it is not, -- Pictura pascit
inani; but if any thing, Golden Apples will satisfy.

And here we have them in this Text, and upon this occasion: Quis dabit
salutare Israel? Who will give salvation unto Israel, out of Sion? When the
Lord, etc.

This Psalm begins with Dixit insipiens, The fool has said in his heart, There
is no God. The prosperity of the wicked is the seed of Atheism; and while Gods
own People lay under a Captivity for no less then 70. years together, and their
enemies, the Babylonians, carried all before them; no wonder if such fools
sprung up every where, where the seed was sown, such as denied God in their
hearts.

This has been the old quarrel against Heaven: Crimen illud Dearum Scylla
felix, as Sencca says; That wicked men should prosper in the world, and good
men be of the suffering side, is a fault, we think, which Heaven cannot answer.
Who would serve God upon such hard conditions? Ergo frustra, Then have I
cleansed my heart in vain, Psalm. 73.13. If I must serve God for naught, nay,
for that which is worse then nothing; if I must be persecuted for my Religion,
for my Allegiance, and performing that which was my duty both to God and Man,
while the Violators of both are in a better condition; no wonder if we see a
large field of Atheism presently, and such fools spring up in every corner. The
Devil waters the seed; these prosper in the world, says he, presently, and no
body thrives but themselves; and therefore they conclude from thence, either
that there is no God, or, if there be, that he cares not for humane affairs.
Scilicet is super is labor est. -- They do but laugh at Religion, and the
professors of it.

Hence you may see the sad effects of it, in this Psalm you may make the
Parallel of it your selves, (for I desire not to rub upon the sore more then I
must needs) and observe, how our Atheists and theirs have jumped. Their throat
is an open sepulcher, Verse 4. With their tongues they deceive, the poison of
Asps is under their lips. There Is Honey and Gall very near one another: it is
not Fell in cord, that is further off, Poison in their hearts; but under their
lips; while the Honey is upon them they deceive with their tongues. Then, Their
feet are swift to shed blood, at the next Verse. No Atheist makes any
Conscience of that: they do not fear lest their Brothers blood, like Abels,
should cry to God, while they make God no better then the Image of Baal, that
cannot hear the cry of it. Hence veloces pedes, their feet are very swift upon
such a design, no murder shall stick with them; nor any other destruction
neither, though it tend to the ruin and desolation of whole Kingdoms. For
that is the way they tread in, Infelicitas in viis, Destruction and unhappiness
is in their ways, and the way of peace have they not known. No, that is a way
they were never acquainted with; but, like Jehu, they drive furiously, from one
wickedness to another; but to look back to the ways of Peace and
Accommodation, is a crime unpardonable; For there is no fear of God before
their eyes, in that Verse: there the fool peeps out of them again; there is no
God, and there is no fear of him, it is all one; for if there were a God, they
must fear him whether they would or no.

And yet they fear their own shadows in the mean time: They were afraid where
no fear was, Verse 9. Atheists are the most cowardly men in the world; you know
what we owe to their fears and jealousies. They study nothing but
self-preservation, and fear them that can kill the body only; but to fear
Hellfire, and him that can cast them into that for their evil deeds, that is
Terriculamentum puerorum, but a Bugbear to affright Children. Hence they turn
Cannibals at the 8. Verse, all such workers of wickedness, that They eat up my
people as it were bread; and if they eat the bread that should sustain them,
it is all one.

Why then is it a wonder, if in the midst of such calamities men cry out for a
deliverance, and wait for the person that brings it? That we have in the Text,
and it is pardonable if they seem to grow impatient for it, after so many years
Captivity. Quis dabit salutare Israel? Who shall give salvation unto Israel?
etc.

Here then we have, 1. The Captives mourning. 2. His Deliverance and Triumph.


1. The Captives mourning in the first words, Who shall give salvation unto
Israel?

2. The Deliverance and Triumph in the later, When the Lord turns the
Captivity of his people, etc.

In the first Part,

1. Thing to be considered is the thing they want or long for, that is Salvation
or Deliverance.

2. The person that should bring it or work it for them; and who that should be
they cannot tell themselves, only Quis dabit, they enquire after him, and in
what quarter of the world he is to be found; who shall give salvation?

3. Having better bethought themselves, they will not look abroad for him, but
ex Sion: Thence he must come when all is done, out of Sion; not out of Babylon,
the place of their Captivity, but out of Sion.

In the second Part we have,

1. The misery the People lay under, and from which they desired to be
delivered; that is no less then Captivity and absolute Slavery.

2. The Author of their deliverance, that no other then God himself, for Man
could not do it; Cum averterit Dominus, When the Lord turns the Captivity.

3. The manner how he brings it to pass, which is very strange and unusual, he
turns it, as if he would turn a River to the Springhead.

4. The next thing is the Persons that are delivered, they his own People,
Jacob and Israel, as it follows, Captivitatem plebis suae, The captivity of his
people. For which you have

5. The Peoples Triumph in the last place, and that expressed in two words,
that you may not think 'twas an ordinary triumph in them, Exultabit and
laetabitur, Then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

I must begin with the Mourning part, the Deliverance and Triumph shall follow
after.

Who shall give salvation unto Israel out of Sion? Where the

First thing to be considered is the thing they long for, which is Salvation or
Deliverance.

And because Contraries do best illustrate one another, we will join the
Captivity with it, and handle them together; the Captivity with the Salvation,
and so it is But Salvation and Deliverance out of Captivity. Did I say But?

Why, can there be any deliverance greater then that? Captivity is the greatest
cross that can befall us in the world: for we are carried from our selves by
it, and put out of our own power. He that is Captive is under the dominion of
another, and slavery is the best he can look for, for he may kill him if he
please: He has potestatem vitae and necis, Grot. de jure belli, lib. 3.
according to the Roman Law; Servus quod servatus, says Donatus; he may do
what he will with him, either kill him, or keep him alive. And the Babylonian
Law certainly was no better, we have reason to think it was worse, if worse
might be, because they were a less-civilized People: And Jeremy, that was one
of the Children of the captivity, and felt it, did not write his Lamentations
for nothing; O vos omnes, qui transitis; ('twould move a stone that which he
says there, or any that have not hearts of stone; and 'twas spoken of the
People in Captivity, though afterward applied to the sufferings of Christ:) O
all you that pass by the way, see and consider, if there be any sorrow like
unto mine, Lam. 1.12. with which God has afflicted me in the day of his fierce
anger: it is vindemiavit me in the Vulgar, as if he had trodden them in a
Wine Press; and we have that word in the 15. Verse of the Chapter, He has
trodden the Wine Press of the Virgin; that is, He has broken and bruised her
therein. Surely Gods anger was very fierce when it came to that, and the
Babylonians mercies were very cruel. Do but remember the fiery Furnace in
Daniel, Dan. 6.^
and the Den of Lions, into which himself was cast; and then you will conceive
the Captivity to be, as it deserves to be conceived, very sad.

And 'twas very long and lasting too, for no less then 70. years it continued;
and they saw several Changes in it, till at last God raised up the spirit of
Cyrus to deliver them, as you may read Ezra 1.1. And under such a Captivity is
it a wonder if the People long for a Redeemer? Of their redemption from the
slavery of Sin I speak not, by the great Redeemer of Israel, Christ Jesus, of
which this Redemption was a Type, and which ought to stir up our longing much
more, but of our redemption from the slavery of Men only, which is intended as
the proper work of this day.

And surely the news of a deliverance would be very welcome, though it be but
Temporal, to men that are in Captivity, as the Jews were here. The Mournings of
such may be heard far, when but their Sighs reach to the ears of God himself:
Let the powerful sighing of the Prisoners come before thee, Psalm. 79. But their
mourning is like the mourning of Hadadrimmon, great mourning, Zech. 12.11. And
then it is no wonder, I say, if the People long for a Deliverance, the next
thing in the Text.

2. Quis dabit salutare Israel? Who shall give salvation unto Israel? You may
turn it into a sigh if you will, according to another reading of it, O that the
salvation were come!

And such Aspirations cannot be concealed in hearts that be oppressed with
grief: Sorrow will break out at the lips as well as at the eyes of men. --
Ingentes stupent, -- They may sometimes silence us, it is true, but yet they
will be heard ever and anon, either in a sigh in one reading, or in a distinct
voice in another, it is all one; but Deliverance is the thing they would have,
every body understands that, Who shall give salvation?

3. Ex Sion, we will put that into it too. The Jews looked for their salvation
out of Sion, though they were Captives at Babylon, yet their salvation they
thought must come from Jerusalem. They were right, as to their spiritual
Redemption from sin, and they had read Balaam's Prophecy no doubt, Orietur
stella ex Jacob, There shall come a star out of Jacob, and a scepter shall
arise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moah, and destroy all the
children of Seth, Number. 24.17. Therefore out of Sion their Redeemer was to come,
so far they were right.

Only they mistook the Redemption he was to work for them; and so did many
others after them, even the Disciples themselves, Luke 14.21.
when they cried, Nos sperabamus, But we trusted that it was he that should
have redeemed Israel; that was from their Temporal Captivity, as they imagined,
bringing a Temporal Kingdom with him, in the mean time forgetting what the
Angel said at his birth, He shall save the people from their sins.

No, their sins they were not so sensible of, but of their present sufferings
by men; and therefore Ibi digitus, he that will deliver them from them, is the
only Redeemer they look after. Why, he must come from Babylon, or from the
Medes rather, pointed at long before he was born for this deliverance, Isaiah
44.28. That says of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my
pleasure, saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built, and to the Temple, The
foundation shall be laid. Well, if we may be assured of that, that we shall be
delivered, it is no matter whence the Deliverer comes, Dummodo constat de re, so
we may be assured of the thing, no matter for persons, or places either: Out of
Sion, we will leave that out of the Text, rather then fail of what we desire,
Who shall give salvation unto Israel?

I have done with the Mourning part, I should now come to the Deliverance and
Triumph: But all this concerns the Jews Mourning only; it is but Plangentes in
plateis, Eccles. 12.5.
in Ecclesiastes, Man goes to his long home, and the Mourners go about the
streets. We must bring them home to our Houses too, and make a part of this
Pomp our selves, or we do nothing.

And if ever any People had cause to mourn, this Nation had it too. Let the
Babylonish Captivity hereafter not be mentioned, we in England have outdone
them; in this at least, that the Jews were Captives to strangers, we to our own
Countrymen: Cic. de Off. l. 1.
Magnum est iisdem uti sacris, sepulchra habere communia: Why, all that is
nothing; The same Religion and the same Graves could not excuse us, but we were
made slaves unto them.

Nay, those that ruled over us for the most part were our servants: Dominati
sunt servi nostri, Lam. 5.
Servants have ruled over us. And then, abating that we were not carried
abroad, and forced into Exile, though that has been the case with too many of
us, and with Him especially who should have ruled over us in the mean time,
wherein come we short of the Jews?

I would not be thought ambitious to aggravate our miseries: Indeed I cannot;
and there was never less need of an Orators Invention then on this subject,
because when we have said all we can, as the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon's
Wisdom, Half is not told you.

I wish I had not such a Field to walk in; a Field, not to gather flowers in,
but a Golgotha, a place of dead men's Skuls, or of Bones; an Aceldama, a Field
of blood, in which every step I make, I must be over shoes in it. Plin
Pa^^^g^r.
And how then can I be silent? Utinam esset ratio minuendi, as he said in his
Panegyric, Let some body show me the way to lessen them, for there is no fear
of multiplying our miseries.

But 'twas an absolute Captivity we were in as well as the Jews: Our Lives at
the devotion of others, and there was not a year past but there must be some
new Rubricks in our Calendar; they speak of Red-letter-men, they have made the
Calendar red indeed with the blood of persons of all ranks, of Citizens, of
Gentlemen, of Clergymen, of Nobles; shall I say of a King too? O tell it not
in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of Askelon. Let Histories pass it over
in silence, let the Annals of that year be buried in oblivion, let Forty eight
be expunged out of our account, and the Thirtieth of January out of the
Calendar of England; it is a day to be remembered with horror, a day of darkness
and blackness for ever. This Rhetoric is to be pardoned me, -- Ignoscite, si
quid
Intumuit pietas, Claudian.
--
He is a fool that is not eloquent upon this subject, and a just Indignation
forces it from me. Yet I pardon the Contrivers of it, and so may others too,
for I my self was not innocent: If I had been, and you that hear me, that
glorious Prince could not have suffered: But the Crown is fallen from our
heads, and woe unto us because we have sinned, as the Prophet makes the
Lamentation, chap. 5. ver. 16. I remember 'twas the observation of Mr. Vowell,
one that suffered for the King, That there were some people in the world, who
once a year sacrificed men to the Devils, like those who offered their children
to Molech. I did not think they had lived in this Island, till we saw those
Anniversaries kept here.

But these are the effects of a Captivity, where men's lives are at the devotion
of others: And then that their Estates were so it is no wonder: The other was
the Anniversary, this the Daily, Sacrifice of these Jews; we were killed all
the day long in this sense, ^sal. 44.2.
in our Livelyhoods and our Estates: And it had been more mercy to some, that
wanted bread in the mean time, if they had been killed outright.

But Captive men must be contented with any thing, nay, with nothing.

-- Quod captis sat est, -- vivamus. For the Conquerors told us, All was their
own. And so they did not blush to tell God too, their Levites especially, when
they thanked him for suffering them to sit under their own Vines, and their
Fig Trees; when alas! all this while they were other men's. Alas, Master, it was
borrowed, 2 Kings 6.5.
I will not say, it was stolen; while they have eaten other men's bread, and
could not afford us the crumbs that fell from their Tables, not by their good
wills, a Tenth part instead of a Fifth. I am sorry for their uncharitableness.

But what was become of their Religion in the mean time? Why that was gone with
the rest, they have mixed -- sacra profanis, and wrapped up all together, and
are gone with it. Joh. 20.2.
They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him, Mary
said weeping: We have no cause to laugh, when we tell you they had taken away
his Service, his Sacraments, his Rites, and the Government of the Church, and
the Maintenance thereof, and we know not where they have laid them too; surely
'twill be hard to find them again in such a Confusion as they have made; but
God, we trust, will gather them out of the dust and rubbish of the Temple, and
restore them to their ancient splendour, that we may worship God in the Beauty
of Holiness again.

In the mean time no man will blame us, if while we sat by the waters of
Babylon, during the time of our Captivity, we have been heard to sigh
sometimes, and to ask after a Deliverance. Nemo felicitatis suae obliviscitur,
as Seneca says, We cannot forget our former happiness. And this has been our
employment for want of a better, Luke 7.32.
like Children sitting in the Marketplace, because no man has hired us. Who
will give salvation? God help us, we have had too much leisure to enquire and
to ask after it, Quis dabit, whence our deliverance should come, whether from
the East, or from the West, from the North, or from the South; for we had our
Times to hope for it from all Quarters: And then as one failed, by and by we
were ready to say as Mordecai did to Hester, Hest 4.14.
Deliverance shall come another way. But one way or other we had to expect it
still, and Quis dabit was the only song of Sion then, instead of all other
Anthems of the Church, Who shall give salvation?

Indeed the Jews might have taught us not to expect it from Babylon, though we
thought sometimes it might come from thence. Salust.
Aut in mederi potes, aut omittenda est cura omnibus, as 'twas said of Caesar
in the Historian, and that either a Catholic or a Christian King, or both
together, would do it, and help him who was the true Defender of the Faith.

But this was an Error in us; and though the Jews had it not there, yet ex
Sion, out of Sion was our deliverance to come. God would not have us to be
beholding to the King of Sodom, Genesis 14.23.
or to any foreign State, to bring home Abraham, or to say, I have enriched
the People: But our deliverance must come out of Sion; those of our own
Religion, of our own Nation, must do it. And, God be thanked, they did; we know
not how dear it might have cost us had it been otherwise. It Is not good to lay
the Cloth to strangers; it may be when they had eaten our Meat, the Dishes
would not have sufficed them. But Sion must deliver it self, and free us from
these Oppressions; else the Remedy might have been as bad as the Disease, and
the Patient have suffered by them both.

It was Gods infinite mercy this, and let him only have the glory of it, that
we fell into the hands of such Physicians that were tender of us, and have
wrought this Cure upon a sick State without any Phlebotomies at all. We had
been used so much to bloodletting before, that they knew 'twould do us no
good; and therefore it must be sine sanguine, without blood now, when our
Sacrifices are restored, though Pilate mixed blood with them when the War
began. We owe this under God to the Conduct of a wise General, whose memory
shall be glorious for it, and who conquered without fighting: It was vidi,
vici, a maiden Victory he obtained, and his Eyes only were triumphant. But
this blessing we have ex Sion, that our deliverance came out of Sion; for
though it were a Northern Army, they had none of the Northern Ice in them; but
most, if not all, of them were our own Contrymen and Friends.

I have said enough of the first part of the Text, and kept you too long in
mourning. And yet if you consider how long we have kept our selves in it, and
that it is but proportionable to that, you will pardon me. 'Twas a long
Captivity, almost the third part of the Babylonian: And how many are delivered
from the bondage of the Body, while they waited for this deliverance of the
Nation? Our Fathers and Brethren are gone most of them while they expected it,
like those Israelites that dyed in the Wilderness, Number. 14.23.
and could never get further then the first part of this Text, Who shall give
salvation unto Israel out of Sion? It Is Gods infinite mercy to me, which I must
ever magnify, that I live to preach upon the second, and to have a share in
this Triumph.

2. When the Lerd turned the Captivity of his People, etc. And my discourse now
shall be most at home, the Argument of a Deliverance being more pleasing. And
here,

1. God stands in the gap, the Author of this deliverance, Cum averterit
Dominus, When the Lord turns the captivity. The Jews might have said, Cyrus
turned it, 2 Chronicles. 26.
that sent them back, or Darius, or Artaxerxes abroad; or else Ezra turned it,
or Nehemias, or Zerubbabel at home: All these contributed much toward it, and
yet it is, Cum averterit Dominus, When the Lord turns the captivity.

It Is not good to admire Instruments when the Workman himself is in place; as
if a man should commend his Club, and take no notice of Hercules: and Men are
but the Instruments of God, as a sword in the hand of a Giant. Gods scourges
wicked men are, as 'twas said of Tamberlane, that he was Flagellum Dei; they
may kill or save, be glorious Instruments of our deliverance, or cursed
Instruments of our destruction. But the Hand and the Contrivance is Gods.
Therefore let all flesh be silent, not so much as named, in a Deliverance
especially. But let God only have the glory of it, for he only has done it;
no body else could. Men cannot work Miracles; Exo. 8.19.
but the Magicians said it was Digitus Dei, when it came to that: This is the
Finger of God, and therefore let not the Arm of Flesh interpose in it.

Gods hand is in our ordinary deliverances, which he works for us every day;
and it is an issue of his Providence that we sleep in safety every night. There
is no Evil in the city which God has not done, and therefore no Good much
more. But there be some deliverances which are written at length, and not in
Figures, as they use to say, that is, they are legible to every eye, even a
blind man may see them. Here Gods finger comes in too; like Apelles upon the
Table, no body could do it but himself, and therefore no body would touch the
Pencil after him: Or like Hercules, we might know he had been there by the
print of his foot. So God leaves the print of his hand and his finger behind
him in some deliverances, which no Mortal dares to counterfeit; for if he
should, every body would see the Forgery, and he deserved to be punished.

And such a Deliverance was ours: the Characters of it are so plain and
distinct, that are cannot possibly mistake. When God wrote Mean Tekel upon the
wall of the Kings Palace, while he caroused in the Vessels of the Sanctuary,
Dan. 5.5, 6.
the Text says, The King saw part of the hand that wrote it, and his
countenance was changed, and his knees smote one against another. Here was Gods
hand visible in a judgment, and I pray take notice, 'twas for Sacrilege. And
did we think that any sin when time was? if we did, methinks we should have
been afraid of the Hand too. But his hand is as visible in some mercies as in
some judgments; when it is as it were (...), and no hand can do it but his: Not
all the Magicians in the world; they his just their Art produce Frogs, an^
truck in ordinary wares like so many Hocus-Pocus's; but when it comes to a
deliverance, especially a extraordinary one, such as a dividing the Sea, and
carrying the Israelites thorough it; then Moses his hand only must do it, by
Gods immediate power and command: Then it is, Ex. 14.16.
Extend manum tuam, Stretch out thy hand ever the sea, and divide it. And lest
any man should think Moses had done it by his own hand, and not Gods, therefore
David ascribes it to God only, and not to Moses, Psalm. 136.12. In manu
potenti, and brachio excelso, he brought out Israel from among them. He that
did all the rest there, with a mighty hand and stretched out arm. Alas! Moses
his hands were not so you know, they grew heavy, and were fain to be stayed up,
Ex. 17.12.
not long after Aaron and Hur did it; (...) they were not mighty o^ themselves,
no more were his arms neither. And though they say Kings have long arms, and
may reach far; yet it is but within their own sphere, when all is done they can
reach no further, but they have bones and flesh in them as well as other men's.
It Is God only that can do things brachio excelso, with a stretched-out arm,
and no body else.

And whether Gods arm were not stretched out in our Deliverance I need not
ask you. It Is true, there was no such apparent Miracle in it, as the dividing
the Sea, or cutting the British Ocean in sunder, to bring over the King on dry
land: No, that was needless in his case, when he had so many Ships ready to
convey him. And God does not work Miracles when ordinary remedies are at hand,
though that was Miracle enough, even the sudden submission of the Sea men to
his just power. It might be said of him in a qualified sense, which the People
said of our Savior when he assuaged the Tempest, What manner of man is this,
whom both the wind and the seas obey? For there had been a Tempest as well at
Sea as at Land. They use to say, If it be foul weather upon the Land, it is
worse at Sea: Yet I know not how the Sea was appeased, and there was a Calm
upon the sudden, and all conspired to the completing the Miracle here.

But upon the Land how many Miracles have been wrought? First, that more then
30. Tyrants, as they were once at Athens, should upon the sudden, when they
thought their Power secured, and themselves scant Mortals, be wrought out by
one, when that one should be arrested by death in the midst of Triumphs, and he
had as much need of a Remembrancer as the Romans had in theirs, That he was a
Man, when the Son of that Man, or Monster rather, should so easily quit his
power to them that could not keep it, but were forced to call in the old Riders
again; for the Commonwealth, as it must be called, was tired before, and yet
they must again bow down their backs to them.

Well, the wheel of Providence was now going, and every Change seemed a
Deliverance to us: It was so as to the event; for as if they had been playing a
game at Chess, while their design was to check him, they did but take up one
another to make room for the King.

But we for the present had little ease by it; we did but change for the worse
still. The old flies were less to be dreaded, quoniam hipleni, as the Horse
said in the Fable, while the new ones came with sharper Appetites upon us.
Only some comfort there was in the very Change. Mal. 3.6.
We are subject to it in our selves, and all that is about us: Only God can
say, Ego non mutor, I am not changed: We are, therefore we love it, and make a
virtue of it, and are glad of Changes every hour. It Is strange none should be
for the better, that among so many Casts there should be none good. We were
used indeed as our Savior was, Luke 23.
sent from Annas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, and
then back again to Pilate; but where was Justice all this while? for the Judges
we see. Indeed we had too much of that sometimes, and their very mercies were
cruel-But here was no Deliverance, but from one Tormentor to another, not a
good cast yet. Why, all were good, and they did Gods work, and the Kings, when
they were most against him.

We are now in this last year of Providence, so many and so great, that it may
be much more justly called Annus mirabilis then that of 88. was. Providence
abroad in the general peace of Christendom, that Janus his Temple might have
been shut up again; which I take to be not the least of Gods Providence to us,
for that peace conduced to ours: And Providence at home, even to a Miracle,
that the Hills should be brought low, those Mountains of proud and
self-interested men which were thought insuperable, that the Valleys should be
exalted, and the way laid even, as it were, Luke 3.5.
and prepared for him, as John the Baptist said of our Savior at his coming,
and all rubs out of it, that all flesh might see the salvation of God, and the
deliverance of this Nation. For it is Salvation, though but Temporal, that
which was chiefly intended in this Text, and a deliverance out of Captivity,
Who shall give salvation unto Israel?

And now you are all ready to answer, Cum averterit Dominus, it is Gods
salvation, and it is he only that has given it, and therefore we give him
only the glory of it; not unto us, nor unto him we most admire in it, as his
Instrument, but unto him. And let it be entered into our Records, and made the
Title Page of the History of our Times, Hoc fecit Dominus, Mat. 21.42.
This has God done, and it is mavelous in our eyes. And as our Savior said
of the Woman that anointed his feet, Wheresoever this Gospel shall be read, for
it is good Tidings too, there shall this also be told; not which she, but he
himself has done for us. His Doing is much more conspicuous if we consider,

2. The Manner of it in the next circumstance of the Text, Cum averterit, When
he Turns the captivity. The Turning of the Jewish Captivity was very strange
and very sudden; for we find it in the last of the Chronicles, after he had
described the destruction of Jerusalem, and the Peoples carrying away,
immediately at the next Verse, Now the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus,
that he made a Proclamation, and said, Who is there among you of his people,
the Lord his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 36.22.
This was all the preparation toward it, God stirred up the heart of Cyrus, and
the Captivity was turned upon the sudden.

And so was ours too; God stirred up the hearts of some worthy Persons, and
after some Turns among our Oppressors, that went off the stage as Praeludium's
to it, our Captivity was turned too. Salust.
Et tandem vicit fortuna Reipublicae, as the Historian said.

'Twas turned as a River to the Springhead, -- Xanthe retro propera, -- Rivers
do not use to do so, but they run to the Sea. And so did our Rivers, the
current of the Nation was so, after such a tract of time, the course of the
stream was almost grown natural, into the Sea, or into a Gulf rather, like
Scylla and Charybdis, that swallowed, and devoured every thing.

Here then was the Miracle, that God turned the stream upon it self, one Army
upon another, the people upon those that had misled them, they came down like
a Torrent, 'twas not safe for any body to stand in their way. 'Twas answerable
to what the people prayed for, Psalm. 126.5. Turn our Captivity, O Lord, as the
Rivers in the South. What was the natural course of the Rivers in the South, I
know not. But I know the Rivers in the North had a strange turn at this time,
when a man might see the whole stream of the Nation run a contrary way upon the
sudden, to what they had been used.

This is that, that makes us yet think we are but in a Dream, we cannot think
we are awaked, to see such a turn as this is, but that we Dream of happiness
only. And yet we are awaked, God be thanked for it. And the Lord has turned
our Captivity.

Ours, that's the Captivity

3. Of his people. We do not deserve that title, whatever the Jews did. Ps. St.
12.
But my people would not hear my voice, and Israel would not obey me. God
complains of them; And certainly we have not been very forward to hear it,
else we had not been punished as they were.

But whatever their punishments were, you see, God owns them for his people
still. And God uses to punish his people more severely, then he does others:
Because their offense is more unpardonable, as a Rebellious Child's is then a
Servants. Et tu Fili, such an ingratitude must needs go near the Father. To
whom much is given, Lu. 12.48.
of him much shall be required, and therefore if he smart for it, he must thank
himself. And yet it is quos diligo, still he loves them whom he chastises, and
he will not renounce them for his Children for all that.

And yet some men have endeavored to make us believe, That those that were
under the Rod were none of his Children, and that Temporal Prosperity was the
only mark of Gods favor. This is one of the new Doctrines indeed, but the old
was quite contrary: And yet how often have we been told to our Heads, as we use
to say, That our Cause was not good because the issue was not successful? In
the mean time I have often wondered at their Foreheads, that would tie Goodness
and Success always together; which if it were true, must make Christians to be
worse then Turks.

Well, howsoever I may be outfaced, I shall never fall into this Heresy, as
long as I see Plebis suae in the Text, and Gods own People in a Captivity too.
Therefore that must comfort us in the remembrance of our sufferings; and now
that we are out of them, oblige us to that which this Text calls for in the
last place,

4. The Peoples Triumph and Thankfulness, Exultabit Jacob and laetabitur
Israel, Then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

Then it seems it is a Duty incumbent upon us to give Thanks for a Deliverance.
We say, He can do little, that cannot say, I thank you: And that Courtesy that
is not worth Thanks, is worth nothing. And yet how many tongue-tyed men are
there in the world, that cannot bring out such a word? when it comes to that,
they have an impediment in their speech, and yet they can speak any thing else
very plain. Molestum hoc verbum, Rogo, Seneca says: Some men do not love to
ask a good turn, and others love as little to acknowledge it; but let the
benefit lie in the middle, and we will take it; as for Rogo or Gratias ago, at
both ends of it, we think it is none of our business; especially to say, I thank
you; there be very few that can pronounce it.

But to say, I thank God, methinks no body should be ashamed of that, Who gives
liberally, and upbraids not, James 1.5. (...), He does it simply without any
reaches in it: They be not Munera in hamo, as men's gifts oftentimes use to be.
And then he does not reproach us with them neither, nor cast them in our dish
when the meat is eaten: And therefore we should be sure to thank him, and to
say grace before we rise from the Table; yet we forget it I know not how. As
among the Lepers in the Gospel, Ubi sunt novem? scarce one in ten that returns
to give thanks.

But for Deliverances, such blessings as these, that are not served in to us
once or twice a day, as our meat is, but once or twice it may be in our whole
lives, especially such a Deliverance as this, there is not only Thanks, but
Joy and Exultation due to it: as the Prophet Zachary says, Exulta filia Sion,
Zach. 9.9.
Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Sion, shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: Behold
thy King comes. 'Twas spoken indeed of the King of Kings, and their spiritual
deliverance from their sins; but, Ecce, rex tuus venit, Behold, thy King comes,
especially coming as he does, after such an Interregnum as we have had, does
deserve an Exultation from us too.

And to give the People their due, they have expressed it: I think no King was
ever received with the like; so many re-iterated Triumphs; when they had done
they begun again, -- Nec dum finitus, -- A man would think they would never
have done; so loud in their Acclamations, so prodigal of their wood in their
Bonfires, as if now that the King is come near them, they should never need any
fire again, and his Sun would warm them still.

This was not to be blamed in them, for we have a Triumph warranted in the
Text; not only exultabit, but laetabitur; when one is done the other shall
begin, like one Bonfire after another; Then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel
shall be glad.

And it is not only Jacob, but Israel; lest any should make excuses, all must
appear at this Solemnity. And some; it may be, did excuse it at the first
Triumph with their Buying of Farms, or Yokes of Oxen, or the like, some
pretenses they had, as many as were over-wary or under-willing, that is, not so
well-affected as they should be. Why, these came in at the second or third
Course, and there was a kind of Coge introire at last, they were in a manner
compelled to come in, because they durst not stay without. But now all join in
the Rejoicing; I hope it is hearty, and not only from the Teeth outward:
However it comes with a Nemine contradicente, No man does, or no man dares,
contradict it.

Why any body should I know not, unless they take it ill to be happy, to be
freed out of slavery, to see Peace established, Religion and the Worship of God
restored. If this be a wrong to them, -- Pol me Occidistis Amici -- The mad man
was wronged, when he was restored to his Wits again. But I will not suppose any
body in that condition, though there have been distempers among us heretofore,
I hope we are all come to our selves now, and that we join heartily in this
Triumph.

And yet some Elder Brothers are apt to find fault, and to repine at the Music
and (...) Dancing, to ask, (...) Journey, If and as he did, as if 'twere too
much or too light for such an occasion. I would not be thought to countenance
any Excess, or to justify all men's extravagancies at such a time; but do
rather reprove them: And when I have done that, I must tell you again, as the
Father did him in that Parable, It is meet that we should make merry and
rejoice: Iu. 15.32.
for not this thy Brother, but thousands of thy Brethren were civilly dead,
that is, ruined and undone, and now they are alive again, they were lost and
they are found. Therefore some Exultation may be allowed, if it be one friske
it may be excused, the Occasion is not ordinary: Exultabit Jacob, Jacob shall
rejoice greatly, as the daughter of Sion was bid to do before, as they would
leap out of their skins, no moderate joy must serve the turn.

(...) Moderation called for by St. Paul, after a re-iterated joy, as it is
here, Again I say, Phil. 4.5.
Rejoice, but let your Moderation be known to all men. The word is (...), and
it is rendered Modestia; and both are needful at this time, a Yielding and a
Modesty, now we may seem to have the advantage of our Enemies. The less there
was of it on their side when time was, let there be the more of it on ours now;
and we must not insult, though we may exult, for this Deliverance. But let your
Moderation be known, it is necessary for the healing of our Breaches, and not
only God, but the King, calls upon us for it.

This is but an Expression of our Thankfulness to God; and yet the best
expression of that, when we have said all we can, is our Obedience. No doubt we
have all of us promised much, Genesis 28.20.
as Jacob did in his Journey, If God will be with me, if he will but deliver us
out of this Bondage, then the Lord shall be our God. These were our Tabulae
votivae, such Vows we have made, or at least should have made, every one of us;
let us be careful to perform them, and express our thankfulness that way. Those
be the best Trophies we can set up, in the Reformation of our Lives; as old
Zachary said in his Song, and 'twas a Song of Triumph too, Luke 1.74.
Ut liberati serviamus, That we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him
all the days of our life.

It Is a great happiness to serve God without fear; we have not done so for many
years together: but as Christ came to his Disciples, so did we to him, the
doors being shut. -- Et aperto vivere voto, -- Every body could not do it; not
that they were ashamed of their Petitions, for they were such as were allowed
by Authority, but for fear of their Enemies. And now that this fear is removed,
let the Service, I pray you, be performed with more Reverence, with Reverence
and Fear still, of God though not of Men. But let us remember the Service, the
Service of the Church, not to neglect that, as formerly we have done; and the
Service of God especially, that we pay him that Obedience in our Lives which is
due to him.

That the World may not condemn us of unthankfulness, that it be not said of us
as it was of his own People, Psalm. 78.
Yet for all this they sinned more against him: it is repeated twice in that
Psalm, and one sin of unthankfulness is too many.

But I will not suspect it in a People so obliged as we are: Being so
delivered, as it is our duty, so I doubt not but it shall be our business to
serve him, even to serve him all the days of our Lives.

Now to God the Father, etc.

A Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of Winchester, on Jan. 30. 1661.
being the Anniversary of the Death of the late King Charles I. of glorious
memory.
LAMENT. 4.20. The breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord was taken
in their nets, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the
heathen.


THis Book is a Book of Lamentations, and so is this Day; a Day, wherein to
lament the loss of a King; a dumb man would speak, as one did in Herodotus to
save a Kings life. But this Book is called (...), Jeremy's Lamentations, the
Prophet wrote it in tears, so it is said in the Vulgar Translation, Sedit
Jeremias flens and planxit, Jeremy wept and lamented when he wrote it: And well
he might, for the occasion of it was very sad, even the Captivity of Jerusalem;
the People were carried to Babylon, and the City and Temple destroyed; and
among the spoils there was Spiritus oris nostri, even he that was The breath of
their nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord. And therefore if the Prophet breath
out nothing but Lamentations and Sighs upon such an occasion, it is no wonder.

We are indeed this day upon the like subject, a day of Lamentations it is: Let
the Priest weep between the Porch and the Altar, and so let the People too; for
when the breath of our nostrils is gone, the People and Priests are both alike,
no better then dead trunks every one of us.

Did I say, A Day of Lamentations? Indeed it should not be called a Day,
wherein the Sun never shined. It Is said, There was darkness over all the Land
until the ninth hour, when they crucified Christ. A man might suppose it so
over this Land of ours, when they murdered the King, and that they came with
Lanthorns and Torches, as they did to apprehend Christ, though 'twere at high
Noon: For sure the Sun would not own the action, nor see the murder of Gods
Anointed, and therefore let it not be numbered amongst the days any longer. But
-- Mira cano, sol occubuit. -- It Is a sad story to remember, the Sun sat at
high Noon. I cannot say, -- Nox nulla sequuta est, as 'twas said of the death
of another Prince; for after the death of this, there was a continued night
amongst us, no daylight for so many years together; till at last the Sun
returned, the same Sun or a brighter, his Fathers own Son it was, and now, God
be thanked for it, it is daylight again with us.

But for the day of the Kings death, I would have it wiped out of the Calendar,
as there is a day put into the Calendar sometimes in February, Dies
intercalaris it is called; so I would have the Thirtieth of January put out, for
it will be a reproach to us, -- Titulumque effeminat anni. It Is pity it should
be remembered, but that the wisdom of our Superiors will have it so, let it be
a day of blackness and darkness for ever.

And yet we remember the deaths of other Martyrs, the days of their deaths are
in the Martyrologies of the Church instead of their Birth-dayes, in which they
were born to Immortality; and therefore the death of this blessed Saint and
Martyr deserves to be remembered too: To be remembered for those Princely Virtues
that shined in him that day, more then in any other of his life. How glorious
was the King of Israel this day? Micah said it of David in a scoff, but 'twas
true in earnest: among the many scoffs that were put upon that glorious Saint,
this might be one too; but 'twas a sad truth nevertheless. How glorious was he
in his Meekness, in his Patience, in his Magnanimity, in his Charity, in his
Contempt of the world, and all the Glory of it? For he had more Tentations to
love it then all his Subjects besides, and therefore how glorious was he in the
despising of it? how glorious was the King of England this day? as 'twas said
of the Proto-Martyr St. Stephen, so it might be said of this Royal Martyr too,
All that sat in the Council saw his face as it had been the face of an Angel.
But that their eyes were holden that they could not know him, as 'twas said of
Christ, Certainly they could not have condemned him. But I say unto you, That
even Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one of These; not like an
ordinary flower, and therefore not like this flower, This Lilly of the Valleys,
this Lilly among Thorns, as it is said of Christ there. And certainly if any
Lilly besides Christ were planted so, this was he^ Among the Thorns indeed,
that pricked him, and did him all the injuries they could. Like the Rose in
Sharon, as it is in that Verse, Cant. 2.1. (there are Prickles enough too) and
the Lilly of the valleys. Never any Lilly stood lower in the Valley, and was
clothed with more humility, and therefore the more glorious in that respect;
and therefore the more fit to be taken notice of this day. It Is Solomon in his
glory, in all his glory; most richly apparelled he was, if the inward Clothing
of the Mind be of any value.

The Kings Daughter is all glorious within: and so was the King himself, a true
Son of that Mother, the Spouse of Christ. And therefore He was clothed like
her, glorious within, howsoever the wrought Gold in His outward clothing was
taken from Him.

Et hinc lachrymae, here the Lamentation begins. When once they begin to unking
Him, and to take His Purple, and His Royal Authority from Him, 'twas no hard
matter to prophecy what would be the end of the Tragedy. Dead men they say have
no Teeth, or cannot Bite: and though they had Him safe enough in their Nets,
yet they did not think him so, nor themselves neither, till He was past Biting;
The Chaldeans were satisfied with less Barbarity then this: and yet here is
matter enough for a Lamentation, though it were but Captus in Laqueis, and
there be no Murder of a King mentioned, The breath of our nostrils, the
Anointed of the Lord was taken in their Nets, of whom we said, Under his
shadow, we shall live among the Heathen.

In this Text then we have the Prophets Lamentation, for the sad condition of a
King. And yet, who this King was, Interpreters agree not, whether it were
Josiah, or Zedekiah, or whether it were Christ himself, He that was the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords. But a King it was, for here we have all the
Characters of Him, spiritus Or is nostri, and Christus Domini, and In umbra tua
vivemus, the breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, and under his
shadow we shall live among the Heathen; of whom but a King, can this be said?
It matters not what King, for even the worst of Kings is sacred, and the loss
of Him to be lamented. Suppose Him to be Zedekiah, and He was none of the best;
as indeed the Chronology, and the rest of the matter of this Book seems to
point at Him. But if it were Josiah, as St. Jerome and the Hebrew Interpreters
think, or if it were Christ as most Interpreters say, what Mourning could be
sufficient? Mary stood by the Sepulcher weeping: and well she might, for such a
loss. But we will not restrain it to any particular, because it is proper
enough to all, and we may apply it to one whom the Prophet never Dreamed of,
even spiritus Oris nostri, He that was the breath of our nostrils, Ours of this
Nation, who breathed by him, and dyed with him.

First then we will observe the Characters of him, as they are given here in
the Text, that you may learn to esteem of him, as he deserved.

Secondly, the calamity that befell him, that you may lament the loss of him.

The Characters of him are three.

1. Spiritus Oris nostri, he was the breath of our nostrils, and that's an
endearing expression of him.

2. Christus Domini, that is a sacred expression of him, he was the Anointed of
the Lord.

3. In umbra tua vivemus, that will make us know the benefit we had by him, and
what we suffer by the loss of him, under his shadow we shall, or we will, live
among the heathen.

And this last has been acknowledged by our selves: We have it Ex ore tuo, out
of our own mouths, and out of theirs too, who it may be afterward would have
denied it.

Cui diximus, to whom, or of whom, we our selves have said and acknowledged
this.

And when we have said that, I wish we had no more to say of it: But there is
that behind which cannot be concealed, and we must all of us lament, according
to the tenor of the Text, and the duty of the Day.

Captus est in laque is ipsorum, He was taken in their nets.

I begin with the first Character of him, an endearing Expression, as I told
you, he was the breath of our nostrils. And what can be dearer to us then that?
If our life be dear to us, our breath must needs be so; for we live no longer
then we breath. God Almighty, when he made Man, He breathed into him the breath
of life, and Man became a living soul, Genesis 2.7. Inspiravit in faciem ejus
spiraculum vitae, there is the breath of life, and this God breathed into him;
but before that he was not a living soul, but a lump of dead earth. It Is the
breath of life that distinguishes us from the Clay that lies in the streets.
-- Ex meliore luto. It Is true, some men may be made of better Clay then others,
but it is all Clay till the breath of life be breathed into us. Why then learn
to value this breath, for then it is a living soul straight. And this God
inspires, not only into the first man, but into every man that comes into the
World. And in this, that he might make Kings like himself, Dixi Dii estis, he
is pleased to impart this honor to them, that either they inspire souls, or at
least they are the souls of their Subjects; for here he gives them such an
Attribute, Spiritus or is nostri, they are the breath of our nostrils. It Is
said of himself, In illo vivimus, In him we live, move, and have our being,
Acts 17. and if Kings be the breath of our nostrils, we live in them too. That
they are so, the Prophet acknowledges it here, in behalf of all the People,
who lived and breathed no otherwise but by him. -- Quod spiro tuum est. -- We
are beholding to him that we live, for it would not be vita vitalis without
him. We were better be dead, then to live in slavery or misery; and I appeal to
all that hear me, what manner of life we lived after he was taken from us.

But would any man be guilty of his own death, a Felo de se? No man ever hated
his own flesh, Ephesians. 5.29.
says St. Paul; and therefore one would think no man should hate his own
Spirit, his Soul much less. Why the King is the Soul of every man; and would
any man hate or hurt that? would he sin against his own Soul so much, as to
entertain the thought of any hurt toward him? If he do it, he sins so: First,
because the King is his Soul here, the very breath of his nostrils: And,
Secondly, because his soul shall be sure to be punished for it hereafter, both
body and soul in Hellfire.

And yet for all this Kings are not secured from violence, though they are as
near to us, and should be as dear to us, as our souls.

If we mark the Expression, one would wonder how this should come to pass: To
catch a Spirit in a Net, as it is here in the Text, Captus est in laqueis, a man
can hardly conceive it. One may as soon paint a Voice, -- Pinge sonum, -- as
lay hold on a Spirit or a Breath. The Nets must be very fine, and artificially
made, as the Poets feign of Vulcans Nets; and commonly there wants no Art in
making of them, in which the breath of our nostrils must be taken.

But what pity is it that Kings are but a Breath? especially good Kings, whom
it does concern the People that they should be Immortal? Psalm. 81.7.
But ye shall dye like men, that is a sad sentence upon Princes. They that are
the breath of our nostrils, that the breath should be in their nostrils too,
and they should be no more then a Breath; this is but a sad Contemplation upon
it. And yet it is true, they are but Treasure in Earthen Vessels, when all is
done no better then ordinary Pitchers, and as easily broken as any of them. And
thence it is that we are bid to Cease from them, Cease ye from Man, Isa. 2.22.
whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of?

In the mean time to make no more of the breath of Princes, then we do of
ordinary men, especially of Murderers and Malefactors, to take away their
breath from them, and our own too, by violent hands; this adds to the Calamity
much, and it is such a frailty of Princes, which God and Nature never intended.
For if they be the breath of our nostrils, we must let them live as long as
they can, Quintil.
Quorum accendit fragilitas pretium; like Crystal Glasses, we should be the
more tender of them for that reason, lest while we shorten their days, we
shorten our own.

And this is one of the Prerogatives of Kings, That they cannot dye alone,
Tert. Apol.
but Vobiscum concutitur Imperium, in Tertullian: The Earthquake is universal,
and all the People must dye with them; Jos. Antiq. lib. 17. c. 8.
it is fit they should. It Is observed by Historians, Josephus and others, That
Herod the Great when he dyed, that he might be sure the People should make
Lamentations at his Funeral, he took order that many of the Nobility of Iewry
should be put to death the same day with him: But it was a needless fear if his
Government had been good. A King cannot go out of the world without the tears
of his Subjects, because they dye as well as he. Possibly there may be no
Mourners because there be no Men, all civilly dead, and none left to bury him,
or to mourn for him: But else Mourners there must be enough, like the
Daughters of Jerusalem, whom Christ bids to weep for themselves, as if all the
men were absolutely dead there, or were to dye shortly after, when Christ dyed
that was their King. And therefore weep for your selves, and not for me; at
your own Funerals, as often as a good King is buried. And so David lamented
over Saul, though he was to succeed him in the Kingdom, 2 Samuel 1.17. it is one
of the Lessons appointed for this day; and he bid them in the next Verse, Teach
their children the use of the Bow: That comes in by a Parenthesis, and it seems
at first sight somewhat impertinent to the matter; but whatever the proper
meaning of it may be, it might be to mind them, that now the King was dead,
they might expect nothing but death too, and cutting of Throats; and therefore
they must stand upon their guards, and teach their children the use of the Bow.
Behold, it is written in the book of Jasher, as it follows; it stands upon
Record there, as a thing worth the remembering. And at the 24. Verse it is, Ye
daughters of Israel, again weep over Saul, as if the men were dead still, who
clothed you in Scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon
your apparel; and it is no wonder if the Women weep for the loss of him then.
But you see by all this what we lose when we lose a King, something besides
Ornaments and good Clothes, even the better part of us, our Souls and Lives;
when he dies, all are civilly dead too, for he is Spiritus oris nostri, The
breath of our nostrith.

I have done with the first Character of a King, I come now to the second.

2. Christus Domini, The Anointed of the Lord. And that as I said, is a sacred
expression of him, for they were only sacred persons, that were wont to be
Anointed: Kings, Priests, and Prophets all to be Anointed alike, and none were
Anointed but them. Some men in the late times of Confusion, while they made
bold to take away the Hedge and Enclosure about the King, made bold to give a
new Interpretation of that Text too, Touch not mine Anointed, and it must be
not Kings only, but ordinary persons that were meant there. As they would have
all the Lords people to be Prophets, and Priests, which are forbid to be
touched too in that place, so they would have all the Lords people to be Kings,
while they attributed this Title of Kings to them also: And all the Saints and
servants of God, say they, are as much Gods Anointed as the King. For this
Anointing is but Gratia gratis data, or Gratia Gratum faciens at most, some
peculiar Gift or Grace in Gods Children, and so all are alike concerned in it,
and so Ecce hic est Christus, lo, here is Christ, here is Gods Anointed, and
lo there, as it was in Christ's own time so in ours, as many Christ's or
Anointed ones as Christians, and Christos meos, concerns every body.

But if you look into that Psalm, you will find it otherwise, and who they were
that were meant by it, Psalm. 105.9, 10. Verses, even the Patriarchs expressed
by name, He made a Covenant with Abraham, and an Oath unto Isaac: And confirmed
the same to Jacob for a Law, etc. And Jacobs Children you know, were called the
twelve Patriarchs, which afterward multiplied into a Nation; But of them 'twas
principally intended, and of others, but by way of participation, in the
opinion of all Interpreters, till these new Glo^^^s sprung up like Gourds in a
night; Touch not mine Anointed. And these Patriarchs we are to know, were
Princes in their times, not only as a Prince, Thou have power, thou have
prevailed with God, Ge. 42.28. as 'twas said of Jacob, but they were Princes
indeed: It Is said so of Abraham expressly, Princeps Dei es apud nos, Thou art a
Prince among us, Genesis 23.5. a Mighty Prince as we read it, and so he showed
himself, when he gave Battle and slew 4 Kings at once, Genesis 14. The like might
be said of Isaac and the rest of them; And their very name speaks them to be
such, Patriarchae, not only Fathers, but Princes in their Generations. And
therefore Christos meos, for all that can be said to the contrary, will concern
Kings still.

And Kings are Gods Anointed after a more peculiar manner: the Character they
have here in the Text speaks them so. It Is not Uncti, but Christi, they are
called so here in the Text, and in that Psalm too, Nolite tangere Christos
meos, Touch not my Christ's. And not only in that, but in many other places
which might be alleged, it is applied to Kings, and to Kings only. As God is
pleased to vouchsafe them his name, Dixi Dii estis, I have said ye are Gods, so
Christ vouchsafes them his, I have said ye are Christ's Messiahs, in the Hebrew,
and Christi mei, my Christ's in the Greek and Latin, and all Interpreters
translate it so, not Uncti, but Christi.

Why then this must make their persons sacred in a very high degree, not only
holy, but the holy of holies; as the inmost place of the Temple was, so is the
person of the King. Let there be a Veil between, as 'twas in the Temple, and
no profane person come near him. His Sacred Majesty is a Title that belongs to
him without flattery. For it is holy oil that he is Anointed with, Psalm. 89.21.
Oleo sancto meo, I have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I
Anointed him. And his Presence was wont to be called Sacra vestigia, and his
Writs Sacri Apices, holy almost every thing about him, and such as should beget
a Reverence in the people.

Since the foundations of Government were shaken, he that shall look back, and
remember the Indignities that were put upon the person of our late Dear
Sovereign, how every wicked and profane person did not only touch him, which
they are forbid to do in that Psalm, but throng him and press him too, as the
Multitude did Christ; and that, not out of any affection to see him, but for
worse ends, which I had rather forget then mention, he will think the Reverence
was lost here, and the Anointing forgotten in the Text. When every hand was
lifted up against him, so many hands at the Sentence, and a hand to execute
that upon the Scaffold, did they think the Lords Anointed was there, or did
they remember the holy oil at that time? Since all holy things were profaned,
they made no reckoning of that, and therefore it is for the Interest of Princes
to keep up the Value of holy things, and not to suffer them to be trampled upon
by the Multitude. But it is worth the observing, which was said of Saul in the
Chapter before cited, 2 Samuel 1.21.
The shield of Saul was vilely cast away, as though he had not been Anointed
with oil; And was not the sacred Head of the King it self used so? -- Horresco
referens, -- As if he had not been Anointed with oil too, or as if never any
such Ceremony had been used. I would not be thought, Ambitiosus in malis, or to
aggravate the offenses of any. For how can I? Language is too narrow for it. --
Si Linguae Centum sint,
Oraque Centum, --
If I had as many Tongues as the Giant had hands, but Christus Domini, was
forgotten, that he was Anointed with oil when those hands were lifted up, and
the Nets were set in the Text. If they had known, they would not have Crucified
the Lord of life, the Apostles Charity so far excused the Jews; and I am
willing my Charity should think the same of these: they did not know him at
that time; in their practical understanding they did not; and 'twas a just
Judgment of God upon them, for their shutting their eyes so long before, and
their not knowing of him when they might. Well, Christus Domini, I have said
enough upon that, that men may know him better hereafter, and take heed how
they touch him. For the King is a Sacred person, The Anointed of the Lord,
that's the second Character of him.

3. The third is, In umbra tua vivemus, under his shadow we shall live among
the Heathen.

It Is no wonder, if we expect to live by him, for he is the breath of our
nostrils before, and I have said enough of that already. But we shall live
under his shadow, that speaks the protection of a King. To live under his
shadow, is to live under that. As Beasts shelter themselves under the shadow of
a tree, so men are sheltered under the protection of a King. You may have heard
of the Royal Oak, or you have read the Dream of Nebuchadnezar, of a tree that
reached to Heaven, and covered the Earth, under which the Beasts of the field
had shadow, and the Fowls of the air dwelt in the Boughs of it. And Daniels
Interpretation of it was this, Dan. 4.22. Tu es Rex, it is thou O King, thy
greatness reaches to Heaven, and thy Dominion to the end of the Earth, and all
had shadow and protection by it.

What the benefit of this Protection is, we have known by the want of it; those
that live sub Dio, that have no Canopy or Covering, but that of the Heavens,
are exposed to the injuries of all weather; whether it be hot or cold, wet or
dry, they have no fence for it, but they must bear it out with head and
shoulders, as we use to say. And this was our Case for many years together:
what storms have we endured? what miseries have we felt? or what have we not
felt rather? and all this for want of a Covering, and of a Protector, and that
shadow and comfort we might have enjoyed by him.

We had indeed one at last that called himself so, a Protector he would needs
be: but, alas! his shadow was but Mock-shade, or Nightshade rather, that was
fatal and deadly to all that stood under it. Requiescite sub umbra mea, as the
Bramble said in Jothams Parable, Rest under my shadow, when, alas! he had no
shadow for them. Whereas the shadow of a lawful King is life to his Subjects;
sub umbra ejus vivemus, Under his shadow we shall live. The sun shall not burn
thee by day, nor the moon by night, as it is Psalm. 121.6. He that dwells under
the shadow of the most High, he has those privileges and many more, Psalm.
91.1. and so has he that lives under the shadow of a lawful King; He shall
defend thee under his wings, as it is there, and thou shall be safe under his
feathers; whereas they that want them have no safety at all, but are exposed
like so many Chickens to be a prey to the Kites.

And what the pleasure of the shade is in hot weather we all know, and most of
us remember how happily we lived under it. -- Hic nemus, hic ipse tecum
consumerer avo. -- We could have been contented to live and dye under it too;
but thus we lived for many years together. We could not see when we were well,
but out of the shade we would go, and out of Gods blessing into the warm Sun,
and down goes the Tree himself, and farewell the shade of him; and what we got
by it you all know.

We are now by Gods blessing got into the shade again; -- Non deficit alter
amens. -- Another Tree is sprung up from the same Root, God be thanked for it,
and we will learn, I hope, to value the Tree better hereafter, and the shadow
we enjoy by him.

But if we have no shadow, in what a case are we many times? Jonah will tell
you, though it were but the shadow of a Gourd, and not of a Tree, that sprung
up and withered in a night, yet when he wanted it, and the East wind blew, and
the Sun beat upon his head, then he wished with himself to dye straight, and,
it is better says he, to dye then to live, Jonah 4.8. And so it is, and the
Bramble I told you of but now knew it, he that called himself Protector, and
that there was no way to take the people better, then to say, Come under my
shadow.

Especially if we consider that which follows in the Text, Inter Gentes, that
we live among the Heathen, as it was the case of the Jews here, they had many
enemies about them, Egyptians, Assyrians, and they that dwelt at Tire, and I
know not who besides, that did but watch their opportunity to make a prey of
them. Therefore a Protector was necessary, and to have shelter and a shadow
somewhere: and so 'twas for us, considering among whom we live, inter gentes,
that we have Enemies round about us, Nations of a different Religion, or if of
the same, that drive other Interests then ours, and therefore if not professed
Enemies, yet suspected Friends at best, and therefore it is good to keep in the
shade, not to lose our Protector if we can choose.

Well, we had him, and so had the Jews too, and we promised our selves all
imaginable happiness under him.

Cui diximus, vivemus, Of whom we said, We shall live under his shadow. This is
but a Pathetical remembrance of their loss, and the happiness they enjoyed
under their King: like Children that have lost their Parents, or Parents that
have lost their Children, in whom they promised themselves much Comfort and
Content; but now they are deprived of them.

It Is not good to set our hearts upon any thing in this world, lest we lament
the loss of it too soon, with a Cui diximus, we promised our selves such and
such things by him. -- At tibi ego Ignarus Thalamos, -- While we provide for
our Childrens Weddings, many times their friends come to their Funerals, and
while we build upon the lives of our Parents, the Fathers of our Country, and
make Panegyricks upon Princes, we lose them before the Speech is ended; such is
the frailty of humane things; Cui diximus vivemus, we said, we shall live under
their shadow, and we live to see them buried before us. Here we should write
Lamentations again, and we want a Jeremy to Weep it out.

But Cui diximus, vivemus, minds us of some what else too, of Indignation, as
well as of Lamentation for a King. For it is not only we shall, but we will
live, Vivemus, the future tense both. And if we said, we will live under his
shadow, how came the Tree to be cut down?

And this we all said, as well as the Jows, we have it, Ex ore tuo, for them,
and they for that King were guilty of no such Cruelty. And so we had it out of
our mouths too; how many Hosannahs were sung to this Blessed Saint and Martyr,
immediately before the War: how many Declarations of Loyalty, and making him a
Glorious King in it? And with the same Breath the Tree is blasted, and
afterward cut down by them. Well, this Cui diximus stands upon Record, to the
Eternal Infamy of these Paricides, they themselves said it over and over, nay,
they swear it too in their Oaths of Allegiance to the King more then once,
Under his shadow we will live, and yet they would not for all that, For

I must come now to the last Act of the Tragedy, and I wish I could be excused
from speaking to it, because no body would believe it, if we had not seen it
Acted before our eyes.

But can any man believe it yet, or his own eyes, that believes what we have
said already, that he is spiritus oris nostri, and Christus Domini, and in
umbra ejus vivemus, The breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, and
we will live under his shadow, and yet that he should read Captus est in
Laqueis ipsorum, after all this he is taken in their Nets.

If you understand it of Josiah or Zedekiah, the Jews are to be excused from
it: For they were guilty of no such wickedness, as I said but now. It Is true,
Josiah was slain at Megiddo, and taken in the Nets of Pharaoh Necho, and so was
Zedekiah taken in the Nets of the Assyrians, and carried Captive to Babylon,
but his own subjects had no hand in it. They lamented his loss; Jeremy here
does it in the name of all the people, who could have been contented to live
under his shadow, and though he was none of the best Kings neither.

But if you will have it to be a Prophecy, and understand it of Christ, then
indeed the Jews were Regicides too. Will ye Crucify your Ring? Pilate asked
them that Question, and they said they would; anguis ejus super nos, his blood
be upon us, and upon our Children.

Well, though in the Prophetical sense of the Text, the Parallel hold good, and
the Jews were as bad as any of us, yet in the Literal sense they were better,
In laqueis ipsorum, must be meant of the Assyrians, or Pharaoh Necho, and not
of the Jews. But in the Prophetical sense, the Jews cannot wash their hands of
it neither. No more can some of us, from being as bad as any Jew of them all.
And In laqueis ipsorum, brings it home to our Regicides too; Therefore let them
take it among them, In their Nets the Lords Anointed was taken.

Theirs! what would some men give now to be excused from this? Why, any bodies
rather then Theirs. Theirs, that is, the Nets of some Foreign Enemy, if you
will, of the Nations among whom they lived in the Text, such threads should be
spun abroad by Pharaoh Necho, or the Assyrians, by Almaynes, or Italians, or
Spaniards, or some strange Nation. -- Hostium tell us habet, -- But I hope they
live not in England, it is no Home-made-Cloth, or Thread either. And yet it is
for all that Ipsorum, we can carry it no further, then to the Doors of our next
Neighbors, those that breathed by him, and lived by him, under his shadow, and
under his Protection: Ipsorum is Latin for Englishmen, In their Nets he was
taken, to revive again an obsolete Observation long out of date with us, to the
dishonor of the Nation, as if the Kings of England were Kings of Devils, and
not of men.

But what? In the Nets of his own subjects? Can they justify a War against
their King? Indeed the Threads of this Net, the Doctrines of Rebellion, and
deposing and Murdering of Princes were first spun abroad in the shops of the
Jesuits. And since I know not how, we are more perfect in them then they. As
it is with many other Commodities, for which we were at first beholding to our
Neighbors, but now we make them as well at home, they be grown staple with us;
so you may have these now in every Weavers shop, as well as in the Jesuits.
They will tell you in plain English, for, In ordine ad spiritualia, has been
translated into all Languages, that to advance the Kingdom of Christ, that is,
their own Kingdom and not his, and to promote the Cause, it is lawful to take
Arms, to Murder Kings, and to commit any Villainy in the world. And yet St.
Paul tells us, that no Cause will justify this: He Preaches subjection to
Princes, Let every soul be subject, and therefore every body much more: and
they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation. And so St. Peter
Preaches the same, and the Primitive Fathers of the Church after them, as, if
we had so much leisure, 'twere very easy to show you. I will instance only in
two, one of the Greek Fathers, and one of the Latin. St. Gregory Nazianzen for
the Greek, and he says, that when Julian the Apostate had designed the Ruin
of the Christians, he was disappointed only by their Tears, Naz. Orat. ^. in
Julianum.
(...), they made use of no other Weapons against the persecutor but Tears, and
yet almost all his Army were Christians. And so St. Ambrose in the like Case,
Lib. 5. Orat. in Auxent.
Dolere potero, potero flere, I can weep and lament, says he, but I cannot
resist; Nec possum nec debeo, I ought not to resist it if I could. These were
all the Nets those Primitive Christians made use of, to catch and Embalme their
Persecutors in their Tears, like a fly in a drop of Amber. But for any other
Nets they never knew the use of them, till these late Modern times, wherein
many new Inventions are discovered, and this among the rest, for subjects to
make Nets for their Kings.

But this, I must tell you, is in Invention deviating from Justify and Right,
as the Wise man says there, God made man upright, but he has sought out many
Inventions; they are but crooked ones, as many turnings in them, as in a
Labyrinth, and the upright man whom God made, will never away with them; for
they are Nets of their own making, and not his. And they be made to a
mischievous end, to catch the feet of Princes.

Mighty Hunters it seems they are, like Nimrod, that no prey will serve them
but their King. Why ordinary Hunters Moll ort praeda saginantur, as it is in
Quintillian, and so ordinary Dogs too, -- Praeda Canum Lepus est, -- A Hare
will serve their turn. Theirs was the Lion, a sport, if I may call it so, not
usual among us in England, what ever it may be among Africans or Indians. But
so it must be, -- Placet in vulnus -- Maxima Cervix. And they loved the sport
too well, a Company of Hell Hounds they were; and you cannot but remember it, to
go a King-catching, with Reverence be it spoken by us to the Sacred Majesty of
Kings, 'twas their pastime, as well to talk of it, as to act it.

And how often their Nets were set for him, 'twould be but a sad story to
repeat. As the Devil sets Nets every where, Totus mundus Diaboli Laqueus, says
St. Gregory, so did these men too. He could not set his foot in any corner of
his Kingdom, but there was a Net set for him. They have set traps in my way,
and in the way wherein I went, have they privily laid a snare for me, as David
complained, Psalm. 142.3. Hunted he was from one place to another, till at last
he fell into the Noose, and Captus est in Laqueis ipsorum, he was taken in
their Nets. He that shall remember how he came into our Neighbor Island, by a
Train, and how fast they held him there when they had him, cannot think this
Text ill applied, but he will look upon it as a Prophecy of him too.

But yet take him alive for all that; -- (...), -- as he said to Agamemnon:
though you have hunted for him, and taken him, yet destroy him not. Zedekiah
was not destroyed, though he were taken. A living Dog is better then a dead
Lion; they did what they could to prefer a Dog before him, for he must not
live. -- Timete superi fata. -- Here Is the height of all Impiety: Next to the
Crucifying of Christ the King of Heaven, I challenge any History to match it;
for he was destroyed not in Battle, as David said of Saul, Forte in praelium
descendens peribit, Peradventure he may fall in the battle; and so there might
be something of Chance in it, and not of Malice, because Bullets distinguish
not; Not by the hands of a wicked Assassinate, as some other Princes have
miscarryed, but as they would have the world believe, by the hand of Justice.
That he might be like his Savior in all things, he must be arraigned, but
before worse Judges then Pilate; for he cried, What evil has he done? and so
washed his hands, for a testimony that he would have no hand in shedding the
blood of Christ; whereas these washed their hands in his blood: they held up
their hands to justify the Sentence, and with their hands subscribed the
Sentence of Death.

And so 'twas acted accordingly. Will Posterity believe it? -- Nec audent Fata
tam vastum nefas -- Admittere. -- Yet so it was, a Scaffold erected at the
Court gate, In ludibrium Majestatis, in defiance of Majesty, and the King was
murdered at high Noon. And it is said there was a Net upon the Scaffold too, in
case of resistance, to make good the Captus in laqueis in every particular,
though this Lamb before the Shearers gave them no occasion to make use of it.

And by this time I suppose it may be sull Sea with you, and you call for
justice upon the Murderers. They have felt it some of them, and they have
suffered deservedly for it; the stroke of Justice found them out at last, and
Gods Providence is magnified in his care of humane affairs.

But while we call for justice upon others, are we our selves innocent? -- Ne
saevi magne sacerdos. -- Something there is in the Text yet, that may draw us
into the Conspiracy too, as well as we think of our selves, and as severe as we
are to other men.

If the Vulgar Translation read the Text right, instead of Captus est in
laqueis ipsoru^, it is there Captus est in poccatis nostris, He was taken, not
in their Nets, but in our sins.

Murder, they say, will out; and then though some have been punished already,
yet there be many more that deserve it; and we our selves are of that number.
Talk no more of the Independents, or the Presbyterians, or the Anabaptists, or
any Sectary besides, the Net was spun by all of us, in our sins he was taken.

And it is most true; A good King cannot miscarry, but for the sins of the
people. If you understand it of Josiah, this reading of the Text proves it. And
therefore the advice is good in Tertullian, Esto tu Religiosus in Deum, Ter.
Apol.
si vis illum propitium Imperatori; the way to preserve a good King, is to be
good our selves; and for a bad one, it is as true, that he miscarries seldom but
upon that account. To look no further then Zedekiah in the Text, that you may
be satisfied, the people spun the Net in which he was taken, as well as
himself, look into the 36. chap. of the second of Chro. ver. 14. there you
shall meet with a Moreover, like an Insuper, after an account, after he had
spoken of Zedekiah, what he was, and what befell him in that Chapter, Moreover,
says the Text, All the chief of the Priests, and the people transgressed very
much, and he sent his Messengers and they despised them, therefore he brought
upon them the King of the Chaldees; and therefore it is true which the Prophet
says here, and it is the best reading of the Text, Captus est in peccatis
nostris, The peoples sins were the chiefest Nets, in which the King was taken.

And they be very strong ones. When the Philistines are upon him, no Sampson
can break them, but his strength then is no more then an ordinary man's.

Why, if that be true, what have we to say for our selves? suppose we were now
at the Bar of Gods Justice, though the Clemency of the King has pardoned us
here, and we were Arraigned for the Murder of his Father; I say, what have we
to say for our selves? 'Twould be in vain to plead Not Guilty, and to lay the
fault upon others, for Captus est in peccat is nostris will confute us, and so
far reconcile all parties, He was taken in our sins.

But our best defense would be a penitent Confession of the fact. -- Me, me,
adsum, -- qui feci, -- It is I that have sinned, but these Sheep, what have
they done? And those Wolves too that tore him in pieces, what have they done
more then any of us? It is usually said, one of the Adverse parties held the
King by the Hair, while the other cut off his Head. That the former of these
take it not ill, we will allow them more Company; for alas! we held him as well
as they. We were not upon the Scaffold to hold him; no more were they. But we
were somewhere else. Like Witches, that can kill a man and never come near him.
Necte tribus nodis. -- So we might tie knots, or thrust pins into him, and yet
sit at home by the fire, or upon our Thresholds, and never come so near him as
to touch his hair at all.

Beloved, I hope no body will take it ill, that I make such a Comparison, or
rank those that were the Kings good subjects, with those that were not so. But
it would be thought upon seriously by every one of us, and this day especially
more then upon any other, how far every one of our particular sins contributed
to the death of our King.

There be many Threads, you know, that must go to the making up of a Net. And if
it be a Net with Cords, as it must be a strong one for such a purpose as this,
to take the feet of a King in, there must be many more.

Therefore let us consider, what particular sins we our selves contributed to
the heap, and the making of this Net. For I will not mention those sins which
were almost Epidemical to the Nation, our Compliances and silence when we saw
the Thieves comeing, and the Murderers setting their Nets for the King, we did
not cry out as we should have done, and so we were Accessaries, at least,
Consenters; we saw a Thief and consented unto him by our silence, if not
principals as they were. And in Crimes of this high nature, Felony and Treason,
the Law says all are Principalls; but our Lukewarmenesse in Religion, neither
hot nor cold, like the Laodiceans, the neglect of our Duties in our several
Stations, both Laymen and Clerks, our Swearing, our Drunkenness, our
Profaneness, our Pride, our Covetousness, our Envy, our Malice, our
Backbiting; all these, and many, infinitely many more put together, will make a
Net with a witness; it is more then a threefold Cord, and it is no wonder if the
feet of the best King in the world were taken in them.

Let us sit down and lament this day, for the wickednesses we our selves were,
and I doubt it still are, guilty of. We see what a Thread we have spun, to the
cutting off the life of a King: And can we think to escape without Repentance?
or because the Galilaeans or some others were greater sinners then we,
therefore we are none at all? I tell you, nay, but except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish.

Though you were none of the Kings Judges, nor his Accusers, nor ever were in
Arms against him, or gave any countenance to the Rebellion; yet like the
Witches I told you of, you might contrive his mischief at home; so you did, in
your Parlours, in your Closets, in your Shops, and in your Chambers.

And therefore Enter into your chambers again, be still, and consider this; for
your own sakes, for the sake of Gods Anointed, lest you bring him into the Net
too: And nothing else can do it, Bella Telemacho paras, -- And if you love the
King think of it, for surely Thou also art one of them, and so was I, and every
one of us; we may be kin to, and love the Traitor, though we hate the Treason
never so much. But let us all show some severity against our selves too, to put
away Gods wrath from the Nation; some vindicative justice in our tears and
abstinences this day, as it has fallen upon others in a severer manner.

And then God will have mercy upon us, he will keep the feet of his Anointed
out of the Nets of wicked men, he will preserve this Church and Kingdom from
violence, and he will bring us to his Kingdom in Heaven.

Which God grant, etc.

A Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of Winchester, on Feb. 24. 1661. at
the Assizes held there.
ISAIAH 1.26. Et restituam judices tuos ut fuerunt prius, and consiliarios tuos
sicut antiquitus: post haec vocaberis civitas justi, urbs fidelis.

And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counselors as at the
beginning: afterward thou shall be called the city of righteousness, the
faithful city.


ET restituam judices tuos. Here Is a Restoration promised in the Text, and
that implies a Desolation before; if you look back to the 7. Verse of the
Chapter, you shall find it so, Terra vestra deserta, Your country is desolate,
your cities are burnt with fire. There Is as much desolation as the fire could
make; and the sword no doubt did its part too, for strangers devour your land,
in that Verse; and in the next Verse, Sion is left as a cottage, and as a lodge
in a garden of Cucumbers. And if the Lord of hosts had not left us a very small
remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto
Gomorrah, Verse 9. and that speaks desolation again.

One of the chief sins that brought it upon them was the perverting of
judgment, at the 21. Verse. How is the faithful City become a Harlot? It was
full of Judgment, Righteousness lodged in it, but now Murderers, Nunc autem
homicidae; Murderers were got into the Judges room; and then the best of them
were no better then companions of thieves, Verse 23. Consenters at least, while
they loved Gifts and followed after Rewards, and refused to judge the
Fatherless, or to let the Cause of the Widow come before them.

In the mean time the people were but in a sad condition, you will believe. And
no sooner had God eased himself of his Adversaries at the 24. Verse, but
presently he had compassion on them, with the turn of a hand as it were, Et
convertam manum, I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy
Dross, and take away all thy Tin, at the Verse immediately before the Text.
And when that is done, the greatest instance of his Mercy was this,

Et restituam judices tuos, And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and
thy counselors as at the beginning: afterward thou shall be called the city of
righteousness, the faithful city. Where

First, we have as I told you, a Restoration promised, Et restituam, that is
the first thing: take the person with it, for it is Gods doing and not man's, I
will restore.

Secondly, the persons restored. Those are of very great consideration in a
Community, Judices tuos, and consiliaries tuos, Thy Judges and thy Counselors.

Thirdly, the Qualification of the persons, they must be, Ut fuerunt prius, and
sicut antiquitus, none of the new Module, or fitted for a new fangled
Government, But thy judges as at the first, and thy counselors as at the
beginning. And this gives

A new name to the Community, as if they were new Christened by good Judges and
faithful Counselors, Afterward thou shall be called the city of
righteousness, the faithful city.

I begin with the Restoration as it is promised here, Et restituam, And I will
restore. This restoring is an Act of infinite Mercy in God, considering how all
the world is set upon Destruction and Desolation. The Devil himself is called
the destroyer, Abaddon, or (...), Apoc. 9.11. The exterminating Angel: but when
he was gone, Vae unum abiit, follows upon it, one woe went with him. And no
wonder then if wicked men be of the same Trade with the Devil, and delight in
nothing but Destruction. Destruction and unhappiness is in their ways, Psalm.
14. It Is a road they can never get out of, a way they have to destroy
themselves, and, if they can, to destroy others with them.

He that shall look over the World, and consider what Desolations have been
made in every corner of it at one time or other, will see the print of the
Devils foot in all places, and that the destroyer has been there.

Even in the holy places themselves. When ye shall see the Abomination of
Desolation standing in the holy place, That we have seen in this, and many
other places besides; the Abomination of Desolation got into Churches, no place
could be excused from Violence; but then 'twas time to fly into the Mountains,
and every body to shift for himself. It Is a complaint the Prophet makes of such
men as These, Locum ejus desolaverunt, For they have devoured Jacob, Psalm. 79.7.
and laid waste his dwelling place. And if they make thus bold with Gods house,
it is no wonder if they make no bones of devouring one another, and there be a
Desolation in other places too. A very Wilderness every place was become; God
sustained his own people forty years in the Wilderness, and we have been
sustained half that time here: In a Wilderness where there has been nothing
but Desolation and Destruction in every corner of the Land.

If there were not a time to gather stones in Ecclesiastes, as well as there is
a time to cast them away, and a time to Plant, as well as to pull up that which
is Planted, we might look for a Desolation indeed, and that there would not be
one stone left upon another; not only in the Temple, but in the City, yea and
in the Country too: And this time of gathering and planting is Gods time, the
time of pulling up and eradicating is the Devils and Wicked men's. Root and
Branch! Unmerciful men, that could think of such an eradication as that was.
Charitas autem Aedificat: Surely there was no Charity among them.

Well, 'twas time God should think of Planting and Restoring, lest all should
have become an absolute Wilderness indeed. And God takes upon him this Work, He
that is the repairer of the Breaches, that is resolved to save you, and to
build the Cities of Judah, Psalm. 102. That says to Ierusalen, Thou shall be
inhabited, and to the Cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will raise up
the decayed places thereof, Isa. 44.26.

This is a work proper for God Almighty. It Is an easy thing to pull down,
every hand can do that, like Scholars that may be perfect in the Analyticks,
and it is all the Logic most men have. But to compose and put together, that
requires Skill and Strength in the Architect. He must be a wise builder, as
'twas said of him in the Gospel; and so he must be Strong and Rich, and have
many other Qualifications besides; lest it be said of him as it is there in that
Chapter, This man began to build, and was not able to finish, St. Luke 14.30.
That Is the case of many in the world, they are not able to finish. God is, he
is Omnipotent, able to finish, and willing to finish too.

Therefore he delights in making. And if he had not made the World, it had not
been made till this time: And if he had not made every thing that is in it, it
had lain in its first Chaos still. But there is a Chapter of the Creation in
Genesis, and St. John sums it up in a Verse: Omnia per ipsum facta sunt, All
things were made by him, and without him was made nothing that was made, St.
John 1.3. As all things were made by him, so all things were marred by the
Devil. And therefore it must be the same hand again to restore, as well as to
make.

And that keeps God Almighty always employed, Pater meus operatur usque adhuc,
Jo. 5.17.
My Father works hitherto, and I work, in restoring and repairing the
breaches which the Devil and wicked men make in the world. And till the time of
the Restitution of all things be come, he will never be at rest, but he is
mending and restoring of some thing or other still. And then at the day of
judgment there will be a restitution of all things, Acts 3.21.

But this all things is but a general expression of Gods making and restoring.
And we have spoken of nothing but things hitherto that have come into Gods
hands, whether to be made or made again. But what say we to persons then? They
are more considerable then any thing else certainly. The King of Sodom was of
that mind: Give me the persons, Genesis 14.21.
says he, take the goods to thy self. And persons are of more value then any
goods, and may do more hurt or good in the world; especially such persons as
they may be. The Sun is not more necessary then some men: and they that take
them away, do as good as Tollere solemn, in the Orators phrase, take the Sun out
of the World. Therefore the restoring of such is as great a Mercy as the making
of a New Heaven and a new Earth, for when we have that, that which St. Peter
says we look for, 2 Pet. 3.13. There shall but dwell righteousness there; and
when we have these, the persons promised in the Text, There will be a city of
righteousness here.

Therefore it is time we come to consider the persons, and they indeed are most
worthy our consideration, who bring such a blessing as that with them.

2. Iudices tuos, and consiliaries tuos, Thy judges, and thy counselors.

Thy judges first. And that takes in the Supreme Judge as well as the
Subordinate. And the Israelites you know were governed by Judges as well as
Kings, such as had the Sovereign Power invested in their persons, therefore to
restore thy Judges will take in the Supreme Judge with them.

And so it is. Pro. 8.15.
By me Kings reign, and Princes execute judgment. It Is the employment of Kings
to execute Judgment, and the Judges to execute it in their names. Therefore
among the Judges that are restored, we must look with an awefull Reverence upon
the Supreme Judge first, and adore the goodness of God in the Restoration of
him.

Et restituam judices, God has made his word good in the Restoration of the
King; for, as God sits in the Congregation of the Princes, and is a Judge among
Gods; so the King sits in the Congregation of the Judges, and he is a Judge
among them. And this Judge God has restored to us, and of all Acts of Mercy
and Restoration in God, none was ever greater then this. We see it, and it is
mavelous in our eyes; but how he came to be restored God Almighty only
knows, for he only did it.

Ego restituam, here comes in the person; as it was in the making of man, he
consulted only with himself, faciamus, He, and the other persons of the
blessed Trinity; so 'twas in the restoring and making again of the King. He
consulted not with flesh and blood, as it is there, nor did he make use of any
arm or hand but his own; it was he that made him, and restored him, and not
we, or any body else. And so God takes it to himself here, I will restore him,
Ut non glorietur omnis caro, that no flesh should boast in his presence, nor
the glory of it be given to any body else.

And yet I know there be some that do boast of it, and think 'twas a work
highly meritorious in themselves. If they did it, I do not envy them the glory
of it. But they should remember the fly upon the Axel-tree, and that the dust
was raised by some body else. Even by him that took off the wheels of Pharaohs
Chariots, that they drove heavily; so he threw dust in the eyes of our drivers,
that they could not see, nor understand one another; and so the King was
restored before they themselves were aware of it. But I had rather look upon
God in this action, then admire the greatness of a fly through any
Multiplying-glasses whatsoever. Ego restituam judices, I will restore thy
judges: That for the persons restoring.

But in the Restoration of the King, the Judges were restored too. And a
Restoration of both was very necessary. I know we had Judges when we had no
King, and so we had Counselors too. They know best from whom they had their
Commission, and I have no Authority to examine that, or to ask the question,
Quis te constituit judicem, Who made thee a judge? It Is enough for us that now
we are sure we have Judges lawfully called. The great Thieves do not lead away
the less now, as the Philosopher said once, but we have Judges of Gods and the
Kings making.

And what a blessing is it that we have them? If by Judges here we understand
the Civil Magistrate at large, as some Interpreters do, all those that do not
affect Anarchy, and to live under no Government, must acknowledge the necessity
of them. But every man did what was good in his own eyes, was no great
commendation of the Government, or of the no-Government rather, when 'twas said
before, In those days there was no King in Israel. And you may see what were
the effects of it in the Verse before, The man Micah had a houseful of Gods,
there Idolatry crept in, and he consecrated one of his Sons who became a
Priest, it is in the Book of Judges Chapter 17. Verse 5. But a Priest He was of
his own making: there was another encroachment, such as we had many, but
without any Consecration at all, when there was no King with us. They did what
they could to have no Priests neither; and in a little time more we should have
had no Religion; for when he is gone that is the keeper of the Tables, as the
King is, what wonder is it if the Tables themselves be broken, the Laws of God
and man violated, and there be neither Religion nor Honesty in the world? This
is the fruit of no King, and of no Government in a Nation. Anabaptists and
other Fanatical persons may like it. But we have felt the smart of it, and
therefore we gratefully acknowledge the benefit of restoring the King and the
lawful Magistrate to us.

But Restituam judices points more particularly to them, whose peculiar Office
it is to judge: And then what greater blessing can be given to a Nation then
this? To send down Justice again from Heaven, which seemed to have taken her
Farewell of the world before; -- Terras Astraea reliquit. -- She was absolutely
gone and taken her flight; and now to see her restored again, to have her
brought home to our very doors, by Judges as at the first; who can look upon
this but as a blessing from Heaven? Righteousness shall go before him, Ps.
85.11.
and Righteousness shall look down from Heaven, whither she was gone before.
This is a Restoration of Justice worthy of God Almighty.

Why then, Salve justitia, as it is said of the Emperor Maximilian, Came. Hist.
Med. lib. 4.
That he was wont to vail his Bonnet as often as he passed by any place of
Execution, and cry, God maintain justice; so we that are Subjects, and have
much more need of justice then the King has, should say the like, and bid
Justice welcome home, that has been a stranger amongst us so many years. And
so we should kiss the feet of those that bring it, the Judges that God
promises to restore here: They are a second sort of Evangelists, they bring
glad ridings of Righteousness, that is as good as Peace; for Righteousness and
Peace kiss each other too, and therefore let us thankfully kiss the feet of
them that bring both; for without Righteousness there would be no Peace:
Magnaregna would be but magna latrocinia, so many Park-Corners every place in
the Kingdom would be, and there would be no more security in the City then in
the Country; for Justice was exiled from both: And those petty Nimrods that
hunt and take Purses upon the Highway, would take them in the High-streets
too, in Cheapside, if there were no justice to keep them in awe.

But remember, that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment; if it
be but in the next world it is enough to cool the courage of any Hector of them
all: And then much more if it be in this. For most men can be contented to
trust God Almighty with their Souls, that dare not trust an Earthly Judge with
their Bodies: And though they are forbid to fear them, that is, comparatively
more then God, that can cast both body and soul into Hellfire, yet they are
awed only with those that can kill the body. And if he be in the literal
sense, Judex ante ostium, if the Judge stand before the door, it is the greatest
security that there will be peace and quietness in the house.

For men are not good but against their wills. Romans 13.4.
Then fear, that is a greater Bridle to restrain us from evil, then all the
Promises in the world; for he bears not the sword in vain. It Is the Sword
that keeps the world in awe, Rewards will not do it: but while there is a
Sword Bearer, and he bears him not in vain; then fear, and in the mean time
honest men may walk the streets without fear.

But without Justice they cannot. It Is so necessary in a Commonwealth, that
those that are the greatest Violators of Justice, Thieves and Robbers
themselves cannot be without it, Ne illi quidem qui scelere pascuntur, De Off.
l. 2.
says Cicero, They that live upon Robbing and Stealing; yet they cannot live
sine particula justitiae, there must be something of justice among them: He
that robs or steals from his fellow, says he, shall be turned out of the
Fraternity, and be suffered to rob no more. And there be Leges latronum,
certain Laws among them, which they themselves require to be observed: and some
that were more honest then the rest, were famous for the observing of them: He
instances in Vargulus and Viriatus, which last was not less famous for his
justice, then that a Roman Army was fain to be sent out to suppress him. But
though when Thieves fall out, honest men may hope to come to their goods, yet
they themselves must look to be undone by it; and if Satan be divided against
himself, his Kingdom. cannot stand, no more can the Kingdom of men neither; but
there must be Justice and Righteousness in them, or else all must come to
confusion: If we look for judgment, and there be none; we may look for
salvation too, but it will be far from us, Isa. 59.10. But if Oppression come
in the room of it, and instead of Righteousness if there be a Cry, Ecce clamor,
as it is there; if such Weeds, or Brambles rather, spring up in the Vineyard
instead of it, though it be the House of Israel it self, Gods own vineyard,
Isa. 5.7. yet Auferam sepem ejus will follow upon it, I will take away the
hedge thereof, and it shall be laid waste. And therefore to prevent that, and
to preserve the Hedges and Enclosures of Meum and Tuum, which must be preserved
if we will preserve any thing, unless we will turn Levellers again, and lay all
in common, which you see God laid as a judgment upon Israel in that Text; how
much does it concern us to maintain Justice and Righteousness amongst us?

Indeed Justice is the soul of a Commonwealth, it lives no longer then that is
duly administered: And Desolation follows in that Chapter, where Oppression went
before. Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair without
Inhabitant, at the 9. Verse of the Chapter. And therefore what a blessing is
returned, when Justice is returned to us, and brought home to our doors by wise
and learned Judges? I will restore thy judges.

And thy counselors too. We must not leave them out, because they are put into
the Text; for Counsel is as necessary as Judgment, and so are the Counselors
too. In the multitude of Counselors there is safety; Solomon was a wise
Prince, and he knew it; and if his Son Rehoboam had followed his Counsel, and
the advice which the old men gave him, the ten Tribes had not so easily
revolted from him as they did. But I have counsel and strength for the War, 2
Kin. 18.20.
and they were not vain words, though the King of Assyria said they were; for
all his great Army was able to do King Hezekiah no hurt. But if it be a Nation
void of Counsel, as God complained of his people there, Deuteronomy. 32.28. it is no
wonder if they be destined to ruin by and by. Therefore I will restore thy
counselors, is an argument that God meant to preserve them; for counsel is
before strength in the Judgment of King Hezekiah in that place.

But Et consiliarios tuos, at this time calls for another Interpretation of the
words; for there is not only the Kings Learned Counsel, but the Judges
Counsel, and the Peoples Counsel too. I doubt they are not all Restored as the
Text says here, for we have seen the faces of some of them before now. But
whether they be or no, good counsel is not to be refused, what ever the persons
be; for there is need of them, and we cannot be without them: For when God
says, I will take away the Honorable man and the Counselor, he intended it
as a heavy Judgment upon Israel, even when there was no Counselor, That when
I asked, could answer a word, Isa. 41.28.

But first there is the Judges Counsel or his Assistants, which you will, and
there is a full Appearance of them, Consiliarios tuos sicut antiquitus, a Bench
full of Justices again, persons of Eminency in their Country, and to whom we
owe the Peace of it.

Secondly, there are the peoples Counsel, their Counsel learned in the Law,
Counselors they are called who are able to Counsel them in the Chamber, and to
speak for them at the Bar.

I know there be some Phanatical people, who, as they would take away all
Judges and Magistrates, so they would take away all Counselors too; Enemies to
all Professions and Callings of men. They would preach themselves, and so they
would plead themselves too. The long Robe is a fashion they like not, and the
Lawyers Gowns, as well as the Canonical Coats, are an Eyesore to them. If such
men's Causes miscarry before the Judges, they must thank themselves, while they
prevaricate against their wills, and, for want of knowledge in the Law, give
the Cause they would defend. We cannot rank these among the Consiliarios tuos
in the Text; they be their own Counselors, and not thine; and if they perish
by their counsel, who can help it?

But thy Counselors are presumed to be men of knowledge in their profession,
such as speak not without book, but are able to give counsel to them that ask
it of them.

And I wish they would give it to those that are poor and indigent, and have
nothing to give for it: But such as I have I give thee. Alas! Silver and Gold
they have none, and to them they that give their Counsel without it, would have
never the less.

But Counselors are a blessing to a Nation as well as Judges, yet not every
Counselor neither nor every Judge; for both have their Qualifications in the
Text, I will give thee judges as at the first, and counselors as at the
beginning.

Sicut fuerunt prius, and Sicut antiquitus; this must make us to look back to
the beginning. And there we find very good Judges indeed, and very good
Counselors, Moses, Joshua, and Samuel, such Judges were able to make it a
Golden Age wherein they lived, and such Counselors as they had. Moses tells
Jethro his Father in law, his manner of judging; When they have a matter they
come unto me, and I judge between one and another, and I make them know the
Statutes of God, and his Laws, Exodus 18.16. If Gods Laws be the standard, you
may be sure the Judgment cannot be amiss. A Judge he was that preferred the
peoples safety before his own. Salus populi, it was the Supreme Law with him.
And therefore he cries out to God, Dele me, Blot me out of the Book rather then
these, Exodus 32.32. And so Joshua succeeded him in his care and Government of
the people; who, among other signs of his good Government, made the Sun stand
still in Gibeon, and God hearkened to the voice of a man, as it is there, Josh.
10.13. Till the people had avenged themselves of their enemies. And for Samuel
to omit the rest that came between, for the time would fail me to tell of
Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of the rest of them, as the Apostle
to the Hebrews speaks of the Judges, but for Samuel, how does he challenge the
world to lay any thing that looks like Corruption to his charge? Whose Ox have
I taken, or of whom have I received any Bribe? Witness against me, they could
not. And though it were an Ass laden with Gold he could not enter where he
was, and therefore a Golden Age it must be still. And so for the Counselors to
such Judges, no doubt they knew all of them to make a good choice of them, as
Moses did for himself by the advice of Iethro, men fearing God and hating
Covetousness. As 'twas said of Joseph of Arimathea afterward, Honorable
Counselors they were.

Such were the Judges and Counselors before, and how much they were
degenerated afterward, we have a sad account of it in this Chapter but three
Verses before my Text, Thy Princes are Companions of Thieves. Omnes diligunt
munera, Every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards, they judge not the
Fatherless, neither does the Cause of the Widow come before them. Why such
Judges would be fley'd, be it spoken with Reverence to those that are not such,
as Cambyses is said to have served such a one. But if good Judges may be
restored in their places, Ut fuerunt prius, and sicut antiquitus, what a
blessing must this be? When the poor man need not thank his good fortune, that
he took the Judge in a good mood, Gaudeat de bona fortuna, as Montaigne says,
'twas wont to be a byword with them in France, and when the Judge does not
write too often in the Margin of his book, Casus proamico, a Case for a friend,
as he says one did, as often as Bartolus and Boldus could not agree upon the
point, and left the Case doubtful. But he will own no friend at all, nor
relation upon the Bench, Point personam amici, he has no friend then, but he
is like Melchisedech, without Father, or Mother, or Children, or Friends, this
is Sicut erant prius, one of the old Judges, whom God sends as a blessing to
the people.

And so for the old Counselors, they were always Consiliarii pacis, as
Solomon calls them, Prove. 12.20. Counselors of peace, they did not encourage
their Neighbors or their Clients in going to Law, but they labored to compose
their differences; all their Counsels and Discourses were Apta temperandis
animis, as Drusus his in Tacitus were: they drove to a reconciliation still,
they did not make the Rent wider, and for that they had joy in their own
Consciences, as it is there. He that does otherwise is none of the old
Counselors.

No more is he that will not speak in a good Cause without excess rewards. I
am not so severe as the Senate was under Tyberius, when they called for L^gem
cinciam, wherein Advocates were to plead for nothing, and they would not have
them Vendere operam, or have Vocem venalem. No, I know that Eloquence and
Knowledge in the Law does not Gratuito contingere, as 'twas urged then, it did
not cost them nothing, and that sublatis studiorum pretiis etiam studia
peritura, without Rewards Professions will come to nothing. But yet after a
long debate before Tyberius, as the result was in Tacitus, Capiendis pecuniis
posuit modum, so I would have a Mean set for Fees, lest otherwise the Remedy
prove worse then the Disease; and a man were better lose his right, Tac. Annal.
lib. 10.
then go about to recover it. As he tells of one Samius a Gentleman of Rome,
who, when he had given his Lawyer Quadringenta Nummorum millia, I will not
English it, for the ill use that may be made of it, and when he found at last
he had prevaricated the Cause too, he killed himself in his Lawyers Chamber.
That was but a sad Catastrophe of a Law suit, and I think I have heard of
something like it. But you will all justify me so far, if any man exceed this
way, and that many do; it is too notorious, it is not sicut antiquitus, if you
look back but thirty or forty years since; I think then no such Rewards were
heard of. And you cannot say this is Vetus querela, because it is a Modern
offense. But it would be reformed, lest otherwise we do Portum Eloquentia
salutarem aperire piratis, as Quintilian says, make the Haven of Eloquence a
harbor for Thieves and Robbers, and that we may make good the promise of God
in the Text, Consiliarios tuos, sicut antiquitus, I will restore thy
counselors as at the beginning.

I will not tell you, it is the reason of these abuses in the practice of the
Law, but in other things, that which God makes the standard to reform by here
in the Text, is made the great stone of offense; that in matters of Religion
it is so I am sure. If you tell them of sicut fuerunt prius, and sicut
antiquitus, of any things that were used heretofore; why, Eo nomine, as we use
to say, it shall be rejected for Popery and Superstition, and I know not what.

We will have nothing that is Old. But we must tell them who were Consuls, the
Month and the day, Sacr. Eccl. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 29.
and then write Edita est fides Catholica, Such a year their new Religion
began, as Athanasius complains of the Arrians in the Ecclesiastical story. So
nothing, but new things please this new generation of men; Quasi now veteris
Dei pudeat, Tert. advers. Martian. lib. 1. cap. 8.
says Tertullian: Why so we may be ashamed of God Almighty, because he is
called the Ancient of days. The truth is, Antiquity must be the standard, as I
said but now, when all is done: From the beginning it was not so, our Savior
brings them to that in the matter of Divorce. And so Tertullian says, Ibid.
lib. 4. cap. 4.
In quantum falsum corruption est very, in tantum praecedat necesse est veritas
falsum; Because falsehood is the corruption of truth, therefore truth must go
before falsehood: And Illud optimum quod primum was his rule, The earlier the
truer every thing must be. Therefore sicut antiquitus should be no scandal to
sober men. But I considered the days of old, and the years that are past,
says David; for they will be the best Counselors for other things, and
therefore no bad ones for the Counselors themselves.

Well, say what we will, ut fuerunt prius and sicut antiquitus, are a blessing
upon a Nation. We know what it means, Res novas moliri, and we have no reason
to be in love with Innovations for their sakes; we have paid dear for our
News. But now sicut antiquitus, to see the old face of things restored, to see
Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning; the good old
Justices I mean, as well as the old Lawyers, if there be any of them left, to
see Justice run in the old Channel again, (for though we might have it before,
yet the course of the stream was altered, and many times it ran over the banks)
to hear Carolus Dei gratia in the Commission again, instead of Custodes
libertatis, (and how they kept it we all know) or instead of some body that was
worse, if worse might be; how must this revive the hearts, and cheer up the
spirits, of honest men?

For I will confess to you, in our late dispensations of Justice, for my own
particular, I never took any comfort at all; when the Judges and Justices
themselves methought looked like so many guilty persons, and a man could hardly
tell which were the greatest offenders, whether they, of the Prisoners that
stood before them. But Justice, I know, was necessary howsoever, and because
they brought that, they are to be excused.

But now we have judices ut fuerunt prius, and consiliarios sicut antiquitus,
the Kings Judges and Justices again; King Charles his Judges, as venerable as
Queen Elizabeth's Knights were wont to be; like old Oaks, quae non tantam habent
speciem, quantam religionem, as Quintillian says; and they dispense Justice to
every body that defires it. And this is as great a blessing as a Nation is
capable of; for now

Justice gives a Denomination to the People themselves, and to the Community
that are made up of them; so we have it in the close of the Text.

Posthac vocaberis civit as justitiae, urbs fidelis, Afterward thou shall be
called the city of righteousness, the faithful city. What they were or might be
called before without justice, I told you before, even no better then a City of
Robbers, a Den of Thieves: But now they have a new name, The city of
righteousness.

There was a King of that name in Scripture, Melchisedech, The King of
righteousness, so the word signifies, Heb. 7.2. And here is a People like their
King, A City of righteousness too. Or the City of the righteous man, Civitas
justi, in the Vulgar Translation, The City of the just person, of Melchisedech,
as I said but now, or the King of righteousness: for the King of
righteousness must be a righteous and just King, else that Name had not been
proper for him.

And that King was Christ, The just one, (...), so we find him called, Acts
3.14. Ye have denied the holy and the just one: He that was a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedech; and so after his order he was a righteous King
too; and the City shall be called after his name, A city of righteousness. But
then as Christ vouchsafes his other Titles to Kings, Dixi, Dii estis, I have
said, Ye are Gods; and Touch not my Christ's: so he will not deny them this,
Every righteous King is a Melchisedech, a King of righteousness, and his
Dominions shall be called Civitas justi, The City of the righteous man; or from
the influence which a good King has over his Subjects, the City of
righteousness it self: For by themselves alone Kings cannot be righteous, but
every body else will follow the fashion. And Civitas here is not Latin for the
Kings Court only, or his Palace, which indeed may be well called the Palace of
righteousness, where the King is a just Prince; but this Righteousness is
diffused further, -- Regis ad exemplum, -- even to all the People, and it is now
a City of righteousness.

What happiness may not such a City promise it self? We have read or heard of
an Utopia, or Plato's Commonwealth, and some men are apt to dream of it; no
Government will please them but that, where Angels must dwell instead of Men,
for there must be no faults nor errors in the Government. Here Is the place they
wot of, not in a fiction but in truth; for it is in righteousness here. Since
the old Judges and Counselors are restored, they shall be called the City of
righteousness.

And what name can be more proper, where Justice is duly administered, and men's
Properties are preserved, and Invaders of other men's Rights punished, and the
Oppressions of the Widows and Fatherless redressed, and there is no
Complaining in the streets, as it is in the Psalm? it is a City of righteousness
you may be sure, and the People are happy that live in it.

To be free of some Cities some men will give much; With a great sum obtained
I this freedom, said the Chief Captain to Saint Paul, and yet 'twas but to be
a Freeman of Rome, which was no City of righteousness neither, especially
under such an Emperor as Claudius or Nero. What would one give to be free of
this City? as Saint Paul was there, to be born free, A City wherein dwells
righteousness, as Saint Peter speaks of that City which is in Heaven, and
wherein righteous men dwell.

It Is in us beloved to make it a City of Righteousness here, and a Heaven upon
Earth. It Is not in the King alone, though he be a Melchisedech, a King of
Righteousness, as I told you: Nor in the Judges neither, though they be never
so Righteous themselves, nor in the Justices and Counselors, though they be
sicut antiquitus, Reformed never so much; yet if the people be the same they
were, it is they that denominate the City; and it is most usual for them to
complain of unrighteousness and bad times, who themselves make them so. But
it is in us I say to reform our selves, and to make it a City of
Righteousness. Great advantages we have, and encouragements by a Righteous
King, and good Judges and Counselors to make us Righteous. But if they be
sicut antiquitus, and we be not so, but sicut heri, and we will be of the new
Mode still, and as we were, we must thank our selves, if it be not a City of
Righteousness. Well, He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; but if we be
so, we must look to bear the blame of it, for frustrating Gods design in the
Text, which is to make us A city of righteousness.

And a faithful city too. Urbs fidelis, this is the last circumstance, and it
comes near us indeed. It Is above Verse 21. How is the faithful city become an
Harlot? It implies, as if we had been unfaithful before. The Septuagint read
it, (...), the faithful Metropolis or Mother City. I know not how that word
came in; but it tempts me to say something which I must not, for the very many
righteous persons sakes that were in it, even then when the times were at the
worst. I will not therefore look back: But for the future I will Prophecy
better, because I have warrant for it in the Text, Vocaberis Urbs fidelis, Thou
shall be called the faithful city.

The brand of Infidelity especially to a lawful King, as it is most odious, so
the Title of faithfulness is most glorious. Vocaberis Urbs fidelis, Thou shall
be called the faithful city; it should be written upon the Gates of them that
were so, and it deserves to stand upon Record to the Eternal Honor of them,
and of this poor City in particular, that durst own the Authority of the King,
even then, when He was going to the Block.

But now every City shall be so called, faithful to their Prince, and faithful
to their God too: faithful to their God in the duties of the first Table, and
faithful to their Prince in those of the second.

And so we shall be called a faithful City, and we shall show the world our
Faith by our Works, as Saint James would have us, by our Obedience to the King,
and by our just dealings and Righteousness one toward another: And for this
God will reward us, and carry us from this City of Righteousness and
faithfulness here, to his Kingdom of Righteousness in Heaven.

Whither we beseech him to bring us all, for the Merits of his Son Christ
Jesus; To whom, etc.

Amen.

FINIS.

