ENGLANDS PATTERN AND DUTY IN IT IS MONTHLY FASTS PRESENTED IN A SERMON,
Preached to both Houses of Parliament assembled, on Friday the 21. of July, An.
Dom. 1643. BEING An extraordinary Day of public Humiliation appointed by
them, throughout London and Westminster, that every one might bitterly bewail
his own sins, and cry mightily unto God for Christ his sake, to remove his
wrath, and heal the Land

By WILLIAM SPURSTOWE sometimes Fellow of KATHERINE HALL in Chambridg, and now
Pastor of HACKNEY near LONDON.

Published by Order of both Houses of Parliament.

In that day did the Lord God of Hosts ^ll to weeping, and to mourning, and to
baldness, and to girding with sackcloth; and behold joy and gladness, slaying
oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine, let us eat, and
drink for to morrow we shall die. And it was revealed in my ears by the Lord
of Hosts; surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till you die, says
the Lord God of Hosts,

Isa. 22. 12. 13. 14. LONDON Printed for Peter Cole at the sign of the Glove
in Corne-hill near the Royal Exchange, 1643.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The House of Lords AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE Of Commons
ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.
IT is reported of a great Persian Monarke, that having lost his royal
Consort, he was so deeply affected with sorrow, as that he refused to admit of
any comfort: In this height of passion, a certain Philosopher undertook, if
that he would furnish him with things necessary for his purpose, to raise the
dead Queen again: the Empirour much taken with the offer, was willing for that
end, to exhaust all his Treasures: but the other only demanded of him three
names of such persons as had never felt any grief or sadness, to engrave them
on the Queens Monument: which after much search throughout his Empire could not
be found. I to the restoring of this bleeding and dying Kingdom, whose wounds
every day grow wider and wider, shall not desire the names of any such persons
as have been altogether strangers unto sorrow and humiliation, they being those
that have drawn the heaviest judgments upon it; but the names of such as have
been real and solemn mourners before God in the behalf of this Land, which
if in any competent number they may be found, I shall not fear but this
Kingdom may see a glorious and happy resurrection.

This affection of sorrow is that which this Sermon did first call for, from
the Pulpit, and does still continue (being published by your Command) to do it
from the Press, as being the most suitable posture and dress to the present
conditon of this Land, it calls and invites all, to an holy mourning and
humiliatiation before the Lord, whose sins have bin as oil to the lamp, and
fuel unto the fire, to feed and nourish that displeasure, that burns in the
bowels of the Kingdom, But more especially your Honors, who are the two eyes
of the Kingdom not only to watch over it for it is good, but to mourn over it
for it is sins and misery: not only to be Reformers of it, but Weepers for
it. And the first stones of Reformation, which are not like the foundation of
the Temple, that was laid with the weepings of the old men, and the shoutings
of the young men, but with the bitter mourning of all sorts will (I doubt not)
in the finishing, and perfecting of the work receive the joyful acclamations
both of young and old, both of Governors and People, the God of Heaven
himself turning our water into wine on the wet seed-time of tears, into an
harvest of joy and spiritual blessings: which that he may speedily do, prays,

Your Honors to serve you for Christ. WILLIAM SPURSTOWE.

A SERMON PREACHED To both Houses of PARLIAMENT On Friday, the 21. of July,
1643.
1. Sam. 7. 6. And they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and powered
it out before the Lord, and fasted that day, and said there, we have sinned
against the Lord.


THe strength and happiness of the State and Kingdom of Israel, was (if you
look into the present Story) sorely shaken and wasted from a double Hand, the
Sword of God, and the Sword of Man: the Sword of the Philistines in one Battle
took away thirty thousand, and the Sword of God at one stroke swept away
fifty thousand. Cap. 4. 10. Cap. 6. 19.
So that all Israel in this sad plight wherein they stand, can scarce tell what
else is left them for to do, but to bewail their condition: The Philistines
they are strong and cannot be resisted, God is angerie, and will not be
entreated; they sigh unto him through the weight of their oppressions, but are
not eased, they lament after him, but do not find him.

In this exigency, the Prophet Samuel counsels and excites Israel, to the
practice of two most seasonable duties, to a real and perfect Reformation, v.
3. to a deep and serious Humiliation, ver. the fifth, the joint performance of
both which, procure no less then a miraculous help from Heaven, to the ruin
of the Philistines, and salvation of all Israel ver. 10. 11.

This Text (which I have read) contains the Relation and Manner of Isreal's
performance of that second duty, to which the Prophet did excite them: And in
it there are these two parts.

The parts of the Text.
First, a general Convention and meeting of the whole State and Kingdom. They
ga^hered together to Mispeh.

Secondly, a particular account of what they did at this Meeting, and that is
set down in three Actions: 1. they drew water, and poured it out before the
Lord, 2. And fasted on that day, 3. And said there, we have sinned before the
Lord.

These three Actions (inlightning the first only with some breife Commentary)
will exactly point out the duty and task of this Day, which is a Day of
mourning, a Day of fasting, and a Day of self arraining before the Lord.

And drew water and poured it out before the Lord. Some Interpreters understand
it of the water of Purification, whereby they testified their hope and faith in
the remission and washing away of their sins. Others think that their
drawing and pouring forth of water, was a lively ceremony to express the great
measure of their Humiliation, that their Souls were poured forth as water upon
the ground. Hieroin (...). Quaest (...). tradit Hebr.
Hierome goes alone, at least without any considerable Train, and says, that
into this water Curses were thrown; and that as in the Law, the water of
Jelousie was appointed for the trial of Adultery, so was this for the trial
of Idolatours whose lips did clamme and cleave together, when they had tasted
of it.

The Chaldee, whom Junius and Osiander follow, expound it of the plenty of
tears, which streamed from their eyes as so many fountains. And this last
sense, shall I at present close with: and so turn the three Actions in Isreal's
National Convention (in the midst of which fasting is so ranked, as to eye
and respect both the other) into two points suitable to this representative
Assembly of this whole Kingdom now met about the same work and duty.

First, that true fasters should be weepers.

Secondly, that in fasting there should be an acknowledgment and confession of
sin.

Doct. 1.
That true fasters should be weepers. Fasting and tears you shall find in
Scripture to be like two twines that cannot be separated, like a pair of
mournful Doves that always accompany together, Nehemiah 1. 4. I sat down and
wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted and prayed before the God of
Heaven. Joel 2. 12. Turn ye to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning. Hester 4. 3. And every Province
whether-soever the Kings Commandment and his Decree came, there was great
mourning among the Jews and fasting, and weeping, and wailing.

For the clear explicating of this point; I will propound two things.

First I will show, why tears are requisite to fasting.

Secondly, what qualifications those tears should have, which are shed in a
day of Fast and Humiliation.

Tears are requisite to fasting for 3. respects.
First, why tears are requisite to fasting, and that in these three respects.

First, in regard of the prevalencie that tears have with the God of Mercy and
bowels. Eusebius tells a Story of a certain Altar that was Clementiae
consecrata, dedicated and consecrated to mercy, upon which no other Sacrifice
was to be laid but tears; intimating thereby, a peculiar aptnes in tears to
stir up bowels, and to beget Compassions, above all other Sacrifices
whatsoever: And indeed with God we shall find them of that e^cacy, as that none
have bedewed his Altar with their unfeined tears, but he has made their Faces
to shine with his oil of gladness.

Hannah in bitterness of Soul, prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore: 1. Sam.
1. 10. But she went her way, and her countenance was no more sad: ver. 18. Good
Hezechia, by his prayer and tears, reversed the Sentence of death; and had
fifteen years added unto his days, 2. King. 20. 5. 6. Jacob had power with
God: yea, he had power over the Angel, and prevailed: but how? he wept and made
supplication unto him, Hosea 12. 3. 4.

Prevalency of tears strang^, in 2. respects.
And this prevalency of tears, as it is great, so it is strange and
wonderful, and that in a double regard

1. Deorsum fluunt, et Coelum petunt: They drop and fall from the eyes to the
earth, but yet by their power they reach and pearce the highest Heavens.

2. Mutae sunt, et loquntur: They hold their peace, and yet they cry, they are
mute, and yet they speak, Psalm. 6. 8. The Lord has heard the voice of my
weeping, Lam. 2. 18. In the Original it runes thus, Non taceat pupilla oculi
tui, let not thine eye hold its peace.

A second respect, that makes tears requisite, is, because the eye has been
the chiefest Broker for sin and vanity: Sin made its first entrance by the
eye, Genesis 3. 6. and still it is one of the widest Gates by which lusts and
follies are let into the Soul.

Fit therefore it is, that in the duties of humiliation, the eye should bear a
part with the other members of the body; that as the heart does sigh, the face
does blush, the tongue does cry, the hand knockes the breast, the lips do
tremble, and the knees do bend, so the eye should mourn and weep, it having
exceeded in guilt any other part, and member of the body; otherwise it is rather
the eye of an Idol, then of a Christian.

Three things occasion tearce.
A third respect, is taken from the confluence of all those things in a day of
Humiliation, which usually are the occasions, and rise of tears.

Now, there are three things, that do dispose and incline a person to weeping.

First, The loss, or absence of some Great Good: That was it which put Micha,
Judges 18. 24. into such a strange mixture of passions, of anger, weeping,
crying out, when being asked, what aileth him? he replies, ye have taken away
my gods which I made and the priest, and ye are gone away: and what have I
more? and what is this that you say unto me what aileth thee? that was it which
sprang as a new leake in Mary's eyes Joh. 20. 13. They have taken away my Lord,
and I know not where they have laid him* that was it which made David and his
people when Ziklag was burnt with fire, and their wives, their sonns, and their
daughters were taken captives, to lift up their voice and weep, until they
had no more power to weep, 1. Sam. 30. 4. Now in a day of fasting what truly
broken and humbled heart reflecting upon its own condition, finds not such a
loss of peace with God, such suspensions of light from God, such an absence of
holiness in it self, such a want of mortification of lusts, as may justly
call for tears, sighs, and what ever else does usually attend great sorrow?
But especially we on this day have cause to mourn, having loss upon losses,
that may provoake us thereunto: A loss of Worthies, that have lately fallen,
and miscarried in our Israel, a loss of hopes and affairs in State, a loss
of expectation in maine blessings, that concern the beauty and the
settlement of the Church whose Foundations are still shaken by the violence and
opposition of many sons of Belial, that are risen up against it. In a word, I
am afraid, that most of us are this day at a loss in regard of all those
affections, of fear, of shame, of indignation, which should be a stirring in
this present duty; the very want of which may cause us to weep, in that we can
fast and mourn no better before the Lord.

Secondly, the fear of some great approaching evil. In the Object which
moves, and begets fear, futurition is required as a necessary condition; but
yet all evil the less future it is, the more dreadful it is: it being with
the Objects of passion in nearenesse of time, as it is with the Objects of
sense in nearenesse of place; propinquitie in either making the objects more
present, and the impressions therefrom upon the faculties more strong. The
fear of Ninivehes speedy destruction (which was prophesied to be within foutie
days) did strike that Heathen King with such apprehensions of dread, as to
make him change his Throne for the pavement, his roabes for sackecloath, his
mirth and fullness into a bitter mourning and fasting. Jonah 3. 6. the going
out of the Decree of Ahasuerus, to destroy and extirpate forthwith all the
Jews, was that which filled every Dwelling with sadness, and every eye with
tears. In every province whethersoever the Kings Commandment and his Decree
came, there was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and
wailing. Est. 4. 3.

Now, if the fear of imminent evils do occasion weeping, what wonder is it
if a faster be a weeper? who fears almost every evil to be feared: He fears
that God may call to rememberance his former iniquities, and make him to
possess the sins of his youth, and therefore weeps: Psalm. 79. 8. Job. 13. 26.
He fears that God, whose blows he can better brook then his absence, will
not be entreated to take up in his bosom, but hold him as a stranger, and
therefore weeps: He fears, that his sins, his deafness to Gods call, his
conterlustings to Gods will, his impuritie in Gods service, his security under
Gods Judgments may cause the hand of Heaven, which is lifted up in threatnigs,
to fall down in seveare punishments, and therefore weeps. Speak you, whose
hearts and eyes are exercised in this days duty, are not these and suchlike
evils the causes of your fears, and the motives to your weeping?

Thirdly, the sense and smart of some grievous pain and extremity. That is
it, which in Hell causes an eternal weeping and gnashing of teeth, the fire
always burns, the worm continually gnawes, they have no moment free from
pain, therefore no moment free from tears. Now this cause of mourning meets
with both the former in a day of humiliation as lines in a Center, to make
fasters to become weepers; for then it is, that the afflicted soul is made
sick with sin, and burdened with the weight of its own guilt, cries out,
who will take this dagger out of my bowels, this poisoned arrow out of my
heart, this millstone off my back, this fire out of my bones, these stinges out
of my conscience? then it is, that seeming sweetness of sin is turned into
gall, and the heart of a sinner is scalded with the estuations of those lusts,
with which formerly it pleased it self: not unlike to the fish that is often
times boiled in that water in which it swimes and sportes it self.

I now come to the second particular propounded, to show what kind of tears
should be shed in Fasts. For there are lacrymae mentiri doctae (as Bernard
speaks) Ber. Ep. 247.
tears that are taught to lie and feign. There are praeficarum lachrymae, the
tears of hired women, which gain and money draws from them, Jer. 9. 17.
there are lachrimae Hiericuntinae, tears that are like Jerichoes waters,
though the duties are sweet in which they be shed, yet they are bitter and
unpleasing.

Six properties of prevailing tears.
I shall therefore acquaint you with six properties, that tears that will
preavaile ought to have.

First: They must spring from a tender and broaken heart freely and
voluntarily: They must be like water from a living fountain that flows
naturally; not like water from a dead pit that is drawn forth with engines:
like water from a cloud, that is melted by the Sun; not like water from a Still
that is forced with fire: the beams of Gods love are they which must di^olve
our hearts, and not the fire of his judgments. An hard heart in times of sore
distress may have plenty of tears, and yet retain its hardness; like
marble that sweates in foul weather, but is not the softer: An Ahab may humble
himself when God threatens, and a Felix may tremble when he hears of
Judgment: 2. King. 23. 29. Act 24. 25.
But a Josiah only whose tears spring from a broken and tender heart, so
mournes (...) to please God, and prevail with God: Chron. 2. 34. 27. Because
thine heart was tender and thou did humble thy self before God, and did
rend thy clothes, and weep before me, I have even heard thee also says the
Lord.

2 Cor. 3. 6.
Secondly, Prevailing tears, must be reforming, and clensing tears, not such
as wet only the face, but such as wash the heart. Humiliation without
reformation, is like the Word of God in the Letter, which kills, and not
quickens, which accents sin, and not lessens it, which hastens judgment, and
not defers it. Palenesse in the face, and blood in the heart, whiteness in the
eye, and blackness in the soul, a knee-bowing to him, and thoughts rising up
against him, an head hanging down like a bull-rush, and an heart like an
Adamant hard and unreformed, are of all sins in Gods sight the worst: like
the Leaprosie in the Law, which was ever uncleanest when whitest: And shall by
God be doomed with the heaviest of judgments. Hyprocrisie is the first borne
of Hell, and must there look for its double portion: Oh therefore take heed to
your selves what you do this day! be sure you that are fasters be reformers,
bring your lives to the Rule, and your actions to the Law of God, and let all
run parallel with the Word, as an exact, and well-made Dial with the Sun.

Thirdly, Prevailing tears and sorrow must eye that more, which dishonors
God, then that which afflictes our selves: they must be more for that which
fights against his Image, then for what is contrary to our nature: more for
that which defiles the spirit, then for that which paineth the flesh: we must
grieve more that sin has made us unholy, then that it has made us unhappy,
that we have run out of the way of the Law, then that we have run in danger of
the Law: we must not cry only with Pharaoh, take away this plague: but with
Israel in the Prophet, take away all Iniquity, and receive us graciously, Hos.
14. 2.

Brisson de Reg. Persi. lib. 2.
Fourthly, Prevailing tears must be constant. The Persians had one day in a
year a festival, which they called vitiorum interitum, wherein they slew all
Serpents, and venomous creatures, and after that till the return of the same
day, suffered them to swarm as fast as ever: not in an unlike manner do many
mourn for their sins; at some set day in the month, or the year appointed by
the State, they hang down their head, they cry out of their sins, and make
professions of better living, and then till the revolution of the same time,
suffer them to spread in their lives, and to grow up in their conversations as
fast as ever.

But those sudden motions and ^ashes, those fits, and starts in humiliation,
are so far wide from the mourning of a true Christian, who in a constant and
regular course crucifies his lusts, weakens the strength of sin, sighs over his
corruptions when he cannot weep and has a bleeding heart often times, when not a
wet eye; as that they will be never able to denominate that man a Christian in
whom they are only found. In Categ. cap. de qualit.
Aristotle excellently distinguishes between colors that arise from passion,
and from complexion. The one he says gives the denomination to the subject
wherein it is, which the other does not. If the Question be asked, what a like
man is Socrates? If he be of a pale or high-colored complexion, it may be
fitly Answered, that he is a pale man, or a sanguine man; but when a man of
another complexion is pale for fear, or red with blushing; we do not use to
say, neither can we properly, that he is a pale man, or an high-colored.
Accordingly in matters of grace, and duties of holiness: we cannot say he is a
penitent, a zealous, a religious man, whose constant motions are in a way of
sin, and his humiliations only in some short fits, that are scarce so long as
the paroxcisme of a burning Ague, which in a few hours goes off again.

Fifthly, prevailing tears must drop from the eye of hope.

To mourn and not to hope, has a double evil in it, both in that it defiles,
and in that it ruins a man: defiles, in that it conceives low and base
thoughts of God himself: in rendering our guilt more omnipotent then his power,
and sin more hurtful then he is good: ruins, in that the mind is thereby
driven to a dreadful flight, and wretched contempt of all the true means of
recoverie. But hope which is as the cork to the net, that keeps it floating
amid'st the roughest Seas, teaches a relapsed yet repenting sinner, when he
despaires in himself to fly to God, when he sees nothing below him, nothing
about him, to believe there is something above him that can, and will support:
It quickens him also in the use of every means, and makes him to do as Marie
did, who being above other sorrowful for the loss of Christ, was above all
other most dilligent to seek him.

Sixthly, prevailing tears must be timely and seasonable.

Historians make mention of a fountain that never sent out any streams, but
the evening before a famine: this fountain (I am afraid) our tears have too
much resembled, which have been so late as to serve only to bemoane our
misery, and not to prevent it: had we wept more timely (I am persuaded) we
should not have so many occa^ons of weeping, as we now have: we now weep,
because the means of our hope are much blasted, and success denied to our
enterprises, but we should have wept unto God that they might have bin blessed,
and prospered by his favor. We mourn now because the Heavens are darkened
with Gods displeasure, which is ready to fall in storms upon us, but we should
have mourned when the cloud was but an hands breadth, and so prevented the
gathering of it: and yet let me not discourage any, that are newly entered upon
this duty of mourning, as if it were altogether too late: the Jews had a
saying amongst them, that the door of prayer has sometimes bin shut, but never
the door of tears, and therefore, you that have not yet mourned, now begin,
and you that have begun, still continue, for who knows, if God will return,
and repent, and leave a blessing behind him, Joel 2. 14.

I now hasten to application: wherein,

1. Use.
First, I shall endeavor to provoke all to an holy, and exceptable weeping,
before the Lord.

It is the errand we all come about, let us not therefore go away, and leave
it undone. Oh that this day you Nobles and Rulers of the people would begin to
them in this weighty service, the mourning of a Great Person is most powerful
Rhetoric to persuade others to weep: as running metal, will sooner melt
other of it is own kind then fire alone: so will examples sooner frame men's
minds to the same temper, then bare and naked devotions can ever do: neither
is it any minoration of your Greatness, to weep, and to be humbled before
your God, to lick the dust of whose feet is greater Honor, then to possess
Crowns and Septers, without his Favor: Oh that I could prevail with you of
the People, to make this place a Bochim with your tears! and to this end I
could wish, that I had some Moses his Rod in my hand, to smite all the Rocks
that are before me, that they might flow forth with water: A Rod (I mean) of
persuasion, that might dissolve, and melt your hearts into tears: I had
thought to framed many, and to have told you, that they are Theriaca
potentissima, the best Triacle to expel the venom of sin, lixivium forte,
the strongest ly to wash out the deepest stains; imbres vere aurei, the true
golden showers, in which God comes down into the heart of a Christian. But
that we may loose no time in the duty, give me leave to, propound Five melting
Considerations, that may incline you to a serious mourning.

Five melting Considerations.
First, take into your thoughs your condition by nature. And such a one it is,
which tears and sighs may better express then words: a condition of
nakedness, blood, impotencie, wrath, (in one word) of sin. Hell it self,
which is the draine and sole receptacle of sin, and sinners, is not more full
of sin in regard of the kinds of it, then your Natures: For, the Seeds of
all those sins, for which the damned are now tormented in hell, lie hid in
our hearts, all being alike corrupted in the root; and therefore it behooves
you, if you would escape the fullness of wrath, which is due to the fullness of
sin that is in you, to cry mightily unto God that he would pity you, yea
though your natures be changed, yet you have cause still to weep and mourn.
For as Basil said of the rose, that it was a fair flower, but it wanted not
his prickles, that might put him in mind of the curse the earth was subject
unto; so in the best, there are those remainders and relics of sin, which
may cause them to mourn and weep still before the Lord.

Secondly, let me propound the present occasion as an inducement unto weeping.
Did you not take this day to afflict your souls before God, as not knowing
whether you might see any more the return of your monthly Fasts, so
exceedingly did the wrath of God hasten it is progress against you? And now,
when you come unto the duty, will you do nothing, that may witness how
bitter your sins are unto you, that have procured all those evils? Let me
tell you, and that without prophesying, if that which God has already done,
prevail not to humiliation, that there are judgments not far off, that will
prevail to ruin and destruction.

Thirdly, consider, what a shame it is for a christian, that crosses and fears
should sit heavy, and that sin should sit light on his spirits.

Sometimes the smart of a single cross enters so deep into us, as that all
expressions of sorrow seem to be far below what we feel: Sometimes, the very
news of an approaching danger, fills the eye with tears, and the mouth with
shreeks: And yet when we come to stand at Gods Bar (as we all do this day) the
confessions of the rebellion of our whole lives, the sad History our finnes,
and the acknowledgment of Gods wrath due to all, make such weak impressions
upon our spirits, as they scarce produce a sigh or troubled thought about our
condition: Now what a shame is it, to hear more outcries from a Christian for
one cross then for thousand sins, one of which, has in it more power and
venom to afflict the conscience, and to make life miserable, then many legions
of devils.

Fourthly, Consider, the Lord Christ himself how deeply he was affected when
he stood under the weight of our sins, and his Fathers wrath.

St Luke speaks much in one word, when he tells us, that Christ was in an
agony, Luke 22. 44, but if you please to admit a breife Commentary upon it,
out of the Evangelists themselves, you may then learn, how sharp and bitter
the agony was. Mar. 14. 33: Mat. 26. 37. 38.
Will you see how it affected his Head? upon the fore-taste he began (...), to
be amazed; how it affected his heart? he began (...), to droope, to faint; how
it affected his soul? (...), it was all overcast with a heaviness to death;
how it affected his body? it made it to sweat great drops of blood. Luke 22.
44. Shall now our sins thus affect Christ and not afflict us? shall they be
as monntaines upon his back, and as Attomes on ours? like to the stone of the
Sybils, (Dio. Chry. orat. 13.) which to some weighed like lead, and others
like a feather: If so, know for a certain, that you whose hearts the love of a
bleeding and crucified Savior do not melt, his glorious and terrible power
shall one day break and afflict for ever.

Fistly, Consider, we have all contributed to that multiplicitie of evils under
which the Kingdom labors and strugles for life.

Had Great ones bin more resolute for God, and not like the top of a Fishers
Angling rod, have bowed and bended to all purposes, and indangger Religion to
save their Honors, had our Magistrates bin more wakefull to prevent both the
sowing and growth of diverse tares, had our Ministers bin more conscientious,
then to daub with untempered mortar, and to expose glass for pearls, Tertul.
had all of us less complied with vanities, with fashions, and sins of the
time, God had not been so angerie, nor we so miserable, as now we are.
Requisite therefore it is, that as we have brought feuell to the fire to
nourish it, so we now bring water, to quench it, and not stand, as many do,
when an house is on fire, like idle spectatours, that hinder rather then
further the quenching.

I have done this use, and only by way of caution shall add a few words to
relieve some troubled souls, with whom tears perhaps are scarce, though grenes
are plentiful: be not discouraged, as if you had done nothing in the duty of
the day, you have had a rational sorrow, though not a passionate sorrow, you
have had sighs which are the inward tears, (as Austin calls them) though not
the outward; and that is the mourning which is most effectual with God.

2. Use.
To discover (for happily we may wonder) why our humiliations and fastings
which have bin so frequent, have not bin returned with success into our
bosoms, suitable to our desires: but that still there are as many dangerous
symptoms of a languishing and dying Kingdom as ever. We have Fasted, but have
we wept? we have wept, but have we wept aright? Give me leave to run over three
of those forementioned qualifications, and you shall see eminent defects in our
weepings.

Three defects in our weeping.
First, the tears which have been shed, have bin rather forced then
voluntary, more from the smart of Strokes, then the sense of sin, more from a
want of outward contentments, then for the loss of Gods favor: And therefore
it is no wonder, if we say with Israel we have covered the Altar of the Lord
with tears, with weeping, and with crying out, and yet he regards it not,
Mal. 2. 13.

Secondly, our tears have not been reforming tears. And here give me leave
(Right Honorable) to speak to you whom Reformation most concerns, you have
passed worthy Votes for a strict Observation of the Sabbath and of fasting
days, but you have been too apt to sit down without a pursuance of the same.
Alas! it is not a naked Vote that passes within your walls, that can vote our
Churches full and the Taverns empty: there must something else be done, before
a Reformation in either will be obtained; offenders must be punished, Ministers
of Justice must he quickened, and called upon by your selves: for else you will
find that true which Alphius the usurer sometime said of his clients, Optima
nomina non appellando fiere mala: (Colum. de re rust. lib. 1. cap. 7.) good
Debtors will grow bad paymasters; if they be let alone.

Thirdly, our mourning have not been constant. The hearing of some ill tidings,
the miscarying of some hopes have caused us to hang down our heads for a day,
and to power forth some tears in the presence of God: but when these things
have bin a little digested and slept upon, we have bin as secure about our
conditions, dead and flat in our duties as ever before. Our tears have bin like
water in the conduits, that runs at times; but not like water in the spring
that rnnes constantly: by fits and starts we have bin earnest with God, like
the grasse-hoppers (as Gregory speaks) Greg. mor. lib. 13. cap. 12.
that make faint assaies to fly up to Heaven, and then presently fall to the
earth again. But if ever we would appease God, while his anger burns, let
our eye weep; while he denies, let us beg; while he withdrawes and absents
himself, let us incessantly cry out, as the Church did, Jer. 14. 9. Oh thou
hope of Jsrael, the Savior thereof in the time of trouble, why should thou
be as a stranger in the Land, and as a wayfaring man that turns a side to
tarry for a night.

I come now to the second point, which is,

That with fasting and weeping Confession and acknowledgment of sin is to be
joined.

The using of certain words in healing the diseases of the body, with which
many ignorant people are better acquainted then with prayer, is no other then a
sinful Charm, but in curing the diseases of the soul, and diverting the
Judgments of Heaven words are Gods Recipe: Hosea 14. 2. Take with you words,
and turn to the Lord, say unto him, take away iniquity, and receive us
graciously: They are the Saints practice, Ezra 9. 9. O Lord my God I am
ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to to thee my God: for our iniquities are
increased over our heads, and our trespass is grown up unto the Heavens: Dan.
9. 4, 5. I set my face unto the Lord God, and to seek by prayer and
supplication, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes, and I prayed unto the
Lord my God and made my confession.

For the explicating of this point, I will show, first, wherein a true
confession of sin stands: Secondly, in what manner it must be performed.

True confession is made up of two particulars, sui ipsius accusatio, sui
ipsius condemnatio: of a man's accusing of himself, and of a man's judging of
himself.

First, in accusing himself, he is to be coelestis et fidelis Dei orator
contra seipsum, (as Parisiensis speaks) a heavenly and faithful pleader for
God against himself: he is to set out his sins with those particular
aggravations, that have run into them, and do truly greaten them in Gods
sight: for as in Greek, we do not usually pronounce according to to the long
or short Syllable, but accorditg to the Accent; so in sin, God does not
always judge the greatness from the Fact, but from the circumstances with which
it is committed: or as in matter of Grace, God does not weigh it by the Scale,
but tries it by the touchstone; so in sin God does not weigh it by the
bulk, but by the ingreadients. A sin of a lesser magnitude committed with
light, with love, stirs up and provokes God more, then a greater sin with
reluctance, passion, or surprizall: for gravius est peccatum diligere, quam
committere, it is far worse to be in love with sin, then to commit it, as
Gregory well says.

Secondly, In condemning a man's self, he is to pass a severe Sentence against
himself, by acknowledging that God may justly let him sink in the midst of
his rebellions, without casting forth a new cord of mercy to help or save;
thus did the humble Prodigal, Luke 15. 18. 19. I have sinned against Heaven
and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son.

Now in the doing of these there is a double good that the sinner gets in the
accusing of himself, he puts Satan that is the great accuser of the Brethren
quite out of office, he can lay no more to his charge, then he has already
laid to his own in condemning himself; he puts God out of office (as I may
so speak) who will not judge them, that have judged and sentenced themselves,
1. Cor. 11. 31.

But to speak more distinctly of this first part of confession, viz, self
accusation; give me leave to propound three particulars about it.

Three partic. in self accusat.
First the Indictment and charge, that a man prefers against himself, it must
be special, and not general.

Confession with many is reckoned to be well enough done, when that some few
such overlie expressions drop from their lips, as, that they are sinners God
help them, and who is not? and they are heartily sorry for what they have done;
but if you descend to particulars, run over the whole Law, and they plead not
guilty; Images they defy, swear they do not, and for Church they come with
the first, and go with the last, as for repentance, if you ask them wherein it
lies, they answer not much unlike him in Quintilian, Quintil. inst. l. 2. c. 11.
who being demanded, what (...), what (...) was; replied, truly he could not
tell, but if it were any thing to the purpose, he was sure it was in his
Declamation: what repentance and sorrow for sin is, they cannot tell, but
sure they are, they have long ago repented for their sins. But how wide such
acknowledgments are from that exact confession which the Scriptures call for,
the practice of repenting sinners does abundantly evince. How often is David
upon his knees in confessing his murder, his adultery? what an History does
Nehemiah make of Isreal's sins in his prayer to God? Neh. cap. 9.
how particularly does Paul describe his madness against the Church, his
blasphemies against Christ? and all to this end, that themselves may be more
ashamed, and God the more glorified. In sins indeed of ignorance God is
pleased to accept of confession in the general, and in the lump, but for
sins of knowledge he looks that they be brought in as distinct debts, and
urged in our confessions as so many new Inditements against our selves.

Seconly, as we are to charge particulars upon our selves, so also among them
to single and cull out our principal and chief sins, streading them before
God with all their aggravations: As Physicians in their Anatomy Lectures,
though the whole body lie before them, yet they read cheifely upon some more
noble and Architectonical parts, the brain, the heart, the stomach, or the
like, so in our humiliations, though we bring the whole body of sin and death
into Gods presence, yet are we to dwell andinsist cheisly upon those
corruptions, which have a greater transcendency of evil in them above others:
As for instance, upon our unbelief, which is a mother sin, and carries a
thousand others in the womb of of it: upon your wordly mindedness, which
takes of the strength of all our affections from God, and pitcheth it upon the
creature, like to an ill spleen that robs the body of it is best norishment to
feed it self. Upon the breaking of our solemn Covenants made and renewed with
God, a sin which above many others, has helped to vnsheath the Sword of God
against us, and to let forth that dispeasure and indignation of the Lord, which
burns like a fire, that will not be quenched.

Thirdly, In Confession we are to charge upon our selves those powerful
stirrings of lust, which spring from the sinful frame and constitution of our
nature and derive a venom to every action that comes from us; sin being in
the faculty, as poison in the Fountain, that sheds infection into every
thing, that proceeds from it. And this is it, which begets an indisposition of
heart to holy services, that in our prayers damps our zeal, fervencie,
humiliation, self abhorrency; that in our meditations makes us roving and
unsettled, driving to no point or issue, like a ship in a tempest, that tosses
much, and sails little; that in our converse mingles much levitie,
frowardness, vnfaithfullnesse: in a word, that is it, which though it do not
make our holy duties sins, and so hateful to God, (as our Adversaries
slander us) Bellarm. de justif. lib. 4. cap. 10.
yet does contribute such a vitiousnesse, as a foul channel does to clean
water, to every thing that proceeds from us, as that God may justly charge us
for mixing our sin with his grace, and throw all our best works as dung in our
faces. Great reason is there therefore, that we should both accuse our selves
for this pravity and deordination of nature, and before God condemn and
sentence our selves for the cursed fruits that flow from it, which is the
second branch of true confession, that is briefly to be unfolded.

This self condemnation lies in two things. First in acknowledgment, that the
vmost wrath and severitie of God is justly due to such sins as we have fallen
into: for though a justified person by his transgressions do not de facto
become subject to the wrath and vengence of God, being a person privileged and
exempted from the maledictions of the law, yet they do de merito make such a
person liable to death; for the covenant of grace does not nullify the merit
of sin, but causes that sin shall not actually condemn and exclude such a
person from salvation; So that a regenerate man when he has sinned against
God, may truly say, as the Prodigal did, Luke 15. 18. I have sinned against
heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Sonue. Yea, it
is his duty in such a manner to sentence the merit of his sins, that he may
the more abundantly admire the riches and fullness of that grace, that has
delivered him from so heavy a curse.

Secondly, In self condemning: we must confess that the smart and
chastisements from God, which for sin at any time we lie under, are exceeding
just and righteous. Has God withdrawn from any of us the light of his
countenance because of our sins, and turned his smiles into frowns? has he
sealed up our lips, straightened our spirit? has he kindled a fire in our bones,
has he blastour estate, has he put gall into our contentments, and made life
it self a sore and heavy burden unto us? yet must we give glory unto god,
and say, as the Church did in the height of all it is afflictions, the Lord our
God is righteous in all his works; for we have not obeyed his veyce, Dan. 9.
14,

I come now to the manner, how the duty of confession is to be performed, and
that consists of of diverse ingredients and qulifications.

Five Qualific. in a true Confession.
First, a genuine confession of sin must be performed, with a great measure
of self abasing, and self humbling. The Leaper in the Law Lev. 13. 45. was
prescribed to have such a carriage and behavior, as might most clearly
express his shame and sorrow for such sins as had drawn so heavy hand of God
upon him, he was to go with his garments rent, that all might see and behold
his leaprosie: with his head bare, to typisie what a servant of servants he had
been what a drudge to his lusts, and the will of the flesh: with his lip
covered, to express (as some of the Hebrews say,) that he was fit for no
company or friendly salutes, but to sit and mo^e alone: to cry, unclean,
unclean; thereby to proclaim his own misery, and forwarne others that they
approach him not, least they be defiled by touching him: this deportment of the
Leaper, some of the Ancients have thought, to be a lively emblem of a penitent
and broken sinner, who when he come before God, to acknowledge his vileness,
is to use all means, and to take all advantages of abasing and shaming himself
in his presence: Vide Mendoc. in lib. 1. Reg. cap. 7. Number. 6. Annot. 25.
he is in some measure to afflict his body in the laying aside all ornaments;
he is to confess his vassalage to his (...) in whose service his hands and his
heart have bin so much hardened: he is to mourn, as one that deserves to have
none to be a comforter: he is with doubled and loud confessions to cry out
before God and man, that he is as an unclean thing, and all his
righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isaiah 64. 6.

Secondly, true confession as it debaseth a sinner, so must it exalt and set up
God. In this work God and a sinner are like unto quantitas discreta, and
quantitas continua, the one of which may be infinitely diminished, and the
other infinitely increased: Gods mercy in bearing, pardoning, healing that may
be highned, and exalted without bounds, and man, wretchedness and baseness
that may be so aggravated, as to make him worse then nothing: Both these things
does Nehemiah excellently perform, in that confession which he makes in the
behalf of the Church, which is all interchangeably woven and interstreaked
with an holy exalting of Gods goodness, and a serious acknowledgment of their
vileness. He begins cap. 9. ver. 7. to ver. 16. with a pithie and sweet
abridgment of Gods goodness to Israel, made known in eminent deliverances,
precious mercies, and strange miracles: then he subjoynes their ill requital
of this his love, from ver. 16. to ver. 19. then from ver. 19. to ver. 26. he
declares a new, how good God was to them, when they had been thus evil to him:
and then again adds, their inflexablenesse and disobedience under all his
continued goodness. And thus like checker work in white and black, in a
narration of Gods mercies, and Isreal's unthankfulness, he continues his
prayer unto the end.

Thirdly, a true Confession must be voluntary. Pij non trahuntur ad tribunal
dei, sed sponte accedunt: holy men prevent summons in Gods Court, and resolve
up on a voluntary appearance, they are active in this work, and not passive.
Wicked men when God awakens their consciences in their bosom, and makes the
smell of the brimstone and the fire of Hell, to come up into their nostrils,
when their soul is sitting upon their lips, and ready to take it is flight into
an other world, will then happily cry out of their sins, and seek pardon,
which in their lives they have despised; but all this is like the howling
devotion of some, desperate mariner in a storm, which is not at all out of
aflection, but out of fear, which will in the end be as far from peace, as
it is at the present from truth, it is the voluntary penitent that finds
mercy, and not he qui ad delinquendum exporrigit frontem, ad confitendum
contrahit, Tertul.
as

Fourthly, a true confession it must be real and sinceare.

It must be a work of the heart, and not of the lips, else though we be much
in the duty, we shall reap little of the fruit of it. Sincerity is that,
which in every service obtaines the blessing, but especiall^ in this, when an
humbled soul lies in the midst of darkness as in a dungeon, sincerity in
it is prayers in it is confessions, is as a chinke to let in some beams of
light, and hope, when as all shows and pretenses without it in any kind
whatsoever, are but like windows fastened upon a thick wall, that though they
contribute beauty to the building, and seem specious to the beholder without,
do yet transmit no light to the dweller within.

Fifthly, a true confession must exclude a willing return to sin again.
Among many names which Parisienses gives to confesion, this is one, he calls it
spiritualis vomitus, spiritual vomit, whereby the burdened soul does ease it
self, like an overcharged stomach by getting up that, which lies hard and
indigested upon it. Now it is the part of a dog to take up his vomit, and not
of a man, much less of a christian.

Oh therefore take heed what you do, that are exercised in the weighty duties
of this Day! do not turn your fastings and confessions into a lie by to
morrowes loose living, contradict not the words that have gone forth out of your
mouths, by a fresh practice of such sins, which you have now engaged your
selves to relinquish, let no lust that you have professed this day to be a
thorn in your sides, be as a crown or garland on your head to morrow, take
nothing again as a friend into your bosom, that you have this day looked upon
as an enemy, But if any man shall dare to mock God, and by fresh apostacies
to break the solemn covennat that he has now entered into, let him know this
for a certain, that if there be justice in Heaven, or fire in Hell, he shall
one day be filled with the bitter fruits of his own ways, and shall find the
wages of sin to be death. For the application of this point, I shall confine
my self unto two Uses, the first whereof shall consist only of some
directions, that may help us in confession, which to perform aright, is not
the least part of a christians work or care.

1. Use.
First, study well your hearts. the heart is a vast maze and labyrinth, in
which not he that runs fastest, soonest comes to an end, but he that walks
most circumspectly: as a dark vault, that stands in need of all the candles of
the Lord, for to enlighten it: as a vast Sea, which needs the longest line for
to fathom it: and the more you are acquainted with it, the more you shall see
cause to abhor your-selves, and matter to plead against your-selves. There
are in the eye a thousand vanities, adulteries, pride, curiosity, thefts, and
the like, but si trabs in oculo, sylva in cord, if there be a beam in the
eye, there is a wood in the heart: there are in the hands violence, rapines,
bloodshed, but they are there only as water in a stream, the heart is the
fountain, that feeds and nourishes it: in all the members there is a fullness
of sin, but the heart is the root that derives life and strength unto all: as
the Sea, that filles the Rivers, but yet it self is never the less empty:
After all communications and diffusions of lust into every faculty there are
in the heart as the proper seat, Atheism, blasphemies, treasons against the
very life and being of God, sins at which the very flesh itself will quake and
tremble, when they do begin to peep and put out in the very shadow of a
thought.

Now can a man that is any way apprehensive, that he has such a treasure, such
an Hell, such a magasin of sins within him, want what to confess? and what to
condemn himself for in the sight of God? no certanly, words he may want, and
tears and sighs, but never matter of confession, and astonishment, were his
life drawn out to an eternity. it is the ignorance only that men have of
their hearts, that filles them with pride, boastings, presumptions of their
estates, opinions of their goodness that make them like the Pharisie that can
find little to confess, but much to commend himself for; whereas if God did
but discover the true condition of their hearts unto them, they would like the
Publican knock and smite their breasts? and cry out, Lord be merciful to me a
sinner.

Secondly, Get a spiritual knowledge of the Law of God. That is it which as a
light discovers those corruptions and sins which lie hid and unseen in the
dark night of ignorance, and makes them to appear in their due shape and
proportion: Paul while this light of the Law shone into his heart, was alive
(as himself confesses) Romans 7. 9. full of conceits of his own righteousness,
and abilities to perform what ever the Law had required to salvation: but when
the Commandment came, sin revived, and Paul dyed: all his presumptions and
misperswations they withered and fell away as leaves do from the trees in
Autumn, and his sins they like the Crows nests appeared, which before are
unseen and undiscerned: then he saw that to be a mountain, which before he
judged to be a moate, and that to be sin, which before he looked upon as
righteousness, then he saw much to bemoan, much to confess, and to be ashamed
of, but nothing to boast, and glory of: some sins indeed the weak glimmerings
of nature may discover unto men to be vile; lying, luxury, idleness; the
Cretian Poet could tax in his own country men: but to read over the whole
History of a man's life without any other candle, is as impossible, as to turn
over great volumes by the light of a glowworme. Tit. 1. 12.


Thirdly, Keep alive in your hearts, the apprehension, of some particular
sins, for which God has deeply humbled you. Christians in their way to
Heaven as they are not without assaults, temptations, importunities of the
flesh; So are they not sometimes without falls and bruses, lusts tempt and they
yield, the flesh flatters and must be gratified, and by this means oftentimes
their peace is impaired, and their consciences deeply wounded: Now if any of us
have such black days in our Calenders, such foul sins in our private
Registers, that may mind us what we have sometimes bin, let us as much as we
can, keep up the apprehensiof that deformity, ugliness, contrariety to the
Law, which they seemed to have, when first God set them upon our consciences,
the fresh remembrance of sin in this kind; it is like a pease in an issue, that
keeps it open and makes it run: it makes the heart to be in a broaken and
melting frame, to be free in confession and earnest in prayer, that God would
show him mercy, and let him live before him.

Fourthly, Reflect seriously upon your ways. Running waters cast no shadow,
no more do fleeting thougts make any representation of a man's condition: he
that rides post, can never make a true map of a Country, nor that man any
discovery of himself whose thoughts do not now and then make a stand and
look backward, it is consideration, that tells us what need we stand in of
mercy to pardon us, and what need we have to confess our sins, that we may
be pardoned: it is consideration, that makes the issues of sin dreadful, and
causes us with trembling to seek him whom we have offended, and to ^urne our
feet unto his Testimonies.

2. Use.
A second Use is in breife to discover. how injurious they are, not only unto
themselves, but unto the the happiness of the whole Kingdom, that would in
these sad times cry down all acknowledgment and confession of sin, as that
which is vselesse, and unbecomming the days and times of the Gospel, and would
by certain arts and wyles put a beauty upon most misshapen and deformed
opinions. Pausanias tells a story, of a mirror in the Temple of Smyrna, that
if any that had a beautiful face, looked in it, he would appear exceedingly
deformed; and if any that were ilfavoured did look in it, they did appear
beautiful and amiable. not much unlike to this glass are their fancies, which
render the blessed truths of God, sorrow for sin, confession of sin, and
prayer for pardon, as things that the Law of the Gospel does not injoyne, or
Christ accept, and cry up a liberty and freedom from the Law, as a rule to
guide and order our conversations, by which Opinion if they should once come to
prevail in men's minds, they will quickly bid farewell to all holiness. But I
spare to speak any more, because that you with whom the weighty affairs of
the Church are betrusted, will do that right to the Gospel and truth, which
shall beseem Persons of your worth and piety.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 13. l. 4. for devotious r. directions. page 14. l. 8. r. prescribed, page
17. l. 10. r. stroke.

Die Jovis 27. Julij, 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that Master Spurstowe has
hereby thanks given him from their Lordships, for the great pains taken by
him in his Sermon he made in Saint Margarets Church Westminster before the
Lords and Commons on Friday the 21. of this instant July, at the public
Humiliation; And is hereby desired to cause his said Sermon to be forthwith
Printed and Published.

John Brown Cler. Parl.

Die Veneris 21. Julij, 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the House of Commons, that Master Salloway do give
thanks to Master Spurstowe, who at the desire of the House this day Preached
before the Commons at St. Margarets, Westminster, it being an extraordinary day
of public Humiliation, and that he be desired to print his Sermon. And it is
Ordered that no man shall print his Sermon, but whom the said Mr. Spurstowe
shall Authorize under his handwriting.

H. Elsygne Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Peter Cole to print my Sermon.

William Spurstowe


