THE FULL VIEW OF Canterburies fall, From POP deliver us all.

Grace, and no grace, Has wrought thy disgrace.

My head that wrought all misery
is smitten off, as you may see,
You Prelates be warned by me,
the reward of evil just you see
Laud sought applaud,
but justice turned the wheel.
Had thou been good,
thou had been graced still
OF Canterbury,
had you had grace
For to beware
this preaching place,
Then had you better
proud to be,
And praises gaind
eternally.


A Brief EXPOSITION, PARAPHRASE, OR INTERPRETATION, UPON THE Lord of
Canterburies Sermon or Speech, upon the last Pulpit that ever he preached,
which was the Scaffold on Tower Hill.

Also, upon the Prayer which he used at the same time and place before his
Execution.

Written by William Starbucke Gentleman, to give the people a glimmering of the
Bishops hypocrisy.

MATTHEW. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves. PROVERB. 26.24. He that hates
dissembling with his lips, and lays up deceit within him: when he speaks
fair believe him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart. LONDON
Printed for William Starbuck. 1645.

To the Christian READER.
CHristian Reader, I know your expectations, or your desires by your Queres,
Questions, Answers, and Objections; or rather indeed by many of your
distractions: to wit, What do you think of my Lord of Canterbury his Speech or
Sermon? how did you like it? To which Queres, Questions, Answers, Objections,
and Distractions, I will give as brief an answer as I may, for these reasons:
first, in regard of my little time; for things in this nature require have.
Secondly, of my unability, for there is such deep mysteries, as Latin, and
other sentences, that I and many more cannot find out the depth of it in a
short time, and it may be never, in regard of his hypocrisy. Thirdly, too
Eccl. 12.
much writing or reading is a weariness both to the writer and reader.

First, what do you think of his Sermon or repentance? my skill or
understanding deceives me, if Judas his repentance were not as good, and
Achans, if not both rather better: for Judas confessed a particular sin, not
only, I have sinned, but, I have sinned in betraying the Mat. 27.4.
innocent blood. Achan likewise, not, I am a sinner, or only, I have sinned
against the Lord; but, thus and thus have I done, I saw a Babylonish garment,
and two wedges of Gold, and I coveted them. In doing this, the Text says, he
gave glory, unto the Josh 7.19, 20
Lord God. But how many of the Saints of God stood and sat looking with their
eyes, and hearing with their ears, and desiring with their prayers, that God
would, if it were his will, give him repentance, whose innocent blood he had
been the arch spiller of, some of them, or their friends; witness Master
Burton, Mr. Prynne, Doctor Bastwicke, and Mr. Lilburne, besides the man that
was put to death as a Traitor, for him, which it may be saw the spilling of
his, some of them: how many were there; nay rather, how many thousands, which
some of them he had been the arch imprisoner of; laying wait for the Prove.
14.15.
righteous, and spoiling them of their resting place, causing them to fly from
one Parish to another, one Town to another, one City to another; nay, from one
Land to another, many into New England, some to the West Indies, and other
places of the World: which of any of all these heard this Merchant, or great
man of the earth, which by his policy robbed and deceived the Nations, waxing
rich by his sorceries, to confess any sin or sins, to Ezekiel. 18.17.
restore any pledge or pledges, either publicly, or privately; ask Mis. S.I.
and others, which have been with him, and then judge of my thoughts; and
parallel Judases and Achans repentance, and then tell me, which of them is the
worst: and now, as in a wilderness, not knowing how to get out, I end my
Epistle, and begin to suspend my thoughts upon his Speech or Sermon; and where
I come too short, I refer you to Master Prynnes, Deeds of darkness, which I
hear say is coming forth, if it be not already.

HEBREWS 12.1, 2. Let us run with patience the race that is set before us,
looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that
was set before him indurd the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at
the right hand of the Throne of God.
The VVriters Apology.
GOod people, my Apology is, as my Lord says in a another case, that you would
pardon my boldness, if I follow the Prophets expressions to the priests of
Baall, whose Sermon I have here to deal with, although as seldom as I may
which was ironically spoken: cry aloud, it may be he is in a journey, or
asleep; which was the preachers practice to both young and old, Rejoice young
man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth: and
walk in the ways of thy heart, (as he did) and in the sight of thine eyes:
but for all these things God will bring thee unto judgment.

The Bishops Apology.
FIrst, before my Lord begun his Sermon he des^^ed the good people to pardon
his old memory, but by right he should have craved pardon when he was younger,
for his memory was as ill to be trusted then as now, but at that time he
granted out so many pardons to others, and absolutions, that he forgot his own,
or else it slipped out of his memory; but it may be, he had it from the Pope long
since, and then it might be in his Study or in some little black box, and so
as safe as his own License or the rest of the priests, that was made by him or
his successors.

Secondly, he told us upon what ocasion he came thither, included in these
words, I am come; he came indeed, but he must needs come when he could not tell
how to help it; for had not the Sheriffs and their Officers, according to an
Ordinance of Parliament, brought him thither, as Elisha said in another case,
so say I, you should not have seen his face that day, especially upon, or in
that pulpit.

Thirdly, he said he must make use of his paper; he dare not trust himself
otherwise: but for my part I thin he he never had a stronger motive to stir up
his memory, so that if he had never preached but upon a paper all hi^ life
before, he might have thrown away his paper then except his Sermon had been
longer, but he that has not the Spirit to depend upon, to bring things into
his memory, and has not a mouth and wisdom given him from God, he must needs
trust to something, let him trust to his paper.

Fourthly, and lastly he says, good people, but he leaves out all, you know
what he means, that is an uncomfortable place to Preach in. I grant it, for if
no afflictions are joyous to the gooly for the present, then much more no
punishments to the wicked, for the prophet says no peace (...)
speaks my God to the wicked: besides to preach glad tidings unto others and
his own Funeral Sermon, it was (...) an uncomfortable time, but the place was
good enough* for he never had more room, (had the scaffold been but empty) nor
yet a greater audience of people; so much for his Apology, now I come to the
^ex Heb. 12.1.2.

As his memory was not to be trusted to, but his paper, and his place very
uncomfortable, so his time was very short, for he wanted time, otherwise he
would have divided his Text; but to show his s^hollership in too many places,
(though it would not have charged his memory, yet his paper,) being charged in
the 7. 10. 13. 14, 18, 19. pages too much Latin, except it had bin all
interpreted, or else he mighth ^^ve been afraid of this word us: for this word
us would have showed, that it was meant the saints, and not Traitors or
impenitent Malefactors, for the cloud of witnesses before used, were such as
were persecuted by such as himself, themselves being no persecuter; He says
he has bin long running the Race, I cannon say so, a Race, but not the Race:
for if he had begun, Christ which was the Author, would have him the finisher,
or if he had bin the finisher, he would have finished his work better,
therefore you say well, you are come to the end of your own Race. You say that
the shame must be despised, or else there is no coming to the crown, I had
thought the crown had bin come to by the free grace of God, and sufferings and
effect, in those which have received the assurance, but now I see your
Arminianism and your general Redemntion although you have kept it close, you
tell us he has despised the shame for you, then Christ has died for all, and
if he died for all, then all shall be saved, Indas share and yours is as good
as the rest of the Disciples, and he despised the shame for Christ though he
crucified him. He says, that be is going apace toward the red Sea, his feet
being upon the brink, and it is an argument, that God is bringing him to the
Land of promise, and that he instituted a Passover for them; so Pharaoh was
going a pace toward the read sea when he persecuted the children of Israel; a
poor argument that ever he should come to the land of Canaan, but he was
drowned in the sea against his will, so you, whilst your chariot wheels were on,
but now you are come to the red Sea against your will, so as Pharaoh and all
his host were drowned, your head has bin chopped off, and your red blood run
about the scaffold: but Israel passed thorough dryshod and triumphed over
Pharaoh and all his Host, as the saints do now over you, your head being chopped
off; the Passover was instituted but for Israel, and the Lord past them by, but
the first borne of Pharaoh were all slain; so God has passed by those which
you have persecuted, and you are catched in the same snare; Hagaion and selah.
As for your digesting the sour Herbs, you must whether you will or no: and for
your being not angry; it is because your Horns be cut off, the day has been,
when you would not have been well pleased with the hearing tell of such sour
and bitter Herbs: and though you were a chief Bishop you mistake Christ's
example, for when he prays that the Cup might pass from him, he prays so,
that the people might understand him, and the Apostle says, be will pray with
the spirit and with understanding also: else how could they that occupied the
room of the unlearned say Amen?

In the next place you see, though he had some faith such a one as it was; that
Israel was saved and their enemies drowned, and the three Children freed from
the fiery furnace, and they that put them in burned, so that he should be
delivered, and they which he suffered under should suffer themselves; but he
wanted a Revelation for that. He told us also, that his resolution was as the
three Childrens, and not to worship the Image which the King had set up:
telling us that the people had set up their imaginations, saying, that he would
not forsake the Temple and Truth, to follow the bleating of Ierobvames Calves
in Dan and Bethell; you see his thoughts of the erecting worship, but he said
nothing of the bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen, which where
in Paul's and many other places pulled down by Order of Parliament; though
formerly reedified by himself. He prayed that God would open the Peoples eyes,
that they might see the right way, for if the blind lead the blind they will
both fall into the ditch, it was well considered, for he had led so many into
the ditch himself, that except they see a righter way then he led them, will
not get out in have.

And as for his Repentance look into the Epistle to the Reader, but behold
what a foul heart he had: for after he had ransaked it he found no sins
there (they being hid as Saul was amongst the stuff,) that deserved Death by
any just Laws of this Kingdom: here is work for the Parliament, he means it
may be repealing work, though he cleares the Judges with his mouth, yet there
might be seven abominations in his heart, for I am sure he condemns the
witnesses, and leaving Christ, he takes comfort in Elfegus; you see that he
keeps his Supremacy still, as the Pope, which says, that he is Christ's
Viegerent upon Earth, forgetting what Christ said to his Apostler, let him that
it chief amongst you be your servant: call no man Lord, for one is your Lord
which is Jesus Christ; be not Lords over Gods heritage; you see he tumbles
good causes and bad together, and good persons and bad together: daubing up his
comforts with John the Baptist, Paul, and Steven, and with ancient Fathers, as
the Papists his Brethren do.

He said also that the Pope had never such a Harvest in his life, but if it
should come to the Popes care, he would give him little thanks for his report;
if Heading, Hanging, Drawing and Quartering, cutting off Archbishops hea^s be
such a harvest, he will not meddle with it, take the cro^ who will.

You see also what a favorite he was to the King, and and how he knows his
mind; and who was his counselor or Achitophel; but I remember Pharaoh he saw
it pleased the people and so he proceeded further.

Citizens clear your selves, for you are taxed by my Lords Book for going to
the Parliament, to cry out for Justice, and there is Scripture against you* so
that by consequence for this great crime you will bring innocent blood on your
selves, but it may be he gives you this caution to make the People think
himself Innocent and you guilty.

Now I am come to my Lords lamentation for the poor Church of England, whilst
my Lord was Arch-governour, you were kept in good order, all things went well,
Paul's went up apace, all the rest of the houses were pulled down that profaned
it, Organs repaired, and not pulled down, I punished those that spoke against
the Service Book; the Singers also had their wages, but now instead of singing
longs of alacrity, they sing songs of lacrymae. Profaneness comes in, and is
already, the high Commission Court is put down, every man may do what he
lift, these Puritans, Roundheads, may do what they please, whereas I could
have slit their Noses, cut their Ears, set them on the Pilory, Starved,
Imprisoned, Compelled them to blaspheme as Paul did, and persecuted them unto
strange Cities.

The last particular, (for my Lord made haste, because the heads-man staid for
him) be tells us of his birth, where he was borne and baptized; to wit, in the
Church of England: but he forgets Sion, which says, this man was borne
there, and that Jerusalem which is from above is the mother of us all. Although
he has been a ruler in England, we have not yet one word of his new birth. But
some of his Chaplains would have done well to have preached out of the third of
John upon his Masters Pulpit, rather then to have let him preached himself; it
may be that might have done him some good, and hindered him from sending abroad
his hypocritical or Jesuiticall poison into the world, and wresting of
Scriptures to his own pardition.

Also he says, this is no time for to dissemble. Is not this the way of all
Jesuits, to die with m^ntall reservation according to Law, who knows his
meaning* telling us of his innocence, how he labored to keep an uniformity;
yea and did, one with the Pope; and would have done with Scotland also, by
sending of his poison thither, if God had not prevented him in his own time.
Also, what clamours of the people has he suffered; how have they clamored, or
rather cried out of him for imprisoning of their husbands, children, and
friends, robbing them by his Pursevants, silencing, and turning wife and
children out of doors. He proceeds, and contrary to all witnesses, and
proceedings of Parliament, cleares himself from Treason, or whatsoever is laid
against him; but as good a Lawyer as he was, let Master Prynne alone with him,
he has persecuted him once for his sincerity, but now he has or will lay open
his hypocrisy. He says he would not enlarge himself, and so forgives others,
and would have others forgive him; he derogates a little from his former
practices in the High-commission-Court: for then he granted out forgivenesses
for others, and asked none himself; desiring them to join with him in prayer,
(though Solomon says, that the prayers of the wicked are an abomination to the
Lord,) the manner and matter being both false. God promised that he would pour
upon the house of David the Spirit of prayer and supplication. Paul prayed with
the spirit and understanding also, and says, that the Spirit helps the
infirmities which cannot be uttered by them; at the day of Pentecost, or the
(...).
fiftieth day, the Spirit came down in cloven tongues, not Books, Beads or
Crucifixes: but my Lord though he was ar^^^, was not there, therefore excuse
him. He desired the Lord to look upon him, but not till he was bathed in the
blood of Christ: here you see he questions his assurance. He prays that the
King and his posterity, and the people may be established in their just Laws,
and ancient liberties: you know what he means.

Some Observations upon Sir John Clotworthys Questions, and my Lords Answers.
I. SIr John Clothworthy asked him, what special place of Scripture was most
comfortable now at his departure.


C. He answers in Latin, that he desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.


Star. You see, as he has got his honor by learning, so he loses his honor
with learning. The Gospel says, If any speak in anunknown Tongue, let it be
interpreted. As also, that he had rather speak five words that he might teach
others, then ten thousand words in an unknown Tongue. But my Lord forgot that.


J. Sir John Clothworthy told him, that was a good desire, but there must be a
foundation for that desire, as assurance.


C. He answers, that no man can express it, it was to be found within.


Star. A fit man to be a Bishop; does not the Scripture say, With the heart man
believes to salvation, and with the tongue confession is made.


I. Sir John Clothworthy said, It is founded on a word, and that word would be
known.


C. He answered, That word is the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him alone.


Star. But my Lord came too short of giving Sir John satisfaction according to
his question. Those that have the knowledge of Christ within them are able to
express it to others. But my Lord satisfied us not that the Lord is within him.


TO THE READER on the Authors name.
WHen I did hear the people to admire,
With zeal my heart did burn like any fire.
What they did speak, and I my self did think
Will I write down with Paper, and with Ink.
Iniquity to hear them to commend,
I had done ill if it I bad^ not pend.
I hearing ill extold, and good called evil,
It to pass by, in me had been uncivil.
Look and behold, and see how they applaud
Like to a God, I mean their little Laud.
Like to a martyr do they think he died,
Lo by the law a malefactor tried.
Look not on men, they are but dust and clay,
Let nothing in them steal your hearts away;
Like to a shade from hence away they pass,
Like to a dream, a bubble, or like grass.
I do admire, and yet admire I not,
In this plain case you should be so besot.
If in his life so many were bereaved,
In death much more they well might be deceived.
Alas poor souls, such thoughts as these a shun,
Above look up, and see what God has done,
Admire and wonder at his Parliament,
And leave such thoughts as give your selves content.
Murders and treasons till they have suppressed,
Minutes, nights, hours, taking little rest:
Maintaining innocents in a right cause,
Malignants punishing that break the Laws.
Such that in prison once were forced to lie,
Strange Countries also forced for to fly,
Seeking for shelter, wandering up and down,
Set are in places now of great renown.
Tho Noses slit, imprisoned, lost their Ears,
They much respected are of Noble Peers.
Tho Bishops once upon them much did frown,
The Prelates prond for them are pulled down.
All you that captives were, and now set free,
Above your voices lift you up with me;
Admire and wonder at such things as these,
At God alone, and let him have the praise.
Raise up your heads, and clap your hands for joy,
Remember how he does your foes destroy:
Revive a little tho they do and spread,
Rotten they be, and soon they will be dead.
Blood which is innocent, he that does spill,
Blood he himself shall drink against his will.
Blood against Caine aloud to Heaven cried,
Because that Abell innocently dyed.
Unto all you I do my speech direct,
Unity which as yet do not affect;
Unto the Lord, and never give him leave
Until in mercy he do you receive.
Call unto God that he would give you grace,
Cry unto him whilst you have time and space.
Crave pardon now before that you be dead,
Cause you the blood of innocents have shed.
Keep in your hearts these Verses few of mine,
Know what they mean, and con them time by time,
Kiss exhortations good, and eke embrace,
Know God in time, to day seek you his face.
FINIS.

