portrait
A SPIRITVAL CORDIAL For my LORD of Canterbury, Which has been long sick of
a Consumption, (Evil men and deceevers waxing worse and worse) made by a
Tenant of his in new Prison. And now presented to him, to see if it may be a
means to recover him, if he be not past Cure.
SOme news, my Lord, I will unfold,
If with you I may be so bold,
To show you how my case it stands,
Now I am in your prison-bands. Hebr. 13. 3.

Tho I be in a prison strong,
Yet unto Christ I do belong;
And tho you have me here in hold,
Yet am I one of Christ's own fold. Ioh. 10. 13.

Is this the flock for to preserve,
To let them in a prison starve?
Your enemies, if you must feed,
The flock, Isay 40. 11.
much more, when they have need.
Is not this to your disgrace,
To spoil me of my resting place?
Me, and my Wife, and Children starve,
Which God commands me to preserve. 1 Timothy 5. 8.

Is this the Gospel for to preach,
To make upon the Saints a breach?
This doctrine will not serve your turn;
No, Isay 61. 3.
it is to comfort those that mourn.
If that your light it be Divine,
Then let it out to others shine.
Under a bushel if it be,
None but your self the same can see. Math. 5. 15.

Servants of God patient must be,
And wait on sinners patiently,
To see if God make them repent,
And not inflict such punishment. 2 Timothy 2. 24.

The wrath of man will not prevail
To make sinners their sins bewail.
The prison will not men compel,
No it is to ring the Gospels bell. Mar. 16. 15.

When Christ his twelve Apostles sent,
That men believe might and repent,
Glad tidings was the only way
To make the people to obey. Math. 10. 7.

And Christ himself did think it meet
That they should shake dust from their feet.
He bad them not to prison hail,
Nor shut them up in any Jaile. Mat. 10. 14.

The woes they did to them present
Was a sufficient punishment;
Which at that great and dreadful day
All have which do not him obey. Mat. 11. 2.

When Paul did preach unto the Jews
And they his doctrine did refuse,
Unto the Gentiles he did turn,
That was the way to make them mourn. Act. 13. 4, 6

Tho Peter they could not abide,
Because he preached Christ crucified,
His Gospel pricked them to the heart,
That only did the Jews convert. Acts 2. 37.

As Abels blood aloud did cry
Unto the Lord that is most high,
So does our bloods cry in his ear,
As once it shall be made appear. 1 Ioh. 3. 12.

For I give credit to his word
Who says, those that fight with the Sword
Shall with the Sword themselves be slain;
The Scriptures makes it very plain. Mat. 26. 52

Those that do so we may well think
They shall have blood themselves to drink.
Under the Alter souls do cry
That he revenge would from on hie. Rev. 6. 10.

Repent, believe, and eke confess,
Of this your crying wickedness,
That you the blood of Saints should spill,
To satisfy your wilful will. Heb. 10. 26

Desire of God to give you grace
Whilst you have any time and space.
Your honor here you must lay down
Before you win the glorious Crown. Rev. 21. 24

I freely do forgive all wrongs
Which once I had, and now for smart,
Not only with my word and tongue,
But also from my very heart. Mark 11. 35.

William Starbucke this Cordial made,
When in the Counter he did he
Of Woodstreet, in the prison house
Because that oath he did deny. Zach. 8. 17.

Per me William Starbuck.
London, Printed for W. S. 1644.


