ROYAL AND OTHER INNOCENT BLOOD CRYING ALOUD TO HEAVEN for due vengeance.
Humbly represented to the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament. And with all humble dutiful submission dedicated to the two High
and Mighty Princes, James Duke of York and Henry Duke of Gloucester, his Sacred
Majestyes ROYAL BRETHREN.

By George Starkey, A true honourer and faithful friend of his Country.

Qui non prohibet, quod in sua potestate est, jubet.

LONDON, Printed by A. Warren for Daniel White at the Sign of the Seven-stars
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

To the High and Mighty Princes, James Duke of York, and Henry Duke of
Gloucester, his Sacred Majestyes happy, and high born Brethren.
MOst Illustrious Princes, this short tractate, though far unworthy your sight,
much less your Princely Patronage, yet is humbly dedicated to your gracious,
and Royal hands, and submitted to your most judicious censure; first
considering your excellent goodness, by which you can (with your favor) make
that which is of no worth, valuable upon the score of your Princely acceptance:
secondly because it is humbly presented to the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, of the first of which, you are incomparable members; lastly
considering the subject it treats of, and the intended scope of it, on which
score, I hope it may meet with a kind acceptance from your true filial Piety
and Princely wisdom: Pardon most royal Heroes, this bold presumption of him,
who wants deserts, yet presuming on your gracious pardon, has the boldness,
(may it not be interpreted impudence) to subscribe himself,

High and Mighty Princes, Your Royal Highnesses unworthy Servant, and most
humble Orator. GEORGE STARKEY.
St. Thomas Apostles June. 18. 1660.
MOST HONORABLE LORDS AND WORTHY GENTLEMEN.
1. GOd having been pleased so highly to honor you, and by your means thus
far to make these Nations happy, as to restore unto us our long exiled, most
excellently accomplished King, and us to him, it behooves every true subject,
with thankfulness to address himself to him by prayer, that he would
abundantly bless him unto us, and amongst us, by pouting out upon him his
spirit; enriching him with all spiritual and temporal good things, and to
neglect this duty is, and will doubtless be accounted their sin, who are
guilty thereof.

2. This remarkable blessing of God vouchsafed to the whole Nation, and so
signal Character of his good will toward you, (whom he has at last chosen so
far to go on in this work, having often before th own aside several persons,
who have attempted it, not only unsuccessfully, but with the loss of their
lives; nor has hitherto suffered any forcible opposition, to retard, much
less th^eaten the overthrow of such happy beginnings;) ought to stir up both
your, and all our hearts, to acknowledge with thankfulness these his favors, so
great, that we scarce durst formerly put up our requests for them, and so
unexpected, that humane wisdom could hardly believe, much less dictate means
to effect, what God in his blessed providence has wonderfully brought about,
beyond both our deserts and hopes.

3. The serious consideration whereof, has invited, and prevailed with me, in
few words to beg, and entreat of you, that as God has so far honored you in
the sight of these Nations, you would make his divine Majesty such Christian
returns of gratitude, as may Evidence, and seal your sincerity, and true piety
to this and future ages.

4. That the thoughts, how God has chosen you, as a select number out of, and
before many thousand Englishmen, to bring home to them (as I may say) a most
heart-refreshing return of many prayers, and tears, which for about twenty
years, in the midst of distracting calamities, have been poured out before,
and addressed to the Divine Majesty, by such who have an interest in the throne
of grace, may now engage you henceforth to deny God nothing, which from his
word of truth may appear to be expected, and required of you, as a grateful
testimony, of your true Christian obedience, and thankfulness.

5. It has seemed good to the Divine providence, which we may truly call
wonderful, so to overruled of late, the counsels of our former oppressors,
(who by strange success, and almost incredible dexterity in villainy, had almost
involved both our Church and state in unavoidable ruin; grinding without
compassion, these (once free) but at length woefully enthralled Nations,
fastening on their neck, an Iron, uneasy yoke of servitude, making them (with
Samson) basely to grind, and abide captivity, and curbing them with rigor, who
before repined at, grew weary of, and rejected the milder scepter, and so to
ensnare them in their contrivances, that their plots (like potters vessels)
were broken upon the wheel, nor produced any thing but confusion and
distraction to themselves, together with unsetledness in the Nation, whence
arose discontent, loss of trade, and poverty, and by means of the last of
these, the wasted peoples whispers, murmurings, and repinings on all hands were
so many and urgent, that the Master builders of our new Babel, by their own
jealousies, misunderstandings, and animosities, were in short time dispersed
hither and hither, through the good hand of God, without stroke on either side.

6. What height of fury, and desperate resolution was on their side, God knew,
and took notice of, nor was it unknown to most of those, who desired, and
prayed for such a composure, and settlement of affairs, as we now see, through
his great goodness, and undeserved kindness to us, who considering the
preparations and contrivances to hinder what we now happily enjoy, could not
expect this redemption, but as a purchass, and with the loss of the lives of
thousands, the shedding much blood, and exposing our hopes to extreme hazard.
The oppressed City, and groaning Countries were resolved, either to shake off
the Arbitrary yoke of Usurpation and Tyranny, or to perish in the attempt. On
the other hand the fatal causers of our long past and present calamities,
animated with guilt and despair, were resolved either to make good their
ground, or expire like Cateline, that is, sell their life as dear as possible,
and cover the place, they maintained fighting in life, with their breathless
Carkases after death, or like Z^mry, rather than lose (by surrender) their
power and estates, fire the whole Nation first, then set some Cities, and
Castles on flame over their heads, and perish together.

7. Yet it pleased the Lord of hoasts, to dissipate their armed powers,
frustrate their designs, and leave the Ringleaders, stripped of all succor, to
the scourge of justice. It stood with his honor and wisdom, to restrain the
rage and fury of man; to glorifye himself, by delivering up these great
Midianitish oppressors, insulting Moabites, Philistim Lords, (with their Balaam
like Prophets and Southsayers) without so much as drawing Sword, or firing
Pistol in a hossile way; notwithstanding, they encouraged each other, and
complotted, as well by hidden machinations, as open hostility, to prevent our
settlement, and secure themselves from justice.

8. This miraculous language of Gods actions, speaking as his power and wisdom,
so his great love to us, gives me hopes, and in a manner assurance, that you,
by whom these unlikely changes were brought about, so much to Gods glory, and
the Kingdoms hope of happiness, will not look upon (with scorn) or reject
with (contempt) any humble advice, which is sincerely offered, and tendered to
your honors wisdom, and most judicious consideration, by one, who most
cordially, and unfeignedly honors you, as well for your actions, as worth:
however inconsiderable, or unworthy, to suggest any thing (by way of Counsel)
he may justly appear unto you.

9. God, who has made choice of your Honors, out of so great a Kingdom,
wherein are found so many, and eminent men, able both for parts and piety, to
appoint you the messengers of such happy tidings, or Angels of peace, unto
these Nations, having laid aside before, so many, and often, both persons of
remarke, and who zealously endeavored the effecting (had God seen it good) of
what is now prosperously brought to pass in your hand, whereby in his
providence he spoke plainly, that neither was that the season, nor those the
persons, by whom he intended deliverance to this his people, therefore they
either failed, or were unsuccessfully ruined in their pious undertakings. The
same thing God then saw good to deny them, he has made easy to you, levelling
(as it were) mountains before you, so that you (worthy Patriots) are become
our Zorobabels, to redeem and restore our captivity, to repair our breaches, to
settle again upon its true and ancient Basis, these three great, however sadly
broken Kingdoms.

10. Remember I beseech you that God, who both names, and appoints honors, and
makes prosperous his Instruments, who called his anointed Cyrus, and made gates
of brass fly open before him, and who knows, but perhaps the same God, who
has raised you, beyond what either you could expect, or find means (of your
selves,) to compass, who has made you serviceable to both King and Country, so
far as to deserve all the honor possible, for this age to invent, thereby to
celebrate your name and worth to posterity, has likewise by his providence
stirred me up, to speak a word to your wisdoms in season, my disposition and
propensity being (I dare assure your honors) to have kept private, and
assisted you (to my power) only with my most sincere wellwishes and prayers to
God, put up in your behalf.

11. Howbeit, considering the season, I am in a manner compelled to come forth
as I do, thus publicly, to offer my most serious thoughts, and reflections of
spirit upon the late miraculous transactions wrought, by the divine providence,
among us; to your most grave and judicious thoughts, with humble submission, to
your most discreet censure.

12. A season, wherein Gods mercies are plentifully poured out upon us,
notwithstanding our great unworthiness, wherein he is most signally propitious,
affording opportunity to make up all our breaches, to repair what has been
thrown down and defaced; happy therefore may he be accounted, who shall any way
assist toward a firm, lasting establishment, and well grounded settlement.

13. A season, wherein many broken bones need binding up, many dislocated
joints settling in place, many ulcers searching, and cleansing, and (trust me,
most honorable Lords, and worthy Gentlemen,) many rotten pieces of flesh
cutting off, many desperate humors lancing, much dead and proud flesh to be
taken away by corrosives, if ever a sound cure be expected, or hoped for in
this body politic.

14. What your proceedings have been in order hereunto; we have seen, and have
all cause both to bless God, and honor you, for so much as already we have
found effected: what your further intentions are, several of your late votes,
gives us both grounds to guess and hope. Give leave therefore, right
honorable, and most deserving Patriots, to tender modestly, to your mature
deliberation, some observations, which I have made, comparing your
determinations, and resolves, with the apparent occurrences, and (to my
apprehension,) very plain language, and loud expressions of these late Divine
providence.

15. God, whose judgments are unfathomable, and ways unsearchable, saw good to
bring upon there Nations (for many years past) such floods of calamities, as
were scarce known, or heard of before, in this, or any neighboring Nation;
extant Histories, as well as humane memory, being at a nonplus to produce the
like instances.

16. Nor were these our miseries more deplorable, our perplexities grievous,
and insufferable, than the ways, and means whereby we became involved in
them, abominable, horrible, ex ecrable, detestable, and damnable.

17. The Quintessence of Rebellion, and Treachery, was aggravated by most
palpable, amazing perjury, falsehood, and deceitful dealing, was exercised on
all occasions, toward all relations, by our inslaving taskmasters, whose breach
of oaths, and renouncing their Loyal Allegiance to the King, served but for a
Prologue, to a large following Tragedy, wherein, O! the perfidious practices,
acted by them against the Parliament, which they at pleasure dismembered,
(cashiering one house) and garbled, (secluding out of the other house) all such
who scorned, or hated to be like themselves; and having thus transformed two
houses of Englands Parliament, into a Mock junto; (called afterward in
derision, the Rump, which was the byword at last of every idle Ballad-maker)
even, this creature of their own, was by them made a Mock Pageant, used for a
stalking horse, (sometimes) otherwhiles thrown aside at pleasure, notwi
hstanding many most facred vows to the contrary, not more solemnly made than
broken, and almost as soon. One while they set up an Usurping Protector, (who
would not be so dallied withal,) however his Son, to whom they were likewise
bound by voluntary protestations, engagements, and addresses, quickly had
experience of their Inconstancy, and Treacherous perjury. In a word England
has been ever since her rebellion against, and Apostasy from lawful
Authority; all along made a Scene, of most gross perjury, and shameful
Treachery:

18. Nor was this all, but as if Satan had taken possession of the Nation, and
held it as his own private murders (which were frequent and merciless,) were
swallowed up in that abomination of desolation the Murder of his Sacred Royal
Majesty: Athiesticall profaness, sacriledg, and seditious heresy, went (hand in
hand) with the (almost) extirpation, of all our fundamental Laws; So that
civil liberty, and true Christianity, were in hazard, (almost quite lost)
together, instead of which were brought in, Arbitrary tyranny, and ruling by
will and lust, (in the state) scandalous in piety, irreligious Sects, and
blasphemous heresies (in the Church; these with an Impudent brow, defied (I may
say) heaven it self. In a word, if superlative villainy in practice, exemplary
malice in contrivance, or resolute impenitency in perseverance, if hellish
designs, implacable resolutions, and incorrigible obstinacy, may be an
aggravation of their crimes, who in these years past, of the Kingdoms
calamities, have been public offenders, and caused, promoted, or helped to
perpetuate them, (had they been able to effect it,) certainly there lies on
them as much guilt, as Satan could furnish them with; or their own reprobate
natures contract.

19. But God has been merciful unto these poor bleeding Kingdoms, so far, as
to defeat at length their plots, who wanted nothing of will, to render us
completely, perpetually, and irrecoverably miserable, they wanted not malice,
in which they were in placable, and inveterate, nor industry, wherein
indefatigable, nor preparation, for which most vigilant, nor design, in which
they beheld us with scorn and triumph, groaning forth our last despairing
sighs, and lying beyond hope or remedy, under the claws of their most
merciless rage, but God alone, has given them this unexpected check, to the
glory of his goodness, and undeserved grace be it spoken, there is nothing left
us to boast of, who could only sit down, and groan out our sighs to him, by
reason of our oppressures and burdens, but neither did nor knew we to help our
selves in the least.

20. This Divine disposure of affairs, after so wonderful a manner, seems by
way of duty to suggest unto us two things.

1. First, how infinitely we stand obliged to that good God, who has been so
eminently, and unexpectedly gracious unto us.

2. Secondly, what justice he now requires and expects, should be done on them
whose insolences, and monstrous impieties cannot be overlooked, unless we
resolve, to bring upon our selves, and intaile upon our posterity, such curses,
as may make them abhor the remisenes and neglect, perhaps, the very memory of
their fathers.

21. The former of these, I shall touch briefly, and so pass it over, it being
far more readily owned, known, and acknowledged to be a duty, than carefully
and conscienciously practiced, which indeed, will be performed, very lamely,
and superficially, unless the latter be more diligently heeded, and seriously
attended.

22. Let us in the first place therefore, all with hearts and hands lifted up
to the most high, with thankful praises celebrate his name, publish and make
known this his great goodness, especially, endeavor the speedy amendment of
our lives, the irregularity of which, has no doubt been the continued cause,
which provoked God to bring, and so long to exercise us, with so many, so
great, and perplexing miseries.

23. Let us confess, bewail, and humble our selves, for our past ingratitude,
that enjoying so great, and invaluable pledges, of Divine favor, we made so
few, and unsuitable returns of them.

24. Let us repent our undutifullness toward superiors, contempt of Authority,
study of change and want of love one toward another, which provoked God to
give us up to men of base extraction, and worse principles, and to let servants
rule over us.

25. Let us hereafter prize Gods offers of Love to us in his Church, nor loath
heavenly Manna any more, as we have done, instead of which we have for a long
time been fed (in the Swines trough) with husks, not yet fatisfied therewith.
These reflections I hope will be made in our breasts, and such like returns we
shall give in remembrance, and acknowledgment, of this undeserved, unlooked
for, yea almost miraculous deliverance.

26. In reference to the second head, I shall humbly take leave, to lay open my
breast, in speaking my conscience, and discover my love, and faithfullness to
the Nation, in addressing my self, with all possible duty, and respect, unto
our most honorable Lords, add worthy Commons, however a weak, and unworthy
Orator.

27. Right honorable, and truly deserving Patriots, it lies now in your power,
and under God is wholly left at your dispose, to make these Nations either
really, and completely, or apparently, and in part only happy, perfectly to
cure, or to palliate their disease, to give them total easment; or for a short
time to leave them sound at bottom, or in danger of a relapse, and breaking out
again, with no less Anguish, perhaps full as much, or more danger to the body
than before.

28. His sacredly Royal, and most gracious Majesty, has committed things
wholly to your dispose, nor do I cuestion, but your piety and prudence, will
lead you, to respect him as Gods deputy here on earth, yearather to look beyond
him to God himself, who by his means, betrusted you with his power,
nevertheless expects the execution thereof, according to his revealed will, as
you will answer the contrary at your peril, in that great, and dreadful day
of Judgment.

29. To acquit the guilty, and condemn the Innocent are equally abominable in
his presence, who is the God of Justice and truth.

30. Besides the murder of his most sacred Majesty, of happy memory, against
whose life to conspire, is death without mercy, by the known Laws of the Land,
there have been (frequently) committed other horrible, bloody murders, the
registers of which, are every day sold among us, but far more exactly kept on
record in Gods Book, nor sooner shall the guilt of them be taken off, from a
private score on Earth, and not revenged, but it will forthwith be entered down
upon the public, or Nations score, in the book of the most righteous God, who
usually takes the vengeance thereof into his own hand.

31. My earnest prayer to God, in your behalf, is and shall be, that you will
not involve your selves with the Nation, in innocent blood, by acquitting the
most notoriously guilty, in that kind, which ever England nourisht, or groaned
under, the ready way to provoke God to revenge it upon the whole Nation,
especially the City. What a plague may follow this lenity, if exercised (which
the Lord avert) he only knows, who (perhaps) waits but your final
determination, before he give it fatal Commission. (Si quid delirant Reges,
plectuntur Ac^^vi) Perhaps the nearest relations, or dearest friends may be so
signally swept away, from the chief authors of these crying murderers
indemnity; As may at once both convince them of sinful compassion, and pierce
their bleeding hearts with ten thousand forrowes. Pray God I may not prove a
Prophet, nor do I speak it, but with deprecation, only faithfullness unto you
compels me thus to utter my self, and lay open my breast to your Honors and
wisdoms.

32. Believe it, my Lords and Gentlemen, Seven or ten is not a competent number
to be exposed to justice, and those most of them fled out of reach, when
sevenscore at least are over head and ears dipped, and beyond excuse concerned,
in that amazing murder of Majesty, (as to guilt, in the eye of man's law) though
I believe not all alike involved in the unpardonable aggravations of knowledge,
and malice.

33. But besides that abominable murder, several more private, but as cruel,
have been committed on diverse persons both of rank and esteem, as might be
instanced, in the Lords Capell, Hamilton, Holland, with many Knights and
Gentlemen of worth, as Lucas, Lisle, Hide, Andrews, Penruddock, Grove,
Burleigh, Love, Gerard, Vowell, Bushel, Hewit, Slingsby Ashton, Bettely,
Stacy, with others, for whose blood, when the holy and just God shall make
inquisition, he will find no legal reckoning made. And what must poor England
then expect from him, who has expressly declared, that blood defiles a land,
nor can be purged from its guilt, but by their blood who shed it, who has
therefore commanded, the retaliation of blood upon the shedders head, whether
man or beast. Yea I tremble to think, when God himself shall come to take
satisfaction thereof, what our lot may be, unless in the Nations behalf its
most honorable Lords and Commons by impartial justice prevent this certain
judgment, if neglect or default herein be made.

34. To avoid which guilt, and (if it may be) to keep off judgments like to
ensue thereon, give me leave to present your honors with some few
considerations, nor I hope unseasonable, or tedious, which I studied to avoid,
first by brevity, and next, by sending them forth, and humbly presenting them
to your view, before the act of Indemnity be fully concluded on.

35. I am sensible of the multiplicity of your pressing affairs, and know,
that you have not leisure from your most serious debates, and agitations, to
attend large declamations, against the crying sin of blood, how it stains,
and defiles a land; yea, I am confident, such common places are very familiar
to you, who are neither unacquainted with the Judgments on that score denounced
in holy writ, nor unfurnished with instances, and examples of Divine vengeance,
attending the impunity of that crying sin, recorded not only by Christian, but
profane Historians.

36. The considerations (then) which I shall most humbly suggest, shall be such
as are taken from, and obvious to the experience, of those (especially) who
have minded the late dealings, both of God and man, toward us.

1. And in them my intended scope and aim is, partly to find and mark out such
whose guilt of this nature, is beyond both pardon and excuse, and whose
impunity cannot but render the Kingdom very unsafe, if we will believe his
threatenings, whose judgments, as well as mercies, are wonderful, and true.

2. Partly, to press the loud calls, and clear motives (appearing in the divine
dispensations, and these late overtures, and transactions) for impartial
justice, which to pass by unregarded, is to provoke God, after once or twice,
yea reiterated speaking, by his providence, without attention, on man's part, to
use shortly, such language, as may make all our bones tremble.

3. But lastly, and most especially, to obviate and answer some plausible,
through carnal (at best) if not unsound arguments, which are brought and
pressed, in their behalf; in performing of which, if I give way to, or discover
any private grudg, or passion, or appear so to your wisdoms, my heart much
deceives me, for I have not the least particular disaffection, for any those
unfortunately criminal Gentlemen, whom I crave leave to call so, though their
actions brand them with so much barbarous cruelty, as may bring in question
their very humanity, so far am I from pesonall prejudice conceived against any
of their number. And I can seriously, solemnly, and truly appeal to the seacher
of hearts, that I should much more de^redly have expressed my self in their
behalf, and been an urgent, though unworthy intercessor for them, but that my
conscience assures me, concerning them, that whoever so favors or befriends
them, as to procure their indemnity, does what in him lies, (ignorantly
perhaps) to pluck the fiercest of Gods Judgments upon the heads, of himself,
and his posterity, and to involve the Kingdom in such future calamities, as may
justly render his indiscreet charity, (rather cruel pity) a cause of doleful
lamentation many ages yet to come.

37. As to those persons, whose pardon cannot consist with the Nations safety,
unless we flatter our selves with peace, where God has most expressly
declared, and severely denounced the contrary, it is very worth our enquiry,
that in case a black cloud of national miseries, should again overspread the
already nigh consumed, and destroyed Kingdoms, (which God in mercy forbid) we
may speedily recollect with our selves the cause, and in time apply a suitable
remedy.

38. It was once remarkable, the case of Gods people Israel, in the time of
David's Reign; year after year, one of the forest of Gods plagues, afflicted
that Nation; three successive years famine, put David upon enquiry after the
cause; who had answer from the Divine oracle, that blood guiltiness in the
house of Saul, who slew the Gibeonites, had called for that national
desolation; now because David, (who ought not to have let crimes of that nature
pass,) had not revenged it, after he come to the Crown, all Israel smarted
severely for this neglect, and yet the Actor was dead, who with his son, fell
in battle, and a great slaughter was made among the whole Army besides;
nevertheless, till particular vengeance for this blood was taken, and Seven of
Readiness family, (among whom were five of Mi^h^^s sons, the daughter of Saul,
born to Adriell the Son of Barzillai the Meholathite) were delivered up to
the injured Gibeonites, and by them hanged before the Lord, the guilt of his
Innocent blood, still cried for vengeance to heaven, and was heard so many
years after, and avenged by the righteous God, with a sore famine, three
years together.

39. My prayer is that the like lot befall not England, which is much more to
be feared, considering the quality of the persons murdered among us, not
Gibeonites, who were part of the Nations by God devoted to destruction, and
saved their lives by a false feigned message, deluding the two credulous
Princes, and bringing them to a rash unadvised oath, to spare their lives; who
yet condemned them to perpetual drudgery to the whole congregation, but our
King here was butchered, our Lords, Knights, Gentry, Godly Divines, and eminent
Citizens, slaughtered. Those were slain by a King in appearing zeal, who might
have for color of this action. First, the change of Government. Secondly, the
fraud, by which that Oath of the Princes of the congregation, was deceitfully
obtained. Thirdly, that the persons swearing, and sworn to, were long since
dead, nor could a grant (fraudulently procured) bind posterity. Fourthly, that
Gods command was to extirpate them, without mercy or pity. Fifthly, the
displeasure of him manifested against Israel, for sparing, and making Leagues
with such Nations, which he had devoted to destruction, and commanded their
utter rooting out. Sixthly, the Divine anger against himself, because he had
been disobediently pitiful in sparing the King of Amaleck, with part of the
spoil. Seventhly, that though the Princes of the congregation had spared them,
and sworn to them, upon a mistake, wherein the Gibeonites were no way
excusable, much less justifiable, yet God had no where declared his assent to,
and approbation of this action of the Princes, but had frequently manifested
his dislike, and fierce Anger against the whole Nation, for not destroying, but
making Leagues with others, for which cause he reptoved them at Bochim, till
they wept exceedingly; Threatened them therefore, and as he had denounced, so he
often sold them as Captives, to almost all the Nations round about, whom they had
spared contrary to command, besides all which pretenses, by Saul no doubt
alleged for that slaughter committed upon them, the quality of him, and them
makes his case, and ours of no comparison together. He a King, and they
contemptible drudges, of a cursed Generation. But with us sworn subjects
murdered their Sovereign, the very tongues, mouths, and lips that had vo'wd
solemn allegiance to him, and to hazard life in his preservation, and to defend
with him his Queen and Progeny, presume to condemn to death the same Royal
Person, proclaim Traitors his Queen, and Sons, yea all that shall adhere to
them, and assert their so often confirmed title, by so sacred and religious
oaths. This certainly next to our blessed Saviors murder was most black and
hortible.

40. Besides, with Majesty fell Nobles, and Gentlemen, Divines, and Citizens,
of as great repute, as any the Land afforded, who were as undoubtedly Innocent,
as cruelly slaughtered, yea their crime objected, was honesty, the pretense of
taking them off, was a colorable mock-justice, yet in their own conscience
they knew their Courts to be only Snares and Engines, to do such work, which by
no known Law of the Land, nor in any regular form of proceeding, could be
effected. If then Readiness bloudy-fact were revenged, with three years famine,
and after that with the death of Seven of his Sons; I tremble to think, what
vengeance the Lord may take of us, for this blood, unless our most honorable
Lords, and those other worthy Patriots of the English Nation, the House of
Commons, by their pious wisdom, and just severity, against unpardonable
malefactors, scatter that black cloud of Gods judgments, which is already
gathering, and who knows how soon it may overspread the whole Kingdom.

41. Breaking Parliaments, subverting Laws, horrible Oppression by
Confiscations, Sequestrations, decimations, Imprisonments, frequent sending out
of Town, setting up Usurpers, making the Nobles more contemptible than any
generous Spirits could bear, are unparalled Treasons, and being against man
more directly, may be famous objects of Pardon, even to astonishment, but to
indemnifie such horrible guilt of blood, is to presume to do that on Earth,
which God will never set his seal to, or confirm in Heaven: It is for man to
exceed his Commission, which presumption he and his Posterity may have cause to
bewail with bitter tears, when it is too late to remedy.

42. My Lords and Gentlemen, although in a Parliamentary way of Convention,
with his Majesty's Royal assent concurring, you have great, (I had almost said
unlimited) power, which is true in a sense, nothing, that is mearly humane, can
bound you, yet there are bounds set even to you, by the hand of God himself, no
less dreadful than the bounds of Sinai, which you cannot transgress, but you
straight incur the displeasure of a revenging Deity, whose Angel with his
flaming sword, is forthwith over your head, and speedy Judgment ready to
overtake you, and treading upon your heels. Nor will this be your private sin,
but (as persons in trust) you contract a fatal score, whereof God alone knows
how many thousands must be the Paymasters. One of those immovable bounds is the
guilt of blood, which debt, if you remit, as to the penalty, it were well if
you could cross it out of Gods book, but that is impossible, blood only is to be
the payment, though it is in your choice, whether this shall be guilty, or
other innocent blood, which God as a Sovereign Lord, perhaps will take, and
place both the former and latter, to their account, at whose door neglect lies.

43. Believe it my Lods and Gentlemen, the persons concerned in that detestable
murder of his Majesty, are not all comprised in the list of those who sat in
the High Court of Mock-justice, that day when sentence was past, that whole
pretended Court, or rather pack of Bloud-hounds, were but the tool and
instrument in the hand of some devilish Workman, Journey (...) employed by
others who contrived the Plot, and set them on work, among whose number some
were more actively daring, and openly appeared, as well to give countenance to,
as encourage the rest, (who were persons qualifyed to serve their turn, and
picked here and there, as they came to hand) others of the grand contrivers,
were more wary, and reserved, who for fear of after-reckonings slipped behind the
Curtain, gave aim unto, and directed the Actors, Haslerig, Vane, Lenthall, and
others of that gang, had as deep hand in that Crimson fact, as any who were
present at sentence, or confirmed it under hand and Seal,

44. That there is no pleading for murder where all are prin cipalls, the Law
of our land makes evident, less for Royal murder, as is clear by that
Scripture-rule, which says. Who can lift up his hand, against the Lords
anointed and be guiltless; and most plainly confirmed by the pattern of David,
who commanded that foolish Amalekite forthwith to be slain, who in hope of
reward, accused himself, that he had at the request of Saul, dispatched his life
(when past hope of recovery, by reason of his mortal wounds) sending him to
his long home with this farewell, thy blood be upon thine own head, forasmuch
as thou have confessed the lifting up thine hand against the Lords anointed.

45. Yet as the first plotter and contriver of a horrid fact, if especially he
stand by, and encourage, advise, assist, justify, and reward the Actor, is the
more unpardonably guilty, so those who appointed an high Court of Justice,
nominated the persons, commissi^^ated, empowered and warranted them, in what
they were to act, were indeed the superlatiue Traitors, and most guilty of
blood.

46. And among those there are yet degrees, some were professed Lawyers, and
could not be ignorant of the Law of the Land, their conscience told them in the
very act of endeavoring to try their King for life, in such an unheard of
Court, themselves were above all, most transcendent Traitors.

47. In which crew, as all (...) Subjects, so many were his Majesty's actual
servants, as Vane, Mildmay, Danvers, Holland, and others, whose fact surpasses
so far the rest, as it is more detestable for a servant, than for a stranger to
kill his Master, by our Law made petty Treason, and more severely punished.
Some were servants in favor, and places of more than ordinary trust, and were
rewarded so largely, as argued a bountiful Prince, and them on that account,
Monsters in nature, who durst abet; much more actually commit such a villainy
upon so gracious a Lord, so loving and bountiful a Master.

48. Their declarations after the fact challenged the imagined repute thereof
to themselves, for as they m^^e no scruple to call themselves the Parliament
and supreme power of England, so they ascribed to themselves the abolishing
Kingship; and accordingly rejected the whole line of the murdered King,
declared for a Commonwealth whithout King or House of Lords, framed and
imposed upon all an engagement to that purpose, which argues plainly, that
those who were the Major part of that Junto, who voted an high Court of
Justice, and who conferred upon them such power, were the plotters and Authors
of what was by the others acted, the first of the two most inexcusable, though
all unpardonable.

49. Besides these, there were contrivers of Petitions, that all great
offenders might be brought to justice, which were accordingly framed, and
presented both from the City and mutinous Army, by which his sacred Majesty was
at first designed to be made a bloody sacrifice, under the notion of the
greatest offender, being brought to justice, Adjutant General Allen at the
disposition of Usurping Richard, wrote a Pamphet, to remind the grand Officers
how the Army were in a wilderness of difficulties, in the year 1647. and how
they at Windsor several days together, had sought God by fasting and prayer,
and how he at last brought them to an unanimous resolve, that they would fight
the Scots, and labor to quell the threatening insurrections in several parts,
and in case God answered their prayers, they would, as a religious return of
thankfulness, revenge the bloodshed committed in these Wars, upon that bloody
man, as he was pleased to style his Sacred Majesty of blessed memory. So that
there was a conspiracy in the Army, with a part of the house of Commons, to
murder the King long before; who therefore pretending fear, with their Speaker
fled to the Headquarters, were brought back by the Armies force, the Commons
House purged, the Lords House turned out of doors. Here my Lords and Gentlemen
was the plot, after which an high Court of Justice was called, and empowered to
put what before was contrived, in execution.

50. Nor were they ignorant of what villainy they went about, or the way must be
made, by breaking the Seal Royal, and maing a new one, because the King could
not be judicially procee^ed against without commission, nor any commission in
force against him, signed with his own Seal, which argued as premeditated, so
desperate malice, joined with knowledge sufficient; they understood the fact,
and its difficulty, as well as its danger, yet resolved to leap over mountains
themselves, rather than not perform this butchery.

51. Mr. Milton in answer to Salmasius gives the whole glory of this Heroic
action (as he called it) to the English Parliament; And indeed it was properly
their act originally, the Judges did but only represent them; acted by their
Commission, who in this are inexcusable also, that they took a Commission, and
put it in execution against their undoubted King, which involved them alike in
the guilt of perjury and Treason, being equally sworn to his Allegiance, and by
this act (however Commissionated) they were questionless murderers.

52. This Honorable house of Commons in their late answer to his Majesty's
most gracious Letter, have this like expression, that the abhorred villainies,
perpetrated upon his Majesty's Royal Father (of blessed memory) could never
possibly have been brought to that pass, had not their privileges been so
shamefully violated; first, that of Englands Parliament nothing was left
remaining but a Mock-Junto. By that discovering their judgments to be, that
they who in order to that butchery, committed such unheard of Rapes upon the
Parliament, were of all others far the most guilty, And therefore deserving
most severe punishment.

53. To come now to the high Court of justice, and take a view of their
proceedings, some sat to the last, and passed the sentence actually under
their hands and Seals, others sat at first only, some sat till the last, and
then disappeared.

All are alike guilty, for his Sacred Majesty demurred at first to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, they who then sat, asserted their own jurisdiction,
declaring that they were satisfied in it; Commanded him to plead positively,
and to own the Court, or else the default should be marked for a contempt; this
was in effect his Majesty's doom; he as a constant assertor of the Laws, and
Liberties of the Nation, was unsatisfied with their Authority; and resolved
rather to die, than by a Plea to own them a jurisdiction at all; (much less over
him, their King) these peremptory villainies assert their own Jurisdiction, tie
him up to answer, or to be recorded for his Contempt, upon which account, the
third default was to be accounted final, then some withdrew, and account
themselves thus excused from his blood, by not sitting at last, when sentence
was given; yet protest not against the proceedings of the rest; when as in
truth they impounded, as I may say, shackled his Majesty, and fitted him for
the block, withdrawing out of a guilty fear, when the blow was to be given,
being assured, that there were Bloud-hounds enough left sitting to worrey him:
not a man more than other can be excused of the murder, unless it appear, that
they showed their dissatisfaction, and dislike of proceedings, to be the cause
of their refusing afterward to sit.

54. Lastly, no doubt but many pretended divine Oracles are equally guilty,
with the rest, who counseled, contrived, and encouraged these villainies, which
ended in murder, and vouched the holy Writ for their warrant, to provoke to
the attempt, and defended the fact afterward, both by preaching and writing;
the Priest who confessed, and absolved the Powder-traytors was found as guilty,
and suffered as deeply, as any among them; Peeters and Goodwyn may be named,
and many more pointed at; but these two, were as Joab to the woman of Tekoah
they had a hand in the whole, from beginning to end, yea, so far are they more
punishable, but how much they abused Scripture to defend, and as it were
entitle God himself to the murder.

55. To descend from this black subject, and bloody discourse, to take a view
of more private murders, tragical enough, yet for which something may be said
in behalf of many concerned therein.

56. When grave, learned, and able Lawyers, shall declare the Authority of a
pretended High Court of Justice to be lawful, and personally act therein,
either as President, as L^sle, or by drawing up charges against Prisoners, and
calling them before such to the Bar, aggravating crimes against them,
soliciting for Justice to be done on them in the name of the Commonwealth,
and in all things, avowing them a Court of Judicature; I marvel not, if many
men unskil'd in the Law, sit among the rest, and act confidently.

57. If the Facts for which they are tried, be by Lawyer declared high Treason,
and Capital, and Witnesses procured to testify the same, (how suborned is not
now the subject of our Enquiry nor how prompted in their Evidence, by the
Attorney General) if Lawyers affirm the trial to be carried on according to
Law, and some reputed godly Divines assure them the way is of God; no wonder if
the Prisoner be convicted and condemned, and yet God forbid, half the Judges
guilty of murder or blood, though concurring in sentence.

58. However, those who advise the erecting such a Court, out of design to
butcher the Parties intended for trial, because they know that the crime
objected, is indeed no crime by the Law of the Land: They who give commission
under the pretended Seal of England, for trying such offenders by nominated
Commission ers, yet know that very Commission to be illegal and unwarrantable,
and yet intended as an Engine to remove some out of the way that are before
marked for destruction; they (lastly) who prosecute the Prisoners at the Bar
of such a Court, The Judge also, who sits in Judgment upon, and pronounces
sentence against them; though both Judge, Attorney and Solicitor know the
Prisoners not to deserve so much as bonds by the known fundamental Laws of the
Land, and the Power by which they pretend to Act, to be usurped and illegal,
nay, contrary to Law, which they (in formality) are sworn to maintain, and
execute Justice accordingly, all these (doubtlesly) are a pack of Conspirators
against the Innocent blood, which is thus shed by them, and most cruel,
unpardonable murderers; this for less public butcheries committed upon the
score of pretended High Courts of Justice.

59. Two private cases remains yet, as namely that of Lucas, and Lisle, and the
other of Penruddok and Grove.

The former were shot to death in cool blood, by sentence of a Court Mattial;
the latter condemned by (that great Prevaricator) Glyn, who caused them to be
indicted for taking up Arms against Cromwell, upon that Law, which makes it
Treason to levy War against the King, no Law being then hatched to secure that
Usurper, and although the Prisoners pleading to the endictment, defended
themselves unanswerably, and made it appear (by that very Law,) that Oliver was
the Traitor in making War upon them, who proclaimed, and fought for that King
whom he opposed, yet this most unrighteous Judge made the Law (violently) to
speak against it self, by his interpretation, and so condemned the most
innocent Prisoners, whom afterward, with others, (upon the same score,) he
caused to be executed, for which, if ever Judge in England deserved exemplary
death, certainly he fell as much, if not more.

60. Thus, most honorable Lords and Gentlemen, having spoken concerning the
persons who they are; give me leave to add some considerations, which speak
them incapable of Indemnity, unless we intend such vengeance to follow their
Pardon, which God (if it be his will) prevent, and by the way, I shall obviate
what objections may be brought against this impartial Justice, or arguments to
the contrary.

61. Consider, I beseech you; First, the crimes and the men, whether or no,
they be fit objects of Mercy, Pardon and Indemnity. Secondly, if they be,
whether it is convenient and expedient to let them find so great a measure of
it, and taste it so largely, and I doubt not but upon enquiry, your wisdoms
will with me conclude in the negative, notwithstanding what ever may be
indiscreetly argued in favor of them.

62. In order then to proceed; First presents it self their Fact, and next
their manner of acting; Lastly, their behavior after it, in all which it is
too manifest, that as they are beyond, and above Pardon, so they are below pity.

63. Their crime, my Lords and Gentlemen, is Murder, of it self unpardonable,
but in them aggravated by Perjury, Malice, inhumane Cruelty, justifying thereof
under pretense of Religion, and the better to secure themselves from Justice,
they spared no manner of Villainy; which a dextrous pernicious wit could prompt,
or a seared conscience commit. Their murder has this astonishing addition, or
rather Complement of guilt, in that its object was their King, to whom they
were most sacredly and religiously obliged, by reiterated Oaths, not only
impoled, but by themselves voluntarily made, and solemnly entered into, this is
the crime of many, nay, most of them, besides other private murders, which on
their part have the aggravations of malice, and inhumane cruelty on the
sufferers, that they were persons of Piety, Esteem, Honor and Faithfulness to
their King and Country, of whom several excelled (in true worth) all their
Martherers together.

64. My Lords and Gentlemen, if to murder a private man, of no esteem, little
worth, perhaps vicious, debauched, and a burden to those with whom he lives,
deserve death unpardonably, and our Law justly condemns, and executes (in such
a case) the murderers, though perhaps many, and otherwise, each far surpassing
the party slain; shall our King (worth ten thousand Subjects,) our eminent
Lords and Gentry, our godly Divines and Citizens, be murdered, by the worst of
the Nation (for real worth,) and among so many murderers, so few be picked
out, (of whom many fled) to be made examples, when they can be caught? when the
whole number (if taken) amounts not to the fourth part of those who by them
have been formally butchered, besides the numberless multitude of those who
have been otherwise slain, starved, ruined and destroyed by means of that first
Heaven-daring butchery. Shall Henry Martin, that infamous Lecher, who having
among Strumpets consumed his Patrimony, has long lain in Jail, to the
defrauding his Creditors, be accounted (when he is taken,) a competent
Sacrifice in lieu of his Sacred Majesty, Lord Capel, Hamilton, and Holland? so
Cornelius Holland, the Linke-boy, who has nothing of Estate, but what is the
price of blood, and reward of his villainies, be given up to Justice (when he is
caught also) in revenge of Hewits, Slingsby's Yeomans, and Butchers blood?
Thomas Scot, that Saint, (who besides his other villainies, most ungraciously,
paid his wife Grace in the same coin, which he in exchange of greater pieces,
received from his girls at a vaulting School, but peppered her so the wrong
way, that she stank the sooner, and lies buried in Westminster) be made
exemplary, (when he likewise comes to hand) in lieu of Mr. Love, Gibbons,
Bushel, Col. Gerard, and Vowel, and so the rest? Or must all these be made the
price of Royal blood only? Certainly Gentlemen, this will be to value his
sacred Person, less than the Scots did, who sold him (in life) for two hundred
thousand pounds, not because they esteemed him worth no more, but because that
was all they could get for him; Had his murderers been twice as many, his
worth and value was so inestimable, that all had made too mean a sacrifice for
his blood.

65. That murder of his Sacred Majesty, brought upon them all the blood which
had been shed in England, and was the cause of all the rest which was shed in
Ireland, and Scotland. The King in wisdom, foresaw the end of the War, levied
against him, and therefore defended himself. So many of the Parliament as were
sincere, abhorred (as by their declarations appeared) those very thoughts, for
which end they framed a vow, and protestation, and after joined with the Scots
in their League and Covenant, (not suspecting this Viper hidden under the green
herbs,) raised therefore, as Commissionated all their forces for the Kings
defense, whereas his murder at last, verified the Prediction of his Majesty,
gave the lie to all the Parliaments pretenses, and made it appear, that this
Tragedy was the end of all those several years wars, and incredible civil blond
shed; Good God! Should these men now be pardoned, what can be imagined? but
that the Parliament in their Vows and Covenant, did all, (both Lords and
Commons,) prevaricate and juggle; The detestation of a fact, is ever judged by
the animadversion made upon it. Talk till Doomes-day, yet none will believe
that the Lords and Commons abhor that murder, and repute it the Nations
infamy resent (...) Vows, Oaths and Covenants broken therein, when the
^ontrivers, Plotters, and horrible Actors, are almost all pardoned by whole
sale, except a few, who in effect have pardoned themselves by flight.

66. My Lords and Gentlemen, because of Oaths, and Swearing this Land has a
long time mourned, not so much for that Oaths were made, but because no better
kept: If you were serious in what you swore, you cannot but revenge the
shameful breach thereof, with all imaginable severity; (trust me) lenity
herein will speak aloud to your reproach, both while you live, and while your
memory lasts, that you are pretty well satisfied, as to the fact, when you
dismiss with free pardon, such a gang of Malefactors, Religion has been
scandalized so fowly by this means, (the Protestant especially) that were it
only to show your detestation thereof, such counsels would take no place in
your honorable breasts. It is the only convincing Argument, that you were
immovably firm to your Oaths and Vows, when you are irreconcilable to those,
who with such abominable aggravations broke them.

67. Those who at present are remote from you, and for futute shall be long
after you, can take notice of no ground of so large an extent of Pardon, but
that you either judge the fact not deserving greater punishment, or that you
are afraid to do Justice upon them; and to speak plainly, such lenity as is
pretended (I hope not intended in this Case,) will leave such a blot upon your
Honors and Wisdoms, as cannot be born with credit, nor wiped off by any
possible future zeal or industry. He who is easily persuaded to re nit so
gross villainies, will always leave a suspicion, that he would not hardly have
been persuaded to be concerned therein, had not politic considerations (more
than conscience) deterred him. It is the glory of a man to pass by the greatest
injury done to himself, without any revenge, but to forgive what is done
against Gods Majesty, with the like readiness and facility, argues that such a
man has but little honor for God.

68. My Lords and Gentlemen, its possible for any man to be so out of reach of
other (...) not to be exposed to their observations, censures and (...)
^ersions, nor is it in your power to regulate them, but every man will follow
the dictates of his own reason, and what appears thereto.

69. The grounds of this overflowing mercy, and enlarged bowels of compassion,
(believe it) will be judged one or all of these: Either a low esteem you had of
his Sacred Majesty; or a private dislike of him, which makes you account his
removal out of the way, some considerable balance, to counterpoise the
execrable, horrible Treachery, and perjurious cruelty committed in his death or
that you give some credit to the imputations laid against him, and so reckon
him as deserving the thing he suffered, though perhaps you disliked the manner.
Or that you were your selves guilty herein more than you would willingly have
known; and therefore pardon so many, least they should speak plainer of your
selves, than you would be willing to have heard. Or that, notwithstanding your
Oaths and Covenants, you intended the same thing in your own way and method,
and so were only prevented. Or that you underhand consented to what was acted,
and most of you by a patient withdrawing, upon seclusion of the forty
Commoners, gave opportunity to what was afterward perpetrated.

70. These suspicions, my Lords and Gentlemen, though, I hope, ye believe them
false and groundless, yet on my credit are more than whispered (among very
sober men,) upon occasion of this too comprehensive act of grace, which is
expected, and would make viler than dirt the blood, not only of many worthy
state-Martyrs, and his sacred Majesty himself, but also of all those whose
lives have been prodigally spent, to subdue the King, and his friends, and
bring him into a capacity of becoming the subject of so abominable a Tragedy,
as also of rejecting and keeping in exile his matchless (for real worth) and
yet by unparalleled villainy, proscribed heir, with two Incomparable pieces of
true Princely gallantry, the Royal Dukes, of York, and Gloucester. The
grinding oppressors also of these three Nations, wherein all the Kings put
together since the Conquest have been exceeded, will be notably rewarded, when
out of more than an hundred unpardonable Murderers, besides incomputable
numbers of high traitors, perhaps five shall dye, and thirty or forty of those
be squeezed a little in their Estates, who have causelessly ruined many
hundreds, sequestered, and forced to monstrous unreasonable compositions, many
thousands; totally confiscated the Estates of six times their number, and by
taxes, excises, impositions, decimations, frequent imprisonments, forged plots
and fines thereupon, have beggared a thousand at least, for every man designed
for nominall confiscation of Estate, which indeed will prove scarce the
plucking away by law one third part of what they before violently and cruelly
ravished from the true owners without all color of Law, rather against it.

71. My Lords and Gentlemen, can it be imagined, that William Lenthall, who had
for a fee five pounds for every compounder, whose number was reckoned by one to
be fourscore thousand (suppose really half the number which was the least)
besides other places of vast prodigious gain, enjoyed by him above board, nor
will any rational man question, but he had private ways of indirect gain,
beyond what can be made now appear upon confiscation will be found the Master
of one tith of what he is (beyond contradiction) owner, questionless no, such
villains as he, always had that of reason, to fear what we se happened, nay,
they had no rational ground to hope for so long prosperity in villainy; upon
which jealousy he, and many of his stamp, no doubt, made such secret provision,
that spating their life (on such terms) is like a School-boyes whipping, (when
over) the fear proving more than the smart, they have time and occasion given,
to laugh at the supiness of their Judges, and to please themselves, how they
give the first, the soundest, and most smarting blow.

72. Who would not, if they had opportunity again, be such Rogues upon the like
terms, be as cruel as possible, as guilty, as wit can invent, the Devil
suggest, or a cursed disposition make, commit villainies to the utmost extent of
power, stop only, where it is not possible to go further, continue as long, as
by Hellish policy is devisable, oppress the Nation, till nothing be left
further to squeeze; yet at last, when our own ungodliness has ensnared us, and
a restoration made, because we can no longer hinder it, nineteen of twenty
shall have peremptory pardon, the rest law, fly, if they can, but if
unavoidable they be caught, they shall have fair trial themselves, who never
allowed others any, come my Masters, find but you consciences, and here are all
the encouragements to monstrous villainy, that are possible.

73. My Lords and Gentlemen, as to the heynousness of this fact, I humbly
entreat you to consider, it is that, which you would have your Kings by
agreement disabled to pardon, and justly, because God is positive therein,
whoever shedds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Will you restrain
your King, yet your selves do it; shall not a private man be murdered, but his
blood required, and shall your King? If so, woe to thee England! What will be
thy doom London! Would God you had the Art to confine divine Judgments within
your own walls, if needs you will pluck them down with such Cart^ropes.

74. You are my Lords and Gentlemen, every one of you put in a public
capacity, do not (I humbly entreat you) offer your selves (now) as bail to
Gods Justice, for such impardonable offenders. The doom of Ahab is not to be
neglected. Because thou have let go a man, whom I appointed to destruction, thy
life shall go for his. A discreet man would hardly engage life for life, for an
infamous thief or highway man. Better be bail for ten such, than for one of
these high Court of Justice men, those especially, who are guilty of Royal
blood, where God himself keeps the recognisance strickly, and will not fail to
require it severely.

75. Your wisdoms are I doubt not advised that forfeiture of estate, (if it
could be total) is no adequate satisfaction, nor competent recompense either
to the Law, or Gods Justice, where both life and state are due, and confiscate;
the one legally given to the King, for his loss of a Subject, the other
indispensably due to that vengeance, which will take no triffe in recompense,
but only life for life, and blood for blood.

76. To conclude this head, concerning the nature of their offense, it is to be
minded universally, that punishment is a glass, in which we contemplate, and
discover either the true nature of the crime, or the unanswerable sense of the
judge, perhaps the joy of restoration has obliterated the remembrance of our
deliverance nor will suffer us to reflect upon our former slavery, and misery,
(with their causes) if so, God who when he was leading his people unto Canaan,
reminded them of the house of Bondage, with thunder, lightning, and
Earthquakes, may also rub up our memories, both with a witness and vengeance.

77. From the crime I beseech your wisdoms to cast your eye upon the persons,
and see how well they appear deserving mercy.

How have they heapt villainies one upon another, as the Giants in their War
against Heaven heapt Pelion upon Ossa, or as waves in a storm follow one upon
the neck of another. Believe it Gentlemen; they are not men of David's spirit,
whose heart smote him, for cutting off Saul's skirt, but when it was motioned,
to go over to him and slay him sleeping, he rejected the offer with
detestation: from Monstrous impieties, they came to that amazing Butchery
committed on the King, not after found they any stroke at heart, but only of
grief, that they had not all the Royal branches in their power to chop down in
one day.

78. Prodigious Malefactors they are, who took their first rise of Monstrous
villainy at the rending up the two howses of Parliament by the Root, (not
considering the first pretended ground of the War, was because the King
demanded to trial, (secured not, nor secluded) five Commoners, and one Peer,
no bones at last were made of either protestations or pretenses, nothing
accounted by them sordid; they pretended a fear, and fled to the Army from
petitioning unarmed apprentises, (spirits often before by themselves conjured up,
and laid again, without dread, while they came and requested blood, war, and
confusion, but now they are dreadful when they petition for settlement, a
thing hateful to those who had been, and expected to be such gainers by
trouble and distraction.) 'Twas that in Church and state they aimed at, in such
waters they longed to fish, and rather then Cromwell, Heslerigge, Vane,
Lenthall, Scot, etc. would lose their longing, they resolved with their father
Pluto, as he is brought in thus speaking by Claudian, -- Patefacta ciebo
Tartara, Saturni veteres laxabo catenas,
Obducam tenebris lucem, compage soluta
Fulgidus umbroso m^scebitur axis averno.


79. My Lords and Gentlemen, consider what a coal you are scraping, to give
your names to posterity an indelible smut, or mark, and what unfeigned
repentance is requisite from you, as soon as this act is concluded, in
reference to the wars past. If it be most certain, Bonus Civis initia belli
Civilis invitus susscipit, extrema non libenter persequitur, there is need of
all the heartbreaking possible on their side, who rose in Arms, hazarded so
many lives, spent so much treasure and blood to restrain his Majesty (of Sacred
Memory) from vexing the people, with those Flea bites, in comparison of the
devouring extortions which these villains afterward oppressed, yea almost
destroyed them with; To prohibit his infringing the Parliamentary privileges,
impeaching five Members, while these impeach eleven at once, and compel them
beyond Sea, without prosecution or Trial: and after secure above forty; force
away two hundred, discard the House of Peers, cashiere their privileges,
murder the King, root up the Law, set up Arbitrary Taxes, impositions,
Excises, etc. Commission monstrous unheard of Courts, and in them hunt to death
as many, and for what they please, where no Law of the Land speaks them so
much as Criminal; yet for all these Treasons, and murders, scarce ten of the
most infamous Commoners in England, are thought fit to die; when for the life
of one man ( Parsons by Name, Lieutenant Colonel to the Drayman, Pride, and
of as obscure original as his Colonel) slain by accident on the High way, not
a man concerned in that Robbery, escaped the Gallows; and when for one
House-Robbery, it is frequent to hang nine or ten, sometimes sixteen, or
twenty, yet all of them infinitely short of these Villains in crimes.

80. How for future dare a Judge sit on the Benth and condemn a poor petty
Thief, a Coyner of money; one in a passion guilty of stabbing; or a poor Wenth
for a Child thrown into a Jakes, which none knows, if or no it were born alive;
nay any murder, when such unparalled Thieves; Traitors beyond president,
Murderers to amazement, and ashonishment, are either judged not fit to die, or
at least not convenient, his Majesty should loose so many Subjects.

81. Bless us good God! Subjects of which no King need beproud, or desirous; A
way to make a happy Prince, when he shall scarce go any where, but (considering
their number) he may meet with one or other of them, and point at them, There
goes one who murdered my Royal Father; banished me, alienated my revenues,
reduced to extreme straits my Mother and Brothers, with all my true friends and
Relations, butchered my Subjects, and illegally extorted from them a thousand
times mo^e th^n they would suffer their Liege and King to levy though with
advice of his Judges, but made war upon him, and took his life upon this
pretense: These good Subjects are left me, through the piety and wisdom of my
two Houses of Parliament, as suitable objects of my Royal Mercy and Pardon.

82. Divinely Gracious Prince, these are not objects of Mercy, God will not
have it so, having expressed his will, in hardening their hearts to the last;
When God hardened the Egyptians, so as to follow the Israelites into the very
bowels of the deep Sea, his providence spoke plainly that his intention was to
drown them. Prudent Generals use to give no quarter to resolute Gatrisons,
which refusing all offers of mercy, stand out to the last; against whom
nevertheless, they have no quarrel but open Hostility, and plain interest of
war: How much less are these Villains, who had forfeited their lives
unpardonably for any one of their inferior murders, to expect pardon after so
great guilt, so long continued in impenitently, and perservered unto the very
last.

83. Who can imagine that they repent any thing but the putting a period thus
to their Usurpation and Tyranny? who had heard Hasterigge threatening to fight
all over again; protesting he had rather been buried in his grave, than seen
the secluded Members restored, that had observed the Rumpers abjuring his
Sacred Majesty, and whole Royal stock, with all Kingly power, sending the
General into the City, to pluck up their Posts, take away their Chains,
Demolish their Gates, imprison their Members, with a further charge (as is
reported) to break down their Wall; Hang up their Aldermen, etc. That had seen
Hewson a little before, marching into the City, and with armed men, killing
poor unarmed Apprentices, barely for assaying to deliver a Petition to their
Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, to consider their distresses, and endeavor a
remedy: That had observed the stickling Rulers of the Roast, upon the last
sitting of the Mock Iunto, to frame a Petition, and labor others colourably to
deliver it to their pious consideration, to have the Oath of Abjuration imposed
upon all Ministers, Schoolmasters, and those in places of trust, upon penalty
of being ejected, in case of refusal: That had observed John Lenthal busy in
London, to dissuade from the thoughts of receiving his Sacred Majesty; reviling
him, calling him Bastard, Son of a Tyrant, Jesuited Papist; with other horrble
amazing reproaches. If these be the signs of penitent traitors, and murderers,
in Gods name let them be pardoned; and at once let all villains past and to
come, be with one Act of Grace forgiven in England for ever.

84. What hopes of their amendment, who have outvyedGunpowder-Traitors; and
Jesuits most dangerous tenants, they have out-acted and defended? who can
expect any good nature yet to lodge in those breasts, who have proved
themselves Monsters in Nature? desperately seared Consciences, to whom
Rebellion and treason is become habitual; Hypocrites in grain, who crave a
Blessing, commonly before their murders; Fast and pray, to seek Gods
assistance on them, and give solemn thanks after them. No expectation of good
from such who have turned the most abominable impieties into a set Form of
Religion; and have used of late years, no other service of God than this.

85. It Is some good sign when men are ashamed of a bad action, study to conceal
it, and excuse it, but to declare wickedness openly, argues one past all grace,
A whore that ownes her self one, and is proud to be accounted so, gives small
hopes of amendment; but she who pleads for it as a lawful trade, may be given
over as desperate.

86. Besides the guilt of not only blood, but frequent, horrible, amazing
Murderers, completed with King-killing and perjury, has an irresistible
power of hardening their hearts, who are guilty; and if these be spared, God may
in Judgment suffer their principles to be penally insnaring; it is a fatal
courtesy, which brings a certain curse on a man's self, and intailes it to his
posterity.

87. Consider Gentlemen, how they dealt with others, as Soldiers, with all the
Ir^sh in our English Wars, who were constantly excluded the benefit of eitster
quarter, or Articles of surrender, in detestation of the bloody tradegy acted
by them on the Protestants, in Tredigh, Wexford and other places in Ireland,
Kallendar-House in Scotland, etc. can witness for them, that having to do with
Christians, they made no scruple of putting thousands to the Sword, who would
not surrender up Caftles and Garrisons to their imperious demand: And as
Judges, it is well known that none of the Irish were suffered to escape with
life, who could be convicted of the Murder of an English Protestant; Can any
Law be more just than their own? Our King, Nobles, Knights, Gentry, Divines,
and Citizens, were of no less esteem than those murdered Protestants in
Ireland, the first valuable with ten thousand; Nor were the Murderers less
barbarous then the Irish Rebels.

88. But above all consider their imperious pride, peremtory saucinefs, and
monstrous cruelty in the trial, sentencing and condemning the King, breaking
his Seal Royal, and making another to render the murder fesible, under a
color of Mock Justice, refusing his demurrs, not admitting him to speak for
himfelf, unless he would own them a Court of Judicature, having power over
him, and take a Trial from them, so to betray England liberties at once, their
appointing the place at his own Gate, to go out of the Window of his former
Princely pleasure, and Royal Magnificence, unto the Stage of his final bloody
Tradgedy; where pullies were prepared with Ropes, perforce to compel him to
bow his Royal Head, and lay his neck on the block, had he refused to submit
willingly, the ghastly Executioners with ugly Visors, representing truly what
they were indeed within, who durst act such a deed; The flourishing of Weapons
in triumph, upon giving that Execrable blow, cutting and wounding any whose
eyes betrayed a relenting heart, at so damnable a sight, yea, decapitating his
harmless Statue upon the Royal Exchange, with an (Exit Tyrannus) writ over
his place of standing, in design to murder his Name and Memory as well as his
Body. What stony heart can think of this and not melt: and yet shall Waller
(not only one of his fatal Judges, but the detestable contriver of that place,
and time of his death, which added cruelty to the height of his other Villainy)
only be plundered of that part of his estate which he has not already made
away, or cannot conceal? Okey another of that cursed Committee, shall he find
the like favor? I hope not.

89. Had any pity or piety been in the breasts of any of the Junto, their
disowning, protesting against, and disclaiming the horribleness of that fact,
had given a present check to it, and perhaps dashed it for ever.

90. Observe I beseech you the usual dealing of these offenders against
others, yea all whom they could ensnare, either as to life or estate, or both,
what art to entrap? Packing of Judges? Suborning witnesses, violence in
prosecution? And like arts, to make as many, as they designed for tuine, to
appear guilty, and what mercy at last, but cruel extremity? It Is Gods rule and
will, that Judgment without mercy should be to him, or them, who showed no
mercy.

91. Thus my Lords and Gentlemen it is evident that neither the fact, nor the
persons deserve mercy, I shall add a few considerations more to evince the
inexpediency of it.

92. By doing this you will either contradict your own vote, which concluded
the fact horrible murder, or give the World to understand, that you judge them
not all guilty who were actors; and then what need of pardon? Or you will let
the Nation know, that for once you will change Seats with God himself, he only
can pardon murder, who said to David, thou shall not die, but has forbidden
man to do it. If you who cannot pardon the blood of a Porter, or Waterbearer;
will presume to prefer Regicides, (besides other murders they are guilty of)
to his Majesty for pardon; It is to be feared you will thus intaile the sword
upon these Kingdoms God knows how long, he that said to David, thou shall not
die, added, Howbeit the sword shall never depart from thy house, in revenge of
one Vriah: But here our David himself was slain, by worse than Vriah, and
besides him several scores of other persons of worth, Gallant Commanders,
Godly Preachers, eminent Gentlemen, and industrious Citizens, all honest,
faithful subjects cut off by Rebels, and prodigious Traitors.

93. What will posterity judge when they read the history of these times (which
he that will be a faithful historian must pen heartily,) when he shall find
such a vast catalogue of stupendous crimes punished (in comparison) only with
a flap of the Fox tail, they must needs either distrust the credit of the
story, or censure the innocence of the Judges; It is an old saying, When
thieves sit in judgment one upon another, the trial may be serious, but the
execution will be but in jest. Facinus quos inquinat, aequat. Should I read
such a story past; I should my self have such thoughts; though I have other
confidence of your Honors, and that the weekly Pamphlets, give not your
cordially true sense and intentions.

94. Where pardon is so large, it is esteemed an Act not of mercy, so much as
of politic justice, and had the murders been spared on the offenders part,
the indemnity could not be too comprehensive, though if it be so large
notwithstanding, the same Justice will be apprehended therein of which
apprehensions, such like will be the constructions.

1. That these few who are made exemplary, suffer on the score of some private
grudge and barely in state policy.

2. That what was done by them was honest enough, if it could have been as
confidently maintained, and defended, as valiantly achieved.

3. That you are convinced of the rationality of Antimonarchicall principles,
and that if a King upon any score head a party in a Civil war, and be
vanquished he is at the victors dispose, that then oaths cease, when he is
unable to protect them, and out of capacity of redeeming himself from them,
that the fountain of power is in the people, with which they betrust their
Kings, and may recall it upon his misgovernment, reassume it into their own
hands, and try, convict, and punish him, even capitally, if they in conscience
judge him guilty, and they will use this lenity of yours in pardoning almost
all who did so, as an unanswerable argument, of these forementioned
apprehensions.

4. That if ever they can get the like opportunity, they may do the same again
and hold out finally, if they can; however, if they fail, this will be a
president, what issue they are to expect. My Lords and Gentlemen, it will be
the most lethall lesson, that can be taught Subjects, to let them know, that
King-kiling is pardonable (as to life) to twenty for one, if they can have but
wit to secure their estate, or the most considerable part thereof. This bout
will only teach them the present failing, and how to avoid it next. Now how
soon they may get opportunity, God knows, especially when you provoke him, to
suffer it, both again and speedily, Benhadad lived to repay Ahab, for letting
him go, by a deaths wound at Ramoth Gilead. When God thunders in his word
again, and again, be sure a storm is not very fat off. Howbeit blessed be God
his Majesty is innocent of this neglect (should any be committed) having wholly
left the matter to your pious discretion, and resolutions.

95. By this means we shall have a young nursery of Traitors enabled to give
their native Country a blow (perhaps) when it is little aware of them, Children
usualy excusing their fathers, unless their crimes be so laid open, and made
notorious by punishment, as may make them hang their Crests: Then they sneake
away, are ashamed both of their name, and relation, endeavoring if possible,
to obliterate out of memory, that they are descended from such, and it will
prove most true, and be constantly found by experience, that he who all his
life studies to defend such villanyes, will at length look upon them with
liking, under the notion of heroic actions.

96. He who spares a malefactor (by the law of God and man unpardonable) had
need of more than ordinary security, for his future good beheavour: it was the
expression, of a wise King who had pardoned a man (through great intercession
for him) convicted of murder, and soon after was found guilty of anothe the
like fact, which being told him he replied, It is I have slain this last man,
for had justice been done on the murderer at first, as God required according
to the sentence paft against him by the law, this last in probability had been
alive. Murder Gentlemen, is prodigiously fertile, none guilty thereof; fail
ordinarily of becoming apt and ready Scholars in Satan's bloody politics, You
know not what a muster-roll of Crimson sins you invite Divine justice to place
to your account for future, which will undoubtedly prove a treasuring wrath
against the day of wrath, and who knows the time and terror of this vengeance.

97. Their acquitting from so black crimes, and bloody guilt may perhaps
moralize the fable of that farmer, who put a snake almost dead with cold, into
his bosom to revive it, and was rewarded with a mortal bite, so soon as the
warmth had recovered it, it is is a proverb not to be neglected, Save a thief
from the gallows and thy self shall not escape that destiny, if he can bring
thee to it: The proverb is so true of none as of such murderers as these, who
destroy not their natural fathers, but the father of their Country, subvert its
laws, and make the land groan with illegal oppressures, proscricptions, and
bloodshed. Should God in judgment suffer them to have such another day (as
they would certainly hug, and improve the opportunity, so) you and your
posterity should first feel their requital of this favor in procuring their
pardon: they of all others would not suffer any to live, at least to inhabit
among them, who could say, I, or my father, saved them, or their fathers from
deserved executions, for the like crimes before, and this now is the recompense.

98. And perhaps, although their children borne, long since, and men grown,
before they became involved in such guilt, may prove better than their fathers,
yet from such as hereafter may become fertile among them, what a pestilent
brood may come into the World, who by Gods law stand accursed, and lie
irremissibly under the bands of death, If a bird constantly lay such an Egg as
will produce a young one like her self, we cannot in reason expect children to
proceed from them, better than the fathers. The Jews have a witty observation,
nor perhaps untrue. That Agag King of Amal^k, during those two years which he
abode with Saul, and verily thought the bitterness of death had been past,
begat a Son from whom lineally came that Haman the Agagite, who in Mordecai's
time, had like to swallow up the whole Jewish Nation, in his unsatiable thirst
of revenge, because one who sat in the Kings gate, would not bow to him. The
moral is very seasonable, and sadly to be thought upon, these bloud-guilty
Traitors, who in justice are sons of Death, whom God would have cut off in
the midst of their days, who are beyond all but foolish pity (which as the
proverb truly has it, ruins oftimes a City) may become the future fathers of
such a pisti lent brood, as may revenge Gods quarrel in the neglect of justice
upon them, to the very fourth generation, of such who are chiefly concerned in
it: Nor is it unlikely, but our present Lambert, may be a branch of that bloody
Archrraytor, of his name, who long ago did such mischief in England.

99. Though their lives be spared, yet future credit and repute, its unlike
they or their children ever will get in these Kingdoms, till the memory of
them be buried in forgetfullness, So that whether they have Estates left, or
no, their bare lives will serve to produce much and great mischief; They have
long been accustomed to villainies of a prodigious bigness; And scorn now to
serve the Devil in sneaking employments. Great Rogues, too lazy to dig; nor
will beg, so long as England has enemies. They are acquainted with all the
petty instruments of villainy three in Kingdoms, and if they cannot set them on
work themselves, can and will recommend their abilityes to foreign Princes,
that bear England little good will, what happiness can we expect, but these
will obstruct, prove Remoras to, and retard? What mischief hatched, but they
will promote, and cherish, no trusting their good nature, who have discovered
themselves prodigies therein, no hoping for their repentance, who have been
seared in their consciences, with twelve years practice of the most
heart-hardning villainies.

100. If any hopes should appear in them of repentance, it is pity but it should
be promoted with execution of that deserved doom, which God requires to be
brought upon them, which to differ, especially to acquit them from, is in
effect to cause those, who chiefly procure this indemnity for them, to enjoy,
neither life, or happiness, longer than they can hinder it. They have been long
acquainted with such butcheries, and imperious usurpation, so as to be courted,
on that score, by Kings, dreaded at home, seared abroad, and admired by nations
far distant; this has scrow'd up their minds to that Generous pitch of
impiety, that rather than live neglectedly, or in contempt, they will spare two
pence at any time, although but masters of a groat in all, to by a faggot,
which may fire their native Country, then they will warm their hands and
rejoice at the flame.

101. Their long experience, although in an usurped way, has rendered them
dangerous persons to be interested against their native country, and the
hopelesness of their pardon, upon any future score of rebellion, or Treason,
would encourage any Prince to trust them very far, who shall be engaged against
England. These are great incarnate devils, every one of them is collective, a
name of number, and there are in these Kingdoms a multitude of close villians,
of their own complexion, who are of inferior ranks and orders, yet mischievous
enough in their kind, whom these formerly State-Angles, shining in usurped
Glory, falling now to be State-Devills, will draw along with them, as Lucifer
did his train after him, or as the Dragor in the Apocalypse, drew the stars
with his tail, these will still, by reason of their close agents, who will
ingratiate themselves as nigh the very Court, and grand Counsels of the Nation,
as possible, learn, and betray your most choice and secret counsels, and
resolves to those, where it will be little for the Nations advantage to have
them known.

102. Believe it confidently, my Lords and Gentlemen, it will be thus, besides
the probability of the thing, you have his Warrant and threatening to assure you
of it, whom you shall never tax with breach of his word. No sooner shall these
be acquitted, but of your own number, one shall be Lenthall, another
Haslerigge, another Vane, a fourth Mildmay, a fifth Whitlock, a sixth Mounson, a
seventh Saint-Johns, and so on, in Gods esteem and account, and who then so fit
to execute his vengeance against you, but these very persons, because you
neglected to do it upon them when God required. And every man of you
representing a County, City, or Borough, what may be the lot of England, I
tremble to think.

103. Thus my Lords and Gentlemen, I have given you some brief, but serious
considerations, not but that I think your wisdoms much more able to
ventilate, and apprehend them, than I to suggest, but knowing your many
employments will hardly, if at all, admit most of you, to think on these
things, out of the walls of your joint deliberation, besides, that so many
intercessors and friends are daily made to you in their behalf, as gives you
little leisure so profoundly to examine things, as one of far inferior parts
to the least of you, may do, being without interruption. I shall in brief touch
some things which may be objected in their behalf.

104. Those who plead for them do it under the notion of moderation, and for
the most part use such arguments as these, first Gods manner of bringing this
about, without stroke, or blood, and therefore conclude this providence
speaks, that if any, yet as little blood ought to be shed, as possibly may.
Secondly his sacred Majesty of royal memory charging his son not to revenge
his blood. Thirdly the penitence of some, and expression of contrary affections
since, by signal duty. Fourthly, the pity they conceive so much blood should be
shed in a time of General rejoicing. And Fifthly the safety of the Nation,
which they imagine best secured by this mercy, and would be hazarded by the
contrary severity. These are the frequent objections I meet withal, except
some, which are brought in the behalf of particular individual persons, which
I shall not here take notice of.

105. The first argument is well brought, but misapplied, it rather argues Gods
intent to have them made examples, who therefore preserved them, that they
should not fall otherwise, which had things come to blows, might have proved
likely enough; Achan who troubled the Camp, himself escaped, being reserved by
God to public Justice, where God had declared a Nation devoted, and accursed;
Joshuah used no less severity, though the victory happened without blood, than
where men fell in battle; Jericho with all it is Inhabitants, Cattle, plunder
and Houses was utterly destroyed; although it fell at the sound of Ramms Horns,
and the shout of the Army, as well as Ai, where Joshuah found a repulse, Gods
command is to be attended, concerning notorious Malefactors, as well though
they be taken by unexpected surprizall, as if they had been subdued fighting:
Yea, rather had they been in the field, and defended by a strong Army, yet in
fear of a greater force, they might have made terms for themselves, which
better than hazard both men's lives, and the cause it self, might have been
granted: but as God disposed affairs, as they deserve no pardon, so they can
plead no Articles; They resisted to the last, nor yielded till they were of all
hands relinquished and deserted; yet even then, where force would do no good,
they attempted Treachery; and wanted little of dashing all our hopes, by sowing
divisions in the Army.

106. The second argument is a clear proof of that blessed Kings Piety, who
with Steven could from his heart forgive his murderers, but is no rule for his
successor, and Parliament to take him at his word: Though it be in villains
power to murder their King, it is out of his power to pardon them, and though
it argue his true Christian piety, to beg their forgiveness heartily from God,
and to express the same at the hour of death; yet there is a Law of God and man
to be satisfied, for the fact, and it would be a cruel kindness in the
successor, to muzzle the mouth of the Law, to indempnifie such villains, whose
crime, although God pardon and remit, as to future judgment, upon signal and
true Repentance, yet if man upon any such consideration, acquit the temporal
guilt, God will revenge it to purpose.

107. To this may be added, that these wretches far exceeded what his Sacred
Majesty thought or could expect. He (pious King) hoped that those, who were so
desperately cruel to him, would in compunction of heart, relent toward his
Son, and feel such a sting in their conscience, as might engage them with so
much greater zeal to study his Sonns good, and observe his just commands, by
how much they were more cruelly barbarous to him: But alas! it proved,
otherwise, the Murderers of the Father, rejected the Son, and continued his
implacable enemies, with such obstinate impenitency, that nothing but a Divine
miraculous course of proceeding did restore to us our Royal exile.

108. As to the third argument, I grant, that years of indiscretion, a weak
Judgment, importunacy of friends concerned, Sophisticate arguments, especially
the Divine Oracles, pretending the thing to be of God; The Prophets prophesying
this to be the way and time of confounding the man of sin, whose supporter they
interpreted regal power to be false witnesses affirming that his Majesty had
committed unapparel'd tyrannies, and Solicitors thereupon, praying sentence
against him: But above all, Lawyers affirming such proceedings to be just and
regular, and the power commissionating them legal; together with their giving
peremptory authority to try the King: Divines also (who pretended themselves
Casuists) resolving oaths no longer to bind, vows to be upon such junctures
enervated, when the King was Captivated, maintaining the power to be from, and
in the people originally, with such like Aphorisms, broached, and confidently
defended by State and Pulpit- Boutefeus: I wonder not if many were engaged in
his Sacred Majesty's Tragedy where treason is only (indeed) their fault, and is
by man pardonable, but the sin; of murder and perjury they before God stand
acquitted off, being seduced by Divines and Lawyers, whose reverence, gravity,
and reputed skill, learning and piety, was their share, for whom what tongue
can plead?

109. Where in conscience the Honorable Lords or worthy Commons can excuse the
party concerned, to be thus deluded, God forbid but pardon may (as a true act
of Grace) be granted, severity involving them also: But upon this pretense to
pardon Lawyers, as Lenthal, St. John's, Cook, etc. or men known of acute wits,
as Haslerigge, Vane, Martin, etc. or those who were his Majesty's servants, as
Mildmay, Holland, Danvers, etc. or indeed any, either Voters of the High Court
of (...), or Judges therein, who cannot make appear they were deluded, ((...)
no way be discovered, but either by their voluntary (...) Act afterward, or
espousing the contrary interest) and manging it with fidelity and vigorous
prosecution, is to justify the villainy, and to draw the guilt upon the Nation
inevitably.

110. The fourth argument is unsound and rotten, Our deliverance, if it make us
forget our misery and duty, God will remind us of both with a vengeance. But
further, if the number punished be not greater than appears, most desperate
Malefactors, they are not too many to be exempted, as may appear from these
instances.

1. Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, how much more when aggravated with
blood, yea, desperate blood-guiltinesse? Forty Witches at a time were counted
no pity to suffer, where perhaps all of them were not convicted of ten men's
death, and that only conjecturally; These are guilty of more than forty
innocent men's lives, befides Royal blood valuable at ten thousand, and those
slain in battle (to bring these murders about) a number not to be reckoned, it is
to be lamented, the Land affords so many villains, but no pity to part with
them,

2. Corah and his Accomplices were many more, who only emulared, slighted and
contemned Authority, yet they, their Wives, Children, Servants, Tents, and all
they had, went at once to perdition, by the immediate hand of God himself, From
whom separation was made by Divine command, upon penalty of partaking in their
punishment. Certainly then, if these who destroyed and trampled down all
Authority that was Lawful, and set up arbitrary tyranny instead thereof, die an
ordinary death, or in peace, those who let them go, may fear lest themselves be
cut off in the midst of their days: to save these is a cruel friendship, and
may prove worse than an hereditary plague to their families, who are concerned
in their impunity.

3, Those who underwant punishment for Aarons Calf, were three thousand, Ahabs
Family, J^zabels Prophets, and Balaams Priests many more, than our offenders.
In a word, those who pay for their obstinacy in too long holding out a
garrison, Castle or with their lives, are of thirty times their number: The
multitude of our slain in these Wars, which this prevarication of theirs has
rendered them guilty of, has been a thousand for one of them, No pity is to be
had of the number where a man cannot be excused with safety to the Nation.
Prudent Generals make no scruple to execute forty, for the safety of ten
thousand: as is apparent in mutinies, where often the tenth man dies merciless,
for terror to the rest, yet for these much may be pleaded, in defense, or at
least excuse, for our murderers nothing,

111. The last argument is also grounded upon a clear mistake, the safety of
this Nation is no more concerned in their pardon, than in suffering unquencht
fire in the roof, or Timberworke of an house; as may appear.

1. First, if they could have checked our hopes, ^^other'd these happy
proceedings, or diverted counsels, we had never seen this happy day, nor do we
enjoy it now with their good will; their power is at present, blessed be God,
less, though their malice, (as to the generality) full as much, no fear of them
now, if we be careful, who could not hinder this our approaching prosperity
then.

2, But Secondly, they are not out of hope still, may they but escape with life,
they yet have tricks to try, nor count the game quite lost, while a gappe is
still open for fraud; If at last they can thrive by a cheat, they value not
their present loss at downright play. For this end they will disoblige, (if
possible) the old cavalty, instigate new favorites to disgusting carriages, in
a word, there shall be no settlement, if they can disquiet the State.

3. But lastly to echo again what I often said before, I beseech you take heed,
lest this Carnal device, to settle the Nation, provoke Gods Judgment to send
such a spirit of unsettlednesse in these Kingdoms, (and that through their
means) as may cause once more a sword to be drawn in England, not to be
sheathed in many ages.

112. Thus my, Lords and Gentlemen, I have freely expressed my mind unto you,
wherein if passion in the least has biassed me, I am much mistaken; that I
have plainly declared my conscience, I crave humbly your pardon, not intending
the edge or point of any thing, by me written should so much as threaten you,
for I hope from your Honors better things, and therefore whatever is expressed
here, presupposes that from your Honors, which I believe not, and my prayer is
that God who is the wonderful Counselor, may direct and advise you, what may
be for his Glory, his sacred Majesty's Honor; Your peace, and comfort, and the
whole Kingdoms welfare, and happiness, So prays.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your Honors most observant, though unworthy Orator.
GEORGE STARKEY.
St. Thomas Apostles June. 18. 1660.
FINIS.

