A Renowned SPEECH Spoken to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, May, 28 at the
last great Assembly of the Gentry and Commonalty of Yorkshire, by that most
Judicious Gentleman Sir Phillip Stapleton, One of the Committees appointed by
the Honorable House of Commons to attend his Majesty's pleasure, and to give
Information to the Members of the said House of all passages that concern the
good of the King and Kingdom.

Wherein is declared the great uncertainty of his Majesty's undertakings, the
said undertakings not being seconded with the unite applause and joint
Assistance of the whole Kingdom.

Likewise discribing the manifold and innumerable dangers that attends Civil
discord, and homebred contention, showing by Presidents of York and
Lancaster, what cruel effects such designs produce both to the King and
Subject.

London, Printed for J. Horton, 1642. June 2.

A Renowned Speech Spoken to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, at the last
great Assembly of the Gentry and Commonalty of Yorkshire, by that most
judicious Gentleman Sir Phillip Stapleton.
Most gracious Sovereign,
LEt not me incur your Majesty's displeasure, if I that am one of the
poorest of the Subjects presume to speak some few words unto my Lord the King.

According to your Majesty's Command we the Gentry and Commonalty of Yorkshire
are here met to know your Majesty's pleasure, and knowing to fulfill what we
with Honor may perform, or with Loyalty execute, nor have we brought with us
the least thought of such a fear since. 'Twere disloyalty in the highest
Degree to think a Prince so gracious, (from whom we have received such large
expressions of Royal Love, and Favor) should Command any thing not suitable to
Law and to our Consciences, far be it from us to think it, only let me take
License with your Royal favor to tell what some men mutter. As touching your
Majesty's Demands to have a guard of Horse and Foot to wait upon your Majesty.

First, that the malignant Party has counseled your Majesty to take this
course, and under this pretense to gain a power of Horse and foot which
should be employed against the Parliament.

We hope much better, nor can We give just, credit to such vain, Reports, yet
should We with our Persons and Estates purchase a ruin to our selves and
Kingdom, it would be a sad reward for all our Service.

Oh my dread Lord,
Let but your serious Judgment call to mind what sad Disasters, homebred
strife does breed in private Families, and if in them what mischief in a
Kingdom, a Kingdom that is divided into as many factions as there is
Counties, the Church, the State, the Court, the City, and the County too full
of dissension, let your Majesty call into your mind the Hellish Plots the
Papists daily laid to ruin and destroy, your Royal Father, could they have
him and yet love you so dear believe it nor my Lord, their slattering tongues
and their dissembling Trains are inwardly a poison; their Oily Councels seem
to quench this Fire, but with that oil they do your fall conspire, cast back
your Eye to York and Lancaster, how many Nobles lost their Noble Lives, how
many Subjects paid their lives as Tribute to their then doubtful King how was
this Kingdom wasted and destroyed, and in the end when war did cease to
frown, he lost a Kingdom, to obtain a Crown.

Besides great King, admit a Guard were raisd as is intended, (depending on
your Royal Wisdom in the use of them) what could such Forces do against
Kingdom, what can raw Soldiers do against those thousands of expert
Soldiers, which have taken Oath to defend your Royal Majesty and the high
Court of Parliament, but if your Majesty shall put your self in opposion, and
raise Forces against your Loyal and obedient Subjects, they ought in Laws of
Nature, both humane and divine, for to defend and make resistance and should
this come to pass which God forbid) Tillage and Trade must cease, Foreign
Commerce and Traffic must have end, and Hostillity must be the practice of
this Kingdom, both to defend your Sacred Majesty from your Domesticke Enemies,
the Papists, (which but assembled by your gracious License would soon declare
themselves your own and Kingdoms greatest Enemies) and to secure the Kingdom
from the invasion of Foreign Enemies, that daily watch advantage to get a
footing in this fruitful I Will, and to suppress the Gospel, and it is greatly
to be feared that by their Grand incendiaries here, they are the chiefest
Authors of these great distractions.

I fear I have displeased your Majesty, if so I crave your gracious pardon it is
my true Love and zealous Loyalty to your Sacred Majesty, and this my Native
Kingdom, that makes me bold to press your Majesty, beside the interrest and
assurance I have of the fidelity of that great Council, whereof by the favor
of my Country, I was chosen a member, which trust I will till death faithfully
discharge both to your Sacred Majesty, and this my Country.

FINIS.

