THE STATE OF SION COLLEGE LONDON, 1681.
THe said College was founded by Dr. Thomas White, Vicar of St. Dunstans in the
West, etc. and confirmed by the Charters of the Kings, Charles the First and
Second. It is governed by a President, two Deans, and four Assistants, annually
chosen out of the Ministers of London, who are all Fellows of the said College.

It consists of a Hall, Library, other public Rooms, Chambers for Students,
and a Hospital for twenty poor aged People, men and women.

In the dreadful Fire of London all the Buildings were consumed, a third part
of the Books burnt, and Rents lost to the yearly value of one hundred and six
Pounds, six Shillings.

By the Charity of several worthy Benefactors (whose names are to be seen in
the Public Register kept in the Library) the said Library and Hospital were
soon rebuilt in as good or better manner than before the Fire; The Hall and
public Rooms are brought up to the Roof, and covered. There has been already
expended in these Works the Sum of Two Thousand Pounds and upwards, and it will
require about Four Hundred Pounds more to finish them.

Besides the great loss of Rents, beforementioned, the Lands which were
appropriated to the maintenance of the Poor are within these few years sunk
from One hundred and twenty to Seventy Pounds per annum; so that the Pensions
of the Poor which were formerly Six Pounds per annum, are now fallen to Three
pounds ten. And though the Salaries of the Clerk and other Officers have been
lessened, and diverse other Expenses wholly taken away, the College is yet
indebted near Four hundred pounds.

It is therefore humbly recommended to all the lovers of Piety and Learning, as
a proper object for their charity and munificence, that by their assistance the
debts of the said College may be discharged, the remaining part of the
Buildings finished, and the Poor receive the same comfortable allowances which
they formerly enjoyed.

And for the speedy finishing of the Buildings, it may be considered that it
will be much for the credit of this Honorable City, not to suffer any part of
the said College to lie in ruins, here being the only public Library in
London, whither diverse Strangers and Foreiners are wont to resort.

Those who shall be pleased to contribute any thing toward all or any of the
purposes herein expressed, are desired to lodge their Charity in the hands of
some of the Governors, or other Ministers of London, to be delivered to some
of the Governors for the time being, to be by them employed according to the
intent of the Donors.


