Judex Expurgatorius: OR, A SHORT EXAMINATION OF THE DOCTRINE OF PURGATORY, In
a SERMON upon 1 PET. 3.19.

TOGETHER WITH An Orthodoxall interpretation of the Text.

By AM: STAVELEY, A.M.

AUGUST: Scitote quia cum anima a corpore avellitur, statim aut in Paradiso pro
meritis bonis collocatur, aut certe pro peccatis in inferni tartara
praecipitatur. PSALM. 95.7. To DAY if you will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for RICH: LOWNDES, at the White-Lyon in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL John Wroth and John Davies Esquires.
I Have sometimes perused, not without regret, that passage of the Historian,
viz. Beneficia eo usque laeta sunt, dum videntur posse, solvi verum ubi multum
ante venere, pro gratia odium redditur. I must confess my self conquered by
accumulated civilities from you, and mine own inability to make you the least
recompense, for alas what are my endeavors? yet really not to belie mine own
temper, I find in my self an ambitious greadinesse, to embrace all occasions,
whereby I may express my gratitude toward you; witness this small Essay,
whereunto I have took the boldness to prefixe your names, not to plead for my
weakness, but to patronize my obedience, choosing rather to run the hazard of
(perhaps deserved) censure, than not to make a public acknowledgement of my
many and deep engagements for your abundant favors. Ac pt (I beseech you) a
thing born through the indulgence of Patronage, and in answer to your Commands,
which I present as a testimony, how much greater my desires, than my abilities
are to deserve the style of being

Gentlemen, Your obliged and obedient Servant, Ambrose Stavely.

1 PET. 3.19. (...). By which also he went and preached unto the Spirits in
Prison.
THere are two Volumes propounded to us Men, wherein God reads
Divinity-Lectures, and instructs us in the glorious Mysteries concerning the
eternal Power and Godhead: The Word of God, the Scriptures; and the Work of
God, the Creation, are so many Tutors to the world below, teaching sundry
lessons in relation to the world above.

And these two books so exactly parallel each the other in their structure,
frame, and constitution, that they cannot in reason but be looked upon as
arguments of much strength and conviction to prove that they were both cast
into the same mould, and the one came from the hand of the same workman with
the other. The (...) and temperature of the Scripture so proportionably
answering the composition and model of the Universe, is a great demonstration,
that one and the same hand was the Architect and contriver of them both: For as
in the works of God, we have high Mountains in one place, and valleys, and
plains in another; flats and shallowes in one place, and heights and depths in
another; some places altogether impregnable, and others again easily
accessible: We shall see the like Checker-wortk interwoven in the Word of God,
and all beautifully conspiring to render the Fabric of them both, suitable to
the wisdom of him, who was their Author and Artificer. The body of the
Scripture is made up of depths and shallowes, of things near at hand, and
things afar off; of things mysterious and profound, and things plain and
obvious: There are contained in them some things whereof the weakest cannot
likely be ignorant, and other things again which the strongest are not able to
understand. God may be said to dwell in the Scriptures, as in the Scripture he
is said to dwell. Sometimes he is said to dwell in light, 1 Timothy 6.16. and
elsewhere he is said to dwell in darkness, 1 Kings 8 12. So in some passages
of Scripture, God comes forth and shows himself in clear and perfect beauty
unto the world, as in a Vision at noon day: Otherwhere he retires and hides
himself behind the dark clouds of obscure and difficult expressions, where we
may seek him long, and not be able to find him. In some veins and places of
the Scripture, God sits as it were, upon the very Superficies, and Surface of
the Letter, where even he who runs may read it; he speaks plainly unto men, and
speaks no parable at all; in others again he draws the Curtains between us
and himself, or deals with us as he did with Moses; he puts us into the Cleft
of the Rock, and covers us with his hand whilst he passes by. There is a path
(says Job) which no foul has known, neither has the Vultures or the Kites
eyes seen it, it is as yet hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close from
the fowls of the air, Job 28.7. Men who soar aloft, and fly the highest pitch
of reason, wisdom and labor, yet fall short in giving us a perfect account of
the Divine meaning in several passages of the Scriptures. And amongst the rest
this parcel of Holy writ, penned by Saint Peter, and [dictated] to me for this
days employment (without any sinister construction be it spoken) is not the
most inconsiderable, wherein God has made darkness his secret place, his
Pavilion round about are dark waters, and thick clouds of the sky, Psalm. 18.11.

The Rabbis have a saying, there are four Keys in Gods keeping: The key of
the Clouds, the key of the Womb, the key of the Grave, and the key of Food. I
may add, that there is a fifth key in Gods bestowing likewise, which is the
key of the Scriptures; and when we attempt to search into those Arcana Dei, we
had need to pray that God would deal with us, as he did with the Apostles, To
open our understanding, that we may understand the Scriptures, Luke 24.45.
Since it is He alone who has the key of David, that opens, and no man
shuts, that shuts and no man opens, Rev. 3.7.

I speak it not to monopolize any vain applause to my self (for I find not
in me the least temptation or itching desire after ostentation) neither yet to
discourage my self from a modest, reverend scrutiny into the meaning; but
there is scarce a Text of greater difficulty, whereon more various, and diverse
expositions are fastened; so that I may take up the same language of Saint Paul,
though uttered upon another case, Speak I these things of my self, or do not
others say the same also? Saint Austin being consulted by Evodius about the
meaning of the place, confesses it did exceedingly puzzle him, and that he
durst not affirm any thing about it: Will you hear him in his own Dialect?
Quaestio (says he) quam mihi proposuisti, ex Epistola Apostoli Petri, solet
nos (ut te non latere arbitror) vehementissime commovere. And again, Vides quam
latebrosum sit, and quae me moveant, ne affirmare hinc aliquid audeam: And the
Jesuit Lorinus in his Commentary upon it, calls it, Difficilimum locum, a most
difficult place, and rehearses ten several expositions. And so Estius also
upon the place says, Locus hic omnium pene interpretum judicio difficilimus
varieque expositus, etc. This place, in the judgment of almost all
Interpreters, is most difficult, and is so diversely expounded, that Lorinus
reckons up nine interpretations of it, to which he adds his own for the
tenth, and yet has not touched all neither. And both Estius and Lorinus note,
that only Arias Montanus did think the place easy to be understood, but
withal his exposition of it is such, that others will not easily embrace it.
For as they relate, Arias by the (...), by the Spirits in Prison, does
understand those eight persons shut up in the Arc, which was a prison to them:
Bellarmine also upon occasion of the Controversy, about Limbus Patrum, and
Christ's descention into Hell, treating of this place speaks thus; Vt autem hic
locus qui semper obscurissimus habitus intelligatur. So that e confesso on all
sides, this place has been accounted most obscure: One sense pleases Origin,
it dislikes another; Hillary approves one Paraphrase, another rejects it;
Zwinglius and Aretius concur in one opinion, there are more oppose it than
subscribe unto it. Calvin and his followers would have their meaning take
place, and others no less eminent in judgment and learning refell it. I
should exceed the bounds of Discourse, should I present you with each
particular mentioned, together with what is requisite to be delivered in the
remainder.

In such a Sea of Controversies, and variety of Expositions, I confess my
self sometimes almost at a loss, when I would resolve where to begin, and
what method to prosecute for your present entertainment. But to avoid
prolixity, there are only two I meet with which are most considerable; the
former is that of the Romish Church, who thus comment upon these words, that
Christ did free those ancient Fathers from Purgatory, wherein they remained
imprisoned till at, or by his death, he paid their ransom, and satisfied his
Fathers justice. But this gloss of theirs being founded upon a false
Hypothesis, is deservedly rejected as spurious and fictitious: but methinkes I
hear some say, how? is it founded upon a false Hypothesis? (...), it is easy
to create an adversary in a man's fancy, and afterward foil him at pleasure;
this sounds to the ear, but does not satisfy the judgment. In examination
therefore of this quarrel between us, I shall deal fide Romana, and fide
Anti-Romana: with a Roman faithfulness, but an Anti-Roman Faith.

The nature of a channel is best discovered by retiring back to the fountain,
and it will not be a little conducible to our purpose, ot enquire after the
Authors, who first laid the foundation of this opinion, and how, and in what
manner, in aftertimes it gathered so much strength, that to keep fuel at
Purgatory-fire, it has put all Christendom into a Paroxisme, and inflamed the
whole world in an unextinguishable conflagration.

Chemnitius a learned Author, who gives us the Narration, or if you please, the
History of Purgatory, tells us that he finds Plato, who flourished about 400
years before Christ's incarnation, to be the first who laid the structure of
Purgatory; and afterward, when the Platonic Philosophers began to be in
admiration with the Ecclesiastical Doctors, this Thesis of his had so much
liberty, as to be controverted in the Church. Now nothing else but humane
Inference, and Philosophical ratiocination inclined Plato to broach this
opinion; Eusebius in his book, De praeparatione Evangelica, having transcribed
a large dispute of Plato, out of his Tractat. de Anima, in reference to a
future life, informs us, that Plato believed, that such men who seemed (...),
insanabiles esse, to be incurable (as such who committed murder praemeditately,
or the like) were cast into a place of torment, from whence they never were to
be set at liberty. Such who committed great sins, but were (...),
Medicabilia, crimes curable (as if out of sudden passion, they committed
Manslaughter, or such like) but yet spent the rest of their life, (...), in
sorrow and repentance; they proportionably to their crimes were cast into
flames, but of a different nature from the former, and after a years
expiration in sufferance, approached to the Lake Acherusias, where they
implored mercy from him whom they had offended: And if they would entreat their
Adversary to be reconciled, they were free, otherwise there to remain till they
had sued out their pardon. On the other side such who lived transcendently
pious, ascended to a place of bliss, there to reside without disturbance: Those
whose conversations in this world were of a different nature, neither reaching
to a full measure of perfection, nor tending to downright profaneness passed
by Acheron into a Lake of Fire, and (...), being purged, (...), are absolved,
and afterward receive a remuneration for their good deeds: Thus Plato. And it
is observable that when Eusebius relates some opinions of Plato, and that
purposely too, to show Philosophers held some tenants not dissonant from the
doctrine of the Church, he makes mention of two places only for the dead, as
agreeable to Scripture, adding nothing of a third place, or of Purgatory, which
questionless he would not there have admitted had the doctrine of Purgatory
then been known or received in the Church: And Saint Austin does not dissemble
it in his book, De civitate Dei; that punishment in Purgatory after death, was
the position of Platonic Philosophers, and the same Saint Austin rehearsing
that verse of Virgil, Quique sui memores alios fecere merendo, wonders to meet
with such an opinion in the Poet, that the dead received comfort by the merits
and suffrages of the living; adding moreover, that without any authority of
Scripture this Thesis crept from the School of Plato into the Church of God.

I should trespass too much upon your patience to enlarge my self in this
particular; but if I do not too much flatter my self, nor too fondly indulge
mine own credulity, I have already produced enough to clear it, that
Pontificiall Purgatory received its Original light from Plato's dim lamp; So
that Tertullian upon mature deliberation pronounces, Philosophos esse
Hareticorum Patriarchas, that Philosophers were the Patriarks of Heretics.
Thus backed by no other authority, did this doctrine at first advance it self
into the world, when the Jews being mingled with the Gentiles, learned their
work as the Psalmist speaks: For the Israelites seeing how Heathens expressed
their Philostorgie, and natural affections toward their dead friends, in
superstitious Sacrifices and Exequies, this practice begun in the declining of
Judaisme to take place amongst them. And on that account, after the time of the
Prophets, the Jews introduced Prayers and Sacrifices for the Dead; about 170.
years before Christ's Incarnation; the first President and Example whereof we
meet with, is the 2 of Macchabees 12. with which book whosoever is acquainted,
shall find the whole frame and fabric of the Jewish Government perturbed and
disordered, the face of it, both as to Ecclesiastical and Civil relations
quite changed: Israel had lost her former beauty wherewith she was renowned,
and the whole state of affairs depraved and corrupted; Their Empire ruinous,
their Doctrine unsound, their Manners, their Rites, their Langnage, their Names
all extinguished, and in one word, in affection of conformity with two other
Nations, they were wholly degenerated into Heathenisme. No warrantable rantable
President or Example had they, no precept, no promise encouraging this action
of theirs, only what themselves had copied forth from the custom of those
Gentiles, amongst whom they had their conversation; whereas neither in the
books of Moses, (which are, as I may so term them, the Headquarters of the
Scriptures) nor yet in the Prophets, we shall not find the least syllable,
tending to advantage their opinion or practice, nor do the Romanists
themselves stick to assent to us in this Position: And should I tell you, that
those books of the Macchabees are not Canonical, and by consequence, no
infallible standards for Speculative or Practical Theology, it is no more
than what I am able to justify, having the suffrages of learned and judicious
Authors, corroborating this assertion; To omit Lyranus, who says, Non sunt in
Canone, leguntur tamen per constitutionem Ecclesiae Romanae: But withal, ut
sobrie legantur. S. Austin in his second Book De Doctrina Christiana, Chap. 8.
reckoning up the Books accounted Canonical, omitteth these books of Macchabees
in his Catalogue, so that it seems that learned Father esteemed them
Apochryphall. And Saint Jerome says expressly, Legit haec ad aedificationem
plebis, non autem ad authoritatem Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum confirmandam. The
Church reads them indeed for instruction of the People, but not to confirm any
Ecclesiastical Tenent; moreover adding, Eorum quippe authoritas, ad roboranda
ea quae in contentionem veniunt, minus idonea judicantur. Their Authority is
insufficient to decide a Controversy. To this agrees Saint Cyprian, Lege
quidem in Ecclesia, volui non tamen proferri ad authoritatem ex his fidei
confirmandam. This now was the sense of the ancient Fathers.

I might expatiate my discourse, to show the vast difference in manner of
composing those two books, the Genius running through the veins of the one,
being altogether unlike that of the other: But he whosoever was the Amanuensis
of the second book, has given occasion enough to suspect it, acknowledging he
had Epitomized it into one volume, from the works of one Jason of Cyrene, who
had degested the History in five books, as in 2 Macehabees 2.23. you may at
leisure peruse, which place, when you consult, be pleased to take a view of
that slender, and childish Apology, made at the end of the Story, which scarce
relisheth of a masculine temper, much less of a Divine inspiration; 2
Macchabees 14. ver. 38, 39. And it is not unworthy of our observation, that in
all Histories it cannot be proved; after the time of Macchabaeus till our
Saviors days, that this custom of Sacrificing or Praying for the Dead, was
retained or used amongst the Jews: Indeed the Rabbis after Christ's time,
having their eyes blinded, and their hearts hardened, renewed it afresh, and (
Lyranus relating it) as from the example of Razis killing himself, they
counted it an Act meritorious, to be felones de se, their own Executioners; so
from the practice of Macchabaeus, the Rabbis instituted Memorialls for the
Dead: And to this day in their Synagogues, they have Memoriales Libellos, out
of which twice every year, from their Pulpits, publicly they rehearse the
names of the deceased: And at the close, prayer is made, that God would in
mercy remember their Souls and place them in Paradise, with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob. Thus have I dealt impartially in this History, which how much, or how
little it patronizeth Roman Purgatory, I leave it to the arbitration of any
indifferent Judge; and whereas our adversaries confess, that they cannot
produce any other place speaking plainly to strengthen their Doctrine; manifest
is it, how ruinous is their structure, whose very basis and foundation is so
infirm and tottering. Having now cleared it, that the Academies of the
Gentiles, were the Seminaries of this opinion of Purgatory, teaching it the
Jews, when their Religion was decaying under the Law; it now remains to be
treated, how it had its entrance amongst Christians, under the time of the
Gospel: That Christ and his Apostles propounded no such Doctrine, might be
insisted on, did not the time prevent me. But if we examine the Springhead of
it, whence first it did descend, we shall find the occasion of its
Introduction into Christian Churches, was no more warrantable, than of old into
the Jewish, both of them alike invalid: I can now stand but only to present
you with a short view of it, which in brief was this; Presently after the
Apostles were taken out of the world, there went abroad some Apocryphal
Comments under their names, which being dissipated, began to be obtruded, if
not to be believed, yet to be disputed, and in process of time, gathered
strength under the arrogated title of Apostolical Tradition: Amongst the rest,
one Hermas, whom report makes to be Saint Paul's Scholar, and he only
averreth it as being dictated to him from the vision of an old woman, where the
relation is so weak and ridiculous, that it is beneath seriousness to repeat
it: Whereupon Chemnitius makes this Animadversion, Et haec lector been notet
quod: Purgatorium quando sub novo Testamento primum quasi de long emicare
caepit anile commentum ab anu personula profectum fuit. I shall not need to
English it. The like spurious stuff is Fathered on Saint James, and Saint
Andrew, to the former whereof, is imputed a Mass, wherein is contained prayer
for the Dead, and a namelesse Author, penning a book of the Acts of the
Apostles, mentions, that S. Andrew interceded for an old dead Man: And
Irenaeus writes that there were some Heretics in his time, who pouring Oil
and Water with some certain invocations, upon the head of the deceased, thought
thereby they mitigated their pains, if any were inflicted upon them, I should
be too prodigal of my time, in pursuing the series of the History, how Clemens
Alexandrinus and Origin were somewhat tainted with an opinion concerning
Purgatory, but so, that it was quite of a different nature from that which the
Romanists endeavor to propagate; For Origen's Purgatory admits no ease,
relaxation or redemption, by the prayers or works of the living, but that
every one expiateth for himself, and therefore indebted to none but themselves
for their releasement. And Clemens Alexandrinus affirms it very dubiously,
(if we may give credit to Chemnitius) who only says, Forsan cessabunt
supplicia post hanc vitam; So that at best his is but conjectural, and (it may
be) this in succeeding generations, was controverted in the Church, till the
Grecians seeing how apt such disputes were to conciliate secret approbation, in
a Council about the year 550. by public authority exploded it, so that never
after did the Eastern Churches receive it, until about the year 1430. Greece
being infested by the attempts of the Turks, in hopes to procure assistance.
Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople, endeavored to make up the breach
between them and the Latins: To which purpose at Ferrara and Florens Agents
met on both sides, to compose the difference, where the great Controversy
betwixt the Eastern and Western Churches, concerning The Procession of the
Holy Ghost, was fully discussed and desided, but their concurrence in this was
not satisfactory to the full; the Bishop of Rome presses strongly, that
amongst the rest of the Articles of Faith, there should be a subscription
likewise to Puratory, to the Supremacy of the Roman See, and to
Transubstantiation in the Eucharist: The Grecians reply, their Commission
extended no further than to treat with them, concerning the Procession of the
holy Ghost, and as for any other Questions newly stated, they could come to no
positive determination, without license from the Eastern Churches: If Greece
will withdraw her hand from subscribing, Rome is resolved to hold her hand in
furnishing them with Auxiliary supplies: At last necessity tyrannizing upon
Paleologus, they are forced to join with Rome, which accordingly was done in
the year, 1439. but scarce were 14. years expired, viz. in the year 1453.
when behold Mahumet Emperor of the Turks surprizeth Constantinople, and with a
puissant Army, invading the Grecian Territories, subdues all the Eastern Empire
to his Dominions, which sad and Tragical passage the Grecians interpreted as
the effects of a just judgment from Heaven upon them, persecuting them for
their base dissembled compliance with the Latins, and therefore broke off all
league and familiarity with them, and as formerly, so to this day constantly
and stoutly renounce and disclaim Purgatory, resolving rather to suffer slavery
under the Turks, where they enjoy their Religion, than submit themselves to the
unbounded, unlimited, usurped jurisdiction of the Roman Patriarch.

In sum, therefore (for I take no delight in Polemical Discourses) (...), Old
women's Fables, Apparitions, and Spectrums of the dead, consultation with, and
answers from Devilish and Heathenish Oracles, these at first created Purgatory
for Orthedox Divinity, which Rome must now stickle to uphold, especially since
the revenues coming in thereby warms her Bishops Kitchen, and if fame belies
him not, provides him his second Course. I am now sensible, that by reason of
the straitness of the time, I must necessarily retract my first resolutions
when I propounded to my self the method in handling this branch of holy Writ,
which was then to have alleged the Latin Fathers, where I find some
affirming Purgatory, others remaining Scepticks in their judgments, suspending
their Verdicts either Pro or Con, others again downright denying it: As for
citations of Councels, themselves have given me occasion enough to spare that
labor, not denying but that the four first General ones were ignorant of
Purgatory, neither was its doctrine ratified by any other ancient one till that
of Florence celebrated in the year 1439. where the Gracians reduced to
Exigencies were compelled to assent, though afterward they did Palinodiam
canere, repenting themselves of their cowardly Pacification, as has already
been spoken. If the Council of Trent be further alleged against us, the whole
world has had sufficient notice of those juglings, impostures and bribings of
suffrages used in their proceedings, we can therefore without much
astonishment, hear their Anathema's thundering against us, whilst we hear God
himself pronouncing, That if we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other
Gospel, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. But to what purpose should I fight a
duel with a Cloud, when by our learned Adversaries acknowledging the
difficulty of the Text, and the rehearsal of the variety of senses, whereof it
is capable; thus much is obtained, that the words have not in them such an
undeniable, unquestionable meaning, as to promote Purgatory, but that other
expositions may reasonably be inferred from them.

The second interpretation I meet with, be pleased to take with this short
Paraphrase; that Christ from the beginning being Head and Governor of the
Church, came in the days of Noah, not in Body, which then he had not, but in
Spirit, and preached by the mouth of Noah, for the space of 120. years, to the
disobedient, which would not repent, and therefore are now in Prison reserved
to the last judgment: Thus Beza.

Now I am the more willingly inclinable to embrace this exposition, because
(besides the agreeableness it has with the precedent and consequent verses)
S. Austin in his forementioned Epistle to Evodius renders it, if not in the
same words, yet in effect to the same sense: By the spirits in Prison he
conceived to be meant men that lived in the days of Noah, whose souls were in
their mortal bodies as in prisons, to which men Christ in his Spirit by Noah
preached, though nevertheless they would not believe: Bellarmine and Estius
acknowledge this to have been the opinion of Saint Aug. concerning these words
of Saint Peter, and that it concurreth very nigh with Beza's exposition.

This interpretation is embraced not only by Bid whom Bellarmine mentions here
in following Saint Aug: but also by Aquinas, and others, as Estius observes,
who also adds that Hesselius (a Romish Author) does understand the place
much after the same manner: And as Lorinus relates Diegus Paiva one who wrote
in defense of the Council of Trent does directly expouned the words as Beza
does, though he would not have it thought that Paiva received it from Beza.

But against this interpretation it may perhaps be objected, that the Spirit by
which Christ went and preached to the Spirits in Prison, is opposed to the
Flesh, and must therefore signify Christ's Soul, not his Divine Nature.

I answer, that Christ's Divine Nature is most fitly understood by the word
Spirit, even as by the word Flesh, is to be understood, not only his Body, but
his whole Humane Nature: in respect of which Nature, Christ was put to death,
and was quickened by his Divine Nature: Thus Oecumenius expounds it, (...),
(...); put to death in the Nature of the Flesh, that is, Humane Nature, and
raised again by the power of the Divine Nature, by which he went and preached,
etc.

And why should this Exposition seem strange, when as Flesh is put for Christ's
Humane Nature, and therefore on the other side, the word Spirit may denote his
Divine Nature? But again it may be objected, that Saint Peter says, Christ
[went] and preached, etc. Therefore it is meant of the Soul, not of his Divine
Nature, in which respect it cannot be said, but improperly, Christ [went] and
preached.

I answer, there is no necessity to take it properly in the words of Saint
Peter, more than in the words of Saint Paul, Ephesians. 2.17. When he says Christ
came and preached peace unto the Ephesians, which must be meant of Christ
coming and preaching by the Apostle, for otherwise he in his own person did
not preach unto them. And thus Estius notes it to be expounded by S. Ambrose,
the interlineary gloss, Aquinas, Lyra and Cajetan: it is objected again, that
by Spirits in Prison, cannot be understood Living Men, except Saint Peter
should on purpose speak improperly, and obscurely.

I answer, not Living Men, but the Souls of Men separated from their Bodies,
are termed Spirits in prison, as being in the Prison of Hell, when Peter wrote
of them, though they were not so, but were joined to their Bodies, and so both
Souls and Bodies joined together, were living men, when Christ preached unto
them by the mouth of Noah. For the (...), Spirits in Prison or Custody, [(...)]
signifying any kind of receptacle, Rev. 18.2. are those Souls of Men that lay
so sheathed, so useless and unprofitable in their Bodies, immersed so deep in
carnality, as not to perform any service to God, who inspired and placed them
there, and it is elsewhere a figurative speech, to express wicked men, who are
called Prisoners and in Prison, that is, (...); Isa. 42.7. and Isa. 49.9. and
bound in Prison, Isa. 61.1. to these Christ, that is, God eternal, who was
yesterday, and to day, and forever, (...) went and preached, in or by that
Spirit, not personally, but by Noah the Preacher of Righteousness, to the old
world, by whom he gave those treatable warnings, to them who made no use of the
light of Nature, premonishing them of that Deluge of wrath, which God was
preparing against impenitent and obdurate sinners. Taking this to be the true
and genuine meaning of the words, (for you will much assist my modesty, if you
please to call it satisfaction) there naturally arifeth this ensuing Corollary.
That

God, before he proceeds in judgment against a People, gives some signal
premonitions, to forewarne them of their intended ruin.

Christ here by his Spirit went and preached to the Old world, before he
brought upon them the Deluge, and inundation of waters: God is not in this case
like the Cannon, which first Executes, and then Reports, but he first makes the
Report, that afterward there may be no need of the Execution. God needed not
to have given these men any warning of his judgment, they gave him no warning
of their sin, no respit: Yet that he might approve his mercies to the very
wicked, he gives them one hundred and twenty years respite of repenting. How
loath is he to strike, who threats and treats so fruitlesly, so ineffectually?
Had he delighted in revenge, how easily, how justly might he have surprised
them unawares? whereas giving them warning, it was a sign he desired to be
prevented: The same Method does he observe toward Sodom, displaying his white
flag of Mercy, before he hung forth his black flagge of Defiance; just Lot
warns them like a Prophet, advises them as a Father: Nineveh had Jonah
dispatched to her, to stand Sentinel, yet within forty days, and Nineveh
shall be destroyed. Nor was Israel exempted, from being partaker of this royal
favor: God sent his Prophets to warn her to repentance, Judges 6.1. And he
sent them Prophets to bring them back again to the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 24.19. (...),
says Saint Chrysostom. He foretells what he will bring upon us, for this
end, that he may not bring it upon us, and warns before he strikes, to make
us careful to avoid the stroke: Peruse all the Prophets of God in former
days, employed for Israel's reducement, and we shall find Promises mixed with
threats, and still, Thus says the Lord, or, The word of the Lord came unto me,
is prefixed in the Frontespiece of all their Embassies. She had her sedulous
watchment standing upon the top of her Towers, striking up Alarums at the
approach of dangers. Nor does he only premonish by the voice of his word, but
his works likewise have oftentimes a language in them, calling upon men to
provide for their safety and security: Jerusalem may bear me witness in this
particular: The prodigious Earthquakes, the portentous Eclipse of the Sun, the
Comet like a flaming Sword hanging over the City, and continuing a year, the
great Light shining about the Altar, and the Temple, about nine a clock of the
night, upon the Feast of unleavened bread, the Meteors seen through all her
Regions; the apparation in the clouds, of Chariots and troops, of armed men
encompassing her walls, and many such things of the like nature, Eusebius calls
them, (...), and again, (...), Prodigies and Sermons of God himself,
manifestly fore-signifying the approaching desolation: Thus God discharges
these warning-pieces over our heads, before he gives fire to the
Murdering-pieces at our Hearts, and in brief, these three ensuing Reasons may
be given: 1. Ad benevolentiam indicandam. 2. Ad apologiam tollendam. 3. Ad
vindictam acuendam.


1. Ad benevolentiam indicandam, to declare his loving kindness to the Sons of
Men, God who is rich in Mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. and delights to be styled the God of
Mercies, Nehem. 9.31. and the Father of Merciet, 2 Cor. 1.3. abundantly
manifests his mercy in dealing thus graciously, in giving such timely notice
of his approaching judgment, and therefore is it he that does arripere ansam,
take all advantages as it were, and lay hold on all occasions to do good, but
to punish and take vengeance is opus alienum, as some expound that in Isa. 28.
His strange work, his strange act, an employment wherein he takes no delight:
As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. Hence
proceed those debatements, those rowlings and soundings of bowels, those
yearnings within him to show compassion, as if it were possible he could, he
would reconcile his Justice and Mercy, to be Just to the Sin, and yet be
Merciful to the Sinner: O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? O Judah how
shall I entreat thee? and why will yo dye O house of Israel? These are the
Expostulations God uses with men, whereby they may discern how they have
provoked an unwilling inflicter: Vengeance comes on heavily, and draws a sigh
from God, when he is necessitated to prepare his Rod, to unsheath his Sword,
to bend his Bow, and make ready his Quiver: Heu consolabor! Ah I must, I see
there is no remedy, ease me of mine Adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies.
Slow to anger, and loath to strike.

Quique dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox. But gracious and merciful, and of
great kindness, abundant in Truth, Joel 2.13. which is the first reason
assigned for our Doctrine.

2. Ad Apologiam tollendam, to cut off all manner of excuse, to elide all their
Apologies, to evacuate all the evasions which the wits of men are apt to frame
and contrive in their own behalf. If I had not come and spoke unto them
(says our Savior) they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for
their sin, John 15.22. Here is that which shall stop the mouths of all
profane men, that neither would Judgments drive them, nor Mercies draw them
to repentance. Whosoever hears the sound of the Trumpet, and takes no
warning, his blood shall be upon him: Ezekiel. 33.4. God demands, What could have
been done more? Isa. 5.
as if he would have been better to us, had we been better to our own selves.
Sed nos per nostrum, non patimur scelus
Iracundo Deum ponere fulmina.
Sinners standing out against all admonitions, weave the web of their own
ruin, and are the unhappy Artificers of their own destruction; Julian gave for
his Arms in his Escutcheon an Eagle struck through the heart, with a flight
Shaft feathered out of her own wings, with this Motto: -- Propriis configimur
alis. A perfect Emblem of depraved man. Our Death flies to us with our own
wings, and our own Feathers pierce us to the heart: Perditio tua ex te, O
Israel; thou have destroyed thy self, O Israel: we must say with Jerusaleus,
The Lord is righteous, but we have rebelled against him; which may serve as the
second Reason for confirmation of the Doctrine.

3. Ad vindictam acuendam, when these distributions of favors prevail nothing
but to encourage and harden men in their sins: it exasperates judgment, and
sharpens revenge against them. Laesa patientia fit furor, Love neglected,
turns into the most desperate Hatred, as the sweetest Wines make the tartest
Vinegar: The more bonds of Duty, the more Plagues for neglect: This was it
which aggravated Isreal's sin, that God had known her of all the Families of
the Earth, therefore he would surely punish her for all her iniquities, Amos
3.2. When wisdom had made her unsuccessefull addresses to the world, in the
first Chapter of the Proverbs, when her warnings were all slighted, her
invitations neglected, as if her eyes had flashed like Lightning, her voice
echoes and resounds like Thunder; Because I have called and ye refused, I have
stretched out mine hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my
Counsel, and would have none of my reproof, I will laugh at your calamity,
and mock when your fear comes; and to the end of the Chapter, she goes on
enraged with an holy fury; which things being premised; I shall give you one or
two inferences, with which I shall put a period to my present employment.

First, Gratitudinem suadet, It strongly obliges us to grateful returns of
Prayers, and Praises: God though he has put a cup of affliction into our
hands, yet is it sweetened with some ingredients of Mercy; though he has fed us
with bread of Adversity, and waters of Affliction, yet are not our teachers
removed into Corners, Isa. 30.20. we need not with Elie's Daughter, name
England, Ichabod, the Arc and glory of the Lord is not as yet, God be thanked,
taken away from us. Even amidst the neighing of Horses, and rattling of Armor,
amidst the sound of the Drums and Trumpets, still have we those who blow the
Trumpet in Sion, and sound an alarm upon Gods holy Mountain. Speak O Son!
whether in all thy travels from East to West, from one quarter of the Heaven,
even to the other, did thine eyes behold such an illightned Goshen, blessed
with the number of Gods Ambassadors, faithfully discharging their Ministerial
duties? let us therefore labor to live answerably and proportionably to this
Mercy, let us walk as becomes the Gospel. It is storied of Marcus Manlius,
having deserved well of the Roman state for defending the Capitol, afterward
upon occasion, fell into disfavour with the people, was adjudged to death;
however, their gratitude prompted them so far, as that they would not execute
him in any place, from whence they might discover any part of the Capitol: at
last in the Peteline Grove, from whence no Pinnacle of that Edifice could be
discerned, he was put to death; It is a wonder men can find any corner to
sin in, any place to let loose the reins to a licentious exorbitancy,
especially since which way soever men turn their eyes, they meet with some
signal objects of Divine favor, and should be engagements to stop and check
us in our full carriere of sinning: nay yet more, to take up the Prophets
Hallelujah; O enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts with
praise, be thankful unto him, and speak good of his name; For the Lord is
gracious, etc.

Lastly, (though many more might have been added) excitet industriam, let these
premonitions have what they chiefly call for, and that is our amendment and
reformation, Discite justitiam moniti non temnere divos. Sure I am, every one
of us, have had our hands in pulling down judgments, we are therefore deeply
concerned to prevent them for the future: From the highest to the lowest, we
have contributed our Talent, and cast in our Oil to increase the flames: Let
us at last after so many warnings shot off from Heaven, bring our buckets to
extinguish them. To what purpose think you is it that God all this while has
not stopped the mouths of his Harbingers, nor yet cancelled their Commission?
These Olive-branches in their Mouths, are real invitations to reconciliation:
We woo, and we woo, we entreat, and we threat, and all (...), and will
neither move or conquer us?

I believe there is none such a stranger in our Israel, but knows how it
fares with us, and that the time is come, that God arise and have Mercy upon
us, yea the time is come: For why her Servants think upon her stones, and it
pittieth them to see her lying in the Dust.

That which remains for us to perform, is, that we entreat Almighty God,
that being taught by his Word, and admonished by his Rod, and humbled under his
correcting hand, we should fly to his Mercy, acknowledge his Justice, implore
his Favor, for the pardon of our Sins, for the amendment of our Lives, and
for the Salvation of our Souls, and all for the merits and mediation of Jesus
Christ the Righteous: To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all
Honor and Glory, Praise, Power, Might, Majesty, Dignity and Dominion ascribed.
Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

