AN ANSWER TO A LIBELL ENTITLED, A COOL CONFERENCE Between the cleared
REFORMATION AND THE APOLOGETICALL NARRATION, Brought together by a Wel-willer
to both; Wherein are clearly refuted what ever he brings against the
Reformation cleared, most humbly submitted to the judgment of the Honorable
Houses of Parliament, the most Learned and Reverend Divines of the Assembly,
and all the Reformed Churches.

By ADAM STEVART.

Amb. lib. 5. de Fide. Si taceamus consentire videbimur; si contendamus
verendum ne carnales judicemur.

Imprinted at London, 1644.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader; I pray thee excuse some of the most material faults, fallen
out, partly by my absence, partly by an accident that befell the Copy, and to
correct them as follows.

PAge 3. line 8. read neither should he have feared a suppression of his book,
p. 10. l. 11. dele all that parenthesis, ibid. p. l. 20. dele because, p. 11.
l. 9. read and those who interesse. p. 16. l. 24. for but so, r. and so, p. 19.
l. 26. r. for it was, 1. it was, p. 22. d. men, p. 25. l. 3. r. Answ. 1. ib. p.
l. 5. for how, r. 2. How, ibid. p. l. 8. after the word Communion add all that
follows.

3. Either this Wel-willer pretends to play the Naturalist or the Divine: If
the Naturalist, he knows not well the nature of the Northerly wind, for
ordinarily it brings not black, but fair weather, and scatters the
clouds, as he might learn of all Naturalists, ab Aqualone aurum, from the
North comes gold, i.e. golden or fair weather, Job 37.22. The North wind
drives away rain, Prove. 25.23. If he play the Divine, and allude to Scripture,
I must say to him as Christ said to the Jews, Ye err, not understanding the
Scriptures; for there it signifies either the Spirit of Christ, as in Salomons
Song. And then he must pray with the Church, A wake O Northwinde, and come thou
South, blow upon my garden that the spices thereof may flow out, Cant. 4.16. Or
Gods people who were Northern in respect of the Philistines, who were their
enemies; so we must be Gods people, and the Independenters (whom this
Wel-willer opposes to the North) their enemies; or the Babylonians who were
septentrionall, or Northward, in respect of Gods people, Esaias 41.25. and so he
esteems us to be Gods enemies; if so, how hold they us for one of the most
pure Churches? but what ever it signify, it can never signify the Church of
Scotland, but in a very good sense. Page 27. d. us, p. 28. for Heb. panegr. r.
as (...) of Scripture, Heb. 12.23. l. ult. for (...) r. (...). p. 29. l. 8. for
vomit r. ye vomit, p. 29. l. 30. d. of my self, p. 43. l. 27. for two read
five, p. 35. l. 29. after the word narration, add all this that follows.

Only I pray the Reader to consider these men's craft in going about to sow the
seeds of division betwixt the civil Magistrate and the orthodox Churches, in
making the world to believe that they grant him more then the maxims of
Presbyteriall Government will suffer them to do. For, 1. They tell not wherein:
2. Whether this power be Ecclesiastical or Civil, as for the Ecclesiastical
they cannot give it: 1. It being only a Ministerial power to serve, and not
Magisteriall to dominiere with, or to be given away by proxy, to whom they
please. 2. If they give the Magistrate any power, what can it be? is it to
preach, to teach, the power of the Keys to Excommunicate, or to attend upon
the sick and poor people? and as for the civil it is not theirs, but His
Majesty's and the Magistrates, as is the constant tenet of all the Orthodox
Churches, who hold the Civil power incompatible with that of a Pastor or
Doctor of the Church.

3. If they grant the Magistrate more power then our Churches, how is it that
they acknowledge the Kings Patent in New England for nothing else but in
matters of State or Civil Government, and Gods word only in Church Government?

4. He and they also hold the same rule in Old-England, and therefore I pray
all men only to consider if this be not rather a gulling of the Civil
Magistrate, then a proof of what they say.

5. I wish him to answer whether New England depend of Old-England, and whether
they think the King and Parliament have power to change Religion and Church
Government there?

6. Whether they both have power to do the same here against Gods word?

7. Whether the Parliament have done well or not in calling of this Assembly of
Divines, to judge of matters of Religion? As for us, the constant opinion of
all our Churches is, that all Civil power belongs only to the Civil
Magistrate, and none at all to the Church. 2. That the Civil Magistrate has
an extrinsecall executive power about Religion to maintain and reform it, in
case of corruption, and that according to the presidents in Scripture; Neither
did ever any good Christian Prince assume any more to himself.

Neither does it any way lessen his power, that it is only extrinsecall; for to
be intrinsecall or extrinsecall signifies not any quantity of greater or
lesser power, but only the manner thereof; for an extrinsecall power and
influence, may be greater then an intrinsecall as appears in that of the
efficient and Material cause, for the first is only active, and yet
extrinsecall; but the second merely passive without any action or efficacy at
all and yet intrinsecall.

PErlegi tractatum hunc, in quo nihil reperio quo minus cum utilitate publica
imprimatur.

IA. CRANFORD.

BEfore I begin the Refutation of this Pamphlet, it shall not be amiss, that
I apologize for my self, for refuting a Book already sufficiently refuted of
it self, and by that very same Book, whereof it intends the refutation: I
will therefore here declare unto the Christian Reader how I came to undertake
it; how unwilling I was to do it; upon what reasons I was moved thereunto. The
truth therefore is thus: That some days after the publication of this book, I
happened to fall in company with some men of quality that were reading of it, and
after the perusal thereof, it was the joint wish of them all that some answer
were drawn up unto it. A few days after that, I chanced to re-encounter with
some of the same company, and some others very well affected to Reformation,
who after sundry discourses fell upon the same Theme again, some of them
saying that it would do well that the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland
would answer it. Where some of them desiring me to deliver my opinion, I
replied several times (as occasion required) in substance that which
follows; That it might seem strange to others if men of such gravity and
learning, and much more of so eminent place and employment, representing the
whole National Church of the Kingdom of Scotland, should stoop to answer
every idle Anonymus Pamphleter, peradventure some Anabaptist, peradventure some
Don^a Catherina (it may be of purpose) put upon the Stage, to make them
ridiculous, if they should acknowledge such inconsiderable persons as a
considerable party. Besides this I told them, that I thought the Author of the
Book was a man very ill-bred, and imprudent, and that for many reasons; and
among the rest, First, because he being (as it seems) but a private man, he
will needs be begging of a quarrel with the Scotch Commissioners, who never
offended him, nor (for any thing that appears) knew not whether he was
inverum natura, or not. Secondly, and if he pretend that they offended some of
his Sect, viz. the five Authors of the Apologeticall Narration; then seems he
yet unwiser then I took him to be, esteeming so highly of himself, as if he
were abler to answer for them, then they for themselves: so judge not wise men,
much less this wise Parliament, for then happily it had made choice of him to
have been a Member of the Assembly, which yet it did not. Thirdly, they are of
age, very able men according to all wise men's judgment, and therefore it
seems more fit that they answer for themselves; and so much rather, because
neither they depend of him, nor he of them, nor any of them one from another;
or all, or any of them, from any superior Ecclesiastical power; but every one
of them stands for himself. And finally, if they had offended those five
venerable persons, or their Sect, in apologizing for the Government of all the
Orthodox Churches, and namely that of Scotland, whereof they be Commissioners,
(howsoever no offense appears) 1. yet offended they them not in particular:
2. Neither took they them directly for parties: 3. Or their Apologeticall
Narration formally to refute, no more then they five took the four
Commissioners for their formal party, or the Discipline of the Orthodox
Churches, or that of Scotland formally to refute. If this Anonymus Divine had
imitated the prudence of either of them, he would have appeared wiser then now
he does; neither should his Book needed to have been suppressed (as it is) in
nature of an infamous Libell. Hereupon I was desired to set upon the work my
self: Whereunto I answered, that hardly could I do it, not knowing who was
the Author of it, or of what Sect or Sex he might be. They taking this my
answer for a merriment, which I gave them in good earnest, replied, That it
could not be a woman, fince the Independents permit not them to write Books:
but this satisfied not at all: for howsoever the Quinqu' Ecclesian Ministers
admit them not to judge of controversies in Doctrine, or in Ecclesiastical
censures, yet is it but a particular opinion of those five, and of some others;
and however they admit them not to such acts, yet may it be doubted whether
they permit them not to write Books of Divinity. Afterward they would
willingly have persuaded me that it was no Anabaptist, since he was an
Independent, and disclaimed them, and spoke contemptuously of them: But that
proved no more satisfactory then the rest: 1. For howsoever all Independenters
be not Anabaptists, yet all Anabaptists, all Sectaries, and Heretics at this
present about London, pretend to be Independents. 2. That the Anabaptists here
in London for the most part agree with them in all things, save only in
delaying of Baptism till the time that the parties to be baptized be of age
sufficient to give an account of their faith; and in re-baptizing such as are
baptized in all other Churches, save those of their own Sect, as I have heard
of themselves. 3. Sundry of the Independents also hold them for very good men,
as they declare to the people in their Sermons, what ever they write to the
contrary. 4. Many of them also hold the Anabaptist error very tolerable, which
is (it may be) the cause that so many daily fall away from Independency to
Anabaptisme; and that not without just cause: for if the Independents stand to
their own principles, and hold no men to be Members of Christ's Church, or
visible Christians, till they be able to give account of their faith, and of
the motions of grace that they feel within themselves, what need they to
Christen those that are not visible Christians? Wherefore delay they not
Baptism as the Anabaptists? and that so much the more, since they refuse it to
some of the children of those of their own Sect. However they esteem their
parents to be very godly, and that only because they were not churched, or
received into Church Covenant with them before their death. Some other reasons
were alleged, which here I omit. To be short, I was entreated again to
answer the Book, which I promised to do, if the Author could be discovered;
whereupon they did what they could, so did I also, but could not certainly
discover him. In fine, I suffered my self for some particular reasons to be
persuaded by them. Only before I enter the lists with him, since the Author
will needs march under a veyle, and conceal himself, I shall pray the
Christian Reader and him both to excuse me, if without any respect to his
person, I refute his Book as it deserves.

Whatever he be, for fear lest good men be deceived under pretext of his
pretended piety, with so many of his Abs, and dear Brethren, I pray them to
observe in him, or at least in his Book, his great weakness, yea (if I may by
his permission say it) his great wickedness in these points following. 1. He
would make the world believe, that the Scots Commissioners acknowledge some
defects and errors in their Discipline, p. 1. which against the known light of
their conscience they will not reform. 2. He falsifieth the Covenant, in
adding some words to it, which corrupt the sense, p. 1.3. And that to extenuate
his perjurie inferres, clearing and expressing those equivocations and mental
reservations which before he concealed, p. 4. he denies that the Synod gave
any thanks to the Scots Commissioners for their Reply to the Apologetical
Narration, or rather for the cleared Reformation, p. 3. which I submit to the
Synods judgment, whether there be not an Act of theirs to the contrary of what
he says in this point. He will persuade the Reader, that the Synod only voyced
them thanks for a two penny Book which they gave them, as if that grave
Assembly had nothing else to do.

I might note many more untruths; if he had had any prudence he might have
learned the contrary either in the City, or at Westminster Hal: but the
Scripture must be true, The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of them,
Ecclesiast. 10.15.
because he knows not how to go to the City. Prove. 12.13.
The wicked is snared by the transgression of his mouth. And this I pray the
Reader to examine, and not to suffer himself to be misseled by any prejudicate
opinion of his apparent piety, his smooth style with his sweet Brethren, but
to examine all things, and to retain what is good, and to consider, that a man
so bold and adventrous, as to propound in face of this most honorable and wise
Parliament, the venerable Assembly of so godly and learned Divines, and of all
the world, so many, so palpable untruths, must needs be very passionate for
those opinions, which with so blind a zeal, and so little care of his credit
he maintains here, and may be no less passionate in other things then in
this. As for the reasons and motives inducing me to refute this Libell, they
were not any stuff the Book contained, or the least fear I had that it could
work upon any rational man; nor set I upon it with purpose to offend any man,
no not the five Independent Members of the Synod; yea, nor so much as the
Author of this Libell, (who has so highly offended all the best Reformed
Churches) for never any one of them offended me; neither is it their Act,
neither believe I that they had any hand in it; or if they had any, they avow
it not. And as for the Author, I can not offend him wittingly, since I know him
not, and this I hope would excuse very much the offense, if any should be: nor
indeed ought he to take offense at this Answer, since he dare not own the
Book. Now if he be either a wise man, or any ways gracious, I suppose he
ought rather to thank me for such an ingenuous reproving of his wicked
calumnies against the whole body of the Reformed Churches; for, A reproof
(says the Wiseman) enters more into a wise man, then an hundred stripes into
a fool. Besides, as I conceive, it is an act of love: for as a Father says,
Aust. Epist. ad Mate.
Magis amat objurgator sanans, quam adulator dissimulans. Neither can such
indignities well be endured by any man, that knows how handsomely to cast
them off, especially when they are published in Print, and that because of the
imminent danger thereby of infecting the weaker sort of people, not only that
now are, but also of the posterity to come. For, as says the Roman
Philosopher: Vitia transmittis ad posteres, Sen. de Morib.
qui prasentibus culpis parcit. But if he should be so fond as to think that
he has done well in what he has done, yet shall this Answer have some effect
upon him: for as Gregory says well, Greg in Past.
Protervos tunc melius corrigimus, cum aequae been egisse credunt, male acta
monstramus, ut unde adepta gloria creditur, inde utilis confessio sequatur.

As for me I can truly say, my principal aim and motive was Gods honor, the
vindication of the Protestant Churches, and especially that of Scotland from
this man's vilde aspersions, and to give contentment to good people, who I am
afraid may have beeno deceived with the glorious pretext of this man's piety;
and particularly, that I might comply with the desires of those my worthy
friends that moved me hereunto. And so come I to the Title of the Book, which
is,

A cool Conference between the cleared Reformation and the Apologeticall
Narration, braught together by a well willer to both.

Here it is to be observed, 1. That this Book carries with it no Approbation
by those who are ordained by the Parliament to license the printing of any
Books: From whence it may be inferred, that in so contemning their Laws and
Ordinances, and afterward in maintaining, that Independents (of whom he
pretends to be one) give more to the Civil Magistrate, then the principles
of Presbyterian Government permit them to do; that this is done, and that said
in derision of them both, and by a man no wise minded to practice what he
says or professes, by some Nostro damus of whom it is said,

Nostro damus cum verba damus quia fallere nostrum;
Et cum verba damus, nil nisi nostr a damus.
Or rather done as the Soldiers did to Christ, who bowed the knee to him,
saying, Hail King of the Jews, and mocked him, and spit upon him. He gives
them much Paper-honour with much real disgrace, and will live as Independent
upon all Civil as all Ecclesiastical authority.

2. It is to be observed, as I said before, that the Author takes no proper
name to himself, but only is described by a common name, which is more
ordinary among beasts then men. For as men's individual Natures and Persons are
signified by proper Names, so are all beasts ordinarily represented by names
common to the whole Species, if you except a few tame beasts: so here there is
no individuum signatum for to own this Pamphlet, which makes some judicious
men to think, that he found himself conscious of what I have said, or am to
say; and therefore went cunningly to work in not owning it, for fear of some
castigation in stead of confutation.

3. That this Authors common Name here is a Goodwiller to both, whereupon at
first, before that I had read over the Book, I wondered much what sort of
creature this could be, what Hybrida and Amphisbaena in matter of Religion,
bred of so opposite Species, having its heads in so opposite parts, carried by
so contrary motions, toward so contrary ends, viz. of Dependency and
Independency. But afterward in running it over I found no such thing
answerable to the Frontispiece, neither in matter nor in manner. For it ye
consider the first, it is nothing else but an intended justification (howsoever
with little success) of the Apologeticall Narration, and a senseless
arraignment of the Reformation cleared: If the second likewise, his
expressions, which be evermore we, us, our, etc. testify most evidently, that
he is a formal party. Truly he wills the Commissioners so little, and his
Quinqu 'Ecclesian Ministers so much good in this cause, that he would make the
world believe that the one party says all, and the other nothing at all. But
what ever good ye will them, pardon us if we give you no credit till they be
brought together, and it be seen what each of them can say for themselves. In
the mean time I pray the Reader to take notice how this man in the evry
threshold furnishes us with so evident an argument of his weakness, in that,
intending a disguisement, he had no better contrivance, then by his own pen
so shamefully to bewray himself. Alas poor man, that professing here so much
truth and honesty, thou should thus foully betray thy self to be neither
true nor honest. He ends his Book in an extraordinary way, with an etc.
intimating something of the Book behind, and afterward Finis, assuring us of
nothing behind; as if his only aim were to contradict himself, and so to
try our patience, and his own parties credulity, how far the contrary party
will permit, or his own admit such palpable untruths, both in the beginning,
and in the end of his Book. Ecclesiast. 10.32. The word of a fool will swallow
himself: The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness, and the end
of his talk is mischievous madness. O what a shame in this Prophet that
professes such piety, that the lying spirit should so prevail in his mouth!
1 Reg. 22.22. If it please the courteous Reader to go along with me in the
Examen of it, he shall find him no better in the midst, so he shall have him
(by Gods grace) completely like to himself in Principio, Medio, and Fine.

5. The Title or Inscription of his Book is A cool Conference. The Author
might have said, A very hot and cool Conference, for it is so hot for the one
party, that ye may esteem it a burning coal, or fire of zeal for it,
howsoever without knowledge: igneus est illi vigor and terrestris origo. But
for the other it is so cool, yea so cold in its behalf, that he may be judged
to be ex frigidis and maleficiatis, or this his discourse to be dropped from
Diacaldius, Driswerus, Nosedropensis, who wrote de frigidis meteor is Nive;
Glacie and Grandine. Neither can it ascend to the supreme Region of the Air,
or produce any effect upon great spirits.

Nec faciles motus men's generosacapit. If it work at all, it must be in the
lowest Region thereof, and upon very weak brains, who will not hearken unto
the truth. But not to insist upon the Title of the Book, I come to the Book
it self.

In the first page, because the Scotch Commissioners say, We are neither so
ignorant, nor so arrogant, as to ascribe to the Church of Scotland such
absolute puruy and perfection, as has not need, or cannot admit of further
Reformation.

Ans. I am assured, that there is no man that professes Christianity that can
find fault with this humble and most modest expression; and yet this
well-willing Pamphleter sets himself to jeere at it, as a golden peace
signifying-speech, as if dropped from the mouth of some Chrysostom, or
conceived by some Ireneus. But it is no new thing that men of golden, and
peaceable spirits, such as Chrysostom and Ireneus, should meet with enemies,
such as theirs were: for Chrysostom had adversaries who had ferreum os, aeneam
frontem, plumbeum cerebrum; and Ireneus had his, who were every whit as busily
cudere (...), as he could be cudere (...).

2. Upon this he groundeth a latitude of Religion, as I believe, greater then
that of Noah's Arc, to receive all sorts of clean and unclean beasts: but we
desire to know of what latitude he would have it; if it shall receive
Brownists, Anabaptists, and the Independenters of New England, who interesse
all the people, yea women too to judge in matters of Religion, and in all
Ecclesiastical Censures whatsoever.

3. Under condition of his latitude of Noah's Arc, or rather of the Regions of
the world, he assures us of their Good will acccording to the Covenant,
wherein they swear to endeavor the preservation of the reformed Religion in
Scotland, in Doctrine Worship, Discipline and Government, against our common
enemies; the Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland,
in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the Word of God,
and the example of the best reformed Churches; And shall endeavor to bring the
Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and
uniformity in Religion, Confession of faith, and form of Church Government.

But here we see no latitude nor condition.

But the Pamphleter to show his wit and skill, and how cunningly he can draw
the guilt of perjury upon himself, has recourse to a Gloss of Orleans, and
some mental reservations, whereby he strangely tortureth the Covenant against
the Text. He tells us that the Covenant only says, the Reformed Religion
in Scotland, that is, or shall be; and till further Reformation we will
preserve it against our common enemy. But never a word in the Covenant of the
Reformation of the Religion in Scotland, that is or shall be; and till further
Reformation. This is an addition to the Text, yea a mere falsification of the
Covenant. The Covenant speaks only of an endeavor of the reformation of
Religion in England and Ireland, according to the word of God, and the example
of the best Reformed Churches, whereof it presupposes that of Scotland to be
one, 1. since it swears to preserve it; Neither could the Covenanters swear
to preserve it, if they thought it to be deformed, for that were to swear to
maintain deformity in Religion, etc. 2. And this may further be confirmed, for
endeavor is finis intenti sed non adepti; of a thing intended, that as yet is
not existent, but to exist; but preservation is of a thing already existent,
and supposed to be. 3. Because it is so expounded in the thanksgiving of the
Assembly to the Scots Commissioners for their Book. Neither for all this
believe we that the Reformed Churches, and namely that of Scotland cannot
err, as the Romanists attribute unto their Church: But the question is only
whether or no they do err, and wherein? if in that, that they will not
receive the Independent Anarchie, and Papalitie into every particular
Congregation, in permitting their particular Consistory compounded of one
Minister, and two or three ruling Elders, to judge so many hundreds of persons,
who will not suffer themselves to be judged by any, yea not by the whole
Christian world: If in this, or any other thing they err, they profess
themselves ready to be informed, and afterward reformed. But because they are
fallible, and may err, to conclude therefore that in every thing wherein they
differ from Independenters, Brownists, Anabaptists, etc. they do err, and so
to quit their Religion, they are not such fools; for by the same reason we
might as well conclude our Brethren should quit their Tenets, and come to us.

P. 2. Apol. Ah dear Brethren: Here he calls us dear, and sweet Brethren:
but this Doctor had need of a Doctor, for his palate is so feverish and
vitiated, that he relishes bitterness in the sweet expressions of those whom
he calls sweet Brethren; and his conceptions are so far disordered, that he
applies to the Apologists what the Reformation cleared says of ignorant and
ill-informed people only; and does not apply that, which justly he might have
applied to them in the following words, viz. the misrepresentations and
indirect aspersions of others, who do so commend, etc. and this distinction
appears clearly by those particles (mistakings of some, and
mis-representations of others.

This well-willer tells us, that wise men are silently intentive, expecting
disputed positions from the Assembly.

Ans. And why not ye also, since in the last disputed Position ye carried away
so great glory. If good Cato say true, Virtutem primam esse puta compescere
linguam, truly ye had the chief of all virtues, and that in a most high
degree, yea in gradu heroico, for ye troubled the Assembly very little with any
Reply to what they answered you. But will ye, our Well-willer, either give us,
or let us give you some positions upon this Subject, that we may receive of you
some edification in particular at least, if we cannot have it in public. Here
I offer you a man to discuss whatsoever positions you please, in all points,
wherein ye dissent from all Protestant and Christian Churches. And since you
put us in mind of it, let me tell you, some have been very desirous to have
had some access to some of your Ministers, to the end they might have received
some edification of them, and have known their opinions, but found them
evermore inaccessible; so desirous were they, it should seem, to hide their
opinions. As for your Prodromus, which ye say has not deserved to be whipped, if
the Parliament permit any of the Assembly differing one from another in
opinion, to present their judgments with their reasons unto the Houses, you
cannot judge it a crime, etc.

Answ. This is already answered by the Author of the Observations and
Annotations upon the Apologeticall Narration. 2. This Proposition is
conditional, and whoever has the least tincture in Logic, knows, that
conditionalis propositio nil ponit in re, nisi posita condition. 3. And if the
Parliament permit it not in this your foolish fashion, what will you say? 4.
What if very wise Parliament men already say, that if in the General Counsels
every one that differed in opinion one from another, had written books one
against another, they should rather have been held for Counsels of fools then
of wise men. 5. And if it be so, (as you say,) wherefore I pray should not the
Scotch Commissioners have written against your Apologeticall Narration; since
they differed in opinion from the Apologists, and so much the rather, being
that they were calumniated by them.

He complains also of their bitterness; And I on the other side wonder at
their patience and meekness, that they have so little gall against Innovators,
calumniating the government of all Protestant, yea of all Christian Churches,
except their own Conventicles, as destitute of the power of godliness, and as
Papists, and Lutherans, defaming them with nicknames, as Calvinians, etc.

P. 3. He asks the Authors of the Reformation cleared, if they think that the
Elders of the quinque Ecclesiae be dark?

Answ. Who these Elders of the quinque Ecclesiae can be, I know not: I have
read in the Revelation of the Angels of 7 Ecclesiae; in the Council of Trent,
de Dudithio Episcopo Quinqu' Ecclesiensi, and of a Town in Hungaria named
Quinque Ecclesiae, at this present under Mahomet, and by the Turks named
Porsheu, and by the Germans Funskirchen; but of any Protestant Quinq' Ecclesian
Elders, I never heard or read of before this: Neither know I what he can mean
by them, but the five independent Ministers of the Assembly, whom hitherto I
never heard designed by such a name or title; and if these be they, I answer,
that the Commissioners say not that they are dark, but those who in the dark
are afraid of that which they know not. Now light may be in darkness; Neither
can he apply this to these Presbyters or to himself, unless he find in
himself there be conscia men's.

The Commissioners add (for explication of themselves) and suffer their
affections to run before their understanding.

The Well-willer replieth: Are we not moral men (voluntas vult, ut intellectus
intelligit) to understand first, and affect after.

Answ. Master Well-willer, if your affections may be judged of by your actions,
certainly they are so independent, that they will not be tied, according to the
rules of Philosophy, to depend upon the understanding, (...) understand first,
and to affect after: and we can tell you, S(...) from Scripture, that if a man
be not a very gracious (I say not a moral) man, he will readily understand as
he affects, rather then affect as he understands.

2. That maxim of Philosophy strikes not at all at the Commissioners
expression: they say that their affections run before their understanding, and
not that their will runs before their understanding: Now will and affection be
two things; the one in the Reasonable soul, the other in the Appetite; unless
with the old Philosophers, as Aristotler elateth of them, l. 3 de Anima, cap.
3. tex. 150.
ye will confound mente^ cu^ sensu, and consequently voluntatem cu^ appetitu,
and so make man's soul mortal, as the late Author of the Mortality of the Soul.

2. Or if ye take the affection in a more large, but less proper
signification, as it signifies also the inclinations and movements of the
will, then they understand not thereby the consulted, deliberated, and advised,
but the rash inconsiderate, precipitate, and indeliberate actions of the will,
otherwise called the first movements of the will motus primo primi, qui omne
judicium rationis antevertunt, which attend not, but prevent the judgment of
reason. i. e. the deliberation and examen of the understanding; And in these
movements it is certain that the affection goes before the understanding; for
in such movements the sensitive appetite which is led by the sense, misleadeth
the understanding; not formally, but objective, in so far forth as drawing with
it the fancy or imagination, whose phantasmata or images determine the
understanding in its judgment, and it being so determined, suddenly without
any moral deliberation determines the will; but so the will is said to affect
without judgment, i. e. without that deliberative judgment, which is
necessary to your moral man, or rather to the moral actions of his will: and
in this sense the Poet said, Scilicet insano nemo in amore videt. Boethius the
Martyr: Quis leges det amantibus? major lex amor est sibi. And Seneca: Quod
ratio poscit, vincit; at regnat furor, Potensque tota mente dominatur Deus. So
Aristotle: Qualis quisque est, talis ei finis esse videtur, neque eadem
videntur amantibus and ^dio habentibus. So should you have taken this judicious
expression of the Commissioners. 3. Item, the will in actionibus suis
imperatis, whereof some be acts of the understanding, must go before the
understanding; for the understanding must command, before that the
understanding can obey. 4. The Actions of the understanding, that are not
involuntary, but voluntary, or willing, must follow the will, for voluntarium
belongs first to the will, and by the will to the other faculties. 5.
Original sin also, ill habitudes, customs, and violent passions, hinder the
will from following the understanding, and make it some times to miscarry
against the light of the understanding. 6. Albeit the will in its movements
presupposes necessarily some judgment of the understanding, yet this judgment
necessarily presupposed, moves it not necessarily, for it may be as well moved
and directed by another judgment, (that moves it not) to the contrary action,
whereunto it is not moved or directed, as it is this or that judgment, that
actually moves and directs it to this, or that action in effect. 7. And if
you believe that the understanding moves the will necessarily, then in our
Regeneration it should suffice, that the understanding alone should be renewed,
for it should necessarily draw the will after it, which cannot be, since
Scripture inculcateth no less the renovation of the will, o^ Heart, than that
of the understanding. 8. A man's Regeneration should consist in Faith alone,
without Charity which likewise cannot hold; for howsoever a man be justified by
Faith alone, without Charity, yet is he not regenerated by Faith alone, without
Charity. 9. A man being endowed with intellectual habitudes, should not stand
in need of Moral virtues to perfect the Will; but to be, as you call it, a
moral, or rather a good man morally, it should suffice to be prudent; and so
moral virtues should have their seat in the understanding, and be nothing
else but Sciences, opinions, or prudences, which was the opinion of Socrates,
universally blamed by all Philosophers. 10. And finally, howsoever the Will is
evermore ruled by some judgment, yet that final judgment, that rules it, or
that judicium ultimum, and practice practicum, that rules humane actions,
depends of the Will, as the Philosophers and Schoolmen both hold. And so
much touching this quarrel, which you here begged with your vain Philosophy,
so much condemned by S. Paul.

P. 3. 1. Wherein, say you, has appeared this preposterousnesse toward you,
whiles the Apology smiles upon you, and sweetly calls you and Holland by
name the more reformed Churches? Do you give them one such a kind word in all
your Reply?

Answ. Here it seems, that this Well-willer would paction with the
Commissioners for an interchange of Commendations: but they have already
answered, that they cannot praise you, but so far forth as truth will suffer
them, p. 2.. 2. Neither do they deny, but the Reformed Churches Discipline may
have need of reformation, as their faith, that is still growing from faith to
faith; but from thence it follows no more, that it is erroneous, then that
their faith is so. And here it is to be noted, how closely this original sin
in arguing evermore a Posse ad Esse, sticks to this as to all other
Independenters bones. Let him show, wherein either the Scots, or other Orthodox
Churches need Reformation: Let him prove, that their Government is but a
contrived Episcopacie; that it is such as makes all Reformed Churches unworthy
of Independenters communion; that their own Churches are endowed with such a
Seraphicall perfection, and ours so corrupt, that they dare no more communicate
with us, then the Pharisees thought they could do with the people: item, that
there is no subordination in Ecclesiastical Judicatories; That men are not
Church members, before they be admitted by a Church Covenant distinct from the
Covenant of Grace. If that he can do this, it will be more to the purpose then
all these ridiculous exclamations and complaints: We desire arguments, and no
compliments.

P. 3. S. 2. Not to make, etc. This is very dangerous, and may breed, if it
have not already, as many Sects of Epheticts, Scepticts, Aporeticts, and
Pyrrhoniens amongst you, as were in former times amongst the Philosophers, no
less destructive of all faith and settled Ecclesiastical laws, then theirs
were of all Sciences; and therefore both so justly branded by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.7.

There is one thing more, that makes the Apologists more confident of their
candor, in that their Apology received so great an Approbation from so pious
and learned a man, etc.

Answ. How confident the Commissioners may be of their candor, and ye should be
of yours, it were better to hear it of the Assembly then of you, since it is
more to be believed in this cause, then ye in judging of your selves. And as
for that Approbation, it was but from one man. 2. It was not approved by the
whole Assembly, as was that of the Reformation cleared, which was approved by
that same very learned man also. 3. And he by that very approbation did
solemnly condemn your Apologeticall Narration. 4. Neither approved he the
substance, but some circumstances of your Apology, viz. its modesty, etc.
wherein he might be very easily deceived. Item, your Communicablenesse, hoping
better of you than appearingly he will find; and compatiblenesse with
Magistracy, which hitherto is not fully proved. 5. Whether he approved all that
ye presented to him at first in your Book, your selves know best: if not, we
have not as yet your opinion, till according to exigence of time, etc. you give
the world a second edition of it, and then ye may tell us news of your candor.
6. Neither could he judge of your candor, since he could no way judge of your
heart, and consequently whether your writ was consona^t to your words, and your
words to your heart. Besides all this, in that Approbation he declares his
aversion from yours, and inclination toward the Presbyterian Government: So as
this man's brain seems of a very strange temper, in citing for him, that,
which is so directly against him.

As on the other side, though the Assembly voted you thanks, yet was it only
for the Books you gave them not for the Reply, as it was expressed (to that
effect) in the Vote, if observation fail not.

Answ. This cannot but be most untrue: 1. for the Assembly voted them no
thanks for the books, till all the Members thereof had read and considered the
same, and were extremely well satisfied with the contents thereof. 2. He would
make this grave Assembly very ridiculous, (to say no more) if it had nothing
else to do, but to employ so much time in voting thanks for so small a
matter, viz. for a two-penny book. 3. If it be so, wherefore voted it not
thanks for the Apologeticall Narration, which was a great deal bigger, and
sold 6d? 4. Here according to your judgment, it cannot escape the blame of
great ingratitude toward the Apologizers, whereof ye will do well to
admonish it. 5. For fear your observation fail you, I pray you look the Act,
and afterward you cannot (if you have any candor) but in imitation of S.
Austin disabuse the world by some book of Retractations, which here you abuse
by this your false observation.

And thus far I came with my reasons grounded upon some general, but very
certain relations, concerning the Assemblies speech, in giving thanks to the
Commissioners of the Church of Scotland for their Reply to the Apologeticall
Narration: but since this my Book has been ended, upon more particular
information I add these following reasons. 8. The Assembly in thanking them
for it calls it a very learned and pious piece, which is not a praise of two
sheets of paper and a little ink; but also of the matter it contains. 9. It
was there said, that it is very useful for this time, when the Assembly has
vowed and covenanted to come as near as they can, in the Government of this
Church unto that of other Reformed Churches, and namely of that of Scotland,
taking evermore Gods Word for their first pattern and infallible rule of
direction. 10. They are thanked for it, because it refuteth some unworthy
aspersions, that some have fastened upon the Government of the Reformed
Churches; now who can those be, judge you Sir. If here the one be thanked, I
may probably say, the other gets little thanks for his pains. 11. The
Assembly rejoices at the washing away of those aspersions, yea unworthy
aspersions, as they are termed by them. 12. The Authors of such filthy
aspersions were there said to affect ways of their own: now what can be those
ways that be their own, since they are not called Gods ways, judge ye
again? 13. They are paralleled there with Bishops, being both two opposite
enemies to the Government of the true Reformed Churches, the Bishops saying, no
Bishop, no King, and the others, that the Reformed Churches gave not the Civil
Magistrate his due; which I interpret to be, as if the one said, a King cannot
be without a Bishop, and the other, a King cannot be with Presbyteriall
Government. 14. Because it was there said, that it was necessary to vindicate
the Churches of God from so unjust imputations. 15. Because the Assembly like
wise men commended very highly the sincerity, gravity, and ingenuity of the
Book. 16. Because the Synod declares, how it acknowledges it self very much
beholden to the Commissioners for the vindication of their own and other
Protestant Churches. 17. It is called a temperate and seasonable vindication.
18. The Assembly says in name of all the Churches of this Kingdom, that they
desire to keep with them all and that of Scotland a more arct Communion and
uniformity in the Ordinances of Jesus Christ. 19. The Assembly declares there,
that they had a very high esteem of the Church of Scotland. 20. It commended
also the Commissioners for their judicious and grave discourse in the Assembly,
which contributed much to the foresaid Uniformitie with all the Protestant
Churches. And all this I have deduced at length, not only to refute this
untruth, but many others, heretofore and hereafter, which this unworthy
Pamphleter casts upon the Commissioners, yea upon all our Churches, to kindle
a fire of Division betwixt the Civil Magistrate and them, in these most
calamitous times, when both Church and State are in combustion already. But
after such evident untruths, he adds, if observation fail not: Here he
seems to make us believe, that the Author of this Pamphlet is one of the
Members of the Assembly, or that some Member of the Assembly has dealt
treacherously and perfidiously with the Assembly, in pinning upon them such an
Act, flatly contrary to their formal expressions, (for none but some Member of
the Assembly could make any such observation) But of this I will say nothing,
it being a matter of higher concernment. I believe rather that the Author of
this Book is minded, in principio, medio, and fine, to be like to himself.

P. 4.. 1. We read nothing else but of the Independenters admirations (which
Philosophers call the daughter of ignorance) and some of their thoughts and
judgments, as if they were giving an account of their Creed: as p. 2. we read
nothing but Interjections of lamentation, ah, oh, etc. of holy and gracious
men: whereas we crave some quia's, ergo's, or other rational Conjunctions;
whereunto we cannot better reply, then did Scotus to a Doctor of the Sorbone in
Paris: This Doctor when he could not answer Scotus his argument by Reason, said
evermore, Respondeo cum Sancto Doctore: Cum S. Doctore, replied the other, si
sanctus oret pro nobis, si Doctor, respondeat ad argumentum: so we to you; If
those men among you be holy, let them cry, ah, for their sins, and pray to
God for Gods Church, but let Doctors propound and answer arguments: but this
man reasons not, but gives out Sentences, as if he were some Judge of one of
the Benches. You do but imagine and fancy whatsoever you say in this Section
of your imagination of the Commissioners extr ajudiciall and eccentricall Act:
your acts may rather seem Eccentricall secundum quid to London, and
Concentricall secundum quid with Oxford, where, me thinks, they have more
regard a great deal to your tender Consciences, then to those of the
Commissioners; Neither can any mortal man hinder so independent imaginations.
It has been already proved, that you have given the first, second, and third
blow, and in your Apologeticall Narration you threatened yet another: your
judgment is utterly erroneous, in thinking that this was intended to disunite
the Presbiterians from others, i. e. from Independenters (since no others can
well be thought upon, all other Orthodox Churches, and all the Synod being no
other) for their intention is altogether to unite you with them. Neither are
there, for any thing we know, any that disunite you from them, or them from
you, save your selves only.

P. 4.. 3. This well willer is very impertinent in proving against the
Commissioners, that Visibility and Succession are not essential notes of a
true Church, which they, I believe, never thought, I am sure never said. And
yet I must say, that howsoever visibility be not essential to a true Church,
yet it is essential to a true visible Church, whereof we all dispute here. And
howsoever of a true Church we cannot infer visibility, yet from true
visibility we may infer a true Church.

P. 5.. 1. He blesses God, that God has made a Rehoboth for the Scots.

And God willing we shall be fruitful in the Land as Isaac, and we pray God
he and his be not as the Herdsmen of Gerar, even striving with our Herdsmen of
Isaac. If we have a Rehoboth, wherefore will ye not drink of our Spring?
wherefore (to use your terms) will ye not jumpe with us? or if ye will not,
ye may be gone as Lot with your Pastors, and separate your selves from Abraham
and Isaac.

Ibid. Who can hinder the winds, if they blow, and bring black weather from
the North, or West?

Answ. No true English hearts have made any such judgment of the Northerly
winds these three years last past. How much trulier might it be said of a
few Donatisticall spirits, with their Vbi habitas amica mea in meridie? that
trouble their mother Church, esteeming all her children unworthy of their
Communion.

Page 5.. 3. Ye come up me thinks somewhat lamely with your Catalogue of
Prophets. 1. For only ye have one Brightman, and yet none of yours, he is of
ours; for he prefers the Scots Church, constituted of Parochial,
Classical, and Synodall Assemblies, before all other, or at least postpones it
to no others. 2. Neither in exposing the Prophecies of Scripture according to
Scripture, can he be said to have had the gift of Prophecy, since his
expositions were not infallible: for so every true Minister of the Gospel
should be a Prophet.

As lamely came ye up with your Martyrs. 1. For when you call it a civil death
or Martyrdom, the word Civil is terminus diminuens aut alienans, which
diminishes, or rather transfers it from a proper to an uncouth or improper
signification; as the word dead, when I say Peter is a dead man, for a dead man
is not a man, i. e. a living man, in making it a civil and improper death, or
Martyrdom; ye make it less then that of the Presbyterians, which was real:
And so indeed it is, for we find you evermore in all the story flying real
Martyrdom, rather then attending it. 2. It is also a maxim in Logic, that a
termino diminuto vel alienato non argumentamur ad eundem terminum absolute
acceptum: So this your argument must be captious in arguing, that ye dye a
civil death, or are civilly Martyrs. Ergo, ye are Martyrs. It is no better
then to say, There is a golden Calfe: Ergo, there is a Calfe.

P. 6.. 3. I say, to receive and practice some things universally received in
the Reformed Churches, and not to receive or practice others, but either to
reject them openly, or cunningly to profess that ye retain your judgment,
seek for further-light, or doubt as the Ephectici, Sceptici and Pyrrhonii,
suffices not to make you parts of the Reformed Churches. 1. For by the same
reason the Donatists should have been parts of the Orthodox Churches of their
time. 2. Item, the universal Reformed Church in respect of its external form
is a totum homogeneum, which may be attributed in recto to all the parts or
particular Churches thereof, which could not be, if some particular Churches
differed in so many practices from all the rest. As for your instance of the
Church of Scotland, that the Commissioners say, it may receive further
Reformation; that may be understood in moribus, sed non in morum legibus, in
manners and practice, but not in Rules of Discipline touching practice. Or if
it be taken of Rules or Laws, it is not in the Rules or Laws that concern
the essential or principal integrant parts of Discipline, but things merely
accidental, as they expound themselves, by the example of faith, which the
best Christian in the world may have, which evermore is perfect essentially,
and according to its integrant parts, in respect of its extension to the
principal parts of its object, how ever it may be imperfect, quoad entitatem
intensivam; and extensivam accidentalem and ratione partium minus principalium:
so their Ecclesiastical Laws may ever better and better be put in execution,
and augmented extensive, in respect of the accidental and most inconsiderable
parts of its object, according to the exigence of time, places, and other
circumstances: But read the Text and ye shall find, that it says no such
thing as this Doctor would draw out of it.

P. 6.. 4. To excuse themselves in calling all Orthodox and Reformed Churches
Calvinians, the Well-willer imployeth all his wit, Rhetoric, and Philosophy.
Here he begins again with his Ah; censures the Commissioners for
complaining of this nickname put upon them, and would feign persuade them, that
it is ad honores, and consequently, that they are bound to thank them for this
injury they have done them.

Answ. But 1. we have Saint Paul expressly condemning such names. 2. They who
accept of them, he calls them carnal. 3. And wills us not to accept of
any name, but of his in whose we are baptized, viz. Christ's. 4. For as he
argues us to be named Cephaists, Paulinians, or Apollonians: so may we to be
called Calvinians, Lutherans, etc. is to make a Schism. 5. Because all the
Orthodox Churches have evermore refused it. 6. And only their enemies, Papists,
and Lutherans still pind this name upon us as opprobrious. 7. Since it is put
upon us against our will, it cannot be good for us, at least in our estimation.
8. For even good urged upon a man against his will is troublesome, and a burden
to him. 9. Besides all this, we have the testimony of Saint Hierome, quoted by
the Commissioners, who with us takes Saint Paul's part against this Doctor. And
hereupon comes in according to his ordinary custom his lamentable
exclamations, his Ohs thrice reiterated, Oh unhappy conjunction; Oh heavy
application; Oh coal black terms. Those be terms of Rhetoric, but not of
Logic. I like better of a quia, then of your Ah, oh, etc. he will neither
depend upon Saint Paul, nor upon Hierom. But he will neither depend upon Saint
Paul, S. Hierome, nor any reason, but will argue against all, 1. That it is to
distinguish us from more corrupted Churches.

Answ. Saint Paul forbids such names of distinction, and Saint Hierome
says; that it distinguishes the Antichristian Church from the Church of
Christ. But if ye will needs be distinguishing us, name us on Gods name by the
names that we accept of, as by that of Orthodox, or Reformed Churches, which
our common enemies refuse us.

2. Ob. It was used to decline the word Presbyterian, that less offense might
be taken.

Answ. It is not necessary to name us by either the one or the other: and yet
were it better to name the Protestant Churches Presbyterians, since this name
is taken from the form of their government.

Ob. 3 I is a name of honor.

Answ. We desire not such honors as are forbidden in Scripture, and that with
such a violent courtesy are urged upon us.

Ob. 4. Papists disgrace not themselves in calling themselves Catholics:
Ergo, No more do the Apologists in calling us Calvinians, since they be such
themselves.

Answ. I deny the consequence, for the Catholic Church is a term of the
Creed, Heb. Panegyris.

As for your self ye may take what names please you best, yet desire we you
to take none that be forbidden in Scripture: Neither heard we ever that ye
accepted it before this present, and that as we conceive to excuse your selves,
rather then that you have any great mind to it yet.

Afterward P. 7. the Doctor calls this expression or reason of the
Commissioners Coloquintida, or Colocynthis, q. (...), Dogs meat, but of what
Dogs I know not, but of such as accept of such names; if it be dogs meat, then
the Apostle and S. Hierome have given you dogs meat. This injury and dogged
answer strikes no less at S. Paul and S. Hierom, then at the Commissioners:
if Colocynthis be quasi (...), because it serves for a vomit or purgation for
the belly, to purge all petuitous, bilious and melancholious humors, we pray
God it may work well upon you, and that this be the last vomit against the
Reformed Churches. If it be applied outwardly, it kills the fruit, and
abortum parit: utinam vobis abortum p^riat; I pray God again it may cause you
abortivenesse, and make you cast your unhappy fruits, before they come to
maturitie.

Yet, as if in revenge, you ding the words of [Separation] and [Brownists]
against the Apologists, as if you had forgotten, or di^ intend to misapply what
you had said in the next line before quoted out of Hierome.

Answ. Te frustra Augurium vani docuere parents. Sir, you are no good Diviner,
for it is not the Apologists, but the Brownists, whom they call the Separation,
as appears most expressly by their own words: The Separation may be well
allowed to be called Brownists. This therefore is but a mere calumny that ye
pin upon them, to the end that thereupon ye may bewail and lament your
condition and great oppression before the people, which take your words upon
credit: but the more to blame a great deal you are, that so ordinarily deceive
their easy credulity. And truly if ye could quit this kind of reasoning, the
rest of the matter you stuff your Book with, would be found very weak. And
yet I must say of my self, what elsewhere I have ever said, that ye are really
Separatists, since ye separate your selves from the Sacramental communion of
all other Orthodox Churches, esteeming them unworthy of your Communion. So by
this time any one may see, they want not memory in what they say, but you
judgment to understand them, or honesty at least to relate faithfully what
they say. Having so dealt with them for want of some other Encomiast, he
sets forth the praises of his own virtues, viz. his great patience and mercy
toward them. Were it not for patience, nay that would hardly do it; were it
not for reverence of you and your Nation, a home answer would be shaped to such
a misshapen misprision. But to love is to live.

Answ. 1. Your patience, Sir, is very weak, yea scarcely in gradu continentiae,
since it can hardly so command your choler and desire of revenge against a
pretended and so imaginary an offense. 2. So surely must be your other
virtues, and consequently your Reverence; for there is a necessary connection
betwixt them all, at least in gradu temperantiae, under the which they cannot
absolutely have the name of virtues. 3. Reverence is a virtue, whereby we give
honor to virtuous persons, and fear to offend them, because of their virtues,
merits or dignity: If so, I pray what Reverence is it, so to calumniate them
as you have done? 4. Or if they be such as you have represented them to be,
then can they not be the object of Reverence, and so this your Reverence is no
real virtue. 5. As for the Reverence ye carry to our Nation, I will but put
you in mind of the good esteem you have of it; as being very windy and
unluckie for English men. Your words are, Who can hinder the winds, if they
blow, and bring black weather out of the North or West? If it be such, it
cannot be thought worthy of any Reverence: so this, you say here, cannot be
said, but in derision of it, unless you be content to give a lie to your
self. But what ever be your judgment of your own Nation, or of ours; We thank
God that they have such esteem one of another, that you cannot much further or
hinder it. As for my self; what Erasmus Roterodamus says of his Holland, that
I may apply to our Scotland. Terra mihi semper and celebranda and veneranda, ut
cui vitae hujus initia debeam: atque utinam illi nos tam possimus honestamento
viciss^m esse, quam illa nobis non est poenitenda. Our Country, Sir, is an
honor to us both, I pray God none of us be a dishonor to our Country. And as
for you, I may say, that when your Country and the Church of God therein (as
many of your Contrymen, very good Christians and Patriots say) had most need
of you, ye left it and neglected it; and at this present, when it stands in
no need at all of you, ye return again unsent for, to vex the Church of God,
and to hinder Reformation in it.

6. I answer: in matters of so high importance, so holy men as ye pretend to
be, should make no distinction of persons, nor distinguish betwixt the Greek
and the Schythian: all should be to you one in Christ; To love indeed is to
live, if your love be such as it should be: but sometimes amantes sunt amentes,
and their love is rather a dream then real, when they dote more upon their
own fancies more then upon truth: Credimus an qui amant, ^n qui sibi somnia
fingunt.

He adds, that we must not set our houses on fire to roast our own eggs.
Answ. Who does it now in matter of Religion, but the Independenters? Vestrorum
causa malorum vos estis.

P. 8.. 1. We are glad that as ye disavow the rest, so ye do this, that ye
intended not to touch the Church of Scotland, in saying that ye had no
Commonwealths to rear. Only this we say, that if ye say true, that then it was
impertinently put in: And as ye say, it might better be understood of those of
New England, who had the Kings Patent for what they did in Policy, as Gods Word
for Church Government. Only here I observe, that you acknowledge the King and
his Patent, only in Policy, and Gods Word only in Church government. Now I
pray, then what more give ye to the Civil Magistrate, then other Reformed
Churches in the point of Church Government? And as for Policy, no Reformed
Churches ever meddled with it, that I know of.

P. 8.. 3. If ye thought it not a blessing of God, or some good worthy of
thanksgiving, not to be engaged by education or other ways to any other of
the Reformed Churches. This discourse must be very impertinent, in bringing
this for a reason, that your Discipline is good, or better, then that of all
other Reformed Churches; for afterward ye bring your selves in as spectators
of all Churches and Disciplines, being of none your selves, but in abstractione
pracisionis.

Neither say the Commissioners absolutely, that the Apologists were left to
their own private thoughts to be moved by, but ex hypothesi, that they were
not engaged to other Churches; and truly no reasonable man can think but they
were so, since they say that in looking upon all Governments they were simple
spectators; so that this Doctor for this extravagant sense, so repugnant to the
text, may be thought to have been Graduate at Orleans.

And since this Well-willer his profession is to live to love the
Commissioners, I shall only note by the way what a rare and curious expression
he has found out to declare it by, viz. that they are men of a better spirit
then the venomous Spider of envy. They are bound to thank you Mr. Doctor of
well-willing, for this pretty complement ye pass upon them.

P. 9. 3. As in all the rest of his Book, so here he goes very cunningly to
work, evermore omitting what is most material in the Commissioners Book. He
answers not a word to the number of Church Officers, or to their
justification against the aspersions laid upon them for Lay Elders, or their
accusation against the Independents, because of their Laymen Preachers and
Prophets etc. All this he passes over by a Doctorall privilege, hic and
ubique terrarum tacendi. Only he scratcheth at the proof they bring for
Presbyteries, Classes, and Synods: but refuteth it not; no more then he does
the Arguments brought by Master Rhetherford, Guelaspe, and others, taken from
Gods Attributes, as 1. from his Goodness, 2. Wisdom, 3. Justice, 4.
Providence, 5. from the nature of the Church, etc. Item, from the Law of
Nature, 6. from sundry inconveniences. 7. From the order established in the
Church of the Jews. 8. From the practice of the Church in the times of the
Apostles. 9. From Christ's institution in the New Testament. 10. From parity of
reason or proportion betwixt a Parishionall Session or Consistory, and six or
seven persons in the real Church thereof, and a combined Presbytery, as ye
call it, and every one of the Churches; peradventure two or three or ten
thousand Parishionall Consistories subject thereunto. 11. From the ends of the
Church, 12. her Conservation, Peace, etc. whereof ye may happily hear more
within a few days. In the mean time I pray you answer to what is written, and
not to clude such arguments with tales at Assizes, Wooll-packes, Cannon-shot.
Bullets, Batteries, and terms of military Discipline, wherewith we are not so
well acquainted.

P. 10.. 3. Here it seems that this Doctor would excuse the Apologizers, in
saying that they give more to the Civil Magistrate, then the principles of the
Presbytertall gevernment will suffer them to yield. As if it were rather said
by way of retaliation and in anger, then in truth, because (as he says) the
peace-plea calls them Independents. If it be so, 1. their passion is worthy
of the others compassion. 2. But this should not have made them to offend all
the Reformed Churches, and especially their Benefactors in the Netherlands,
which are all Presbyterians. 3. All comparisons are also odious, especially
amongst men well bred. 4. And yet howsoever they hate the name, yet they love
dearly the thing signified by the name, and will depend of no Ecclesiastical
Judicatory, yea (as the Author of the Observations and Annotations shows
clearly) not upon all the Churches of the world; and yet will that their
Congregations depend of themselves, who yet will depend upon no men in
spiritual power or authority.

But the Doctor says, If upon a gross error of another Church they (viz.
Independent Churches) dare exercise only a non communion with it, then there is
more left for the Magistrate to do, then when you have excommunicated it.

Answ. In excommunicating a private person, or a particular Church (when it can
be done with less hurt to the Church then is the good included therein) it
leaves all to be done by the Magistrate, that God has ordained him to do,
viz. in political government. Non auferet mortalia, quiregna dat coelestia.
Neither requires the godly Magistrate, our King or this Parliament any more:
but ye are importune who will give him more then he requires of you, or then
either God or the Magistrate has commanded you. The French say of such men, Il
est valet du Diable, ilfait plus que commandment. I will not here insist upon
your impertinency in denying the name of excommunication to non communion, and
that great pride in not submitting the judgment of five or six (some times)
idle, yea (oftentimes) wicked felllowes, to the judgment of all the Divines
and Churches of the world, in case they should dogmatise and sustein the most
damnable heresies of the world, and yet unto their judgment, however so
contemptible a number, ye will submit the judgment of all their Congregation,
amounting peradventure to the number of many hundreds, (it may be) better men
then themselves. Neither is it enough to leave it to the Civil Magistrate; for
his power is not spiritual: God has given an intrinsecall power to the
Church, sufficient for its spiritual end: the Civil Magistrate may be a
Pagan, an Antichristian Christian, an external Christian, but an inward enemy
to the Church: he may be negligent in his charge, etc. and is it credible, that
in such cases God has instituted no Discipline or Government to take order
with offenders? But of this I need not to say any thing, this evasion being so
well, so evidently and briefly refuted in the Commissioners own words, which I
pray the Reader to consider, p. 21.22. if it please the Reader, he may have
sundry reasons against this opinion in the considerations and Annotations upon
the Apologeticall Narration. It is an untruth also that the Doctor presupposes
here, viz. that a Classical Presbytery is made up of many Ministers and Lay
men in the Kingdom of Scotland or among other Protestants; And false again,
that their Assemblies are made up of persons partly Ecclesiastical and partly
civil, or that they there rule persons partly Ecclesiastical, partly Civil:
we say that there can be no such persons; for howsoever one person may have one
charge Ecclesiastical, and another secular or Civil, yet is he not therefore
a mixed person, neither be these several charges mixed, but distinguished in
him, fince of the two there resu'teth not any third Charge compounded of both,
as in mixtions: but he exercises them both distinctly and severally, in such a
fashion, that the one never concurreth to the function and operation of the
other. By the same reason it should follow, that the diverse faculties of the
soul, as the understanding, and expulsive faculty in a man, should be mixed
together, since they be both in one soul, as the most part of Philosophers
hold. When a Statesman sits as a member of an Ecclesiastical Assembly, he
sits no ways as a Statesman, but as a Churchman: neither judges he a
State-man or secular person in quality of a Statesman, or of a secular
person, but in quality of a member of the Church: So they judge not of civil
matters formally, as they are subject to the Civil Magistrates authority, but
materially and in so far as they are subject to a spiritual formality, or
conduce to a spiritual end, under the which notion they belong not ordinarily
to the Civil Magistrate, or per se and intrinscce, but per accidens and
extrinsece. as all Orthodox Divines of the Reformed Churches do teach. But this
is not all, for sundry of the Independents have told us, that the Civil
Magistrate, according to Gods Word, cannot punish any man for matters of
Religion, how abominable soever his opinions be.

P. 11. and 12. the Doctor will not answer, because he has not the Books at
hand, and so shifts over the argument: What he says of Aerius, who held out
against Bishops, as our Reformed Churches do, is not to the purpose: No more
is this, That Counsels may err. Afterward he tells us, that French
Ministers (as Anonymus as himself) and the French Discipline is for the
Independenters, but proves it not; but supposes that we should take it upon
his word, which we may not at any hand do, till we see more candor and
sincerity in his proceedings. As for Merellus and some Ministers of the French
Church, excommunicated for their erroneous opinions, or ill lives, and
afterward assaulted the Discipline whereby they were sentenced, if they have
any such for them, we envy them not such brethren.

Because the Commissioners, p. 18. of the Reformation cleated, mainteining the
fidelity of the Reformers of the Scottish Church, say, that they deserted not
their Churches, nor carried away Churches with them, nor did undergo any
voluntary exile, but thought it a great spoil after that they were sentenced
to exile to save their lives, and to live with very small means, far from
any friends to comfort them. This the Doctor applies to the Independenters, of
whom the Commissioners do not speak, but of their own Ministers: But since
it is his pleasure to do so, I must say that hence it follows, that their
exile was a far greater suffering then that of the Independents: 1. for it was
involuntary; but the more involuntary that any afflictions be, the greater they
are; and the more voluntary they be, the least they be; for, poena debet esse
molesta and involuntaria; but that which is voluntary, is not troublesome. 2.
That of the Independents was accompanied with many friends and worldly means:
so was not the other. 3. It may be doubted, if Pastors for their personal or
particular persecution may fly, without actual compulsion, and the public
consent of their Flock, since they are not in the Church in quality of
particular, but of public persons, and Heads of the Flock; Neither can that
Text of Scripture help him, viz. When they persecute you in one place, fly to
another; for that is said of particular, and not of public persons: or if it
be said of the Apostles, as to the Apostles, it holds not in particular
Ministers tied to particular Churches, for they are tied to their particular
Churches, but so were not the Apostles, who were equally bound to teach all the
Churches of the world, according to that saying of Christ, Go teach all
Nations, Matthew. 28.19. and so could never abandon their flock. And as for his
Answer, that they hept themselves for a reserve, to assist the Church at their
return: I must say they were very provident in foreseeing such an
extraordinary case, and prudent in preserving of their persons, whereas the
others sacrificed their lives for Christ's truth.

Page 12.. 3. and p. 13.. 1. and 2. the Doctor says nothing against that which
the Commissioners say, and so approves it: he applies it to the
Independenters, and denies that they esteem so of Excommunication, viz. that
to limit the censure of Excommunication, in matter of opinion, to the common
and uncontroverted principles, and in the matter of manners to the common and
universal practices of Christianity, and in both to the parties known light,
is the dangerous opinion of the Arminians and Socinians, opens a wide door
and proclaims liberty to all other practices and errors which are not
fundamental, and universally abhorred by all Christians, etc.

To this he answers with complaints, and says, that there is no argument
here: But in this Laconick discourse there be more arguments then he sees. The
first is,

Arminians and Socinians opinions are not to be received.

But to limit Excommunication in matters of opinion, etc. is Arminians and
Socinians opinions.

Ergo, It is not to be received.

The second is:

What opens a door, and proclaims libertle to all other practifes and
errors, which are not fundamental, is not to be admitted.

But to limit Excommunication, etc. is such, Ergo, it is not to be admitted.

The third is:

An opinion universally abhorred by all Christians, is not to be received.

But to limit Excommunication, in matter of opinion to the common
uncontroverted principles, and in matter of manners to the common and
universal practices of Christianitle, and in both to the parties known light,
(viz. of Nature or of Grace,) is an opinion universally abhorred by all
Christians, Ergo, to limit Excommunication, etc. is not to be admitted.

4. The Doctrine that tends to the overthrow of the Reformed Religion, is not
to be received.

But to limit excommunication, etc. tends to the overthrow of the Reformed
Religion, Ergo, it is not to be received.

To these Arguments he answers not formally, neither to the matter nor to the
form; and no wonder, for he could not observe them. Only to the end he may
seem not to have answered nothing at all, he tells us, that Pagans and
Infidels do not practice: But how is that to the purpose? since in all the
Commissioners Discourse there is not one word of Pagans or Infidels. 2. He
answers that Papists, Prelates, Socinians, Arminians, Brownists, and
Separatists, do not hold some common truths with Christians. But to what
purpose he says this, I know not: if it be to prove, that they may be
excommunicated, we deny it not; but say, that to hold such an opinion, is
Arminianisme, Socinianisme, etc. i. e. an Arminian or Socinian opinion,
whereunto he answers not. Again, by Socinians, Arminians, etc. either he
understands those who are not borne in the Church, and who profess not our
Religion; or those who are borne in the Church, and profess our Religion: If
the first, they cannot be excommunicated, since they are not, nor ever were of
our communion: if the last, it is true, they may be excommunicated; but that is
not the question: but whether this be not Socinianisme and Arminianisme, viz.
to limit Excommunication in matter of Opinion to the common and uncontroverted
principles, and in matter of Manners to the universal practices of
Christianity. Item, whether this opens not a door to all other errors and
practices, as they say?

After this, when he can answer nothing, he returns unto his ordinary
lamentations, that they are compared to Infidels, etc. But the Commissioners
serve not themselves of bare comparisons, as ye use to do, but with solid
Arguments, which prove you clearly what they say: neither are ye compared by
them with Seperatists, but I prove you to be such, for separating your selves
from the reformed Churches Sacramental communion; neither are ye compared with
Brownists, etc. for conforming of Church Government with Scripture, as ye
pretend, but for perverting of it against Scripture; wherefore all these your
complaints are nothing else but calumnies, that ye cast upon the Church of
Christ, evermore sophisticating with your captions of non causa ut causa,
according to the ordinary custom of your Sect.

And I pray this Doctor, what if a man become brutish, and have the light of
his understanding altogether corrupted, so as to deny that there is any sin
against the light of Nature? shall he not be excommunicated for it? shall his
ignorance excuse him? is not his ignorance a sin, and especially when it is
concomitant or subsequent to some other sin or action of the will? when he
has procured it to himself, or when he used not moral diligence enough to
chase it away? shall, or can the ignorance of the Law, or of his duty, which
he is bound to know, excuse him, or free him from excommunication? Is not that
Socinianisme, Arminianisme, judge ye Master Doctor? and answer not with
complaints, and lamentable Interjections, as if you would rather be pitied then
bound to prove any thing ye say; pay us not with generalities, and Individuum
vagums, but signatums. Answer I pray you to the point.

All the authority that this Master Doctor Well-willer can bring for himself,
p. 11. and 12. is a Morellus, and some other excommunicated Ministers in
France, which yet he has borrowed from the cleared Reformation.

As for that which he says, p. 13.. 2. that a Bishop is a Presbytery
contracted; and a Presbytery a Bishop diffused: 1. It is but one of the
Separatists ordinary jeeres against Presbyterian Government. 2. They prove it
not. 3. The Commissioners answer it, p. 25. 4. And if it were so, yet
Presbyterian Aristocracie should be admitted, since it is Gods ordinance, but
nor Episcopacy, since it is not Gods ordinance. 5. Amongst the Helvetians, if
one man should go and contrive into his own person all the authority, which
is diffused amongst all the Rulers there, think you that they would endure
him, or rather not put him to death, as a Tyrant and a Traitor, according to
his demerits? The very contrivance of authority into one person, which God has
diffused in many, is unjust and tyrannical in Gods Church.

But the Doctor objecteth, that in forbearing Excommunication (I believe he
understands the greater) they leave more to the Magistrate then the
Presbytery does.

Answ. This the Doctor says, but proves it not: and therefore we deny it with
the like facility that he propounds it: our reason is, because when a man is
excommunicated, the Civil Magistrate cease not for all that to punish him
civilly: for the Presbytery by excommunication exileth or casts him out of
the Church society: notwithstanding which he remains in the State society:
and if his sin be against the State, and deserve it, the Magistrate may exile
him, and cast him out of the State society, or of the Kingdom, but not out of
the Church, no more then the Church may cast him out of the Kingdom. As for
your comparisons in saying that it is not an English heart that speaks so, it
is but a sophistical evasion, seditiously to clude their argument, whereunto
you cannot bring so much as a probable solution: so you grant what they say.
Neither is our dispute here about English, Scots, or French, but about
Christian hearts and consciences: It is a shame to an English man to be Author
of Schism in his own Country, when Strangers employ all their endeavors for
union and peace, both in Church and Commonwealth. But this I leave, and pray
you to tell us what ye give more to the Civil Magistrate then we? whether it
be an Ecclesiastical or Civil power, and wherein? whether to judge in matter
of Doctrine or Discipline? Remember, Sir, that in speaking of New England, P. 8.
you give them nothing else but Gods word for Church Government, and the Kings
patent for what they did in Policy; and tell us if ever they followed the
Kings or his Councels directions in Church Policy. Item, tell us whether it is
the Civil Magistrate, or the Church Officers part to erect Church Government,
and to make the Laws thereof; to judge according to the same, and to put them
in execution etc?

Here he tells us also, or objecteth, that Excommunication has need of
better grounds then men's sinning of simplicity or ignorance.

Answ. So the ignorance of Jesus Christ, and denying of his merits should not
incur the sentence of Excommunication.

He objecteth, that the punishment of Excommunication for small faults will
make the punishment at last small in the eyes of men.

Answ. It is true, but is it the doctrine of the Reformed Churches that it
should be inflicted for small faults?

But to clear more this matter, two things are needful to be expounded: the
first is, what the Independents understand by great sins? the second, what
they understand by the parties known light: thirdly, what by Christianity:
fourthly, what by common received practices of Christianity: fifthly, what by
the Church?

As for the first, a sin may be great either quoad essentiam, or quoad
entitatem, according to its essence or entity, or as it were its quantity. That
sin is said to be greater then another according to its essence, the species
whereof degenerateth most from the divine Rule of Gods Law, such as be the
sins, that are greatest in regard of their object; so it is a greater sin to
offend God then man, because it includes in it self a greater objective
deformity, then the other. But a sin is greater then another according to its
entity or quantity, that has greater extension, intension, or duration, i. e.
more parts, more degrees, and of a longer continuance then another: By
extension, or more parts, I understand either objective, or formal parts, viz.
when a sin is committed against more persons as the sin committed against
twenty is greater then that committed against two; or has more material
objects, as when one steals more money, viz. two pound, it is a greater finne
then to steal two pence: So it is a greater sin in respect of the formal
perts, or acts wherein formally sin consifteth, if they be taken in concreto,
when a man returns oftentimes to the same sin, as he who steals ten
times is a far greater sinner, then he that steals but only once.

In respect of the intention or degrees of sin, that sin is greater then
another wherein there be more degrees, as when it is committed more willingly,
with greaterliberty, with greater violence, with greater knowledge; Item, by
him that has greater helps of grace, or of nature to resist it, and to
produce the opposite effects of virtue. Finally, that sin is greater then
another in duration, that continues longer: So a sin may be greater then
another quoad essentiam, and less quoadentitatem, or essentially greater, but
entitatively or in quantity less then another: and on the contrary greater
then another quoad entitatem, or in regard of its quantity, but not greater
essentially. For example, if a man sin against the precepts of the first Table,
in not loving God with all his heart, and be sorry therefore; and against his
Father, not only in not loving him as himself, but also in abusing him
willingly, and offering him violence without any remorse of conscience, the
first sin is greater essentialiter, but the last is greater entitative: so
some Schoolmen say, that faith is more certain then any natural science
quoad essentiam, but that natural sciences and the habitudes of natural
principles are more certain quoad entitatem: and this distinction being
observed, it may so fall out, that a sin that is greater essentially may not
deserve Excommunication, and that which is less, deserve it: so that this
Maxim of the Independenters will not hold universally.

As for the parties known light or knowledge, it is either Speculative which of
it self directs not the will in its practices or actions, as to know that
there is three Persons in the Trinity; or Practical, which directs the Will
in its actions, in dictating unto it to do good, and to fly evil: This is
either General, as in general to know that good should be done; or
Particular, as when it dictates that this good should be done; and then either
it is Practical in part, or imperfect; or altogether, absolutely, and
perfectly; which, when the thing that is to be done being well examined
according to its substance and all its circumstances, it dictates, that it
should be done here, in this place, by me, in this time, notwithstanding this
opposition, etc. and this ordinarily in the Schools is called cognitio
practice practica, a knowledge practically practical, i.e. altogether
practical. Now I desire to know of which of these several sorts of light, or
of knowledge of the Party, this Doctor speaks, otherwise we cannot
understand him?

In the 3. and 5. difficulty, we wish that our Brethren would declare unto us,
whether by Christianity and the Church they understand all those who profess,
Christianity in name, or those only who profess it really and in effect; and
then; whether all those who hold their fundamentalia or Essentialia only; or if
they will them not to stand in mere fundamental points, but also require that
they pass unto their Superstructories, and how far? item, that they would
distinguish between their fundamental and superstructory points in Doctrine
and in manners; for this is the whole foundation and ground of this their
debate: otherwise all that they say is but so many evasions, and we cannot know
wherein they dissent from us, or what they would be at. Item, whether by the
word [Church] they understand any Church or multitude that lays claim to this
name? or the true Church? or the pure Church? and then whether pure in their
Fundamentalia only, or also in their Superstructories?

As for the 4. Difficulty: Common received practices in Christianity, are of
as large an extent as Christianity or the Christian Church, and may signify
practices common to all Churches either nominally or really, or common to the
only real and true Christian Churches, either in fundamental points only, or
also in Superstructories, or common to all pure Churches only: The Doctor then,
and his Sect, to the end they may be understood by us, whom they oppose, must
clearly expound us what they mean by these words and expressions.

But to cut off all sort of Sophistication, and to bring them to the point, I
will press and urge them more closely in this fashion: Either our Brethren in
this point about Sin and Sinners, who are the adequate object of
Excommunication, agree with us, or disagree from us: if they grant the first,
what needs all this dispute and contentiones they fight but with their own
shadow, if the second, let them show us wherein we disagree; and either we
shall give them sufficient satisfaction, or render our selves to the (...), in
case we be gone astray from it.

But to generalities we cannot answer. Neither is it Christianly done by
pretended Reformed and Reformers to cast such general filthy aspersions upon
all the Reformed Churches, when as they can particularize nothing at all: The
Lord lay it not unto their charge in that great day when all such captions and
sophistications shall be in no request.

There be two maine objections, which ordinarily the Independents propound
against the Government of all the Reformed Churches, and namely of that of
Scotland. The Commissioners from page 2.. 2. to the end of their Book propound
them in as great force as possibly they can have, and dissolve them both so
strongly and evidently, that it is a wonder how this Well-willer had any
stomach to reply. The Doctor also brings them from p. 14.. 2. to the end of
his book, where he travaileth so slenderly, to justify them, that he seems
willingly desirous to be condemned: only rather then to be thought a desertor
of the cause, he would rather answer impertinently, then to quit his Brethren.

The first argument put in form, will be thus:

Where there is or may be exhortation of partioular Churches one to another,
and protestation of one against another and the withdrawing of Communion one
from another, (especially when the Magistrate interposeth his power) there the
Authoritative power of Presbyteries and Synods is not necessary.

But in the Church of God or Militant Church, there is or may be exhortation of
particular Churches, etc.

Ergo, In the Church of God or Militant Church, the Authoritative power of
Presbyteries and Synods is not necessary.

The Assumption is certain.

The proof of the Connection of the first Proposition may be thus:

Where there is a sufficient remedy, and no less effectual against all
offenses, then the Authoritative power of Presbyteries and Synods, or of
Excommunication, there an authoritative power of Presbyteries and Synods, or of
Excommunication is not necessary.

But where there is, or may be Exhortation of particucular Churches, etc. there
is a sufficient remedy, and no less effectual against all offenses then the
Authoritative power of Presbyteries, Synods, or of Excommunication.

Ergo, Where there is, or may be Exhortation of particular Churches, etc. there
is no need of the Authoritative power of Presbyteries, Synods, or of
Excommunication.

They prove the Assumption here, for he who will or dare condemn the one, will
not care for the other, unless the Magistrates Authority intervene.

Answ. The Commissioners answer 1. that this Argument supposes an
extraordinary Case, which has never fallen out in the Church of Scotland, or
any other Reformed Churches, except those of the Separation, who propound the
Argument, viz. the pronouncing of noncommunion or excommunication against a
whole Church, and we hope such a case never shall fall out. Now laws are made
for cases that be ordinary, and not for these that are extraordinary.

The Doctor replies, that they speak not one word to extenuate the Authority
of Synods.

Rep. But in depriving them of their Authoritative power, which is their form,
they extenuate their Authority yea they destroy their essence; for without an
authoritative power, they sit in quality of private persons only, or of
Ministers gathered together by chance, or otherwise, and not in quality of
Synods; or rather, as the Commissioners answer most judiciously and clearly,
In this Exhortation, etc. there is no more to be found then one particular
member may do against another, which yet is acknowledged to be insufficient for
removing of offenses, unless the Authority of the Church of which both of them
are members, shall intervene.

The Doctor replieth, that besides Exhortations, Protestations, and
non-communion, they professo themselves ever to submit, and to have recourse to
the Civil Magistrate.

Inst. This profession of submission is either voluntary, depending of their
own free will; or by necessity of obligation, whereunto they are subject by
Law: If they chose the first, it is no more then a number of Watermen, Tinkers
and Cobblers may do of them-selves by a particular convention. 2. It is not
juris divini, as they pretend their Government to be, but humani, depending of
their own fancy. And to profess themselves to be willing to have recourse to
the civil Magistrate, it is not at all to the purpose, but most absurd: 1. for
that power of the Clvill Magistrate is not intrinsecall, but extrinsecall unto
the Church: but we speak only of the power that is intrinsecall, and proper to
the Church; and so must our Brethren also, if they will speak rationally. 2.
In so doing, they make the Civil Magistrate Judge of Ecclesiastical
controversies in Doctrine and Discipline, and Head of the Church, etc. which
cannot hold when he is an Infidel, an Antichristian, etc. whereof see more in
the Commissioners answer, and in the Observations and Annotations upon the
Apologeticall Narration. 3. In so doing, ye make the Churcle power subordinate
to Civil power, which cannot be, for subordination is betwixt things of the
same kind or sort; but such are not Civil and Ecclesiastical power, which
are opposite, or rather contradistinguished or differenced one from another, as
things destinated to or different ends, the one spiritual, and the
othertemporall.

2. He complains that the Commissioners call [them] these of the Separation,
unless withal they expressed they meant the separation from the Prolates ways,
as Scotland and England now do.

Answ. Yea, but they separate themselves also from the Sacramental communion
of all Christian Churches, yea of all the Reformed Churches of the world: And
(if it be true, what we have read in the letters from New England) from the
communion of one Church with another amongst themselves.

3. He says, that such a Case may fallout amongst us, with swasmes of
Anabaptists and Antinomians.

Answ. That cannot be; for they have no Communion with us, and therefore cannot
be excommunicated by us. 2. It may easily fall out amongst you, for the
Anabaptists, as we have already showed, are your own, and not ours.

4. He says, that the Commissioners suppose more in their second Answer, viz.
that two or more Churches may mutually pretest and pronounce the sentence of
noncommunion one against another.

Answ. This Doctor is either very dull, in not conceiving of this clear and
solid answer of the Commissioners; or else very malicious in disguising of it;
for the Commissioners argue here upon a Case, according to the Independenters
Hypothesis, which cannot but be ordinary amongst them, according to their
Discipline: and howbeit their Churches be very few, and have been a very short
time in rerum natura, yet it has fallen out amongst them in New England, and
they have had the like Case in the Netherlands, according to their own
Relation: but in our way and Discipline it cannot fall out amongst us; for if
two Parish Churches have any difference, they submit themselves both to the
Colloque, or to the Provincial Assembly: if two Provincial Synods or
Assemblies differ, the National Assembly judges betwixt them both; so that
this Case cannot fall out amongst us: and it is a practical principle, that
par in parem non habet imperium, since neither of the equals are subject one to
the other; and such are all Parish Churches amongst themselves, Classes amongst
themselves, and Provincial Synods amongst themselves.

The Doctor by a Doctorall power jumpeth over the 3. and 4. Answer, with this
worthy and most Laconicke reply, viz. This same reply sarveth to year third and
fourth answer. Which, whether it be truly said, I remit it to the Readers
judgment.

The Commissioners fifth Answer is, By what probability can it be made to
appear to any rational man, and indifferent mind, that no authority shall be
as valid as authority against the obstinate; that via admonitionis and
requisitionis is equal with via citationis and publiea authoritatis? There
cannot be so much as trial and examination of the offense without authority,
unless the party be willing to appear: that persuasion and jurisdiction,
that the delivering over to Satan, and thereby striking the conscience with the
terror of God by the authority of Jesus Christ, which has the promise of a
special and strong ratification in heaven, and any other Ecclesiastical way
whatsoever, which must be inferior unto this, and depend only upon persuasion
on the one part, and free will on the other, can be supposed to be like
efficacious. No man will say, but in civil matters it is one thing to have
ado with our neighbor, who has no more authority over us, then we have over
him; and another thing to have to do with civil power, which has authority
over both: this solution I have written over in the Commissioners own words,
because it is so significative, so strong and evident, that it dissolveth all
the frivolous Replies of this good Doctor.

The Doctor hence supposes 1. That there is no authority but
Scripture-authority, (by Scripture-authority I believe he means that
instituted by Scripture, otherways Scripture authority is the excellency of
Scripture verity, which binds us to believe it, because of its Author, which is
God) 2. He supposes that to be most valid, that convinces and conquers actus
elicitos, the mind, rather then that which does only manacle and constrain
^^^us imperatos, the outward carriage: then makes his quaere thus, Is the way
of admonition, protestation, and non-communion no authority?

Reply. But here the Doctor is mightily mistaken, both in his Authority, and in
his Actus eliciti, and Imperati. 1. For every thing that is said in Scripture,
howbeit its verity be grounded on Divine Authority, yet gives it not men an
authority or authoritative power; for what authoritative power is given to man
or Angel by those words, In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth? 2.
Neither does every admonition in Scripture made to men, arm them with
authority, as that place of Saint Paul whereon the Doctor builds his
authority, Give no offense: for it commands not an authority, or
authoritative power to be exercised, but an act of obedience to be practiced.
Item, no public power or authority, but a private duty, because it is common
to all men, which cannot be said of Ecclesiastical authority.

Likewise that other passage, better a millstone were hanged about ones neck,
and he cast into the Sea, then to offend a weak brother. Item, that we were
better not to eat flesh, then to offend, etc. All this is said by Divine
Authority in respect of its truth, in so far as authority signifies an
excellency or dignity in this truth, for which it should be believed, because
of the excellency of the Author, who is God, who cannot err, by reason of the
infallibity of his knowledge, or verity; or lead others into error, because of
the goodness of his will, or veracity: but to say that these passages signify
any authority, whereof we speak, i. e. either power to judge, to command, or
to inflict spiritual punishments, no reasonable man can think it, that
knows what power or authority means. 1. For the acts of power are either
imperative, or executive, or some other like, whereof none is here expressed.
2. These sentences are all merely ^^^ntiative, which formally are not
authoritative, or of power. 3. Authority belongs rather adfacultatem, actum,
imperantem, quam ad elicientem; as this here. 4. The acts of power perse, of
themselves, belong to the will, and not to the understanding, as these here
expressed. 5. They are not expressed by Verbes of the Indicative or Optative,
but of the Imperative mood; not in this fashion, this should be done; oh, that
this were done; but in this; do this: whereunto sometimes are annexed promises,
in case of obedience; sometimes comminations, in case of disobedience; after
which follows the performance or execution, viz. actual recompense, or
punishment. 6. If an admonition, a protestation, or a non-communion be
authority, then every beggar has this authority, yea as much as all the
Churches of the world, as it follows upon the Commissioners Argument, who
say, that every neighbor should have it who has no more authority over us,
then we over them.

The Doctor also is mightily mistaken in limiting actus imperatos to the
outward carriage; for many of the acts of the mind, will, and sensitive
appetite, are imperati, as when I will understand, or willingly understand,
when I will my self to will, and in virtue of that will I will. Item, when I
will apply my appetite to good, and command it to do good. No less a fault is
it in him to take actum elicitum in the same latitude with the actions of the
mind, for some of them are merely eliciti, and others merely imperati.

We grant you that to be most valid that convinces, and conquers actus
elicitos, i. e. (as ye take it) the inward actions, rather then that which
does only manacle and constrain actus imperatos, the outward carriage. But we
deny you that Ecclesiastical Discipline, much less your admonition, etc. can
do it, for that is a work of Gods Almighty power only; he only who created
all things, can create new hearts in us, and he only who knows men's hearts
can persuade them: the voice of the Minister only sounds externally in our
cares, but Gods Spirit to the heart. Neither is it the internal, or nearest
aim of Discipline or Church Government to work upon, or rule the mind, which
is not known to the Church, or Church Governors, but to procure the external
peace of the Church, which may be obtained, the mind remaining still
unconvinced. Aliud est, esse bonum Christianum, aliud, bonum civem in Ecclesia.

The other Objection is, That by this authority and order of Government, one
Church has power over another, which is contrary to that liberty and equality
Christ bath endowed his Church with, and is no other but a new Prelaticall
dominion, set over the Churches of Christ.

The Commissioners answer, denying that by their Government any particular
Church can judge another; but that the whole Representative Church in virtue of
its aggregative power judges of them all, which they illustrate very prettily
and judiciously by examples taken from the parts of a man's body, the Members of
a Parliament, and Towns and Cities. Neither is it a Prelaticall domination, as
they calumniate it, for that of Prelates is extrinsecall to particular
Churches, as being enclosed in their Metropolitan Church, which is
extrinsecall to the particular Churches, as not compounded of any of their
members per se, particularly called thereunto: but that of our Presbyteries and
such like Ecclesiastical Senates is intrinsecall to every particular Church,
being compounded of their organicall parts, or Ministers, in virtue of their
general vocation, and particular mission, admission, or election particularly
called thereunto. But here I pray the Reader to consider the Commissioners most
clear and judicious expressions, which being compared with this well-willers
reply, will sufficiently refute all he says.

Our Well-willer replieth: Sure your Laws do impose, that one Congregation
shall be subject to the Elders (suppose) of twenty Congregations; And the
Authority of nineteen of them is as Collateral.

Answ. Note here fallaciam (...), a captious Argument, whereby he proves one
thing for another, that which is not in question, for that which is in
question: viz. an Authority that is as collateral, in stead of an Authority
that is collateral; which is an Epidemicall sickness in independent Divinity.

2. I answer, that the Elders of particular Congregations, who sit in Classes
and Synods, may be considered two ways: 1. Materially, as men, who are Elders:
2. Formally, in quality of Elders; and then again, either 1. in quality of
particular Elders, tied to such a particular Church, in virtue of their
particular Mission, Admission, or Election, made by such a particular Church;
or 2. in quality of Elders in general, called to feed the whole Church, in
virtue of their general vocation; which again as the Author of the
Observations and Annotations told you, may either be considered in actu
signato, when only it is signified to belong to their Charge, before they
exercise it, or in actu exercito, when in virtue of some Mission, Admisson, and
particular Commission they may exercise it.

If the Elders of particular Churches be considered materially only, they are
not so much as formally Elders: If 2. formally, in quality of particular
Elders, tied to a particular Church, they have not power to reed any Church but
heir own particular Church. And in this sense it is an untruth, that any one
Congregation is subject to nineteen or twenty particular Congregations. Yea,
they are so far from this disorder and confusion, that the Pastor of one
Congregation cannot preach in another without the consent of that particular
Congregation, as the Rules and Laws of our Ecclesiastical Discipline may
(...), if they be considered. 3. In virtue of their (...)ll v^^^^ion they have
power to rule the Church in general, and may actually do it in Synods, in
acta signate, if they be considered precisely, before their particular mission
and commission, and in actu exercito, i.e they may exercise it actually after
their particular commission, their mistion from their particular Representative
Church, and admission into the Representative or Collective Body or Association
and Representation of many particular Churches, whether Clasicall or Synodall.

Master Well-willer replies, that the Congregations every one chose their own
Officers to rule ever them in the Lord, but not to rule ever themselves, and
others.

Answ. 1. What is Well-willer understands by Congregations, whether Ministers
alone, of Ruling Elders alone, or both together, or men, or all men, women and
children, and in a word, all the members of the Church, I know not. Neither
does he express his mind upon this point. Only I must say, that being once
in company with some of their Preachers; I heard some women maintain stoutly
in presence of the Minister, without any contradiction made by him, that women
also had power in Ecclefiasticall Assemblies to judge of Controversies of
Religion, and in matter of all Ecclesiastical Censures.

2. I answer, it is one thing 1. to call a Church Officer to his charge, or to
give him his vocation or calling: 2. another to send him into the charge, or to
give him his mission: 3. another to admit him into the charge, and to elect him
or choose him. The first is an act of the Church officers who examine his life
and Doctrine, and afterward give him his Ordination, in the name of the whole
Ministry. The second is an act of those who send him, and sometimes is done by
the Ministers in a Colloque, or a Synod, which give him his Ordination; as when
he is sent to feed a particular flock; sometimes by a particular Church, as
in some particular Commission to a Class, or Synod, but in the name of the
universal visible Church, as ye see in the Assembly at Antiochia, in sending
some Ministers to the Assembly at Jerusalem. The third is an act sometimes of
particular Churches, as in the admission and election of their own Ministers.
Sometimes of a Colloque and Synod, as in the admission of the Members thereof,
as in that Synod at Jerusalem. And here to avoid all Sophistications of our
Adversaries, note that I speak here only of the visible Church according to its
visible form, and consequently of the visible and externe Vocation, Mission,
Admission, and Election of Ministers: so I say every Church chooses, i. e.
elects its own Ministers, but it calls them not, nor sends them; It gives
them not their general Vocation nor Mission into the Ministry, but that is an
act of the whole Church, which in actu signato belongs to the whole Church,
but in actu exercito, according to the exigence of time and places to
particular Ministers, not in quality of Ministers of particular Congregations,
but of greater consociations, in a representative body of many particular
Churches. So a Minister in a Synod has power of God by the whole visible
Church to judge, rule, and feed many Churches, positis ponendio, and ut poni
debent; so as nothing thereunto requisite be wanting, but all ordered as it
should, viz. if it be by consent or election of his particular Church, and he
be admitted by the Class or Synod whereunto he is sent, etc. as it is
ordinarily practiced in our Reformed Churches.

Master Well-willer replyeth again, That Episcopacy is as intrinsecall to
particular Churches, as the Presbyteric, since Bishops are chosen by the people
at their instalment, where customarily people are allowed to make any just
exception.

Answ. I deny the Assumption, viz. that it is as intrinsecall, and that for the
reason brought by the Commissioners. As for that which he brings for
confirmation thereof, viz. because they are chosen by the people, I answer 1.
It is not enough they have their Election from the people, but they must also
have their Vocation and Mission from the Church in the name and authority of
Christ, which they have not according to this Well-willers own Tenets. 2.
Because the people can make no Church Officer, and principally Ministers, since
they have not the abilities to judge of their learning and gifts. 3. In
choosing of an Archbishop it is not morally possible that all the people can
elect him, and especially when he is a great Archbishop, or a Primate over a
whole Kingdom, for all the people cannot well meet together. 4. And howbeit
they could meet, yet could not their consent and voices easily be gathered. 5.
It were a ridiculous thing in choosing of him to seek the consent and voices of
every idle and ignorant fellow, yea of women, that are of the people. 6.
Neither is it enough to chose a Bishop, to make any just exception, for that is
not to elect him, but to hinder his Election. 7. Neither is this ordinarily
practiced. 8. And Master Well-willer to the Bishops here confesses in the next
line, that it has had little success.

But Master Well-willer confirms it out of that ordinary passage of
Hieronymus, To avoid Schism one of the classical Presbytery was chosen to be
as Chair man.

Answ. 1. Such a Bishop is not an English, or Papist Bishop, but a Moderator of
the action, or a Master of the Chair, which will not make up a Bishop, in so
far as a Bishop is distinguished from an ordinary Minister, for ye your
selves pretend to have your Synods, which cannot be without some Moderator,
President, or Master of the Chair, and yet ye deny that ye have any Bishops,
or Episcopal Government. 2. Neither are Bishops annually. 3. To be short,
Master Well-willer brings us here no real, but imaginary Bishops, in the
Kingdom of Utopia, viz. that are only Masters of the Chair, annual, etc. 4.
Item, whose Chancellor, Archdeacon, etc. were Parishioners. 5. Their
Chancellours are not ordinarily Ecclesiastical, but Laymen, as ye call them,
who nevertheless judge of all Ecclesiastical Causes, which ye ordinarily
blame. 6. Neither have they Vocation from God, as ye confess. Neither are
they chosen by all the Churches that they rule and feed, if any food they give,
and feed not themselves with the fat of the people.

You are also too bold Master Well-willer, to say that the people formerly have
been as willing they should reign as ever any people were in your Kingdom to
have the Presbytery ever them.

Answ. We can show you hundreds, yea thousands, who have cutled their
Government both in England and in Ireland; and what has been the good will of
the Scots toward them, they can best tell themselves, as having felt it these
four or five years last past. But as for the Presbyterian Government, ye have
never heard the People murmr, much less rise up against it. 2. But if it be
so, that ye have found them so sweet, what needed ye run away, and desert the
Church here? They did compel Ministers and Churchwardens to do many things
against their conscience, and in case of refufall did ordinarily undo them, as
we can produce many examples both in England and Ireland, yea of the
Independenters themselves, before that they spoke this way, in despite of the
Reformed Churches. The like of this cannot without singular impudence be said
to have been any where practiced by any Scots Presbytery. We grant you, that
it is not the peoples consent only, but if according to the Word that makes a
Government lawful. But wherefore may not a Congregationall representative
Church as well choose men for Classical Assemblies, as for Synods? What
pattern have you for the one rather then for the other? To all this according
to your usual custom, ye say much, but prove little or nothing of what is in
dispute betwixt us: many books ye make, but little to the purpose: And now when
ye can do no better, ye can your selves most desperately on the Bishops side,
to maintain their cause, when ye are yet too weak to maintain your own.

This Well-willer, in the end of his Book, wishes that the Commissioners
golden speech be written upon all their actions, viz. That those that are most
averse to Presbytery, if they allow no matertall difference in Doctrine,
Worship, or Practice, might enjoy their peace, and all comforts of their
Ministry, and Profession under it, without controllment of that Authoritative
power which they so much apprehend.

And thereunto replieth, We have (says he) been of late made to fear the
contrary, by the reports of some (not of the meanest rank) rf your own Nation.

Answ. No godly man, that knows what is Presbyterian Government, can doubt of
it; for according to the rules thereof, 1. no man is compelled to be Actor in
any thing against his own conscience. 2. If you will be under it, and allow no
material difference, etc. without doubt the Synod and all Orthodox Churches
will cherish you, and assure you of it.

But if ye will ever live in Panick fears, and be so witty as evermore to find
out new matter of jealousies to vex your own souls, and make you to live in
such a perpetual diffidence, all the forces of the King and his three
Kingdoms is not able to hinder it; ye must trust in God, and admit of such
security from your Brethren as morally ye can have: If this do not the
business, we know not what to advise you.

As for that Anonymous Countryman of ours, who he can be, and if any such be,
and whether his discourse with you could give you matter of just fear, we know
not, and therefore forbear to answer: Only I wish seriously on your behalf,
ye would do nothing against the glory of your God, the weal of your Country,
or to the breach of charity with your Brethren, who so much desire to live in
peace with you all. The peace of God be with you all. Amen.

FINIS.

