VINDICIAE FVNDAMENTI: Or a threefold defense of the DOCTRINE OF Original Sin:
Together with some other fundamentals of Salvation

The first against the exceptions of Mr. Robert Everard, in his book entitled,
The Creation and the Fall of man.

The second against the Examiners of the late Assemblies Confession of Faith.

The third against the Allegations of Dr. Jeremy Tailor, in his Unum
Necessarium, and two lesser Treatises of his.

By NATHANIEL STEPHENS Minister of Fenny-Drayton in Leicestershire.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Edmund Paxton in Paul's Chain, right
over against the Castle-Tavern, near Doctors Commons. 1658.

THE PREFACE TO THE Reader, Showing the Reasons of publishing the present
Treatise in these times.
ALthough we are fallen into an age, where books of all sorts do abound; yet in
two cases (as long as the Lord has a Church upon the earth,) there will be
still need of writing more.

The first, when many divine mysteries do remain still enclosed, and sealed up
in the Scriptures, no man will doubt (upon such a supposal) but it is the duty
of those that read (according to ability) to bring the truth to light. I did in
order to this, publish a Tract concerning the Beast, his name, mark, and the
number of his name, etc. Here if any will say, shall we be wiser than our
forefathers, to endeavor the discovery of that, which they could never find
out? The answer is clear, truth is the Daughter of Time: A Pigmy upon a Giants
shoulder, may see farther than the Giant himself: Even so we standing upon the
shoulders, and enjoying the labors of those that have gone before, may see as
far as they did, and by wading into further depths, may go further than they.
Upon this account it does more peculiarly belong to us, to continue the (...)
where they left it, to add to the stock of knowledge, to be clear, where (...)
were confused, to turn into the way, where they went (...), and to bring those
things to light that have been, either totally, or in part obscured from them.
Some are of the judgment that we are come to the very Zenith, and top of all
kind of learning, and that we know already, all that we need know. But an
hundred, and a thousand ensamples, may be showed to the contrary: We are dark
in many of those things that are reserved for the industry and diligence of the
latter times. If men would convert the course of their studies this way; as
they would make a better return of their labors, so they would be less
prejudicial to the writings of former times: At least all must acknowledge that
there will be just occasion of printing (...) books, as long as new matter
remains to be published to the world.

A second case of new writing, is; when the plain, fundamenal, and common
truths of God, are made dark by the new fangled opinious, and brangling queres
of each age; In such a case a necessity does lie upon us; and woe is unto us,
if we do not plead for the truth, when it is notably and eminently endangered
by others. In the present case I have not to do so much with that which is
dark, and abstruse in its own nature; but with that which is made so, by the
devises and subtilties of men. The doctrine of original sin, and the natural
servitude of the will (at least to any spiritual good) is plainly enough set
forth in the Scriptures, yet there are more than too many in these times, who
endeavor with all their might, to draw a cloud over this cleerenesse. I cannot
see but as a Minister is to preach, and to live according to the truth; so it
is his office and duty also to clear the same truth, from the errors, and
intanglements of his own age. As evil manners occasion good Laws, so evil
opinions, and evil interpretations of Scripture, (specially) where gainsaying
spirits do endeavor to puddle the stream) should make us more skillful in the
mystery of salvation. Whatsoever the reason is, many of the friends and
followers of the separation with us, do not rest satisfied with the denial of
Infant Baptism, but they proceed also to deny al infants to be born in original
sin: The confession of the faith of the thirty separate Congregations, has not
(as far as I can perceive) any one word of the sin of the nature: Some do
more apparently deny the thing, and others are more close in what they hold.
But Master Everard in his Book entitled, the Creation and the fall of man,
contains the substance of all their arguments. Which Tract of his, seeing it
is spread far and near, to the deceiving of many poor souls, and to the
troubling of others. I have thought it necessary to examine all the material
passages, and to detect the subtilties and fallacies thereof. The chief points
he does insist on, are these; whether had Adam the Spirit, or was he a
spiritual man before his fall? Secondly, how far do obedient actions proceed
from the operation of the Spirit: and how far are they a man's own act?
Thirdly, he treats concerning the contrariety of the two wills, the secret, and
the revealed will of God. Lastly, he comes to the maine point, to assert the
innocence and the purity of the natural birth. And for this he seems to
himself, and others of that way to have some coulourable reassons.

When I had done with him, there came to my hand the Examen of the late
Assemblies Confession of Faith: I am uncertain whether one, or more are the
Authors: Some circumstances do not obscurely insinuate it to be the act of
more than one man, and therefore in the ensuing Discourse, I do speak of them
in the plural number; Because in the points of free will and original sin,
they do concord with Master Everard, and the Antipedobaptists of our Vicinity.
I have taken them into the Company to which they do belong.

Now this last year (considering the State of our Affairs) when certain friends
of mine, Ministers as well as others, did desire me to publish what I had
written: At the same time did Doctor Jeremy Tailor set forth his Vnum
Necessarium. In that Book of his Chap. six, as also in two other small
Treatises, the answer to the Bishops letter, and The Further Explication, does
the Author fall upon our differences: alleging the same things, in effect,
which our Antagonists for certain years past, have alleged against us.
Only this difference is to be made, he does ascribe much to the Testimonies of
the Fathers, and other Ancient Authors; They do slight all such kinds of
authority: He does own (for ought as I could ever hear) the Baptism of
infants: They more securely to deny infant Baptism, do seem also, upon the
same reason, to deny all Infants to be borne in original sin. His Writings
are like to have a free passage in all the parts of the Land: Theirs for ought
as I can hear, are received more chiefly in their own society. His Writings,
considering the greatness of his learning, the Elegancy of his style, and the
favor he bears to the Episcopal cause, are like to pass with those that are
Friends of that way: They (whatsoever their interests) their Principles do not
go in that stream. He in many cases, is too much for that which is old: and
they contrarily, are too much for that which is new: What reasons did first
move him to enterprise the business, he himself does relate, in his own
words. These things (says he) have I chose to say and publish, because I find
that the usual Doctrines, about original sin, are not only false, and
presumed, without any competent proof, but because as they are commonly
believed, they are no friends to Piety, but Patrons to idleness, and
dishonorable to the reputation of Gods goodness and justice, and more to that
purpose he has further explicated, page 502. Here I do willingly agree with
him, that great circumspection ought to be used in the right handling of these
things. But then on the otherside he has special cause to beware that he do
not turn to the more dangerous extreme.

Original sin (in that sense as we define it) cannot be denied, but upon the
denial many desperate absurdities will ensue. We had a conference with the
Brethren of the separation at a Neighbour-Towne, Anno 1654. February the 22.
Because they occasioned the dispute by disturbing the Minister of the place,
and were so tenacious of the point; We did put it upon them to answer the
question as follows. If all infants be born free from original sin, when do
they begin to be sinners, that we may call them so? They told us when they
did act sin. We replied, then in all that space of time from the conception
in the womb to their acting of sin they are all free? They answered; they
are all free: we demanded, why is it then the peculiar prerogative of Christ,
if infants in all the forementioned space do partake of the same privilege? To
this they said, that infants are as free from all sin as Christ himself. We
told them that we did much admire at the boldness of such an assertion: They
answered, set his Godhead aside, they are as pure as Christ himself was pure.
We rejoynd, why was the Lord Christ conceived of the Holy Ghost, and borne of
the Virgin Mary? To this, they made no great Answer: And the standers by did
seem to look upon such a position with a kind of horror.

But as strange as the Tenet is, I find that Doctor Jeremy Tailor, the Author
above named, does not shun to say the same thing in effect, at least he seems
to go very near to that coast. For in his answer to the Bishops letter, he
brings the Bishop speaking after this manner. If there be no such thing as
original sin transmitted from Adam to his posterity, then all that sixth
Chapter is a strise about a shadow, a Non ens. Answ. It is true my Lord, (says
he,) The question, as it is usually handled, is so: For when the Franciscan and
the Dominican do eternally dispute about the conception of the Blessed Virgin:
whether it was with or without original sin, meaning by way of grace, and
special exemption, this de non ente, for there was no need of any such
exemption: And they supposing that commonly it was otherwise, troubled
themselves about the exception of a rule, which in that sense, which they
supposed was not true at all: she was borne as innocent from any impurity and
formal guilt as Adam was created, and so was her Mother, and so was all her
family. In which words of his, if he had said that his own answer to the
Bishops letter was a mere non ens, he had spoken more truly: for where there
is no such thing as the Bishop of Rochester at all, what answer can be given to
his letter? But whereas he stands upon it, that the impurity of the natural
birth from Adam the root of corruption, is a mere non ens, what will you make
of regeneration, and of Baptism the washing of regeneration? Where there is no
sinfulness in the natural generation, what need of Baptism or regeneration at
all? Besides, the Scriptures do speak abundantly of the putting off of the Old
man, and of the mortification of the sin of the nature, if there be no such
sin of the nature from Adam the root of corruption this whole work will be de
non ente, for that which is not true in any sense, cannot be mortified at all.
And whither will this conceit go at last? Further, the Saints have been deeply
humbled for their birth sin. I was borne in iniquity, and in sin did my
Mother conceive me: What is man that he should be clean, and he that is borne
of a woman that he should be righteons, etc? If there be no such sin at all,
these confessions and humiliations will be de non ente. The Saints shall be
humbled for a sin, and yet no such sin is to be found. In former times
there were Thanksgivings for victories over enemies, which indeed and in truth
were de non ente. But here we have Confessions and Humiliations of the same
kind, innumerable other absurdities will ensue upon the denial of such a
truth, which as I may so say, is one of the first magnitude among the
principles of the Faith. It were good that this learned man and others that are
concerned in the point would timely think upon it, and be better advised before
they go to farie. Again, on the otherside, I do not deny, that the points of
original sin, and free will, have been so handled in some systems of
Divinity, Commentaries, and Polemical Discourses, that maintains there has
been a want of consideration, sometimes a want of truth. What they bring out of
the Scriptures (truly understood) to prove the substance of the Doctrine is
sound and good, but what is alleged out of the Schoolmen to confirm the
same, is not always authenick: Paul's words do bind the conscience always,
and at all times, but not always as they are delivered in the notions, in the
terms, and in the method of Aquinus. Suppose that Saint Paul was now alive
upon the earth, and it were laid as a task upon him to read the whole body of
the controversy, as it now lies between the Dominicans and the Jesuits, the
Jansenists and the Molinists; such a case being imagined, we may easily
conceive what his judgment would be. As he would condemn one part for their
dangerous setting up of free will in derogation to the grace of God: so he
would not altogether approve the other part for the mingling of spiritual
truths with strange speculations of Philosophy, and with Metaphysical
quiddities, notions, and conceptions of their own commenting. Doubtless he
would find many things in them that would not hold weight with the shekel of
the Sanctuary. Among our selves also there are some passages that might have
been uttered with greater caution. The Treatise of Luther de servo arbitrio is
questionless in it self a worthy work, yet I think that Calvin in his answer
to Albertus Pighins did not speak amiss, This also is true, some things which
Luther wrote in a Scholastical kind of way, and in a less popular style;
Philip Melancthon by his prudent and dextrous bending it to the milder part,
did more fitly apply to the ordinary capacity of men, and to the common use of
life. Yet for all this in other places that great instrument of reformation
does so abundantly speak of the freeness of the grace of Christ, to every
brokenhearted sinner, that he does satisfy all tender consciences, and leave
a solid foundation for the endeavor of man. Now every one cannot do this, for
they that follow the asperity and the rigor of Luther in some positions of
his, cannot with the same spiritual evidence set forth the grace of the Gospel:
And so it comes to pass that the harshnesse and the incongruity imputed to the
doctrine, is indeed and in truth no other but the sole defect of the Teacher.
By right spiritual truths should have spiritual Teachers, and spiritual
hearers, and then a true judgment may be made of the real excellency and worth
of them.

These things considered, I do intend to observe these rules in the ensuing
discourse.

First, laying aside all nice and curious speculations, to retain so much of
the terms of the Schoolmen, that will serve only to explain the doctrine of
the Gospel, that spiritual things may be set forth in a spiritual manner.

Secondly, my scope (the Lord enabling) shall be as to speak the pure truth, so
likewise the whole truth of God. When I speak of the impurity of the natural
birth, then I will take occasion to show also how this does refer immediately
to the grace that does regenerate; and when I shall have occasion to speak of
Adam as a root of corruption to all his branches, I shall as carefully remember
that this is a counterpane to Christ, being a root of grace and spiritual life
also to all his branches. When it shall come in my way to mention the
imperfection of man, and the spirituality of the command, I shall be as careful
to inculcate that which does answer to it (viz.) that all help is to be had
from the Word of promise. When I shall say that a man has no free will by
nature to that which is spiritually good, I shall be as willing to recite the
true cause where the freedom is to be had, to wit, from the Son of God, if the
Son will make you free, you shall be free indeed: Further, where I shall
speak of a certain number of elect which the Lord does decree curtainly, and
infallibly to bring to glory. I shall demonstrate also that this necessity of
infallibility does not, nor cannot (whatsoever men may think) overturne the
liberty of the will: For those that the Lord has certainly appointed to
salvation, he will as certainly, first or last, sooner or later, draw their
wills so effectually that they shall freely choose the way and means that lead
to salvation as the end. Those and such liketruths that are usually
misunderstood through inconsiderate handling, I shall endeavor to represent
them in their true beauty: For as it is with the members of the body, so it is
with these myseries of salvation; Being considered apart, they seem to be
deformed, but being put together, there is an excellent correspondence and
symetry in the whole.

Finally, according to our Saviors rule I shall endeavor (I hope without
detriment to either part) to give to grace that which does belong to her, and
to the will that which does belong to her; I would not take the least dram
from the true grace of God, so on the otherside I would have the will to work
under the grace received. These are the reasons of publishing the treatise in
these times.

I rest thine in the Lord N. S.

The Arguments of each Book.
The first Book in Mr. Everards Method.
Chap. 1. WHat were the causes, that gave Adam his being? Chap. 2. Wherein
Adams abilities did consist? Chap. 3. Whether righteousness, and holiness be
Gods image? Chap. 4. Wherein that image did consist, that God did create Adam
in? Chap. 5. Concerning the power that God gave Adam, and what is the
definition thereof? Chap. 6. Adams entertainment in the garden. Chap. 7.
Free Will in the nature thereof unfolded. Chap. 8. How far God assisted Adam,
or assisteth other men, that they might be such free-willers, as has been
described? Chap. 9. Though God gives power, he gives not the actions of
obedience. Chap. 10. Concerning diverse questions, with their solutions. Chap.
11. Whether Adams sin, or any other man's sin, does produce death in a
natural way? Chap. 12. What Adam retained of his forfeiture, till his death?
Chap. 13. Whether Adam did dye the same day that he eat of the forbidden
fruit? Chap. 14. Whether Adam did dye a spiritual death, yea or no? Chap. 15.
Whether Adams posterity were guilty of his transgression? This point is more
fully debated.
The Second Book in the method of the Examiners.
Sect. 1. WHat places of Scripture they bring to prove the purity of the
natural birth? Sect. 2. What answer they endeavor to make to the texts
alleged by us?
The third Book in the method of Dr. Tailor.
Sect. 1. OF Concupiscence, and Original sin, and whether or no, and how far we
are bound to repent of it? Sect. 2. A consideration of objections, against the
former doctrine. Sect. 3. How God punishes the fathers sin upon the children?
Sect. 4. Of the causes of the universal wickedness of mankind. Sect. 5. Of the
liberty of election, remaining after Adams fall.
The first Book containing the Answer to Master EVERARD concerning the Creation
and fall of Man,
SIR,
OCcasion being given to me to read over your Treatise concerning the creation
and the fall of Adam, I shall now endeavor to give you an account what I judge
of your doctrine. I shall not stand upon every point, but only upon that which
is of special moment. In the end of your Introduction you signify the cause of
your undertaking, in these words, Whereby we may be the more enabled to
vindicate the Righteous Creator from many misconstructions which have been for
a long time nourished for want of due consideration. For the vindicating of the
Righteous Creator I shall be no enemy to you, so far as you go according to
the rule of the Word and the analogy of faith. But I fear under the color of
this pretended Vindication you drive a design to put Christ out of place.
Through the whole body of your Treatise you stand upon the purity of nature,
the denial of Original sin, and the improvement of natural abilities. We will
go in your method, and begin with your first Chapter.

CHAP. I. What were the causes that gave Adam his being?
HEre you debate the efficient, material, formal, and final causes of that
being which he had in the beginning, and tell us that God saw all that he had
made, and behold it was very good, Genesis 1.32. From whence you draw this
Conclusion, doubtless these words were spoken to take off some future
objections, or to prevent men's sayings, that Adam consisted in creation of two
sorts of people, one being assigned for heaven, the other for hell. And lest we
should judge that God made any part of him for damnation, at that time he
assures us that he made all things very good. When I read this passage of
yours, I do call to mind a kind of torment used in the Primitive times: when
the persecutors would expose the bodies of Christians to wild beasts, they did
sometimes cover and disguise them with the skins of other living creatures. So
do you here, and in other parts of your book with the doctrine of Gods free
election. When you see that there is such a Majesty in the truth it self that
you cannot well oppose it, you do draw an ugly visage and form over it, to the
end that you may bait and encounter it more easily at your own pleasure. The
Lords making all good in the beginning, does not infringe the election of some,
and the non-election of others, if these things be rightly construed. And
therefore whether you consider men in that first state made after the image of
God, or in that state as fallen, in both these I conceive all mankind to be
equal. The difference of elect or non-elect is immanent only in the Decree of
God, and election does only so far forth begin to be manifest as men living
under the means come to be called, justified, sanctified by the Spirit, Romans
8.30. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. We have no other way to take notice of election but this
only. For that saying of yours that Adam consisted of two sorts of people in
creation, the one part being assigned for heaven, and the other for hell. We
willingly acknowledge that the number of the elect were known to God before the
foundation of the world, yet this difference between man and man in the Lords
secret intention did make no difference between man and man in the creation or
in the fall. The nature of all men, elect and others, was equally good before
the fall, as it was equally corrupted and depraved after the fall. As in the
like case, Jesse was the father of many sons, of which one was designed in the
secret counsel of God to rule the Kingdom of Israel: As they were the sons of
one parent they were all equal, made of one blood, partakers of the same
education, though one was specially designed for the Kingdom. So in the
present case, the nature of all men may be equally good before the fall, all
may have one and the same image of God, all may fall in one and the same
parent, yet God may in a special manner intend to bring some to salvation, and
to leave others voluntarily to run their own ruin; he may have mercy on whom
he will have mercy, and he may have compassion on whom he will have
compassion. You do then plainly impose upon us with your sophistry, when you
fetch arguments from some temporal acts to overturne the Lords eternal Decrees.
But this is a passage only by the way, we will go to the next Chapter.

CHAP. II. Wherein Adams abilities did consist.
HEre you define ability, that it is a fitness in the subject commanded every
way answerable to perform any action that the Creator is pleased to call the
creature to, page 5. In this I do agree, that originally God did proportion the
abilities of Adam to the commands that he gave him. I do also willingly
acknowledge with you, that he had first a capassity to receive intelligence;
secondly, directions; thirdly, abilities in present possession; and fourthly,
time. But whereas you say, p. 7. that our Lord the Creator afforded all these
aforenamed accommodations as a sufficient means for every man to obey his
commands. In this I believe you do not only equal, but go beyond Pelagius
himself. For you say in effect that man has as great abilities after the fall,
as before. But lest that any may think that these are the consequences of mine
own making, and that they are not the true result of your doctrine, let him go
to the fourteenth chapter of your book, and there let him see how you do
expedite the question. You propound the quere what Adam retained of his
forfeiture after his death? and here you determine that his power was inwardly
as great to keep the commands of God as before. You say if in that service of
God which Adam had to do he was completely furnished by God, why should I judge
that he would employ him in a more hard service and not aford him suitable
accommodations? seeing God was as willing that his commands should be obeyed
after as he was before the fall. For I judge the work that God set Adam about
before the fall he had ability to do after the fall if God had given him a
command to return into the garden, page 110. Let any man who reads these
words judge in his own heart whether Pelagius himself could have spoken more to
the derogation of the free grace of God in Christ, then you have done. To this
if we add the several passages in your Treatise concerning the improvement of
nature, and the freedom of infants from original sin, and compare all
together, we shall find the whole tenor of your doctrine to be manifestly
destructive to the Covenant of Grace. We will therefore endeavor on the
contrary to show the positive truth. And therefore, seeing God does require
obedience of man after the fall, I do freely assent that he does give suitable
accommodation. But how? the accommodation does not consist in the presence of
any natural ability, but in the promise since the fall there is an ability to
obey the Lords commands, but that ability is out of man, in Christ only: To
him they must go to supply all their wants, and he must help them to perform
all the duties enjoined: If you stand upon the proportion of abilities to
commands, then say that the ability is in Christ only to be had, and we shall
easily agree. He of God is made to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. In him all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
are hid, Col. 2.3. Of his fullness have we all received grace for grace, John
1.16. It shall never be denied by me, nay, I will maintain it, that now since
the fall there is a proportion betwixt the ability and the command, but then
the ability must be had from Christ only, and the immediate supply of his
Spirit. In this sense Saint Paul had abilities in a meet temper and
correspondence to his duties; for he says, I can do all things through Christ
that strengthens me, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13. And in another place, my grace shall
be sufficient for thee, my strength shall be seen in thy weakness, 2 Cor.
12.7.8, 9, But the way to come by this ability is not in your method to set up
nature, but to die to a man's self, and to be emptied of all natural abilities.
Most gladly therefore will I glory in mine infirmities, that the power of
Christ might rest upon me, 2 Cor. 12.9. The Authors of the Confession do seem
to speak more fairly for the grace of God then you do. They do not shun to
affirm that we have all from Christ, and that of our selves we have not
ability to think a good thought, and much to the same purpose. But by this
affirmation of theirs how can they possibly agree with their own principles of
the purity of nature? For where there is no depravation of the natural birth,
what need or what use is there of the grace of regeneration? They conceal
themselves, and you openly profess your judgment: they seem to speak more
fairly, but you are more true to the principles and positions of the Separate
Churches.

CHAP. III. Whether righteousness and holiness be Gods Image.
HEre you endeavor to prove the Negative, to wit, that righteousness and
holiness in man was not the image of God in the first creation. Because this
is not your own single opinion, but also the doctrine of the thirty
Congregations, who place the image of God only in dominion over the creature,
we will debate the point more fully. And so much the rather, because you did
urge me at Earle-Shilton in Leicestershire, Anno 1650. December. 26. before a
multitude of people to answer this question, what place of Scripture have you
to prove that Adam had the Spirit of God, or that he was a spiritual man before
his fall? I did then cite three several texts, the natural sense and import of
all which is to show that God made man after his own Image, and that this Image
did principally consist in spiritual and inward holiness.

For that place, Genesis 1.26. Come let us make man after our Image, in our own
likeness. There is none does doubt but this is the speech of the three persons
in Trinity. Only the question is wherein did this Image principally consist.
The separate congregations and you also affirm, that it did appear only in
Dominion and Lordship over the creature; these words do immediately follow in
the text, let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the foul of
the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping
thing that creeps upon the earth. But herein both they and you are deceived,
for primarily and properly the Image of God was resplendent in the conformity
of the soul to the spiritual Law of God. Secondarily, the Image of God was
resplendent in that external privilege of rule and dominion over the creature.

Now that it may appear that the principal part of the Image of God is in
inward holiness, and that the soul so inwardly and spiritually endowed, does
more lively express his similitude, for this, read that Scripture, Put on the
new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him,
Col. 3.10. Here note, what it is that the Apostle would have the Colossians to
put on, Put on the new man. By this he does mean the Christ-like and spiritual
disposition, set in immediate opposition to the old carnal disposition of the
flesh, which they had already in good measure begun to put off. Secondly, the
word (renewed) does note a repair or renovation of that which formerly was
decayed. So the Psalmist prays, Create in me a clean heart, and renew within
me a right spirit, Psalm. 51.10. He does pray for the return of the same spirit
which formerly he had, but now seemingly had lost. So thy youth is renewed like
the Eagles, Psalm. 103.5. As much in sense as that he makes thee vigorous like
an Eagle, who by casting her beak and feathers, renews her former agility. And
so in the present case wherein it is said, Put on the new man which is renewed
in knowledge, this notes the repair and renovation of that spiritual
disposition which Adam had, but lost it by his fall. Thirdly, for the matter of
the renovation, venewed in knowledge, does signify spiritual knowledge in the
nature thereof, and that which comes from the Spirit of God as the cause.
Fourthly, for the pattern of the renovation, it is expressly said, after the
image of him that created him; Therefore the first man must be made in a state
of spiritual knowledge and holiness. If this be not so, how could the
believing Colossians be renewed after this example as the Prototype?

Let us go to the next Scripture, that ye put on the new man, which after God
is created in rigteousnesse and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. This Scripture also
does plainly show that Adam had the Spirit of God before his fall. For first,
why is it said be renewed in the spirit of your mind? This implies that we
were sometimes such. Secondly, the expression of righteousness and true
holiness is opposed to feigned, and hypocritical sanctity. Thirdly, the whole
tenor of the speech is to this end, that the Ephesians should put off the old
Adam-like disposition with all the deceitful lusts thereof; and that they
should put on the Christ-like nature which is renewed after the similitude and
pattern of the image of God in man before the fall. The argument is thus
grounded upon the text. What the Saints are by renovation, such Adam was by
creation; But by renovation the Saints are just and holy: From all which we do
conclude that Adam was a spiritual man, and had the Spirit of God before his
fall.

Now to the Scriptures let us add a few reasons. First, it is a Maxim
generally received, that the Law was made for man before his fall. Now how the
first man could be conformable to so spiritual and divine a Law, and he himself
be destitute of the Spirit, it is not within the compass of my understanding
to discern. If we will argue a posteriori, from the event, we must necessarily
conclude that he must not only be spiritual, but also have a great measure of
spirit to keep such a divine and spiritual Law. Secondly, the Apostle says,
you has he quickened that were dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1, 2. If
all be dead in trespasses and sins, this spiritual death must begin at the
fall, and so by consequence the first man must have the spirit, and spiritual
life before his fall. For what is spiritual death, but a privation of the life
of the Spirit of God? These and many more reasons might be brought to prove
Adam to be a spiritual man as long as he stood in that state in which God had
placed him. Now let us hear your arguments to the contrary.

You say that Adams righteousness and holiness was not in believing a
Savior, because be was not in a lost condition, page 10 Suppose all this be
granted, that Adam was not to believe a Savior, because he was not in a lapsed
or fallen condition; how does this prove that he was absolutely carnal and
destitute of the Spirit? He was to believe the Father as Lord Creator, he was
bound to love him, to delight in him, and how could he possibly do all this but
he must have some measure of Spirit? Therefore Adam had the Spirit, and was a
spiritual man before his fall. You go on, and say, whatsoever qualifications
the children of God have attained unto, in, and through Jesus Christ their
Lord, by remission of sin, or the hope of a resurrection, and the attainment
of a better life, Adam was not capable of. To this I answer, though the
difference may be in circumstances, the substance is the same. For if you
reckon all that Adam had in present possession, and all that he might have had
if he had stood; if you compare his whole state with the state of the Saints,
with that which they have, and that which they shall have, you shall find an
excellent correspondence betwixt both. For what if Adam was not capable of
remission of sin by Christ's blood, it is all one if he be made in a state
free from sin? What if he was not capable of regeneration because he had no
pollution of nature? yet he was created with a pure and spiritual nature in
original righteousness. What if he was not capable of the resurrection from
the dead, because he died not a natural death? yet he was capable to eat of
the tree of life, to keep himself from death, and so to live for ever. Your
whole way of reasoning is merely fallacious, because Adam had not spiritual
life every way the same in circumstance, therefore he had not the spirit in the
substance and being thereof. You go on and tell us, If men will hold this
opinion, that righteousness and true holiness is the Image of God which the
Lord created man in, and is not to be found there residing, then it is very
requisite that this holiness and righteousness be released. But how do you
prove that this holiness and righteousness did not reside in Adam? If you
shall say, that he was not capable of such Evangelical holiness as is set
forth in the second Covenant; what of all this, notwithstanding the difference
in circumstance, he may have the same in substance. Saint Paul says, I delight
in the Law of the Lord after the inward man, Romans 7.22. He had the same
spiritual delight in the Law by Renovation, which Adam had before his fall by
Creation; where then is the difference? Adam had no rebellion, no law of the
flesh warring against the law of his mind, as Saint Paul had. There was the
same spirit of love in both, but in the one it was with the love of the flesh,
and with conflict with the love of the flesh: but the other was absolutely
free: He did not know by experience what it was to have the flesh rebel against
the spirit. Because the Law requires entire obedience of body and soul,
inward and outward, throughout all the parts of our life; because it is
spiritual it self, and requires that the thoughts, words and deeds be
spiritual; we must necessarily conclude, that the first man must be spiritual
in a large degree, seeing the Law was tempered and proportioned in the
beginning to that ability he had.

But you have another evasion, you say, that at the Creation Adam was not made
conformable to the Image of the Son, seeing he had no such laws to be
conformable to. Here you still harp upon the same string. Because Adam was not
conformable in the same manner, therefore he had not the conformity to the
Image of Christ in substance. I pray you tell me the meaning of this Scripture,
Come let us make man after our own Image. Is not this the speech of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost? You cannot deny it. No more can you deny that Adam was
made after the Image of Christ as Lord Creator. In this point we must
necessarily say that Adam had the same Image of God, and the same spirit in the
general nature of it, as the Saints have in the state of Regeneration, only the
difference lies in some circumstances. He might also have the same faith in the
general nature of faith; though it was impossible for him in that state he
stood to have justifying faith: Seeing he was absolutely without the guilt of
all sin, he needed no pardon by Christ's blood. Suppose all this be granted,
that Adam was not to believe in a Savior, because he was not in a lapsed or
fallen condition, yet all this does not prove him to be a carnal man, or
absolutely destitute of the Spirit before his fall. He might believe in God the
Father, as Lord Creator, to prevent that misery which should ensue by the fall.
And to such a kind of faith it is necessary, that he should have some measure
of spirit Upon this ground also we may conclude him to be spiritual, and to
have the Spirit before his fall.

But whereas the Scripture says, That God made man righteous, you put off all
with this shift, That God made Adam without any stain or blemish in the
beginning, page 13. This we willingly confess to be true, but it is not the
whole, nor the principal part of truth. For uprightness in the
Scripture Language, does not only signify a freedom from evil, but also a
positive habit of righteousness and holiness, and in this state did God make
man in the beginning.

But admit that be granted, What do you gather from hence? you say, If those
that would have holiness and righteousness, to be entitled the Image of God,
and shall mean by it a condition without sin, simply so considered, then the
whole Creation of God might be said to bear the Image of God, page 13. Answ.
Your consequence will not hold, That Adam was without sin at the time of his
Creation, it was from hence, that God made him a holy creature after his own
Image: That other creatures are without sin, is merely from incapacity, seeing
they have neither an understanding to know the Law of God, nor a will to
embrace good or evil, therefore they cannot sin: For that speech of yours,
page 14. It will appear that the Image which Adam did bear, wherein he
represented God, lies in some other place, where none of the creatures are in
acapacity to come, it being beyond them all. Though in the general, I do
acknowledge this to be a solid truth, yet you do not rightly apply it. What
think you of that saying of our Savior, There are some Eunuchs that are so
borne from their mothers womb, and there are some made Eunuchs of men, and
there are some that have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 19.12. Here are three sorts of Eunuchs, but one sort only is so made by
grace, and the mortifying work of the Spirit. So in the present case, the
creatures were free from sin as well as Adam, but their freedom was merely from
incapacity, because they were not able to receive a spiritual Law; And Adams
freedom was from the holiness of that state in which the Lord had made him.
Therefore in the point of nontransgression, Adam was put into such a state as
none of the creatures could come to.

Next you enquire, Whether the Image of God did consist in light? These are
your words, If the light that Adam had, was the Image, then it must be a light
spiritual or natural, or both. Now that it was not the light of the Gospel that
Adam had, is clear, there being neither malady nor remedy which were in being
in the time of this light, page 15. Though there was neither malady nor remedy
at that time, yet he might have spiritual light in the substance thereof, and
the Image of God might principally consist in this. The Apostle speaking of the
regenerate, has this expression, renewed in knowledge after the Image of him
that created him, Col. 3.10. This shows plainly, that man in the beginning
was created after the Image of God, and that Image did chiefly consist in the
spiritual light that was in the understanding.

But because there is a great controversy between the Arminians and us about
the nature of this light, viz. Whether Adam had a power before his fall to
believe in Christ? and because this is a point pertinent to our purpose, I will
briefly recite three Arguments used by Corvinus, in his Answer to Du Moulin.
First, says he, Adam was not bound to believe in Christ, therefore he did not
receive ability to believe in him: such an ability would be unnecessary and
unprofitable, where there was no use of it at all. Chap. 11. sect. 4.5. page
156. Answ. The Argument does not hold; God did not require Adam to believe the
Stories written in the five Books of Moses, the Books of Josbua, Judges,
Samuel, etc. But will any man be so void of reason to argue, that he had no
power to believe these Stories, in case they had been revealed to him? so God
did not require Abraham to believe in Christ, as he was revealed and exhibited
in the last dispensation of the promise: shall we therefore argue that he had
not ability to believe, or that he had not the same spirit in substance which
the Saints now have? He that does so judge, let him answer the meaning of this
Scripture, We having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I
believed, and therefore have I spoken, we also believe, and therefore speak, 2
Cor. 4.13. It is clear from hence, that the Patriarchs Prophets, and Apostles,
had all of them the same spirit of faith in substance; yet all of them have not
the same revelation of the promise, in the circumstances thereof.

Secondly, Corvinus says, that before the fall the Gospel was not credible,
because in the Gospel a sinner is commanded to believe himself to be a sinner,
and that by himself and his own works he cannot be saved, and that all
salvation is placed in Christ the Mediator. And further he adds. It was so
far from man to be able to believe all these things, that he was then bound
rather to believe the contrary, to wit, himself to be upright, and that he
should be blessed if he did persist in his uprightness. p. 154, 162, 164, 165.
Answ. To this we willingly agree, That the way to salvation, as now it is, does
differ very much from that state wherein Adam stood. But the question is not
concerning the diversity or contrariety of the states; but concerning the
power and ability that Adam had, whether it be one and the same in substance
with that which the Saints now have. White and black are two contrary colors,
yet the same eye does see both. Heat and cold are two qualities in the extreme,
yet they are tangible objects to one and the same sense of seeling. So in the
like case, though the Word of the Law, and the Word of the Gospel, are two
contrary ways to salvation, yet there is nothing does exclude, but they may be
apprehended by one and the same spirit of faith. The Word may be one and the
same in the general notion and nature of the Word, and it may be apprehended by
one and the same spirit of faith, yet it may differ in circumstance. But
because the force of the Argument does lie in the contradictory nature of the
two states, we will come to instance in a case or two. Adam before his fall
could not show mercy, if we look to the outward act or the performance of the
duty, for where there is no misery, what mercy can be showed? shall we
therefore argue that he had no such affection in him as mercy? So in the like
case, it is not compatible with the state of the blessed Angels to believe in a
Christ to recover them out of their fall, for they that never fall, have no
need of a recovery: what then shall we say that they have no ability to
understand the Mystery of the Gospel? This cannot be, for so the Apostle
reasons, By them which have preached the Gospel unto you, with the Holy Ghost
sent down from Heaven, which things the Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet.
1.12. Though the blessed Angels have no need of salvation by grace held out in
the Gospel, yet they have ability to understand it, they have a desire to pry
and gaze into it. So in the like case, though Adam had no need of salvation
before his fall by the Mediator, yet he might have ability to understand that
way of salvation, in case it had been revealed.

Thirdly, Corvinus says, that greater abilities are required to faith in
Christ, then that ability which Adam bad before his fall. Answ. I cannot see
possibly how he can consist with his own principles. For seeing he does stand
upon it in his Treatises against Moulin, page 159.165. that God does proportion
abilities to commands; and seeing also he says, that God did promise life to
Adam, under the condition of most perfect and absolute obedience. By the
position of these two, he must necessarily affirm Adams abilities to be
exceeding great before his fall. For seeing the work required was to yield such
a perfect obedience, as none else can perform since the fall but Christ alone;
it must necessarily follow that Adam must have a large portion of spirit fitted
for such an employment. As in some Monuments of Antiquity, we do argue, how
strong such a Prince was, that died many hundred years ago, from the
greatness and weight of his sword: so from the spirituality of the Law given
to Adam before his fall, we do infer his abilities to have been exceeding
great. And thus much out of Corvinus his own principles. Now Mr. Everard, let
us return back again to you. And here, to deal plainly with you and the
Churches that do depend upon your Institution, I must tell you, that neither
Arminius nor Corvinus, nor any other of that party, (to my knowledge) did ever
spin such a course thread as you do. For though they stand upon it, that Adam
had not abilities to believe in Christ, and to raise himself from his fall, yet
none of them do utter such speeches as these, that Adam was altogether
destitute of the Spirit of God, and that he was a mere carnal man before his
fall. This to my understanding does cast a blurre upon the Creator himself.
Now I would entreat you to show some further reason, wherefore the Image of God
did not stand in spiritual light. You say, it remains yet to prove that Adam
had a supernatural light, Which they will never be able to do, unless they
will prove that he was set about some spiritual employments. For God giving
light suitable to the employment he sets his creature about, so suitably God
proportions his light, that it might be just suitable for his works and no
more, page 16. And for the works wherein Adam was employed, you tell us what
they were, p. 17. He was to look after the Garden, to dress and keep it, and
to settle names and titles upon every creature, to eat and drink, with such
like works, as also to bear rule and dominion over the creatures. But Sir, in
this point you are wonderful fallacious. For first, what warrant have you to
take the height, length and breadth of Adams abilities from his present
employments? There is many a true Christian man in these times, that does
believe some truths, who has ability to receive more if it would please the
Lord to reveal them. So we may say in the like case concerning Adam, he was
able to receive more truths if they had been revealed, and to do more duties if
he had been commanded. We are not absolutely to tie and confine men's abilities
to their present employments. Further, what ground have you to affirm, that
Adams employment was only in those externals of keeping the Garden, and giving
names to all cattle, etc? Will you argue, because you read of no more, that
therefore he had no more employment? Thirdly, suppose it should be granted to
you, that Adam was wholly taken up in these outward actions, this does not
prove that he was destitute of spiritual abilities. When the Apostle speaks to
servants, to obey their Masters according to the flesh, Ephesians. 6.5. There is no
man doubts but he speaks of an outward work, but when he says, that they
should do it with singleness of heart, as unto the Lord Christ, and not unto
men: Here is the performance of an outward service in a spiritual manner. Even
so, Adam might be spiritually employed in those works of his, of dressing the
Garden, and of giving names to all cattle, etc.

And thus we have tried your Reasons, how far you are able to prove that the
Image of God in Adam did not consist in righteousness and true holiness, and
that he was not a spiritual man before his fall. This also is the doctrine of
the Thirty Separate Congregations, who place the Image of God only in Lordship
and dominion over the creature.

Next you come to enquire, Whether the Image of God in dam did consist in
degrees of light? And here say you, if this be admitted, upon such a
supposition, not one in all the world can tell what it is to bear the title;
for how can they tell of what height, length and breadth this knowledge should
be of? page 17.18. To ease you of all the pains of searching out the several
degrees of longitude or latitude; I say, precisely at that time, when a man
does receive the true light of the Spirit, he does resume more or less that
Image of God which Adam lost. And look by how many degrees this light does
increase, by so many degrees proportionably this Image of God is renewed. The
Apostle speaks very properly to the purpose, We all with open face beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from
glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.19. Here these
four things are to be noted. First, the pattern or the Idea, we are changed
into the same Image, to wit, into the Image of the Lord Christ himself.
Secondly, the degrees or the several stages: we are changed from glory to
glory. Thirdly, the mean or the instrument of the change, we all with open face
beholding as in a glass, the glory of Christ revealed in the Gospel, by prying
into it, and gazing upon it we are altered and translated into the same image.
Fourthly, the principal cause of the transmutation, even as by the Spirit of
the Lord, by the inward work of the Spirit men come to be enlightened, and so
more and more to put on the Image of God: From these several particulars it is
clear, that the Regenerate are renewed after the Image of Christ, and the
excel noy thereof does stand in spiritual light. And this light in substance
we say that Adam had before his fall. They are the words of the Apostle, as we
have formerly said, renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him who created
him.

Further, you endeavor to show that the Image of God did not stand in
holiness: You say, If it had layen in holiness never so Evangelical and
spiritual, surely the woman that believed in the Lord Jesus would not have been
deprived of that title, but the Apostle expostulateth the cause of the
difference, 1 Cor. 11.7. where he clearly ascribes that title. scil. the Image
of God to reside only in pre-eminence, page 23. But this will not serve your
turn neither, for when God created the woman in the beginning, she was not
only created after his Image in righteousness and true holiness, but she was
also created in a state to have Lordship over the creature. These are the words
of the Text, So God created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created
be him, male and female created he them. And God said unto them, be fruitful
and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over
the fish of the sea, Genes. 27.28. These words were not only spoken to the
first man, but to the first woman also, and to all mankind whether male or
female that should come of them, that they should people the world and bring it
in subjection. If this be so, the man and the woman were both created in that
state to have preeminence over the Creation. And for the words of the Apostle,
they do not deny the woman to be made after the Image of God, though this Image
was more immediately and fundamentally in man the head and lord of the
Creation; If you look narrowly into the text, you shall find a reason
wherefore man does more immediately bear the Image of God, and is a more lively
representative of his Majesty, because the woman was made for the man as an
help meet for him. Now we proceed to the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Wherein that Image did consist that God did create Adam in.
IN this Chapter you endeavor to prove that the Image did consist in dominion
and rule over the creature, page 24. In this I will be no adversary to you. But
the question is, whether did that Image only or principally consist in the
aforementioned dominion, as the Separate Congregations, and you in this
Treatise do labor to prove. This I deny.

For the words that follow, Let them have dominion over the fish of the sea,
and the fowl of the air, they are spoken only to the vulgar capacity of the
Reader. For in the ordinary way the Image of God is more visible and easy to
be discerned in the external dominion over the creature, then in the spiritual
and inward endowment of the soul.

Further, whereas you say, That Magistrates in the Scripture are called gods,
and that in respect of their dominion they do carry the Image of God, page 24,
25. From these words of yours you may be condemned, for it is too apparent in
the next Chapter, that you vilify and slight all kind of Magistracy, and make
it a matter of nothing. And for the proof out of Daniel and the Revelation, you
do show your rudeness in that kind of learning. By the head of gold (say you)
Daniel plainly shows to the King, thou art the head of gold. This King was an
image in reference to his pre-eminence, otherwise he had not differed from
other men, page 26. That Nebuchadnezzar was a King, and a mighty King, and that
in his Kingly power he did carry the Image of God, I do willingly confess. But
I pray you tell me, whence is it that you call him an image? To say the truth,
he is typed and set forth by some part of the image. By the same Law you may
call the Counties of Devonshire and Cornwall a Map of all England: whereas
these Countries are described as some parts in the Map. Further, if we should
grant that the Babylonian Empire in Nebuchadnezzar, might be said to be the
image by a Synechdoche, because it is some part of the image; what is this to
the Image of God; and to the Creation of man after his Image? For the image
spoken of in the text, it is only a type and a figure which the Lord did use to
set forth the four Tyrannical Empires, which in their several successions one
after another should afflict the Church. These four great Empires be does set
forth by so many beasts, chap. 7. as they are described by the four regions
and parts of the image, chap. 2. But what reference has this description to
the Image of God in the Creation of man, I cannot discern: I think as good a
resemblance may be found between a shepherds dog, and the dog star, as
between these two images which you parallel and compare together. But if to
mend the matter you shall say, that Rulers are signified by the several parts
and regions of the image; I will answer, in propriety of speech, the Lord by
this figure does represent so many successions of tyranny rather then of
lawful dominion, and why he should do this by the four parts of the body of
man is from his own institution.

Neither is that other place more fitly alleged out of the book of the
Revelation, for though it be true in the general, that Rulers in respect of
their pre-eminence do carry the Image of God; yet how can you conclude anything
from that text, The Dragon gave life to the image? Rev. 13.15. The scope of the
Spirit in this Prophecy, is mainly concerning the sufferings of the Church
under two forms of Roman dominion, under the tyranny of Rome Imperial, and
Rome Papal, and so it was when the persecuting Empire was destroyed, there was
a renovation and repair of that Majesty, and a reviving of it, as it were,
from the dead. This the Spirit does express, when he says, that the beast had
a wound in one of his heads: this wound was cured, and the second beast made an
image to the beast that had received a wound in one of his heads. The scope of
all is to show the repair of the Roman Tyranny in the Popes, that was formerly
lost in the Cesars. Now how do you gather from hence that Magistrates do carry
the image of God, in respect of their authority? Indeed, in these words there
is mention made of an image, but none of Gods Image: of the image of the beast,
which had received a wound in one of his heads. Again, here is mention made of
a vicegerent, but none of Gods Vice gerents upon the earth. The Dragon gave
him his power, seat and great authority. Now Sir, I leave it to any ordinary
understanding, to judge what woeful havoc is here made of the Word of God. I do
the more willingly put you in mind of these things, because now a days so many
bold and ignorant men intrude themselves into the place of the Ministry, and
take so much upon them to expound the Revelation, Daniel, Canticles, and other
hard Scriptures.

CHAP. V. Concerning the power that God gave Adam, and what is the definition
thereof.
TO the end that we may understand what power Adam lost, and what he retained,
you do well in the beginning to define what his power was. You say, you do not
take power for ability, or the use of ability, but for a word of command,
issuing from the great Commander, with reference to man: or a lawful Commission
given to men, whereby they are enabled to justify their actions, in case they
neither add nor diminish. And then you conclude, so much command a man has
from God, so much power he has of God, page 29, 30. Here you seem to me to
affect a way by your self. For though sometimes power is taken for authority,
for that which a man may warrantably and lawfully do, yet I think in the
present case, when you speak of the power which Adam had before his fall, it
had been more proper to insist upon his ability, what he was able to act
according to the Law that was given to him. Secondly, if we take power in the
latter sense. Adams freedom did not stand so much in what the Lord did
positively command him, as in that which he did not precisely and strictly
forbid him. And therefore you must needs err in the definition of that power
that Adam had before his fall. But these improper speeches of yours might
pass, if you did not turn them against the Civil power. These are your words,
from Romans 13.1. If the soul must be subject to such Powers as are the
Ordinances of God, and there be no Powers but Gods Ordinances, then Gods Word
or his Command are his Ordinances. And from hence you infer, if Rulers come as
Gods Ministers, they must produce his Word for the power of Ordinances, page
30. Here I would have you to assign the difference between the power
appertaining to a Magistrate, and the power belonging to every private man; for
if that be true, as you say, that Rulers are to be obeyed, so far forth only as
they bring the Word; I pray you tell me, must not every man be obeyed upon the
same terms? what do you make then of the power of the Magistrate? when Pilate
boasted, Know thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and power to
release thee? The Lord made him this answer, Thou have no power, but it is
given thee from above, John 19 10 11. It is plain then, that Pilate as a
Magistrate and a Judge had a power given him of God. Now then if that be true
which you say, that the Magistrate has no power but the Word it self, then it
will follow that these are co-incident terms. For to speak properly, the power
of the Magistrate and the Word are not one and the same, but the Authority of
the Magistrate does depend upon the Word, from whence it has its Original and
Institution. You go on, and argue, Are not all men Gods creatures, if so, how
comes it to pass that one should be in subjection to another will, and that
upon such sore punishment? page 30, 31. Here in these words you come very near
the doctrine of the Levellers: Can you make no distinction between subjection
to the lawful power, and man's illegal will? And then turning off from this
digression, you conclude, that the Command of God is the Power, and therefore
so far as the Lords Command did extend, so much power Adam had. But for this
matter we are content to let you pass with your own peculiar way of
expression. Let us now see how you describe Adams entertainment in the Garden.

CHAP. VI. Adams entertainment in the Garden.
IN this Chapter you discourse how Adam was placed in the Garden, how Eve was
made an helper meet for him, and how the Lord brought all the creatures to him,
that he might give them their several names and titles. Because these are Plain
Scripture-truths, I will not be an adversary to you here. But then two
questions are to be demanded; First, whether was his chief emploiment in these
externals? Secondly, whether he did act in them as a mere carnal man?

For the first, if you shall say that Adam was only employed in these
externals, then show why was the Law of God written in his heart? None can
imagine but that it was engraven and written there, to that end, that he should
yield proportionable obedience: he had spiritual abilities that he might be
proportionable to a spiritual Law. If you shall deny this, you will unavoidably
be cast upon that rock, that Adam had the Law put into his heart for no use or
end at all.

Secondly, though he was taken up in externals, in giving names to all
creatures, and in tilling of the ground, yet in this you must look upon him as
a man that was spiritual, able to do these things in a spiritual manner. These
two points I thought good to re-minde you of, because you did a little before
affirm that Adam was a mere carnal man before his fall, and that his
occupation and employment was only in externals. Let us go to the next Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Free will in its nature unfolded.
HEre in the beginning, you define free will to be a cheerful putting forth of
those abilities which the Lord has given us to action. And this you prove by
many Scripture-instances, to clear the nature of freedom. By this account it
will follow, that a natural man, as such, without the help of the Spirit has
no free will at all: he is so far from a free, voluntary, and cheerful putting
forth of abilities, that in spiritual things he is utterly void and destitute
of all ability. But as in the former Chapter you had your digression to turn
out against the Magistrate, when you spoke of the power of Adam before the
fall; so now speaking of his free will you have your vagaries and excursions
against the Ministry. These are your words, Paul preached the Gospel freely, he
stood not upon such punctilio's to have the tenth of the labors of the people,
page 40. The Separate Congregations also agree with you here. For, say they,
the maintenance of the Ministers which labor in the Word of God, ought to be
the free and charitable benevolence, or the cheerful contribution of those that
acknowledge themselves members of the same fellowship, page 22. And the ground
they have to prove it is from that place of the Apostle, while by the
experiment of this ministration they glorify God for your professed subjection
unto the Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto them, and
unto all men, 2 Cor. 9.13. It is clear that the Apostle in these words speaks
of the distributions, and the voluntary benevolences of the Churches to the
necessities of the poor Saints at Jerusalem. But by what Logic the brethren
of the Separation can apply this to the maintenance of the Ministry, in the
time of the New Testament, for my part I cannot discern. Sure I am, when you
and they shall go about to make the people free-willers, in so doing you will
make a servile and a slavish Ministry. As for the due in the payment of the
tenth, it does as truly appertain to the Ministers, as any man's possession or
inheritance does belong to him. And therefore if either you or any man else
shall endeavor to take away the tenth from the Ministry, it is all one as to
endeavor to take away the propriety from other men. Having gone so far along
with you in your digression, let us now come to that freedom of will which
Adam had before his fall. And here I do agree with you, that he had liberty to
put himself forth cheerfully and freely to action, by virtue of such abilities
as he had received from God; yet when you come to the negative part, to pluck
that down which is built by other men, you plainly show, that your definition
is not proper to the case in hand. For thus you conclude, Now some have
conceived that free will had been a man's being, left to his choice whether he
would do the Will of God or no. But I know no such freedom given by God, that a
man should have liberty to dispose of himself, unless you will call that
freedom of will, which a man is prohibited from upon penalties of death; but
God gives no man freedom to sin, but preventions; To this I answer, though the
Lord gave Adam no freedom to sin, but rather tied up his liberty by a contrary
command, yet it is a sure rule, that he made him in such a pendulous estate
that he might stand or fall. And though in that state he had freedom and power
to will that which was good, nay, cheerfully to put forth his ability to act,
yet for all this, his condition was but mutable, he might fall if he would, as
appears by the event. Now that the liberty of Adam did stand between these
two, between the choosing of the good, and the refusing of the evil, it is
clear from the signification of the two trees. The Tree of life signified what
happiness he should enjoy if he stood; the Tree of knowledge of good and evil,
what misery should attend him if he fell. Therefore the liberty of Adam stood
betwixt choosing of the good, and refusing of the evil.

For your definition of free will, that it is a cheerful issuing forth to
action by virtue of abilities received, this might in some sort be applied to
the blessed Angels and Saints in the state of glory. For though they be
established and confirmed in their holy and happy estate that they cannot fall,
yet they do most freely, voluntarily and cheerfully put forth their abilities
to the glory of God: but Adams freedom was otherwise for the trial of his
obedience. He was made in a mutable and changeable condition, in which he might
stand or fall by his own free election, not only because the Lord would be obey
ed by a free choice, but also that through his fall, a door might-be opened to
the sending of the Son, and that salvation might be had upon terms of grace
only, to the fuller declaration of the glory of God.

CHAP. VIII. How far God assisted Adam, or assisteth other men, that they might
be such free-willers as has been described.
TO the performance of duty you tell us, that God does give, first, a capacity
to understand; secondly, ability to perform; thirdly, time; fourthly, he does
use exhortations and reproofs. And then you add, that he gives these rich
accommodations as a sufficient means, for all men to obey every one of his
commands; and he goes no further for effecting any man's actions in the world,
page 42, 43. In these words of yours you do plainly eliminate and extinguish
Gods peculiar grace by and through which he does infalliblie and certainly
carry on his own people to salvation. But that we may join issue with you, we
do freely yield, that God gives greater abilities and helps to men then they
ordinarily make use of. Yet I know no reason in the world you have to confound
the abilities that Adam had before the fall, with the abilities that every man
now has in the state of nature. Again, if you look upon all men as lapsed or
fallen, how can you affirm that the abilities which the Lord gives are equal
to all. Is not this contrary both to Scripture and experience? you tell us how
far God goes with every man in the conferring and bestowing abilities upon
him, and then peremptorily and magisterially determine, that he does not go
further to the effecting of any man's actions in the world. Thirdly, it is a
point well worth the searching, what you mean by these abilities. Pelagius
himself did stand much upon this, that he was a patron and a great friend to
the grace of God. But how did he maintain it? he had a clancular and a reserved
sense, he conceived the mind, will, and other natural abilities to be the
gifts of God, and called them by the name of his free grace. This Augustine of
old did acknowledge to be true in the general, but he did blame him for his
obscuring and darkning the inward special grace of God, through which he does
effectually work upon the hearts of men. And I would we had not too much cause
given to us to judge the same of you. For though you speak much of the ability
which God does give, yet when all is done, you go no further then the natural
faculties. Let any man consider what you have written concerning this point, in
the denial of Original sin, in the advancement of the purity of nature, in the
emprovement of natural abilities, in asserting that Adams ability was as good
after the fall as it was before. By the collation of all these, let any man
judge whether you do not advance nature, and depresse the grace of God; and
whether in these assertions and affirmations of yours, you are not a downright
Pelagian. You cite that place, Is. 5 Judge I pray you now betwixt me and my
vineyard, what could I have done more to my Vineyard that I have not done? From
whence you infer, Where are those disputers against God, that will say be made
a man able to oppress and do unrighteously, and left him destitute of ability
and power to do those things which he commanded. Because this text, as
formerly, so now, is much alleged by the Patrons of free will; I shall
endeavor the more diligently to show the meaning thereof; I see no reason from
the Lords peculiar bounty to the Jewish Church, that we should conclude so
generally that he gives the same ability to every man, in the same degree and
the same measure, and that in point of Conversion and turning to God. There is
nothing in the parable, but (if the Scriptures rightly be compared) you shall
find the truth of the thing will answer the emphasis of the words. For that
expression, What could I have done more to my Vineyard that I have not done?
the truth of this will appear, if you consider all along what God had done for
them, in choosing them above all the people of the world, what he had done for
them in Egypt, in the wilderness, in bringing them into the land of Canaan;
how he had been present with them in all the times of the Judges and the Kings,
how he had delivered them from great dangers, how he had taught them by
afflictions, how he had raised up Prophets in several successions of time to
turn them from the evil of their evil ways; and many such like passages of his
grace and goodness to that people, which plainly seal the truth of that
saying, What could I have done more to my Vineyard which I have not done? This
is true in particular of the Jewish Church. set forth by the figure of the
Vineyard: but how does it prove the question that does lie before us? your task
is to show the general assistance that God gives to every man to make him a
free-willer, yet here I do in sense agree with Dr. Mayer and others upon the
place, that at seasons the Lord by sending in of light does so loosen the will
that is bound, that then a man has some power to will that which is good. And
hereupon they infer,
that the fault is in man himself. For although by nature he be not able to
will the good, yet when he hears outwardly, and the Spirit moves inwardly, he
is able to go the next step, and his condemnation is in this, that he does not
act according to the ability administered. As for that saying of yours, that God
gives a man ability to oppress, but not to obey his Commands: This is none of
our positions, but it is one of your calumnies. We hold that God has put so
much light into the heart of the Gentiles, to know that they must not steal,
that they must not defraud or oppress: the Lord also does give them power to
act according to their light in these and such like outward moralities. This is
clear from the first and second Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans; and it
is evident also by that Scripture, that God was indeed much dishonored by
their not emproving their abilities which he had bestowed upon them, to the
bringing forth of such actions of obedience as he had required of them. He was
angry with them because they did not walk after the light, because they held
the truth in unrighteousness, because by oppression and other sins they did
not answer the Law written in their heart. Though in these externals the
Gentiles had abilities some way proportionable to the Commands, yet in the case
of true repentance, and turning to God, the same Apostle does drive the
Gentiles from all confidence and dependence upon natural ability. The whole
tenor of his speech is to show, that the proper use of the light which God
gives, is primarily and immediately to help a man to judge himself, and in
judging, to see his own emptiness, that so in the sense of his own misery he
may make out for mercy. The whole scope then of the Apostle is to show, that
Jews and Gentiles are all under sin, that they have no ability of their own:
and the end is to drive them to a Christ to make up all.

Next you go to the Parable of the Talents, Matthew. 25. You reason, Our Savior
comes and bears witness to the world that he desires no more increase then the
benefit of what he had first given means sufficient to bring forth, no more
then was answerable to the seed he had first sown; if one Talent, then the
increase of one, verse 18. The slothful man hides the Lords treasury, but verse
30, the Lord presents to us what course he will take with such servants who use
such kind of sayings (as too many do in these days) that God would be
gathering where he scatters not: but that must needs be a lie, for what
pleasure could the Lord himself take in any such increase where himself is not
the planter? page 45. I have often found this Scripture cited by the Arminians,
yet among them all I never met with any that made so corrupt a use of it as you
do. Not many years since the learned Chamier, treating of the point of
free will, did endeavor to show the difference betwixt the Philosophers and
the Jesuits; They (says he, meaning the Jesuits) do admit some kind of
grace, which never entered into the thought of Aristotle; they acknowledge the
corruption of nature by sin, which the Philosophe's did never so much as
dream of, Tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 2. sect 9. If this Author were now alive, I
would gladly know what difference he would set betwixt the Philosophers and the
Brethren of the Separation, who hold that infants are free from all natural
corruption; what difference he would set betwixt Aristotle's Ethical Philosophy
and your Moral Divinity, when you teach that Adams abilities were as good
after the fall as they were before. But now let us come to clear the Parable of
the Talents. First, suppose by sufficient means you understand only the supply
of the Spirit of Christ, how can you justify this to be a true interpretation,
that Christ requires no more increase then the benefit of what he had first
given sufficient means to bring forth? Will you say that it is absolutely
necessary to have the ability in present possession before the command can be
given? If this be your opinion, you must needs block up the right and the true
way of bringing a soul to Christ. We preach the Law in the spiritual nature of
it to a natural man, to what end is all this, but that by the sight of his own
emptiness, by the convictions of the guilt of sin he may look after a
Christ, first, to justify and to pardon; secondly, to sanctify and to cleanse
the pollution of his nature? We do not preach the Law to him, supposing that he
has ability, but the immediate end of our preaching is by and thorough the
inward working of the Spirit to empty him of all ability, that so he may look
to the promise, where true ability is only to be had. For the words of the
Parable, that he gave to every man according to his ability, ver. 15. We are
not strictly to adhere to the letter, as though the Lord does give his grace
according to every man's natural ability, but it is spoken after the manner of
men; he gives his grace in a different measure, to some more, and to some
less; yet all the ability is from Christ himself. And therefore when he that
received one Talent accused the Lord for an hard man, for reaping there where
he did not sow; the answer was, thou should have given my money to the
exchanger: that is, though thou had no ability of thine own, yet if thou
had gone to the exchanger, to the Promiser, he was able to make profit of the
money, he was able to help thee with foreign supply where thine own natural
and domestical ability was wanting. Secondly, whereas you affirm, that there
are many in these days that use such hard kind of sayings, that God would be
gathering where he scatters not, and that one day he will call such servants
to account; I do acknowledge, as heretofore, so now, there are more then too
many who do neglect their talent, and cast the blame upon God himself. But your
aim is not so much at these, as against others who oppose free will, and your
way of setting up the natural ability of man. Though some passages in their
writings are hard, yet if you would compare one thing with another, you should
find that they do speak of abilities that do answer duties; of a word of
promise that answers the word of command; of the fullness of Christ set in
opposition to the sinfulness and misery by Adam. Doctor Twisse disputing
against the Arminians, lib. 3. errat. 9. page 211. does of all others seem to
tread something hard, yet he does show many pithie reasons wherefore the Lord
may give a command where there is a want of abiliy. First, says he, men are
too apt to trust in their own work to bring them to salvation; therefore that
they may know the common contagion of Original sin, and thereupon the
impotency and weakness that has ensued to all good, the Lord takes this
course to show them their misery. Secondly he adds these words, If by the
grace of God we know our selves to be no way fit or able to do those things
which the Lord commands, yet by his just counsel he does command us, and by
his commands he does show what we are indebted to him as Lord Creator, and that
which we are not able to perform our selves we may beg help of him that we may
perform it. And from the words of Augustine he infers that therefore the
Lord commands us that which is impossible, that we may know what to ask of
him, for that which is impossible to be done by nature, is not impossible to be
done by grace. And to come to you more particularly, he adds, It is not
necessary that we should have this grace before the Lord does signify and make
known to us by his commands what our duty is. And so in the close of all in the
end of the Section he concludes. And therefore though they could not (speaking
of the Jewish Church compared to the Vineyard) rightly use those outward means
by their natural abilities, yet they could by the helps of grace. So far the
Author aforenamed. I have stayed the longer upon this point, that you may see
that they who have most strongly asserted the grace of God, are no enemies to
the endeavor of man, and though they do teach every where that there is a want
of ability to perform the commands, yet they show also where the true ability
is to be had, to wit, in the Lord Christ, and in the freeness of his grace.
And this is the true meaning of the parable of the Talents and of the use of
them, and how in the case of non-ability we should go to the Lord Jesus Christ
the great exchanger.

CHAP. IX. Showing that though God afforded means whereby men have ability and
power to do the things he requires, yet he gives them not the actions of
obedience.
IN this Chaptuer you dispute the point very largely that God gives ability to
act, but not the action. For the clearing of the matter, I will first state the
question, and then I will try the strength of your reasons so far forth as
they are of force against us. For the state of the question, there are four
principal opinions. The first is of them that stand upon the power of nature,
as the Pelagians of old, and you now endeavor to prove that man's ability is as
good since the fall, as it was before. The second is of them who do acknowledge
the need of grace to heal the sinfulness of nature, but (as they define it)
it is such a general, weak and common grace, that it is only made efficacious
in and by the concurrence of the will. This doctrine is maintained by the
Jesuits and Arminians. The third is of those who stand so much for the
efficacy of grace, that they wholly take away the endeavor of man. The
Enthusiasts in these days are so for the immediate workings of the Spirit,
that they make us passive, as though we were mere blocks and stones in the
work of our salvation. The fourth is of those who turn from these dangerous
extrems, they hold a need of the grace to carry on the whole work to
salvation, yet so, that man is a free agent, who works under the grace, or by
the help of grace received. This is the doctrine of our Divines. And therefore
when Bellarmine lays it to our charge, as though we should teach that men are
moved as mere inanimate and dead instruments. Doctor Ames makes this answer,
Bellarminus hic luctatur cum larva a seipso corsicta, Bellarmine does here
fight with a man of straw of his own making, Ames. Tom. 4. cap. 3. Sect 4. And
truly Sir, when you stand so much upon the point, that obedient actions are not
the gift of God, if you think that we hold that men are not free agents under
grace, in this you fight against your own shadow, and not against us. Your
arguments, some of them, if they were rightly alleged, would be of good use
against the Enthusiasts of these latter times. Let us now see how you do
proceed.

Reas. 1.
First, say you, if God do engage himself to perform these actions, as
certainly as he gives the means for that purpose, then where actions are
wanting, and means in place, God may be said to fall short of finishing his
own work. Then that reproach which befell the man which began to build, and
finished not, will fall heavy upon the glory of God, page 46.

Answ.
This Argument is of force against them who hold that God does work in us as
inanimate creatures. For where actions are wanting, I cannot see but by the
tenor of this doctrine the defect will lie upon God, and to this pass are
more then too many brought in these days. For, do they not say, are not all
the Promises of God our portion? what if we neglect such Ordinances, such means
of salvation? are we not above all? Are not all the Promises of God ours, for
keeping, guiding and preserving of us? We will not look to Paul, or Apollo, or
the outward means, but to Christ himself to do all in us and for us. Thus men
separate Gods Promises from his ways and prescriptions. But let this be
observed, though God does all by his Spirit, yet he does it mediately by
instruments, and our own endeavor is not to be excluded. For instance, to show
the first work of grace upon the heart, let us consider that passage of the
Apostle, and there we shall see the concurrence of Gods grace, and man's
endeavor. In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and
that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken
captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. Though gainsayers are the
furthest off from the Kingdom of Christ and of God: the Apostle would have a
Minister of the Gospel to show all meekness and patience, and brotherly to
exhort them? and here lays this for a ground of encouragement, Peradventure
God will give them repentance to come to the acknowledging of the truth. The
Minister of the Gospel must set forth the truth in evidence and demonstration,
and leave it to the Lord to sanctify the work. Here then is an excellent
agreement between the grace of God, and the endeavor of man. Further, after
the feeling of the first grace man is not to lie idle; for, it is plainly
expressed, after God has given them repentance to come to the acknowledging of
the truth, which is Gods act, then these words immediately are added, that they
may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil. The word in the Original
is (...), that they may awake out of the snare of the devil. It is a metaphor
drawn from men's awaking out of their drink: For as long as they are in their
natural estate, and do oppose the truth, they do not know the peril of their
condition; but when the Lord gives repentance, then they begin to recover
themselves out of their former miserable condition, and look for further supply
of grace. And so here also is an excellent concord betwixt Gods grace, and the
endeavor of man. But yet for further proof of this, let us consider that text,
I am persuaded that he who has begun a good work in you, will perform it to
the day of Christ, Phil. 1.6. Here the Apostle speaks of a work that is
spiritually and theologically good. Secondly, concerning the person that does
begin the work. Thirdly, the persons who they are in whom this good work is
begun. Fourthly, the accomplishment and performance thereof, I am persuaded
that he who has begun a good work in you, will perform it unto the day of
Christ. Here some may say, if the Apostle had that persuasion, that the work of
grace would go on in the Philippians hearts, whether they did eat or drink,
sleep or play, why did he not bid them be secure, and refer all to God? He had
no such meaning, for when he says, I am persuaded that he who has begun a
good work in you, will perform the same, he does speak in relation to his own
prayer, in the words immediately going before. Always in every prayer of mine
for you all, making request with joy for your fellowship in the Gospel from the
first day until now. In relation to this prayer, and their particular striving
and looking after further degrees of grace, he was confident that the Lord who
had begun the work, would bring the same to perfection. Let us consider the
words in the following chapter, ver. 13. Work out your own salvation with fear
and trembling; for it is God that works in you both to will and to do of his
good pleasure. Here the Apostle does attribute the whole work of man's
salvation, the will and the deed, to the powerful working of the Spirit of God.
And that which is more, he does ascribe it to his good pleasure to work when he
will, how he will, and upon what terms he will. If any shall say, seeing God
does all, what is here left for man to do? does not this utterly drown and
extinguish endeavor? No: for upon this ground he exhorts them to work out
their salvation with fear and trembling, seeing they have no natural ability
and free will of their own, but must merely depend upon the grace of God for
the supply of his Spirit to carry on the work; therefore they must walk humbly
with him, and take the season of grace as it is offered. Because the husbandman
cannot make the Sun to shine, and the rain to fall at his own pleasure,
therefore he does wait upon God for the seasons. Even so because in the work of
man's salvation, the will and the deed does merely depend upon Gods good
pleasure, to work it when he will, and how he will, we are to apply our selves
to him only. When he administers the grace, we should be careful to make use of
the season; seeing the matter is wholly in his hands we should walk humbly with
him. And thus Mr. Everard, you see that though the action is man's, yet the
ability to will and to do is only from God, and nothing from man. And so the
natural ability which you endeavor to set up is nothing at all. Now let us see
what you gather from the parable of the talents. I observe, say you, that
Christ sets no man on work whom he has not enabled to perform it: for he
gives out his work answerable to abilities, Matthew. 25.25. Comparing himself to
a Merchant he straight way went from home, as if he had said, I have so ordered
my family, that I have seen my servants furnished: such a course have I taken
to give every one employment not exceeding their abilities. And what could I
have done more for them? do but name it. Is it not sufficient that I have made
men and women fit for my work? I gave them light to direct them, and they
wanted for no materials, for time they had enough. They had my commands and
persuasions, and also threats in case they did neglect, page 48. These
collections of yours from the parable of the Talents I might let pass, seeing
I have some way hinted at these things before. But because the Pelagians,
Arminians, and you of the Separation do so triumph in the words of this
Scripture, I will take the more pains to clear the meaning of the text. And I
will do it the rather because of one particular passage, which if it were
clearly understood, would break the great design of all those who endeavor to
set up the will of man: They would quickly perceive that they have no such
colorable ground from the words of this Scripture. First, I do willingly agree
that the command does stand in proportion to abilities, but how? not in
proportion to natural abilities, not in proportion to abilities of grace in
present possession, but in proportion only to the supply of the Spirit, as it
shall please the Lord to administer to them that shall work out their own
salvation, and by the prayer of faith wait upon the Lord for the performance of
the promise. Now whereas the slothful servant did complain against the Master
for requiring more then he gave him ability to do, the Lord tells him plainly,
though he had no ability of his own to husband the talent, yet he might have
put the money to the exchanger. The force of which words is thus much, that
though in these supernatural works which men have to do in and toward the
working out of their salvation they have no ability of their own, they may go
to the exchangers, to the word of promise, to the prayer of faith, and to the
continual supply of the Spirit of Christ. As the ability did lie in Adam before
the fall: so now all ability is to be had from Christ only. To him therefore
all that are weary and heavy laden must go for help. And the Apostle when he
had exhorted the believing Ephesians to the performance of many duties, for
matter of ability he shuts up all with this conclusion, Now unto him who is
able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think according
to the power that works in us, Ephesians. 3 20. Here it is plain, that Christ
gives forth work answerable to abilities, but these abilities are not inherent
in men, or in the natural power of man's own will, but they are wholly to be had
from the supply of the Spirit of Christ. They who pray, seek, and ask they
only shall receive. We come now to your second reason.

Reason 2.
Secondly, say you, If God gives us these good actions which we perform, by
confequence this will make void all the commands of God, page 49.

Answer.
In this I am of your judgment, for if any shall say that the Lord does all by
the inward working of the Spirit, and does not leave so much to man as to be a
free agent by the power of grace received, to what purpose are counsels
commands and direct one given to him who is to perform the work. This may
properly be applied to the Enthusiasts, but it does not any way extend to us.
For though we wholly ascribe all to grace,
yet we acknowledge man to be a free agent, who works and acts by the help
of grace administered. Though God himself be almighty and often does work so
almightily, that none can or shall resist him, yet his way of working in the
soul in the excitings and movings of his grace are not always in that almighty
way. Sometimes men do resist, nay the very elect themselves do oppose the
workings of his Spirit, though they do not, nor cannot finally resist. We
constantly affirm that the grace is Gods, and the act is man's. For proof of
this let us consider the meaning of that expression, By the grace of God I am
what I am, and his grace in me was not in vain, but I labored more then they
all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. Here he
does ascribe all to grace, when he says, by the grace of God I am what I am.
Though he does attribute all to grace as to the Architectonical and principal
cause, for all was done by the vigor and efficacy of that grace which was in
him, yet for all this he does not deny himself to be a free agent. He did
instrumentally work by the power of that grace which was in him. Therefore in
the work of his Ministry there is a truth that grace did all, and Paul did
labor more then any of the Apostles: Grace did it principally, and Paul did it
organically and ministerially. And thus you see though the action be man's, the
vigor spirituality and efficacy is wholly from God, and nothing from man.
This is the substance of our doctrine. Now let us see how you concord Gods
grace with man's endeavor. Without further controversy, say you, let it be
confessed that the teachings of God come in to the sons and daughters of men as
the tillings and manurings of God, to provoke them to produce obedient actions,
page 50. This passage of yours we might let go for present, were it not for a
Pelagian sense which it carries with it. For from what Scripture or experience
have you this similitude, that man's nature is to be compared to a fruitful
soil in such things as concern salvation? A fruitful soil though it do want
due culture, has a natural aptness to bring forth fruit: will you say that
there is the same aptness in the nature of man to produce actions of
obedience? does not this go against the scope of Scripture? and do not the
Saints for the production of obedient actions find need of a daily and
continual supply of the Spirit of Christ? All shall turn to my salvation
through your prayer and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.19.
Though the Saints do bring forth fruit, and though it be the act of their own
free obedience, yet it is not from nature as a fruitful soil, but from Christ
the Vine, John 15.1, 2, etc. Our Savior does plainly show that every branch
abiding in him, brings forth fruit. But if you will needs argue from hence the
goodness and fertility of the branch in it self, he says in express terms,
without me ye can do nothing. Further you add, If this opinion should take
place, that God gives our actions, it would as well dismiss the office of the
Spirit of God, and so destroy the internal means. The Spirit stands at the
door of the heart, and calls, provoking us with a multiplicity of
allurements, that we would put forth our abilities to a present performance of
action, p. 51. Here, Sir, as I have formerly said, we have nothing to do with
that idle opinion, that obedient actions are only the gift of God, we have
nothing to do with them who demolish the endeavor of man; let them bear their
own burden whosoever they be. But on the other side we must needs blame you for
running into a contrary extreme, for whereas you say, that the Spirit stands
at the door of the heart, provoking us with a multiplicity of allurements to
put forth our abilities to present performance; here I would entreat you to
define what those abilities are which the Spirit does provoke us to exert and
put forth? If you mean our natural abilities (as you can mean no other, seeing
they stand contradistinct to the allurements of the Spirit) then you will
ascribe the chief work of salvation to man's nature, and the part of the Spirit
shall be only to allure and persuade. By this account not only the action,
but also the ability and the power to act will be from man.

But because the Pelagians of old, the Arminians of late, and you now have such
frequent recourse to this Scripture, Rev. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20. let us read the
words. Because thou say I am rich, and increased in goods, and have need of
nothing, and know not that thou art poor, miserable, blind, and naked: I
counsel thee that thou buy of me gold tried in the fire that thou may be
rich, and white raiment that thou may be clothed, that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eye salve that thou may
see. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore and amend.
Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in and sup with him. From the words these Corollaries may be
deduced. First, not only the Church of Laodicea, but also all men else are
spiritually dead and miserable, if we look upon them as considered in the state
of nature. Secondly, men by their natural ability do not discern the misery of
that condition. Thirdly, such as Christ does intend to bring to salvation he
will begin with them in the opening of the eye of their understanding to see
that in themselves they are poor, miserable, blind and naked. Fourthly, by the
conviction of his Spirit he will show them that he has a supply for all their
wants: for their blindness he has eye salve, for their nakedness he has
white raiment, for their poverty he has gold tried in the fire, and for all
their wants he has a proportionable supply. Fifthly, the Lord Christ at sundry
intervals of time does stand at the door and show these things to the hearts of
the sons men: if therefore they see them, receive them, and in the sense of
their own emptiness go to him for all, they shall have more large and full
communications of himself, he will come in and sup with them. This is the
natural sense of the text, and what is here to set up the ability of man: The
whole scope of the place is rather to pluck down his abilities that the Lord
Christ may be all in all. But in case you stand upon these words, if any man
hear my voice, and open the door, we grant that in the matter of salvation man
is a free agent; when God sends the Spirit into his heart to reprove him of
sin; he is then able to judge himself, when the Lord also discovers the love
of Christ to the heart, by the teachings of the Word without, and the Spirit
within, he is then able to believe. Further, when God gives a Christ-like
disposition, he is then able to show son-like affections toward God, and make
expression that the Law is written in his heart: In a word, he has power so
far to open the door as he has ability from Christ, he cannot go one step
further. And therefore when the Spirit stands at the door and knocks, to speak
properly, there is no natural ability in us, all ability is from grace; we must
look to Christ only, and the more we look to him in the sense of our own
weakness, the more we shall have. All that may truly be gathered from this
Scripture is, that a man is a free agent in the work of his salvation, but the
ability is only from Christ and not from us. Now we will consider the force of
your third Reason.

Reas. 3.
If God, say you, gives men actions of obedience, then were he to be obeyed by
men no otherwise then the winds and seas obey him. In this case there can be no
talent, no neglect of duty on man's part, no more then there is in the axe or
saw in dividing of a piece of timber.

Answer.
This argument I confess is of force against them who give all to the Spirit,
that they make man himself merely passive, as a stupid block. I am against them
as well as you. But you do not only strike at these, but against them also who
are for the Lords free election, and the special communication of his own grace
infallibly to bring his people to salvation. And thereupon, say you, such an
obedience may thus be compared, as if God should come and put a purse of gold
into the hand of men and force it upon them, and call that their obedience; and
to many other men give them not a pennyworth, and demand some of them, and
because it was not there dispose of their persons to everlasting ruin, page
53. Here you endeavor to misrepresent the doctrine of the Lords free election,
and make it odious to your own ends. But we will make it clear that man's
obedience may well consist with the doctrine of election, and his disobedience
also may consist with the doctrine of non-election.


For the first, let us consider the meaning of that place, I will make an
everlasting covenant with them, I will never turn away from them to do them
good, I will put my fear into their hearts, and they shall never depart from
me, Jer. 32.40. That which is here spoken must needs be a promise to the elect,
because it is expressly said, I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, I
will never turn away from them. These words do note the communication of an
infallible grace, but yet not so as any kind of way to diminish and empaire the
endeavor of man: for this is not wrought immediately by the Spirit alone, but
mediately by the Spirit upon the heart of man. And therefore these words are
immediately added, I will put my fear into their heart, and they shall never
depart from me. Because the Lord had an intent to keep them from backsliding,
de did resolve to infuse a son-like fear into their hearts to avoid all
spiritual dangers, and to keep themselves from falling. And so we may see how
the infallible administration of the grace may stand with the free act and
endeavor of man. But let us go to another Scripture. I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh, and will give you a heart of flesh, I will put
my Spirit within you, and will cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall
keep my judgments and do them. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and
your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight
for your iniquities, and for your abominations, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. Here in
these words also there is a promise to the Lords peculiar people, that he will
bestow his special grace upon them; in these words, a new heart will I give
them, and they shall keep my commandments; I will wash them with clean water.

Secondly, here is their particular act, by the power of grace received, they
shall freely walk in the Lords statutes when he shall give them a new heart;
they shall loath their abominations when he shall wash them with clean water.
The more subtle sort of Arminians in several Treatises do seem to ascribe
much to grace, only they make the point of the question to stand in the modus
rei, or the manner of the grace, that God does not so infallibly work upon the
heart ut eventus non possit non sequi, that the event cannot choose but follow.
This is the stumbling stone and the rock of offense that they stumble at.

Now let us consider what is allege in their Apology to the forementioned
Scripture, First, say they, this promise is peculiar to the last times,
therefore it cannot be applied to the conversion of the elect, which is one and
the same in all times. Answ. Though the promise is specially to be applied to
the call to the Jews, yet it does strongly enforce the point. For the question
being only de modo rei, concerning the manner of the thing this Scripture
plainly shows the certainty and infallibility of such a grace, by and
thorough which the Jews shall be brought home in the last days. If we look to
the dispersion of that Nation over all Countries of the world, we may conceive
it a thing impossible to natural reason for them to be gathered together, yet
God has promised to gather them into one body, and that David shall be their
King in the latter days. Even so, if we look to the enmity and perverseness
of a people against the Gospel of Christ, there is no Nation under the whole
heaven for these many hundred years that has been such desperate adversaries
as they have been. There are neither English, nor Spanish, nor French, nor
Italian, no not Turks nor Tartars that are greater haters of the Gospel then
this people have been, and yet are: Yet notwithstanding all this antipathy they
shall be called, and thorough the call they shall be infallibly brought home in
the latter times. Though according to natural reason this may seem very
improbable, God will certainly perform his promise, and no obstacle or
hindrance shall be able to obstruct the work. From hence then it is clear, if
we go to the modus rei, or the manner of the thing, we may easily collect that
the way of God in working the conversion of his people may be after a certain
and infallible manner.

Secondly, they argue, If God will do all by his power, why are men commanded
to make themselves a new heart and a new spirit? This were irrational to do on
man's part, seeing God has already decreed and promised to do the work himself.
Answ. Though God does resolve certainly to bring a thing to pass in his
decrees and purposes, though he does promise also that it shall be certainly
done, yet this does not hinder the endeavor of man, seeing it is his manner to
bring things about by man's endeavor as the chief mean or instrument. As for
example, when Saint Paul and his company were in danger of shipwreck, the Lord
did tell him by night in a vision, that there should not be the loss of any
man's life, but of the ship only, Acts 27.22. Here was a certain promise, and
thereupon the Apostle did certainly conclude that they should all come safe to
land. You will say then, did not the certainty of the promise, especially
seeing God would perform it by power, hinder their endeavor? No: For when
they came into a place where two seas did meet, and the ship did stick fast in
the sand, every man did shift for his own life, some by swimming, and some upon
broken pieces of the ship, God had promised that there should not be the loss
of any man's life,
and this he did effect by making every one of them careful to preserve his own
life. So in the case of those men which God does intend to bring to eternal
salvation, he will first or last, sooner or later, and that by his own power
make them careful of their own salvation. As in the words of the text, he first
promised to give a new heart, that is, the spirit of love into the heart, and
when this is done, then they shall keep his commandments. So then it is clear
that the infallibility of the decree of election, and the certainty of the
promise of God do not make void the free obedience of that people which he does
intend to bring to salvation.

But thirdly, they object, Though he does give a new heart, it is not
absolutely necessary that he should give it cum effectu, with the effect. He
may give it with great efficacy, yet nevertheless the grace may be resisted
by the malignity of the will of man. Answ. It is confessed that God may give
grace, and men may resist, and by resisting may lose the grace that is offered.
But the question is, whether the new heart or the new spirit may finally be
resisted, ye or no? If any man believe that it may, let him answer the words of
that promise, Jer. 31.31, 32. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I
will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, not according to the
Covenant which I made with their fathers when I took them by the hand to bring
them out of the land of Egypt, which Covenant they brake. But this is the
Covenant that I will make after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law
in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God,
and they shall be my people. In the present case then, the writing of the Law
in the heart must be meant only of an effectual inscription; if this be not so,
where will be the difference betwixt the old and the new Covenant, betwixt the
Covenant that God made with the people when he brought them out of the Land of
Egypt, and the Covenant that he will make in the latter days? For the covenant
that he made with them at their coming out of Egypt they brake, but the new
Covenant shall not be broken: when the Lord shall write his Law in their hearts,
then all shall know him from the greatest to the least. Therefore, if we go to
the manner of the thing, the work of conversion may be wrought with efficacy
and infallibility on Gods part, and yet there be no detriment or damage to
man's obedience.

Master Everard, I have stayed the longer upon this point, to to show you the
inequality of your similitude, as though God did deal with his elect in
forcing a purse of gold upon them, and then call that their obedience. We say
the contrary, God may infallibly work upon the hearts of his people, and by his
necessary and infallible workings bring them on to a free and a cheerful
obedience. Their free endeavor must needs stand with a subordination under his
decrees and workings.

Now let us go to the harder case of the Non-elect; and here the decree of God,
and the certainty thereof does not any way free men from being the children of
disobedience. Let us take a view of that Scripture, What if God willing to show
his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering
vessels of wrath fitted to destruction? Romans 9.22. From hence it is clear that
there are none destroyed but such as are prepared and fitted for destruction;
and for the preparation the Lord in the ordinary way does endure men first with
much long-suffering. For the clearing of this, let us consider that passage of
the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. By which spirit also he went and preached to
those spirits that are in prison, which sometimes were disobedient when once
the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah. Therefore let the decree
of non-election be what it will be in the purpose of God, yet we are sure in
the ordinary way it is not put in execution,
but the Lord does endure men first with much long-suffering. We may proceed
with this gradation, None are destroyed but those that are made fit for
destruction: None are made fit for destruction but such as he has endured with
much patience; and there is none that he has endured with much patience, but
he has striven with them from time to time with convictions of his Spirit, and
they have showed many acts of disobedience against such inward motions and
workings. Therefore the decree of non-election, (as it is to be put in
execution) may well stand and consist with the disobedience of man: so that he
himself shall be the cause of his own condemnation. If this be so, I know no
just cause you have to complain; for say you, I wonder how they can call it
our duty, while they affirm that God never intended that we should do that
work, and so never furnished us to that purpose, page. 55. If you apply these
things to us and our doctrine, (as it is probable you do,) then I must tell you
that you heap up calumnies; we do not maintain any such position, that the
Lord does not surnish the non-elect with abilities; there is none of them all
but he has more ability then he uses. And for the temporary believer, we hold
that he has very great qualifications, and is able to go very sarre. Here
only lies the point of the difference, that the Lord does not give him such
abilities as will infallibly carry him on unto salvation. This is his peculiar
dealing with the elect, as may be proved from diverse Scriptures.
But here perhaps will lie a great question between the grace administered to
the elect, and to the non-elect, where does the way part, and how shall we
distinguish them? In this case we may not look so nicely to every punctilio,
there is a day appointed in which God will judge the world, yet for the
particular time no man can tell when it shall be, that all may be prepared for
it. So in the present case, it is confessed by all serious and sober-minded
men, that God does administer his grace to bring the sons of men to
salvation, yet for the manner, why he should administer it to some this way,
and to others that way; why he should continue it to some notwithstanding all
resistings, and on the contrary take it from others when they have resisted
such a certain time. For these various and several ways of administration, I
think they are of set purpose kept secret in the will of God that men should
work out their salvation with fear and trembling, that they should strive to
enter in at the strait gate, that they should not neglect the day of their
visitation. We now come to your fourth reason.

Reas. 4.
If God, say you, were so the giver of actions that our not performing of
actions were for want of his gift, then our not acting could not be
transgression, page 56.

Answer.
Let them consider this to whom it does belong, it is none of our doctrine: but
you are as faulty in the other extreme, when you say that God requires action
of none but those whom he has furnished with present abilities. This (if my
judgment be any thing) is the grand fallacy that has not only imposed upon
you, but also upon many others of your way. But seeing you will needs have it
that God calls men to act according to present abilities, I pray you tell me
what present ability had Moses to bring Israel out of Egypt? what ships had he
prepared to transport them over the red sea? show me also what provision he had
laid up in store for forty years march thorough the wilderness? what council
of war had he to judge when it was fit for the campt to move. Nay thorough
the whole story of the Bible make it appear what abilities any of the Saints
had,
if you speak of their own abilities to do the greatest works of faith. In
these cases I think rather that Gods Word of command is given in mutual
relation and correspondencie to his Word of promise, and not to abilities which
any man has in present possession. If we attentively consider the meaning of
the Scriptures we shall find when the Spies returned from searching the Land
of Canaan, the great sin of the people of Israel was, that they measured all
by present abilities. Because the sons of Anach were there, they did conclude
it was a thing impossible to bring that Land into subjection, they never
considered that it was the Land of promise, and that the Lord himself would do
all by his own power, Number. 13.27, 28. Josh. 1.2, 3. Psalm. 44.1, 2, 3. And for
that speech of yours, that Christ never blamed the unprofitable servant for
want of abilities; Though he did not blame him for that, yet he did condemn
him for not putting his money to the exchanger. In this case though he had no
ability of his own, yet he might have it from another, if he had looked after
the grace and the power of God. And further, whereas you say that Christ calls
for action of them only whom he has already furnished; this is not so, he
calls for action of those whom he either has furnished, or will furnish. The
Martyrs have been called forth to great sufferings in times of persecution, yet
the whole stock of abilities was not put into their hands at one time: they did
believe what God did call them to, he would make them able to bear. And that
which they had not for the present, they did believe they should have, seeing
he was faithful that had promised. As for that instance which you aledge, that
Jethro, Moses his father in Law did blame him for doing of that which he was
not able to do. Consider the case aright, Jethro did question whether the thing
which Moses did, was commanded of God or no, and therefore he did debate the
matter with him, why he did undertake a business beyond his strength. But it
is not so in the matter that concerns our salvation; we are to do that which
is commanded of God, and to look to him for supply of Spirit for the
performance of his own work. But against this you let fall a desperate speech;
Such a neglect of action (say you) will never deserve to be called sin,
because it is a forced waiting and staying the Lords leisure. But where men are
entitled offenders for not putting forth to action, is not because they stayed
for Gods acting, but rather God for a long time waited for them, page 57. I
answer, men are entitled offenders both ways; first, because they come not in
to God when he calls them. Secondly, when they do not wait upon him for the
performance of the promise. The Israelites in the Wilderness may be an
example; they sinned in this, in that they came not in to God when he waited
for them; and it is as true also that they sinned in not putting forth to
action when they had so many promises of the presence and assistance of God to
go along with them. The Psalmist did assign this as the chief cause of their
grand rebellio, they always erred in their hearts, because they knew not his
ways. They would have all in present possession, and God would have them also
to live by faith in the promise.

Reas. 5.
We must (say you) take heed of harboring such a doctrine, which in the very
nature of it breeds such conceits, that God is a respecter of persons, if he
should give some men means to act and actions, and not give them unto all whom
he bath commanded to act, page 60.

Answ.
In this I do agree with you, that they do involve themselves in many
difficulties whosoever they be that teach that obedient actions are so the gift
of God, that man is merely passive without life or motion. There are more then
too many in these days that are of this belief, and there are a multitude of
abfurdities which follow that doctrine. But whereas you admonish us of
harboring such a tenent as in the very nature of it breeds such conceits
that God is a respecter of persons; this imputation, as of old, so now of late,
in your apprehension does seem to lie heavy upon them that maintain the
doctrine of Gods free election. But in this case the Apostle himself does make
a plain and an express answer, he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
he has compassion on whom he will have compassion, Romans 9.11, 12, 13. The
sense of the place is briefly this, If God choose Jacob, it is an act of his
mere mercy, he is not bound to it by any rule of distributive justice: and if
he hate Esan, that is, if he do not love him with that peculiar love infallibly
to bring him to salvation, he has no obligation upon him, he may do with his
own as he pleases. His purpose is in the salvation of the elect to magnify
the riches of his grace, as in the condemnation of the non-elect to set forth
the glory of his justice. But let us more attentively consider the words of the
Apostle, What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
endured with much long-suffering vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, Romans
9.23. Camero upon the place has this good observation: Which difference,
says he, the Apostle has prudently noted, for when be does discourse
concerning them whom God has called, he does use these words, whom he has
before prepared to glory, to wit, that he may here decipher the effectual work
of God. But when he does speak of them whom he does not call, he does not say
that they are such vessels which God has before prepared, but simply vessels
prepared and fitted, according to that saying, thy destruction is of thy self
O Israel. Upon these grounds we do conclude, in matter of election and
non-election there can be no respect of persons with God: for the elect are
saved merely by grace, and the non-elect are damned and cast away justly for
their sins; nay, for the slighting, neglecting, and most wilful abusing of the
patience and long-suffering of God, and the voluntary hardening themselves in
sin.

Reas. 6.
Further you argue, If God were simply the worker of obedient actions in men,
or for men, as be does with other creatures, then there were no use for
repentance: the ground of that work were wholly prevented. For should they
repent because God has not acted, it were all one as to repent because God
has made no more worlds, page 60.

Answ.
This argument of yours, if it were rightly applied, would be of good moment
against that kind of men who are for enthusiasmes. For if it be a good reason
to affirm that there are no more worlds in being because God has made no
more; the reason must be one and the same, according to their doctrine, such
and such a man does not repent because God did not work repentance in him as an
inanimate instrument. For our parts we plainly affirm, that though God does
work repentance in men, he does it congruenter, as in rational and intellectual
creatures. For we are to suppose that men have principles to act them, and
therefore when the Lord does enable them to repent, they have power to turn
from their evil way. In this case as repentance is Gods gift, so it is man's
act; man does freely repent by the power of grace received; Many also
voluntarily do harden their own hearts in neglecting of that grace which should
bring them to repentance. From all which we do conclude, that obedient actions
do belong to men as the power, ability and grace is wholly from God.

We will go on, and consider the Scriptures which you do pervert to a contrary
sense. To begin therefore with that place of the Apostle, work out your
salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in you the will
and the deed. Here say you, If God does work the will and the deed, what is
here left for man to do?
Answ. Such a good proficient you are in your way of wrangling against the
Priests (as you call them) that now at last you are come to except against the
words of the Apostle. Does he not say in plain and significant terms, that the
Lord does work in us the will and the deed? and does he not upon this ground
exhort men to work out their salvation with fear and trembling? But that we may
clear the coherence and connection of the text, we will note three things in
special. First, we are to distinguish betwixt Gods dealing in the work of
creation, and his dealing in the working of man's salvation. For his dealing in
the work of creation, he made man in a moment of time; but for the work of
salvation, he does carry it on step by step. Again, in the work of creation
the Lord did make man without any act of his own, he did not know when he was
in making: but it is otherwise in the act of salvation, this work is carried on
by men's own acts, and by the concurrence of their own endeavor. And hereupon
though the Apostle does affirm that God does work the will and the deed, yet
it is men's duty also to work out their own salvation. Secondly, we are to note
that the act of man in working out his own salvation must be by a supernatural
power; he may govern families, he may build Cities, he may learn arts and
sciences without the communication of any special grace from God: but he cannot
do so in the working out of his own salvation; God must first work the will and
the deed, and then man will be able to work out his salvation, and not till
then. Thirdly; these words are added, with fear and trembling, to show that man
must do it humbly, carefully, and with dependence upon the grace of God, seeing
he has not the power of inspiration in his own hand. But more fully to set
forth the meaning of the Apostle, we will cite another Scripture which is
parallel to this. These are the words of the Lord to the children of Israel in
the wilderness, Behold I send mine Angel before thee to keep thee in the way
to bring thee into the place which I have prepared. Beware of him, provoke him
not, for he will not pardon your transgressions, for my name is in him. But if
thou shall indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an
enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary to thine adversaries, for my Angel
shall go before thee and bring thee unto the Amorites, the Hittites and the
Perizites, and I will cut them off. Exodus 23.21, 22, 23. Here, if you
diligently observe the text, do ly first a promise, secondly a Precept. For the
promise the Lord does tell them, That he will send his Angel before them as a
Convoy, to guide them in the way, and to plant them in the land of Canaan. And
for the way, because they were to be in the Wilderness forty years, without
fields, without clothing, without means to sustain the life of man, therefore
they should be more immediately under the custody and tuition of the Angel.
This Angel must needs be Christ, he was the pillar of cloud that went before
them by day, and he was the pillar of fire that was their leader by night, he
fed them with Manna, and supplied their want with water out of the rock. To
this the Apostle seems to allude, they did all eat the same spiritual meat,
and did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of that rock which
followed them, and that rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4, 5. Further, after the
forty years pilgrimage were ended the Lord does promise that their Convoy
should not leave them, but that he should go before them and drive out the
Canaanites, because it was not in their own power to bring the land into
subjection. This is the Lords promise, and therefore in sense and substance the
Angel must do the whole work. Secondly, let us consider what is the duty of the
people, and that is contained in these words, Beware of him, obey his voice,
provoke him not, etc. Because they did wholly depend upon him for all,
therefore they should be careful to observe him and to follow him in his
leadings. The force of the reason is the same in the words of the text, work
out your salvation with fear and trembling, because God works in you the will
and the deed; because his Spirit is all in all the cause of man's salvation to
carry on the work; because his Spirit does convince, reprove, teach, comfort,
seal, and guide the Saints, therefore they should walk tenderly and carefully
toward him; The Apostle says, grieve not the Spirit of grace by which ye are
sealed unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. In case they do with him as
disobedient children do with their parents, when they give them good counsel,
the Spirit will neither comfort nor seal them any more, but will leave them to
a state of darkness and discomfort. And this is the true meaning of the text.
We may hereby understand how God does carry on the whole work of salvation, and
this does no way impair or diminish the endeavor of man.

In the close of all you tell us, Let us say with the Apostle, in our hearts,
that we desire to strive with daily labourings, according to the mighty
workings whereby he works in us, Col. 1.29. And do not say any more it is God
that works our actions, but be thankful to him that gives us sufficient
means, Page 63. You have heard before that the Lord does work in us the will
and the deed, and therefore the spirituality of the action is wholly from God,
though we are free workers by the help of his grace. But let us take your words
in the fairest construction; If you will stand firmly to this principle, that
God gives sufficient means by a power working in us, you need not fly to the
purity of nature, to natural free will, and to such like beggarly rudiments to
salve the endeavor of man. In this place you seem to speak for grace, when
elsewhere through your whole treatise you drive the bargain altogether for the
natural abilities of the will. But seeing you have offered this text to our
consideration, we will endeavor to draw from it the concord betwixt the grace
of God, and the endeavor of man. The words are these, Whereunto I also labor,
striving according to his working which works in me mightily. The Apostle
speaks of the work of the Ministry, whom we preach, warning every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus, whereunto I labor according to the mighty workings that he
works in us. Here it is plain that the Apostle did work in teaching and
instructing every one, and it was not so much his work as the work of the
Spirit in him and by him. When he was at Athens his Spirit was stirred up in
him, when he saw the City wholly given to Idolatry. Why are not the like
excitations of spirit in men in there days who travel to Constantinople, to
Ligorn, to Rome, seeing hose people are wholly given either to Mahumetan
superstition, or Popish Idolatry? The reason is manifest, the same spirit does
not work so mightily in the hearts of men as it did sometime in the heart of
Paul; because he was filled with the Spirit he did show abundant sympathy and
bowels of affection toward all the lost sons of men. But to come to
instances in these last times, when the Gospel was plucked down, and the Mass
was set up in Queen Mary's days, the Martyr being in a journey, declared his
intention, that he would preach in his charg the next Lords day; and when he
that journeyed with him, told him, then he would certainly be cast into prison;
his answer was, I am in prison, till I am in prison. He was bound in his spirit
to preach the Gospel to the souls which he had taken charg of; he could have
no peace otherwise then in the discharge of his duty. He did labor freely, yet
so as his labor was by the inward moving of the Spirit. But of all other
places that passage of our Savior is most used by the Enthusiasts, Ye shall be
brought before Kings and Princes for my sake, but when they shall deliver you
up, take no thought how or what you shall speak, for it shall be given to you
in that hour what you shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit
of your Father that speaks in you, Mat. 10.18, 19, 20. Though this promise is
made to the Martyrs and Confessors in times of persecution, yet it is not made
to them in that manner as to extinguish and drown all endeavor of their own;
as though God would do all, and they should be discharged of their duty. The
promise is only made to such as should engage themselves for Christ, and should
humbly in the use of the means depend upon him for the supply of his Spirit.
And thus we see that the Spirit does all, and yet in the most spiritual actions
man himself is a free-worker. It shall be given you in that hour what you
shall speak. This expression, what you shall speak, shows plainly that the
Saints are free Agents.

Let us now consider that place, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. For by grace ye are saved
through faith, not of your selves, it is the gift of God.
Here you yield that salvation as purchased by Christ, is the gift of God, but
you will not have faith it self to be the gift of God: you grant one part of
the text to deny another. If you consider the words, you shall find that not
only salvation, but also faith it self is Gods free gift. If this be not so,
how could the Ephesians come to believe? The Apostle says, that they were dead
in trespasses and sins, they walked according to the course of the world,
they fulfilled the lusts of the flesh and of the mind. Therefore they could not
come to believe by any natural ability, but merely by the quickening work of the
Spirit. Further, this expression is added ver. 10. We are his work manship
created of God unto good works. By nature they were dead in trespasses and
sins, and if that now they could perform any spiritual act they were made
able to do this by the new creation or workmanship of God. Further, if faith be
not the Lords gift, the believing Ephesians must be supposed to have it from
their own ability. If this be so, how shall we agree with the scope of the
Apostle? who says in express terms, You are saved by grace through faith,
not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should
boast. Truly Sir, if your faith be not Gods gift, it will be of your self, and
you will have cause of boasting, as though you did make your self to differ
from other men, and what is this else but to go point blanck against the scope
of the Scripture? And though I do plead this truth against you, in affirming
faith to be the gift of God, yet I say also it is the act of man. God gives the
grace, and man believes. These two are not so parted asunder, but that they may
be joined together.

For your third Scripture, concerning the striving for the faith given to the
Saints which S. Jude speaks of, this is not meant of the grace or habit of
faith in the heart, but of the doctrine of faith only: That men should strive
to preserve the Gospel in its purity and integrity against the heresies of the
times. But you go further to show the absurdities that will follow upon the
holding of that position, that obedient actions are the gift of God you say, If
God should give the actions as sure as he gives means to act, then a man's
conscience might and would as well accuse him for want of means to act, as for
want of action. But I never heard (say you) that any man's conscience accused
him for want of means to perform his actions, but because be made not use of
the means. In this passage of yours as there ear some things which I allow as
true and sound: so there are others which I do reject as false and unsound,
For, as I have said before, they who deny a man to be a free Agent, I cannot
see by the tenor of their doctrine how their conscience can accuse them for
nonperformance of action; seeing they hold that both the act and the means to
act are only from God, and man is merely passive. So far you and I are agreed,
but whereas you oppose the carrying on of the work of salvation by the power
and the grace of God, in this you contradict the Scriptures, and by name that
place of the Apostle We are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. That the Saints do persevere, it is mainly from the
power of God who carries on the work: But how? not without their own endeavor.
Ye are kept by the power of God through faith. Men must apply the promise of
God, and that will engage his power to carry them on to salvation. And yet
further, God speaks of his elect, I will put my Spirit in them, that they
shall keep my Commandments and do them. But most plainly in that place, 2 These.
2.13. We are bound to give God thanks for you brethren, that he has chosen you
from the beginning to salvation, thorough the sanctification of the Spirit and
belief of the truth. In the Words going before, he does speak of the great
Apostasy that should be in all Antichristian times; that because men did not
receive the truth in the love of it that they might he saved, therefore God
should deliver them over to strong delusions to believe lies. By way of
opposition to these Apostates, the Apostle comforts the believing Thessalonians
with the infallibility and certainty of their salvation. But how would he bring
them to salvation? thorough the sanctification of the Spirit, and the belief of
the truth. These two means he does name, to show that God will bring none to
salvation as the end, but he will first justify and sanctify them in the use
of the means. Though he will carry on the work by his own power infallibly and
certainly in the hearts of his people, yet their act endeavor and obedience
shall go along with the working of his grace. Many such like places might be
brought to show that the infallible workings of God may stand with the
endeavors of his own people. Secondly, whereas you affirm That you never
heard any man's conscience accuse him for want of means, but for want of using
the means: Oh Sir, in what corner of the world were you brought up, that the
fame of this never came to your ears! I think it is a truth well known in the
Church of God, that men's consciences do accuse them not only because they made
no use of the means, but also because thorough their own default the means are
not administered to them, or that they are taken from them. If it had been your
lot to visit men in trouble of conscience, in agonies and gripes upon their
sick-beds, there you should have heard such words as these, again and again
repeated, Had I sought God, had I prayed in faith of his promise, had I walked
humbly with him, had I fruitfully used the grace administered to me as a good
and profitable Steward, I had never wanted the means to subdue the power and
rage of such and such corruptions. It is merely from mine own defect that
there is such a strangeness betwixt the Lord and me. These are the ordinary
complaints of men who neglect the day of their salvation, and you tell us you
never heard any man's conscience accuse him for the want of the means: when the
talent was taken from the unprofitable servant he was deprived of the means:
but was not that deprivation through his own fault? but you further add, If
conscience be so well informed, that it must and will bear witness, then of whom
shall it bear witness? against God? No marvail that there be so many corrupt
sayings, if God had given me abilities, powers and actions, then I would have
done it. Nay do not many say, I must be contented to stay Gods time? Has God
commanded you before his time? Nay do not you discharge your self of duties in
saying it is not his time? page 72. Such a dextrous faculty you have in
cavilling against the main truths of Christianity. But when I read this and
such like passages thorough your whole Treatise, I cannot but compare the state
of the Church in these times to the ship that carried Saint Paul to Rome, the
forepart of it stuck in the sand, and the hinder part of it was broken with the
waves. Into such desperate extremes are we now fallen. For if we speak of
actions of obedience, if the power be not placed chiefly in the will of man,
you and the whole nation of the Free-willers do tell us that we be discharged
from duty, seeing we are cast upon a necessity of waiting when the matter is
not in our own hand. On the other side there is sprung up a generation of
fanatical men which are so opposite to the freedom of will, that they think
the Spirit must do all: they will not give thanks at meat, nor pray in their
families, nor hear the Word, nor perform any other spiritual duty, until they
have a motion of the Spirit. Indeed the Waiters in this sense do come to your
pitch, they think themselves to be discharged from duty till the coming of the
Spirit. But is there no middle between these desperate extremes? Is there no
discharge of duty in obedience to the Commands of God? There is no man that
lives in the Kingdom of grace, but in some one thing or other he must be
contented to stay the Lords time: what then, shall we say because he is
necessitated to wait, he is therefore discharged of all duty? Not so: he is
still to act in a lower sphere, and to wait for further communications as it
shall please the Lord to impart them. These are the words of the Apostle, let
us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded; and if in any thing you be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. Nevertheless whereunto
we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, Phil. 3.15, 16. The
meaning of the place is this; every man should walk according to his present
seize and abilities,
and in walking, doing and discharging his duty wait upon God for further
discoveries. A natural man is furthest off from God: what then? is he
absolutely discharged from duty? Is he not to come to Church, to hear the
Gospel, and to wait upon the means? peradventure God may give him repentance to
convince him of the evil of his ways. Though it is not in his own power to
repent, yet thereby he is not acquitted and discharged from all performance of
duty. And so in sundry cases, men are to discharge their duty according to
present abilities, they are to walk in those paths that he has appointed, and
to wait upon him for the supply of spirit. It is the voice of the Church in her
great tribulation, I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my
salvation, Mic 7.7. Now tell me I pray you, seeing the Church was compelled to
stay Gods time, to wait as it were on a Watch Tower (for so the word in the
Original does signify) will you lay that in this whole interval she is
discharged from all duty? This is not so; she did discharge her duty in
praying, seeking and looking to God only, and in the performance of all these
she waited upon him for comfort; she had none else in all the world, no father,
no brother, no friend, no wisdom of the flesh, no other refuge but God only.
When she had darkness and no light, she had a firm persuasion that at last he
would plead her cause, execute judgment for her, that he would bring her forth
to light, and she should see his righteousness. But you go on, do not other
men say of God, that he so pitied the world, seeing their hard cold frozen
hearts, therefore of his own goodness did he provide fuel enough to warm and
melt them, but when that is done, withholds the right hand of his power from
putting the fuel into a flaming fire to succor them in their distress, and
then comes to them, and says be warmed and comforted? likening God to that
hard hearted man spoken of Jam. 2.15, 16. And more such like passages you have
page 72. Who these other men are whom you here intend I cannot certainly tell;
if you mean the friends and followers of this Church from whom you have
departed, I must tell you, you do charge us with that which we do not maintain;
It is not the result of our doctrine, to resemble God to that hard hearted man,
Who bids them be warmed, and gives them not wherewithal? We say there are
promises to give faith, as well as to faith given; to give love, as well as to
love given; to put fear into the heart, as well as to fear which is put into
the heart. There are sundry promises given to that end, that men may go
cheerfully about the performance of action, that doing their duties they may
feel the power and presence of the Spirit to go along with them. Therefore we
do not say that God keeps the fuel in his own hand, and that men are frozen
for want of heat. These are your calumnies, but not our doctrine. But to
aggravate the matter, you further add, The Physician opens the mouth of one
in a hundred, and pours it in by force, as for all the rest they are not
allotted any share or part therein, and yet shall suffer deeply for not taking
it, it being proffered, but not given them. page 73. How hard a thing is it for
you to leave your old custom of corrupting our sayings before you do confute
them? We hold that there is a peculiar number which God has chosen from the
beginning to salvation; these in time he effectually calls, justifies and
sanctifies; but we never teach that he pours his grace into them by force.
Again, for others, we hold there is a grace given to them: nay, temporary
believers have very great degrees of grace which they fall from by their own
desault. It is an Impudent calumny then to affirm of us that we should say
there is no share or part allotted to them; that grace is proffered, and not
given. For my part I do believe in the ordinary way God gives more abilities to
men by the convictions of his Spirit then they do profitably use. All the
difficulty of the point will come to this issue, touching the peculiarity of
this grace which carries some infallibly and certainly to salvation, when
others are left for their resisting of the Spirit. If then you list to go
further, and ask after the reason why God does deal so unequally with men; here
the Scriptures do confine you to the Lords good pleasure. This I am sure they
would not do if a substantial reason otherwise might be given from any thing in
man himself. Why else should our Savior say, Thou have hid these things from
the wise and prudent and have revealed them unto babes; even so, O Father,
because it pleases thee. And yet further,
they who do with judgment maintain the doctrine of election, do not think that
this mystery is to be propounded to all men, and at all times, as some
unadvised and inconsiderate men have done. To let pass all that may be said,
if you will go to the Doctrine of the Church of England in the seventeeth
Article, you shall find that the main sense and import of the Article is this,
that such persons only should have the consideration of their election in
Christ propounded to them, who feel in themselves the Spirit mortifying the
works of the flesh. As for curious and carnal persons it is more proper for
them to look to the threats of God that they may be humbled; and for others
also when they come to be humbled, it is not for them presently and immediately
to meddle with election, but with Gods promises in such wise only as they are
generally set forth to them in holy Scriptures, and that will of God they are
to follow which he has expressly declared and revealed in his own Word. This
is the substance of the Doctrine of our Church concerning election, and how by
several stages and degrees we are to come to the assurance thereof.

We will add a few words more to the clearing of the point, that we may see
how the endeavor of man does run parallel with the grace of God and does work
under the grace. To this end let us distinguish the two states of man; his
state before conversion, and his state after. For the state of man before
conversion,
though of himself he cannot think a good thought, yet by and thorough the
convictions of the Spilt he may be helped to judge himself and to see the
misery of his lost condition. Many solid and judicious Writers do acknowledge
antecedaneous works before conversion. Secondly, after conversion, when a man
is brought so far as to apprehend the promise, and has a real work wrought
upon his heart in feeling the love of Christ to the lost sons of men: when he
is come so far the work is not at an end, for these two reasons. First, there
are higher degrees of grace which a Christian is to follow after: for so says
the Apostle, not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect,
but I follow after to apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ
Jesus. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended but this one thing I
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those
things which are before, I press toward the mark, for the price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.13, 14 Here these particulars are
observable. First, what was the goal that the Apostle did drive at, it was for
the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Secondly, with what
affection did he follow after the mark of the price; he did forget the things
that were behind, and did press forward to the things that were before. As
poor people in a dear year do press forward, and reach over one another heads
to receive a dole of meat or money. Thirdly, what was that which moved him to
be so vehement in his pursuit, it was not from any natural instinct, but from
the drawing of the Spirit of Christ, which did whet on his desires. I follow on
to apprehend that for which I am apprehended of Christ. Here is an excellent
agreement betwixt the grace and the Spirit of Christ that did first apprehend
Paul, and his endeavor that did follow on to apprehend. And thus we see from
the beginning to the end, that the grace does all, and the endeavor of man is
never idle. I have been the more full in this Doctrine, because the Enthusiasts
on the one side, and the Arminians on the other side lie in camp against the
Church. On either side they have some color of truth to usher in their
damnable Positions, by and thorough which the simple are ensnared. And as many
subtle Merchants, when they have bad corn to fell, put the best upon the top
of the bag: even so do these seducers begin with very taking considerations,
that by some preceding truths they may bring in their subsequent errors. The
Enthusiast will speak against a notional faith, and against idle speculations
of Christ without power; and stand strongly upon it that there must be a real
and an inward work wrought upon the heart, or else all is nothing: and so far
he goes fair. But this is not enough with him, he is not contented only to
condemn them that make an Idol of the means, but also he will slight all
means whatsoever; all reading of Scriptures, all frequenting of Ordinances, all
striving in prayer, all endeavor whatsoever with him are empty figures and
bare externals. Now you on the other side turn unto another extreme, and in
your way you have also the best corn upon the top of the bag. You stand
strictly to maintain that a man is a free-worker in the matter of his
salvation, otherwise exhortations and admonitions would be of no moment; and so
far you go very right. But this will not satisfy you unless you may set up
the natural ability of man, maintain free will, and other such like Pelagian
positions. For these reasons I have taken the more pains rightly to define and
to state the truth betwixt the grace of God and the endeavor of man, to avoid
the detestable errors on both extremes. Now I will proceed to your next
Chapter.

CHAP. X. Containing diverse questions with their solutions.
HERE in the beginning you raise two questions concerning the ability which
Adam had before the fall; and then propound a third, whether the fall was
decreed by the secret will of God? For the ability which Adam had before his
fall, I do willingly acknowledge that men may raise intricate and thorny
questions about this, though to small purpose. But touching this point I do
desire to lay down some necessary observations, because I will not stand upon
every punctilio; And then I will come to the solution of your chief question.

First, for the true cause of the fall, we do affirm that our first parents
being seduced by the temptation of Satan, did voluntarily and freely eat the
forbidden fruit. Their own defective will was the immediate cause of their
fall. Secondly, God was pleased according to his wise and just Council to
permit the fall, that thereby a door might be opened to the sending of Christ
for the more full declaration of the glory of his grace in the salvation of man
as fallen. Thirdly, for the power that Adam bad to stand or fall, as on the one
side we must necessarily say that he was made in a state very good and free
from all sin: so also it must needs be affirmed, that he was made in a
mutable state, far different from the state of the blessed Saints and Angels
confirmed in grace, and farthest off from the immutability of the Creator
himself. Fourthly, if the question be put, how far did the Lord go in the
fall of Adam? we must needs affirm that he created the first man in such a
holy state that he might freely obey all his commands: only he did not sustain
him with that special and infallible grace to preserve him from falling. These
four observations, if they be rightly understood, will help to expedite and
clear many hard questions that may be propounded concerning the ability of Adam
before his fall. We come now to your chief question.

Had not God appointed that Adam should fall by his secret will, before by his
revealed will he commanded him to stand?

Here you endeavor in the beginning to show that the revealed will of God
before it was first communicated, was his secret will; and being once revealed,
it loses the title of a secret will to them to whom it is revealed. page 77.
In this passage of yours there are some words of truth, though, after your
manner, you make an ill use of them. I yield in the general, that the revealed
will of God was sometimes his secret will before it was revealed. But the
question in hand is this, when Adam knew his duty that he should not eat of the
forbidden fruit, was not that part of the will of God concerning the permission
of the fall, and sending of the Son, part of the secret will of God? and
whether by right ought it not to be secret so long as he was upon the trial or
his obedience? for the clearing of the point we will speak somewhat more
largely concerning the secret will of God. There is one part of his secret will
absolutely secret, that never shall be known either in this life or in that
which is to come. The Apostle speaking of the casting away of the Jews, and
their wonderful calling again, concludes, O the depth of the riches, of the
wisdom, and the knowledge of God! Romans 11.33. There is then a part of the
secret will of God, especially in the reasons of his decrees, which none either
can or shall know. Secondly, there is a part of his secret will which though it
shall be revealed in the world to come, yet it must be concealed in this life.
Now are we the sons of God, but it is not yet manifest what we shall be, 1 John 3.1, 2. Though the Saints know much of the mind of Christ, and feel his
love in their hearts by the teaching and demonstration of the Spirit, yet the
excellency of their future glory is hidden from them. Thirdly, there is a part
of the secret will of God which though it be hidden from some, yet it is
revealed to others, even in this life. The Apostles did see those things which
the Prophets and the righteous men could never see. The Lord showed Peter by
what death he should glorify God, but he did not show this to other men, no
not to John the beloved Disciple, Joh. 21.20, 21. Fourthly, to one and the same
man that part of the will of God which was secret heretofore by the event or
revelation may prove to be his revealed will; and so in the particular case of
Adam, the permission of the fall and the promise of the sending of the Son were
the concealed will of God for a season, and were afterward made known by the
event. If this be granted, we have as much as we do desire. But you put the
question, How God could decree by his secret will that Adam should fall before
in his revealed will he commanded him to stand? As hard a case as you make it,
I believe there is no man but will easily understand, that that which the Lord
had decreed concerning the fall of Adam in his secret will from all eternity,
must needs go before his temporal commands and injunctions. But that which
offends you is the seeming contrariety of the two wills. You say, is it a small
thing that the righteousness of God should be questioned upon such low terms,
as to imagine that when, in his revealed will he shall say, eat not, in his
secret will he shall say, thou shall eat? This opinion that renders God to have
two wills, renders them divided in their nature when they are but differing in
terms. For the external will is not another will, but the same made manifest.
page 79. That the will of God is one entire will in substance, we do affirm as
well as you, yet we would have you to observe that one and the same will may be
discriminated and distinguished by diverse relations. As one and the same fire
that hardens the clay may soften the wax: so one and the same will may be
distinguished according to diverse operations. Let us note the distinction
betwixt Gods will of decree and his will of command. That such a distinction
must be made between these two wills is clear and manifest from many
Scriptures: Joseph said to his brethren, Genesis 45.7, 8. Ye sent me not hither,
but God. His sending into Egypt was by Gods will of Decree, to save much people
alive; yet none can say that Joseph's brethren did the Lords will of command;
they went against his command, when they sold their brother as a bondslave. So
it is expressly said of the sons of Eli, that they would not hearken unto the
voice of their father, because the Lord would slay them, 1 Samuel 2.25. These
disobedient children in not harkening to the voice of their Father did fulfill
the Lords will of Decree, who had a purpose to judge the house of Eli for their
sins. But we cannot say that they did obey the Lords will of command, unless
such a command may be produced that children ought not to obey their parents.
So in the case of crucifying the Lord Christ, the Apostle speaks, they did
whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. Herod,
Pilate, and the Nation of the Jews did perform the Lords will of Decree to
crucify Christ, yet we cannot say they did perform his will of command. These
and many other examples may be brought to prove the necessity of such a
distinction. And though the Arminians ( Corvinus by name) do cavil at words and
expressions, yet they cannot rationally deny the substance of the thing. And
therefore to the point in hand we say, it is true in a sense that God did not
will the fall of Adam, that is, he did not approve that sin by his will of
command; yet in a sense it is as true, that by his will of decree he did permit
it. As in the like case the Apostle says, There must be heresies amongst you,
that they which are approved may be made manifest. 1 Cor. 11.19. if there must
be heresies, this is spoken in relation to the will of God, not in relation to
his will of command, for then God would have given men a command to raise
heresies and damnable doctrines in his Church, which none will imagine. But
there must be heresies, this is in relation to his will of Decree, to tolerate
such things for the clearer trial of those that are sincere. So in the present
case, God did will the fall of Adam, not by his will of command, for he gave
him no command to eat of the forbidden fruit, but by his will of Decree he was
pleased to permit the fall that it might be subservient and conducing to his
more excellent end of sending the Son for the full declaration of the glory of
his grace; which otherwise would not have been so conspicuous if the first man
had not fallen. So then, to gather up all into one sum, you may easily
understand, if you will, how God in his will of command may say eat not, and
yet in his secreet will permit him to eat. These two are not so put asunder,
but they may well be joined together. But still you take offense at the
contrariety of the two wills. You say There is an impossibility for Adam to
serve two Masters, especially when one commands him to stand by a revealed
will, and the other has determined the fall by his secret will at the same
time: unless he could serve the one in the forenoon,
the other in the afternoon. And yet further, to amplify the difficulty, you
say, The secret will is the controuler, for let the revealed will command any
thing, we are to center in the determination of the secret. And then you
pathetically call upon man to bewail the time that ever be had a being in this
world, because he is sure to come to ruin which will soever he obeys. If Adam
did obey the secret will of God, then the penalties inflicted by the revealed
will would fall upon him. And then you conclude in these words, Might we not
say farewell all hopes of another life, and so hang down our heads, crying out,
alas we are undone! our Leaders are not agreed? for what the one says do,
the other determines that he shall not do. And much more you have to the same
effect, page 80. But all may be answered in a few words. We plainly affirm, in
matters of obedience men have nothing to do with the secret will of God,
according to that determination, Secret things belong to God, but those things
which are revealed belong to us, and to our children for ever, that we may do
the words of this Law. Deuteronomy. 29.29. This also is the doctrine of the Church of
England, That men should not meddle with predestination and election, but those
only who have the fruits of election, who are called, justified and sanctified.
For the ordinary sort of men, they only are to look at the general threats that
they may be humbled, and to the general promises, that you may believe, Artic
17. And so in the particular case of Adam, we say that he had nothing to do
with the secret will of God concerning the permission of the fall, his duty
only was to look to the command. That was the Cynosure or only rule which he
was to be guided by. And it is the duty of us all to do that which the Lord
commands, and to rest upon him to make our Leaders to agree. It does not
appertain to you, nor me, nor any man living to make a reconciliation betwixt
these two wills in their seeming differences, let us keep the ordinary path.
But if you will say, that the secret will is that which does prevail; though
this does prove true in the event, yet nevertheless the revealed will of God
is the only rule or cannon which we must walk by; as for example, the Lord in
his revealed will required Abraham to offer up his son Isaac in sacrifice, when
in his secret will he had decreed that Isaac should not be sacrificed. If we go
to the event, the secret will was the more preponderating and prevailing will
of the twain. Though it was, yet the obedience of Abraham had its special
testimony in this, that he had regard to the revealed will of God, Genesis 22.2,
12. So in the case of Hezekiah, the Prophet was sent with a message to him, set
thy house in order, for thou shall dye and not live, Isa. 38.2. and yet we
find that the Lord in his secret will had decreed that he should not die at
that time: fifteen years more were added to the days of his life. In the
present case then, though the secret will did carry the sway, yet the
commendation of the obedience of Hezekiah did ly in giving assent to the
threatening of God denounced by the mouth of the Prophet. Though the
denunciation was merely conditional, spoken only in relation to second
causes, thou shall dye of the present disease, unless thou humble thy self,
and by fervent prayer seek the face of God. Though this declaration of the will
of God did imply a condition, yet because it was the will declared and
outwardly revealed to Hezekiah, he was to have respect to this only. He was
not (whatsoever you suggest to the contrary) at a dilemma or strait, which of
these two wills ought to be obeyed, he never lamented the day of his birth
because his Leaders were not agreed. He never faulted the contrariety of the
two wills, that the revealed will should say thou shall die, and the secret will
imply thou shall live. What God had revealed concerning his present death he
did believe the sentence outwardly made known to him; as for Gods secret
Decree, he had nothing to do with that, which did merely lie hid in God. We
read indeed after his humiliation when the Lord had made known so much of his
secret purpose that he would add fifteen years more to the days of his life,
then he was bound to believe and to live in faith of that particular promise
which was made. I might go further with the example of the Ninevites, the Lords
revealed will or his sentence outwardly denounced, was, Yet forty days and
Nineve shall be destroyed, Jonah 3.4. Now in his secret will or absolute Decree
the Lord had not purposed that Nineveh should be destroyed, but that that
people should escape by true repentance at that time. Though the secret will
did prevail, or to use your language, was the will that did control, yet for
the time being the Ninevites had nothing to do with the will of Decree, no
further then this, Who can tell whether the Lord will return from his fierce
anger? verse 9. The will which they were immediately to believe, was the
sentence denounced by the mouth of the Prophet; they were bound to believe that
their sins were so great that they did deserve destruction, and that the Lord
would certainly destroy them within the space of forty days unless they did
repent in that limited time. Their believing the revealed will of God, and
their trembling at his Word was one principal mean to bring about his secret
will, and what he had decreed in his secret will concerning their preservation.
And though the denunciation by the Ministry of Jonah came not to pass, it was
no false message, because it was reversible upon a tacit condition, which the
Lord was pleased for a season to conceal from the Ninevites, to drive them more
effectually out of their carnal security. I might add more examples to prove
the vanity of your exceptions; but I will go nearer the matter, and that in a
harder case then any propounded by you. We read touching the wast of the Church
in the latter times, The outward Court cast it out and measure it not, for it
shall be given to the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread under foot
forty and two months, Rev. 11.2. Here it is plain that the Lord speaks
concerning the desolation of the Church that shall be in all Antichristian
times. Now seeing the Lord has revealed these things to his people, to the end
that they should believe them and prepare themselves for the trial, upon the
supposal of this what should a believer do living upon the borders of the Anti
Christian desolation? should he build the Church according to Gods general
Command of preaching the Gospel, or should he believe that the Church should be
destroyed according to the Prophecies. Here are two cross wills in appearance,
yet it is certain that it is the duty of such a one to preach the Gospel
according to the Commandment, and to leave the vicissitudes and changes of time
unto the Lord himself. The Apostle says, We are a sweet savor in them that
are saved and in them that perish, 2 Cor. 2.15. And the Prophet Jeremy
foreseeing the captivity of Babylon, that it should certainly come to pass,
did himself believe it, and blame the people for their incredulity. Yet
nevertheless in the ordinary way he did exhort them to repent, and to turn
from their Idolatry and other sins that would be the cause of their captivity.
By all that has been spoken, I now leave to your own conscience to judge what
cause you had to raise such tragical outcries against the contrariety of the
two wills, and the inevitable misery of man which will soever he obeyed. When
wise men shall come to the hearing of the matter, I believe they will judge
that it is rather a pang of your ignorant and blind zeal then of right
knowledge. And such an horrid expression you have, That if a man should study
many years for a destroying Principle to dishonor his Creator, he could not
parallel this, which is the sharpest Sword that ever was drawn against the
righteousness of God. page 80. Pray Sir, be pacified, there is no harm done.
As I have told you before, so I say again, leave it to God to reconcile his own
wills, and let us follow that which he has revealed in his Word. But you say,
The voice of this destroys all the testimonies which God gives of himself.
What shall we do with those Scriptures where he says, he alters not, if there
be a secret will of his that controuls his revealed? page 81. In this also you
may hold your self content, for the Scriptures which say God alters not, are
understood concerning his will of Decree, which for the most part is secret to
us. But for his revealed will, in the declaration of mercies and judgments, he
does many times and upon sundry occasions alter his promises or threats. For
these are not made according to his absolute and eternal Decrees, but are
suspended upon outward conditions, as in the case of the Ninevites, and
Hezekiah forealledged. In this case the outward revelations of the will of God
are but subservient to his eternal Decree. And though they seem to our
understanding to differ, yet they do excellently agree among themselves. Now
last of all you come to your chiefest argument. You cannot see, say you, how
such a will can agree with the death of Christ and the general tenders of grace.
These are your words, I fear me too many have a hand in nourishing and
maintaining this opinion, and then no marvail that so many cannot believe the
record that God gave of his Son. So when God swears by himself, as he lives,
he desires not the death of him that dies, and that he would have no man to
perish, but that he gave his Son a light unto the world that all men thorough
him might believe, for which purpose he tasted death for every man, and not for
the Saints only, but also for the sins of the whole world. But these sayings
are but the revealed will, and the same people that hold this revealed will to
be a guide to themselves, do yet hold a contradiction in the wills of God,
saying, it is true, God says so, but his meaning is not so. Now this sort of
people should not believe the revealed will at all if they hold his secret will
to be the Superior, page 81 82. I say the same as formerly, though the secret
will of God be the Superior, yet we are to look to that which is revealed. As
for those who affirm that the Lord has chosen a peculiar number of people
from the beginning to salvation, If you go to them man by man, I think you will
scarce find any one of solid judgment that will tell you we must begin at the
knowledge of the secret will of God. They all say, that you must begin first
with the general threats and the general promises; and when men are once
brought thorough the convictions of the spirit to see their miserable and lost
condition, then they say they are sit auditors of the doctrine of the Gospel in
the tenders and the offers of grace. When the promise is apprehended by a true
and a lively faitht, he next work they say i, to attain the (...) and full
assurance of faith. And then last of all after many experiences comes the
assurance of election. In this method they proceed in the discovery of this
mystery, and not otherwise. Though election be first in the Lords intention,
yet they hold that the assurance thereof is and ought to be the last in our
feeling. And so they expound the words of the Apostle, give all diligence to
make your calling and election su e, 2 Pet. 1.10. And further, though they
maintain an assurance of election, yet they do not hold an absolute certainty,
but such a one as is liable to many temptations, desertions, and eclipses.
Neither do they hold such an immediate assurance as though the elect by
intuition did look into the Decrees of God; only they stand for a mediate and
discursive knowledge of the grace of election by the necessary effects and
fruits thereof. As you know the rising of the Sun by the dawning of the day.
What other knowledge is this of the secret will of God, but that which he
himself has first made discovery of by the fruits?

As for the secret will of God in the Decree of non-election, though they do
believe according to the Scriptures that there are a great multitude of men
that the Lord does intend to pass by, yet if you come to singulars, neither
you nor any man living can show who they are in special. If you shall say that
such and such a one is a notorious evil doer, and therefore a reprobate.
Ananias thought but little better of Paul, Lord I have heard of this man how
much evil he bath done. But the answer was, go thy way I have made him a chosen
vessel unto me, Act. 9.14. If such a one has continued many years under the
means of grace, and does yet stand out in impenitency and hardness of heart:
this is no infallible argument of non-election, for men may come into the
Vineyard at all hours. So far forth as men live wickedly we may preach
hypothetically and conditionally, according to the revealed will of God, that
their courses are damnable, and as long as they so continue they are in the way
to damnation: yet we cannot absolutely pronounce concerning the persons
themselves, it belongs only to God to judge of their final and eternal
condition And for that place which you alledg that God swears that he
desires not the death of him that dies, I pray you now tell us the particular
man in our method and way of teaching hat is not a capable hearer of this
doctrine. Whatsoever God does intend in his secret Decrees concerning the
eternal state of men what is that to us? We must make the tenders, proposals
and offers of grace according to the terms set down in the Gospel. Indeed, as
men do submit to the promise and do take Christ for their Head, so God does
bring about that which he has determined in his secret will. And therefore
when you speak concerning this sort of people, That they should not believe his
revealed will at all, if they hold his secret will to be the Superior; what
good reason can you show for that? for though the secret will of God touching
the salvation of his elect be the Superior, yet all the tenders of grace, all
faith in the promises are but the ordinary way to bring us to salvation. Here
is no contrariety of will against will, but an excellent subordination. Because
the Lord had many people in the City of Corinth that did belong to him in the
determination of his secret will, therefore the Apostle had a command to preach
the Gospel in that City, and he did continue there the space of a year and six
months, Acts 18. ver. 10, 11. But if it be further objected, how can you pray
for the salvation of all, seeing that the Lord does determine to pass by a
great number of men? I answer, though it be so, we are to do the duty. Paul did
know that a greater part of the Jews should be hardened, and that a remnant
only should be saved; yet for all this he did preach the Gospel, and use all
means that he might save some of them, Romans 11.7, 8, 9, 10. Augustine, one of
the greatest assertors of the prerogative of free grace, in his book de
correptione and gratia has these words, We not knowing who belong to the
number of the predestinate, and who not, ought so to be moved with the
affection of charity that we should will all men to be saved. And so far as it
does appertain to us who are not able to distinguish the predestinate from them
who are not predestinate, for this very thing because we ought to will all men
to be saved, we must medicinally use sharp reproof to all men to save them from
perishing. Dr. Twisse also has these words, moreover of those who are now
alive, though the greater part of them should be reprobated, seeing this is not
known to us, there is nothing does hinder but we may make supplications for
all. Vindic. great. lib. 2. Crimin. 4. Sect. 9 Page 91. Many more testimonies I
might bring of that kind of people as you call them who maintain the secret
will of God to be the more prevailing, yet in order to our understanding they
show that we are to look only unto that which is revealed. They do with one
heart and with one mouth declare that you must begin at the lower end of the
ladder before you can come to the top. As for the secret and the revealed will
of God, though this seem to us to be contradictory, there is no contradiction.
The river that in appearance seems to go another way, if you follow it by
diverse mazes and turnings it will bring you to the Sea at last. But if you
further urge, how can the sending of Christ into the world to die for the lost
sons of men stand with the Decree of election, where some only are chosen to
salvation? Answ. This point is solidly handled by Dr. Davenant, in his answer
to that book that bears the title Gods love to mankind; and in another Treatise
of the death of Christ. The scope and tenor of the whole discourse is to show
that the non-elect may be partakers of many fruits of the death of Christ,
though they are not partakers of that grace which will certainly and infallibly
bring them to salvation;
and so he does concord the general atonement with the peculiar Decree of
election. But because this point is exceedingly controverted in these times,
and is as it were the very rock of offense, I will particularly show how far
I can go along with you. First, I do agree that by his death the Son has
removed the bar out of the way that hinders the salvation of man. For God
having once made a Law, in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the
death, according to the rigor of the Covenant of works and the strictness of
divine justice there was no possibility for any man's salvation. But the Lord
Christ having once satisfied the justice of God and removed the bar, there is
now a possibility for all the lost sons of men to be saved, they are brought
into a savable condition, notwithstanding all the strict demands of
satisfaction according to the first Covenant. And this I take to be the natural
sense of that place which you and others stand so much upon, Who will have all
men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. For there is one
God and one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time, 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. The
scope of which words is briefly this, that seeing the Lord Jesus Christ did
give himself as a ransom for all men, there is a possibility of salvation
forall upon terms of repentance and faith. Secondly, I do agree with you, that
by the death of Christ the Lord does show patience and long-suffering to the
rebellious to invite them to repentance, Romans 2.4. And though since the fall of
man the thoughts of his heart were evil from his childhood; yet respect being
had to the Mediators blood, typed in the sacrifice of Noah, the promise to the
whole world was that the Lord would no more curse the ground for man's sake, but
seed time and harvest, winter and summer, day and night should continue to the
worlds end. Thirdly, I do also agree with you in this, that the Lord Jesus by
the shedding of his blood has not only procured a possibility for the lost
sons of men, but also at seasons he does give them some portions of spirit,
enabling them to judge themselves. And for temporary believers they go so far
in the participation of the fruits of the death of the Son as to taste the good
Word of God and the powers of the life to come, Heb. 6.5. These are the general
fruits of the death of Christ; and in this sense we may say, that he tasted
death for every man. In what sense then does Christ dye for the elect only? He
did shed his blood not only to obtain a possibility for them, but that they
may be certainly and insallibly brought to glory. Hence is it that he speaks
concerning his sheep (for whom he dyed in a special manner) My Father that gave
them me is greater then all, and none can take them out of my Fathers hands,
Joh. 10.29. And in another place, who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect? it is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that
dyed, Romans 8 33, 34. The death of Christ for the elect is not only to obtain
salvation upon terms of repentance and faith, or other general fruits of his
death, but it is certainly and infallibly to bring them to salvation. In
relation to this peculiar love the Apostle says, Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ? Romans 8.35. And our Savior, John 10.28. I will give them
eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man be able to
take them out of my hand. He speaks these things of his sheep for whom he had
laid down his life in that special sense mentioned before. Having thus cleared
all your Objections in this Chapter, we proceed to the next.

CHAP. XI. Whether Adams sin, or any other man's sin does produce death or
condemnation in a natural way.
TOuching the manner of the thing, how sin does cause death, whether death be
the natural fruit of sin, or whether it does merely depend upon the will of
him who has threatened to punish sin with death, is much disputed. But, Mr.
Everard, leaving that which may be supposed, it is too too plain in this
Chapter that you mainly drive at this, to prove that sin is not the
meritorious cause of death, and that Adams sin was no cause of his
condemnation. And then afterward going to discover the causes of judgment; you
tell us for the efficient cause, God is only the contriver who does inflict
punishments. For the material cause, the creatures are the only instruments.
For the formal, it is the manner of judgment coming upon men, the fire by
burning, the water by drowning. For the final, it is the declaration of the
justice of God upon the contemners of his grace. And so you conclude, That sin
sin is no cause of punishment neither efficient, material, formal, nor final,
page 95. 96. And for the meritorious cause, You say also, that sin does not
merit death, but it does only prepare, fit and qualify a man for death, as
grace does for eternal life. page 106, 107, 108. You do not shun to tell us
in the last two lines of the Chapter, speaking of eternal life and eternal
death, That God is as simply and entirely the Author of the one as of the
other. Page 108. In opposition to all this, I do affirm that sin is the
meritorious cause of death, and death is the fruit of sin. Let us consider the
Scriptures and let us vindicate them from your cavils.

First, it is said the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal
life, Romans 6.23. From hence it is plain that eternal life, sanctification of
the Spirit, belief of the truth, and all other things that tend to salvation,
are the mere gift of God, but the wages of sin is death. If death be the
wages of sin, then sin must be the meritorious cause of death. But say you,
Though death be the wages of sin, yet it is not the fruit thereof, page 91.
Though in some cases we may call that the fruit which is not the wages, yet in
the sense of the text, the wages and the fruit are all one. Read but the words
going before, What fruit had you then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? the wages of sin is death. The fruit and the wages are all one, and
the sense of the whole text is this, that sin is the meritorious cause of
damnation. For the second Scripture, Romans 8.6. To be carnally minded is death,
but to be spiritually minded is life and peace. Here say you, If it be death it
self, it cannot be the cause of death. But, Sir, you are to look to the sense,
and not to the strictness of the letter. In strict terms you cannot say, that
to be spiritually minded is life and peace. In this life many that are truly
spiritual, that have the reality of grace in their heart, have not the peace of
grace. The meaning of the text is briefly this, that as peace and life does
follow a spiritual mind, so death does follow the carnal mind as the wages and
fruit thereof. But here you show your skill at catch-ball. I confess, say you,
that he who walks carnally to his end shall receive eternal death; so he that
lives a spiritual life, shall enjoy everlasting life: But neither the death nor
the life were any branches produced by either, for they came both from God. And
as God has no desire that any man should sin, so sin has as little desire
to receive punishment. page 92. Still you go on in the same way of sophistry.
We willingly agree, that he who walks spiritually to the end shall receive
eternal life, because such walking is the way to eternal life. But the carnal
walking is not only the way that leads to death; but (by a Metonymie, the
effect being put for the cause) it is death it self; or, in the way of
causality, a carnal mind is that which produces death, and death is the fruit
thereof. But whereas you affirm, that neither death nor life are branches
produced either by carnal or spiritual walking; in this you err. For though a
godly walking is not the meritorious cause of eternal life, yet a carnal and
sinful walking is the meritorious cause of eternal death; Why else should it be
said, The wages of sin is death? Masters use to pay their servants their
wages at night in relation to that which they have deserved in the day; and for
a weeks work, they pay them commonly at the end of the week. The payment of
wages has near relation to the labor of the hireling that has deserved it.
And therefore the Scriptures do use this expression, the wages of sin is
death, showing that sin is the meritorious cause of death, and death is the
desert of sin. And for that expression of yours, that death is no branch
produced by sin,
but it comes merely from God who inflicteth death; this I think no pious man
can look upon but with a great deal of horror. What is this but to transfer the
cause of death upon God only? But if to mend the matter you shall say that God
does inflict death as the just punishment of sin; in so saying you contradict
your self, and blow up your own position. For if God does inflict death as the
punishment of sin, then it will follow that sin is the meritorious cause of
death; and death does not only come from God, but also from the sinner who
has deserved it. And so you lose your cause.

Thirdly, the Apostle says, Lust when it has conceived, it brings forth
sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth death. Jam. 1.13, 14. To
avoid the force of this Scripture you tell us, That sin does not bring forth
death as lust does bring forth sin, sin is lusts natural seed, but death
has no conceptions by any seed of sin. page 94. But Sir, I would entreat you
to leave all windings and shifts, deal plainly with the words of the text. The
Apostle says, sin when it is finished brings forth death. I do here put it
upon you to give a downright answer, seeing the words of the Apostle are so
plain. If sin does any way bring forth death then we must needs conclude that
sin is the cause of death; and this is the true meaning of the Apostle. But
seeing you bind so much upon the Lords institution, who has threatened death to
the sinner, let us come to the original text, In the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shall dye the death. And here, setting the Lords prohibition
aside, I do willingly yield that there was no evil in the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, if we go to evil in the intrinsecal nature thereof; but the Lord
having forbidden it, it was evil to go against his Command. In this sense I
say, though death was threatened by God, yet Adams own personal sin was the
meritorious cause of death to himself and to all his posterity. And this is the
ground of the Apostles speech, By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin; and death has past over all men unto condemnation. You labor
in many pages together to prove that Adams sin was no cause of his
condemnation; and when all comes to all, This is your chief ground, that the
Lord in his institution did ordain to punish sin and sinners with death; and
therefore sin is not the meritorious cause of death. Good Sir, may not both
stand together as social causes? what do you think of the two Malefactors that
were hanged upon the Cross, the one on the right hand, and the other on the
left hand of our Savior? Were they not both put to death by the sentence of
the Law, yet for all this they were the cause of their own condemnation. The
converted thief will tell you as much, Do thou not fear God, seeing thou art
in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly suffer, for we receive the due
reward of our deeds. Luke 23.40, 41. In like manner I say, though death was
inflicted upon Adam as the just judgment of God, yet Adams sin was the cause
of his own condemnation.

Now whereas you call death a righteous branch. It is true if you look to the
sentence of the just Judge, who has appointed death as the punishment of
sin; yet if you look unto the nature of death, he is an enemy: The last enemy
that shall be destroyed is death. 1 Cor. 15.26. Further, in the book of the
Revelation, we read, that after the Beast, the false Prophet and the Dragon
were cast into the lake of fire, then death it self was cast into the lake of
fire. Rev. 20.14. What is the meaning of this, but that the Lord Christ is Head
and King of the Church, and will tread down all his enemies in the several and
respective times appointed for their destruction, and then last of all, death
it self shall come to be destroyed? If death then be an enemy, the last enemy,
and shall be destroyed as an enemy, how can you affirm that it is a righteous
Branch? Further you argue, That death cannot be the fruit of sin, seeing God
has pleased to punish sin with death; sin, and punishment for sin agree
no more than light and darkness, page 91. If this be your opinion, I pray you
tell me what do you think of that case where God does punish one sin with
another? He gave up the Gentiles to vile affections, that they might receive in
themselves that recompense of their error which was meet. Romans 1.23 24. If one
sin may be the punishment of another, why do you put such a difference
betwixt sin and punishment as betwixt light and darkness? you have another
evasion to help you our, you say, The very voice or death is enough to scare a
sinner from his sins, therefore death is not the natural fruit of sin, page
95. Give me leave to observe the same way of reasoning. The Devil, if he should
visibly appear, the very sight of him would be enough to scare a sinner from
his sins: Therefore a wicked sinner when he does commit sin, does not fulfill
the lusts of his father the Devil, which is to go point blank against the
Scripture, John 8.44. After this you come to answer a weak and incongruous
objection of your own making: you feign an adversary to reason in this wile, If
there had been no sin, there had been no punishment, therefore pun shmext
must be produced by sin, page 949. In this you deceive your self, we do not
argue so loosely, to make every antecedent a necessary cause of that which
comes after for then by the like reason you might argue as you do. If there
had been no Law, there had been no transgression; therefore transgression is
produced by the Law. We say, that sin does not go before death as a meet
antecedent or occasion only, but as the meritorious cause of death; the Apostle
says, sin brings forth death as the cause does the effect, and the wages
of sin is death: when the work is done, the wages is to be paid. Last of all
you come to the particular examples of Corah, of Herod, of Ananias and
Sapphira; and from thence you reason, If death be the natural fruit of sin,
why are not all Rebels punished as Corah, all proud men as well as Herod, all
guilty of the sin of equivocation as well as Ananias? This is the substance
of your argument, page 99, 100. To all which I make this answer, unless they
repent they shall meet with the same righteous judgment of God. The Lord is
free in the execution of judgment as upon those eighteen on whom the Tower in
Siloah fell; yet that it may appear to you that death is the natural fruit of
sin, and that sin is the meritorious cause of death, our Savior shuts up
the matter with these words, unless you repent, you shall all likewise perish,
Luke 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. But you go on, and strike still upon the same string, If
I should allow as much demerit in Adams disobedience to bring death, as Christ
had merit in his obedience both active and passive to bring life into the
world, yet it would not amount to such a pitch to be the only cause. For
though the obedience of Christ was the cause of the coming of life into the
world, yet the appointment of God was as principal a cause as the obedience of
Christ. And so, though sin had been ten thousand times more sinful, yet
without an Ordinance from God death could never have seized upon the world,
page 101. 102, 103. What is all this but a palpable and gross mistake of the
question, or as Logicians call it, an ignorance of the elench? We do confess,
as shrist brought life into the world he brought it in by the institution of
his Father; so when sin brought death into the world, it was by the just
appointment of God to punish sin with death. The question that is in debate
betwixt us is, whether sin be the (...) cause of death as the obedience of
Christ active and passive is the meritorious cause of life! If you yield this,
(as yield it you must we have as much as we do desire. Next, you enquire, how
sin may be the cause of condemnation? supposing that it cannot be the
principal cause, you demand whether it may be a cause in subordination? And
here you tell us, that sin will not be found neither, seeing such causes are
good in their own nature, Well then, what is the cause? you tell us, seeing
sin is an invention of man and the Devil, a mere accident that cleaves to
the subject, man; we may call sin an accidental cause of condemnation seizing
upon man found sinful. page 105. If this way of reasoning be good, why may not
I proceed in the like manner? Heat is an accident in the subject, fire;
therefore the heat of the fire is a mere accidental cause of the boiling of
the water. The force of your reason is no better when you say sin is a mere
accident in the subject, man; therefore it is only the accidental cause of
condemnation. If you well observe the expression, you shall find it to be very
absurd to call sin a mere accidental cause of condemnation. Condemnation is
always set in relation to the guilt of some sin that does deserve it, how
then can you call sin an accidental cause of condemnation? The Scriptures
say, that the Lord will render to every one according to his works, that they
who commit such things are worthy of death; And many passages of the like kind.
What will you say to all this? Here you have a pretty shift to help you out.
Sin (say you) puts a man in a suitable disposition and qualification for
death. page 106. Indeed our Divines when they speak of eternal life, that the
Lord will render to every man according to his works, they take the word
(worthy) only for a suitable qualification: According to that of the Apostle,
he has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light,
Col. 1.12. Though this may be affirmed of the Saints, that they are made meet
for eternal life, it were too short and too diminuent an expression to affirm
that wicked men only are made suitable to receive vengeance, for then the
wicked are no more worthy of eternal death then the Saints are worthy of
eternal life;
which is plainly to cross the Apostle, the wages of sin is death, but the
gift of God is eternal life. I cannot then but mention your words with a kind
of horror with which you close the Chapter: speaking of the wicked, they are,
say you a suitable matter to receive vengeance, as Gods people are suitable to
receive all the joys of eternal life. Now the joys of eternal life are the
free-gift of God. All qualifications, dispositions, frames of spirit, though
never so evangelical in the abundance thereof, do not abate the worth of an
hair of eternal life to be the free-gift of God. For there was not the least
deserts in a holy life to the procuring of eternal salvation, but only it was
the will of God to make eternal life as a Crown to put upon the head of those
men that lived holy here, which were fit or suitable for the Crown of honor. So
men that have lived never so notoriously wicked, rebeling and blaspheming
against God day after day to their lives end, are no otherwise worthy than
persons fitted as the true subjects suitable for wrath, and God is as simply and
entirely the author of the one as the other. And so far you. Now I leave it
to all tender consciences to understand and to give sentence. We do willingly
confess that we cannot merit any thing by our own works in the way to
salvation, there being such a disproportion between them and the glory to come.
But I do detest and abhor that speech of yours, when you say that the
greatest sinner, who continues so all his life long is no otherwise worthy of
death than a person fitted or a subject made suitable for wrath; and that God is
as much the cause of the damnation of the one as the salvation of the other. If
this doctrine of yours be sound and Orthodox, why may not the wicked in hell
cast all upon God, as the sole Author of their misery, as well as the Saints
in heaven ascribe all to the glory of his free grace? I will use your own words
though to far better purpose, If a man should study many years for a
destroying Principle to dishonor his Creator, he could not parallel this,
which is the sharpest Sword that was ever drawn against the righteousness of
God.

I have staid the longer upon this point, because you have used so many
arguments to prove sin to be no meritorious cause of condemnation, I have more
carefully endeavored to vindicate the truth because this is one of the first
fundamentals that is put into the heart of the Gentiles: They knowing the
judgment of God against them which do such things, that they are worthy of
death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them, Romans 1.32.
That sin is the meritorious cause of death, and that a sinner is worthy of
death, is graven in the heart of every man alive: and God at seasons does
stir up the confideration of the guilt of sin in the conscience of the
Gentiles, to look after pardon, and to make their peace with God. The first
convictions of the Spirit do begin with considerations of the Godhead and the
guilt of sin, that so men may be brought to see their misery. And yet you
teach us here in this Chapter, that sin is not the meritorious cause of
condemnation. Now we proceed to your next Chapter.

CHAP. XII. What Adam retained of his forfeiture till his death.
HERE also you teach such things as do little less then strike at the
foundation. You tell us, that Adam after the fall, for his body had all the
parts and lineaments thereof: He had his senses, and retained his knowledge.
And further you add, I make no question but God had so ordered the
employments, that he had for Adam some of them to be more spiritual than ever
he had to do before his fall; and then that he should utterly disable him from
the performance thereof, will never be made good by any man under heaven, page
110. I do fully agree with you in this, that the employment which God had to do
for Adam after the fall, was as spiritual as before. But then consider the
ability does not lie in man, but only in the Lord Christ, and in the Word of
promise. The true Church does hold and ever has held, that the employment
which God has now for every true believer, is a spiritual employment. Yet they
hold it also as a truth of the foundation, that Adam lost all ability to
spiritual good. But here you think you have an unanswerable argument, for say
you, in that service which Adam bad to do, if he was completely furnished by
God, why should I judge that he would employ him in a more hard service, and
not afford him suitable accommodation? Had God no other way to give Adam and his
posterity suitable accommodation to obey his commands, but there must be a
necessity in it for him to retain the same abilities after, which he had before
the fall? when you thus endeavor to proportion abilities to commands in a
natural way you overthrow the scope of the Gospel and the main sense of the
Scriptures, which show that all ability is to be had from Christ. God has
tempered salvation, and has so put it into the hands of Christ that all that
want abilities should go to him in the sense of their own misery. And to this
end he has suffered the first man to fall, and to lose all natural abilities,
that supply and help may be had from Christ only in the Covenant of grace.
This is the main scope of the Scriptures. And judge you now whether you do not
go against the main foundation of the doctrine of Christ when you teach such
things as these, The Examiners of the late Synods confession of faith in the
Chapter of free will, Sect. 2. are (in a manner) as foul as you. For the Synod
having laid down this truth concerning Adam in the state of innocence, that
then he had a power and freedom to will that which was good and pleasing to
God, but yet mutably; the Censors are not contented with this, but they seem to
plead for the same liberty still in man after the fall. These are their words,
That, man in the state of innocence had freedom and power to will and do that
which was good, seems to us in some sort to hold true still of all men as they
are now borne till they have personally and actually sinned. If this be so,
what need is there of a Christ to sanctify and to regenerate, and to take away
the sin of the nature? But now we will go along with you. You say, I judge
the work that God set Adam about before the fall, he had an ability to do after
the fall, if God had but given him a command to return into the garden again,
page 110. By this account then he had an ability to keep the Covenant of works
after his fall. The Covenant of works was that wherein life was promised to
Adam, and in him to his posterity upon condition of perfect and personal
obedience. Will you say then that he had ability to keep this Covenant if God
had given him liberty to return into the garden? Let us hear what ground you
have for this God: (say you) knew well enough that Adam had not lost his
understanding nor his memory, for he could tell the use of the tree and where
it stood, that should have cured him of his deadly wound: otherwise, the Lord
would not have made so strong provision to prevent him, page 111. True indeed,
we read that the Lord placed at the East of the garden of Eden Cherubims and a
flaming Sword which turned every way to keep the way of the tree of life. This
Provision in the general shows that Adam knew the particular place where the
tree of life stood, and in general what was the use of the tree, yet for all
this he might be bereaved of his spititual knowledge. Natural men may
altogether be destitute of the knowledge of the Spirit, yet judge of external
objects represented to the senses. A Temporary believer who has lost his
feeling may tell the time when, the place where, and the instrument by whom he
was first wrought upon. Therefore if we take it as granted that Adam knew the
way to the tree of life, and the general use of the tree, this does not prove
him to retain the same spiritual and internal knowledge which he had before
his fall.

Let us hear the Inventory of Adams losses as you make the account. You tell
us that Adam forfeited his body and his limbs, and that God would bereave him
of all after that nine hundred thirty years were expired. And you further add,
that God cast him out of that pleasant place of accommodation, that neither he
nor his posterity had power to do the will of God in the garden any longer,
page 111, 112. This is the total which you bring in of his losses, and this is
a very short reckoning. As for Adams being cast out of the Garden, it was a
part of his misery to be deprived of that earthly mansion, but it is the least
part of his loss. The principal damage which he met withal was internal, in
his soul, which was more than the loss of a thousand gardens. But we go to
your next question.

CHAP. XIII. Whether Adam did dye in the same day that he did eat the forbidden
fruit.
TO the clearing of this point you begin with the diverse acceptions of the word
day. And then you come to eavil against the Lords day, in these words.
This day some affirm that it was the first day of the week, but there is
little to be shown for that. It is a very private Interpretation, because there
is no public manifestation by the Word, but that men are willing to strengthen
the opinion and practice of a first days Sabbath with a reference to the
changing of Gods Commands, and setting up of their own thoughts, page 114, 115.
By this it is clear what your judgment is concerning the Christian Sabbath, but
we will briefly clear the point. First, it is of the Law of nature that a due
proportion of time be set apart for the worship of God. Also the Lord in his
Word by a positive and perpetual Command, binding all men in all times, has
appointed one day in seven to be kept wholly unto him, Exodus 20 8, 10, 11. Now
this from the beginning of the world to the resurrection of Christ was the last
day of the week, and from the resurrection, and so downward, it is changed into
the first day. Upon these grounds, therefore if the question be put to us,
wherefore do you keep one in seven? we plead the morality of the Command. And
if it shall be surther alleged, why keep ye the particular first day in memory
of the resurrection of the Lord? Our ground is the perpetual use of the Church,
founded upon express Apostolical practice, and implicit Apostolical precept,
which we are sufficiently able to prove and evince by the collation of four
Scriptures if we were put upon that argument. But this would be too larg a
digression from the matter in hand.

Next, you come to show the sense of the commination. And here you tell us that
Adam did not dye the same day, if the day be taken for the space of twelve or
twenty four hours. This is in plain terms to contradict the scope and sense
of the text. For there it is expressly said in the very same moment and
instant of time in which our first parents did eat the forbidden fruit their
eyes were opened, and they saw that they were naked, Genesis 3.7. If you take this
for the eyes of their mind, it is most clear that their eyes were opened not
only to see their inward nakedness in the loss of the image of God, but also
to feel the guilt of sin as the just fruit of their disobedience. If the
opening of the eyes be taken for the eyes of the body, then their eyes were
opened to see that, which they did not, nor could see before. Their nakedness
before was a nakedness of honor, innocence and righteousness, but their
nakedness after was a nakedness of dishonor, of misery, of sin, of
provocation to sin. And for the particular time it is expressed in the
Comination, in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death. And
accordingly in the same instant of time when they had eaten the forbidden
fruit, the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked.
Therefore death and misery did seize upon them the same day according to the
Commination. But because you are so peremptory in it, that Adam did not dye the
same day if the day be taken for an ordinary day of twelve hours long: For the
clearing of this I would entreat you to answer me this question, why did God
appear to Adam in the evening in the cool of the day? If you shall say, it was
to call the man and his wife to account for their disobedience; I grant this to
be true, but it does not satisfy the question, for the particular time. He
might have called him to account at any other time; and what necessity was
there that it should be left upon record that he came to judgment the very same
day? The Lord had said, in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the
death, and the same day that the forbidden fruit was eaten at evening in the
cool or wind of the day (as the Hebrew has it) the Lord came to inquire after
the fact to give sentence and to execute judgment. In Scripture where promises
or threats are declared to be fulfilled in such a particular time there the
Holy Ghost is punctual in the observation of the time. The children of Israel
should be in bondage sour hundred years according to the promise, Gen 15.13,
14. And when that time was fulfilled the very same day they came out of the
land of Egypt with their Armies, Exodus 12. 41, 42. So our Lord and Savior did
signify to his Disciples that he should be crucified and slain, and the third
day rise again. Mat. 16.24. And how careful are all the Evangelists to repeat
the time of the resurrection, that it was on the first day of the week, the
third day after his passion? And so in the present case, when it is said in the
day that thou eatest thereof shall thou dye the death, to the fulfilling of
this the eyes of our first parents were opened the very first day: And the Lord
came to execute judgment upon them for their disobedience the evening of the
same day. After all this let us now hear what exposition you do give of the
text. Though Adam (say you) did not dye the same day as he did eat of the
forbidden fruit, yet he forfeited his life to the Lord of the great Charter of
the world, he was then in a capacity to dye, he did then fall under the
expectation of death. As in the English, such a man is a dead man because he is
condemned by the sentence of the Law. That which you say is true, and it is in
effect that which I teach: but according to your sense it is not the whole
truth. For when the Lord says in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall
dye the death, he does not speak this only of a capacity of dying but of an
actual seizing of death: for he was struck with spiritual death the very same
day he sinned. And for a temporal death likewise, though there was not a
present dissolution of the soul from the body, yet presently he fell under the
curse, to conflict with Armies of diseases which should never leave him till
they had brought him to his grave. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat
bread until thou return unto the ground, for out of it was thou taken, for
dust thou art and unto dust thou shall return. Chap. 3. ver. 19. But now you
further add, If Adam had dyed the same day he could not have tilled the
ground, he could not have lived so long as to see a son of his own. To all this
I agree, if you take death in the most strict sense for the actual dissolution
of the soul from the body, but what ground have we so to limit the words of the
text? I have said before that God did smite him the same day with spiritual
death, and for a temporal death he came under the dominion and reign of it. In
that famous place when the Apostle says, by one man, sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, and death has passed over all men to condemnation,
Romans 5.12. He does here speak of the immediate reign of death. Death reigned
from Adam to Moses over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression, ver. 14. And in the close of all, as sin has reigned to
death, so might grace reign thorough righteousnesseunto eternal life, v. 21.
Therefore the same day that Adam sinned, though he lived to till the ground, and
to beget children after his own image, yet he and all his fell immediately
under the reign of death: so that all who are now born into the world, infants
as well as others, are under the reign of death by the disobedience of the
first man. Having given the true sense of the Scripture, we will take a view of
your interpretation. And here you say,
that Adam did dye the same day, though he lived nine hundred thirty nine
years after. And to make good this strange gloss of yours you tell us that
God did not prescribe any quantity of hours, but has declared that a thousand
years are as one day in his account, page 118. I must indeed acknowledge, that
a day is taken sometimes for a year, sometimes for a greater revolution of
time, as may be seen in the Prophetical Scriptures. But the scope of the text
is plainly to be taken for a literal ordinary day, as we have formerly proved.
And strange it is that the Lord in the denunciation of judgment should go to
the typical and parabolicall expressions used in Daniel, and the Revelation,
and Peter's Epistle.

After this you come to enquire, whether Christ by his suffering did not
prevent the falling of death upon Adam? And you resolve it in the negative. For
say you, either Adam must suffer, or the Word of God, seeing God had once
declared the sentence, thou shall surely dye. In case then he should give his
Son to prevent the death of Adam, there had been a clear contradiction, page
119. In the commination there are some things which I do acknowledge to be
infallible as the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which alter not; and
therefore to make good the sentence, all that are now born into the world after
the course of natural generation, are borne in the state of spiritual death,
subject to the miseries of nature, and shall inevitably be brought to temporal
death at last. All these things do hold by virtue of the first sentence: yet
you must take heed that you go no further, because the second man has all
fullness of grace to repair the losses brought in by the first. By his
intervening patience and long-suffering is extended to all the sons of men.
And therefore whatsoever you suggest to the contrary, there is indeed and in
truth no contradiction between the sentence in the day thou eatest thereof thou
shall dye the death, and the delay thereof in a qualified sense. In some
particulars long-suffering may be extended, and yet in others there may be a
speedy execution of the sentence. But you go on, seeing God would not have Adam
to come near the tree of life, therefore he would not have him to be free from
death that way, page 119. Neither do we maintain that it was the purpose of God
to free Adam in that manner that he should not taste of a temporal death. He
came under the dominion of that death the same day he sinned, and the most holy
Saints that are must all dye before they can be raised again, to set forth the
truth and certainty of the Lords commination. Yet for all this at present the
stroke was stayed by the Mediators blood, and long-suffering was extended to
men, that salvation might be had by the Covenant of grace. As for the tree of
life, it is most true, that God did forbid Adam access to that tree, not
absolutely because he would not have him to recover life, but because he had
provided another way for the restoring of man by Christ the promised seed. He
would not come to the most extreme and final execution of the sentence, because
his purpose was to have a posterity upon the earth, and a seminary for the
Church. Further, you argue, there was a necessity for Adam to dye, otherwise
Christ could not make him alive, page 119. Here you mistake the state of the
question, we agree that Christ did not dye simply to free man that he should
not fall into the dust, but only to raise him from the dust again. It was
necessary to fulfill the truth of the commination, that Adam should return to
dust, but it was not necessary that he should return to dust the very same day.
It was necessary that he should fall under the reign of death, and under a
necessity of dying the same day he sinned, and this to continue to the
resurrection of the just: Then this mortal shall put on immortality, and this
corruptible shall put on incorruption. 1 Cor. 15.53. The Apostle also says,
when he shall change these vile bodies that they may be made like his glorious
body. Phil. 3.21. All the bodies of the Saints shall be made like the body of
Christ as now it is in glory. But how did the bodies of the Saints begin to be
vile bodies? By vile bodies he does mean these corruptible tabernacles of the
soul, liable to diseases and to all the miseries of nature. But when did this
vileness and misery begin seeing they were not made vile by creation. They
began to be vile bodies the same day that Adam did sin, they have been so ever
since, and they must continue such unto the resurrection, and then the bodies
of the Saints shall be made conformable to the body of Christ in glory,
Philip. 3 Vlt.

CHAP. XIV. Whether Adam did dye a spiritual death yea or no?
IN the discovery of this point you observe this method. First you show what
spiritual life is. Secondly, you resolve upon the question. For your
description of spiritual life, though you miserably confound the Scriptures, we
will take it in the best sense, for such a life as has the Spirit for the
cause, Gal. 4.19. John 6.63. Col. 33. But you err in your application, when
you use such an expression as this, that Adam had not such a cup of water in
all his four Rivers. You say also, that he could not savor the voice of the
resurrection from the dead: for the goodness of a Savior must be resented by
those that are lost, but Adam knew no such need. page 122. Your argument is
fallacious, because Adam had not spiritual life in the same way as the Saints
now have, therefore he had no spiritual life at all. He might have ability to
love Christ as Lord Creator. Further you say that the voice of forgiveness of
sin was a stranger to him. Well, let this be admitted, it does not prove the
point neither. Sickness it self was a stranger to Adam before his fall, will
you infer then that there were no herbs for medicine, and that the Lord did
not create the herb of the field with a medicinal virtue? So in the like case,
what if remission of sin and the way of pardon of sin by Christ's blood was
a thing hidden from Adam, as being not compatible with his condition; will you
enforce from hence a want of capacity in him to understand the mystery of
salvation by Christ? or will you affirm from hence, that he was a mere carnal
man before his fall? Take heed that by these and such like positions you do not
reflect upon God himself. The Apostle says, the carnal mind is enmity against
God, for it is not subject to the Law of God neither indeed can be, Romans 8.
ver. 6, 7. If you go to the Original of this enmity or non-subjection, and say
it did proceed from the fall of Adam, you do agree with us. But if you go
higher, and stand upon it that Adam was a mere natural man by the condition of
his creation, then you will lay the blame upon God that set him in such a state
of enmity; and whither will you go in the issue if you maintain such positions
as these?

But to make good your assertion you argue, The first man is of the earth
earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven. So though Adam was the first
man, and a living man yet it was not a living soul that proves that Adam had a
quickened Spirit. page 12^. But in this you do miserably soobisticate. For
though the Apostle does draw a parallel between both the Adams; If you do well
ponder the Scripture, you shall find that the parallel does not stand so much
between Adam before his fall as between the first Adam and the second after the
fall. 2ly. upon good consideration you shall find that the Apostle in this
Scripture does not speak so much concerning the Spirit of God in the souls of
the Saints as concerning the spirituality of their bodies that shall be at the
resurrection. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption, it is
sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory? it is sown a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body and there is aspiritual body,
1 Cor. 15.43, 44. If then you will needs conclude Adam to be a carnal man
before his fall, because his body was not made a spiritual body; by the same
reason you must conclude all the Saints that have ever been since the creation
of the world, to be carnal men, and absolutely destitute of the work of the
Spirit. For the bodies of the Saints are yet carnal, and must abide in their
incarnality till the resurrection of the dead. But whereas you build so
strongly upon that expression, the first man Adam was made a living soul the
last man Adam was made a quickening Spirit, verse 45. This does not prove the
first man to have been merely carnal or absolutely void of the Spirit before
his fall. For it is not the scope of the Apostle in this Scripture to speak of
the excellency of man made after the image of God, but only of the corruptible
state of the body as it stands in immediate relation to that immortal
condition which it shall have at the resurrection of the dead. And whereas it
is said the second man was a quickening Spirit, this is meant principally of the
divinity of Christ, by and thorough which he will raise the dead. So then, if
you will build upon this ground, and argue from hence, that the first man was a
mere carnal man, because he was not a quickening Spirit, by the same principle
you must conclude that all the Saints living are carnal men. For of what one of
them may it be affirmed that he is a quickening Spirit, who by his power and
divinity is able to raise the dead? But if you will make a right analogy, let
us compare the things that ought to be compared. First, let us consider what
the first man was before his fall, and what the Saints are as renewed by grace.
Secondly, let us compare what the first man might have been if he had eaten of
the tree of life, and what the Saints shall be at the resurrection of the dead.
For the first of these, if you speak of the Saints as renewed by grace, though
their bodies be natural, they are spiritual in respect of the inward man. The
same may be said of Adam before his fall, though his body was made of the dust,
yet by grace and special favor he did carry the image of God. For the second,
if you shall affirm that all the bodies of the Saints shall be made immortal
and spiritual at the resurrection, consider what the body of Adam might have
been if he had continued in his obedience and eaten of the tree of life. If you
would make a right collation between state and stat, ethe parallel should run
in these terms. But because you stand so strongly upon this expression, that
the first man is of the earth earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven;
seeing you will have all this to be applied to Adam before his fall, I pray you
resolve me this question, seeing the Apostle says, as we have born the image
of the earthy so shall we bear the image of the heavenly, Who are they that
bear the image of Adam before his fall? I think if you were put to it, you
could not produce any one instance in all Europe, Asia, Africa, or America that
ever stood up after this similitude. The scope of the text is only concerning
man after the fall, and how the resurrection of the dead does take away that
death which is brought in by the fall. In the close of the Chapter you propound
this question, whether was not Adam to have dyed an eternal death for eating of
the forbidden fruit? For the clearing of the question let us distinctly set
down how the three kinds of death did seize upon Adam, and how they come upon
all his branches. First, for spiritual death, it is evident that he died this
death as soon as he did eat of the forbidden fruit. For the temporal death, he
fell under the reign of it the same day he sinned. And for eternal death,
though according to the truth of the commination, Adam and his posterity should
have dyed, the Lord Christ stepping in did set a stop to the sentence. And
therefore for the cause of the condemnation of man, it is now principally and
immediately for the neglect of the grace of God that should lead him to
repentance. But you add further, I can safely say, that if Adam was to have
dyed an eternal death, and that by the appointment of God, then Christ neither
would nor could have stepped in; nay he could not have lifted up his little
finger to have helped Adam or his posterity. page 125. I answer, If God had
decreed in his secret purpose that Adam and all his posterity should have dyed
the death, in such a case Christ neither would nor could have stepped in to cross
the Decree of God; but Sir, who is the man that does maintain that position?
For my part, I take the Decree of God to be one thing, and the outward
denunciation of judgment to be another. For the Decree, that cannot be changed,
but the sentence may recieve alteration according to diverse outward
circumstances and conditions that may occur. Besides, if you should build
never so strongly upon the letter of the text, we can easily reconcile the
truth of the commination, in saying that Adam might die the death the same day
he sinned,
though the Lord was not pleased presently to inflict death in all its kinds.
From all which we do conclude, if the Lord Christ came to free men from the
reign of death, Heb. 2.14, 15. We may easily gather that Adam brought himself
and all his posterity under the dominion of that syrant: and so he and all his
should have dyed that kind of death if the Lord Christ had not stepped in. But
you go about to deface this speech in the end of the Chapter, for if in case
that Christ had not stepped in there had been no recovery, this were to exclude
all other means, and to limit the holy One of Israel. page 126. Sir, I would
entreat you not to make the doctrine of salvation odious by picking quarrels
against words. For we do not peremptorily define that there was no other way
possible to save man unless Christ had stepped in; we leave it only to the
Lord himself to judge of the several possibilities of the salvation of man.
This only we affirm, so far as it is revealed to us, the present is the most
excellent way to satisfy the justice of God and to show abundant mercy. And
though you now, as others before you, go about to cast an hatred upon the
doctrine of the Church in the points of the fall of Adam, original sin,
free will, and the like; I must tell you, if you and they would not tear those
things asunder which should be joined together, if you would compare one thing
with another, you should find that there is nothing so deformed in the state of
the first man, but there is that in the second which will answer all. But here
is the misery, you look upon the mystery of salvation in some broken pieces and
parts only, and do not consider the whole compages or sum of the truth in one
body. We will now proceed to your next Chapter.

CHAP. XV. Whether Adams posterity were guilty of his transgression,
IN this Chapter you endeavor to make good the purity of nature, and the
freedom of all infants from original sin; you do not, as the Jesuits and
Arminians, extenuate the matter, but after the manner of the ancient Pelagians
you deny the sin of the nature. And here you do not go alone. The Confession
of faith, lately set forth by the thirty separate Congregations, does not speak
one word of this sin of the nature. If we go to the beginning of their book,
(where all other Chatechismes do show the misery of man by nature) they are
altogether silent in the point of original sin. In the middle where they
speak of the grace of Christ there is not one syllable concerning the grace
that does regenerate or purge out the sin of the nature. In the third and
last part of the book when they come to duties after regeneration they speak
nothing of the great work of the mortification of the Old man and the putting
on of the New man, but only of dipping, and baptizing Disciples, and of the
manner of living in their way of Church Membership. And thus one great error
at the foundation does in a manner overthrow the whole building of the
Christian faith. And this is the woeful state of the separate Congregations
with us. Neither are these Churches in so bad a condition, but the Examinors
and Censors of the late Confession of faith set forth by the Assembly of
Divines, these clancular Authors (whosoever they be) have further swarved from
the truth.
For they in their late Examen do not only maintain the purity of the natural
birth, but also have many other positions and damnable tenants. I will
therefore take the liberty to join all together. And therefore, Mr. Everard,
where you and they do agree one answer shall serve both, and where they have
any thing which you have not touched I shall begin with them as as soon as I
have ended with you.

Before I come to answer your arguments, let me put both you and them in mind
of your sophystical dealing.
For neither you in your treatise, nor they in their Examen do mention our
chiefest argument drawn from Job. 3. These are the words of our Savior to
Nicodemus, Jesus answered and said unto him, verily, verily, I say unto thee,
except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Nicodemus says
unto him; how can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time
into his mothers womb and be borne? Jesus answered verily, verily, I say unto
thee except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh and that which is
born of the Spirit is Spirit. Marvail not that I said unto thee you must be
borne again, verse 3.4, 5, 6, 7. These words are most plain and significant to
prove the impurity of the natural birth, and the necessity of the new birth, as
every one that reads may easily understand. I do marvel then that you should
overpasse this place in silence.

But let us now come to the meaning of the text; to prove the necessity of
Regeneration our Savior does use this medium, that which is borne of flesh is
flesh. Because man is polluted in his natural birth, therefore he needs have a
new birth. By flesh we do not understand that mass and lump of the body which
we carry about us, for in it there is neither good nor evil; but our Lord
Christ does here intend the corruption of nature as it is opposed to the
sanctifying work of the Spirit: for so flesh and Spirit are commonly opposed in
Scripture. This may more particularly be seen in Romans 8. in the beginning of
the Chapter. Therefore our Saviors argument is much in effect, because the
nature of man is defiled with original sin from the very birth the remedy
must be proportionable to the disease,
it is necessary that every one that shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven
must be new born. There be diverse cause? that do bring men to a habit of sin,
and there are diverse means to be used to break of such habits. First, men are
brought to a custom in sinning by example; and therefore the Word commands
that we should turn away from such evil communications as will corrupt good
manners. Secondly, men are brought to a habit in sin by long custom, which
is as it were a second nature: and therefore the Scripture speaks that we
should break off such kind of customs by a kind of violence. Thirdly, men come
to a practice of sin by temptation, as Achan saw the wedge of gold and the
babylonish garment and coveted it: and therefore the Scriptures do every where
say that we should resist the temptations of the world, the allurements of the
flesh, and to pray unto the Lord that he would not lead us into temptation.
These are in part the causes of the habit and practice of sin, but they are not
the original and the principal cause; that lies higher, in the natural birth:
There is a necessity of Regeneration by the Spirit because all that are borne
in the natural way are defiled with sin. They then who maintain the purity of
the natural birth as the Examiners, Mr. Everard, and the separate Churches do,
overthrow the doctrine of the foundation of Christ. Now, Mr. Everard,
let us come to your arguments.

First, you say, we could not sin in Adam, our souls and bodies were not
together in him, and how we could commit sin you know not, therefore believe
not. page 127. But Sir, if you would seriously consider the words of the
Apostle, Romans 5.12. by one man sin entered into the world, etc. You should
find that all then were in one public man, and sinned in him; and this is the
reason which the Apostle gives why death passed universally upon all men,
because in one all have sinned; his one act was the act of all. But for more
abundant confirmation let us consider the scope of the text. The drift of the
Apostle is to draw a parallel between both the Adams, Frist in those points
wherein they do agree. Secondly, in those wherein they do disagree. For the
points of agreement, the most remarkable to the purpose in hand are these.
First, the two Adams are described as two persons which are the roots to their
several and respective posterities. The first Adam is a root to all his
branches, and the second Adam is a root to all branches. I marvail then what
delusion has seized upon the Examiners, who do positively maintain, that the
first Adam is not here intended as he was the Father of us all. Secondly, they
are described by the plurality of branches, as the first Adam had a
multiplicity of branches out of him, so the second Adam had a plurality of
branches out of him. And therefore the Apostle does elegantly proceed in the
collation: as by the offense of one, many be dead; so the gift of grace which
is by one man Jesus Christ has abounded unto many. As by one man's offense
death reigned by one: much more they which receive abundance of grace shall
reign in life by one Jesus Christ. And so the Apostle does compare one Adam to
one Christ; Adam the root of all his branches, Christ the root of all his
branches. Thirdly, they are set forth by the passage of the common sap out of
each root into its branches, respectively. And therefore the Apostle speaks
concerning the first Adam, by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and death passed over all men. The common sap then that passed out of
the first man into all his branches, is first sin, and then death by sin.
By sin is here principally meant original sin and all other sins that
flow from this as the fountain. But if further enquiry be made concerning the
passage of sin and death into all the branches that come of Adam, the passage
is not all at one and the same instant. It is now five thousand six hundred
years since the fall of Adam, and in all this time original sin has been in
continual flux and succession. As in several generations men come to be born,
so they actually participate of the sap that comes from the first root. The
like may be said of the second Adam and of his branches. They which receive
abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by
one Jesus Christ. ver. 17. The sap then that comes from Christ as the common
root, is grace and spiritual life; this does flow out of him into all his
branches. And for the passage thereof, it is not all at one time, but as men
come to receive the gift of righteousness and to be born anew they come to the
actual fruition thereof. For, let the death of Christ be never so largely
tendered to the lost sons of men, there is no actual participation of him till
he be received by faith. The words of the text are most emphatical and
significant, They which receive abundance of grace and the gift of
righteousness shall reign in life. As who would say in plainer terms, they
only shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ who do particularly receive the
gift of righteousness which is generally offered. This is the undoubted
meaning of the text. And therefore for you to say that we could not sin in
Adam, our souls and bodies not being in him, how do you answer the scope of
the text? by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners, by one man sin
entered into the world. Adam, is here set forth as the root of all his branches,
and all the branches were in him as the first public man. What can you or the
Examiners say to this?

2ly. you say that we had no Law in Adam. Now where there is no Law, there is
no transgression; and if we had received any Law, it must have been made known
to us, but there was none made known to us, and therefore there was no Law.
page 127. To this I rejoyn,
if there was no Law given to us in Adam, how come we to be guilty of his
transgression? how come we to bear the burden of his sin? why does the
Apostle speak so plainly, by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners?
We must then necessarily come to affirm this for a truth, that the Law was
given to Adam as a public man, and in him to all his posterity. And, whereas
you say, that there was no Law made known to us at that time, therefore we had
no interest in the Law: why do not you infer by the like reason, when the
second Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ, suffered death upon the Cross, because at
that very time the merit of his death was not made known, you had no part or
portion in that death which was one thousand six hundred years before you were
born. If you will be loath to stand to the latter, to lose your privilege by
the second Adam, I pray you give us leave to maintain the damage that was
brought in by the first Adam. And yet further; to take away all scruples from
tender consciences, if it might seem harsh for all the sons of men to perish
by the disobedience of one man, especially when the Law was not made known to
them in their own individual persons, but in the common root of all mankind,
let us consider how the second man came as a remedy to free the same miserable
sons of men from the state of sin and death, especially when they neither
thought nor knew any thing concerning the means of their salvation. The
greatness of our misery by Adam, does amplify and set forth the merit of
Christ in the fullness thereof. Now then when the Examiners and you both go
about to extenuate the misery of the fall, you do rob Christ of the glory of
his grace.

You say, The branch has not any thing, but what it has by dependence upon
the tree. Now it is not so with us; for that which we call the Principal part
of man, his soul or spirit was not dependant upon Adam, but had his dependancy
from the very same fountain from whence Adam received his, even from God
himself. p. 128. Here I confess there is a great question concerning the manner
of the propagation of Original sin, and men do weary themselves very much to
find out, whether the soul be by infusion or by traduction? But I see no cause
why we should entangle our selves in that difficulty.
For, whether the soul be infused, or whether it be traduced, or which way
soever it be conveyed, we must necessarily affirm in the continual flux of
original sin from father to child, each father does propagate it to his
child, as Adam did to the whole posterity. If this be not a real truth, what
shall we make of the speech of our Savior, that which is born of the flesh is
flesh? Joh. 3.6. The Father then does propagate the corruption of nature to his
child as he himself did first receive it by propagation. We must needs then
yield the truth of the thing, though there be some difficulty in the discovery
of the manner. But that which does very much satisfy me in this point is the
consideration of that speech to Adam, and in him to all mankind; be fruitful
and multiply, replenish the earth and subdue it, Genesis 1.28. From whence I
gather, that the propagation of mankind does chiefly depend upon this promise
established in the beginning. And therefore suppose that be true which you say,
that the soul does come immediately from God, the question is whether in matter
of generation, in matter of union of the soul with the body, in matter of
propagation of the kind, the child does not depend upon the father as the
branch does upon the root. And does not the Lord continue still to perform
that promise that he made in the beginning? Surely, by what power the earth
does continue to bring forth herbs, and every thing does fructify according to
its kind; by the same ordinance, blessing and promise of God does the father
beget the child, to continue a posterity upon the earth. To the right solution
of the question then, we must give a double answer. For if it be demanded in
the first place, why a man does generate a man? It is from the Ordinance and
blessing of God, and from that fundamental Law, increase and multiply. But if
it be further inquired, why a sinful father does continue to beget a sinful
child? the traduction of original sin is from Adam, the common root of the
corruption of nature ever since the fall. For the fountain being corrupted the
corruption does go down the stream, and is in perpetual flux and succession
from the Spring head. But to make the matter good, you go on, If the souls and
spirits of all that stock that came from Adam should have been lineally
derived, then they must have returned again to him, page 228. This does not
follow for by the like reason, why do you not argue concerning the branches and
leaves of all the trees and forests in the world, because they have their
derivation from the root therefore they must return into the root again; But
you add further, admit (say you) we had such a being in Adam as the branches
had in the tree, and produce actions in a natural way, being prone thereunto,
yet that which is to be expected must have been such fruits as were natural to
the tree and no other; but sin was no natural fruit, but an accident, page
129. Indeed if you take nature in its first essence and institution, it is
good, and all sin is unnatural and accidental; but if you take nature in its
vicious qualities, as it is since the fall, then it is depraved in Adam, and
our immediate parents are so many conduit-pipes of the corruption of nature. If
this be not so, what can be the meaning of our Saviors words, that which is
born of flesh is flesh? This shows plainly that Adam is not only the root of
nature, but also since the fall a root of the corruption of nature; and upon
this ground lies a necessity of regeneration, or having a new nature from
Christ the second Adam.

Thirdly, you say, If we must own all Adams actions sinful, as our acts, then
pray give me leave to appropriate as large a portion in all his good actions.
For why should I not plead for as much propriety in all his good actions, as
some will persuade me I have in all his evil actions, seeing I was as much in
him before the fall, as since? And then I might say as well, that I walked in
the Garden, and dressed it, and gave names to all creatures, page 129. If this
will give you content, I know nothing to the contrary but we may affirm, that
all mankind were in Adam when he walked in the Garden, and gave names to all
cattle. And without question you should have had as great a part in his good
actions if he had stood, as now you have a share in the evil of that action, by
which he fell. To make this appear, in that state as we are now restored by
Christ, Man has Lordship and Dominion over the creature. If you will fetch
this dominion from that great Charter, Let them have dominion over the fish of
the Sea, the foul of the air, etc. Genesis 1.26. Then you must needs conclude,
that the privilege which was given to Adam, was given to all his posterity.
Yea, in that particular case, when the Lord brought all creatures to Adam to
see what names he would give them, he did bring the creatures to him, as to the
head of all mankind; and he not only in his own private, but in their public
right did give names to all cattle. The like may be said of the institution of
marriage in the beginning, and of a man's leaving his father and mother, and
cleaving to his wife: This did not so immediately concern Adam in his own
person, as all mankind that should come of him in succeeding generations, Mat.
19.4.

Fourthly, you say, If all men did sin in Adam when he did eat the forbiden
fruit, why might it not as well be said, when Adam believed, I believed; when
Adam repented, I repented? page 130. I answer, the case is not equal, for when
Adam did eat the forbidden fruit, he did this as a public person, as the root
of all mankind: but when he did believe, he did that as a particular member of
Christ. I may say on the other side, when Christ suffered upon the Cross to
satisfy the justice of God, this was all one as if Adam and Paul themselves
had satisfied the justice of God. What Christ did, he did for them, and when he
did it, they did it in him and by him. The like answer may be given to that
question, why do not the regenerate propagate grace as well as original sin?
The answer is plain, piety is not hereditary, as original sin is, neither
does holiness come into us by nature, but by grace; not generation but
regeneration does entitle us to salvation. And therefore in the aforementioned
case, when Adam did beget Cain in his own likeness, he did not beget him as
the son of his faith, but the son of his corrupt nature. The same may be
said of the natural Progeny of all believers, they are born in original sin
as well as the children of Infidels. The Jew that was circumcised himself,
begat one that was uncircumcised. It is therefore a poor and a weak shift of
the Examiners, (who, to illude the force of that Scripture, I was conceived in
sin and born in iniquity,) do not shun to tell us that David's father was a
pious man in Israel, and his mother was a godly. Matron, and being both of them
well grown in grace before they begat this their youngest son, they were more
like to convey grace and holiness (if that be communicable) than sin unto
him. Be like then, these new Divines think the grace of God runs in a blood,
at least wise, that it is a more probable truth than to believe the propagation
of the sin of the nature.

Now you come to open the text, and here say you, If we had all committed sin
in Adam, then of what use were these words (by the offense of one?) I do not
find such a saying parallelled, viz that one man's offense can be called all
men's act that followed him, and that without their knowledge and consent. page
131. If in this point you would seriously ponder the Scripture, you will have
your doubts resolved. The words of the Apostle are plain, by the disobedience
of one, many were made sinners. How came they to be sinners, to have the guilt
of sin imputed, and original sin derived with all the effects and fruits
thereof, but by the disobedience of one man? If that be true which is affirmed
by you, that one man's disobedience cannot be called all men's act, by the
strictness and rigor of such a position, you will take away the very ground
and strength of the Apostles argument, and destroy the parallel which he does
draw between Adam and Christ. The whole tenor of his discourse is turned upon
this hing, as the disobedience of one man is the act of all the posterity that
came after him: so the obedience of one man is the act of all the posterity
that believe in him. And whereas you say, you cannot find such a passage as
this parallelled in Scripture; I would entreat you to consider the temporal
judgments of God as they have been poured upon several families. The house of
Eli were to suffer for many generations, when all that came of that lineage did
not know what Eli did, neither did they give consent to the sins of Hophni
and Phinehas; yet for all this it is clear that the sin did redound to the
posterity. 1 Samuel 2.32.

Now you come to acquaint us with some of your observations, and you tell us, I
have heard say, and true it is, that what being we had in Adam, we had it
as soon as himself, and so, if we had done the same actions, he had done nothing
before us, page 131. In this I do agree with you, that it is true that the
whole nature of man, as it has in time subsisted in thousands and millions,
did originally subsist in Adam as in the common root. I do agree also that what
Adam did as the first public man, he did it in our stead, yet, if you will go
to moments and scruples of time, we must say also that in order of existence,
Adam had a being before us; we must say that Adams personal sin was before
the pollution of nature, but our nature is first polluted in the corrupted
mass before we come to commit sin in person, nay before we come personally to
exist.

You have a second answer to the words of the text, you say, If we had all
committed that sin in Adam, that he was called to account for, then we should
have sinned after the same similitude: but we sinned not after the same
similitude; and so we committed not the same sin. And here also I yield,
according to the strictness of terms, that we could not siune after the
similitude of Adams transgression: for Adam sinned by a deliberate will and by
a free choice, so could not we. Yet nevertheless, though we could not sin
after the same similitude, we might sin in him as the first public man. For
proof of this, read but the words of the text, Nevertheless death reigned from
Adam to Moses even ever them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression, verse 14. The Apostle speaks of Infants for two thousand five
hundred years, from the fall of Adam to the giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai.
Here I demand, how could death reign over the Infants aforesaid? No Law was
then publicly given upon Mount Sinai, and the Infants had no understanding,
neither could they give any consent of will: How then could death justly reign
over them, seeing they never committed any sin in their own persons? Though
they did not, yet they sinned in the first man, and by the reign of death
universally over all men, over Infants as well as others, the Apostle proves
this assertion. How weakly then do the Examiners of the late Confession argue,
when they say, surely, If the Apostle had believed any such thing as the
reigning of death over all men by the first man's sin, he would not have
omitted that, and only mentioned from Adam to Moses? page 81. Though he does
mention the reign of death from Adam to Moses; this does not imply any thing to
the contrary, but that death has reigned ever since. The words are plain,
death has passed over all men to condemnation. But there was less reason for
it, that death should reign from Adam to Moses, when the Law was not publicly
delivered, especially over Infants, that never sinned after the similitude of
Adams transgression. But seeing experience has plainly showed in this whole
interval of time that death has reigned over Infants; by this medium the
Apostle proves them to have been guilty of sin. How guilty of sin? Not in
their own persons, for they never committed any; but only in Adam the common
root of all mankind. And so that universal affirmation is made good, by one man
sin entered into the world and death by sin, and death has passed over all
men to condemnation. The universality of death does prove the universality of
sin in the first man. But you further stand upon a privilege to interpret
the words of the text, why in such a case as this (say you) may not I have the
same privilege to give an exposition of these words (in whom all have sinned,)
seeing no sound Scripture can be given to evince the conscience of any
certainty of committing sin in Adam? page 133. For that freedom of
expounding one Scripture by the accounts of another,
by my consent you shall have it; for I think the strongest Demonstration in
divine matters is drawn from the harmony of Scripture. And upon these grounds
we do proceed, because the whole Gospel in a manner is concerning the
regenerating work of the Spirit. Hence we do argue that the nature is defiled.
And because the promise is to believers and their seed in the last
dispensation, we do hereupon conclude the right to the seal: as I have already
proved against you in my Treatise of Infant Baptism. But seeing you are so
confident in it, that no sound Scripture can be given to evince the conscience
of any certainty of our committing sin in Adam; I pray you deal ingenuously,
and according to your own principles, do you not believe that Infants do bear
he punishment of Adams sin? How could they justly bear the punishment, and be
no way guilty of the transgression? The scope of the Apostle is plainly to the
contrary, because death reigns over all, over Infants as well as others, from
hence he concludes, that in one all have sinned. If you do well consider (by
denying original sin, and by taking away the corruption of nature as derived
from the first man.) you do in effect call in question whether there be any
regenerating grace to be had from the second man. And so when you tell us that
no sound Scripture can be given to prove the certainty of our committing sin
in Adam, you do as good as say, no sound Scripture can be given to evince the
certainty of satisfaction made to the justice of God by the suffering of
Christ. In this matter the Apostle shows, that the first man is the figure of
him that is to come. If that be true then which you and the Examiners teach,
that the guilt of the first man's sin does not redound to his posterity, you
must say also that the obedience of the second man, and the free guilt do not
redound to those that appertain to him. And this is point blank to go against
the scope of Scripture.

Now let us hear what your interpretation is, and what account you do give of
the Apostles meaning. I will repeat your own expressions more largely, that the
world may both read and give sentence. These are your words, I shall take some
pains in opening that place, 2 Cor. 5.21. He made him to be sin for us, who
knew no sin. By this means we may more fully understand in what sense we
were made sinners in Adam, and knew no sin. Wherein it will appear that we
were as guiltless of that act, with reference to the fact committed by us, as
Christ was guiltless in committing the sins of the world. Therefore take
notice that Christ was said to be made sin for us, in no other sense but
this, viz. He has laid upon him that punishment which was due for sin; he
was wounded for our transgressions, he was reckoned amongst transgressors. But
for any man so to affirm it, would be as large an untruth as men and Devils
could devise. For it is one thing to be made sin, and another thing to act
sin. Now Christ was said to be made sin as one that had taken upon him such
losses as did accompany sin. So those damages that were to befall the world
for Adams sin, Christ is said to bear them, not in their essence or being,
but in the demerit of them. As he was made sin, not knowing a deceiving heart
in himself, so we were made sinners by Adam, who knew no such sin. And many
such passages you have to the same purpose, page. 133, 134. Now I leave it to
the Reader to judge to what pass you are come. And here so far as you
affirm that Christ himself was free from sin when he did bear the penalties
of our sins, we do agree with you. And we further also assent, that all the
Children of Adam do bear the punishment of his disobedience. But whereas you
say, that we are only made sin in Adam after the same manner as Christ was
made sin for us, I do here admire at your boldness in many respects: First,
when Christ was made sin for us, by his own voluntary undertaking he was made
a surety and a propitiation for to satisfy the justice of God for our sins.
Will you say the like of all the Infants that come of Adam, that by the merit
of their sufferings they should propitiate his transgression? Secondly, when
Christ was made sin for us he knew no sin, he never committed sin, he had
no natural pollution from the birth. Now it is not so with us, we bear the
guilt of Adams sin as copartners with him in the common pollution of nature.
Thirdly, when the Apostle says, he made him sin for us that knew no sin;
here you must necessarily understand that he speaks of the peculiar prerogative
of the Lord Jesus Christ, that he did bear the burden of sin when he knew no
sin in himself. Now then, if that be true which the Examiners and you do
affirm, that Infants are free from the natural pollution, and you here mainly
stand upon it that they only bear the burden of Adams sin when they knew no
such sin; I would entreat you to judge in your own conscience, whether by
such a position of the purity of the natural birth you do not make all Infants
equal with Christ, and if it be true, as you affirm, that they bear the burden
of Adams sin when they knew no sin, why does the Apostle speak so
peculiarly, so emphatically, so singularly of Christ above all other men, that
he was made sin for us when he knew no sin? By this error you do entrench
upon the sovereign prerogative of the Lord Jesus, and I fear, (unless you and
the Examiners repent) you may one day dearly answer for it. But you have an
evasion, for say you, we are as guiltless of that act with reference unto the
fact committed by us as Christ was guiltless in committing the sins of the
world: But this restriction (as the act committed by us) will not mollify the
matter. For though the sin of Adam was not committed by any act or will of
ours immediately in our own person,
yet it was mediatly committed by the free act of our first parent. In this
case, according to Scripture, the will of the first man does pass for the will
of the whole nature, and of all that do partake of the nature. And this is the
meaning of the Apostle, by one man sinne-entred into the world. By sin he
means original sin, or the sin of the nature, and this says he entered
into the world; but how? not by the proper private and particular will of every
individual man, but by the common parent of all mankind. And for that
expression of yours, that we are as guiltless of Adams sin, as Christ is
guiltless of the sins of the world; I do admire that you did not tremble
when you wrote such things as these.
For we can plainly prove from the scope of the Scripture, that Adam by his
disobedience did not only fasten guilt upon his posterity, but by that act of
his he did taint and defile the whole nature of mankind. Will you say the like
of Christ, that he did not only bear the guilt of the sins of the world, but
that his nature was also defiled with the lusts of the world. This were (to use
your own language) as large an untruth as men or Devils could devise.

Now let us make enquiry into the true original of your mistake, you think the
words by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners, Romans 5. Do allude to
that other passage, He made him sin for us who knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5. And
from the collation of both you conclude, as Christ was made sin for us who knew
no deceiving heart in himself: so we were made sinners by Adam who knew no such
sin. But here you are grossly mistaken, when you take these two for parallel
Scriptures which are not parallel. The text in the Corinthians is meantionely
of the punishment of sin, that Christ did bear the burden of our iniquities.
But the text in the Romans is not only meant of the punishment and the guilt
of sin, but also of the depravation of the nature of man. The scope of the
place is plainly to show that by the disobedience of one, many were constituted
sinners or sinful men. And the word in the original is ordinarily taken for men
who have the habit and the nature of sin in them. Peter said depart from me I
am a sinful man, Luke 5.8. And our Savior in another place, whosoever shall be
ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, Mark
8.38. And the Apostle in the Epistle to the Romans, that sin by the
Commandment might appear exceeding sinful. Chap 6. verse 13. In these and such
like places the word (...) is taken for such a one as is a sinner by
intrinsecal denomination. And therefore in the present case when the Apostle
says by the disobedience of one many were made (...) sinners, as our
translation has it, his meaning is, they were made sinful men, that is, they
had the nature and the habit of sin derived to them from the disobedience of
the first man. And thus you may plainly see that the two texts which you put
for like are very unlike; and this is one chief ground of your error.

Again, your deductions are every was as unsound, for say you, at Christ was
made sin for us when he knew no sin: so we are made sinners for Adam when
we knew no such sin. And to confirm this, you further tell us, it is one
thing to be made sin so as to bear the burden of Adams sin, and another
thing to act sin. But whereas you speak of two things only, you should have
mentioned three. It is one thing to be made sin, and another thing to be made
sinful, and a third to act sin. If you speak of being made sin, so Christ
only was made a sacrifice for sin, to satisfy the justice of God. But if
you speak of being made sinful, so is the whole race of mankind, by the
disobedience of the first man. And in the third place, if you speak of
committing the act of sin, this only men can do when they have the use of
reason and understanding. From all which we conclude, though Infants cannot be
said to act sin, yet nevertheless through the disobedience of the first man
they may have the pollution of nature. Further, you say, as we are made sinners
by Adam, so we are made righteous by Christ, and yet had no hand in those
astions that made us righteous; In the like case, we were made sinners by Adams
disobedience, and yet had no hand in his so acting. To say the truth, if you go
to the personal act particularly and individually, we had no hand either in the
obedience of the one, or the disobedience of the other; yet in a general sense
the acts of the two Adams are the act of the whole posterity that come of them.
As for example, the first man by his disobedience did defile the whole nature
without the knowledge, will, motion, or act of any of the persons that were to
come of him; yet so really and effectually, that none can come by propagation
from him, but they partake of the guilt of his sin, and the pollution of his
nature, ver. 12.14, 17. So in the like case, the second man did satisfy the
justice of God, and sanctify our nature without any personal knowledge, will,
motion or act of ours; yet so really and effectually, that none of us can truly
believe but we must some way come to partake of that nature. To as many as
received him has he given this power to be called the sons of God, to them
that do believe on his name: being born not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of man, but of God, Joh. 1.12, 13.

Further, you say, we had as little capacity to act in Adam, as we had to act
in Christ. For this must be granted, that when God makes the creature capable
to act, he makes him as capable to act for himself as for the Devil; Else he
had better provided for his enemies than for himself, page 137. These also are
the whimsies of the Examiners of the late Confession. For they (speaking of the
indifferency of the will) tell us in plain terms, that as Adams will before
his fall did hang in an aequilibrium to good or bad, and inclined more to that
which was good than that which was evil: so they hold the same of the will of
all men else before their personal fall. To all which I answer, that these are
dangerous speeches, which derogate much from the grace of God in Christ. For
whosoever they be that do either lessen the misery of nature, and cry up the
natural ability of the will, they do in sense take that away from Christ, which
they give to men. As for that objection of yours, that God should better
provide for his enemies than for himself, hold your self contented, God is able
to secure his own glory, though all men are born in original sin; and the
Apostle does plainly give the reason, the Lord does quicken us when we are dead
in trespasses and sins, when we walk according to the course of this world,
when we serve diverse lusts and pleasures, when we are by nature the children of
wrath as well as others. He does quicken us when we are in this estate, that in
the ages to come he may show the exceeding riches of his grace toward us in
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2. ver. 1.2, 3, etc. Therefore the declaration of the
glory of Christ in giving spiritual life to them that are dead, must
necessarily suppose men to be by nature dead in the passes and sins, that
they may be the greater objects of mercy. If you go in this method, though all
Infants are involved in original sin, though all are miserable by nature, yet
God has better provided for himself than for his enemies; when his grand
design is through the misery of man to show the riches of his grace.

We will now proceed to Psalm. 51. ver. 5. And here let us see how many shifts
you have to elude the force and manifest sense of this Scripture. In the
beginning you agree that we bear the punishment of another man's sin. But say
you, that children have any spawn of sin cleaving to them, as seed to hatch
and gender in, and by any thing received from Adam as we sprang from his
loins, this I deny, page 136. This also is the judgment of the Examiners in
many pages together. Now if this be so, that infants have no such spawn of
original sin in them, why do the Scriptures speak so largely of the pollution
of nature? why is it said of man in general that the thoughts of the
imaginations of his heart are only evil from his childhood? Why does the Lord
Christ so earnestly press a necessity of regeneration? Why does he urge it
upon such a ground as this, that which is born of the flesh is flesh! There is
nothing more clear than that the nature of man is wholly defiled from the very
birth. And for the Psalmist in his particular, though it be true that he did
bear the burden of Adams sin, yet it is not the whole, nor the full truth.
The full truth is this, that he was conceived in sin, that in the conception
his nature was defiled, and the natural defilement was the cause of the two
great sins of murder and adultery. And hereupon in relation to his natural
pollution he does pray unto the Lord to give him a new heart, he went to the
true root and cause of all the evil. I must needs acknowledge that the Authors
of the Examen when they speak of fallen man, they render true causes of his not
willing of good. First, the ignorance of that which is good; the second, a
depraved judgment; the third, a want of due remembrance; the fourth, the power
of temptation; the fifth, the habit and custom of sin, page 132. These are
indeed true causes, but they are too short and too narrow in their
determination, they do not come to the root of the evil, to the inherent
perverseness of the will it self, and the pollution of the natural birth. When
the bottom of a wound is not searched such Mountebanks must needs make a
palliate cure.

Next you say, If you will take from David's particular example the general
condition of all infants, why do not you take the text concerning John his
being sanctified from his mothers womb, and argue that all the children of the
world are sanctified in that sense as John was sanctified? And if this were so,
there would not be so many lazy Priests and others in the world as there be,
page 135. For the parallel between David and John, there is no equality betwixt
them in the present collation. For whereas it is said of John, that he was
sanctified from his mothers womb, this was by a peculiar privilege granted to
him; And whereas David says, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me, he does not speak this as a King, or a Saint, or an
Israelite, but in the most general relation as one of the lost sons of men
fallen in Adam and born in the corrupted mass; and this is the reason why from
the particular example of David we draw a general conclusion of the pollution
and the defilement of nature in all. But the Authors of the Examen do stiffly
maintain, that the nature conveyed from Adam to all his posterity in the way of
ordinary generation is not defiled with sin. For, say they, some are
sanctified from the womb, as Jeremiah and John the Baptist were, and the Virgin
Mary might possibly be, page 65. Though this may be admitted, that some of the
Saints may be sanctified sooner then others, and the work of sanctification may
begin in them from their childhood; yet what is all this to the purpose? It
must necessarily be supposed that corruption will have a being in certain
moments of time before the grace of God can have its being. Jeremiah was
sanctified from his mothers womb, yet he did curse the day of his birth, he did
resolve to speak no more to the people in the name of the Lord, he did show
many fruits of the flesh as well as he did manifest many fruits of the Spirit.
And therefore to the particular case, as he did consist of flesh and spirit, in
him the flesh and the Old man had its being before the Spirit and the new man.
This I believe none can rationally deny, though they will acknowledge also that
he was sanctified from his mothers womb. But, Mr. Everard, to return to you
again. For the trouble you have with the lazy Priests, I fear Sir, the more
godly, the more conscientious, the more laborious any Minister is, the worse he
is in your opinion, and in the opinion of such as you are: if he oppose the
innovations and errors of the times. But I pray God give you repentance, else
you will have an heavy account to make one day for all your hard speeches
against the godly Ministry.

For the text, Mat. 18.3. Except ye be converted and become as little children
ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Here say you, If infants be so
filthy, why does our Savior set such a pattern before us? And the Authors of
the Examen also, page 70, speak much to the same effect? does not our Savior
(say they) declare the state of children both to be innocent and blessed, when
first he makes it terminus ad quem, the mark unto which in our conversion and
regeneration we must return? And then tells us, that the Kingdom of heaven
belongs to such, and is replenished with such? I answer, in parables and
similitudes we are to look only to the scope. Our Savior speaks of the
unjust Steward of putting the talent to the exchanger, of his own coming like a
thief in the night. What then, is it his intent to approve of the evil of these
ways? No: he does only point to something wherein the force of the similitude
does stand? And so in the present case, when he speaks of humbling our
selves, and becoming like little children, it is not his purpose to ascribe
such perfection to them, as though all infants were free from original sin,
or that their innocence were the terminus ad quem, the term to which our
conversion and regeneration must return. These are very strange deductions. The
words of our Savior are therefore to be taken only in a restrained sense, that
in affectation of worldly glory we should be like little children. There is no
such distance between the children of Princes, and the children of beggars, but
all are one. The mind of the Lord is only this, that we should come to act the
same things by the power of grace, as little children do thorough the weakness
and infirmity of age. We should not look upon Lords and Ladies, upon learning
or parts, or upon any other external excellency in comparison of the grace of
God. Commonly men that have these things are very proud of them, and do look
upon them too much; and to these the exhortation is given in special, that they
should be humbled, and become as little children. There lies then a palpable
and gross fallacy in your whole discourse, when you take the words absolutely
that all infants are free from sin, when our Savior speaks in a particular
sense only of the act and execution of this or that particular evil.

Now you proceed, and tell us, it was never heard that children had any sin
by way of act; and by way of omission, you cannot make it good that they ever
received a command or were capable of any command from God, page 138. Answ.
What we have learned we are willing to acknowledge, and though we never heard
that infants had any sin in them by any act of their own, yet we have learned
from Scriptures, yea from the very first principles of the faith, that they
have it by contagion, and the disobedience of the first man* The words of our
Savior are plain, Joh. 3.8. That which is born of the flesh is flesh: And that
of the Apostle, Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin. And many such places there are to prove infants to be guilty of sin by
the disobedience of the first man, and to be involved in the pollution of
nature by hereditary contagion. But because you and the Examiners are so strict
upon the point, I pray you resolve me in this one case. When the promise was
made, the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head, was not this the
promise of Christ to Adam after his fall? If infants therefore are absolutely
acquitted from the guilt of Adams sin, as being another man's act; if they be
free from the pollution of nature, to what end was the promise of Christ? How
did he come in the nature of a Physician to cure when there was no disease?
Where there is no malady, there needs no remedy. And whereas you go about to
free infants from the sin of omission, because they are not capable of a
command, I pray you show the reason why the Lord was so strict in his command
to the Jewish infant that he should be circumcised upon the eighth day? and
that the uncircumcised man-child should be cut off from his people? Genesis
17.11.12, etc. For my part I know no reason of the strictness of this Law, but
that the Lord would signify to believers under this dispensation that there
infants were born in original sin, and that it was not safe to omit the
remedy for that disease. And though in strictness of terms we will yield so
far to Corvinus and to Julian the Pelagian, that there is no particular
command that forbids an infant to be born in original sin; yet for all this
they must needs allow, that the Law was given to reveal, to convince, and to
discover the sin of the nature, and by the discovery thereof to drive a man
to Christ, to look to him only for sanctifying and regenerating glrace, S.
Paul says, the Law is spiritual, and I am carnal, sold under sin. And in the
same text, I had not known sin, except the Law had said, thou shall not
covet, Romans 7.

You go on, for this sin called original, if infants had committed it, God
would have called them to repentance for it, when they had come to years at
least wise; but I can safely say, that there is no man living that to this day
ever made it appear to be the mind of God for any man to repent of that sin.
Truly Sir your confidence is very great, and you have more boldness than truth
on your side. For we may believe that you never heard of the promises nor the
commands mentioned in Scripture when you dare affirm such things as these.
When the Lord promises in the new Covenant, I will take out of their bowels a
heart of stone, and will give them a heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36. By the heart of
stone he means a hard heart, and a sinful nature that every infant did bring
into the world; he does promise to take away the corruption of nature, and that
he will sanctify his people by his Spirit. So for the commands of God, we read
every where that men are exhorted to put off the Old Adam-like disposition.
That ye put off concerning the former conversation the Old man, which is
corrupt according to the deceivable lusts, Ephesians. 4.22. By the Old man he does
mean the carnal disposition which we have from Adam by natural generation. This
corrupted disposition of the flesh he would have the believing Ephesians, and
in them, all others, to subdue and mortify. And further, if you look to the
right use of Baptism now, as of circumcision of old, you shall find that the
institution of these things does primarily intend the doing away of the sin
of the nature, as I have already showed in my Treatise of Infant Baptism.
Therefore I cannot but admire at your boldness, when you stand so much upon it
that you can safely say, that God never called men to repentance for original
sin. I am so far from your judgment, that I think the greatest part of
repentance lies in the mortification of the sin of the nature. But you have
an evasion, this sin called original sin, if infants had committed it, God
would have called them to repentance. Here you put that upon us which we do not
speak, and I know no solid Writer in the world that does use such an expression
of committing original sin. It is proper only to men of ripe years to commit
sin. For original sin, we say that is only by propagation, thorough the
disobedience of the first man, and when men come to be sanctified by the Spirit
of God they are qualified with inward principles to purge out the sin of the
nature.

Neither does your argument drawn from the example of Christ any whit promote
your cause. You say, If this principle should find a being in the world, that
every infant was born in sin, because lineally derived from Adam, then where
will you get water to wash your hands of that grand absurdity, to wit, that
Jesus Christ was not free from original sin? for then he must have a share
because he came from the loins of a woman the Daughter of Adam, page 139. To
this I answer, if you will make Christ and all Infants to run parallel in the
purity of their natural birth, then why did Christ die for them? why did he
sanctify their nature? There is no need of salvation by the merit of Chri,st
where there is no guilt of sin. There needs no sanctification of the Spirit,
where there is no pollution of nature. Why do not you exclude all Infants from
these as you do from the water of baptism? For your Argument drawn from the
example of Christ. If you build so much upon that, I would entreat you to
consider two things; First, why he did assume our nature? Secondly, assuming
our nature, how came he to be exempt from original sin? For the first, he did
assume our nature with all the miseries thereof, sin only excepted, that he
might make expiation of sin in that nature that had sinned. He did not take the
nature of Adam before his fall nor that humane nature which the Saints shall
have in the state of glory, but merely the nature of man clothed with all the
infirmities thereof, to sanctify that nature, and to satisfy divine justice.
To this purpose the Apostle speaks, Romans 8.3. What the Law could not do in
that it was weak through the flesh, God sent his Son in the similitude of
sinful flesh and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. In these words we may
note, that because Christ came in the similitude of sinful flesh, all flesh
besides his, of infants as well as others was sinful flesh; only Christ came
in the similitude of sinful flesh. He had the reality of our nature with all
the miseries thereof, only he was born in the similitude of our sinfulness,
that he might satisfy the justice of God. And for the second point, how he
came to be free from original sin, this is plainly expressed in the articles
of the Creed; He was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary. For
his conception, that part of the Virgins flesh was so sanctified, by the
overshadowing of the Holy Spirit, that it might be free from the natural
contagion, and that the nature of God and the nature of man together might make
one person. And that which may further amplify the truth of this, Christ was
not born by virtue of that promise, increase and multiply; for this since the
fall has filled the world with sinners: but he was born by virtue of the
special promise, the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head. And this
is the true reason, for though Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, a Daughter
of Adam, though he had the common nature of all mankind for truth and
substance, yet he was made free from original sin by the mean of a wonderful
generation. And in this matter by way of retortion we may turn your own weapons
upon your self, and upon the Examiners. For if that be true, that all infants
are free from natural pollution, what need was there that the Son of God should
be conceived by the Holy Ghost, and be born of the Virgin Mary? His conception
needed not to have been by the Holy Ghost in case the natural generation did
not necessarily enforce the propagation of original sin. These extraordinary
means would have been superfluous in case he might have been exempt from all
sin in the ordinary way.

The arguments which you further allege are as invalid as the former. You say,
If we were in the transgression as soon as Adam himself, how come we to derive
it from him? page 139. To the satisfying of this doubt, I would entreat you to
distinguish between the things that are attributed to Adam as a public man,
and the things that are ascribed to him as a particular person. If you speak of
his public relations as the root and head of all his posterity; It is true,
what he did, we did in him, we were in the transgression as soon as himself was,
his sin was not so much his own as the sin of the humane nature. But if you
speak of him as a particular person, according to the order of existence he is
the first of the race, and so in succession of generations all that were in the
corrupted mass, as they come to be born severally and individually, to derive
from him. In a sense therefore it is true that we were in the transgression
as soon as himself was. It is the Apostles own expression in whom all have
sinned. Yet in flux and succession of generations it is as true that he did go
before, and all others did follow after in their respective times.

Next you argue, If we sinned in him, why might not we have sinned without him?
how came we all to be of one mind? page 139. You may I confess make such a
supposition, and a thousand more of the like kind, and there will be no end of
your cavilling. But the Scriptures tell us plainly that one man was made in the
beginning, he was the root of all mankind, and by this one man sin entered
into the world: If this seem harsh to you, to the Examiners, and to others,
that all should be brought under a necessity of sinning and perishing by the
disobedience of one man, this should pacify your minds, that all are brought
under a possibility of salvation by the obedience of the second man. This is
the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. Take heed then, lest by diminishing
the sin of the first man you do not take away from the grace and the blessing
brought in by the second. If your nature was never defiled, what need have you
of a Christ? What need of a new nature? What need of regeneration of the
Spirit. I hope the Examiners and you will not say that these are only for the
purging out of actual sin, or the habit of sin got by imitation. Let us now
come to hear your admirations.

I strange (say you) at your hard thoughts of Adam that he had more pronenesse
to sin after the fall than before. If you can bring no proof for what you say
for this, or for the like case, then you must excuse my infidelity in the
point. You proceed after that manner as your brethren do, they desire to have
their infidelity excused, because they do not read in so many letters and
syllables of the Baptism of infants in the new Testament. And so here, you do
not read of such and such particular sins which Adam did commit after his
fall, and therefore you desire to be excused for your unbeleef in that point.
But Sir, If you would look to the harmony of Scripture you should find that
this testimony is not only given of Adam, but also of all his posterity. God
saw the wickedness of man that it was great in the earth, and that every
imagination of the thought of his heart was only evil from his childhood, Genesis
6.5. If every imagination of his heart was evil from his childhood, then there
must be some particular time assigned where this universal corruption and
depravation of nature did begin. If it did begin at the fall (as there begin it
must) then you must also necessarily conclude that Adam had a greater
pronenesse to sin after the fall than he had before. But say you, If it could
be proved that Adam sinned ten thousand times afterward, must we therefore set
all his sins upon the first sins score, page 142? As difficult a point as
you make of it, the Apostle does set all upon the disobedience of the first
man, as he does put all upon the obedience of the second man. As by the
disobedience of one, many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, many
were made righteous, Romans 5.19. The comparison would be of no value at all if
that which is peculiarly spoken to Adam, might be applied to any other parent
whatsoever in respect of his posterity. And of the sins which Adam did
commit, we are not to admire why all are set upon the score of the first sin.
When he received original righteousness in the beginning, he received it not
only for himself, but also for his whole posterity. And therefore if he had
stood, he had conveyed it to all his branches; but falling, he lost it from
himself and all his offspring. And this is the reason why all is charged upon
the first sin, because that was the sin of a fiduciary or trustee. The
parent was entrusted with the whole stock, which was not only his own peculiar,
but also the public loss of all his posterity. If we might suppose that Adam
did commit ten thousand sins afterward, the hurt could not redound to any
other but to himself only. For how could he bring damage to small or great by
any disobedient act, seeing he was trusted no more? You now come to declare
your judgment, why (say you) might we not have thought it more safe, that that
which gave the first occasion to sins being, was yet the original cause of
all other sins committed by him? What need we yet to say that sin had any other
father or mother than its first parents viz, the Devil and temptation, Joh.
8.44. Answ. I do not deny but in a sense the Devil and temptation may be called
the parents of sin, because wicked men are led by the temptations of Satan,
and do imitate his example. But strange it is that you would have no other
parents but the Devil and temptation. This is in plain terms to excuse men,
and to make them without blame, when any sin is committed. The Apostle does
otherwise state the true cause of sin, every man is drawn away with his own
lust, and enticed, and lust when it has conceived, brings forth sin, Jam.
1.13. The sinful will of man and the lust of his heart, may be a cause that
does procreate sin as well as the Devil and temptation. And more specially to
speak in the case we are now upon, concerning the sin of the first man; and
the traducing of original sin to all posterity, I do not doubt but the Devil
and temptation had a great stroke in the fall of man, but we must go to other
causes as well as to them; Adams own defective will was a chief cause: And
therefore we read of the great judgments that were inflicted upon him for his
disobedience to the command. And for that place of Scripture which you allege,
Joh. 8.44. He that commits sin, is of the Devil; it is most true that men
commit sin by the temptation of the Devil, but how does this prove the point
which you undertake, that the Devil is the only parent of sin, and that we
need go to no other but to him only? Besides, in the case of original sin,
as the corruption of nature does pass by propagation, the Apostle says we
must go to one man as the fountain; by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin, etc. And therefore if to salve your Tenet, you shall allege
that speech, you are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your father
will you do: By this I do confess that the Devil is proved the first parent of
sin by infusion and suggestion; but he is not the father by generation. And
therefore when the Apostle says, put off, as concerning the former
conversation, the Old man which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts:
Ephesians. 4.22. Here, by the Old man we are to understand the Old Adam like
disposition, as it has passed from Adam to all his posterity. This old
disposition the Saints are to put off, and they are to endeavor to put on the
Christ-like nature. So then, if you will say that the Devil was the first
father of sin by temptation and seduction, we will not gainsay it. Only we
do entreat you to remember that Adam is the cause of the conveying of original
sin to all his posterity by generation and traduction.

You have yet more evasions if it might be possible to illude the truth. If
Adam (say you) had sinned afterward, how can we say that he had a way to
communicate it to all his posterity? It is more then the Devil can do to infuse
sin into any man without a man's consent, page 142. This is true if you speak
in the case of actual sin only, but for the derivation of original sin,
the case is otherwise. The corruption of nature is derived from the
disobedience of the first man. His personal disobedience was sufficient to
deprave and vitiate the whole nature.
This may be proved by the harmony of Scripture, and there is no harshnesse in
the point so long as there is such an effectual remedy prepared by the second
man for the lost sons of men. And yet further, though the first man by his
fall did vitiate the nature without any individual or personal consent of ours,
yet the lying and living in the sinfulness of nature is not without our
deliberate and free consent. This is the condemnation, that light is come into
the world, and men love darkness more than light, Joh. 3.18, 19, 20. God does
at sundry seasons open the eyes of men that they may see their natural
pollution; but they have not a desire to see that which they may see. Further,
you add, some say the want of pure nature is the cause of our sin, but it is
plain that the purity of nature exempts not a man from sin, for if it had,
then Adam had not sinned, page 142. We would not have you to mistake our
meaning, we do not stand so much upon the want of the purity of nature, as upon
the pollution and depravation of nature. And this since the fall is no only
the cause of sinning, but also is the true cause why we can do nothing else but
sin. And this begins to appear to those who are sanctified by the Spirit, and
therefore the Apostle says, in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good
thing. For other kind of men they do not feel the burden of a carnal mind. As a
bucket of water weighs nothing in the Well, but when it is removed from its
proper element, then the weight thereof is discerned. Pride of heart, and other
secret lusts, are not burdensome to a carnal man who is in his proper element,
but a spiritual man feels the enmity of these against the command of God, and
sees by experience that according to the flesh he can do nothing else but sin.
Further, you alledg, that it is like that Adam would not have sinned again
because he sped so ill, page 142. I believe it was with him after his fall as
it was with David after his two sins of murder and adultery; David when he
had committed those sins did look to the fountain of his misery as it did lie
in the pollution of the natural birth, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceive me. Hereupon he did pray unto the Lord that he would
create in him a new heart. Even so, Adam after his fall was able to see his
misery when his eyes were opened; but he was not, as you suggest, like a
burned child, able of himself to take heed of the fire. All the ability that he
had, was by looking to the promise, and the same ability we now have to help us
out of our natural corruption. Our Savior told the Jews, if the Son will
make you free, ye shall be free indeed, Joh. 8.36. By freedom we are to
understand not such a civil immunity as Emperors and Kings do give, but a
freedom from the bondage and vassalage of corruption. And therefore when the
Jews made him this answer, that they were Abraham's children, and never in
bondage to any man, his reply was, he that commits sin, is the servant of
sin, v. 33, 34. The slavery of sin is the bondage that is here meant, and there
is no other way to be freed but by Christ only. Further, you say, we cannot
prove that Adam did subject himself to any temptation after the fall, page 143.
What if we do not read in so many letters and syllables that he did subject
himself to temptation? can you therefore probably collect that he was free from
all sin, and that he did resist all temptations? Again, suppose that after
his fall he did resist many temptations, yet as the strongest Christian may
fall when God does leave him, and the weakest may stand when the Lord will
uphold him with his supporting grace; Even so, Adam being without all original
sin, being left to himself to try what free will could do, might fall in a
state of natural purity. And being supported by the Spirit, to show what grace
could do, might be able to stand in a state of natural corruption. Therefore
all that you have said does not any way enforce an equality of the states, or
that a man's ability was as great after as it was before the fall.

Now let us go to the third Scripture, and were by nature the children of wrath
as well as others, Ephesians. 2 3. Here, to support the purity of nature and to
avoid the force of this text, you have many evasions and shifts; let us hear
them as they come in their order. There are (say you) natural men that discern
not the things of God, neither can do; for a man cannot go East and West at one
and the same time, neither serve two Masters to be true to them both, page 145.
I confess it is true that a man cannot go East and West at one and the same
time, but our question is, whether any natural man, merely as natural, without
the inspiration of the Spirit can go any other way but that which is merely
enmity against God? The Apostle says, the natural man perceives not the
things of the Spirit of God, because they are foolishness to him, neither can
he perceive them, because they are spiritually to be discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. He
speaks this of the Philosophers and other Grecians who had improved nature to
the highest: To these the preaching of the Cross was foolishness. They could
discern the wisdom of Plato, and the depth of Aristotle, but the wisdom of
Christ they were not able to discern. Hereupon in the three first Chapters of
the Epistle the Apostle does largely dispute that the knowledge of these things
does merely come by the inward teaching and revelation of the Spirit. And then
he shuts up the dispute with this coronis, If any man seem to be wise in
this world, let him become a fool that he may be wise. A fool is one that has
no wit, he is not able to speak for himself, or to help himself. The way then
to know Christ is not by the advancement of natural abilities, but rather by
the true sight of inability and the lost condition we are fallen into,
Aristotle was a Philosopher of great name amongst the Grecians, yet of all the
books that he wrote, of all the speeches that he spoke in none of them all he
came nearer to God than in that speech which he is reported for to speak, O ens
entium miserere mei, O thou being of beings, have mercy upon me. The first step
to salvation does begin with the sight of misery, and the next is to look
after the free grace and mercy of God.

But you go on, and tell us, nature, simply so considered as it is created of
God, cannot oppose any spiritual light, but comply with those things which God
holds forth unto it, page 146. Here we desire you to keep to the state of the
question, we are not upon the debate of nature in its purity, but of nature as
it is since the fall. If you speak of nature created in the beginning, nature
is good; nature cannot oppose any spiritual light, and it is serviceable to
those ends for which God made it. But as strictly as both you and the Examiners
stand for such a natural purity, I would entreat you to show the man in all
Asia, Africa, Europe, or America that has this purity, this integrity of
nature. But if you speak of nature vitiated and corrupted, the Scriptures do
every where make mention of such a nature that it is enmity against God, that
it is not subject to the Law of God, nor can be. And therefore when the
Examiners in the Chapter of free will do plead so strongly that there are some
good things in natural men, as in Herod and Balaam, and that all natural men
are not equally corrupt; what of all this? this does not prove the goodness of
nature. For that some natural men have some inward workings in them, it is from
the convictions of the Spirit, and that some are less evil then others; it is
from the bar of restraining grace. Otherwise, take a natural man as merely
natural, he is not subject to the Law of God, nor can be, Romans 8.7. As it may
be seen in this familiar instance. When men are enemies to the State, and will
not have them to reign over them, all the money, horses, armor, Cities,
Castles that they can get into their power, are employed to set up another Law,
and to supplant the power that is over them. So all the endeavors of a natural
man, all his principles and his reasonings are to pluck down Christ, and to set
up his own excellency. And therefore the natural mind is enmity against God.

Next you cite two Scriptures concerning sins against nature Backbiters, haters
of God, despitefull, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to
parents, without understanding, Covenant-breakers, without natural affection,
Romans 1.30, 31. 2 Timothy 3.3. From hence you draw this conclusion, to be natural
(say you) were to have acted such actions as might have testified to the world
that they had been lovers of God, because those actions were wanting, they are
said to be unnatural. So it may appear that nature was not improved to those
ends to which God assigned it, page 146. It is true that in these Scriptures
the word nature is taken in the better sense, yet not in such a sense as will
furnish your intention. First, I do acknowledge that God has left relics or
remainders of his Law in the hearts of the Gentiles. This is commonly called
the Law of nature, and by this men know that God ought to be worshipped, that
parents ought to be honored, and that every man is to have his own, etc.
Secondly, I yield also that they who go against this Law may rightly be called
unnatural, because they go against the dictates or principles of of nature.
Thirdly, they who do thus deviate from natural principles do not improve nature
to those ends which God has made it. All these things I do allow, and so far I
will go along with you; But how do you prove from hence the purity of nature,
and that a mere natural man, as such, is able to understand the things of the
Spirit of God? You do in the next page distinguish natural men into two kinds,
these are your words. Who requires no other way to be glorified but by those
principles that he had furnished them withal. And because they opposed their
own nature, resusing the counsel of God, they are called unnatural, because
they employed their nature wholly to satisfy their lusts. Such natural men
percieve not the things of God. The same matter in substance is spoken by the
Examiners in the Chapter of free will, for the Synod having rightly determined
according to the Scriptures that a natural man being altogether averse from
that good, and dead in sin, he is not able by his own strength to convert
himself or prepare himself thereunto. Against this passage the men take great
offense, and, as their manner is, accuse the Synod for their defects and
falsehoods. For their defects, they blame them because they do not distinguish
the several kinds of natural men; and for their falsehoods they accuse them for
saying that the fallen man has lost all ability to spiritual good. They
distinguish also several kinds of will, and tell us in the third place, as the
will of our first parents, so of all men else does stand in a kind of
aequilibrium page 128.129, 130.

Now to take off these several Objections, I would entreat both you and them to
consider these two points. First, if you look to the better sort of natural
men, to those who are no Backbiters, no Covenant-breakers, etc. Whether may not
many of these in the most essential, vital and spiritual parts of the Law, be
great enemies against God, and be lovers of themselves more than lovers of God?
If the most refined natural men may be secret enemies, why do you and they
speak of pure nature, and of the improvement of natural abilities when it is
certain that men can do no good without the help of the Spirit? Natural men may
be distinguished into a thousand kinds according to the different circumstances
of time and place, yet all of them do agree in this, that they are natural, and
without the help of the Spirit they are not able to judge of the things of God.
Secondly, when the Apostle speaks of the Gentiles, who having no Law, do by
nature the things contained in the Law, their thoughts in the mean while
accusing or else excusing one another, Romans 2.14. When the Gentiles do make
use of the Law written in their heart (as they do at certain seasons) to judge
themselves, does not this proceed from the general convictions and workings of
the Spirit? If the act of self-judging be from the conviction of the Spirit,
this is no praise to natural abilities, but the glory belongs to the grace of
God. And the words of the Confession are very sound, that a natural man cannot
convert himself, or prepare himself thereunto. In which words they do
distinguish between conversion it self, and the antecedaneous works before
conversion. In neither of these they say that a natural man is able to do any
thing of himself, but all his ability is from the help of the Spirit. I wonder
then what reason the Examiners had given them to cavil at such an innocent
expression. But if you shall stand upon the letter of the text, that the
Gentiles do by nature the things contained in the Law. Here you may observe
that the Apostle does only oppose the natural Law to the Law written in tables
of stone and communicated to the Church by revelation. He never meant that any
of the Gentiles merely by their own strength were able to keep that Law which
was made known to them. Only at seasons the Spirit did excite and stir up
strong convictions in their consciences, to apply those principles and dictates
which they had by the light of nature. The most common and universal maxim of
all men in the world, is this, that there is a God: Why then does the
consideration of the Godhead so forcibly and powerfully awake at some intervals
of time more than at others? We can give no other reason but this, that the
truth in the hearts of the Gentiles is like a cinder in the Smiths forge, which
by the operations and stirrings of the Spirit is enlivened, and being once
enlivened, men have more power to judge themselves, and to look after God in
those seasons than at others.

And from hence also we might take occasion to answer that great difficulty in
the Epistle to the Romans. The Apostle in the first Chapter speaking of the
knowledge of the Gentiles, and how naturally they hold the truth in
unrighteousness, and that for this cause the Lord does give them up to a
reprobate sense; yet in the next Chapter he does show that the Gentiles do by
nature the things contained in the Law, and do show (...), the work of the Law
written in their hearts when their thoughts do at sundry times accuse or excuse
one another. To the resolution of the difficulty we say, that the Gentiles so
far forth as they are principled by the corruption of nature are prone to no
other but to imprison the light; but as they are under and do submit unto the
convictions of the Spirit, they are helped sometimes to go so far as to judge
themselves, and to cry out in their misery, O being of beings, have mercy upon
us. The main drift of the Apostle, is to show that Jews and Gentiles are both
under sin, and how by the sight of the misery of nature such of them as are
saved come to be saved only by looking after the grace and the free-mercy of
God. If this be the meaning of the Spirit what shall we think of pure nature,
or the emproving of nature to those ends to which God had assigned it? These
are the Chimera's and fictions of men's own devising. For if we will go to the
utmost that a natural man can do, at seasons he has ability to judge himself,
this is not from himself, but from the convictions of the Spirit. And it is
never better with him in the way to attain salvation than when he is beaten off
from all his own abilities; when in the sight of his own misery and emptiness
he does rely upon the mercy of God.

Now we will go on to the meaning of that expression, and were by nature the
children of wrath as well as others. Here you distinguish betwixt that wrath
which is due by the appointment of God for Adams sin, and the wrath which is
due for despising the riches of grace. Concerning this text (say you) we were
by nature the children of wrath as well as others; if it be universal, it must
be meant of the first condemnation which came by Adam. But if it be meant of
the second wrath, then it belongs to such persons only as are dead in
trespasses and sins; that is, such as have been in actual defiance, which
walked after the course of the world, after the Prince of the power of the air
in opposition to the Spirit of truth, page 150. Here I do agree with you, that
distinction is to be made between the wrath due for the sin of Adam, and the
wrath due for the actual refusal of Christ in the tender of grace. Though this
distinction be admitted, yet it does not disanul that truth we were by nature
the children of wrath as well as others. For infants, so far forth as they
come out of Adams loins in that precise and single consideration they may be
the children of wrath by nature, though the cause why wrath does not seize upon
them, is from the shedding of the blood of Christ. Secondly, let us take this
expression, and were by nature the children of wrath as well as others, that it
is meant only of those who have been in actual defiance, this will avail
nothing so long as it is clear from the text that men by nature can do no other
than live in actual defiance against God. Neither do the Examiners mend the
matter by their Intepretation, when they say, it is one thing to be sinners
from our first nativity, and another in time to become the children of wrath by
our personal fall and actual disobedience, which also coming to pass in our
natural man, and by his default we may truly be said to be by nature the
children of wrath, especially when sin by custom becomes a second nature to
us, page 78. Here we will be no adversaries to them so far as they say that
men become the children of wrath by their own personal falls and actual
disobedience. But the question is, whether this disobedience does not radically
and originally proceed from the default of the nature. They seem to say so much
in sense when they do oppose it. Secondly, though it be true which they say,
that the evil does come upon men throught heir personal fall, yet the Apostle
does especially look unto the sin of the nature: And therefore does amplify
the grace of God in quickening and enlivening again when he says you has he
quickened that were dead in trespasses and sins. They were not only truly
dead in sin thorough custom and sinful conversation, but also thorough the
state and condition of their natural birth, they were by nature the children of
wrath as well as others. Upon these grounds he tells them that God who was rich
in mercy did quicken them, when they were dead in trespasses and sins.

Next, you come to open the meaning of the expression, dead in trespasses and
sins. You say, a spiritual death must be meant of a declining from spiritual
things, which is a resistance of the spirit, or a dying, that is a forsaking
the truth of God made manifest in them. Now such a death as this cannot befall
any who never had that spiritual life; for it is the loss of life that must
prove a death, or otherwise we may say that all other creatures besides man are
spiritually dead, page 151. In this point you and I do agree that the loss of
life must prove a death; and this to me is the great reason why not only the
Ephesians, but also all mankind had sometimes spiritual life before they became
to be dead in trespasses and sins. It is plain from the scope of Scripture
and the Analogy of faith, as I have proved before, that this death came in by
the fall of Adam, therefore he had spiritual life before his fall. And for that
expression of yours, otherwise we may say as well that all other creatures are
spiritually dead; I answer, not so neither: other creatures can not properly be
said to be spiritually dead because they never had a capacity of spiritual
life. And though men are dead in trespasses and sins, they are not dead as
stocks and stones and other senseless creatures, but they are dead as they who
sometime had spiritual life, and may have the return of the same life again in
and thorough Christ the way, the truth, and the life. So also the Examiners in
the Chapter of free will, page 130. do but calumniate, when they say that we
teach, that a man is a mere passive block or a dead trunck without a willing
or a nilling faculty. This is an odious imputation of their own devising; we
hold that man is a rational creature, and he has those natural and essential
properties of the soul, though in spiritual things he be altogether dead. And
for spiritual things also he may be said to have a remote capacity when
blindness shall be taken away from his understanding, and perverseness from
his will. It is an excellent speech of Augustine, posse credere naturae est
hominum, to have a remote ability to believe, is of the nature of men, for
stocks and stones have no such capacity. And in opposition to natural men, he
says, velle credere gratiae est fidelium, to have a will to believe, is of the
grace given to believers: showing that no natural man has an immediate power
to believe till he come inwardly to be enlivened by the Spirit.

Let us hear then what you can say; how the sons of men may be said to be
dead in trespasses and sins. If you shall mean that every man, or all mankind
in that sense is dead before the light or the life of the Gospel is made known
to them, then I shall grant it. But I shall deny that such a death is any
sin: For, where no Law is made manifest, there is no transgression. But all
children, if you mean infants, have no Law, or Law made known, page 152. This
is true in the case of actual sin, that there must be a Law, and a Law made
known, or else there can be no actual transgression. And for this reason we say
that all Infants are exempt from the guilt of actual sin, because they are
not capable of the knowledge of a Law. But this is not our question, the point
in hand is concerning the guilt of original sin. Suppose there were no Law
given personally and individually to infants, yet the Law once given to Adam,
is sufficient to involve all his children in the sin of the nature till they
come to be freed by Christ. Therefore in sense we affirm that not only the
Ephesians, but also all others are dead in trespasses and sins. But let us
further enquire into the meaning of the words, and were by nature the children
of wrath as well as others. Does not the Apostle go here to the corruption of
nature as to the Fountain? and whereas you say, that the Ephesians by the
course of their lives living in rebellion against God, were naturally the
children of wrath; Do not you by this affirmation yield the cause? For admit
that the Ephesians did by their own free act live in disobedience against God,
yet all comes to one issue, when they did it by a natural propension received
from Adam, the common root of the corruption of nature. But you further say, It
cannot be expected that those who never committed any actions of disobedience
should have this text applied to them; but infants neither did nor could commit
any acts of rebellion; Therefore this will not prove that infants were so the
children of wrath by nature, page 152. This expression, that infants were not
so the children of wrath by nature, is, as Logicians call it, an ignorance of
the elench. For we do not say that Infants in every respect are so the children
of wrath as those Ephesians who lived in wilful disobedience. It is enough for
us to affirm that they are any way the children of wrath, so far at least as
they do partake of the corruption of the nature. For the clearing of the point,
let us distinguish three sorts of men that are liable to wrath.

The first are such as reject Christ in the public tenders of the Gospel. If I
had not come and spoken unto them, they should have had no sin, but now they
have no cloak for their sin, Joh. 12.48. In this sense we say that not only
Infants, but also the natural Ephesians themselves were free from the guilt of
sin. For if infants (as you affirm) cannot sin, nor men neither, if they
can truly maintain that they rceived no Law; In this sense the Ephesians
themselves, who served diverse lusts and pleasures could not sin, because the
Gospel was not preached, and Christ was not tendered to them. The Apostle says
they were at that time strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, and aliens
from the Covenant of promise. Secondly, they are liable to wrath, who, though
they never had the Gospel preached, yet do wilfully hold the truth in
unrighteousness, Romans 1.19.20, 21. In this sense the Ephesians before their
conversion did serve diverse lusts, and were by nature the children of wrath as
well as others. The sins of their lives, though they were their own voluntary
acts, yet they were the proper and genuine fruit of their sinful and depraved
nature. In this as in the former sense, I do willingly yield, that infants
cannot sin as those that disobey the Gospel, because they have no discoveries
of Christ in the public Ministry of the Word. Neither can they sin as did
the Gentiles, which went against the general convictions of the Godhead in the
conscience, and wilfully held the truth in unrighteousness. Thirdly, they are
liable to wrath, who, though they never committed actual sin, yet do partake
of the sin of the nature, and of the guilt of that sin. If this be not so,
what is the meaning of the words, and were by nature the children of wrath as
well as others? In a sense then it is true, that so far as men are by nature,
so far they are the children of wrath.

Here then two objections come to be answered, the one in respect of infants,
the other in respect of them who live out of the bounds of the visible Church.
First, in the case of infants, some may say, they must unavoidably lie under
wrath, if this once be admitted, that by nature they are the children of wrath.
I answer, the consequences is not good, for though by nature they are liable to
wrath, yet they do not unavoidably lie under a necessity of perishing. As for
example, David by his murder and adultery, Peter by the denial of his Master,
and Paul by persecuting of the Church, did fall under wrath, yet wrath did not
seize upon them. So infants, though by nature they are the children of wrath,
yet that wrath due unto the sin of the nature does not lay hold upon them
because Christ has satisfied the justice of God.

Secondly, if it be further alleged, that they which live out of the bosom of
the visible Church must lie under a necessity of perishing, not only because
by nature they are the children of wrath, but because they want the Gospel; the
means of their salvation. Here I answer, though they want the most effectual
outward means, yet they do not simply want all the means. Nay, I may affirm
there is no man whose eyes are truly opened thorough the conviction of the
Spirit to see his lost condition who is under an absolute necessity of
perishing. For God who is a God of grace and mercy, is ready to help them that
come to him in a sense of their misery. We have a proof for this in the words
of Hanain the Prophet, to Asah the King, the eyes of the Lord run to and fro
through the whole earth to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose
heart is perfect toward him, 1 Chr. 16.9.

He does not speak in the case of Asah, or of the family of David alone; but
the words are more general; the eyes of the Lord go thorough the whole earth,
to help all those whosoever they be, that have perfect hearts toward him. From
whence I gather, that men are not left under an unavoidable necessity of
perishing.

Thus I have gone thorough all the arguments, brought by Mr. Everard, to prove
the purity of the natural birth; and where the Examiners have pitched upon the
same reasons, I have taken them in for company. What is proper and peculiar to
them alone, shall be handled in the ensuing discourse.

The second Book contains the Answer, to the Examiners of the late Assemblies
Confession.
SECT. 1.
IN the Chapter concerning Original sin they do first endeavor to bring such
Scriptures as seem to make for their own purpose. And here they pitch upon that
image of God, that man is said to retain since his fall, Genesis 9. Our answer is,
though men may be said to have that image, and may carry the resemblance
thereof, yet this does not disprove their being born in original sin.
Notwithstanding such a polluted birth they may have the remainders of that
image which was by creation, and a possibility of the recovery of the same
image by Christ. That this truth may more clearly appear, we will distinguish
betwixt the image of God which is external, and the image which is internal.
For the image that is external and stands in Lordship and dominion over the
creature, man has not this image by natural generation, but by covenant
promise, and the Mediators blood. And therefore we read, that the Lord after
the flood did revive the great Charter once given to man before the fall. Be
fruitful and replenish the earth, and the fear of you, and the dread of you
shall be upon every foul of the air, upon all that moves upon the earth, and
upon all the fishes of the Sea: into your hand are they delivered, Genesis 9.2.
The same privilege is here granted to Noah and his sons, which was given to
Adam before his fall. But how did Noah, his sons, and in them all mankind
come to partake of it? Not by generation, but by the promise and Covenant. In
the former Chapter we read that Noah offered up a Sacrifice, and the Lord smelt
a savor of rest in and thorough the Mediators blood. Hereupon he made a solemn
promise that he would no more curse the ground for man's sake, though the
thoughts of the imaginations of his heart were evil from his childhood. By
virtue of the promise does man come to be re-invested with that part of the
Image of God which stands in Lordship over the creature, and he has not this
privilege in respect of his natural birth. Secondly, if we look to that part
of the Image of God which is internal in the soul, in this sense, though man
be born in original sin, and though he has lost the spiritual knowledge,
righteousness and holiness wherein he was most like his Creator and does now
carry the image of Satan, yet nevertheless he has still some remainders and
relics of the former Image, he has an immortal soul, an understanding, will
and other natural powers, and in and thorough Christ he has a capacity to
receive that spiritual part of the Image of God which was lost. According to
the tenor of this doctrine we may expound the precept that does inhibit the
shedding of man's blood, whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed, for in the Image of God made he man. The same answer may be given to that
text which they allege in the twelfth and last place, therewith curse we men,
which are made after the similitude of God, Jam. 3 9. Here we say the same in
substance, that though men are born in original sin, yet they have some
relics and remainders of the former Image that was lost, and a possibility by
Christ to come to the fullness of that glory.

The second Scripture to be considered, is that place, Deuteronomy. 32.4, 5. Where,
say they, we have two argnments more to prove Israel, and consequently all men
to be still created innocent. The first is from the perfection of all Gods
works, ver. 4. He is the rock, his work is perfect; for all his ways are
judgment, a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he. How then
can he, who is holy, righteous, and pure, create any thing that is unrighteous,
unclean or impure? The second is taken from Gods complaint there against men's
personal fall and corrupting themselves, whom God had not brought forth with
any such spots, ver. 5. They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the
spot of his children, they are a perverse and crooked generation, page 67. But
neither of these two arguments will prove the purity and the innocence of man's
natural birth. For though all infants through the fall of Adam are born in
original sin, this is no impeachment to God, he both is, and ever was
righteous in all his works. Though all mankind has fallen through the
disobedience of the first man, yet he was pure, righteous, and holy in the work
of creation. And though the greater part of the Israelites did rebel in the
Wilderness, this did not diminish the goodness of God to that people in
bringing them out of Egypt. Secondly, whereas it is said that they did corrupt
themselves by their own personal disobedience, this must needs be so, because
they were a rebellious generation. Moses speaks remarkably to this purpose in
the latter end of the former Chapter. I know that after my death you will
utterly corrupt your selves, and turn aside from the way which I have commanded
you, ver. 29. When he says I know that ye will utterly corrupt your selves;
shall we argue from hence that they were free from all corruption for the
present, and that the corrupting of themselves should merely be their own
personal act for the future? This cannot be the force of the argument. For
Moses did conclude that they would show the fruits of their corruption after
his death, because he did perceive such a rebellious and corrupted nature in
them for the present. Behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have
been rebellious against the Lord: How much more after my death? And for that
expression, their spot, is not the spot of his children, it is true indeed,
Gods children have many stains and spots, as Noah, David, Peter: But because
they have a living fountain of grace within, they do daily purge out the sin
and corruption of nature, 2 Cor. 7.1. Now it is not so with others, or with
those Apostates, to whom Moses spoke, because they had no living principle
within; they would totally fall from that good which they seemed to have. This
is the sense of the text, and how does this prove the purity of the natural
birth?

A third place they bring to assert the innocence of man, is the eighth Psalm,
where ver. 4.5, 6. the Psalmist speaks thus of all mankind, what is man that
thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou visitest him? for thou
have made him a little lower than the Angels, and have crowned him with glory
and honor. Say they, the Psalmist shows that man is still set in honor by
his first state of production, though he does not long retain the same, but
falls therefrom. But if a man had been created so corrupt as you speak, he had
not only been lower than the Angels, but below all ereatures here, page 67.
For the general sense of this Scripture, we do agree that man has still
dominion, Lordship, and pre-eminence over the creature, and in this dignity and
honor, he does carry the lively effigies, resemblance and Image of God, as he
is his vicegerent upon the earth. There is none who doubts of the truth of this
in general, but the main question is about the ground of the vicegerency,
whether it be from the state of man in his natural production, as these Censors
do affirm. This we deny, for according to the course of natural generation, as
it is since the fall, manhath lost the image of God in dominion and Lordship
over the creature; the earth is accursed, and the creature made subject to
vanity. You will say how then does he enjoy this privilege still? I answer, by
Christ the second Adam, and therefore it is observable that the Apostle does
apply the passages of the Psalmist more immediately to Christ, thou made him
a little lower than the Angels, thou crownest him with glory and honor; and
did set him over the work of thy hands, thou have put all things in
subjection under his feet, Heb. 2.7, 8 9. The whole creation then immediately
is put under Christ, and in and thorough him all men now come to have dominion
and Lordship over the creature. And therefore though all are fallen in Adam,
and have lost this privilege in their natural birth, yet it is repaired and
renewed by Christ.

A fourth place which they bring to evict man's uprightness by the creation, is
that of the wise man, God has made man upright, but they have sought out many
inventions, Eccles. 7.29. Here they insist especially upon two particulars.
First, that this is spoken of all mankind. Secondly, that every man's fall is by
his own personal and individual act. These are their words, he ascribes it not
to their first fathers alone, but to the individuals of their posterity
likewise, saying, but they have sought cut many inventions, page 68. Neither do
we affirm, that the blame is only to be laid on Adam, for others also, born
in original sin, and having the corruption of nature within them, do
personally and individually show the fruits of their own corruption in seeking
out many inventions. The Israelites, as we have formerly heard, did corrupt
themselves, yet this was from their own natural corruption as the fountain.
Secondly, when God made Adam in the beginning, he made him, and all mankind in
him, upright; but they have sought out many inventions. For what the first man
did, all his posterity did in him and by him. Neither is it improper to ascribe
the particle [they] to the relations, actions and conditions of the first man.
As for example, when the Lord said let us make man in our own image, and let
them have dominion over the fish of the Sea, and the foul of the air, Genesis
1.26. These words are more immediately spoken to Adam, and mediatly to all his
posterity, to the whole species of men, Let them have dominion over the fish of
the Sea. So in the present case, it may be said of Adam primarily, that God
made man upright, but he and all mankind in him have sought out many
inventions. The deed of the first man, is the deed of the species or whole
kind. As in a parallel case, the act of the first woman and the promise made to
her are ascribed to the whole sex: she shall be saved by childbearing, if they
continue in the faith, 1 Timothy 2.15. Thirdly, that no blame may be cast upon
God, we may say since the fall also, though men are born in original sin, God
does from time to time send inward convictions into their hearts to enable them
to distinguish betwixt good and evil. If therefore they will not see what they
may see, but will fallaciously endeavor to find out many inventions, the
fault is merely their own. All these passages are true, and being put together
they show the scope of the text, but they do not prove the purity of the
natural birth.

For the sixth, seventh and eighth places which the Examiners do bring out of
the Prophets, Isa. 1.21.22. Jer. 2.21. Isa. 5.1, 2, 3. Jer. 8.4, 5. I do not
see how these or such like do any way make to the purpose. For we will easily
grant that Jerusalem was a faithful City in the beginning, and that the
faithful City did become an Harlot. We will grant also that the Jewish Church
was the Lords Vineyard, planted with the choicest Vine, and thorough her own
default she turned into the degenerate plant of a wild Vine, and brought forth
wild grapes. These and many more texts may be alleged to prove the privileges
of that Church in her first institution; but how does this prove the purity of
the natural birth, seeing that Nation had all these privileges merely by
promise and Covenant? If they stand upon Analogy, and say that it is rational
for God to do with all men as with that people. To this we answer though all
are born in original sin and in the corruption of nature, yet they are not
left in a helpless or hopeless condition; Thorough Christ men have a
possibility of salvation though thorough their own default they neglect this
great salvation (as the people of Israel did,) and are justly liable to the
same reproof.

Ninthly, they go to that famous place in Hosea, thy destruction is of thy
self, O Israel, but in me is thy help, Hos. 13.9. Here say they the Lord lays
Isreal's destruction upon her self, and not upon her first parents, page 70.
Neither does this any whit promote their cause, for if we do read the stories
of the Judges and of the Kings, all along for the space of nine hundred years,
we shall find that the Church and state of Israel were liable to a total and
final destruction, for theird Iolatry and other great sins; In this respect
therefore the Prophet says thy destruction is of thy self, O Israel. And when
they were at the brink of destruction many times, and under the power of the
enemy than the Lord did wonderfully come in to help them. And this is the
meaning of the Prophets words, but in me is thy help. Thorough their own sin
many times they were at the brink of ruin, but the Lord of his great mercy did
deliver them. We may apply the case more generally, though Adam did fall and
all mankind by his personal disobedience, the destruction is of themselves, yet
in and thorough Christ it may be said in me is thy help. Secondly, this speech
is to be applied to Israel, a people in covenant with God, that they are the
causes of their own destruction, but their help is immediately from him. So we,
by our personal disobedience do many times what lies in us, procure our own
destruction, but our help is merely from his grace. This is the full meaning
of the place, and how does this prove the purity of the natural birth? Fathers
and children and all are the meritorious cause of their own destruction, if
they be considered in immediate opposition to the goodness of God, the cause
of their deliverance.

We will go on, and see whether they be more happy in the places which they
cite out of the new Testament: For the tenth place, which they cite out of Mat.
18.3. Except ye be converted and become as little children ye shall not enter
into the Kingdom of God; Because we have examined this text already, and the
Censors say no more but that which Mr. Everard has in substance spoken before,
we are content to let them pass in this matter.

From the eleventh place they do conclude absolutely, that infants are free
from all kind of sin. These are their words, does not the Apostle remove, not
only from children, malice, but also all evil of iniquity, when he would have
the Corinthians in that behalf conformed to them, 1 Cor. 14.20. saying,
Brethren be not children in understanding, howbeit (...) in malice or iniquity
be children, page 70. Here, as I have formerly touched is a palpable sophisme a
dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, as Logicians term it. For though
the word (...) in the general notion thereof may signify all evil of iniquity,
yet in the sense of the text it notes the particular evil of malice only: and
therefore he says in malice be ye children. Neither is it his purpose to
acquit children from all kind of malice or envy, for they have seminally and
vertually the seed of all this in their hearts. Do ye think that the Scripture
says in vain, the spirit that is in us lusts unto envy? Jam. 4.5. We see by
experience that this is no fable, that envy is naturally seated in the heart of
man; one child many times does envy another for a little coat. And though God
does give to the Regenerate more grace to purge out the sin of the nature, as
it is afterward expressed in the next verse, but he gives more grace,
wherefore he says, God resists the proud and gives grace to the humble.
Notwithstanding all this the nature of man does lust to envy, and it is
vertually and, eminally in infants. You will say then, why does the Apostle
exhort, in malice be ye children? His meaning is this, that they should do as
children, who are apt to forget the wrongs and injuries that are done to them,
and to look-upon them as though they had never been. And therefore the Apostle
says, be angry but sin not, let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, Ephesians.
4.26. This is all one, with that expression, in malice be ye children; that is,
do not retain heart-burnings and hatred one against another, but forget the
wrongs and injuries that are done to you as children do. It is but a
comparative speech.

These are all the places of Scripture which are alleged by these Censors to
prove the purity of the natural birth, and how well they have done it, we leave
to any indifferent understanding to judge: and yet how do they glory when they
utter such words as these, page 71? Thus we have proved that neither the guilt
of our first parents sin was imputed, nor their spiritual death in sin and
corrupted nature was conveyed to all their posterity, or to any one of them by
ordinary generation. And directing their speech to the Assembly after this
manner, do thus insult, though this your doctrine (say they) has gone from
hand to hand a long time by tradition, yet neither did the Scribes and
Pharisees, nor yet the disciples of Christ, and much less Christ himself, hold
forth any such doctrine, nor were any of them leavened with this opinion of
yours, and your long mistaken Predecessors. For the Pharisees with the Jews
being highly displeased with him, who was borne blind, and whose eyes Christ
had opened, for defending his Savior and blessed Oculist, said thus unto him,
John 9 34. Thou wast altogether born in sin, and do thou teach us? Whence
it is evident that they did neither conceive all men in general, nor yet
themselves to be by propagation conceived and born in sin, page 71. What
apprehensions and conceptions soever the Pharisees and other Jews had, I will
not dispute. Sure I am, they who do rightly understand the doctrine of the
Jewish Church, could not well be ignorant of the sin of the nature. For when
our Savior did discourse of the necessity of regeneration, and Nicodemus did
admire at the strangeness of that doctrine, our Savior made him this answer,
Art thou a Master in Israel, and know not these things? John 3.7. In which
words it is plain that the pollution of the natural birth, and the necessity of
regeneration, were then points easy to be known; and a wonder it was to our
Savior that any could be ignorant of such fundamentals. And I cannot but
admire that these men, Mr. Everard, and the thirty separate Congregations,
should profess themselves to be members of the Christian Church, and be
ignorant of these things. But our Examiners build upon our Saviors words,
neither has this man sinned nor his parents, but that the works of God should
be made manifest in him. Where according to your doctrine (say they) our
Savior should have answered positively, that both he and his parents with all
his progenetors, even as far as Adam, had sinned. What need was there at all,
that our Savior should speak of the common cause of the misery of all mankind,
seeing the Disciples question was more immediately touching the particular
blindness of this man? They were not ignorant that original sin was the
common cause of all diseases; only they did put the question, what was the
proper cause of the blindness of this individual man, whether it did lie in
himself or in his parents, that he was born blind? In relation to this
particular question, for any eminency or singularity of sin above other men
the answer is plain, that neither he nor his parents have sin'ned. This was
the presumption and singular opinion of the Pharisees, as it appears in the
aforementioned words, Thou wast altogether born in sin, and do thou teach
us? The whole Process of this argument is a mere fallacy, a dicto secundum
quid addictum simplicietr. They go on, and from the Lords appointing the Cities
of refuge for the Man slayer to flee unto, when he had killed his Neighbor
unawares, they reason, The Lord commanded by Moses that Cities of refuge should
be set apart in all the coasts and habitations of Israel for such to flee to;
and will he pursue the innocent seed of Adam, and hold them guilty for their
fathers sin, perpetrated ere they were born? Yea, will he himself be the
avenger of the blood against these innocents? page 70. In answer to this, I
say, did these men seriously consider the whole truth, they would not raise
such tragical cries against this doctrine. The Cities of refuge anciently
appointed for the Manslayer, were types and figures of Christ to come: To him
only the soul is to fly, when she is pursued by the curse of the Law, as by an
avenger of blood. So then, if all the children of Adam were liable to the guilt
of his sin perpetrated, before they were born, there is no harshnesse in the
saying, if we believe that the fall of Adam does open a door, to the grace that
comes by Christ, and that the grace of Christ is a City of refuge, for the lost
sinner to fly to; And for infants, though we hold them guilty of sin by the
disobedience of the first man, what detriment or damage is this to them, as
long as mercy is extended through the obedience of the second man. By all that
I can understand, these men are afraid of nothing more than that Christ should
have too much honor given to him in releeving the miserable lost sons of
men, otherwise they would never stand so much as they do upon the purity of the
natural birth.

SECT. 2.
NOW let us hear what answers they return to our arguments. And here I say
they are extremely fallacious; for as they do not produce some of our
arguments, which have most cogent proof, so they do mention others, which are
of small moment, which is scarce honest dealing. But for the places which they
do allege, there are four in number, which do carry some weight with them.

First, from that place Genesis 8.21. for the imagination of man's heart is evil
from his youth, they gather thus much, Even as Esau or Edom, though he had a
birthright, yet sold it in his youth to satisfy some strong desires kindled
in him: so men, though created innocent, do in the time of temptation and
trial too often, and too soon, yield unto the temptation, and sell or forfeit
that their innocence and birthright, and so their imaginations become evil
from their youth, but are not so from their birth, unless you here understand
a spiritual conception or birth in sin by our personal fall, page 71. In this
I do agree with them, that men in time of their tempration too often and too
easily fall from God thorough their own actual disobedience. This is a part,
but it is not the whole truth, for if they had compared the text as they should
have done with Genesis 6. ver. 3.4, 5. they would find that both Scriptures speak
of the sin of the nature. First, the Lord says, my Spirit shall not always
strive with man for that he also is flesh, ver. 3. As who would say in plainer
times, because his nature is defiled I will destroy him from the earth.
Secondly, the whole nature must needs be depraved, because the principles and
lively fountains are corrupt, every imagination of the thoughts of his heart
are evil. Thirdly, the universality of the depravation, it is not spoken of
this or that particular imagination, but every imagination of his heart is
evil, and that which is more, it is only evil, without the combination,
connection and commixture of any good. Fourthly, the perpetuity of the time, in
the one text it is said the thoughts of his heart are only evil continually,
and in the other the imagination of man's heart is evil from his childhood; If
we put altogether, we may plainly see that there is a depravation of nature,
that this depravation is generally in all parts, and in all times from the very
birth and conception. And for that example of Esau which they allege, that he
sold his birthright, that primogeniture was a special privilege in the family
of the Patriarchs, but what is this to every man's natural birthright? can he
forfeit that natural innocence which he never had? Again, Esau did sell his
birthright at a certain time of his age, by a deliberate and a free choice,
when Jacob and he were come near to man's estate, and therefore the Apostle
says, Let there be no profane person among you as Esau, who for one morsel of
meat sold his birth right, Heb. 12.16. Now it is otherwise with the the words
of the text, there, it is expressed that the thoughts of the imaginations of
his heart are evil from his childhood. As much in sense as that the whole
nature is depraved, and that depravation does begin from the very birth.

Secondly, for the texts cited out of Job, I do agree with the Examiners in the
general, that those wise men speaking of the purity of God in relation to the
imperfection of the creature, do oftentimes use an hyperbolical way of
expression. As in that passage of Eliphaz, behold he puts no trust in his
Saints, yea the heavens are not clear in his sight, Job. 15.15. I do agree also
that men do voluntarily corrupt themselves; how much more abominable and filthy
is man who drinks iniquity like water? ver. 16. Though these things be true,
yet they do not contain the whole truth nor the Emphasis of that Scripture, for
the words immediately going before, are concerning the natural generation of
man, what is man that he should be clean, and he that is born of a woman that
he should be righteous? ver. 14. The same in substance is spoken by Job himself
touching the natural birth, who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not
one, Chap. 14 4. Both Scriptures do plainly show that the nature is defiled,
because it does proceed from so unclean a fountain. And this does agree with
the doctrine of our Savior, when he presses a necessity of regeneration, that
which is born of flesh is flesh, therefore there is a necessity that man should
be born again. The whole force of the argument is thus much in effect, from the
greater to the less; If the heavens and the Saints which are the more perfect
creatures, are not pure in the sight of God, what righteousness is in man, who
is defiled with original sin even from the very birth? This is the natural
sense of the words of Eliphas.

Thirdly, to that place, Psalm. 51.5. behold I was shapen in iniquity and in
sin did my mother conceive me, they answer, We would (say they) First, gladly
know of you, whether it be not David's scope in this confession to aggravate his
sin. But if he here pleads the inevitable corruption of nature, which you
hold forth, his words will be found a mere extenuation of his offenses, if not
a throwing off all or most of the blame upon God, who had brought him forth so
corrupt and averse to all good, and so propense to all evil, and that without
hope of an absolute cure while he was in this world, page 75. Where is the
honesty and conscience of these men when they patch that upon others, which is
none of their doctrine? For where can they show that either the Assembly of
Divines, or any other serious Authors, did ever teach that the nature of man is
corrupt and propense to evil, without any hope of cure while he is in this
world, and that in this case man does lie under an inevitable necessity? Do not
the Assembly of Divines, and all other Authors almost speak of the Covenant of
grace, after they have showed the misery of nature? For though the nature of
man is wholly defiled, yet from Christ there is hope to have the nature
cleansed. Though David was born in original sin, yet he was not destitute of
a remedy, he believed the grace of God made known in the promise, and therefore
prays, create in me a clean heart, renew in me a right spirit. He did desire
that his defilement by natural generation might be done away by the work of the
new creation. And whereas these confident men would desire to know whether it
be not David's scope in his confession to aggravate his sin, I answer, it is,
and therefore he does cry out against the sin of the nature, he does use the
same expression in effect as Paul does, Romans 7. I know that in me, that is, in
my flesh, dwells no good thing, ver. 18. And O wretched man that I am! who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? ver. 24. Where we may observe
these three points. First, they who are inwardly and truly enlightened, do feel
the burden of a carnal mind, which they have by natural generation, whereas
other men account the liberty of lust their greatest freedom. Secondly, they
feeling the propension of their nature wholly to sin, do hereupon aggravate
the sinfulness of their nature. Thirdly, by this means they do more highly
prize the grace of Christ, and that freedom which he does bring to set them at
liberty from the bondage of corruption, and the reign of their lusts, Joh.
8.31 32, 33. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. Mat. 12.20. The promise of Christ is, that a
bruised reed he will not break, and the smoking flax he will not quench until
he have brought forth judgment unto victory. By judgment is here meant
deliverance from under the tyranny and reign of original sin, when men serve
diverse lusts and pleasures. The deliverance from the power of corruption is the
judgment meant in the text. This deliverance is not wrought in an instant, but
by degrees, and our Savior is ready to help the weakest that fly to him in a
sense of their own misery. There is nothing more weak than a bruised reed, and
the least degree of fire will make flax to smoke. Even so, if there be the
least grace to feel the bondage of corruption, the Lord Christ is ready to
cherish it, and never to leave till he have brought forth judgment unto
victory, to make men conquerors of their lusts. But the ground of all this, is,
to feel the burden of a carnal mind, which it is most probable, these Censors
are strangers to, or else they would not so extenuate the sin of the nature, as
they do.

Now let us hear what interpretation they give of the Psalmists words. It was,
say they, the lie, or lying promises of Satan, with the folly therein
contained by which he was shapen in iniquity, or conceived in sin. page 74.
And they ground themselves upon that passage, that the devil is the father of
sin. These are their words, besides our natural parents, we have spiritual
fathers and mothers, whether for our begetting in evil and iniquity, or for our
regeneration in grace and goodness. Concerning our procreation in sin, our
Savior speaks thus unto the Jews, Joh. 8.44. Ye are of your father the Devil,
and his lusts will ye do. Now this father makes use of a twofold mother to
beget men in wickedness, besides their own lust, which when it is enticed and
drawn away by temptation, conceives and brings forth sin. Jam. 1.14, 15. And
here first they reckon the lying word or promise by which Satan deceives men;
and secondly the false Synagogue which thorough Satan's helps begets men in a
false faith, Page. 75. 76. But this gloss will not serve their turn neither,
for though the Devil be the father of sin, he is so only by temptation and
suggestion; but the Psalmist speaks of sin by derivation and propagation: I
was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. And for that
which they allege out of the Epistle of St. James, he does only speak of the
order of generation of sin in the heart, every man is drawn away of his own
lust and enticed, and lust when it has conceived, brings forth sin. But what
is this to the purpose of the Psalmist, he does not speak of the generation of
lust or of sin in his heart, but he does speak of his own generation. This is
evident from the words themselves, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me. Secondly, it is manifest from the words that follow,
because he was defiled with the pollution of the natural birth, by way of
opposition he prays unto the Lord to create in him a clean heart; because his
old was defiled, therefore he did beg a new nature.

Fourthly, to that place. Ephesians. 2.3. And were by nature the children of wrath as
well as others, they answer by a distinction, It is one thing, say they, to be
sinners from our first nativity, and another thing in time to become the
children of wrath by our personal fall and actual disobedience, which also
coming to pass in our natural man, and by his default, we may truly be said by
nature to be the children of wrath, when sin by custom becomes a second nature
to us, Page. 78. Here I yield, that the Ephesians before their conversion, and
all other natural men do thorough their own actual disobedience serve diverse
lusts and pleasures. This is the truth, but it is not the whole truth. If they
were only defiled by custom, which in a sense may be called a second nature,
by good custom then they need only a remedy of the evil of their nature; and
we need not the knowledge of Divinity, but only of Moral Philosophy toward
the recovery out of our misery. For that which is now the judgment of these
Censors, was sometimes the opinion of Aristotle: He did believe that man in his
birth was like a white sheet of paper, and that thereupon the habit of virtue
was attainable by many acts. But the Apostle does not deal upon such weak
beggarly and Ethical grounds, because the Ephesians were not only sinners by
conversation, but by nature also were the children of wrath, hereupon in
relation to their natural corruption, he says, you has he quickened which
were dead in trespasses and sins. Their quickening by the spirit a posteriori
does show the pollution of their natures a priori. But if they were the
children of wrath only by custom a second nature, by breaking off old customs
they might reduce themselves to their ancient purity of nature. And this is the
Moral Philosophy of these Censors and the separate Churches of this way.

Fifthly, for that place of the Romans, by one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin, Chap. 5. v. 12. That we may more orderly proceed, let us
consider how they plant their own interpretation, and then how they oppugn
ours. This one man say they by whom sin entered into the world is not our
first parent Adam, but our own earthly or natural man, which is called Adam and
Edom from the earth of his foundation, page 78. Here I do plainly and openly
confess I do not know what they mean by this Adam, neither can I see how
possibly they can apply such a sense to this Scripture. First, seeing they will
not have the nature of man to be defiled in Adam, how is this common nature
called by the title of one man, seeing it contains such an infinite number of
men? Secondly, how did sin by this one man enter into the world? For this
common nature of one man must either be nature pure, or nature impure. If they
will have this to be meant of nature pure, then this necessarily must be the
meaning of the text, by one common pure natural man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin, etc. As this is a strange and wild interpretation in it self,
so it does cast the blame only upon God for making such a nature that by it
generally death should pass upon all men to condemnation. But if to amend the
matter they shall say that he made the nature of Adam in creation, and the
nature of every man pure in natural generation, but it is their own fault that
they corrupt themselves. Here the plaster is not wide enough for the sore, for
the Apostle gives the reason why death passes upon all men, because in one all
have sinned. But now if it be true, as these Censors say, that in one common
nature all have not sinned, but those only that fall through their personal
disobedience. Here I would have them to show why does death pass upon all men,
and how will this satisfy the sense of the Apostle? By their account then only
they should be liable to death who were guilty of disobedience in their pure
nature. But let us suppose that they say by one common nature impure sin entered
into the world, and then this will be a gross tautologie. Besides, if the
whole nature of man be impure, there must be some cause of the general
depravation of nature, which will bring us to the disobedience of the first
man, and so they will lose their cause. Further, I demand, if by one man they
understand the common nature of all, how will they preserve the Emphasis of the
Apostle in opposing one man to all men? He plainly says that death has passed
upon all men, but how? thorough the means of one man. Again, how will they make
it good, that by the disobedience of one many were made sinners, in case they
take one man for the common nature of men. The acts of obedience or
disobedience are usually attributed to particular persons that live under some
Law. But they have a better faculty to cavil at the truth than positively to
maintain their own heterogeneal doctrines.

Let us hear then what cavils they have against the true interpretation of the
words. First, say they, this one by whom sin entered into the world, is not
meant by our first parent Adam, for the Apostle shows that he was not the
original or first sinner, 1 Timothy 2.14. For Adam was not deceived, but the woman
being deceived, was in the transgression. According to your doctrine then, the
Apostle should have said, by one woman sin entered into the world, page 78.
Indeed the scope of his doctrine, in that text is to show that the woman was
more immediately tempted by Satan, and she was first in the transgression; yet
in the matter of propagating original sin, it is as true also, that by one
man sin entered into the world. For Adam and Eve make but one root in the
propagation of the kind: and therefore in the institution of marriage it is
said, for this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and cleave to his
wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, Genesis 2, 24. In the case then of
Propagation, Adam and Eve go but for one, and Adam is here immediately opposed
to Christ, so far forth as he is the root of all his posterity.

Secondly, say they, these words, And death passed upon all men (...), are thus
to be rendered, in as much or so far forth as all have sinned, page 78. Well,
let the words be rendered, which way they will, the scope of the text, and the
connexive particle, for, do plainly show that they contain the reason of the
general passage of death upon every individual man. And therefore we must
necessarily and unavoidably come to the disobedience of the first man, in whom,
as in the common root all have sinned.

Thirdly, they thus except, If the Apostle had believed any such thing, as the
reigning of death upon all men by the first man's sin, he would not have
omitted that, and only mentioned from Adam to Moses, page 81. Though he does
speak of the reign of death from Adam to Moses, he does not hereby restrain it
to that particular time only. For he plainly says, that death passed upon all
men, absolutely and universally in all times, but he does mention the time from
Adam to Moses in special, because then it seemed to be more rational and
congruous, that sin should not be imputed, because no Law was then publicly
delivered; yet in this time he affirms, that all universally were under the
reign of death: not only Cain, the builders of Babel, the people of the old
world, and the Cities of Sodom, all which were destroyed for their personal
sins; but he plainly affirms, that death reigned over infants in all that
interval of time, though they never sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression. If infants be under the reign of death, we must necessarily
suppose, that sin must be the cause thereof, but infants cannot commit any
sin personally. Therefore they must be supposed to be guilty of sin through
the disobedience of Adam. And this makes good the main argument of the Apostle,
by one man sin entered into the world, he does argue from the effect to the
cause; because death has universally past upon all, by the disobedience of
one, therefore all were involved in the guilt of that disobedience.

Fourthly, say they, the nineteenth verse is more plain against universal
corruption by the first man's disobedience, for there the Apostle uses the word
(many,) and says, by one man's disobedience many (not all) were made sinners;
therefore all did not fall in the first individual Adam, page 82. Though the
word (many) be equivocal, yet in the sense of the text it must necessarily be
meant of every individual man, because death has absolutely passed upon every
man, no one excepted, therefore it necessarily follows that this passage, by
the disobedience of one, many were made sinners, must be meant of every
individual man. But here they have a cavil, the word [many] in the latter part
of the verse must have the same latitude allowed, for the Apostle sets down
a full comparison of equals in that verse. Here the verse must be thus
interpreted, that as by one man's disobedience, all were made sinners, so by one
man's obedience, all were made righteous, page 82. Neither will this help the
matter, for it is not necessary that there should be the same latitude in the
collation betwixt the first and the second man; only this is sufficient that
the first man is the root of all his branches, and all that come of him were
made sinners by him; and the second man is the root of all his branches, and
all that are ingraffed into him, are made righteous by him. Secondly, some of
them that stand for the universal redemption do not plead an absolute or
universal justification of all men by the obedience of the first man; but only
plead for a general impretation or possibility of salvation, which then only
comes to be applied when men believe and receive the promise by a lively faith.

Thus, we have passed through all the arguments of the Examiners, and we have
seen their cavils against the several Scriptures alleged by us. As for those
similitudes, of punishing the posterity of Traitors, for the treason of their
parents, and the killing of the young vipers with the old, by reason of their
poisonous nature, etc. forasmuch as these are only illustrations of the truth,
so all the pains which they take here is only to cavil at illustrations. Other
passages they have of lesser moment, which we have answered before, only they
have one argument in the Chapter of free will from that place, Isaiah 7.14.
Before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land
which thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her Kings. Here they would have
us observe two points, First, that though this place be commonly understood of
our Savior, yet it is meant of the common state of man. Secondly, this child
from his infancy, according to the common state of mankind; should have the
knowledge and ability to refuse the evil and choose the good. From hence they
do infer, that a natural man can both will and act according to his first
integrity, until he disables and corrupts himself. Further, they stand upon
it, that a man has a power to choose the good, and to that purpose they cite
the words of Moses, Deuteronomie 30.19. I have set before you life and death,
blessing and cursing, therefore choose life, page 126, 127, 128. If they did
well understand the meaning of these Scriptures, they would not pervert them to
so strange a sense. For the Text in Isaiah, we do acknowledge, that the
children in an ordinary way have a power to choose the good, and to refuse the
evil, when they come to years of discretion. But what kind of good is here
meant? not that good which is spiritual or divine; for this they cannot choose
without an inward work of the Spirit; but that good only which is moral and
civil, and this at years of discretion men are able to make choice of. And for
the words of Moses, I have set before you blessing and cursing, therefore
choose life, etc. To the clearing of this, Let us distinguish; First what he
speaks of, and Secondly, the persons to whom he speaks. First, if by choosing
the good, be meant the true God in opposition to all the Heathen gods of the
Gentiles, here Moses speaks to the Israelites, as to a people that had clear
evidences and convictions, that there was no other God in all the world but
theirs only. And therefore he does exhort them to choose the true God for their
God. Secondly, if by choosing the good be meant the loving of the Lord their
God with all their heart, and with all their soul, as it is employed, verse 10.
then this word of command is given only in relation to the word of promise,
verse 6. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy
seed to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul that
thou may live. In immediate relation to this promise, Moses says, I command
thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways and to keep his
commandments that thou may live, verse 16. So then we do conclude that the
ability to choose the good, is not from any natural power, but from the grace
of God, and the word of promise.

Thus I have gone thorough all the reasons which are alleged either by Mr.
Everard, or the Examiners, the late Patrones of the purity of natural birth. If
they have any thing more to say for this, my desire is that they would show
their strength, or else confess their wicked errors, and submit to the clear
evidence of truth. Now let us consider the several and respective arguments of
Dr. Jeremy Tailor, and what has been lately said by him concerning the same
subject.

The third Book contains the Answer to several Arguments of Dr. Jeremy Tailor
in his Vnum Necessarium and two smaller Treatises of his.
Forasmuch as this Learned man does tread in the footsteps of our Antagonists
and does plead the same things against the Doctrine of original sin, as they
have pleaded against us for certain years last past. And seeing also, that many
are like to be taken with the purity and elegancy of his Style, that probably
are not able to judge of the foulness and impurity of his Doctrine; We have
thought it worth our labor, to provide an antidote to secure the souls of
men, and if it may be possible in a peaceable and brotherly manner to reduce
him from the evil of his opinions. And so we come to the several Sections of
the sixth Chapter in the treatise aforesaid.
SECT. 1. Of Concupiscence and original sin and whither or no, and how far we
are bound to repent of it.
ORIGINal sin is so called (...) or figuratively, meaning the sin of Adam,
which was committed in the original of mankind by our first parent.

Answ. We deny not, but the sin of Adam may be called the original, or the
first sin, because it was the first that was committed. But then we must take
heed, that with our Author we do not deny also the pollution and the
corruption of the natural birth. In so doing we must needs destroy regeneration
or the new birth; we must needs also evacuate the Baptism of the Spirit, so
far as it does seal regeneration: humiliation for the birth, sin will be a
mere non ens and the mortification of the sin of the nature will be a
nullity. In a word, one of the chief ends of the Christian faith (which is to
put on the Christ-like disposition) will be frustrated and greatly impaired.
For what need I to put on the new disposition, as it is from Christ the root of
all grace and spiritual life; if there be no pravity and sinfulness of nature,
from Adam the root of corruption? In Scripture the one is set forth as the
immediate opposite to the other. But he further shows.

This sin brought upon Adam all that God threatened, but no more, a certainty
of dying, together with the proper effects, and affections of mortality.

Answ. Besides the affections of mortality, and the certainty of dying, this
sin also brought upon Adam, the depravation of original righteousness; and
the depravation of his nature, as afterward shall be showed. Next he seems
to speak more fairly.

Man being left in the state of pure naturals, could not by his own strength,
arrive to a supernatural end, for eternal life being an end above our natural
proportion, cannot be acquired by any natural means.

Answ. In this, and such like passages of his, he does seem to me, to cross
his whole undertaking. One chief end of entitling his book (as may appear by
the preface; The Doctrine and Practice of repentance, rescued from popular
errors; is the scandal and offense that he seems to take at our Doctrine of
original sin. For thinks he, if the nature be depraved, a necessity of
sinning will be introduced, and the natural liberty of the Will, will be taken
away: and therefore in much compassion and tenderness, he seems (to himself
at least) to vindicate the truth, to make Religion more reasonable, and
intelligible: and to rescue the Schools, and Pulpits, from the rigor, and
austerity of the doctrines of such a nature. But when all is done, he speaks
the same in effect, that we do. For if man being in his natural condition, by
his own strength, cannot arrive to a supernatural end, but needs the help of
the Spirit: This being supposed, I will put it upon him, seriously to consider,
whether the same Spirit that helps a man out of this imaginary deficiency,
privation, and imperfection, is not as able also, to rescue him from that
inherent defilement, pravity, and corruption of the natural birth? The Spirit
can do as much in the one, as in the other. And exhortations will be as useful
in the one case, as in the other. What need then has our Author to raise up
all this dust? But he further adds.

What gifts and graces or supernatural endowments God gave to Adam in his state
of innocence we know not, God has no where told us.

Answ. Though he has no where told us in so many letters, yet by collation of
circumstances, we may gather that Adam had the Spirit, and was a spiritual man
before his fall. In the creation it is expressly said, come, let us make man
after our own image, Genesis 1. The Apostle does declare wherein this image does
consist, That concerning the former conversation, ye put off the Old man, which
is corrupt according to deceitful lusts, and that ye be renewed in the Spirit
of the mind, and that ye put on the New man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.22 23, 24. In these words there are
four particulars that seem to speak fair for Adam, that he had the Spirit, and
was a spiritual man before his fall. First, it is said that they should put off
the Old man, corrupt according to deceitful lusts; Corruption is of a different
nature according to the condition of the subject matter; there is a corruption
of seeds, of grains, of metals, of the members of a man's body, but here the
Apostle must needs speak of the corruption of that which is spiritual. From
whence we collect that the Old man, or the disposition of the flesh, is but the
corruption of that holy and spiritual state n which Adam was made.

Secondly, it is said, be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds; The word
renewed does import the restoring of a thing to that perfection, which sometime
it had in its first institution. An house is renewed, not when it is built new
from the ground, but when it is amended. When an infant is born into the world,
it is not proper to say that he is renewed, but a man does renew his strength,
when he does recover it by degrees after a long sickness. So in the present
case, when the Apostle says, be renewed in the spirit of your mind, he
speaks of the renovation of that knowledge, holiness and righteousness that
Adam sometimes had, but lost it by his fall.

Thirdly, it is said, after the image of him that created him. Though this is
specially meant of the new creature, yet it is with respect also to that
passage in the old creation, let us make man after our own image. For (...),
secundum Deum, according to God, is as much in effect, as after the likeness,
similitude and image of God who upon this account must needs be the pattern in
both creatio'ns.

Fourthly, to put all out of question it is expressly said, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness. What difference soever there may
be between Adam in innocence, and the Saints in the state of regeneration,
certain it is, that holiness and righteousness must needs be the morality of
the Law, and none can rationally deny, but that Adam was endued and invested
with these two before his fall. By his righteousness he was enabled to deal
justly with man, and by his holiness he was carried out to know God, to love
him, to delight in him, to fear him, and to take him as his chiefest good. All
these particulars (expressing the spirituality and purity of the Law) do
signify to us that Adam had the Spirit, and was a spiritual man before his
fall. Now let us go on.

Receiving more by the second Adam, than we lost by the first, the sons of God
are now spiritual, which he never was that we can find.

Answ. That which he writes here, does manifestly contradict what he speaks
elsewhere, for page 383. He plainly shows that original righteousness in Adam
and habitual righteousness in the Saints; are all one. These are his own
words, if one sin (says he) could naturally, and by a physical causalty
destroy original righteousness, then every ones sin in the regenerate, can
as well destroy habitual righteousness, because that, and this differ not, but
in their principle, not in their nature and constitution. And why should not a
righteous man as easily and as quickly fall from grace, and loose his habits,
as Adam did? naturally it is all one, so far he. To which we answer, Adam
fell from original righteousness, because he stood only by the covenant of
works, the Saints do not fall from habitual righteousness, because they have
their standing by the covenant of grace. But as to the point in hand, original
righteousness in Adam, and habitual righteousness in the Saints, he tells us,
that both are one, and the same in essence and constitution and then again, he
tells us, the sons of God are spiritual, which Adam never was that he could
find. So great a faculty he has to blow hot and cold in the same breath.

Now he comes to explicate that Scripture, by one man sin entered into the
world, Romans 5. etc.

That sin, says he, entered into the world by Adam, is therefore certain,
because he was the first man. It must needs enter in him, because it first
comes in by the first.

Answ. It is true that sin entered into the world by Adam, as the first man,
but it is not the whole truth, for in such a sense (as he understands it) the
old Pelagians may make good that position of theirs, that original sin is by
imitation they that come after, do only imitate the ensample of him that went
before. Of the entrance of death by sin he speaks as follows.

Death by sin, that is death, which at the first was the condition of nature
became a punishment upon that account, just as it was with the Scrpent to creep
upon his belly, and the woman to be subject to her husband.

Answ. In these words of his, he does distinguish between death as a mere
condition of nature, and death as a punishment. The former he will have to be
in the state of innocence, latter only to be introduced by the fall. But
against this I have many things to allege.

First, if Adam should have dyed in innocence, and that merely by the
condition of his nature, what can we possibly make of the sense of that
commination, in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death? what
propable interpretation can we give of those Scriptures, by one man, sin
entered into the world, and death by sin. The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.
Vlt? Surely all this plainly shows, that death came into the world, merely
by the sin of man, and if he had not sinned he had not dyed. Further, the
Apostle said, the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death, 1 Cor. 15.16.
The question is, when did death begin to be an enemy, and from what time are we
to fetch the date thereof? If Adam should have dyed in innocence, than the
enmity of death must begin in Paradise, we must fetch the date of it from the
creation and not from the fall. And so consequently death will be rather the
work of God, than the fruit of sin. But let it be supposed in this low and
dimunitive sense, that death came into the world as a punishment and began to
be penal at the fall only. If we take the matter in this sense it will not
serve his turn neither, nor will other passages of his doctrine, abide the
rigor of this interpretation. For how often does he plead after this manner?
In other cases, says he; Laws be not given to Idiots, infants, and persons
incapable: why should they be given here? In all cases of the world, it is
unjust to lay the sin of the father upon the children, and is it otherwise in
this case only? And if the answer may be admitted, any man may suffer for the
sin of any father, because it may be said here as well as there, that
although the innocent must not perish for another fault, yet the son is not
innocent as being in the fathers loins when the fault was committed, and the
Law calls him and makes him guilty? Many such Aphorisms he has, where he
shows or at least endeavors to show how contrary it is to the justice and
mercy of God, any way to burden the posterity of Adam with the guilt of his
sin. And yet here he confesses plainly and openly, that death quatenus, a
punishment in the penalty of it, came into the world by the disobedience of the
first man: How he can make one part of his doctrine to agree with the other, it
passes all understanding of mine to discern? In his answer to the Bishops
letter he seems to me to let fall a strange contradiction: I have (says he,)
the plain words of Saint Paul, death passed upon all men, forasmuch as all have
sinned, all men, that is, the generality of mankind, all that lived till they
could sin; Others that dyed before, dyed in their nature, not in their sin,
neither Adams, nor their own, save only that Adam brought it upon them, or
rather left it to them, himself being disrobed of all that could hinder it.
Answ. let page 49. Here in the former part of his words, he says, that infants
dye in their nature, not in their sin, neither Adams nor their own; and yet
he tells us again, that Adam brought in death upon them, and through his
disobedience they were disrobed of all that could hinder it: If he did bring in
death upon them, then they did not dye purely in their own nature; they must
some way die in or by his sin. Again, if they dyed purely in their own
nature, and not at all in his sin, how can he be said to bring in death? Can he
bring in death, and can he not bring in death? and all this upon one sort of
people, at one and the same time? Neither can I see, how he will acquit
himself, if it should be put upon him to show the true reason why infants are
liable to burning feavours, convulsion fitts, and pass through the pangs of
death at last: Are these the infelicities of nature? Then God has made them in
this state, and their misery will be purely the work of his own hands. Are
these the punishment of Adams sin? then the innocent child will bear the
burden of his fathers iniquity, in such a case where it is not possible for the
son to follow the fathers ensample, which is plainly to give up the cause. Now
let us consider what he says of the quality of the persons upon whom there
has been such a passage of death.

Death (says he) passed upon all men, that is, upon all the old world, who
were drowned in the flood of divine vengeance, and who did sin after the
similitude of Adam, and therefore the Apostle St. Paul adds that for a reason,
inasmuch as all men have sinned.

Ans. Though the word all in it self has an ambiguity in it, yet the scope of
the text, and the condition of the subject, does plainly demonstrate that the
passage of death from Adam as a common root must be absolutely upon all men, as
men so far forth as they are his sons, and not upon all to the flood only.
But concerning this matter we have his meaning more fully in the next passage.

If all men (says he,) have sinned upon their own account, as it is certain
they have, then these words can very well mean that Adam first sinned, and all
his sons and daughters sinned after him: and so dyed in their own sin by a
death, which at the first, and in the whole constitution of affairs is
natural, and a death which their own sin deserved, but yet was hastened and
ascertained upon them for the sin of their Progenitor.

Answ. In these words of his, as plausibly as he seems to speak of the cause of
death, he puts that for the cause which is not the cause, and where he speaks
of the true cause, it does not answer the sense of the text.

First, he puts that for the cause, that is not the cause. For, from what
Scripture, or from what consequence of Scripture does he prove it, that Adam
and his sons in the whole constitution of affiaires should have dyed a death
that is natural; The Scripture does every where make death to be the fruit of
sin, as we have formerly proved. Again, it is most true, that men dye,
because by their own sin they deserve death, but the scope of the Apostle is
here only concerning the disobedience of the first man, and the passage of
death upon all by the account of his sin. That which is the principal cause
of death, at least to the purpose in hand, he looks upon it as a business by
the by; In the next words he comes to deliver himself more clearly for
speaking of the fall of Adam he adds.

Sin propagated upon that root and vicious ensample, or rather from that
beginning, not from that cause, but dum ita peccant, and similiter moriuntur.
If they sin so, then so shall they die, so Saint Hierom.

Answ. This passage, though it be clothed with the words of Hierom, it has the
sense of the Pelagians: For observe what he says sin is propagated from that
vicious ensample, it does descend from Adam not so much as a cause, but as a
beginning, and so far as men tread in his steps they are liable to the same
punishment. In his answer to the Bishops letter, he brings in an ensample to
confirm this way of exposition, these are his own words: To this purpose we
have an ensample of Gods transmitting the curse from one to the other. Both
were sinners, but one was the Original of the curse or punishment. So said the
Prophet to the wife of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14.16. He shall give Israel up because
of the sins of Jeroboam, who did sin and made Israel to sin. Joroboam was
the root of the sin and of the curse: here it was also, that I may use the
words of the Apostle, that by the sin of one man, Jeroboam, sin went into all
Israel, and the curse, captivity or death by sin, and so death went upon all
men of Israel (...) inasmuch as all men of Israel have sinned. So far he, page
32. By this instance of his it is clear, that Original sin must pass into the
world, not so much by propagation as by imitation. The Kings of Israel did
walk in the ways of Jeroboam that made Israel to sin, and thereupon the
curse, captivity and death came upon all the whole succession, and upon all
Israel so far forth as they did walk in his ways and did follow his ensample.
If this be a parallel case we must say, sin, the guilt of sin, and the curse
for sin came into the world only by the institution and command of the first
man, and all his posterity are so far forth involved in his sin, as they walk
after such an injunction, and imitate that ensample. Now if this be so, I will
leave it to any man to judge whither this gloss will go at last. The Apostle
says that the first man is the figure of him that is to come. If therefore we
are implicated in the sin of Adam no otherwise, but by obeying his command,
and following his ensample. Our salvation by Christ will chiefly consist in our
imitating of him, and in obedience to his commands. As for the merit of his
blood, the worth of his passion, the imputation of his righteousness, all this
must be set apart as a matter of little use and small profit. Having done with
his own he comes to paraphrase upon the exposition given by us.

They think these words (...) -- forasmuch as all have sinned, ought to be
expounded thus; death passed upon all men, in whom all have sinned, meaning
that in Adam we really sinned, and God does truly and justly impute his sin to
us, to make us as guilty, as he that did it, and as much punished and liable to
eternal damnation: and all the force of this great fancy, relyes upon this
exposition of (...) to signify in him.

Answ. We do in substance own the interpretation to be ours, but that all the
force of it does depend upon (...) to signify in him, this we plainly deny.
Our interpretation is grounded upon the scope of the text. For let us suppose
the words to be construed in his sense. Forasmuch as all have sinned, when he
has done all that he can, he must come to the interpretation given by us. For
the drift of the Apostle in the former words, is not only to show that sin
has past upon all men, and death by sin; but he speaks of such a passage of
sin and death upon all men out of one man; If therefore, there be such a
general passage of sin and death upon all out of one man, then virtually, and
interpretatively all must sin in one man. Again, in the subsequent verses the
Apostle says, that the first Adam is the figure of him that is to come, If you
ask how and wherein, we must needs say from the whole series of the text, that
they are two public persons, and two representatives of the kind. By this
account then the disobedience of the first man, must be virtually the act of
all, and what he did they did in him, and by him: So then our interpretation is
founded upon the whole scope of the context. As for his Critiscismes we will
leave them to such who have more leisure to busy themselves about words, we
will follow him as he goes on in expounding the sense of the Apostle.

Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses even over them that bad not
sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, who is the figure of him
that is to come: By which discourse it appears that St. Paul does not speak of
all mankind, as if the evil occasion by Adams sin did descend for ever upon
that account, but it had a limited effect and reached only to those that were
in the interval between Adam and Moses.

Answ. But if the matter be well considered there is no such collection to be
made from the discourse of the Apostle. Indeed he speaks of the reign of
death over those that lived in the interval between Adam and Moses; but shall
we argue from thence that the evil occasioned by the fall did descend to them
only, and go no further? This cannot be, for afterward the Apostle drawing a
parallel between both Adams, has these words: If through the offense of one,
many be dead, much more the grace of God; and the gift by grace, which is by
one man Jesus Christ has abounded unto many. Now then if we shall say, by the
offense of one, many be dead, and understand this many, or multitude in a
limited sense; namely, of such only that lived in the interval between Adam and
Moses, by this account, such a number alone will stand opposite to the many
that have life and grace by Christ. Nay, that which is more, the forementioned
number might in their time only look to one man the Lord Jesus for recovery out
of sin and death, and so the Gospel will be delivered to the consolation of
such only that lived in the forementioned interval between Adam and Moses; And
so we that live in the latter ages of the world, shall have nothing to do with
the Gospel, nor the Gospel with us. But of this I have formerly spoken in my
answer to Mr. Everard and the Examiners: There I have showed the reason why the
Apostle does mention the reign of death in the interval between Adam and
Moses. He goes on.

This death (says he) was brought upon them by Adam, that is, death which was
threatened to Adam only, went forth upon them also who indeed were sinners, but
not after the similitude of Adams transgression, that is, who sinned not so
capitally as be did.

Answ. This expression death threatened only to Adam, has some ambiguity in it:
If he speaks of Adam as a particnliar person, death was not only threatened to
him, for in the present case he is to be looked upon as the common root of the
nature, when he fell, all mankind fell in him, from him death passed upon all,
not only as sinners in their own person, but in that formality as made sinners,
or sinful by his disobedience. Of infants it is true as well as others, in Adam
all dye, and so death passes upon all. Next he tells us what it is to sin
like Adam.

To sin like Adam (says he) is used as a tragical and high expression: so it
is in the Prophet, they like men have transgressed: so we read it, but in the
Hebrew it is, they like Adam have transgrest, and yet death passed upon them
that did not sin after the similitude of Adam.

Answ. For the text in Hosea, our English translation may well pass by an
Enallage of the number. They like man, that is, like fickle and inconstant men
have transgrest my Covenant. Or, if this will not satisfy, that of Tremellius
may obtain Tanquam hominis transgressi sunt faedus; They have played fast and
loose with me, as if it were no other but a mere Covenant of man. But let us
take the words in the sense that is most propitious to him, viz. that the
Prophet here looks to Adam as the head of all Apostates, and that the
Israelites had sinned in as tragical a manner as Adam did: what does he infer
from hence? he tells us, that death reigned from Adam to Moses over those that
had not so tragically sinned as Adam had done. Truly the old world that was
drowned in the flood, Sodom and Gomorrah, that were burnt with fire, the
builders of Babel, whose language was confounded; these, and such like sinners
(though they lived in the interval between Adam and Moses) were none of the
least. But let us take it in his own sense, that death reigned over Abel, Seth,
Noah, and others that did not sin so capitally as Adam did. If this be well
considered, it does make more for our purpose, than it does for his: For these
holy men that lived in the interval between Adam and Moses were under the
reign of death. Here I demand how came they to be under this reign? If he
will say their own sin was the principal cause, how will he answer the words
of the Apostle, who expressly tells us, by one man's offense, death reigned
over all, ver. 17. Again, if he shall say they came under this power by the
sin of Adam, then he makes good the interpretation given by us, that by the
sin of Adam infants as well as others, in all that interval between Adam and
Moses came under the power and sovereignty of death. He further adds.

God (says he) was so exasperated with mankind, that being angry, would still
continue that punishment, even to less sins and sinners, which he only had
first threatened to Adam, and so Adam brought it upon them. They indeed in
rigor, did themselves deserve it, but if it had not been for that provocation
by Adam, they who sinned not so bad, and had not been so severely and
expressly threatened, had not suffered so severely.

Answ. By the tenor of the Doctrine we may understand, that men by their own
sins do deserve death; as for the sin of Adam, by this account it is only an
aggravating circumstance, and a cause merely of the severity of the sentence.
Now if this be so, how shall we expound the meaning of the Apostle? By one man
sin entered into the world and death by sin, and death passed upon all men. He
speaks of the entrance of sin, of the entrance of death, of the entrance of
sin and death, upon all by the sin and disobedience of one man. Is all this
only to make Adams sin a mere accessory, or aggravating circumstance? away with
such a conceit. The text does pitch upon it as the principal and general cause
of death. Again the Apostle says, by the offense of one, death reigned by
one: If all men fall under the reign of death by the offense of one, then
certainly his offense is not the cause alone why they are more severely dealt
with: but it is the very cause why they fall under the power and dominion of
death it self. Shall we make a circumstance of that which is the principal
cause: Further, what is the reason that infants dye, seeing personally and
individually they are guilty of no sin of their own to deserve death? in his
answer to the Bishops letter he does not shun to affirm, that death comes
upon infants merely by right of dominion. But then (says he) the evil of
punishment may pass further than the action. If it passes upon the innocent it
is not a punishment to them, but an evil inflicted by right of dominion, yet by
reason of the relation of the offlicted to him that sinned, to him it is a
punishment. But if it passes upon others that are not innocent, then it is a
punishment to both, to the first principally to the descendants or relatives
for the others sake his sin being impured so far: and more he has to the
same purpose, page 43. Here he plainly delivers his opinion that death is
inflicted upon others, because they do partake with Adam in his sin, but it
descends and comes upon infants merely by way of prerogative and absolute
dominion. And if their death be a punishment it is so only to Adam in as much
as they stand related to him as being his descendants and relatives. Against
this I have some things to oppose. First, in his Vnum necessarium, page 403. He
lays down this as a sure axiom. When Godnsing the power and the dominion of a
Lord, and the severity of a Judge does punish posterity, it must be so long as
the Parents may live, and see it, and so out of Chrysostom he does expound it
to be to the third and fourth generation and no longer. Now here I argue, if
God punishes Adam in his infant children, this is not to the third and fourth,
but to the hundredth generation. Again, why should he be punished in his
infantchildren when he has been dead many hundred, nay certain thousand years
ago! shall he only be punished and never survive or live so long, as to see
the punishment? again, the words of the Apostle are clear: as by the offense
of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation, ver. the 18. If it came
upon all men? it came upon infants as well as others, and if it came upon all
to condemnation, then infants bear the guilt of sin, the infelicities,
miseries and pains of death, not by way of sovereignty, but as a punishment
and judgment laid upon them for their sin and disobedience of the first man.
But to color the matter, he has a restriction in his answer to the Bishops
letter. Now then your Lordship (says he) sees that what you note of the
meaning of (...) I admit, and is indeed true enough, and agreeable to the scope
of the Apostle, and very much in justification of what I taught. The word (...)
signifies a punishment for sin, and this sin to be theirs upon whom the
condemnation comes. I easily subscribe to it: but then take in the words of St.
Paul (...) by one sin, or by the sin of one the curse passed upon all men to
condemnation; that is the curse descended from Adam; for his sake it was
propagated (...) to a real condemnation, viz. when they should sin, for though
this (...) or curse of death was threatened only to Adam, yet upon Gods being
angry with him God resolved it should descend: and if men did sin as Adam, or
if they sin at all, though less than Adam, yet the (...) or the curse
threatened to them should pass (...) unto the same actual condemnation which
fell upon him, that is, it should actually bring them under the reign of
death, page 45, 46. By these words of his it is clear that the curse does
descend upon infants, not when they are borne in sin, for he does own no such
sin of the nature, but it descends only to their real condemnation when they
come to act sin. Here I would entreat him to consider the words of the
Apostle, so by the righteousness of one man the free gift came upon all men to
justification of life. If it came upon all men, it came upon infants and if the
blessing of Christ does come upon infants, surely the curse also must descend
upon them. For we cannot imagine any to be made partakers of the blessing,
benefit, grace, and life by the second man, but he must be some way involved in
the guilt, misery, death, and condemnation, brought in by the first. On the
contrary if he will say that the curse does not descend upon infants, by the
rule of proportion it will follow that infants shall have no part in the
comforts, privileges, and blessings that come by the Gospel. And truly this
must be the upshot of this dismal doctrine. Now let us consider what exposition
he gives of those words, by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners.

But that (says he) which I dwell and rely upon, is this: sin is often used
in Scripture for the punishment of sin, and they that suffer are called
sinners, though they be innocent; so it is in this case, by Adams disobedience,
many were sinners, that is, the sin of Adam passed upon them, and sat upon
them with evil effect.

Answ. We do not deny but the word sin may be taken for the punishment of
sin, and to that purpose what he speaks of Bathsheba, I and my son
Solomon shall be sinners, but more especially that of our Savior, he made him
sin for us, that knew no sin: These, and such like passages which he has,
page 368, etc. We do not deny the truth of them in the general: Only this we
say, that we are not only made sinners by imputation, but also we derive a
sinful nature from Adam by propagation, and by contagion. For First: If there
were only an imputation of guilt, and no inherent corruption, men would bear
the burden and punishment of sin without cause, and God would punish sin
where none is. Our Savior indeed was made sin, who knew no sin, because he
came in the nature of a Surety: But the sons of Adam are no sureties, they
must be some way sinners themselves, if they will righteously bear the burden
of Adams sin. Again, the words of the Apostle are most emphatical, by the
disobedience of one, many were made sinful, for the word (...), does note, one
that has the habit of sin, that is, a sinful man as I have proved in the
former part of the Treatise, from whence we collect, that the sons of Adam
are not only made sinners by imputation, but sinful also by hereditary
contagion. Further, the word (...), are constituted sinners, or sinful. This
expression, if it be seriously considered, is set in immediate opposition to
the constitution of things in the creation. If a reason be demanded concerning
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, of the ebbing and the flowing of the Sea, of the
vicissitude of Winter and Summer; The answer is easy, all these things have
their being, because God made them and constituted them so in the beginning.
But if a reason be demanded, how all men came to be sinners by imputation, and
sinful by propagation? the answer is as easy: They are made and constituted,
as by the disobedience of the first man, so by the just judgment of God upon
that disobedience. If the sinfulness of nature be not by the fall, it must
come by creation, or some other reason must necessarily be assigned to make all
men so unanimous and universal in matter of sinning. Lastly, the Apostle
draws a parallel between both the Adams, as by the disobedience of one, many
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, many shall be made righteous.
Now it is evident none are made righteous by imputation in the ordinary way,
but they do in some measure or other partake of the life and spiritual nature
of Christ, as the seccond Adam. Therefore we say on the contrary part, there
are none that have the guilt of the sin of Adam imputed to them but they must
also derive the pollution of nature from him as the root of corruption. But to
this he has a solution, (as he pretends at least) in his answer to the Bishops
letter. This is sufficient (says he) for the Apostles argument, and yet no
necessity to affirm that we are sinners any more than by imputation: for we
are by Christ made just no other wise than hy imputation, page 38, etc. To
which we reply, the question is not about the formal reason of our
justification, which we acknowledge to be by the alone imputation of the
righteousness of Christ: But the point in hand is, whether any be justified by
the blood which are not sanctified by the Spirit. So in the present case, we
say none have the guilt of Adams sin, but such only that partake of his
nature; For in the next Chapter, when the Apostle comes to speak of
sanctification, he has these words, know ye not that our Old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, Romans 6.6. By the old man,
he means the sinful disposition of the flesh derived from Adam the root of
corruption. So then the Scripture plainly does show that the opposition between
both the Adams, does not only stand in imputation of guilt, but also in the
propagation of the nature. And it is a great wonder that any exception can be
made against so plain a truth. Thus, I have passed through all the material
objections, and we have seen all of moment that can be said, if it might be
possible to take this Scripture out of our hands. Now he comes to form the
state of the question, to show how far he allows original sin, and where
he differs from us? Because this is the foot of the work, let him deliver
himself in his own words. Adams sin (says he) was punished by an expulsion
out of Paradise, in which was a tree appointed to be the cure of diseases and
the conservatory of life. There was no more told as done, but this and its
proper consequents. He came into a land less blessed, a land which bore
thistles and briars, etc. And then he adds thus, death came in not by any new
sentence or change of nature: for man was created mortal, and if Adam had not
sinned, he should have been immortal by grace, that is, by the use of the tree
of life; and now being driven from the place where the tree grew, was left in
his own natural constitution, that is, to be sick and dye without that remedy.
And he further explaineth himself, page 372. This evil which is the condition
of all our natures, viz. to dye, was to some a punishment, to others not so. It
was a punishment to all that sinned both before Moses and since, upon the first
it fell as a consequent of Gods anger upon Adam, upon the latter it fell as a
consequent of that anger threatened in Moses his law. But to those that sinned,
not at all as infants and innocents, it was merely a condition of their nature,
and no more a punishment than to be a child is. It was a punishment of Adams
sin, because by his sin humane nature came to be disrobed of their
preternatural immortality, and therefore upon that account they dye. But as it
is related to the persons, it was not a punishment, not an evil inflicted for
their sake, or any guiltiness of their own properly so called. And then going
on, he says, we find nothing else in Scripture expressed to be the effect of
Adams sin, and beyond this without authority we must not go. Turning his style
against us, he adds, other things are said, but I find no warrant for them
in that sense as they are usually supposed, and some of them in no sense at
all. Then he comes to particularize, The particulars (says he) commonly
reckoned, are that from Adam, we derive an original ignorance, a pronenesse to
sin, a fomes or nest of sin imprinted and placed in our souls, a loss of our
wills, liberty, and nothing else left, but a liberty to sin; which liberty upon
the sum of affairs is expounded a necessity to sin, and the effect of all
is, we are borne heirs of damnation. These are the particulars which he
excepts against, and these he endeavors with all his might to oppugn: we will
go in the same method as he does; beginning with original ignorance, he thus
speaks.

It is true (says he) that we derive it from our Parents, I mean, we are
borne with it, but I do not know that any man thinks, that if Adam had not
sinned that sin, Cain should have been wise as soon as his navel had been cut.

Answ. We cannot so precisely determine what Adams children should have been in
innocence, because he did not continue so long to beget a child in that pure
estate, yet I think none may doubt, had he begotten children in that estate, he
had conveied the same image of God, the same knowledge (respecting the kind of
it) that himself was created in. And though in respect of actual knowledge,
Cain should not have been wise as soon as his navel was cut, yet in respect of
potential knowledge he should have been borne in a capacity, and by degrees
should have attained the same knowledge as Adam himself was created in. But he
further argues.

If he had so great knowledge (says he) it is likely that he would not so
cheaply have sold himself and all his hopes out of a greedy appetite to get
some knowledge.

Answ. The Apostle St. Jude tells us. The Angels that left their first
habitation, are kept in chains of darkness to the judgment of the great day,
v. 6. Shall we say then, because they did so cheaply leave their first
habitation, was there no such dignity or excellency in it? The way of reasoning
is one and the same in substance. He goes on.

The state of ignorance we do derive from Adam as we do our nature, which is a
state of ignorance, and all manner of imperfection, but whether it was not
imperfect, and apt to fall into forbidden instances, we may best guess it by
the event.

Answ. We may guess by the event, that he was made in a state from which he
might fall, but this does no way hinder his being a spiritual man, or that
endowment of spiritual knowledge which he had before his fall. First, by his
fall he did lose in his judgment, he and all mankind did fall from faith to
unbelief; and hence it is, that ever since for happiness all men rely upon
their own wit, learning, beauty, strength, friends, riches, nobility, etc. This
plainly shows, that Adam at the first was made in a state of dependence upon
the true God, which could not be, but he must be endued with a great measure of
spiritual knowledge, and in his judgment at least he must discern that
excellency that is in God. Further, the Apostle speaks, ye have put on the
new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him,
Col. 3.10. By knowledge he does not point so much to that which is literal,
hystorical, and textual, but to that which is spiritual, by which the Saints
come to be clothed with a new nature. Secondly, (he says) is renewed, which
imports the restitution of that knowledge that man once had, but had lost by
his fall. In a sense therefore we may say, that the knowledge of the Saint is a
kind of remembrance, and that saying of Plato is not to much out of the way.
Thirdly, is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him. This
plainly shows, that in the old and the new creation a man is made after the
image of God, and this image does principally stand in the divineness of the
light. Some differences there are between the knowledge which Adam had before
his fall, and the knowledge that is renewed in the Saints, Adam had it by
creation, they have it by inspiration: Adam could propagate it to his
posterity, they cannot propagate it to posterity: Adams knowledge was without
the sight of his misery, their knowledge when they do begin to know as they
ought to know, does begin with the sight of their misery: Lastly, Adams
knowledge was not so perfect, but the Saints knowledge shall be most perfect in
degree, when they come to live in the state of glory. These circumstances
considered respecting the manner, there is some difference to be made; yet in
substance both kinds of knowledge is one and the same. For though it did not
belong to Adam to know his misery, and to believe in a Christ, yet the
righteousness of the moral law did appertain to him. It did belong to him to
love God, to fear him, to trust in him, to obey him, etc. Now how could all
this possibly be done, but he must know him, and believe him, therefore his
knowledge must needs be spiritual before his fall.

We come now to the next point, he endeavors to prove that infants by the
sin of Adam are not heirs of damnation. We need not in this matter be
careful to give him an answer.

If it be a question de jure, we say the sin of Adam is such, and Original sin
in its own nature is such, that it does deserve damnation: But if it be a
question de facto, there is no such need that we should possitively affirm the
actual damnation of infants. They that be saved, we may safely affirm are
saved by the mercy of God; and they that are damned, God can clear his justice
in their condemnation: though in all things the reason of his proceeding is not
so intelligible to us. And our Author himself, I believe, when he has well
pondred the business, will find it to be more safe to rest in such a
determination. But as for his arguments, they are fallacious in many
particulars: For most of them I have answered in the former part of the
treatise; And for the residue I shall have occasion to speak of them
afterward. Here only four things are to be noted in the general.

First, by the same reasons as he does overturne damnation by the sin of Adam,
any Jew or Turk may overthrow salvation by the merit of Christ. For why may not
such a one argue the death of Christ was an act of his, and none of ours, he
suffered many hundred years ago? What he did, we cannot be said to do, either
vertually, or interpretively, in him or by him, we had no being at all, that
our wills should be contained in his.

His sufferings were without any knowledge, and consent of ours, and wherefore
should any benefit arise to us? If there be any such thing, why should it so
many ages together be concealed from the greatest part of mankind? Most of his
arguments do go after this way, and by the same reasons that he takes away the
guilt of sin by the disobedience of the first man, by the same he does destroy
all possibility of salvation by the second.

Secondly, other of his reasons do go too far in questioning the absolute
power, justice, and sovereignty of God. As he would have men to be temperate in
such speeches that seem to condemn infants to hell for the fault of another, so
he also should be more moderate in those sayings, that question the power and
the justice of God. What is, or what shall be the whole course of the Lords
proceeding against infants that dye in original sin, is variously disputed:
some speak of a Limbus infantum, whither those infants go that dye without
baptism: Others speak of the penalty of loss, without a penalty of sense: A
third sort dream of I know not what common receptacle, where infants as well
as the souls of others do still remain in expectation of the resurrection. But
sure I am, none do speak more dangerously and desperately, than they that
except against the justice and the mercy of God, now in this our Author is too
bold.

Thirdly, in all his reasons, he goes against that which he teaches elsewhere.
For in sundry places he shows, that without the infusion of supernatural
grace, no man, neither infant nor other, can enter into the Kingdom of heaven.
Again (he says) that by the fall of Adam mankind came to be divested and
disrobed of those supernatural excellencies that formerly he had. Now by the
position of these two, I leave it to any man to judge, infants, as now borne in
their natural condition, whether are they capable of salvation? whatsoever he
may say in words, he and we as to this point may agree in the same principles.
But in his answer to the Bishops letter, he seems to be of opinion, that
infants went neither to heaven nor hell, at least such a collection may be
drawn from his words. Just so it is (says he) in infants: Hell was not made
for man, but for devils, and therefore it must be something besides mere
nature that must bear any man thither: mere nature neither goes to heaven nor
hell, page 17. In which words of his we acknowledge it to be true in a sense,
that mere nature does not carry a man to heaven or hell, for that which is not
true at all, cannot carry a man any whither. The Sophisters do indeed speak of
the creation of man, in puris naturalibus, in his pure naturals, but I no where
find that God did ever make, or did intend to make any man in such estate that
was neither good nor evil, I know no such mere nature to be found in any part
of the habitable earth; and therefore it is some way a truth (in this abstract
consideration) that a pure nature carries a man no whether. But he has another
meaning in which he is greatly mistaken, for under that notion and
consideration, as infants are now borne, this nature depraved carries only to
hell. We were by nature the children of wrath as well as others, Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
But here perhaps he will except by such a tenet as this, all infants will be
necessitated to damnation. Not so neither: they will be borne only in a nature
liable to damnation. But by our doctrine, we do not say that they must be all
damned. I see nothing to the contrary, but Christ is as well able to save them
from the pollution and corruption of the natural birth, as well as if they were
all reduced to that imaginary state that he speaks of. Concerning this matter,
he delivers his judgment in his answer to the Bishops letter. When I affirm
that infants, being by Adam reduced and left to their mere natural estate, fall
short of heaven, I do not say they cannot go to heaven at all, but they cannot
go thither by their natural powers, they cannot without a new grace and favor
go to heaven: But then it cannot presently be inferred that therefore they go
to hell, but this ought to be inferred, which indeed was the real consequent of
it, therefore it is necessary that Gods grace should supply this defect if God
intends heaven to them at all, and because nature cannot, God sent a Savior by
whom it was effected: so far he, page 15. Now I leave it to any man to judge,
whither the same mutatis mutandis may not be said of our opinion, though
infants are borne in Original sin, and are by nature the children of wrath, yet
they may be saved by grace. By all this it is evident, that we are as fair for
the salvation of infants as he is, and by the same door as he goes out, we
will go out at the same.

And for the sayings of our writers, I have three things to answer.

First, some speak more mildly in the point, rather inclining to the salvation,
than the damnation of infants. Junius in his collation de natura and gratia,
has these words: Nemo nostrum it a fuerit aut furere compertus est, etc. There
is none of ours that is so mad, or was ever found so void of reason, who would
simply affirm infants to be damned. They which teach otherwise, let themselves
look to it by what right they moy do it, and by what authority it may be done.
For although in respect of their own selves, and that common nature of ours,
they may be in a state liable to damnation; it follows not that we should pass
the sentence of damnation upon them, etc. In the process of his discourse he
gives sundry reasons: First, the promise of God to believers, and their
natural seed. Secondly, his mercy to thousands, and that through many descents,
where the Ancestors have sometimes belonged to the Covenant. Thirdly, The
judgment of charity, seeing it is the Lords pleasure to take them away in
their infancy, we may presume that by that fatherly act of his he intends to
receive them to mercy. Other testimonies may be brought of such that have gone
in the milder way, but these shall suffice.

A second sort of our Expositiors there are that do pitch more hard. They say
that some infants may go to hell, yet they moderate their sentence, as Chamier.
Non abhorret a verisimilitudine paenas eorum esse mitissimas, It is very
probable their punishments are most mild.

A third sort leave the matter wholly in suspense; they think it sufficient to
believe that all infants are borne in a state liable to damnation; they have in
them the seeds of all evil, yet for all this they conceive that God may show
mercy in and through Christ, specially to the infants of such that do belong to
the Covenant, specially where conscience is made to enter them into the outward
visible Church by baptism. And this is all that we will say of this question.

Leaving this business of the state of infants, and reserving to God the
secrets of election or non-election, we will come to the point that is more
useful and more easy to be understood. And here he questions, whether Adam did
debauch our nature, and corrupt our will and manner by his fall? And if he did
it, he further enquires after the manner how it was done? First, whether it was
done by a natural or physical efficiency of sin it self? Secondly, whether was
it because we are all in the loins of Adam? or, Thirdly, whether was the
sentence and the decree of God the cause thereof? he has four arguments
against a physical efficiency, which we have in part handled already, and shall
have occasion to speak afterward. And therefore to avoid repetition we will
come to the second branch, whether Adam did debauch our nature, because we are
all in his loins. Against this he has sundry reasons that follow in order.

By the same reason (says he) we are guilty of all the sins that he committed
while we were in his loins, there being no imaginable reason why the first
should be propagated, and not the rest.

Answ. As I have formerly showed, so I declare again, the pollution of nature
can only be propagated from the first sin, because in that only Adam did act as
a public man, in which sense the Apostle calls him, the figure of him that is
to come. But of this I have spoken already.

Secondly, upon this account (says he) all the sins of all our progenitors
will be imputed to us, because we were in their loins when they sinned them.

Answ. Not so neither, for though we were in their loins when they sinned, yet
in a strict sense they are only vehicula, so many conduit pipes of the
conveyances of the nature from the first root. To speak properly, there are
only two roots of the nature: Adam the root of corruption to all his branches,
Christ the root of grace and spiritual life to all his branches. If any
question be made of the truth of this, there is every where in the doctrine of
St. Paul, an antithesis between the flesh and the spirit, between the old man
and the new, betwixt generation and regeneration, betwixt Adam and Christ.
Between these two there is a plain opposition in three things in point of
justification. Secondly, in point of sanctification. Thirdly, in point of the
resurrection from the dead. And therefore, whereas the first man by his act
brings us under the guilt of sin, the second washes away the guilt of sin by
his blood: and whereas the first man pollutes our nature, and is the root of
the corruption of nature; the second man sanctifies our nature, and is the root
of a new nature to all his branches: And whereas the first man did bring in
death, and all the miseries of nature upon our bodies that lead to death, the
second man frees us from all these by the resurrection from the dead. But he
further alleges.

Thirdly, Sin (says he) is seated, in the will it is an action, and so
transient, and when it dwells or abides, it abides no where but in the will by
approbation and love, to which is naturally consequent a readiness in the
inferior faculties to obey and act accordingly, and therefore sin does not
infect our mere natural faculties, but the will only, and not that in the
natural capacity, but in its moral only.

Answ. Though it be true that sin is principally seated in the will, yet we
shall find all along, that the Scriptures do lay great weight upon the
blindness and the perversity of the judgment; and as in the old creation, so
it is in the new. The first work that is done is the creation of light: Besides
the Christ-like disposition is begun and carried on by degrees, and all this by
the renovation of light. The understanding is first enlightened, and then the
will comes to choose the things of God. Further, let it be supposed, that sin
is only seated in the will. Great difference is to be made between the will of
other sinners, and the will of the first man. The will of other sinners does
only redundare in personam, it does increase the habit of sin in their own
persons alone: the will of the first man did redundare in naturam, it did
vitiate and deprave the whole nature as we have formerly showed. And yet
thirdly, whereas he says, that sin does infect the will, not in its natural
capacity, but in its moral only. This expression of his must (under favor) be
taken with a grain of salt. We do willingly yield, that the will is morally,
or rather spiritually corrupt because she wents that holiness, that purity and
righteousness which the law requires; yet if we look to the reasons of things,
the corruption was brought into the will by the fall of Adam. They then do not
speak improperly, that call the corruption of the will pravitatem
physicomoralem. It is a moral depravation, because it is against the rectitude
of the moral law: it is a natural depravation, because it flows from the first
man as the root of corruption. For the proof of the latter, let us have
recourse to that place of the Apostle, ye have put off the old man with his
deeds, and have put on the new man. In these words of his, there is a direct
opposition between the old man and the new. By the old man he means the
pravity and corruption of nature, which though it has had its being in
hundreds, thousands, and millions of men, yet originally all comes out of one
root. In this regard the whole nature is called by the title of the old man. So
proportionably the Christ-like disposition, though it has been diffused into
infinite persons, who have lived in several ages of the Church, yet the whole
nature does originally proceed out of one root, and therefore in this regard is
elegantly called by the title of the new man. Secondly, the opposition is
between (...) their being uncloathed, and their (...) their being clothed
upon. By this way of expression the Apostle does insinuate, the corrupt
disposition of the flesh is that which the soul is clothed upon, which
clothing she had from Adam the root of corruption. Now the believing
Colossians, because they had a living principal within, and had begun to put
off, and did so continue in putting off the old man, he speaks of it as a work
already done, ye have put off the old man with his deeds. So likewise the new
nature, or the Christ-like disposition is here resembled to a garment, with
which they were clothed upon, because they had begun and did so continue to
put it on by degrees, he does speak of it as a matter already effected, ye have
put on the new man. From all which we gather the pravity of the will, though it
be in its own nature a moral, or rather spiritual obliquity. Yet respecting the
cause, it proceeds from Adam the root of corruption. If this truth be not
admitted, we shall cross and hinder the very chief design of the Gospel: For
the corruption of nature being laid in the first Adam, it does cast us all upon
the seeking, longing, desiring the new nature that is to be had from the second.

Fourthly, (says he) to him that considers it, it will seem strange and
monstrous, that a moral obliquity in a single instance, should make an
universal change in a natural suscipient, and in a natural capacity.

Answ. This is no more strange then true: we say that Adams disobedience was a
moral obliquity, and he by that single act of his, did cause an universal
change in the whole nature of man: By it the souls of men come to be clothed
upon with the habit of sin, and their bodies with corruption. And if he or any
man else shall marvel at this, they must upon this account wonder at the chief
foundations of the Gospel. For we will not doubt to say in the parallel case,
as the Lord Christ did humble himself to the death of the cross, it was in
genere moris, a moral obedience, he did obey the command of his Father. Yet by
this one act of his, he did make a change, not only in a moral, but also in a
natural suscipient he did a thing by, and through which the souls of the Saints
may be freed from inward pravity, and corruption, and their bodies raised from
the dead at the last day, Phil. 3. ult.

Fifthly, He reasons, no man can transmit a good habit, a grace, or a virtue.
By natural generation, as a great Scholars son cannot be borne with learning,
etc. and how can it be, that a naughty quality should be more apt to be
disseminated than a good one, when it is not in the goodness, or badnesse of
the quality that hinders his dissemination, but its being an acquired, and
superinduced quality that makes it cannot naturally descend?

Answ. We willingly yield, that a good quality is as apt to be disseminated as
a bad: and therefore had Adam stood, he had disseminated the image of God, to
the posterity that did come of him. But seeing that he fell by his fall, he
does now disseminate Original corruption to all his branches. Further, though
Adam does disseminate corruption by natural generation, mankind is not left
under an absolute necessity of perishing, as long as a second Adam is prepared
to disseminate grace and spiritual life by regeneration, Excellent is that
speech of Hillary upon the forty eighth Psalm. Quoniam animarum medicus non
venit vocare justos, etc. Because the Physician of souls came not to call the
just, but sinners to repentance: therefore he ordained, that whatsoever was
worst in every company, should be soonest called. Of all men living upon the
earth, the heathen were the worst, yet they were the soonest called. Further,
whereas our Author says, that a great Scholars son cannot be borne with
learning, and the child of a Judge cannot upon his birthday give wise
sentences; the reason is plain, personal privileges and acquired habits do
not naturally descend. But with the two Adams the case is far otherwise, for
they have a nature to communicate to all their branches. The first does
communicate it by generation, the second by regeneration, as we have formerly
proved. And whereas he argues.

How can a quality morally bad, be directly and regularly transmitted by an
action morally good, and since that, neither God that is the Maker of all, does
amiss, and the Father that begets, sins not, and the child that is begotten
cannot sin, by what conveyance can any positive evil be derived to posterity?

To this we say that the body and the soul are both the workmanship of God, yet
both may be made the subject, and the seat of sin, through the temptation of
Satan, and a vicious propagation. Neither is the evil any way to be ascribed
to the Creator, but to the temptation of Satan, and the disobedience of the
first man. Augustine speaks to good purpose, Sic ego tibi rectissime dico malum
cum quo nascitur homo, etc. Thus I do most rightly say to thee, that the evil
with which a man is borne, is not of the fruits, bodies, sexes, conjunctions,
of which goods the Lord is the Author, but of the first sin which is to be
ascribed to the devil. Here he does distinguish between the work of creation,
and so God is the Author of all that good that was made in the beginning: and
the sinfulness of nature; that he will have to spring only from the devils
temptation, and the disobedience of the first man.

Sixthly, how can it be (says he) that the Father that contributes nothing to
the production of the soul, should contribute to her pollution, and he that did
not transmit life, how should he transmit his sin.

Answ. Though the Father does not contribute to the soul in her production, yet
he does contribute to the soul in her union with the body: So by this account,
the action of God is terminated in the simple being of the soul: The action of
the Parent is her being in the body, that is, in her union with the body. But
if it be here alleged, that a man is principally a man in respect of his soul,
and therefore if the Parent does not contribute to the soul, he does not
contribute to the being of a man: the answer is plain. A man is not a man,
neither by the soul apart, nor by the body apart, but by the whole humane
nature which does consist in the union of both: we see in ordinary experience,
as children derive their inheritances, privileges, nobility, and such like
from their Parents, so also their Parents miseries, infelicities, poverty, and
ignobility do naturally descend. In the present case I demand, how do they
descend? will any man be so curious to hold a dispute, whether they do descend
from the body, or the soul of the Parent? Or whether is the soul the first
seat, or receptacle of nobility, or ignobility? or does the right to the
fathers inheritance descend from the fathers body or the soul? In the affairs
of this life, it is not usual with men to spin out themselves with such
philosophical niceties. The skilful in the laws, conceive it is enough in the
general to say, that such a Son did come out of the loins of such a Father.
Why then should the learned man, with whom we have to do, be more curious in
the conveyance of original sin? why should it not be enough for us to say, that
that which is borne of flesh, is flesh, Joh. 3.6. Suppose, for the manner of
the thing we are not able to satisfy the doubt, shall we deny the thing,
because we are not able to explain every punctilio? why, by the same reason
does not he himself deny the motion of the Sun, the ebbing and the flowing of
the sea, the organizing of the infant in the mothers womb? in these and a
thousand more the thing is clear, when the manner does lie in the dark.

Seventhly, says he, If in him we sinned, then it were just that in him we
should be punished, for as the sin is, so ought the punishment to be.

Answ. If he will stand to this rule, he both does, and will make good that
which is asserted by us. The disobedience of the first man must be imputed to
all his posterity, because he is the head, the root and the representative of
the whole nature. But if he thinks this to be a mere non-ens, then let him say,
that the obedience of the second man as the head-root, and the representative
of the whole nature, is a non-ens and a nullity also, and so he will raise the
Gospel to the foundation thereof.

Now we come to the third question to enquire, whether Adam did debauch our
nature by the sentence and the just judgment of God, and here he lays down
this for a sure ground.

He and all his posterity were left in the mere natural estate, that is, in a
state of imperfection, in a state that was not sufficiently instructed and
furnished with ability in order to a supernatural end, whether God had secretly
designed mankind.

Answ. In this expression of his, we know no such state of mere imperfection,
which is not also a state of corruption. Again, in this expression he seems
to me, to pluck down that natural ability of the will which he endeavors to
set up. For if a man since the fall is not instructed and furnished with
abilities in order to a supernatural end, he must come to Christ only for the
supply of all. Why then does he raise all this dust against the rigor and
severity of our doctrine, when he himself does here plainly teach, that the
will can do nothing without the help of the Spirit? He goes on.

It cannot be supposed, (says he) that God did inflict any necessity of
sinning upon Adam or his posterity, because from that time, even unto this day,
he by new laws had required innocence of life, or repentance and holiness.

Answ. The consequence is not good, for now since the fall, the Lord does not
give laws in proportion to natural ability, but in relation to his own word of
promise, and his free mercy in the Covenant of grace. So far then it is a
testimony of divine favor that God will employ us, and require more service of
us, that where we have no strength of our own, we may in the sense of our own
natural weakness go to him for help. And whereas he brings us speaking in
this wise: that it is just with God to exact the law of man, even where he is
unable to keep it, because God once made him able, but he disabled himself:
True indeed, this is an answer given by us, but it is not the whole, nor the
principal part of that answer which may be given. For secondly, where God does
require subjection to his law, man being not able to perform it, his demand is
not irrational; For though man is not subject, nor in himself can be subject
to the law, Romans 8.7. This non-subjection does not so much arise from the want
of judgment, will, or any other natural faculty, as from a perverse sinful
habit that does reside in the faculty. That a drunkard cannot stand, walk, nor
perform acts of reason, as an other man is not simply for want of ability, as
from an evil distemper that does suspend the operations of the faculties, so it
is in the present case, men need no new faculties, but they need new habits to
set the faculty aright. But our third answer is, though a man naturally cannot
be subject to the law, (respecting the evil habit that disorders the faculty)
yet if he go to Christ in the sense of his own misery, all ability is to be had
from him: God is so infinitely gracious, that he is ready to help all that come
to him. A bruised reed he will not break, Mat. 12.20. Come unto me all ye that
are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. Will not your heavenly Father give his
Spirit to them that ask it? Luke 11.13. and many more places of the like
nature: This is the whole answer which our Divines do commonly give, when they
speak of the necessity of sinning, and of the inability which is brought upon
man by the fall of Adam. In this case they do not simply and absolutely deny
all ability, for then of what use would exhortations, reproves, and commands
be? Only they deny a natural ability, and such an ability which our Author
seems to plead for. Next he tells us.

It is all one with the case of voluntary and affected ignorance. He that
refuses knowledge, lest he should understand his duty, and he that disables
himself that he may not do it may be punished, not only for not doing it, but
for making it impossible to be done. But that was not Adams case so far as we
know, and it is certain that it was not ours in the matter of his sin.

Answ. We confess, that we did neither personally nor individually disable our
selves in the matter of his sin, but he that stood in our stead, did
voluntarily disable himself and us too. And therefore his will does
interpretively, virtually, and potentially go for the will of the whole nature,
as we have formerly proved. Perhaps he will say, how can we be justly punished,
if we are disabled by the act of another? This would have some color,
provided, that there were no Christ, no grace, no mercy to be had. Our great
fault is, that we do not seek for help, where help is to be found.

But (says he) If a man commits a fault, that does accidentally disable him,
as if he eat too much, and be sick the next day, and fall into a fever, he may
indeed, and is justly punished for his gluttony, but he is not punishable for
omitting that which in his present weakness he can no way perform.

Answ. Here he speaks, as if we did leave men to strive with an unavoidable
necessity, whereas the necessity of sinning is not absolute, for that which is
unavoidable by nature, may be avoidable by grace. And to the particular case,
suppose a centinal drink too much, and through his default a great party of the
Army come to have their throats cut, will he say that he is only to be
punished for his drunkenness, but is not punishable for the omitting of that
which in his present weakness, he was not able to perform. By the laws of the
land he should only pay five shillings, Next he says,

In laws to be imposed afterward, the case is otherwise because the persons
are not capable of any such law, and God knowing they cannot perform, cannot
intend they should, and therefore cannot justly punish them for not doing,
which himself did never heartily intend they should do, because he knew they
could not.

Ans. If this be so, let him give a reason why the old world was drowned in the
waters of the flood. All flesh had corrupted their way, and if he himself may
believed, the reason was not so much from the corruption of nature, but because
Gods laws did command such things which were a restraint to the indifferent,
and otherwise lawful inclinations of nature. Besides he tells us that they had
no spiritual promises in those times. The commands were heightened above all
natural abilities, spiritual promises were denied; God never intended (if he
speak true) that his Laws should be obeyed; he knew they could not. Let him
fairly tell us the reason then why the old world was drowned? Now on the
contrary, we say, no such thing, the commandment was given to Adam in
proportion to the abilities he had in possession, he falling, all ability is to
be had from Christ in the covenant of grace. And there was a covenant of grace
suitable to the times that were before the flood, Jesus Christ yesterday, and
today, and the same for ever, Heb. 13.8.

But now in the close of this Section, we will speak a little practically to
the purpose in hand. You will say, why does God give commands above natural
ability? It is to this end, that in the sense of their own emptiness men
should go to Christ, when they so come, they shall be graciously received. You
will say, how does that appear? I answer. As by the general tenders of the
Word, so specially by that place, Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters, and he that has no money, come ye buy and eat, yea, come by wine and
milk without money and without price, Isaiah 55.1. Here many things are to be
observed; First, by wine and milk are understood the spiritual comforts and
excellencies of the Gospel, for as wine and milk are truly refreshing to the
bodies of men; So are these really sweet to their spiritual taste. Secondly, by
buying of wine and milk, is meant, the earnest seeking after these things in
all those ways that the Lord has sanctified, and in all those means where
they may be found. Thirdly, without money or price. It would be thought a
solecisme in merchandising, to buy a Cow and Horse, and a parcel of Sheep, and
give no money for them. Usually men buy, when they give an equivolent price.
But in matter of salvation, we have no ability of our own, all ability is to be
had from the freeness and fullness of the promise. Fourthly, the persons
invited. Ho, every one that thirsts, come to the waters, etc. In matters of
the world, men may have a great desire after riches, long life, honors, favor
of Princes, popular applause, and yet they may never attain what they desire,
nay, the thing desired (as their own shadow) may flee from them. But in matters
of salvation, the case is otherwise. If men truly desire, and continue
desiring, praying, longing, waiting, they cannot miss what they desire. The
greatest part of the work is done already, and all the residue does remain upon
the fidelity, and the truth of the Promiser to make good. Lastly, it is spoken
to every one that thirsts. There are diverse degrees and kinds of spiritual
thirsting, some that are scorched with the feeling of the wrath of God,
earnestly desire salvation and remission of sin by Christ's blood, and these
commonly are the first desires of those that are babes in Christ. Others,
feeling the bondage of corruption, do as earnestly long for that spiritual
freedom that is to be had from the Son. A third sort go higher, they desire
the excellency of Christ purely, for that excellency that is in himself; they
do not love him so much for his portion, as for his person. I count all things
but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, Phil.
3.8. A fourth sort go to the highest point. They love the appearing of the Lord
Jesus, which others do tremble at, and the Spirit and the Bride say, come, and
let him that hears say, come, and let him that is athirst come, Revel. 22 17.
etc. All these desires are the fruit of the Spirit. He that comes to the first,
does not come to the second, at least not to the third or fourth degree.
However the whole course of Christianity is unum continuum sitis, one continual
succession of spiritual desires. And in immediate opposition, there is unum
continuum auxilii, an interchangable supply of auxiliary grace, this latter
answering the former, as the one part of the deed does answer the other. So
then, though the Saints have no ability in themselves to supernatural duties,
yet they may have it from Christ and the freeness of the promise. These things
I have drawn out more at large, because I see, as formerly, it has done to
others; So our doctrine does seem to give great offense to our Author. It
seems strange to him that we should exhort men to spiritual duties, and yet
teach that all mankind through the condition of the natural birth, lie under a
necessity of sinning. Whereas, if he did well understand the grand design of
the Gospel, he should find that all ability to do these things, is to be had
from Christ alone, and that upon terms of believing, desiring, longing, and
waiting for them. The Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and other holy men, have in
their several times done their duties, and served their generation. But how?
not by any ability of their own, but by the continual supply of the Spirit of
Christ, as the Scriptures and all experience do abundantly testify.

Now we come to the next Section.

SECT. 2. Consideration of the objections against the former Doctrine.
THE first Scripture which he insists upon, is, Gen 6. Every imagination of the
thoughts of man's heart are only evil continually. Here he does end avour to
frame sundry answers,

First, it is true (says he) they were so, but it was their own fault, not
Adams; for so it is said expressly. All flesh had corrupted their way upon
earth, and the earth was filled with violence.

Repl. It was their own fault, and Adams too. It was their own, as they
corrupted their own ways, it was Adams as they were flesh, for he brought them
into that sinful condition by his fall. So then the force of our argument
stands thus. First, the thoughts of man were evil. Secondly, they were all
evil. Thirdly, they were only evil. Fourthly, they were continually evil.
Fifthly, they were evil from his childhood. Now such an universal effect cannot
be without some universal cause from whence all this evil must necessarily
spring. And where shall we look for the cause, but in the text it self; My
Spirit shall not always strive with man, because he is but flesh. Because he is
but flesh, and borne in the sin of the nature, therefore the thoughts of his
heart are evil from his childhood.

Secondly, (says he) if this corruption had been natural and unavoidable, why
did God punish all the world for it, except eight persons? Why did he punish
those that could not help it? and why did others escape that were equally
guilty?

Repl. That which God did punish in the old world in ordinary men, was the
violence of their hands, and in his own people was the breach of covenant.
Though these two did naturally flow from original corruption, as all other
evils do, yet we cannot say, that they are absolutely unavoidable; for the act
of violence and of marriage with the daughter of a strange god, men have a
liberty to forbear the outward execution of these evils. And for the lust of
the heart, though it is unavoidable by nature, yet it is not simply
unavoidable, for God is so full of mercy, that he is ready to help all those
that flee to him, in the sense of their own misery. He has declared himself to
be a Physician, ready to cure all brokenhearted sinners. The men of Nineveh,
did turn from the violence of their hands, and how ready was he to forgive
them. The people in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah did repent of their
Idolatrous marriages, and how did he pass by their iniquity? Of all the
Authors that ever I met with, Luther in his Tract deservo arbitrio, is most
severe against the liberty of the will; yet in the end of the treatise, he
brings in Erasmus thus speaking. Why does he command us any duty, seeing all
things are done by necessity? His answer is, he does command that he may
admonish and instruct us what we ought to do, that being humbled in the sense
and feeling of our own evil, we may repair to his grace for help, as we have
abundantly spoken. And as for the Lords punishing of those that could not help
it. We say in public, solemn and exemplary judgments he has always reserved a
liberty for the exemple of others, and the declaration of his justice and
mercy. It is true also that they that were equally guilty did not perish in the
waters of the flood. What of all this? though they did escape that judgment,
they were liable to the judgment of God.

Thirdly, (says he) God might have as well punished all the world for sleeping
once in a day, or for being hungry, as for sinning, if so to do, be natural and
unavoidable.

Repl. The cases are not equal, mankind cannot live without meat and drink,
sleep and such other refections of nature, when they were made in the
beginning, they were made in such an estate, that they had need of these
things, I trow they had no need of sin? Again, for sinful acts, though they
come from the corruption of the flesh, as the sparks do out of the Chimney,
yet in externals, man has a liberty to commit or not commit such an evil. Also
for the lust of the heart, that which is unavoidable by nature, is avoidable by
grace. The guilt of sin may be taken away by the blood of Christ, the power
of it by the Spirit of Christ; and the very being of it, when the Saints shall
be made partakers of the adoption or the redemption of their bodies.

Fourthly, if God in these words complained of their natural and original
corruption, why did he but then as if it were, a new thing, complain of it, and
repent that he made man since he proved so bad?

Repl. God did then complain of original corruption, because in a most eminent
degree it did put forth it self in oppression, breach of covenant, and other
evils. He did complain in those times, because iniquity was then come to a
ripeness, and the years of his patience was almost run out.

Fifthly, (says he) this malice and corruption was such, that God did send
Noah a Preacher of righteousness, to draw the world from it. But no man
supposes that it was fit to send a Preacher to dehort them from being guilty of
original sin.

Repl. So far as we may gather, Noah's message to the old world was the same
in effect, as that of Jonah's to Nineveh, he was to exhort them to turn from
the violence of their hands, as being one fruit of original sin. Moreover, he
was sent to admonish the people of God in those days of their sinful
confederacies and marriages with Idolaters; and whereas he says, no man
supposes it fit to send a Preacher to dehort men from being guilty of original
sin. Though the best as long as they live here, are subject to that sin,
yet I hope he will allow that a Preacher may be sent to exhort men to mortify
the lusts of their nature, and to fly to the mercy of God for the pardon and
forgiveness of that sin, as well as others. What the Economy or dispensation
of grace was in those times. I will not take upon me to define, sure I am the
Lord himself says, My Spirit shall not always strive with man. The best
Scholars, according to the original, have it, My Spirit shall not always dispute
reason, or plead with man. It argues then that as the Spirit was in the
Ministry of Noah, so it was some way operative in the consciences of the people
of those times to bring them to repentance. Compare with this, 1 Pet. 3.19, and
20. Now he comes to lay the blame of all upon evil-custome, which is the very
height of Pelagianisme. Blame not nature, (says he) but thy own evil customs;
for the neglect of thy fields will make fearne, and thistles to grow. It is not
only because the ground is accursed, but because it is neglected it bears
thorns. Thou art deceived if thou think that vices are born with us. No,
they are super-induced, and come upon us afterward. To which we reply, These
strange expressions he has not from any of the Prophets or Apostles, but from
Horace and Seneca. As these things are scarcely tolerable in them, so they are
not to be born with in our Author, and others which have had their being and
education in the Church of God. Because in these days, there are more then too
many which cannot distinguish between Ethics and Divinity, between that which
is moral, and that which is spiritual; we will insist upon this point a little
more largely.

The chief principals and foundation of moral Philosophy, are such as these.
First, that nature is pure. Secondly, that nature has the seed of all virtue.
Thirdly, there is a natural freedom of the will. Fourthly, by the repitition of
many virtuous acts men come to the habit of virtue; These and many such like
rules there are in the treatises of the learned Grecians and Romans. And
according to this sense the aforementioned sayings of Horace and Seneca are to
be understood. We deny not but toward the attaining of a Philosophical good, a
man has some power (by general assistance) he may do some duties of the first
and second table. He may contain his hands from the outward acts of murder,
adultery, theft, and the like.

But for the spiritual and theological good, to love God above all, to delight
in him, to believe in him, to trust in him. In order to these, plain
experience shows that he has no ability, nay, the contrary is evident, that
he has a downright enmity. The wisdom of his flesh is always prone to rear
up some earthly excellency or other, and to set it in the place of the true
God. Therefore these are the true principles of Theology. First, the nature of
man is depraved from the pollution of the natural birth. Secondly, that he has
no freedom to spiritual good. Thirdly, in this miserable estate, the first
step to his recovery, is by the reproving work of the Spirit, whose office it
is to convince the conscience of the guilt of sin, and of the bondage of
corruption. Fourthly, the conscience being so convinced, it is prepared and
fitted for the grace of the Gospel, and the freeness of the promise, that he
which has no help in himself, may have it from Christ. Fifthly, When he is
come to Christ, and united to him by faith, he has ability from him, as a root
of all grace, life, heating spiritual nature, and in a word, all that we have
lost in the first man, is to be recovered in him. This is the very scope the
Gospel. By these things it is evident, that the endeavor of man is not
destroyed by the principles of Theology; Only he is more soundly directed to
the attaining of that good which is spiritual. There be many passages in moral
Philosophy concerning the liberty of the will, which we may well admit of; and
again, others there are which will scarce hold water. As in the young man in
the Gospel, our Savior did not disallow his outward moralities, only he
convinced him that he fell short of the holiness, purity and spirituality of
the Law. When he was put upon it to love God above all, to leave all for him,
by this he was brought to understand his own imperfection, and that he had need
of some power from above.

But that this matter may be the more fully understood, we will refer our
selves to that place of Scripture, which is commonly called Saint Peter's
Ethics. There we may distinguish between the Ethics (as I may so say) of the
Apostles, and those of the ordinary moral Philosophers. These are his words,
According as his divine power has given us all things that pertain to life
and godliness, by the knowledge of him that has called us to glory and
virtue. Whereby are given to us exceeding great and precious promises, that by
these we may be made partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
pollution of the world through lust. And besides this, giving all diligence,
add to our says virtue, and to virtue knowledge, etc. 2 Peter Chap. 1. ver.
3, 4, 5.

As in our ordinary books of moral Philosophy, so these words of the Apostle
may conveniently be divided into two parts; into that which treats of the
divine nature and virtue in general, and into that which speaks of particular
virtues: For the divine nature, these particulars are to be observed. First,
the Apostle calls it a nature, as there is a nature of Birds, Beasts, and
Fishes; so there is a nature peculiar to the Saints, which they have, and none
else. Secondly, it is called the divine nature, though in a more peculiar
sense; Father Son and holy Ghost are said to have the divine nature, yet in a
more general acception, the new creature is said to have the divine nature,
because he comes in the nearest similitude to the nature, purity, and holiness
of God, because he derives it from Christ as the root of the nature. The
Apostle has a like expression that ye may be filled with the fullness of God,
that is, with the fullness of the grace, and the love of God, Ephesians. 3.16, 17,
18, 19. But the chief thing in the Apostles words, is, concerning the means
how we may come to this nature. As in moral Philosophy, great regard is had to
the natural liberty of the will, to the towardliness of the disposition, and
too much exercise, by and through which men think to come to the habit of
virtue: So on the contrary part, let us see what principles the Apostle does
lay down for the attaining of the divine nature, and let us compare them with
those which our Author brings out of Horace and Seneca.

First, the Apostle points to the promises, there are given to us exceeding
great and precious promises, that by these ye may be made partakers of the
divine nature. What these promises are, we find mentioned in the Scripture. I
will put my law in their heart, and write it in their inward part, Jer. 31.33.
A new heart, and a new spirit I will give them, I will take out of their bowels
the heart of stone, and will give them a heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. These are
called exceeding great promises, because they contain the greatest things, for
what greater thing is there than to change the nature of a man. It is as great
a work, as to bring Israel out of Egypt, to divide the sea, and to make the sun
stand still. They are called also honorable, or precious promises, to a
spiritual understanding they are of an higher value than the greatest treasures
of the earth.

Secondly, the way to come to the divine nature, is not by the promises alone,
but by faith in the promises. The Apostle does direct his speech, to such that
had obtained like precious faith with us, verse the first. And again, his
divine power has given us all things pertaining to life and godliness. But
how? not absolutely, but through the knowledge of him, that is, through faith
in him that has called us to glory and virtue. And, as it is in another place,
we are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Peter 1.5. We
are kept by the power of God to salvation, but through faith.

Thirdly, the way to come to the divine nature, is by the power of God; there
can be no coming to the divine nature, but by the divine power: his divine
power does give us all things that does pertain to life and godliness. So
then the inward work does proceed after this method. First, the promise is
freely made. Secondly, faith apprehends the promise. Thirdly, the promise
being apprehended by says, does engage the power of God to perform that which
is promised, and so the Saints come to be partakers of the divine nature.

Lastly, the increase of the nature is by mortification of lusts, having
escaped the pollution of the world through lust. If we speak properly, it is
neither profit, pleasure, honor, or any thing else that can corrupt the soul,
were it that she were free in her self. These are the particulars that
concern the divine nature, or the nature of virtue in general. The Apostle
after this, speaks of particular virtues, add to your faith, virtue, and to
virtue, knowledge. By all these particulars we may discern for the cherishing
of endeavor, what little need we have to fly to the rudiments of heathen
Philosophy, to the purity of the natural birth, and to such like dictates of
Seneca, and Horace. These are the things which the Apostle does admonish us.
Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the
rudiments of the world, Col. 2.8. They that do this, do not hold Christ for a
head, but do go directly against the principles of baptism and circumcision,
as all do that deny original sin, and plead the purity of the natural birth,
having gone so far, we will return to our Author again, as he expounds the
words of the text.

By this (says he) we may the better understand the following words, I will
not again curse the ground for man's sake, for the imagination of man's heart is
evil from his childhood, Genesis 8.21. Concerning which, note, that these words
are not two sentences. For this is not the reason wherefore God gave over
smiting, for if it had been the reason, it would have come to pass, that the
same cause that would have moved God to smite, would also move him to forbear,
which were a strange Economy.

Reply There is no such strange Economy in the words, if the scope of both
texts be diligently considered. In the sixth of Genesis the Lord says, that he
would destroy the world, because the thoughts of the imagination of man's heart
are evil continually. Here we have a plain reason given, why the world is
destroyed, all flesh had corrupted their ways, and this corruption did arise
from the common pravity of nature from the first root. But in the eighth of
Genesis the matter is otherwise. The Lord did not look so much to that which
man had deserved, as to the merit of the blood of Christ, figured in the
sacrifice of Noah. And therefore the words do best go after this tenor, I will
not curse the ground any more, although the thoughts of man's heart are evil
from his childhood. And therefore we agree with our Author, that these words
are an aggravation of the kindness and mercy of God, as if he had said, though
men be continually evil, yet I will not for all that drown the world for man's
being so evil. The former text does show what God might do, respect being had
to his justice: The latter does show what he will do with reference to the
merit of his Son, and his own mercy. These things are no way contrary to our
assertion. We come to the second Scripture.

I was borne in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me,

Psalm 51.5.
To this, he does endeavor, to frame sundry answers.

First, (says he) These words are an Hebraisme, and signify nothing, but an
aggrandation of his sinfulness, and are intended for an high expression,
meaning that I am wholly, and entirely wicked.

Rely There are (I confess) as in other Authors; so in the Scriptures, some
such forms, and ways of expression which are true in the figure, but false in
the letter. But whether this expression is of that nature, we cannot easily
admit: For he prays that God would create in him a clean heart. This plainly
shows, that the evil was in his heart from the very beginning. Besides, other
Scriptures do abundantly confirm the litteral interpretation of the words.
That which is borne of flesh is flesh, Joh. 3.6. Borne, not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, Joh. 1.13. were by
nature the children of wrath, as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. All these plainly
express the impurity of the natural birth, and that the words of the Psalmist
are to be taken according to the letter. And that Scripture (which he seems
to build so much upon) if it be well considered, does not make for his purpose
one jot. The like (says he) is that saying of the Pharisees. Thou were
altogether borne in sin, and do thou teach us, Joh. 9.35? Which phrase and
manner of speaking, being plainly a reproach of the poor blind man, and a
disparagement of him, did mean only to call him a very wicked person: but not
that he had derived his sin originally, and from his birth, for that had been
their own case, as much as his. To all which we reply, the Pharisees might
think him or his Parents to be some great sinners, because he was borne blind,
for the disciples themselves did put such a kind of question, to our Savior
himself, did this man, or his parents sin, that he was borne blind? verse the
second. Further, suppose that the Pharisees had been of the judgment, that it
had been this man's peculiar infelicity; and that it was not the common misery
of man to be borne in original sin, must their error be a prejudice to the
truth? Nicodemus himself was dark in the point of regeneration, must his
ignorance be a rule to us?

Secondly, (says he) if David had meant it literally, it had not signified
that himself was borne in original sin, but his Father, and his Mother sinned
when they begot him.

Reply Its very rational to conceive, that his Father, that went for an old man
in the days of Saul, and his Mother that bare him (specially he being the
youngest) were both dead, at the time of the making of the Psalm. To what
purpose should he confess the sin of the dead, and pray for the dead? But
suppose he did confess the sin of his Parents, he must needs look upon them as
the conduit-pipes, and the conveyances of the corruption of the nature from the
first root. This does strengthen the truth of our interpretation; and therefore
he does devoutly, and pathetically pray, Create in me a clean heart, renew
within me a right spirit: wash me with hysop, and I shall be clean.

Thirdly, (says he) if it did relate to his own person, he might mean that he
was begotten with that sanguine disposition, and libidinous temper that was the
original of his vile adultery; and then, though David said this truly of
himself, it is not true of all, nor of those whose temper is phlegmatic, and
unactive.

Reply By this rule we may gather, that the phlegmatic, and unactive
(whatsoever the sanguine be) are free from original sin; and that it does not
belong so much to Divines, as to Physicians to judge of the sin of the nature.
But in this, he is greatly deceived. David does not confess the sin of
adultery alone, but the sin of murder; deliver me from blood-guiltinesse, thou
God of my righteousness, verse the sixteenth. Nay, that which did principally
affect him, was his unbelief, unthankfulness, neglect, and contempt of the
goodness and mercy of God; and his making the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme. And therefore he says, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, verse
the sixth. Though he had sinned against Vriah, against himself, and against
the Church: yet the most aggravating circumstance was, that he had sinned
against God. This we may see in the parable of Nathan, who thereupon did argue
with him, upon the considerations of mercies received: so then when the
Psalmist says, I was borne in iniquity, he has not respect only to the
libidinous temper, but also to a sinful temper, of a more general nature.

Fourthly, (says he) if David had meant this of himself, and that in regard
of original sin, this had been so far from being a penitential expression, or a
confessing of his sin, that it had been a plain accusation of God, and an
excusing of himself. As if he had said, O Lord, I confess I have sinned, in
this horrible murder, and adultery; but thou O Lord know, how it comes to
pass, even by that fatal punishment; which thou did, for the sin of Adam,
inflict on me and all mankind, above three thousand years before I was borne.
Thereby making me, to fall into so horrible corruption of nature, that unless
thou did unresistibly force me from it, I cannot abstain from my sin, being
most naturally inclined to evil.

Reply To all which we rejoyne, though there was a necessity laid upon David,
as upon other men, to be borne in original sin, and this three thousand years
before he was borne; yet nevertheless it will be no plea to excuse his
murder, and adultery: For howsoever he was borne in sin, his murder, and
adultery were his own voluntary acts. Ordinary experience shewetn (by the
common assistance of God) that men have a power to avoid many outward evils, to
which their natures are inclined. Further, for the inward lust, though it was
inflicted as a punishment upon him, as upon all mankind, this can be no charge
upon God, seeing he has provided a remedy, to help men out of their misery.
David had rather cause to accuse himself, for fulfilling the lusts of his
nature, and for the neglecting of that grace that was promised to him, and to
other believers in the Jewish Church, to cleanse out the sin of the nature; I
will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, that thou might love
the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 30.6. So then, though David was born in original sin,
the fruits of that sin, were his own voluntary acts, and the living in that
sin also, was his own free choice. Bernard in his Homily 81. on the
Canticles, has an excellent passage to this purpose, Homo interveniente
peccato, patitur quandam vincet ipse, etc. Man by the intervening of sin, he
himself does suffer a kind of necessity from his will, not from nature, that
so truly he may not be deprived of his inbred liberty: For that the soul
cannot rise of her self, the will is the cause, who languishing, and laying
prostrate with the vitiated, and vicious love of a corrupted body, does not
withal admit the love of righteousness. It is so I know not by what wounderful
mean, the will being made worse, she her self, does make a necessity to her
self; That the necessity while its voluntary, may not be able to excuse the
will: Neither the will while it is drawn, may have power to shake off the
necessity: for truly after a sort, this is a voluntary necessity. In these
words of his, he does elegantly set forth the truth of the thing, and therein
he does liken the soul to a man grovelling upon the earth, he cannot rise
because he will not; He will not rise because his nature does incline him to
lie down under the power of his lusts. And this was David's very case, he was
born in iniquity, and he did freely and voluntarily bring forth the fruits,
that were the very product, and result of a sinful nature; he did too much
neglect the grace by which he might be cured, and though his necessity was
natural, respecting the inclinations that came from his birth, yet also it was
a voluntary necessity; All natural men do account the liberty of lusts, to be
the greatest freedom, and therefore they be not captives so much against, as
with their wills. The first step therefore to salvation is, as to understand
the guilt of sin, so also the spiritual captivity, and bondage of the soul,
under the tyranny of a carnal mind.

Sixthly, He adds, that David thought nothing of this, or any thing like it,
we may understand by the preceding words, which are a preface to these in the
objection, against thee only have I sinned.

Reply. We willingly yield, that it was the purpose of David to clear the
justice of God, but here is no need to call his justice in question, for though
David was borne in sin, the act of murder and adultery were the deeds of his
own will, besides, the lust of his heart might have been cured by the grace of
God.

Seaventhly, (says he) if this had been natural and unavoidable, God, who knew
perfectly well, would have expected nothing else of him. For he will not
require of a stone to speak, nor a fire to be cold, unless himself be pleased
to work a miracle to have them so.

Repl. The case is not all one. It is not in the nature of stones to speak, but
men may avoid many outward acts of sin, and the evil of their natural
disposition may be mortified by the Spirit. The Apostle speaking of certain,
that had eyes full of adulery, that cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2.14. Our
Author in his answer to the Bishops letter does expound, (...) eyes full of
the adulteress, therefore they cannot cease from sin. This shows how hard it
is to escape adultery, when men have received the beauty of the adulteress
into their eye. Why then are Laws made against this sin? It is in their power
outwardly to fly such occasions that lead thereto. The wise man says, remove
thy way far from her, and come not near the door of her house. Is not this
too precise and strict a point? No, some men's natures, are like tinder to the
fire; they must not only fly sins, but all occasions that lead thereto. Now
it is plain, that in these things, men have a power to forbear the evil; and
therefore the wise man accordingly does temper his exhortation. And for the
lust of the heart, though a man cannot flee from it, yet God is able to give
more grace, which he is always ready to do to those, who in the sense of their
own emptiness do flee to him for help. Where is the man that did ever truly
desire, and continue desiring helps against his infirmities, that God did ever
neglect? If this could be proved, then something may be said to the purpose.
Now we go to the next Scripture.

Among whom we in all times past had our conversation in the lusts of the
flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature
the children of wrath, as well as others.
He has many observations upon the words of this text.

This therefoore (says he) as appears by the discourse of the Apostle, relates
not to riginal sin, but to actual.

Repl. It relates to both, as the Ephesians had their conversation in the lusts
of the flesh, and did fulfill the lusts of the flesh and mind, so it does
relate to actual sin: But as they were by nature the children of wrath, this
is with reference to original, sin. And whereas he does bring in Justin
Martyr arguing upon this ground, that therefore it cannot be extended to
Christ, we willingly yield that Christ is an exempt person, by reason of his
extraordinary birth, and conception, but then in Justines sense, all else,
infants as well as others, will partake of the sin of the nature. But he
further adds.

Heirs of wrath signifies persons liable to punishment, heirs of death. It is
an usual expression among the Hebrews; So sons of death in the holy Scripture,
are those that deserve death, or are condemned to dye.

Repl. It is true that the Hebrews call a man the son of death, that has
deserved death, specially when he is condemned to die. Though all this be
granted, it does not void the force of our reason, for we do not argue so much
from the Apostles words, that the Ephesians before conversion, were the
children of wrath, but from those words, [were by nature the children of
wrath,] The scope of all which is to show, that they were not only subjected
to wrath, through a sinful conversation, but through an evil nature, the root
of that evil conversation. If therefore, our Author, or any man else, will
make use of the Hebrew Idiotisme, the words will go fairly in this sense, that
the believing Ephesians, both by the condition of the natural birth, and the
whole course of their conversation, as they did serve diverse lusts, and
pleasures, were liable to wrath, and the only mean by which they did escape,
was the quickening, and enlivening work of the Spirit, by and through which they
were brought out of that estate, in which they were born. But he has another
evasion.

By nature is here most likely to be meant, that which Galen calls (...) an
acquisite nature, (...) customs, and evil habits.

Repl. If we would apply our selves to authors, and to the ordinary speech of
men: custom, and nature, are usually opposed, each to other. In some cases a
man may be said to have a thing both by nature, and custom, very rarely or
never, we say that custom is nature. Sometimes men speak in a more general
sense, that custom is as it were a second nature; But because he stands upon
it, that it is most likely that the words of the Apostle, are meant only of
custom, and acquired nature (for so he desires to speak) then by this rule we
must say, that the believing Ephesians, before conversion, were by ill custom
only, the children of wrath. If this be so, why does the Apostle say, you has
he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins: What need of the infusion
of a new life to bring them off off an ill custom? In such a case it were
only requisite, to reduce nature to her original purity; and to amend that by
good usuages, which ill customs had marred. Besides, seeing several Nations
have their customs, was it a peculiar custom to the Ephesians? Or was it
common to all Nations to be the children of wrath? It was peculiar to the
Ephesians, then they only had need of the infusion of a new life. If it was
common to all Nations: How did they all generally agree in such a custom? And
what was the cause of the agreement? Besides, seeing there are some in their
tender years, of whom we may presume, that they are neither quickened by grace,
nor hardened by ill custom, whether such may be saved without the infusion of
a new life, yea or no? If they may be saved without the infusion of a new life,
this will be against the scope of the Apostle, who tells us they were saved
from wrath, by the inward quickening. But if he will say, that such cannot be
saved without the infusion of a new life, then it is plain that by nature must
be meant more than acquired nature. Infants are born in a sinful nature and do
need the sanctification of the Spirit. But he has a passage out of Suidas,
when the Apostle says, you were by nature the children of wrath, he means not
that which is the usual signification of nature, for then it were not their
fault but the fault of him that made them such. To which we rejoyn, In men of
ripe years, it is both their fault, that they do abide in the sin of the
nature, and it is also the fault of Adam, that did vitiate and deprave the
nature, at his fall. That men do fulfill the lusts of the flesh and mind, is
their own voluntary act. And though indeed and in truth, it is not their
personal fault, that men are born in original sin, yet it is their fault that
they fulfill the lusts of their nature; and continue in that state, at least
that they do not use, and hearken to those precursory motions, and previous
workings of the Spirit, which the Lord does administer to them, at some seasons
at least; The end of all which is to bring them out of the evil of that state.
The first works of the Spirit are to reprove, to convince, to accuse, to
terrify men, to humble them for their evil deeds, that so they may come to
Christ for pardon of their sin, and for the healing of their nature. But here
they wilfully shut out the light, will not see what they may, and this will be
the great condemnation, Joh. 3.18, 19, and 20 verses. He goes on,

By nature the Apostle (says he) means not by birth, natural extraction, or
any other original derivation from Adam.

Rep. By the same reason he might argue, that the Ephesians, when they were
quickened, had not a new life by regeneration, or spiritual extraction, out of
the second Adam, which is immediately opposed to the other, as the counterpane
or the other part of a deed. In seeking to deny the misery by the first, he
must take away the happiness, grace, and life that comes in by the second man.
But he gives his reason, The Ephesians were no more guilty than every one else,
and no more before their conversion than after. We say the same in effect, and
it is the force of our argument, because all need a new life, a new birth, a
new extraction out of the second Adam, as well as the Ephesians, therefore all
are equally by nature the children of wrath, and do partake of the sin of the
nature as well as they. But whereas he adds, that the Ephesians were no more
guilty of this sin before conversion than they were after, in this he is
monstrous absurd: For after conversion, the guilt of that sin was done away,
and the power of it was broken by the inward work of the Spirit; now he cannot
say that this was done before their conversion. He further adds.

By nature the children of wrath, must be expounded, as much as (...), really,
and truly, the children of wrath, it is agreeable to the usuage, of the same
phrase, Galatians 4.8. Ye did service to them, that by nature were no gods,
that is, which really are none.

Repl. We may understand the meaning of the Apostle, in this Scripture, by
comparing it with others, God that made the world and all that is therein,
dwells not in Temples made with hands, Acts 17.24. The invisible things of
him are clearly seen from the creation of the world, even his eternal power and
Godhead, Rom 1.20. So in the present case, when the Galatians did service to
those that by nature were not gods, his meaning is no other but this, they did
service to them that had not the essence, and the being of the Godhead. As in a
little case, the nature of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, is taken for the essence,
and the being it self. As in the expression of Saint James, every kind of
Birds, that is, every nature of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes is tamed, and has
been tamed by mankind, or according to the original by the nature of man. So in
the present case, when the Apostle says that the Ephesians were by nature the
children of wrath, he does not say only that they were really, and truly, the
children of wrath. For so they might be by ill-custome, when their nature was
good, as the water is really and truly hot, though it be not naturally hot:
But his meaning is this, that their very essence, and being was sinful, and
that their corruption was in the very nature it self, as they did derive out of
Adam a common root. The scope of the text, does plainly show that this is the
meaning: the sinfulness of nature, immediately opposed to that life,
spiritualnesse, and new nature they had from the second Adam. And whereas he
says, as these Ephesians were before their conversion, so were the Israclites
in the days of their rebellion, a wicked stubborn people, insomuch that they
are by the Prophet called children of transgression, a seed of falsehood. All
this does confirm the truth of our interpretation he calls them a seed of
evil doers, meaning that they were not only sinners by custom, and evil
ensample, but by propagation of the kind. Let him grant this in the case of the
Ephesians, and the question is at an end.

This is all that he has in his Vnum Necessarium. Now let us consider what
further he says, to this Scripture, in his answer to the Bishops letter,

Here he tells us, that these words do not at all relate to the matter of
original, but to the state of Heathens sins, habitual Idolatries, and
impurities; in which the world was dead, before the great Reformation by Christ
page 74.

Repl. By this account when the Ephesians had a new life infused, this was
only to cure them of their heathenish Idolatries, and superstitions: In which
sense the Jews (free from such Idolatries) needed no new life at all Besides,
how is it possible that the words are to be understood, only of heathenish
Idolatries and impurities, when the Apostle himself expressly says, among
whom we all had our conversation. Did he live in heathenish Idolatries before
his conversion, or was he an Idolater before his calling? But seeing our
Author tells us, how the Bishop did admonish him to remember how often the
Apostle calls concupiscence, sin; we will urge the text a little more
closely, and consider what is the value of his answers. To ground the
business, we argue thus. If the Ephesians were accounted the children of
wrath, because they had their conversation in the lusts of the flesh; by this
reason then, the flesh must needs be evil, because it was evil, to converse in
those lusts. Further, to come to the point, If the lusts of the flesh be evil,
it must be true in a sense, that the flesh it self must be more evil, because
it is the very fountain from which the lusts do stream. When he has said all
that he can, when he has accused the Ephesians of an evil conversation, of
evil customs, of evil acts, of evil desires, he must come to an evil nature,
that lies at the bottom, and that which is worst of all, he will find it to be
the very root, and cause of the the mischief. The Apostle does very elegantly
call all lusts, the works and effects of the flesh, because they are the
effects, that the flesh does produce, in opposition to the effects and fruits
of the Spirit, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. This ground being laid, let us come to his
exceptions as they follow in their order.

First, (says he) I know Saint Paul reckons concupiscence to be one of the
works of the flesh, and consequently such as excludes from heaven, Col. 3.5.
[Evil concupiscence] concupiscence with something superadded, but certainly,
that is nothing that is natural: for God made nothing that is evil; and
whatsoever is natural and necessary cannot be mortified.

Repl. That which is natural and necessary by creation, we confess cannot, nor
ought not to be mortified. Of this kind is the lust after meat, drink, sleep,
etc. but that which is natural, and necessary by corruption, ought chiefly to
be mortified; nay, it is the prime work of Christianity, to put off the
Adam-like, and by degrees to put on the Christ-like disposition, Gal. 5.24. He
proceeds.

I come (says he) to consider that by concupiscence either must be meant the
first inclinations to their object, or the proper acts of Election, which are
the second acts of concupiscence. If the first inclinations be meant, then
certainly that cannot be a sin, which is natural, and necessary?

Repl. We do willingly admit such a distinction, concupiscence is sometime
taken for the habit, or the root it self, and sometimes for those second acts
that do flow from the root. Now in such a case it is to me a great wonder that
any should own the second acts of concupiscence to be sin, and yet own no
sinfulness in the concupiscence, that is more radical and fundamental. Acts do
flow from the nature, and therefore where acts be bad, the nature cannot be
good. It is our Saviors own argument, Men do not gather grapes of thorns, nor
figs of thistles. And whereas he stands upon this subtilty, that the first
inclinations are unavoidable, therefore they are not sinful. If he means that
they are absolutely unavoidable, this we deny. For that which is unavoidable by
nature, may be avoided by grace. The guilt of concupiscence may be taken away
that it be not imputed, the power of it may be broken by the Spirit, and the
remainders of it may be clean extinguished in the life of glory. Now he
proceeds.

To desire that to which all men tend naturally is no more a sin, than to
desire to be happy is a sin. Desire is no more a sin, than joy or sorrow is.

Repl. If he speak of the natural tendency of desire, as it is by creation; We
willingly subscribe, and so it is no sin to desire to eat, drink, or to long
after an happy estate. But if he speak of natural desires, as they are now
since the fall; The desires of the flesh do wholly rend to evil. The flesh
lusts (...), against the Spirit, and the works of the flesh are manifest,
adultry, fornication, etc. Gal. 5.18, etc. He further argues.

Then there can be no reason told, why it is more a sin to will evil than to
understand it: and how does that which is moral, differ from that which is
natural? For the understanding is first, and primely moved by his object.

Rep. The Scripture does testify of the blindness of the mind, and the
perversity of the judgment, as well as of the pravity of the will. Not to go
far for an instance, the words of the text are plain. The Ephesians are said
to be the children of wrath, under this title, and formality, because they did
fulfill the lusts of their mind; or according to the original, the wills of
their cogitations, and their reasonings. They are termed the wills of the
cogitation, because the choice of the will, and the disorder of that choice,
does arise commonly from the blindness of judgment. As for his question, how
does that which is natural, differ from that which is moral: We need not
trouble our selves in the business. For the blindness of the judgment, and
the perversity of the will, are natural and moral both. They are natural, so
far forth as they come by propagation from the first root: they are moral, in
respect of the anomy, and irregularity, as being contrary to the spiritual,
holy, and pure law of God. He goes on.

I cannot but wonder says he, why men are pleased wherever they find the
word concupiscence in the new Testament, presently to dream of original sin,
and make that to be the sum total of it: whereas concupiscence, if it were
the product of Adams fall, is but one small part of it.

Rep. There is a double reason may be given (as I conceive) where men find
mention made of concupiscence, they do thereby understand original sin;
First, because that sin is commonly called by the title of concupiscence.
Secondly, Those derivative concupiscences (as I may so say) which are by choice
and election, do all flow from the mother concupiscence, and do exceedingly
symbolize with her. As in that famous passage of the Apostle. Every man is
drawn away with his own lust, and enticed, and lust, when it has conceived, it
brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished, brings forth death, Jam.
1.14, 15. By sin he must needs mean, the open act of sin, as it is in the
public view of man. After this he speaks of finishing of sin, when men have
filled the measure of their iniquity, then death comes at last, as the wages of
sin. Though this be so in the end, yet at the first, all sin is brooded in the
lust of the heart. All secondary acts of concupiscence do spring from the
original concupiscence, which is the cause of all. Upon these grounds. The
sinful disposition of the nature may well pass under the name, and notion of
concupiscence; because the operations within, do chiefly consist in lusting,
and all the acts of sin do flow from the lust of the heart within.

Concupiscence (says he) is but one of the passions, and in the utmost
extension of the word, it can be taken but for one half of the passions, for
not only all the passions of the concupiscible faculty can be a principle of
sin, but the irascible does more hurt in the world: that is more sensual,
this more devilish, page 94.

Rep. It is true in moral Philosophy, the usual distinction is into (...), et
(...) the irascible and concupiscible faculty, but what need is there of such a
difference in the case that we now speak? for the Apostle reckons up the lusts
of the flesh, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, hatred, variance, emulation,
etc. Gal. 5.19. There is no man will doubt, but in this list or catalogue, he
has respect as well to things that belong to the irascible, as to the
concupiscible faculty; yet all is contained under the notion, and name of
concupiscence. For in the verses immediately going before, he exhorts, walk
in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. According to
the original, it is, ye shall not accomplish (...) the concupiscence of the
flesh. In the present case then when the Galathians did live in malice, envy,
hateful, and hating one another, they did fulfill the concupiscence of the
flesh. And so by this account the lusts, both of the concupiscible, and the
irascible faculty are comprehended (more generally) under one name and title of
concupiscence. And all his contrary reasoning is just nothing at all. Now let
us come to his last Scripture.

The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, because they
are foolishness to him,

1 Cor. 2.14.
Here he bestows much pains, to weaken the force of the text.

An animal man (says he) that is a Philosopher, or a rational man, such as
were the Greek and Roman Philosophers, upon the stock and account of the
learning of all the Schools, could not discern the excellency of the
Gospel-mysteries as of God, incarnate, Christ dying, the resurrection of the
body, and the like.

Rep. Its true, that the Philosophers aforementioned, were such natural, or
animal men, but it is not the whole truth; For they that come to Church, and
publicly profess, may be animal men also, and in their animality may be far
from receiving the things of the Spirit. A schoole-boy, that is able some way
to make a Gramatical construction of the Greek of Euclide, and Ptolomy, is not
presently capable, of the mysteries of Geometry, and Astronomy. That requires
the skill of an Artist, as well as of a Gramarian. And, if the laws of the land
were translated into English. I think we should not be all Lawyers out of hand.
So in the present case, though all may outwardly own, and some may preach the
Doctrine, and mysteries of salvation, this does not presently entitle them, to
that kind of learning that comes only by the teaching of the Spirit. Many may
speak much of the love of Christ, that never had the feeling of it in their
hearts. Moses tells the people in his time, ye have seen all that the Lord did
before your eyes, yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and
eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day, Deuteronomy. 29.24. They did see, and
they did not see, they did outwardly see the works, but they did not inwardly
believe the truth, wisdom, goodness, and power of God. For had they seen
these things, as they ought, they could not but have loved the Lord their God,
and have lived in obedience to his laws. So then, not only the Greek
Philosophers; but many Christians also, may be called natural, or animal men.
He further shows what animality is.

Animality, which is a reliance upon natural principles, without revelation is
a state privatively opposed to the Spirit, and a man in that state cannot be
saved, because he wants a vital part, he wants the Spirit.

Rep. What he says here, and in the words immediately following is the same in
substance, that we speak, and is extremely contrary to the design that he
derives at. For if in the state of animality, a man cannot be saved, because he
wants the Spirit, the chief vital of salvation; Why does he (to make religion
intelligible) deny original sin, plead for the freedom of the will, and
establish the purity of the natural birth. We say, because a man is borne in
original sin, and dead in trespasses and sins, therefore he cannot be saved,
without the infusion of a new life. He says that a man in his animality cannot
go to heaven, without the Spirit, the chief vital of salvation. Let a wise man
now, judge where we and he do differ. But to blind the business, he has a
subtle distinction between carnality and animality.

Carnality, (says he) or the state of being in the flesh, is not only
privatively opposed, but contrarily also to the spiritual staee of grace.

Rep. This expression of his, might pass well enough, were it not for that
which follows. First, speaking of the state of animality, and then of
carnality afterward, he has these words. The first is only an imperfection,
and a want of supernatural aides, the other is indeed, a direct state of sin,
and hated by God, but superinduced by choice, and not discending naturally.

Rep. In this expression of his there are two things, that need a better
enquiry. First, how does he prove that the state of animality is only a state
of mere imperfection, and no more? St. James tells us, the wisdom from
beneath, is earthly, sensual, devilish; or according to the original, earthly,
animal (...) devilish. I think none will say, that the animality of this
wisdom, is a bare imperfection, and no more. Its positively opposed to the
wisdom that is above, and can there be a greater enemy, to the wisdom above,
then that which is beneath? The Apostle St. Jude also says, that Mockers
should come walking after their ungodly lusts. These are they that separate
themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit. ver. 18, 19. the word is, they are
(...), animal, not having the Spirit. Now in this case will any man be so void
of understanding, to affirm that these in their animality, were merely
defective, and that they were not in a direct state of enmity against God? I
think none will easily assert it. Sure I am many ensamples may be brought, to
prove the distinction between animality and carnality to be a mere non-ens, or
nullity. Secondly, we agree that the state of carnality, is a state of sin, and
hated of God; but whereas he says that it is only superinduced by choice, as
also that it does not naturally descend. Herein we crave liberty to depart from
him. The Scriptures all along (specially the writings of St. Paul) speak of the
flesh, in opposition to the Spirit. Now will he, or any man else, assert that
this is a state merely superinduced, and that men come to be flesh, purely by
the choice of their own will? If this be so, how do all come to agree in one
and the same choice? All do not agree to be Soldiers, to be Scholars, to be
Merchants, to be Mariners, yet all are flesh, before they come to be sanctified
by the Spirit. Seeing he will not have this state naturally to descend, let him
assign some general cause, how all do agree to be carnal. Necessarily some
general cause must lie at the bottom; but he further says.

Adam did leave us all in an animal state, but this is not a state of anmity,
of direct opposition to God, but a state insufficient, and imperfect.

Rep. This state of mere imperfection, which he speaks so much of, both here
and elsewhere, is only a notion of his own commenting. For when God made man
in the beginning, he made him in a state very good, but when he fell, he left
all his posterity, not only in an imperfect, but in a sinful condition. As for
that middle state of deficiency, which he imagins, I know not where it is to be
found, unless it be in the Atlantis of Plate. Besides, if animality be only a
state of deficiency, why does the Apostle so plainly tell us, that the animal
man receives not the things of the Spirit, they are foolishness unto him. This
cannot be a state of mere imperfection, but a state of direct opposition, the
principles of animality diametrally opposite to the things of the Spirit,
Michal scoft at David's dancing before the Ark. Lot seemed to his sons-in-law to
be as one that mocked, when he told them of the destruction of the City; the
preaching of the cross seemed to be very mean matter to the Philosophers, and
learned Grecians. Now shall we say that all these were only in a state of
animality or imperfection, and no more? I think none will easily believe it.
But in the close of all he has these words.

In the state of animality (says he) a man cannot go to heaven, but neither
will that alone carry them to hell, and therefore God does not let a man alone
in that state, for either God suggests to him that which is spiritual, or if he
does not, it is because himself has superinduced something that is carnal.

Rep. We are told here of a state, that carries neither to heaven nor to hell:
and I believe if we go to men of ripe years, there is no man lives in this
estate in all Asia, Africa, Europe, and America. Why then does he trouble us
with that which is not? Further, we do agree, that the Lord does (at seasons)
suggest something that is spiritual to animal men; by this they are enabled to
see their own misery, and to judge themselves. Now this does rather strengthen
the force of the argument, for if an animal man could purely of himself,
perceive the things of the Spirit, what need had he of the suggestion of the
Spirit? But for that which he adds, that the animal man does superinduce
something that is carnal, I think this cannot reasonably be denied, and
therefore I do not see, but the state of animality and carnality both are equal
estates of enmity against God. Thus have I been more large in clearing those
Scriptures which concern the maine of the question: in others of less moment
I will be more brief.

SECT. 3. How God punishes the Fathers sin upon the children.
THe end wherefore he is so willing to dispute this point, he himself does
express, page 40^. Upon this account alone (says he) it must be impossible to
be consented unto, that God should still under the Gospel, after so many
generations of vengance, and taking punishment for the sin, after the
publication of so many mercies and so infinite a graciousnesse, that is
revealed to mankind in Jesus Christ, after so great provisions against sin,
even the horrible threatenings of damnation still to persevere to punish Adam,
in his posterity and the posterity for that he never did.

Rep. In this passage of his, he does show how much he does mistake the scope
of Scripture, for it is the chief design of the holy Ghost, to amplify the
sin of Adam, and all the evil that comes thereby, to the end that all might be
humbled, and that they might come to Christ as to a Sovereigne remedy to help
them in their misery. And in very deed, whatsoever he thinks to the contrary,
the Doctrine of the Gospel cannot be so clearly preached, without the knowledge
of that misery that came by the fall. The knowledge of the one, does as it were
open a door to the knowledge of the other.

Again, in the whole process of the discourse he is very faliacious. Suppose
ordinarily God does not now punish the fathers sin upon the children, is this a
good argument to prove that the sin of Adam is not rightly imputed to
posterity? Other Parents (comparatively) are but private persons, and their
sins are but the sins of private men, but Adam was the root of the nature, and
his sin was the sin of the whole kind. As on the other side, the suffering of
Christ upon the cross, was not the suffering of a private person, but the
suffering of the whole humane nature. By this the lost sons of men have a door
of grace opened, the tender of grace is made to all, and the great condemnation
is for unbelief. Now we will consider what the rules are which he does lay down.

First, (says he) God may and does very often bless children, to reward the
Fathers piety, as it is notorious in the famous descent of Abraham's family. But
the same is not the reason of favors and punishments.

Answ. Here we would entreat him to observe that it is true, that for a long
descent, God did show kindness to the family of Abraham: but if he well
observe the matter, this kindness was extended, not so much for Abraham's
piety, as for the Lords own promise, and for his truth in keeping the promise.
Again, whereas he says, There is not the same reason of favors, and
punishments: let him show why the Jews are cast away, why they have been
little better than outcasts of the Covenant, now above one thousand five
hundred years? Questionless, as God will magnify his mercy in their call: so
for many ages together, they have stood and do yet stand under the burden of
that heavy curse, which they did wish upon themselves, his blood be upon us and
our children, etc.

Secondly, (says he) God never imputes the sin to the son, or relative
formally making him guilty, or being angry with the innocent eternally.

Answ. Though we should say, the sin of Adam is imputed to all his relatives,
and that also to their eternal damnation; this in the whole were no hard
assertion: as long as we teach, that a second man is provided for eternal
salvation. We willingly yield, as the case now stands, the great condemnation
is for the neglect, and the contempt of that salvation, mercy, and grace that
is to be had by Christ. If men run out the years of the patience, and
long-suffering of God; if they continue in unbelife, and hardness of heart; if
they resist the convictions, and operations of the Spirit, as they are
administered in their respective seasons. I think it is but just, that they
should fall, not only under the guilt of their own actual sins: but under the
eternal damnation also, that was brought upon them by the sin of Adam, the root
of the nature. All the hurt of such a position (if it be a hurt) is more
vigorously to drive men to Christ. As for infants, though they are fallen into
all kinds of misery, temporal, and eternal by Adams sin: what harm, as long
as so fair a probability may be extended to them in Christ: God is a gracious
God, and he is able to show mercy where the sin was the act, and deed of
another. Of believers infants, we have a more special ground of hope. So then
the matter will come to this issue; Though infants may be miserable by Adam,
nay may be made eternally miserable through him: yet here is the comfort, that
mercy may be extended to them in Christ. He further adds.

Thirdly, when God inflicts a temporal evil upon the son for the fathers sin,
he does it as a Judge to the father, but as a Lord only to the son.

Answ. Suppose this were granted, it makes nothing to the purpose; all other
Parents in comparison, are but private men: but Adam as a public person, did
represent the whole nature. That may be asserted of him, which cannot be of any
other: The Apostle expressly says, by the disobedience of one, many were made
sinners. If they were made sinners only by the imputation of Adams sin, this is
enough to put a difference between him and other progenitors. Again, in the
fame place it is expressly said, by one man's offense, judgment came upon all
men to condemnation. If it came upon all men to condemnation, all are under the
sentence of the Judge, for the sin of one man. And whereas he says. If God
inflicts a temporal evil upon the son for the fathers sin, he does it not as a
Judge, but as a Lord only to the son. Upon this account I demand, the Lord
inflicting evil upon the sons of Adam for his sin, does he only inflict it in a
prerogative way to the son? then it will follow, that Christ must dye, and by
shedding of his blood, he must take away such evils (from infants at least)
that are brought upon them in the way of prerogative. This would be a strange
sound, to such ears that have always heard, and believed that we come to be
sinners in Adam, and Christ came to take away the guilt of that sin.

Fourthly, God using (says he) the power, and dominion of a Lord, and the
severity of a Judge, did punish posterity, it was but so long as the Parents
might live, and see it, as Chrysostom says, to the third and fourth
generation, and no longer.

Answ. If this be so, why do the Jews at this day bear the burden of that
sin, committed many hundred years ago? why did God inflict judgments upon the
house of Ely, of Saul, of Ahab, of Jehu, and of others, when the Parents were
dead? Besides, if God should have such a purpose to punish the Parents in the
children, that thereby the Parents themselves might be brought to repentance;
this is not a parallel case, to that which we are upon. God suffered Adam to
fall, and in falling, to involve himself, and his posterity under all
miseries, temporal, and eternal; that so a door might be opened, for the grace
that comes by Christ. In this regard the Apostle expressly tells us, that the
first man is the figure of him that is to come. This must not, nor cannot be
said of our immediate Parents.

Fifthly, he adds, this power and dominion, which God uses, was not in
ordinary cases, but in the biggest crimes only.

Answ. Let this be admitted, it does abundantly confirm the truth of our
assertion. For the case of Adam was more than ordinary, there is no such
ensample like his, from the beginning of the world. He stood as a public man,
as a root of the nature, the whole stock was put into his hand, he had but one
only way by which he might fall; and therefore he falling, it is no such
irrational thing to conceive, that all his posterity should fall with him.

Sixthly, (says he) Although God threatened this, and has a right and a power
to do this; yet he does not often use this right, but only in such notable
ensamples, as were sufficient to all ages, to consigne, and testify his great
indignation against those things, for the punishment of which he was pleased to
use his right or rights of dominion.

Answ. True, there are some special ensamples of the Lords judgment upon whole
families, for their fathers sin; this may be seen in the cases of Corah, Achan,
Saul, Jeroboam, Ahab, and others. Neither do we doubt, but the Lords end was to
testify to all ages, his indignation against sin, by such like instances of
his severity. But what is this to the purpose in hand? the end wherefore the
Lord did lay such an heavy burden upon the sons of Adam, was not so much that
the children should take heed, by the ensample of their father, for there were
some particulars that the children could not possibly imitate the father; but a
prime end of the misery of the sons of men, by the fall of Adam, is to open a
door, for the grace that comes by Christ. The knowledge of the one contrary
does exceedingly conduce to the knowledge of the other.

Seaventhly, (says he) his goodness, and graciousnesse grew quickly weary of
this way of proceeding. They were the terrors of the Law, and God did not
delight in them. Therefore in the time of Ezekiel the Prophet, he declared
against them.

Answ. This passage of Ezekiel the Prophet, does of all others singularly make
for our purpose. For though Adam did eat of the forbidden fruit, and all his
posterity did, and do bear the burden of his sin: yet they are not left, in
that state irrecoverably, without all kind of help. A door of grace is opened
for the lost sons of men, by the coming of Christ; upon this ground, the
truth of Ezekiels speech is founded, the soul that sins, that soul shall
die. His meaning is, the soul that sins and continues in his sin, through
impenitency and unbelief, that soul shall dye.

Eighthly, (says he) something extraordinary, was then needful to be done, to
so vile a people, to restrain their sinfulness; but when the Gospel was
published, and hellfire threatened to persovering, and greater sinners, the
former way of punishment was quite left off. And in all the Gospel, there is
not one word of threatening passing beyond the person offending.

Answ. I marvel how it comes to pass then, that the Jews do bear the
burden of their Ancestors sin, as we have formerlysaid. Besides, if we
diligently look to the scope of the Gospel, we shall find that the Lord does
punish the posterity for the sin of Adam, that so thereby a way may be
prepared for the grace that comes by Christ These things are not opposite, or
contrary, but subordinate and subalternate, the miseries by the fall do prepare
the way for the grace that comes by Christ. But he further adds.

Either this evil (says he) that falls upon us for Adams sin, is inflicted
upon us by way of proper punishment, or by right of dominion, if by proper
punishment to us, then we understand not the justice of it, because we were not
personally guilty.

Answ. If we cannot understand the justice of it, because we were not
personally guilty, why by the same reason does he not wholly exclude us from
having any part of share in the benefit of the death of Christ. For what
personal act or concurrence have we to the suffering of that death. And whereas
he alleges the ensamples of Pausanias the Grecian General, Avidius Cassius,
and others, that would not punish the children for the fathers offense: We
acknowledge the rationality and the equity of such proceedings, but what is
this to the case in hand? The Law was so given to Adam, that was never given to
any else but to Christ alone. It was given to him as the Headman, and the root
of the nature. If he fell, all must fall with him Neither is there any
hardness or harshnesse in this doctrine as long as the misery by one does open
a door for the grace by the other. He goes on.

If God (says he) inflicts this evil upon Adams posterity by using his own
right of power, and dominion, which he has over his creatures; then it is a
strange anger which God had against Adam that he still retains so fierce an
indignation as not to take off his hand from striking after five thousand six
hundred years; and striking him for that of which he repented him, and which in
all reason we believe he then pardoned or resolved to pardon when he promised
the Messiah to him.

Answ. If he would but remember himself what he speaks elsewhere, he shall
find that he says the same in effect as we do. For though in his further
explication, page 453. He affirms that Adam was made mortal, and proves it by
his eating, and drinking, his sleep, and recreation, by ingestion, and egestion
by breathing, generating, and the like, which immortal substances never do.
Though by these and such like mediums, he endeavors to prove the mortality of
the state in which he was made, yet in the same and other places he does
acknowledge that the untimelinesse and infelicity of death, came in by the
fall. By the fall he tells us that Adam was cast into a place of labor and
uneasinesse of briars and thorns, ill air, and violent chances. The woman was
condemned to hard labor and travel, and that which troubled her most,
obedience to her husband, etc. Now let us take the misery brought in by the
fall in such a low and diminutive sense that he would take it. It is now above
five thousand six hundred years that mankind has been under the miseries and
infelicities of death, all this while they have continued in a place of labor
and uneasinesse of ill air, and hard chances, the woman also besides the
pains and peril of childbirth has been subject to her husband for five
thousand six hundred years, and yet she knows no end of her apprentiship. As
strange as the anger is against Adam and his posterity, he must needs say the
same in effect as we do. But to give a positive answer. These miseries brought
in by the fall of Adam have continued, and must continue to the end of the
world. Neither is it a strange thing that the Lord should continue his anger,
seeing by the continuation thereof he does continue to drive men to Christ. If
he pleased he could immediately take away all these miseries brought in by the
fall. But for most excellent ends to humble men to pluck down their pride, to
beat them out of their carnal security, he does rather suffer them to abide.
And for the case of the woman. The Apostle does not deny her pains and peril
of childbirth to come in by the fall, but then he adds, they shall be saved
in childbearing if they continue in the faith, 1 Timothy 2. last. Notable to this
purpose is that speech of Augustine to Julian the Pelagian, est enim aliquid in
^bdito and alto ejus consilio, etc. There is therefore a reason in his hidden
and deep counsel, why so long as we live in this mortal flesh, there is
something in us against which our mind may conflict, there is something that we
may say forgive us our trespasses. And a little after therefore it is done in
the place of our infirmity, that we should not live proudly, but should live
under a daily need of remission of sins. Much more to the same purpose. What
he adds is monstrous false.

It is not easily (says he) to be imagined, how Christ reconciled the world
unto his Father, if after the death of Christ, God is so angry with mankind, so
unappeased, that the most innocent part of mankind may perish for Adams sin;
and the other are perpetually punished with a corrupted nature, a pronenesse to
sin, a servile will, a filthy concupiscence, and an impossibility of being
innocent; that no faith, no Sacrament, no prayers, no industry, can obtain
pardon from this punishment.

Answ. It were a very happy thing, if this learned man would once think that
there were a ninth commandment, and that he would make conscience of bearing
false-witnesse against his neighbor. We say, as the case now stands, men are
pestred with a corrupted nature, with a pronenesse to sin, with a servile
will, but that there is no remedy to bring us out of this evil, this was never
affirmed by us. There is in the blood of Christ that which will take away the
guilt of sin, in the Spirit of Christ to free us from the bondage of
corruption, and also in his power to raise our bodies at the last. Only it is
the good will and pleasure of God in the whole Economy of the salvation of
man, that we should wait till all these things be fulfilled. That is a most
sweet passage of Bid taken from some ancienter Author. No man (says he)
takes away sin, which the Law, although holy, and just, and good, could not
take away; but he in whom there was no sin. Now he takes away sins by
pardoning those that are done, and by assisting us that they may not be done,
and by bringing of us to the life where they cannot at all be done, and so we
are come to an end of this Section.

SECT. 4. Of the causes of the universal wickedness of mankind.
In the beginning he does take upon him to propound an objection. If there were
not some common principle of evil introduced by the sin of our parents upon
all his posterity, how should all men be so naturally inclined to be vicious.
To this he endeavors to frame many answers.

First (says he) if we will suppose that there must be a cause in our nature
determining us to sin, by an unresistible necessity, I desire to know why
such a principle should be more necessary to us, than it was to Adam?

Repl. As I have said before, Adam had only a possibility to sin, he did
sin so, that he had liberty, and freedom not to sin; But as the case now
stands, we can do nothing else but sin. It is true in the particular, every
man is free in the committing of this, or that particular sin, though it be
true in the General, an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. It is possible
that an healthy man, by disorder, may fall into great sicknesses, but a man of
frail, and infirm constitution, is wholly inclined to sicknesses and diseases.
As great, nay, a far greater difference, was between that liberty that Adam
had before his fall, and what we now have. He had a freedom to choose the
good, and to refuse the evil; so have not we now. But to take away the force of
this answer, he further argues.

That we can choose the good, and as naturally love good as evil, and in some
instances more. A man cannot naturally hate God, if he knows any thing of him;
a man naturally loves his parents, he naturally hates some sorts of
uncleanness.

Repl. We do not deny, but (by the general concurrence and assistance of God)
man since the fall, has some ability to choose, and love the good: But what
kind of good? that which is ethical and moral, but not that which is spiritual.
In the very best actions that a natural man does, when he gives alms, when he
observes promises, when he does perform any good, he sins in the manner;
because his actions do not proceed from sincere love, neither are they directed
to a right end. The end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart, a good
conscience, and faith unfaigned, 1 Timothy 1.5.

Because a natural man wants these principles, his best actions are stained
with sin. As strange as this doctrine seems to be, there is none of us all,
but may find a truth of it in our own experience. For let us hear, read,
pray, meditate, give alms, dispute for the truth, reform errors and abuses,
and do much good for the Church; yet we can have no comfort if our conscience
once tell us, that we do not these things for God, but for our selves. This is
the very case of every natural man besides the sinisterity of ends, his actions
do not proceed from right principles. And whereas he argues, that a man cannot
naturally hate God if he knows any thing of him. If he speak of the excellency
of God, and his holiness? In such a sense if men did know him they could not
hate him. For that they love him, fear him, obey him, trust in him, do all for
him, leave all for his sake, this is grounded upon the right knowledge of that
excellency, and goodness that is in himself. And therefore since the fall, the
blindness of mind is the cause of a great part of the mischief. The will is
perverse in her choice; the affections are out of order, because the judgment
is not rightly informed. In a lower sense we do acknowledge, that men may know
some things of God, and their knowledge may be the ground of their hatred of
God. It may be with some wicked men, as with the Devils, they believe there is
one God, and tremble. But as to the choice of spiritual good, he further says.

Neither was Adams case better than ours in this particular. For that his
nature could not carry him to heaven, or indeed to please God in order to it
seems to be confessed by them who have therefore affirmed him to have a
supernatural righteousness.

Repl. If the collation be between state and state Adam had a power to
understand that good which is spiritual, tolove and choose it more than we now
have since the fall. The wise man says, God made man upright, but they have
sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7. ult. He must needs speak of a spiritual
uprightness contrary to the deceits that are to be found amongst thousands of
men and women. And whereas he says that Adams nature could not carry him to
heaven. If this be so, God provided worse for him than for the rest of the
creatures. The rest of the creatures were made with such natures suitable to
their ends. If therefore God did not make Adam in a state someway fit for
heaven, why did he create him with an immortal soul? This state plainly
shows that had he stood or eaten of the tree of life, he should have lived
for ever. But falling, he did run the hazard of the loss of that life that
might have been had. Lastly, if Adam coald not have gone to heaven in that
nature that God had made him, the falling short of eternal life could not have
been any fault of his own; and the blame would have laid on the creation. Were
it rational for God to require Adam to go to heaven, and yet no way to make him
suitable or fit for such a condition. This were to require the whole tale of
bricks, and to give no straw. And for that Tenet of the Romish Doctors, I
wonder that he should stand upon it that Adam was endued with supernatural
righteousness in that sense, at least, as they understand it, for look what
righteousness Adam had, it was by creation. The had stood he had propagated it
to posterity. The relics of the image of God do plainly show in what state he
was made in the beginning. In the creation of man it is said, he made all
things very good, Herbs, Trees, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, all these may be good
in their kind, though they were not made in a state fit to go to heaven. But
it is impossible that Adam could be made in a state very good, but he must be
some way fit for union with God, in which all spiritual and eternal good does
consist.

Now he comes to the main objection, and here he tells us that it is certain
there is not only one, but many common principles from which sin derives it
self into the manners of all men. This he undertakes to prove in opposition to
our assertion, who hold that the pravity and corruption of nature does flow
from the disobedience of the first man. But let us hear him speak in his own
words.

The first great cause (says he) of an universal implety, is, that at first
God had made no promises of heaven, he had not propounded any glorious rewards
to be as an argument to support the superior faculty against the inferior,
that is, to make the will to choose the best and to leave the worst, and to be
as a reward for suffering contradiction, And going on, he further adds this to
be the reason of the general corruption of the old world; Because (says he)
there was no such thing in that period of the world, therefore almost all flesh
corrupted themselves, excepting Abel, Seth, Enos, and Enoch, we find not one
good man from Adam to Noah; and therefore the Apostle calls that world (...),
the world of the ungodly. It was not so much wonder, that when Adam had no
promises made to enable him to contest his natural concupiscence, he should
strive to make his conditions by the Devils Promises.

Reply It is true the Apostle calls the old world (...), the world of
ungodly, but that there were no spiritual promises in those times, this we
utterly deny.

What shall we make of that promise, the seed of the woman shall break the
Serpents head? What shall we make of the sacrifices? were they not all figures
of the blood of Christ to come? Saint Peter also plainly tells us, That the
spirits of the fathers were disobedient in the times of the old world. In what
sense then does he call them disobedient? Their disobedience must be expounded
in reference to the teachings, convictions that they had by and through the
Spirit of Christ, whether in Noah's Ministry or otherwise. Many more reasons
might be alleged to prove that the fathers were not altogether destitute of
spiritual promises. If our Author will prove it, let him show how they were too
blame for their disobedience.

But he is as strange in assigning that which he terms the second cause of
the general impiety.

A second cause (says he) of the general iniquity of the world is, because our
nature is so hard put to it in many instances. Not because nature is originally
corrupted, but because Gods laws command such things which are a restraint to
the indifferent, and otherwise lawful inclinations of nature. And then going
on, he does in the same page explain himself more fully. Our unwillingnesse and
averseness came by occasion of the Law coming cross upon our nature: not
because our nature is contrary unto God, but because God was pleased to
super-induce some commandments contrary to our nature For if God had commanded
us to eat the best meats and to drink the richest wines as long as they could
please us, and were to be had, I suppose it will not be thought that original
sin would hinder us from obedience. But because we are forbidden to do
somethings which naturally we desire to do, and love, therefore our nature is
hard put to it, and this is the cause of the difficulty. So far he, page 413.
414, 415, 416.

Reply. From these and such like speeches of his, I would entreat him (that is
so apt to condemn others) to observe the rigor and the severity of his own
principles.

First, he tells us that there was no proposal of spiritual promises to the old
world, and then Secondly, God laid such commands upon them, that were
altogether above their natural abilities, and from the position of these two,
he shows us that the world did so generally overflow with all kind of
wickedness. These things are so extreme hard, that I do not find their
parallel in any of our writers. They do indeed say that God gives commands
far above natural abilities, but not far above that natural ability that
Adam was furnished withal in the beginning, neither above that gracious
ability which God has engaged himself to bestow in the Word of promise. But to
amplify commands upon feeble flesh, and to make no spiritual promises
answerable to the command, is plainly to make the Lord himself extremely
severe to the sons of men. None of our Authors ever would allow such a
severity.

Of all the Ancients, Augustine is the Author that seems to be most rigorous
in the points of original sin, and the natural servitude of the will, yet if
we consider the whole scope of his doctrine, he does not come near to the
severity of the position above mentioned; when some did reason with him, If
there be no free will, to what purpose exhortations and commands? I answe,
this, he purposely wrote his book de correptione and gratia, the effect of
which is to this purpose, In commands know what thou ought to do, in reproof
know what thou have not done through thine own default, in prayer know whence
thou may receive what thou would have. And when the Pelagians did
vehemently inculcate that which our Author does so much stand upon; Peccatum
voluntatis an necessitatis est? si necessitatis est peccatum non est: si
voluntatis vitari potest. Sin (say they) is either of the will, or of
necessity,) If it be of necessity, it is no sin, if it be of the will, it may
be avoided. To this he has a double answer. First, (says he) Vt sanemur, in
vccamus eum cui dicitur in Psalmo de necessitatibus educ me. That we may be
healed, we call upon him to whom it is said in the Psalm, bring me out of my
necessities. His second answer is, vitari posse peccatum si natura vitiata
sanetur gratia Dei per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Sin may be avoided in
case our corrupt nature may be healed by the grace of God through Jesus Christ
our Lord. There would be no end if we should cite all the passages that he has
to this purpose. In which he does acknowledge that we lie under a natural
necessity of sinning, but yet that necessity is not absolute and irrecoverable
where there is a want of ability to keep the command, there he does refer us
to the ability to be had from the word of promise. Of all our Authors in these
latter times, Luther in his treatise de servo arbitrio, seems to speak most
hard, yet for all this in the case of commands above natural abilities he
always incourages men to go to free grace. He always testifies that the Law
is to be preached to kill and undo a sinner, to put him under the curse and
under wrath, that so he may come to Christ. To let pass all ensamples, we will
come to that one instance in the beginning of the book, when Erasmus did argue
in this wise. What profit or necessity is there to divulge such things, seeing
from thence so many evils may seem to arise. To this he has a double answer.
Prima est humiliatio nostrae super^^^^^^ cognitio gratiae Dei, alteraipsa fides
Christiana, etc. The first is the humiliation of our Pride, and the knowledge
of the grace of God, the other is the Christian faith it self. First, God
certainly has promised his grace to the humble, that is, to those that are
cast down, and are without hope. Now a man cannot be thoroughly humbled, until
he know as wholly out of his own abilities, councels, studies, wills, works:
so his salvation altogether to depend upon the disposal, council, will, work
of another that is of God alone. For as long as he is persuaded that he can do
the least for his salvation, he does remain in the trust of himself, neither
does he wholly despair of himself. Therefore is not humbled before God, but
presumes upon place, time, or some work for himself either does hope or at
least wish for that by which he may come to salvation. He therefore that
doubts not wholly to depend upon the will of God, altogether dispaires of
himself chooses nothing, but expects God to work it in him, and for him, he
is nearest to salvation. More he has to the same purpose, Concerning the
second reason, he has these words, therefore says he, that there maybe some
place found for faith, it is needful that all things which are believed may be
hidden out of sight, and they cannot be further hidden than under the contrary
object, sense, experience. So God when he quickneth, he does it by killing,
when he justifies, he does that thing by convincing men of the guilt of sin,
when he lifts up to heaven, he does it by bringing down to hell, and much
more to that purpose. All this is but a specimen, or handsel of the doctrine of
Luther, though he does every where teach that there is no ability in man to
obey the command, yet all ability is to he had in the word of promise. He does
abundantly show that the use of the Law properly is to bring men to despair,
that despairing in themselves, they may be driven to Christ. He does
marvellously express the doctrine of Saint Paul, in the Epistle to the Romans
and elsewhere. Now on the contrary, Doctor Jeremy Tailor tells us a contrary
tale, that the Lord did increase his commands above the ability of men in the
times of the old world; and gave no spiritual promises in answer to the
commands given in those days, and this he does avouch to be the true cause why
iniquity did abound in that age. Now how he can make Religion intelligible by
the position of such principles, for my part I cannot understand. I think never
any of our Divines was ever found to come to such a high pitch of severity.

Now we go to his next Section.

SECT. 5. Of the liberty of election remaining after Adams fall.
HEre he does make it one chief part of his work, to prove the liberty of the
will, to this purpose he brings many arguments against us, whereas (if he did
well consider the matter) we do not deny such a natural faculty. Man has a
power in naturals and externals of Religion to use a liberty, and in spirituals
when he is made free by Christ. Bellarmine brings in this as one chief point
of accusation. They deny (says he) free will, so excellent and worthy a gift
of God, and the best of all that are in man, by which alone we may be
distinguished from bruit beasts, and may come nearest to the nature of Angels,
and may bear the image of the Godhead it self; which also the whole race of
mankind upon the earth do testify with great consent of mind: A thing (I
say,) so clear that almost every moment it comes into the view of our eyes and
minds: yet nevertheless with incredible madness, and fury, these men do most
obstinately refuse, confute, and reject it. So far Bellarmine. In which words
of his, if he speak of liberty of will, so far as it is a faculty we do not
deny it, we would as soon deny the fire to be hot, or the water to be moist.
Only this we deny in things spiritual, in matters that concern salvation, a
man has no free will. Neither do we absolutely say this in spiritual things,
for though he has no freedom by nature; he may be made free by grace. Grace
does not destroy the faculty, but does perfect and adorn it. But of all our
Authors let Doctor Usher in his answer to the challenge made by a Jesuit in
Ireland, lay down our judgment, and then we shall see how fairly and
honestly Bellarmine, and now last of all, our Author himself does deal with us.
That man has free will (says he) is not by us gainsaid: though we dare not
give him so large a freedom as the Jesuits presume to do. Freedom of will we
know does as essentially belong unto a man as reason it self: and he that
spoileth him of that power, does in effect make him a very beast. For this is
the difference betwixt reasonable and unreasonable creatures: as Damascene
rightly notes. The unreasonable are rather led by nature, than themselves are
the leaders of it; and therefore do they never contradict their natural
appetite, but as soon as they affect any thing, they rush to the prosecution of
it. But man being endued with reason, does rather led nature, than is lead by
it: and therefore being moved with appetite, if he will he has power to
restrain his appetite, or to follow it. Hereby he is enabled to do the things
which he does neither by a brute instinct of nature, nor yet by any compulsion,
but by advice and deliberation: the mind first taking into considerartion the
grounds and circumstances of each action, and freely debating on either side
what in this case were best to be done, or not done, and then the will
enclining it self to put in execution the last and conclusive judgment of the
practical understanding. This liberty we acknowledge, a man may exercise in all
actions that are within his power to do whether they be lawful, unlawful, or
indifferent, whether done, by the strength of nature or of grace. For even in
doing the works of grace, our free will suspendeth not her action, but being
moved and guided by grace, does that which is fit for her to do, grace not
taking away that liberty which comes by Gods creation, but the pravity of the
will, that arises from man's corruption. So far Dr. Usher, page 465. In which
words of his, if we speak of the nature of free will, we do not deny it to be a
free faculty both under corruption and under grace, and why should we be
upbraided, then with that which we do not maintain? but if we speak of the
strength and ability of free will, it is our constant doctrine that naturally a
man has no freedom to that which is spiritually good till he is made free by
grace. And so far as he is made free by grace, and the way to obtain this
freedom, the first step is to see his slavery and his bondage-under
corruption. These things being premised and the state of the question made
clear, we will now come to see what our Author can allege to the contrary.
He proceeds as follows.

The objection (says he) hinders not, but choice still remains to a man, and
that he is not naturally sinful, as he is naturally heavy, and upright, apt to
laugh and weep.

Answ. Though in a sense it is true, that a man is not naturally sinful as he
is naturally heavy, yet it is from the corruption, and pravity of his nature
within, that he is still apt to choose that which is evil. For though every man
does not choose the same sin, nor for the same cause, neither does he always
choose it, yet it is apparent that our wills are in a state of servility, and
that the power to choose the things that are good is naturally lost. But he
further adds.

This doctrine is destructive to all laws, it takes away reward and punishment,
and we have nothing whereby we can serve God, and precepts of holiness might
be preached to a wolf as well as a man, if men were naturally and inevitably
wicked.

Answ. These terms naturally and inevitably wicked are fallaciously coupled
together. The Ephesians before their conversion were naturally wicked, they
were by nature the children of wrath as well as others. But will any man say,
that they were inevitably wicked? how then could they be quickened and made
alive again by the infusion of a new life? Further, it is not destructive to
all laws to say a man is naturally wicked, for by the help of restraining
grace, he may outwardly sorbeare many evils which are forbidden in the law,
only his sinfulness lies in this, that of himself he cannot come up to the
purity and spirituality of the law in the denial of his lusts. Again, though
naturally he be under the reign of lust, he does not inevitably lie under that
bondage. That reign may be broken, when he shall come to be acquainted with the
liberty of the Spirit. The law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus,
has made me free from the law of sin and death, Romans chap 8 2. Neither upon
such a supposal is it true, that precepts of holiness may be given to a wolf
as well as a man. A wolf is no way capable of precepts for want of faculties,
he has neither understanding will, nor any other power of the soul as a man
has. That of Augustine is true. A man does not believe the impedement is not
in the faculty, but in the vicious habit that does hinder the faculty. Posse
credere naturae est hominum velle credere gratiae est fidelium: to have a
remote power to believe is of the nature of men, to have a will to believe is
of the grace of believers. But a wolf has neither nature nor grace to
believe, and therefore he has no precepts given to him to believe.

Upon this account (says he) it is so far from being true, that a man after
his fall did forfeit his natural power of election, that it seems rather to be
increased. For as a man's knowledge grows, so his will comes to be better
attended, and ministered unto. But after his fall his knowledge was much more
than it was before; he knew what madness was, and had experience of the
difference of things, he perceived the evil and mischief of disobedience.

Answ. I willingly yield, that as a man's knowledge grows, his will comes to be
better attended and ministered unto. But that his knowledge should be much more
after his fall than it was before: this goes against the whole scope of
Scripture. For one chief cause of the servility and vassallage of the natural
man under sin, does arise from the blindness and darkness of his judgment.
This is most lively set forth in the words of the Apostle. The wisdom of the
flesh is enmity against God, because it is not subject to the law, nor can be,
Romans 8.7. We will explain the particulars in order. The wisdom of the flesh
in the Original is (...), the Saplence, prudence, and mind of the flesh. That
which the eye is to the body to direct and guide it, the same is this (...) or
mind of the flesh to the will, and other faculties: it teaches them what to
choose, and what to refuse, what to love, and what to hate? Now a man cannot
choose the things of God, till he does see the excellency of them. Further, to
show the misery of the natural man, the wisdom of his flesh is said to be
enmity against God. He does not say, an enemy in the concrete, but enmity it
self in the abstract; that is, an enemy in the highest degree. God is an enemy
to such a mind, and such a mind is an enemy to God. And therefore in the
third place he gives a reason of the enmity, it is not subject to the law of
God, for the chief design of the mind of the flesh, is to set up other Gods
in place of the true God; other Lords in direct opposition to the law of the
Spirit. When men should trust in the Lord alone, this wisdom does prompt them
to trust in horses, and armies for victory, in good husbandry for riches, in
friends for preferment in the world, etc. And this is the reason wherefore the
wisdom of the flesh is called enmity against God, because it is always
tempting, and alluring men to love the things of the world, to delight in them,
and to trust in them more than the true God. Nay, the Apostle goes a step
further, he does not say that it is not subject, but it cannot be subject to
the law of God. He does not deny only an actual subjection, but that which is
more, he denies a potential subjection also. Among several kinds of birds and
beasts, there are many that are not actually subject to man, yet there is
nothing does exclude, but they may be brought under subjection. But the wisdom
of the flesh is such, that it cannot be made subjection by art, or industry, or
any outward means till grace comes. If this be so, it is strange to me that
any man should so far forget himself, to affirm that a man's knowledge is more
after his fall than it was before, seeing a great part of his misery lies in
the blindness of his judgment. And therefore as in the old creation, so it is
in the new. The first work is in making of light, God that commanded the light
to shine out of darkness, has commanded the light of his grace to shine in
your hearts in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4 6. By the same argument as he
proves Adams knowledge to be greater after, than it was before his fall, he may
prove us to have more knowledge than Christ. Of Christ it is peculiarly said,
he made him sin that knew no sin, we have an experimental knowledge of sin that
Christ never had: so Adam had an experimental knowledge of sin and misery,
after which he never had before his fall. But he further adds.

We may (says he) as well suppose an understanding that can never understand,
and passions that can never desire nor refuse, and a memory that can never
remember, as a will that cannot choose.

Answ. Though it be a preposterous thing to imagine a will that cannot choose,
yet there is no strangeness to conceive of a will that cannot choose the
things of the Spirit. To choose is natural to the will, as it is to fire to
burn, to the memory to remember; but to choose the things of the Spirit of
God, this must be from supernatural operation. When the rich Merchant found the
pearl hid in the field, for joy he went and sold all that he had, Mat. 13.44.
But he says,

As sin is the action of a free faculty, it can no more take away the freedom
of that faculty than virtue can, for that also is the action of the same free
faculty.

Answ. Neither do we say, that sin takes away the freedom of the faculty, for
all that do commit sin, do freely commit it, only it takes away the freedom to
that which is spiritually good. In this sense our Savior says, He that
commits sin, is the servant of sin, Joh. 8.36. While they promise themselves
liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption, 2 Pet. 2.19. But he
further says,

Men sometimes by evil habits, and by choosing vile things along time together
make it morally impossible to choose that which is good, and to love that in
particular which is contrary to their evil customs. Heraclitus says, custom
is that devil that brings in new natures upon us.

Answ. It is most certain true, that many fall under the power of evil by long
custom. But the maine question is, Whether is evil custom the whole and
adequate cause of the evil? This we deny: men by ill custom may intend the
habit of original sin, as varnish may make colors more orient, and God in his
just judgment may justly harden men in their sin, so that they may be worse
than the ordinary sort of natural men. This we do willingly confess, but then
also we must consider that the bottom, and the ground of all the evil does lie
in a sinful nature. This does naturally descend upon us all from Adam, the root
of corruption, and is only to be done away by Christ, the root of all grace,
life, spiritual nature, as the Scriptures do abundantly testify. Next, he
comes to the testimony of the Philosophers.

Seneca says, nature does not engage us upon a vice, she made us entire, she
left us free, but we make our selves prisoners, and slaves by vicious habits.

Answ. It is no way to be doubted, but we make our selves slaves by vicious
habits of our own acquiring. But whereas Seneca says, nature has made us
free, nature has left us free, these are those rudiments of the world of which
the Apostle speaks, beware least any man spaile you through Philosophy, Col.
2 7. If nature has made us free, what need is there of Christ, of the freedom
of the Spirit, of the grace of regeneration, of all those things that are held
forth to us in the principles of baptism and circumcision? In this sense the
Apostle is to be understood, when he says, beware lest any man spoil you
through Philosophy, he does not speak of the knowledge that the Philosophers
have of the motions of the heavens, and the measures of the earth, and such
like speculations, but he speaks of Philosophy as it does not hold Christ the
Head, and is contrary to the very principles of baptism, and circumcision, as
may be see by the context. Of this kind are those sayings of Seneca, nature
has made us free, nature has left us free, such doctrines are contrary to
Christ the Head. He further proceeds.

The Saints (says he) love God so fully, that they cannot hate him or desire
to displease him. And in hell the accursed spirits so perfectly hate him, that
they can never love him; But in this, that is, status viae a middle condition
between both, or a passage to one or the other it cannot be supposed to be so,
unless a man here also be already saved or damned.

Answ. We do agree, that the Saints in heaven do so perfectly love God, that
they cannot hate him, and the damned spirits in hell do so absolutely hate him,
that they cannot love him. But what of all this? The case of sinners upon the
earth, is not all one with the damned in hell. The damned in hell do absolutely
and irrecoverably hate God, but so do not sinners upon the earth. Though they
are borne in sin, and lie under a natural necessity of sinning, yet they do not
hate God absolutely and irrecoverably, but so far only as they are naturally
corrupt and do remain in their natural condition. Though Ministers in the
general do know that all shall not be saved, yet personally and individually no
Minister can say that this or that man shall not be saved. They can say, as
long as men continue in such ways they are in the way to damnation, but cannot
certainly and infallibly pronounce of the final, and eternal estate of this or
that particular man. Now it is not so with the damned in hell. But he further
says,

Men can choose that which is commanded, and abstain from that which is
forbidden, for if they could not, they ought no more to perish for this, than
infants for that.

Answ. Though we stand upon it, that a man cannot naturally choose that which
is spiritually good, yet his case is not all one with the state and condition
of an infant. For an infant cannot actually understand, will, nill, choose,
refuse, but a natural man has a power to will that which is in his own
compass, he may perform many outward duties, abstain from many outward
evils, and fly many occasions of sin. And for his willing the good that is
spiritual, though he cannot choose it so far forth as is natural, yet
doubtless his condemnation shall be, that he did not go so far as he might go
by the help of the Spirit. At some seasons the Spirit does convince, accuse,
reprove, terrify, and put him upon a way of judging and condemning of himself,
that so he might look after pardoning and healing mercy. But his fault is, that
he will not see that which he may see, and does obstinately harden himself
against the light. But he further shows,

This is so necessary a truth, that it is one of the greatest grounds and
necessities of obedience and holy living; and if after the fall of Adam it be
not by God permitted to us to choose or refuse, there is nothing left whereby a
man can serve God or affer him a sacrifice.

Answ. Though the Divines do maintain a necessity of sinning, and the loss of
the liberty of the will, to spiritual good at least; they are not cast upon
such a strait as our Author thinks they are. Indeed some of them are more
clear, and distinct, and do give less offense than others do, yet I know none
do absolutely take away the power from the will to choose or refuse. To what
purpose then would exhortations, admonitions, and reproves be given? But
leaving all others, we will cite a testimony out of one of the chiefest of our
Authors, for he may serve as a pattern for the rest. Mr. Calvin in his book of
Institutions, Lib. 2. Chap. 2. does show, that the foundation of all sound
learning is grounded upon the knowledge of a man's self. But how? not upon the
knowledge of a man's own excellencies, perfections, natural liberties, for so
the Philosophers do vainly trifle: But upon the knowledge of his own misery,
thraldom under sin, and this he affirms to be the bottom of all saving
knowledge to bring men to Christ. By the former kind of learning men are set
up, and by the latter they are plucked down. He speaks of two dangerous
extremes to be avoided on either side, some when they hear that a man has no
ability, no freedom of will, they give over all care of piety and godliness:
On the other side, others trusting in their own ability, liberty of will, and
the like, they bereave the Lord of that honor that is due to him. He shows
that a middle course is to be taken between these two extremes, and that the
rocks on either side are to be declined. For the clearing of this, he shows
how far a natural man may go in all natural, civil, ecclesiastical actions, and
how (by the general assistance and concurrence of the Spirit) he may do great
things in all Physical, Mathematical, Ethical, Oeconomical, and Political kinds
of learning. Only when he comes to that which is spiritual, here he plainly
tells us that a man has no power, and to use the words of the Author, he has
no ability to offer a sacrifice to God. What is then to be done? here he tells
us, that we must have recourse to the freeness of the promise where all
fullness is to be had. To that end he cites the words of the Prophet Isaiah, I
will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods of water upon the dry
ground, Isa. chap. 44.3. And again, Ho, every one that thinsteth, come ye to
the waters of life, chap. 55.1. Having cited these and such like passages, he
comes to close in these words: Quae testantur ad percipiendas dei
benedictiones, nullos admit ti nisi suae paupertatis sensu tabescentes. Which
testifies to the receiving of the blessings of God, no others are to be
admitted, but such only which languish with a sense of their own poverty And
then he adds. Semper sane mihi vehementer illud Chrysostomi placuit;
Fundamentum nostrae Philosophiae esse humilitatem. That of Chrysostom has
always pleased me exceedingly. Humility to be the foundation of our
Philosophy. Or rather that of Augnstine, even as the Retoricion says, when he
was demanded, what was the chief thing in the precepts of eloquence, answered,
pronunciation, what the second, pronunciation, what the third, pronunciation:
So if thou may ask me concerning the precepts of Christian Religion, first,
second and third, always it would please me to give this answer, humility, and
more he has to the same purpose. I have drawn out the words more at length,
because the Author himself is a chief leader in the reformed Churches, and
because indeed, they are the pattern of whole some words. By this our Author
may understand, though Original sin be asserted, the natural liberty of the
will denied, and the necessity of sinning introduced, yet nevertheless
according to the tenor of these principles, men may have a sacrifice to offer,
and exhortations may be of good use. Dr. Preston in his Treatise of
humiliation, page 224. does propound the question, who is able to practice
according to his knowledge? His answer is, and I will appeal to any man's
experience, let him look back to the course of his life and examine himself,
was there any particular action in all thy life from which thou wast so hindered
that thou caust say, that thou could not do it? was there any particular sin
of which thou could say, this sin I could not abstain from? And howsoever
we may make it a matter of dispute in the Schools, yet the worst man, in whom
we may think corruption of nature to be most strong, when he comes to dye, does
not excuse himself, but acknowledges he is guilty. In the next page he
propounds the maine objection. How can a man he condemned for not believing and
turning to God, when naturally he has no power to do these things? To this he
answers. Though a man has no power to believe and repent, yet he is condemned
for the neglect of such precedent actions which he had a liberty to do, etc.
Our Divines in the Synod of Dort, in the Suffrage of the Britans, do
distinguish betwixt regeneration, and those antecedaneous acts that lead
toward regeneration. These antecedaneous acts, a natural man (by the help of
the Spirit) may do as to see sin, mourn over it, judge himself for it, he
may go further, he may taste the sweetness of the promise, and have some
beginnings of joys, all which he may fall from: many other testimonies may be
brought to show that our Authors, by the tenor of their principles do not
extinguish the endeavor of man, but do rather more truly direct and instruct
men to follow the right course. I shall stay too long upon this point, because
I perceive that it is the chief rock of offense that our Author does stumple
at: he further shows,

All things else are determined, and fixed by the divine providence even all
the actions of men, but the inward act of the will, is left under the command
of laws only and under the arrest of threatenings, and the invitation of
promises.

Answ. Its true, that laws, threatenings, promises, are made with special
respect to the will. But that the inward act of the will should be so under
laws, that it should not be under the decree of God: this Tenet does exclude
the chiefest part of the world from being under the care of God. Nay, if the
matter be well considered, here is the very height of the Atheism of the
ancient Philosophers. To maintain the absoluteness, independency, and
sovereignty of the will of man upon the earth, they do deny the providence of
God in heaven. Cicero upon this reason, did deny the infallibility of the
prescience of God. And our Author seems to me to come too near to this
coast. In the next words he gives his reason.

And that this is left for man, can no way impede any of the divine decrees,
because the outward act being overruled by the divine providence, it is
strange that the Schools will leave nothing to man whereby he may glorify
God.

Answ. If it be supposed that the inward act of the will be under the decree of
God, as well as the outward action, this does not take away that by and through
which we may glorify God. For it is not all kinds of necessity that are
contrary to liberty, but some only. The necessity of nature, the necessities
of a bruit instinct, and outward compulsion cannot stand with liberty: but the
necessity of the decree of God, the necessity of infallibility, the necessity
of the creatures dependency can be proved to consist with liberty. For God
usually brings his decrees to pass by the free act of his creature, which work
under his decrees, and are subservient to those ends that he has appointed.
And for the inward motions of the will, innumerable examples may be brought to
prove that they are under the decrees of God. The Kings heart is in the hand of
the Lord, and he turns it about as the streams of water, Prove. 21.1. God has
put it into their hearts to hate the whore, and to burn her flesh with fire,
Apoc. 17.11. And speaking of the Egyptians, he turned their heart to hate his
people, Psalm. 105.25. Besides the promise. A new heart and a new spirit I will
give them, Ezekiel. 36.26. The Psalmist prayed, create in me a clean heart O God,
and renew within me a right Spirit, Psalm. 51.10. All these places of Scripture
do abundantly prove, that the inward act of the will is under the decree of
God, as well as under laws, and that the certainty of the decree does not
overturne the liberty of the will, but both do go together. Next he tells us:

That Augustine in his zeal against a certain error of the Pelagians, made
him take in auxiliaries from an uncertain and less discerned error, and
caused him to say many things which all antiquity disavowed, and which the
following ages took up upon his account.

Answ. The following ages, specially since the times of Luther, have adhered to
the doctrine of Augustine. But that the Sager sort have done this merely upon
his account, we cannot easily admit. They have followed him so far, as his
interpretations have come nearer to the natural and genuine sense of Scripture.
What hard speeches he has concerning original sin, the natural servitude of
the will, the spirituality of the law, and the imperfection of man; the rigor
and austerity of them will be well allayed, by comparing them with other sweet
sayings of his concerning the fullness of Christ, and the freeness of the
promises. His scope is no way to hinder the endeavor of man, but to ground and
settle it upon such principles that are more solid and divine. And whereas our
Author in his Vnum Necessarium, and his further explication, does commend the
Fathers before the times of Auguistine for their temperate speeches concerning
free will: Here many things are to be observed. First, who will assures us that
he may not do the same with their authorities about free will, as he does with
the doctrine of the Church of England, and the sense of the Article in the
point of Original sin? If he will pervert the plain sense of that which is
open in the view of all men, what may he not do with the testimonies of the
Ancients? Besides, what he alleges for free will out of Justin Martyr,
Cyril, Hierome, and others, those speeches may admit of a benign
interpretation. All Divines do agree that a man has free will, he has a power
to understand, to choose, to refuse, to act by counsel, he were not a man if
he could not do this. The speeches of the Fathers may be taken in such an
absolute sense: in relation also to a particular state, Adam had free will in
innocence; and the Saints have free will to that which is spiritually good in
the state of grace: Further, suppose some things have escaped from them that
have been less authentic, let us consider that many of them came new out of
the Schools of the Philosophers, and therefore together with the truth they
might mingle some errors of Philosophy. Their conflicts also were with the
Philosophers, and the Maniches, and therefore it was necessary that they should
speak something more than ordinary for the liberty of the will. But enough of
this matter, which is so largely spoken and so plentifully by others.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some books printed for, and sold by Edmund Paxton, over
against the Castle Tavern, near to the Doctors Commons.
THe holy Arbor, containing the body of Divinity, or the sum and substance of
Christian Religion; for the benefit and delight of such as thirst after
righteousness; wherein also are fully resolved, the questions of whatsoever
point of moment have been, or are now controverted in Divinity, By John
Godolphin, J. C. D. fol.

The holy Lymbeck, or A Semicentury of spiritual extractions: wherein the
Spirit is extracted from the letter, of certain eminent places in the holy
Scriptures. By John Godolphin, J. C. D. 12.

The Temple measured, or a brief survey of the Temple mystical, which is in the
instituted Church of Christ, wherein is solidly and modestly discussed, most of
the material questions, touching the constitution and Government of the visible
Church-militant here on earth, etc. By James Noyes of New- England. 4.

Laws and Ordinances of War in 4.

Englands complete law-Judge, and Lawyer by Charles George Cock.

The method of grace in the justification of sinners being a reply to a book
written by Mr. William Air of Salisbury: by Benjamin Woodbridge Minister of
Newberry.


