PHINEHAS'S ZEAL IN EXECVTION OF IVDGEMENT. OR, A DIVINE REMEDY FOR ENGLANDS
Misery. A SERMON PREACHED before the Right Honorable House of Lords in the
Abbey of Westminster, at their late Solemn monthly Fast, October 30. 1644.

By Edmund Staunton D. D. Pastor of Kingston upon Thames in the County of
Surrey.

A Member of the Assembly of Divines.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Christopher Meredith, at the sign of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

Die Mercurii 30 October. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament: That this House does hereby
return thanks to Doctor Staunton, for his great pains taken in his Sermon
preached by him this day, before their Lordships in the Abbey Church
Westminster, it being the day of the monthly Fast: And this House does desire
him to Print and publish the same. And lastly, it is Ordered that none shall
presume to Print or reprint his said Sermon, without being Authorized under the
hand of the said Doctor Staunton.

Io. Brown. Cler. Parliamentorum.

I Authorize CHRISTOPHER MEREDITH to print my Sermon.

EDMUND STAUNTON.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HOUSE OF LORDS Assembled in Parliament.
My Lords,
SHort warning is some apology for slight performances, and what I cannot
farther fairly excuse, your noble Candor can freely pardon. The City Petition
for execution of Judgment, Ordin. Octo. 24. 1644.
and your Golden Ordinance, for giving no quarter to Irish, or Papists borne in
Ireland, taken in Arms against the Parliament; led my thoughts to this
Argument, as seasonable, if not as necessary. (...) Gladitus, a vastando
dictus, a (...) devastatus fuit.
The Sword like it self, lays waste and desolate; bleeding England groaneth
and cries, Ierm. 47.6.
O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thy
self into thy scabbard, rest and be still: Many Sovereign sword-quieting
Remedies have been recommended to your Honors: as faith acted, prayer fervent,
Humiliation unfeigned, reformation real, of persons and families. And this of
executing Judgment, has in it an healing virtue also. Though when all is
done, Christ alone must dry up our bloody issues, and that living Cornerstone,
must be our boodstone. It was your Honors just attempt long ago, to bring
delinquents to condign punishment, the opposition whereof by an adverse
party, has occasioned these Civil wars, and intestine broils in the
Nation, so that the Case of the Israelites opposed by the Benjamites, runs
Parallel with our present quarrels; The Israelites had a general Assembly, a
kind of Parliament, whereto complaint is made by the Levite, Iud. 19. last.
against the men of Gibeah for their horrid, their nonsuch delinquencie.
Hereupon the Assembly Orders and Decrees their punishment, sends out
Messengers to the Benjamites, Iud. 20.
and fairly demands that those Children of Belial might be by them delivered
up to Justice; but the Benjamites would not hearken to their Brethren the
Israelites; take up Arms rather to protect their Delinquents: and thus the war
began, which for a while went on dubiously, for the Israelites (though friends
to Truth and Justice) lost in two battles forty thousand men; yet the war
ended successefully. God directed the Israelites to a Stratagem, whereby all
the Benjamites except six hundredth were destroyed. And all this may Encourage
your Honors to work for, and wait on God. And when perhaps some elsewhere
Nobles, may be solemnizing The Solemn Festivals. December. 25.
these approaching Idolized Festivals, with Plays and Interludes, which in
Ludorum scenicorum delicata est insania. Aust. lib. 1. de Civ. Dei. cap. 32.
Austins Language is a delicate madness, Your Honors, I hope, will be
fasting, praying, hearing, and receiving the word with all readiness of mind,
which will be your Act. 17.11. (...), more noble. non genere, sed virtute and
pietate nobiles, Bez. in Loc.
Berean Nobility; And though others may be hatching devilish designs for the
pouring out of blood Innocent; Your Honors will engage your Selves in due
execution of Judgment; and so offer to God a Isa. 34.5,6.
sacrifice of blood nocent. I know there may be many Politic Reasonings in the
Case, but when God gives out a Command, he expects downright Duty, not any
subtle Dispute. A due and Regular execution of Judgment, will gild over your
Coats of Honor, and as it were Royalize your blood already noble. The
Heathens got a name, a kind of immortality, for their moral endowments;
Socrates for his wisdom, Aristides for Justice, Cicero for his eloquence, and
Cato for gravitie, etc. And your Lordships zeal for God in execution of
Judgment, will make posterity to mention your Names and Families with Honor.
I am

Your Lordships to serve you in and for the Lord of Lords: EDMUND STAUNTON.

A SERMON PREACHED TO the Right Honorable House of Lords on the Monthly Fast,
October 30. 1644.
Psalm. 106. verse. 30. Then stood up Phinehas and executed judgment, and so the
plague was stayed.


Coherence.
HEre are three verses together, which holds forth a threefold estate of Israel.

1. Sinning Israel; They joined themselves unto Baalpeor, and eat the
sacrifices of the dead, verse. 28. 2. Plagued Israel; They provoked him to anger
with their inventions: and the plague brake in upon them, verse. 29. 3. Relieved
Israel. Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment: and so the plague was
stayed. verse. 30.
1. Sinning Israel.
1. Isreal's Sin was twofold. First, Corporal uncleanness, They committed
whoredom with the daughters of Moab. Numb. 25.1. Secondly, Spiritual
uncleanness, The people did eat and bowed down to their gods. verse. 2. They
joined themselves to Baal-peor, and eat the sacrifice of the dead, to wit,
dead Israel, of dead sacrifices to dead gods, so the Psalmist, verse. 28.

Observation.
Hence observe, that Corporal and spiritual uncleanness, usually go
together: adultery and idolatry are sister sins; and upon this double right of
double uncleanness, Rome challenges that title of Mother of Or fornications.
(...).
harlots and abominations of the earth, Rev. 17.5.

2. Plagued Israel.
2. Gods plaguing of Israel has two degrees or steps in it. 1. The kindling of
it in Gods wrath, they provoked him to anger with there inventions. 2. The
flaming of it in Isreal's misery, the plague brake in upon them, verse. 29.

For clearing the history which we have at large, Numb. 25. and the opening of
the text, these quere's must be answered.

1. Quaere.
1. What kind of plague this was. For answer, some think it was the plague of
pestilence, because the word plague is usually so taken: others conceive it
rather to be a plague of slaughters by the hand of Moses, who had command from
God to take all the heads of the people, (to wit, the ringleaders to idolatry)
and to hang them up before the Lord against the Sun. Numb. 25.4. and by the
Judges, who had command from Moses, To slay every one his men that were joined
unto Baal peor, verse. 5. And probably this was the plague the Psalmist speaks
of, partly, because the word is genericall, implying many kinds or species, and
is sometimes particularly applied to this by slaughters. So there was a great
slaughter or plague among the people, 1 Samuel 4.17. partly, because it suits
best with the Numb. 25.
history, which mentions this plague by slaughter, not that by pestilence.

2. Quaere.
2. Quere is this, The plague being great, for it brake in upon them as a flood
of waters, or as an host of armed men, the question is, how great this plague
was: For answer, ask Moses, he says, those that died in the plague were
twenty and four thousand, Numb. 25.9. ask Paul and he says, There fell
three and twenty thousand, 1 Corinthians. 10.8. these varying calculations, some
reconcile thus; Paul speaks in generals, relating to the story, Numbers 25.
Moses speaks more particularly, being the Historian: others take notice of the
double slaughter, one by the Judges with the sword, wherein probably were cut
off about three and twenty thousand, and this is Paul's number, another by
Moses, with the halter hanging up the heads of the people, probably about a
thousand, which being added to the former, makes up the four and twenty
thousand, the number set down by Moses.

3. Quaere.
A third Quere is this, Why and how the execution of judgment should be called
a plague in Israel; it seems rather a blessing then a curse in Israel. For
Answer, What was done by Moses and the Judges, as it was the cutting off of so
many Idolaters and Adulterers, so it was a blessing; as there was the taking
away of so many men's lives, so it was a sad thing, a kind of plague in Israel,
especially, all these falling in one day, 1 Cor. 10.8. as for instance, should
the Parliament put to death an hundred, or but half an hundred of the Traitors
and Rebels against the State in a day, it would in one sense be a sad
spectacle, a kind of plague, but in another a blessing in our Israel.

3. Releeved Israel.
Thirdly, for the releeving of Israel, that is brought about by the execution
of judgment: Then stood up Phinehas and executed judgment, and then the
plague was stayed, verse. 30. And here two doubts more must be answered.

1. Doubt Answered.
First, What Phinehas had to do in execution of Judgment, who for his pedigree
was the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the Priest, Numb. 25.7. for his
office at the most but praefectus sacris (as Mollerus) Mol. in v. 31.
a Ruler in the Sanctuary, but in public administration of civil Justice, he
was privatus, e plebe unus, a private man, one among the people, so that this
act of his might seem not to be zeal, but murder rather, and that in a high
degree, for there was shedding blood, noble, if not royal blood, Zimri being
the son of Salu, a prince of a chief house among the Simeonites, Numb.
25.14. and withal his slaying them in the act of their sinning might be at
once a killing of their bodies and souls also, and so double murder: For
Answer, it is clear that this act of Phineas was counted unto him for
righteousness, to wit, as a Non loquitur de iustitia personae, sedoperis. Mol.
righteous act unto all generations for evermore, verse. 31. And some Divines
give this reason for the clearing of him, that he did it by special instinct,
and by a motion extraordinary, Calv. in Locum.
and by a holy pang of zeal, yet this (by the way) is no constant rule for us
to walk by.

2. Doubt answered.
A second Doubt is, Why the pacifying of Gods wrath, and the staying of the
plague is ascribed to this act of Phineas, having a blush of irregularitie in
it, rather then to the acts of Moses and the Judges, which were by express
command from God and very regular; For Answer, the acts of Moses and the Judges
Numb. 25.4.
shaked the fire of Gods wrath, that of Phineas quenched it; again, the acts of
Moses and the Judges had a rise from a spark, that of Phineas from a flame of
zeal and holy indignation in him; hence the Lord who is exceedingly taken with
the springs and roots of actions, sets the crown upon the head of Phineas.
These things I lay down as probable, not as demonstrative.

Division of the words.
The Text has in it four particulars.

First, The quando, The circumstance of time, then.

Secondly, The quis, The agent, Phineas.

Thirdly, The quid, What he does, his acts are double. First, he stood up, or,
arose up, Numb. 25.7.
being quickened by a spirit of zeal within him. Secondly, he executed
judgment or prayed, so some render it, it may be both.

Fourthly, The quid inde, the fruits and issues. First, the wrath of God was
pacified, as it is employed in the Psalm, and expressed in Numbers. (...) in
Pih. iudicavit. (...) in Hithp. Oravit. Call. Mol. Numb. 25.11.
Secondly, the plague was stayed.

1. The Quando. The time.
First, for the quando, or the circumstance of time, it falls under a
threefold consideration.

First, then, when sin came to a height of impudency, Zimri and Cosby not
blushing to act uncleanness Numb. 25.6.
in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the Congregation of the
children of Israel, who were weeping before the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation: As it were on a Day of Solemn Humiliations.

Observation.
Hence observe, that when sin is grown impudent, that is Gods time to cut off
a sinner. Put ye in the sicle, for the harvest is ripe; come get you down for
the press is full, the fats overflow, for their wickedness is great, says
the Lord by his Prophet Joel. Joel 3.13.


Secondly, when Zimri and Cosby were in the act of sinning.

Observation.
Hence observe, how Dan. 5.23,24,25.
the vengeance of God often seiseth on the sinner in the very act of sinning. So
Belshazzer is met withal in his carowsing act, Act. 5.1,2,3,4.
Ananias and Saphira in their lying act leavened with sacrilege, and Herod in
his proud act, taking in the applause of the people, crying, It is the voice of
a God, and not of a man: Act. 12.22,23.
for the Angel of the Lord smote him as some think, with an audible blow,
Lorinus in Locum.
however a blow fatal and deadly, for because he gave not God the glory, he
was eaten up of worms (of worms above ground) and gave up the ghost.

Thirdly, Then, when Moses and the Judges were cutting off the troublers of
Israel, by thousands, in a way of justice.

Observation.
Hence observe, the Magistrates due and regular execution of justice, binds
not up Gods hands from pouring out of his wrath upon his enemies, in ways
something strange and extraordinary.

2. The quis. Phinehas.
Secondly, For the quis, the agent, Phinehas is the man that executes judgment,
a man unthought of for such a service: Observation.
hence observe that when God has work to do, he can find out workmen, a
Phinehas with zeal in his heart and a javelin in his hand, to thrust through
the proudest Zimri's and Cosbi's, the most daring sinners.

3. The quid. 4. Quid inde; together.
I shall put the third and the fourth, the quid and the quid inde, both
together, what he does and what comes of it, he executes judgment, and
thereupon wrath was pacified and the plague stayed.

Observation.
Hence observe, Numb. 25.11.
that execution of judgment, is Gods way to pacisie Gods wrath and to stay his
judgments.

The confirmation hereof I shall lay down in three Arguments.

1. Argument. A Remotione causae.
First, The removal of the Cause takes away the effect also, execution of
judgment removes the sin or the sinner, and therefore takes away Gods wrath
and judgment; Whilst Achan lives, Israel is troubled; stone Achan, burn the
accursed wedge of gold, the silver, and the Babylonish garment, etc. and the
Lord turns from the fierceness of his anger, Josh. 7. last. Whilst Jonah is
in the ship, the Searageth, cast him over board, and there is a calm
presently, Jonah 1.15.

2. Argument. A Maiore.
The second Argument runs thus; Execution of judgment that a vertus in it, to
turn a curse into a blessing, therefore much more to prevent a curse or
procure a blessing; instance the case of Levi, his curse was to be divided in
Jacob, and scattered in Israel, Genesis 49. verse 7. But the Levites in an
after story showed themselves zealous in execution of judgment upon the
Idolaters, who had worshipped the Molten Calfe, Moses stood in the Gate of the
Camp, and said, Who is on the Lords side? let him come to me: and all the
sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him, and he said unto them,
Thus says the Lord God of Israel, put every man his sword by his side, and go
in and out from gate to gate throughout the Camp and slay every man his
Brother, and every man his Companion, and every man his neighbor: and the
children of Levi did according to the word of Moses, and there fell of the
people that day about three thousand men; thereupon God bestowed upon the
Levites a blessing that day, Exodus 32.26,27,28,29. What blessing? this, that
the Levites should be given to the Priests for the Service of the Tabernacle of
the Congregation, Numb. 3.6,7. And thus their scattering is made no curse, but
a blessing, an honor to Levi, and a mercy to all Israel: Levi unscattered had
been as Candles in the pound, dark and useles, but the Levites thus scattered,
are set up as so many shining lights through all the rooms of the house of
Israel. Levi unscattered had been as so many scholars cloystered together in
the Academy, So Levi. Deuteronomy. 33.10.
but the Levites thus scattered, are as so many pious able Divines, dispersed
up and down through a Kingdom, a blessing to a Nation.

3. Argument. Ab exemplo divino.
A third Argument is from Gods own example, who best knows the way for the
pacifying of his own wrath, and he quiets himself in his executions of
judgment; the Genesis 7. and 8. Chapters.
old world sins, God is angry, the world is drowned, and God pacified. So
also in the Prophet Isaiah Chap. 1. verse. 24. The Lord of hosts the mighty one
of Israel says, Ah, I will ease me of mine Adversaries, and avenge me of mine
Enemies. Gods avenging himself is his self-easing. Again thus in the Prophet
Zachary Chap. 6. verse. 8. The Angel cries unto him, saying, Behold these that
go toward the North country have quieted my spirit in the North country.
Whether the black horses in the vision were Angels, or Meeds and Persians,
laying wast the Babylonians which lay North from Judea, it may be questioned,
but this is certain that Judgment was executed, and thereby the spirit of the
Lord quieted.

The Application.
1. Information.
For application in the first place, this truth informs us who are friends, who
enemies to our English Israel, who for the pacifying of wrath, and the removal
of judgments; those who advance and help on the execution of Judgment are our
friends, they who hinder are our enemies; obstructers of justice are
State-traitors; the weeds and flags that stop the rivers make the floods rise,
the waters to overflow; and drown the Countries, and the damming up of the
streams of Justice makes the wrath of God to arise as a mighty flood of
waters, and deluge like to drown a Nation. God seems to cry in England as
once Iehu did in Iezreel, 2 King. 9.32,33.
Who is one my side, who? The Eunuchs looked out at the window, and he said,
Throw her down: and some of her blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on the
horses, and he trod her under foot; their executing of Judgment did evidence
their siding with Iehu, and those in Israel, who stand for execution of
Justice, side with the God of Israel.

2. Exhortation
1. To personal execution of judgment.
Again in the next place this exhorts and counsels us to the execution of
Judgment, and that first private and personal on our own lusts in our breasts
and bosoms, lying, swearing, prophanations of Sabbaths, breach of Covenants,
uncleanness, etc. these, these are the Acbans that trouble Israel:
Covetousness with her self ends and aims, seeking great things, even in sad
times, makes up the wedge of Gold, and the Silver, pride in Apparel, naked
breasts, even in a Day of Humiliation, and that in the solemn Congregation
(which of late mine eyes have seen, and my heart lamented) black spots to set
out beauty, (It is mercy God turns them not into blew spots, tokens of the
pestilence) are as the babylonish garment, accursed things in Israel; the way
to help all were for every man to mortify his lusts by that spirit of Judgment
and of burning, Isaiah 4.4. Were our Corruptions brought forth and arraigned as
the malefactors, and by the spirit of the Lord adjudged to death, and executed,
were our lusts laid on heaps as the fuel, and by the spirit of the Lord, as a
flame of fire, burnt and consumed, this were the way to pacify Gods wrath, and
remove his judgments: let us not wrangle with Parliament and Armies, and
complain such a Commander is unfaithful, such a leading man carries on his
own designs, when our lusts at home, our personal corruptions are the inlets
of all our miseries; yea the sins of inferiors God often times punishes with
sinful miscariages in superiors; the akeing of the head is often from taking
cold in the feet, and the wheels above in the clock stand still, because the
plummets below are down; and God gives up David to a numbering of the people,
when the anger of the Lord was yet kindled against Israel: 2 Samuel 24.1.
holiness at home gives victories abroad; Jacob cleanses his household from the
strange Gods, bids it be clean, Genesis 35.2. and the terror of the Lord was
upon the cities round about him, verse. 5. Joshua was the man renouned for
victories, and he is the man that says, I and my house will serve the Lord:
Josh. 24.15.
and David's method is first to cleanse his family, and then purge the Kingdom,
He that works deceit shall not dwell within my house, Psalm. 101.7. And then, I
will early destroy all the wicked of the land, etc. ver. 8.

Secondly, For public and national executions of judgment, you (my Lords) are
some of our State-Physitians, and Kingdom-Chirurgions, the people bring in
complaints, make known their grievances, lay open their sores, that you might
help to heal them; What if County Committees gall and tire out the people day
after day, week after week, with tedious waitings, and sorely grieve them
with unjust taxations? your Honors must help to ease them; if widows and
orphans made so by the wars, I may call them sword widows, and sword orphans;
if a company of poor maimed soldiers that once fought for their lives, now beg
that they may live, (which is neither for the honor nor encouragement of
Soldiery) (you my Lords) must take some order for the releeving of them; if
justice, justice be cried for by God and the Kingdom, you are the Moseses and
Judges that must sentence them to the axe, or to the halter. For the manner
how, and the motives why there should be a due execution of Justice, we may
take it in these ensuing considerations.

Modificativa.
1. Sincerely.
For the manner first, the execution of justice should be sincere, sincerely,
in regard of its springs and aims, the springs are zeal for God, a love of
truth and justice, hatred of sin, and a desire of welfare to Church and
State; the ends should be Gods glory, the advancing of truth and peace,
suppressing of sin and error, reformation and (if it may be) salvation to
such as fall under the lash of Justice. Moses grinds to powder the golden Calf,
and it was his zeal constrained him; Exodus 32.20.
Phinehas thrust Zimri and Cos by through with a javelin, and it was his zeal
that fired him thereto; Numb. 25.30.
Christ whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, and the reason was, the
Ioh. 2.17.
zeal of his fathers house eat him up. Iehu had a kind of zeal too, and
that in the execution of judgment upon the house of Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 22.8.
but his eye was upon himself, not upon the Lord, and for the establishing of
his own Kingdom, not the Lords, he failed in the spring and end of action, and
therefore what he does is accounted by the Lord not zeal but murder, and God
threatens to avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu, Hosea 1.4.

2. Magnanimous eye.
Secondly, Judgment should be executed magnanimiter, with a resolution
removing all blocks in the way, breaking all bars that hinder Justice.

1. Iron bar.
As first, an Iron bar of fears: The fear of man brings a snare; Prove. 29.25.
What if the Popish party should in the end prevail? It is wisdom so to
carry it, that which way soever the game goes, we may save our own stakes: thus
reasons flesh and blood, but faith and zeal soon snap this bar in sunder.

2. Golden bar.
Secondly, there is a Golden bar of hopes which hinders Justice; hopes of
preferment, a high prizing of court smiles; and promises, a gaping for great
places, are remora's and lets to the execution of Justice, though the covenant
engages all that have taken it, not to be swayed by fears or hopes, Dan. 11.32.
yet that of Daniel is the portion of too too many, that they do wickedly
against the Covenant, and are corrupt by flatteries; when in the mean time,
the people that know their God shall be strong and do exployts. Themistocles a
Heathen may shame many a Christian, Toll tu, ego sum Themistocles.
who finding a chain of Gold in the street, would not foul his finger for it;
but in an heroic Morality of spirit says to another, Take thou it up, I am
Themistocles.

3. Fleshie bar.
A third is, a Fleshy bar of natural or civil Relations and Engagements,
Such a man should be punished, but he is my near Kinsman, my old Companion;
Another deserves to smart for his facts, but a dear friend spoke for him; in
such a case remember Levi, who said unto his father and to his mother, I have
not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own
children, for they observed the word of the Lord and kept his Covenant, Deuteronomy.
33.9. Zeal laid aside natural affections in Levi, when it put him upon this
work, the execution of Judgment. Brutus spared not his own sons, when they
transgressed the Laws. And Aristides was so Constant and Resolute in a way of
Justice, Aristides. Citius solemn de coelo, etc.
that the Sun might as easily be pulled out of the firmament, as he from his
or be of Justice.

4. Effeminate bar.
Lastly, there is an Effeminate bar (if I may so phrase it) of groundless
pity, that is an enemy to Justice; pity is due to men, but Justice to the
troublers of Israel, and pity to one, may be cruelty to thousands. Augustine:
saevit in vulnus, ut homo sanetur; si vulnus palpetur, homo perdetur.
The Surgeon is cruel to the wound, that he may save the man, and kindness
to a disease, may prove the death to the Patient. Moses was the meekest man on
earth in his days, a man full of pity, and yet he hangs up many, very many of
the heads of the people against the Sun before the Lord.

3. Speedily,
Thirdly, Judgment must be executed celeriter speedily, without delays: Let
Judgment be speedily executed, Ezra 7.26. Execute Judgment in the morning,
Ier. 21.12. Evening-justice, Noon-justice, is not so seasonable, so acceptable
to the Lord as Morning-justice; delays break the spirits of the innocent,
harden the hearts, and strengthen the hands of the guilty.

4. Proportionably.
Fourthly, Justice and judgment should be administered proportionaliter, in a
proportion to the nature and degree of crimes and facts, sometiems death,
sometimes banishment, Ezra 7.26.
in one case confiscation of goods, in another imprisonment. I need not mind
your Honors of a mixture of mercy with justice, the Judges robes, though red,
have some streamings of white about them; and David says, he will sing of
mercy, of Judgment, Psalm. 101.1. as occasion serves execute justice, and
pronounce sentence yea unto death, though Augustus-like, you do it with tears
in your eyes.

5. Impartially.
Lastly, execute judgment impartialiter, impartially and thoroughly, in regard
of persons and things: to hang a poor soldier now and then for running from
his Colors, who was perhaps afraid of being starved at his Colors, may have a
piece of Justice in it, but it was Saul's sparing of Agag, and the fat among the
flock, that rent his Kingdom from him, and gave it to his neighbor better
then he. 1 Samuel 15.28. Salomons throne was supported by Lions, and it is
Courageous execution of lustice, that holds up thrones and kingdoms.

Motives.
The Considerations, enforcing the duty of executing Judgment, may be briefly
these.

Gods Approbation.
First, Gods approbation: Phinehas executes Judgment, and it is accounted to
him for righteousness, verse. 31. Fasting, praying, and hearing are good, and
execution of judgment is good also; 1 Samuel 15.
Saul's obedience in slaying Agag, had been better then his sacrifice. Josh. 7.
Joshua rends his clothes, lies on his face until evening, but all in vain,
whilst the accursed thing remains in the Camp of Israel.

2. Gods Remuneration.
Secondly, Consider Gods remuneration, his rewarding those that do execute
judgment: the Lord gives unto Phinehas his covenant of peace, and to his seed
after him, even the covenant of an everlasting Priesthood; because he was
zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the children of Israel, Numb.
25.12,13. Mol. in loc. Cum Deus approbet, and praemiis ornet hoc factum,
exemplum hoc omnibus gubernatoribus proponitur, ut iusto zelo arderent adversus
turpitudinem, etc.
and so holds out an example, and encouragement to all in authority, to burn
with zeal for God against his enemies: God will be no man's debtor, whoever
honors him he will honor: and would you (my Lords) Exodus 1. alluded to.
as the Hebrew midwives fear God, and preserve the Males in Israel, the Cause
of God, and of his people, God would build you Houses, raise your Families, and
spread your Honors.

3. Gods Pacification.
Thirdly, Execution of Judgment for God, is the pacification of wrath in God;
Hence the Lord by the Prophet, Ier. 5.1. Run ye to and fro through the streets
of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, to
wit, to the gates where were the Seats of Justice, if you can find a man,
(that is) a public man zealous for God, if there be any that executes
judgment, and seeks the truth, and I will pardon it. Whence we may argue
thus; If one such man saves a Jerusalem, and that by promise, then many such
men might save a Nation: There is a fire of civil war kindled in England,
still burning in the bowels of it, and for my part, I think there is but two
bloods will quench it, the blood of Christ and of his desperate enemies: free
grace in God has powered out the one, full Justice in your Honors should help
to power out the other. The sacred Story in the Old Testament all along,
discovers sin to be the makebate, and execution of Judgment to be the
make-peace between God and Israel; and the judicial Laws for the policy of
the Jews, however abrogated, yet had they an appendix of moral equity, and
so a perpetual obligation in them.

4. Hopes and fears.
Fourthly, Fears and hopes, should spur on to the execution of judgment:
fear we may, when we remember Gods curse on Ahab, who cried my brother
Benhadad, the curse was this, Because thou have let go out of thy hand, a man
whom I appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life,
and thy people for his people, 1 King, 20.42. The ac^omplishment whereof we
find, when the dogs licked up the blood of Ahab, according to the word of the
Lord which he spoke, Chap. 22.38. Should the bloodthirsty enemies break in upon
us, and spill our blood as water upon the ground, ravish our wives and
daughters, and slay our tender infants, before our faces, then would our lives
go for their lives, and our people for their people. Probably the way to
sheath one sword were to draw another, and if the sword of Justice did more,
the sword of war would do less; the Physician by way of revulsion stops
bleeding by letting blood; and did England bleed enough in the Malignant vein,
we have cause to think that other sad Issues of blood would be stopped and
staunched. And again hope we may for peace, for plenty, for all prosperity,
and that by promise upon the due execution of Judgment; If you thoroughly
execute judgment between a man and his neighbor, then will I cause you to
dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers for ever and ever,
Ier. 7.5.7. We dwell yet in a Land flowing with milk and honey, in a healthy
and wealthy Nation, given to our fathers, let us not loose England for want of
Justice.

5. It evidenceth the sincerity of devotions.
Fifthly and lastly; All devotions, yea, fasting and praying, are but formal
and hypocritical, without execution of judgment; Hence Gods expostulation
with the people, Zach. 7.5. When you fasted and mourned, did you at all fast
unto me, even unto me? their fasting was no fasting in Gods account, and the
reason is, because they did not execute true judgment, verse. 9. to fast and
set Naboth on high, crushing the innocent, is Iesabelish and devilish, to fast
and spare Agags, our fatest lusts unmortified, and the great firebrands of
State unpunished, is but to play the hypocrite and the Pharisee.

My Lords, we are cast upon troublous times, which are trying times, and as
Hierom says of Job, Hier. Haec ei contigerunt, ut appareret foris hominibus,
quod intrinsecus erat apud Deum.
all those evils befell him, that he might appear to be outwardly to men, what
he was inwardly to God, so the Lord goes on in such a way of providence, as
that the thoughts of many hearts will be discovered, and it will appear who
are for God, and who for Baal. It is sad to think how some renowned Worthies,
L. Brook, Mr. Hamden, etc.
who traveled with your Honors in this work of Reformation, have laid down
their lives in the quarrel; it is sadder yet to see that others like the Neh.
3.5.
Nobles of Tecoa have not put their necks to the work of the Lord; Nay, their
heads, hearts, and hands, their lands, and their lives are laid out against
the Lord, and against his cause; yet ride you on patiently (ye men of Honor)
gird your swords upon your thighs, execute judgment in the fear of the Lord
faithfully, and with a perfect heart; so God did command the Levites, 2 Chronicles.
19.9. Go on not in your own names or strength, but in the name and strength of
the Lord your God; let there be a holy ambition, and a pious emulation among
you, to be each more active, more helpful then other for the building of the
walls, yea, the Temple of Jerusalem, for settling the affairs of State and
Church, and in the things of God, his worship and Churchgovernment be not
swayed by subtle insinuations, seeming holiness, personal preengagements or
popular politic Arguments on the one side, or on the other, but what shall be
found to have Gods Royal stamp of Ius Divinum, be it Formaliter, by express
precept, or constant Apostolical practice, or consequeutive only, by a
necessity of rational deduction, fear not to give it your political stamp
of civil sanction, whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be
diligently done, for the house of the God of heaven, Ezra 7.23. Your enemies
are engaged, and you had need be resolute, your Arc and their Dagon will
scarce stand together, and in probability, either your sword must cut down
them, or theirs you; should you hold your peace, and stay in the cause, yet (as
Mordecai to Hester) deliverance shall come from some other place, but you and
your fathers houses shall be destroyed, and who knows whether God has not
reserved you in the Kingdom for such a time as this? Hest. 4.14.
The Kingdom, nay the three kingdoms upon the point have much what entrusted
your Honors with their lands, liberties, lives, and souls also; yea, with all
that concerns them and their posterities, therefore be faithful to the death,
and the Lord of Lords shall give you the crown of Life. I beseech you execute
judgment, as you will answer it at the Day of Judgment.

And now could I lift up my voice as a trumpet, had I the shrill cry of an
angel, which might be heard from East, to West, from North to South, in all
the corners of the Kingdom, my note should be, execution of judgment,
execution of judgment, execution of judgment, that is Gods way to pacify
Gods wrath; Then stood up Phinehas and executed judge meant, and so the plague
was stayed.

FINIS.

