A DIVRNALL, OF True Proceedings OF OUR ARMIES AT Sherbourne, Since their first
coming there, and their happy issues related.

Showing the goodness of God in preserving the courage of those that stand for
King and Parliament against the Cavalliers, and their Adherents.

Desired by many to be published, being the last true news. And of the Battle
there fought.

LONDON, Printed by Luke Norton for Benjamin Allen in Popes head Alley.
September. 14. 1642.

Loving Cozen,
YOur Letters, as also my Pistols I received yesterday at my return home from
the Army, and give you thanks for your careful sending of them. Now to give
you some touch of our proceedings in these parts. I will relate it unto you in
way of a diurnall; First, therefore on Sunday the 25. of August the Earl of
Bedford came into this County, where the Gentlemen of this County met him, and
attended him that night to Wells, where they stayed till Saturday following, the
Country (I mean) the Traine-Bands, and Volunteers resorted unto him in great
numbers: on Saturday hey marched from Wells to Glassenbury where they stayed till
Tuesday, on Tuesday they marched to Elchester, where they stayed Wednesday being
Fast day, and on Thursday marched to Evell, and on Friday marched to the hill
where we lay that night, not doing any thing, only a few of the Cavaleirs
shawing themselves at Sherborne Towns end in a bravado, a squadron of Major
Prittys troop (in whose company I entered my self and two more of Cozen Ashes
men well horst) rode down to them, but they retreated back into the Town,
not changing one Bullet; on Saturday morning our forces horse and foot were
drawn down to the towns end, as also all our Ordnance which were about eight
or nine, in our march as we past by the Castle, they at the Castle let fly
eight or nine pieces of Ordnance at us, two of which were let fly against out
troop we being the first troop in the field, but (praised be God) they fell
short and did us no hurt, but the bullets fell so near us that we took them
up. Our Companies being come up, some foot of ours were drawn up into the lane
that enters the Town, and our troop to enter the town, my place was the
right hand file of the Coronet in the front of the battle: The Cavalliers had
placed store of Musketeers on both sides of the lane under hedges and bushes
which play very thick upon us, the bullets flying very thick about our ears,
they being under covert, and we lying an open mark unto them, our Gunners
began to play with a small brass piece upon the Town, what service they did
we know no; the Cavalliers grew so fast upon us, having that great advantage,
that we were forced to draw back our pecce of Ordnance higher upon the hill,
and our troop to retreat higher, having been half an hour in this great
danger, not one of us (praised be God) hurt, the first man that fell in this
skirmish of ours was one that was shot by his next fellow, who shot him through
the back.

Now was our troop relieved and fresh men to supply, playing on both sides
very sharp and quick, continuing till Evening; on our fide we had not above
six killed and hurt, one of which there were kill I was a shearman of Cozen
Ashes, who looking over a little wall after he had discharged his Musket, was
shot through the head, what hurt was on the enemies side we cannot learn; at
evening, at the closure of the night, our troop was drawn up again to enter
the Town, which had been a great hazard to us all the enemy being in houses,
and we open to their mark: And in the dark night we as likely to shoot our
selves as our enemies, this was at last considered of, and after we had sitten
at the lanes end two or three hours, were brought back again to our Camp.

This evening our greatest pieces (which were not very big) began to play at
the Castle, discharged nine pieces, which we conceived had done good service
against the Castle, we could not perceive the Castle, for it was in the dark of
the evening; but the next morning we could perceive no service that they had
done. Sunday morning we removed further upon the hill over against the Casile,
and began to entrench, some few musketeers on both sides making light
skirmishes one against the other; and some few of our horse scouting out, but
nothing done worth the writing. I had now watched three nights together.
Thursday night, Friday night, and Saturday, and sitting continually upon my
horse, was so tired, that I could not hold up my head any longer, so this night
I went with my cousin Samuel Ash to Evell; three miles from the Camp, and on
Monday we returned to the Camp again, where nothing more was done.

Our countrymen with this long and tedious march grew very weary, and
abundance of them stole a way from the Camp, some of them throwing their arms
away into the corn fields, the better to escape home; so that our Army now
grew l^sse and less, and our m^n very weary and tired. I offered my self on
Saturday (...) pence to a boy to fetch me a draught of wat^r (...) was the
Cavalliers policy, for they were warm, and their bellies full, lying in their
beds and they knew well, that our country fellows that were wont to have their
bellies full of good beef, and then to their beds, would not long endure hunger
and cold on a bleak hill.

On Tuesday it was concluded by our Council of War, that our Army should
retird that night to Evell, from whence my Lord with what forces he thought
good would march to Dorchester, there to remain till he had sent to the
Parliament, and as I hear, to have some of your Generals forces to come
hither. We came to Evell that night, and on Wednesday I came homewards in
company of Captain Barnards foot, We came Wednesday night to Elchester now let
me tell you of a passage that happened on Wedsday at evening after I was come
from Evel: The Cavalliers with a great force of horse and 3. companies of foot
came from Sherbourn, to the hill over Evell, about a mile from the town; whose
unexpected appear^nce put the town in a great hu^ly Burly: But after our men
had placed their Ordnance for the security of the town and strengthened them
with men; Captain Askew and his troop of horte and Captain Thomson and his
troop, with twenty musquettiers attending each troop were sent to the hill,
Captain Askew took one way up the hill, and Captain Thomson another, Captain
Askew was the first who with his small troop charged them so courageously that
he went through and through them, killed as is reported) eight of them, and
after discharging Carbines and pistols fell to work with their swords and so
retreated: Captain Askew lost in this conflict three of his men; by this time
Captain Thomson charged them on the other side and presently routed them, they
taking themselves to their horse heels, the three captains of their foot,
young Lunsford fled away upon his horse; Captain Hussy killed, and the third
Captain taken prisoner: Our men fell upon their foot, killed betwixt thirty
and forty; took many prisoners, and but that the night fell dark upon them
had cut them all off: And our horse followed their horse home to Sherborne
towns end, We hear that Sir Ralph Hopton is hurt, one of the Bartlets killed,
with some other of their Commanders: This has a little cooled their
Insolences. Thus much in haste for news in these parts.

Freshford, 10. Septembris, 1642. Your loving Cousin till death, Lat. Sampson.

From Dorchester Septembris, 10. 1642.
From an Alderman to his Friend in London.
HEre in the Country we dare not send seven miles abroad for the Cavalliers,
who at Sherbourn do pillage rob, and kill like the Sons of hell; but they were
met withal this week to the purpose, by some London Troopers; and our
Dorchester Troopers. My Lord of Bedford finding the Castle to be a piece of
greater str^ngth than he imagined, and seeing his trained band men forsake
him, so that of six or seven thousand, he had but 1500. left within three
days, not that they deserted the country, but being men that have wives and
estates, were loath to lose or hazard them in an obscure way, my Lord resolved
to raise the siege, and they marched to a Town called Evell, within four miles
of Sherborne. There was lost seven or eight men of a side at the siege, very
few more or less that we can learn: I am sure no more of our side on
Wednesday toward evening, while my Lord of Bedford and the soldiers were at a
Sermon in Evell at the Funeral of some soldiers lately killed. The Sherborn
Lords and Cavalliers having that day received into their aid an hundred horse,
and two hundred foot from Master Rogers, one of our high knights, entertained
them with triumph at the departure of my Lord of Bedfords forces, contemning
the Parliament, came in a bravado, pitching themselves in battle array with
400. horse, and 200. musketeers in ambush at the top of the hill before Evell
and Sherborne middle way, which the London troops hearing of, two of their
troops and our Dorchester troops lay ready to assault the enemies, the other
Troops abiding at the end of the town of Evell fearing the Cavalleirs would
surprise the town, our men have about one hundred musquetieres and one hundred
and forty horse: and marched while bullets flew as thick as hail about their
ears, they assaulted the Cavalleirs while they spent their shot and came within
sword point, cutting and slashing without either pity or mercy the great
r^bels without respect of person; but the night came on else they in
likelihood had killed and taken every man. God cast upon the Cavalleirs a
spirit of fea^fulnesse that they, ran like mise into every hole the
musketeers threw down their Arms and fied so that our men took about twenty
men in ambush, with some chief Commanders and killed many, amongst whom were
Colonel Lunsford and the Lord Paulet credibly reported to be slain: the next
morning were twenty eight dead bodies found lying on the ground besides those
that were carried away in the night by the Rebels, there were lanth^rns and
candles seen sear^hing for dead bodies all the night at the Cavalliers flying
away as they did like mad men, they said hold your hands for you have shed much
noble blood: Of our side were slain five men, and two or three taken prisoners,
and some more likely wounded. The Cavalliers were heard to say at their coming
home, The Roundheads did fight more like Devils than men, and swore that they
thought they had lost half their men. Of 200. musketeers there returned but
18. into the Castle the first night: This news is certain, my man was in the
fight; only it is not certain whether my Lord Paulet is slain, or dangerously
hurt.

I desire you to take notice of one passage, That a Cavallierbeing beaten off
his horse, cried out for mercy, for they had a bad cause: But one of Captain
Askews men being deadly wounded, called to his fellows to go on, for they had
a good cause: We see conscience in dying men will speak truth.

FINIS.

