Catholic Divinity: OR, The most Solid and Sententious Expressions of the
Primitive Doctors of the Church.

With other Ecclesiastical, and Civil Authors: Dilated upon, and fitted to the
Explication of the most Doctrinal Texts of Scripture, in a choice way both for
the matter, and the language, and very useful for the Pulpit, and these Times.

By Dr. Stuart, Dean of St. Paul's, afterward Dean of Westminster, and Clerk of
the Closet to the late K. Charles.

LONDON, Printed for H. M. and are to be sold by Timo. Smart at his shop in
the Great Old-Bayly near the Sessions House 1657.

To the Reader.
YOu may by these few sheets understand in some part that great benefit of
humane Learning, how serviceable it may be made for Divine. For as the
Badger-skins, and Goats-hair were made use of for the service of the Tabernacle
in the Jewish Church: So may the Endowments of profane Infidel-Philosophers,
Orators, and Poets, be employed for the service of the Christian. And indeed
the Arts are but as handmaids to Divinity. Look but back upon those two famous
patterns of Jewish and Christian Divines, Moses learned in all the wisdom of
the Egyptians, and St. Paul wise in all the learning of the Grecians, a great
Artist, and a good Linguist: Now to what purpose both those gifts, unless
improved to a further end, then they were first intended, namely to make Greece
and Egypt Proselites, and to teach those Nations Christianity from the grounds
and principles of their own learning.

And thus, Reader, may thou make use of this Book, if a Minister for thy
Pulpit; if a Layman for thy practice. As for the Author, he is too well
known, to be praised by a private Pen; only thus much take notice in his
behalf, that these were only some loose scattered sheets of his Juvenilia; by
which you may guess what his full grown elaborate pieces will be, when ever it
shall please God to instruct these ignorant Times with those his most learned
Productions. Till when, I am

Thine in all Christian service, H. M.

Catholic Divinity: OR, The most solid and sententious Expressions of the
Primitive Doctors of the Church, etc.
Quam male est extra legem viventibus, quicquid meruerunt semper expectant.

Petronius.
FAt Swine cry hideously, if but touched or meddled with, as knowing they owe
their life to every one that will take it. Tyberius felt the remorse of
conscience so violent, that he protested to the Senate, that he suffered
death daily: Whereupon Tacitus makes this good Note, Tandem-facinora and
flagitia in supplicium vertuntur, as every body has its shadow appertaining to
it, so has every sin its punishment: And although they escape the lash of the
Law, yet vengeance will not suffer them to live (as the Barbarians rashly
censured St. Paul Act. 28.) quietly at least. Richard the Third after the
Murder of his two Nephews, had fearful dreams and visions, insomuch that he
did often leap out of his bed in the dark, and catching his sword (which always
naked stuck by his side) he would go distractedly about the chamber, every
where seeking to find our the cause of his own occasioned disquiet. It is as
proper for sin to raise fears in the soul, as for rotten flesh and wood to
breed worms. That worm that never dies, is bred here in the froth of filthy
lusts and flagitious courses, and lies gnawing and grabling upon men's inwards;
many times in the ruff of all their jollity. This makes Saul call for a
Minstrel, Belshazzar for his carowsing cups, others for other pleasures, to put
by the pangs of their wounded spirits, and throbbing consciences. Charles the
fourth after the Massacre of France, could never endure to be awakened in the
night without Music, or some like diversion, he became as terrible to himself
as formerly he had been to others; but above all, I pity the loss of their
souls, who serve themselves as the Jesuit in Laucashire, followed by one that
found his glove, with a desire to restore it him; but pursued inwardly with a
guilty conscience, he leapes over a hedge, plunges into a Marlepit behind it
unseen and unthought of, wherein he was drowned.

Vestium curiosit as, deformitatis mentium and morum indicium est.

St. Bernard.
OUr first Parents, who even after the Fall, were the goodliest creatures that
ever lived, went no better clothed, than with leather; no more did those
Worthies, of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11. 37 And surely, however our
condition and calling, afford us better array, and the Vulgar like a Pohemian
Cur, fawn upon every good suit (purpuram magis quam dominu^ colunt) yet we
must take heed that pride creep not into our clothes, those Ensigns of our sin
and shame, seeing our fineness, is but our filthiness; our weakness, our
nastiness. It is a sure sign of a base mind to think he can make himself
great with any thing that is less than himself, and win more credit by his
garments than his graces. St. Peter teaches women, 1 Pet. 3. 3. to garnish
themselves, not with gay clothes, but with a meek and quiet spirit, and not as
those mincing Dames, whose pride the Prophet Isaiah inveighes against, as
punctually as if he had viewed the Ladies Wardrobes in Jerusalem. Rich Apparel
are but fine covers for the foulest shame; the worst is Natures garment, the
best but follies garnish. How blessed a Nation were we, if every silken suit
did cause a sanctified soul; or if we could look upon our clothes, as our
first Parents did, as love tokens from God.

Quicquid propter Deum fit, equaliter fit.

St. August.
IT is said in the seventh of Genesis verse. 5. That Noah did according to all that
the Lord had commanded him; Where the word All, is a little word, but of a
large extent; he does not his Masters, but his own will, that does no more
than himself will. A disspensatory conscience, is an evil conscience, God
cries to us, (...), he will have universal obedience both for subject and
object. We must be entirely willing in all things to please God, or we
utterly displease him. Herod did many things, and was not any thing the better.
Jehues golden Calves made an end of him, though he had made an end of Baals
worship: He that does some, and not all Gods will, with no desire and
affection at least, does but as Benhadad, recover of one disease, and dye of
another; yea if he take not a better course with himself, he does but take
pains to go to Hell. Then shall we not be ashamed, when we have respect to
all Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6.

Sordet in conspectu judicis, quod fulg^^ in conspect ^ operantis.

Gregor.
GOd can find flaws in that for which we may look for thanks. This makes
Nehemiah crave pardon of his zealous Reformations; and David cries out, Enter
not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for no flesh is righteous in thy
sight. Ye are they that justify your selves before men (says Christ to the
Pharisees) but God knows your hearts, for that which is highly esteemed amongst
men, is abamination in the sight of God. A thing which I see in the night may
shine, and that shining proceed from nothing but rottenness, but be not
deceived (or if you be, yet) God is not mocked, when he comes to turn the
bottom of the bag upwards (as the Steward did Benjamins) all our secret thefts
will out, all our collusions come to light; His Law is a Law of fire, Deuteronomy. 33.
2. His Tribunal of fire, Ezekiel. 1. 27. His pleading with sinners, in flames of
fire, Isa. 60. 15. The trial of our works shall be by fire, and before God who
is a consuming fire. Happy are they that are here purged by that spirit of
judgment and burning.

Bona res neminem scandalizant, nisi malam mentem.

Tertullian.
GOod meats displease none but the distempered pallats; and must the wholesome
dishes be barred the table, because they offend the aguish? No, Scandal in
this case is medicinable. You know the Physician offends the sick, that he may
the more surely cure him. If to do well cause discontent, we then offend not
against men, but their errors; and in this regard, we are tender to the
persons themselves when we strike down their ignorance. In Matthew. 8. where our
Savior taught the abrogation of Jewish Ceremonies, and that the worst meats
could not defile us, the text intimates the Pharisees were offended; nay, and
his Disciples from hence seem to entreat his silence, Master, See thou not
that they are offended? But did our Savior regard it? Let them alone, says
he, They are blind leaders of the blind. Christ meant to teach us when men
grow discontented at the truth it self, the offense is taken only, not given,
and they be said then rather to make, than to receive a scandal: Which may
serve to reprove too many in our Church, who still cry out of weakness, who sit
not easy though on their mothers 'knees, they complain her clothes do offend
their tender eyes, her Rites say they are scandalous, and they must be
relieved by that text in Saint Paul, If meat offend my brother, I will eat no
meat while I live. It follows then that for their weak sakes, we must forbear
those weak ceremonies. But is the reason the same? to eat is a private action
in common converse, wherein each man is true Lord of himself, he may command
his actions, and therefore in this case to use connivency is still to be
thought most commendable. But we speak of actions public, solemnly designed
for our Religious meetings, actions enjoined by Laws, and approved by the far
more, which is the rule of Laws; should the Church give content to some few
that dislike, she would displease multitudes, that approve her Ceremonies, and
so instead of a pretended slight offense, she should run her self upon a true
gross scandal.

Non omne quod licet, etiam honestum est.

Paulus Canonista.
IT is a Rule of the Canonists, and they borrowed it from their own
Innocentius. In all our actions three things must be observed, Quid liceat;
Quid deceat; Quid expediat: What is lawful, What decent, and what expedient.
Our actions must not be lawful only; for he that does no more than he is
bound to, is rather wary than good, and has learned only safe dishonesty, how
by keeping the Kingdoms Laws, he may abuse her people. There is a difference
between strict Law and honesty. In rigor things may be done, which yet are
neither decent in the actor himself, nor expedient for the Commonwealth. Its
thus in the Church too: Many things has God here left in their own selves
indifferent; he has therefore not forbidden them, because they may oftentimes
be done in safety, and yet cannot we be free, except we become injurious.
Is there no way to show our own liberty but in our neighbors destruction?
Grant these things to be lawful, yet they may be unseemly, and shall we
shame our selves? They may be expedient too, and shall we endanger others? It
is not enough to keep the first Precept to forbear things unlawful: A
Christian man must be wary too in matters of indifferency.

Quae per rationem innotescunt, non sunt articuli fidei, sed praeambula, ad
articulos.

Aquinas.
TO behold this goodly Fabric of the world, may soon force a Pagan to confess
that there is a Deity, but to know that this God is both three and one; or that
of these three, one was Incarnate: Here nature is blind, and requires help
from a clearer light. To instance in the Resurrection, to see the Grave open,
the Earth trembling, the Angels attending, did no doubt persuade the Watchmen
themselves that Christ was risen, but to believe that he rose both God and
man, This proceeds from the Spirit alone, who only can enlighten them that sit
in darkness. Our domestic abilities may some way prepare us to entertain
faith; when it is received, they may perchance confirm or awaken it; but we
must confess the author of it to be the Holy Ghost alone, and the word his
instrument. Notwithstanding where thou may use these helps, neglect not the
benefits of such outward testimonies; for though faith come by hearing, yet let
Christians be spectators too, and learn, as well to see God in his Works, as
to believe him in his Scriptures, though that he that made thine eye, as well
as thy soul, exacts a tribute no less from thy fenfe than from thy reason.
These lower powers are made for his glory; and when they are employed to viler
ends, remember that thou do not more abuse thy self, than wrong thy Maker.

Mors optima est perire, dum lacrymant Sancti.

Seneca in Hypol.
SOmething is to be given to Custom, something to Fame, to Nature, and to
Civilities, and to the honor of deceased Friends. For that man is esteemed to
dye miserable, for whom no friend, no relative sheds a tear, or pays a solemn
sigh. I desire to dye a dry death, but am not very desirous to have a dry
Funeral. Some flowers sprinkled on my grave would do well, and comely; and a
soft shower to turn those flowers into a springing memory, or a fair rehearsal,
that I may not go forth of my doors as my servants carry out the entrails of
Beasts. But that which is to be saulted in this particular is, when the grief
is immoderate and unreasonable; and Paula Romana deserved to have felt the
weight of St. Jeroms severe reproof, when at the death of every one of her
children she almost wept her self into her grave. But it is worse, yet when
people by an ambitious and a pompous sorrow, and by ceremonies invented for the
ostentation of their grief, fill Heaven and Earth with exclamations, and grow
troublesome, because their friend is happy, or themselves want his company.

It is certainly a sad thing in Nature to see a friend trembling with a Palsy,
or scorched with Fevers, or dried up like a Potsherd with immoderate heats,
and rolling upon his uneasy bed without sleep, which cannot be invited with
Music; nothing but the servants of cold death, poppy, and weariness, can
tempt' the eyes to let their curtains down, and then they fleep only to taste
of death, and yet we weep not here: The solemn opportunity for tears, we
choose when our friend is fallen asleep, when he has laid his neck upon the lap
of his mother, and let his head down to be raised up to Heaven: This grief is
ill placed, and undecent.

Ne^^ me lacbrym is (...), nec (...)
Faxit: Cur? V^lit^ vi^^^ per ora vi^^^^.
Ennius.
SOlemn and appointed mournings are good expressions of our dearness to the
departed soul of our friend, and of his worth, and our value of him; and it
has its praise in Nature, and in Manners, and public Custom; but the praise
of it is not in the Gospel; that is, It has no proper and direct uses in
Religion. For if the dead did dye in the Lord, then there is joy in him; and it
is an ill expression of our affection, and our charity, to weep uncomfortably
at the change that has carried my friend to the state of an huge felicity. But
if the man did perish in his folly, and his sins, there is indeed cause to
mourn, but no hopes of being comforted; for he shall never return to light, or
to hopes of restitution; Therefore beware lest thou also come into the same
place of torment; and let thy grief sit down, and rest upon thine own turf, and
weep till a shower spring from thine eyes to heal the wounds of thy spirit.
Turn thy sorrow into caution, thy grief for him that is dead, to thy care for
thy self who art alive, lest thou dye, and fall like one of the fools, whose
life is worse than death, and their death is the consummation of all
infelicities. The Church in her funerals of the dead used to sing Psalms, and
to give thanks for the redemption, and delivery of the soul from the evil, and
dangers of mortality. And therefore we have no reason to be angry when God
hears our prayers, who call upon him to hasten his coming, and to fill up his
numbers, and to do that which we pretend to give him thanks for.

Ne excedat medicina modum.

Galenus.
CUt not too deep, nor lance too far; Nam non medicina ista, sed clades est,
said Germanicus in Tacitus, when he saw a great number of Soldiers put to
death for Mutiny, * Beriere nocentes
Sed cum jam soli poterunt super^sse nocentes.
Spoken by Lucan of Scylla; he let out the corrupt blood, but when there was
in a manner no other blood left in the whole body of the Commonwealth; and this
was not to cure, but to cut off a Commonwealth. And therefore in all
punishments let this be your rule, and let the severity of your justice be
regulated by this prudential and merciful Aphorism; Poena ad paucos, met us ad
omnes perveniat, let the clap fright all, the Thunderbolt strike but a few. For
principi non minus turpia multa supplicia quam medico funera, it is as great a
shame for a Magistrate, as for a Physician to have many dye under his hand. To
save whole multitudes, is a work of Gods mercy; and that Prince deserves the
name of Gods Vicegerent that imitates him in this particular. For which reason
it was that Scipio when he put thirty of his Soldiers to death, ante suas
lachrymas quam ipsorum sanguinem effudit, shed his own tears before their blood.

Si molliora frustra cesserint medicus ferit venam,

Senec. Et efflatur omne priusquam concutitur,

idem.
NOthing is struck with the Thunderbolt, which is not blasted before with
lightning; first to use gentle means before we take a more severe course. For
great spirits are for the most part like the Colossus at Tarentum, which you
may move with your finger, but cannot wag if you put your whole strength to it,
it a ratio est libramenti, Plin. Much resembling in this the Pyrrhite stone,
which may be gently ground, or cut with a sharp tool, but if you press it
hard, or handle it rudely, it burns your fingers; So great men may be wrought
upon in a civil courteous way, but if you think to bring them to goodness by
authority and power, you will then put them in mind of their own strength,
raise enemies, and opposition, where you did expect a compliance, and friends;
and so instead of saving others, you will destroy your self.

Sua sponte cadentem maturius extinguere vulnere, inhumanum est.

Cice.
TO break the bruised reed, to trouble the grieved spirit, to strike the breath
out of a man's body, who is giving up the ghost, is cruelty upon cruelty. And
therefore it was the complaint of Cyprian against the persecutors of Christians
in his time, in servis Dei non torquebantur membra sed vulnera, they laid
stripes upon stripes, and inflicted wounds upon sores, and tortured not so much
the members of Gods servants, as their bleeding wounds.

Tota funeris pompa contemnenda est in nobis, non tamen negligenda in nostris.

Cice.
THough the pomp of Funerals concerns not the dead in real and effective
purposes, nor is it with care to be provided for within themselves; yet it is
the duty of the living to see their friends fairly interred: For to the dead it
is all one whether they be carried forth upon a Chariot, or a wodden Beer,
whether they rot in the air, or in the earth, whether they be devoured by
fishes, or by worms. When Cryton asked Socrates how he would be buried, he
told him, I think I shall escape from you, and that you cannot catch me; but
so much of me as you can apprehend, use it as you see cause for, and bury it,
but however do it according to the Laws. There is nothing in this but opinion,
and the decency of some to be served. Let thy friend therefore be interred
after the manner of the Country, and the Laws of the place, and the dignity of
the person. For so Jacob was buried with great solemnity, and Josophs bones
were carried into Canaan, after they had been embalmed, and kept four hundred
years, and devout men carried St. Stephen to his burial, making great
lamentation over him. And Aelian tells, that those who were the most excellent
persons were buried in purple, and men of an ordinary courage and fortune, had
their graves only trimmed with branches of Olive, and mourning flowers. It was
noted for piety in the men of Jabesh Gilead, that they showed kindness to their
Lord Sanl, and buried him, and they did it honorably. And our blessed Savior,
who was temperate in his expense, and grave in all the parts of his life and
death, as age and sobriety it self, yet was pleased to admit the cost of Mary's
ointment upon his head and feet, because she did it against his burial; and
though she little thought it had been so nigh, yet because he accepted it for
that end, he knew he had made her Apology sufficient; by which he remarked
it to be a great act of piety, and honorable to inter our friends and
relatives, according to the proportion of their condition, and so to give a
testimony of our hopes of their resurrection.

In spiritualibus nihil perfectum.

Augustinus Sermon.
TO prove this, that in spiritual things nothing is perfect, we may afford a
kind of spiritual nature to knowledge. And how imperfect is all our knowledge;
what one thing do we know perfectly? whether we consider Arts or Sciences,
the servant knows but according to the proportion of his Masters knowledge in
that Art; and the Scholar knows but according to the proportion of his Masters
knowledge in that Science: Young men mend not their sight by using old men's
spectacles. Almost all knowledge is rather like a child that is imbalmed to
make mummy, than that is nursed to make a man; rather conserved in the stature
of the first age, than grown to be greater; rather a singularity in a desire of
proposing something that was not known at all before, then an improving an
advancing, a multiplying of former inceptions; and by that means no knowledge
comes to be perfect. St. Paul found that to be all knowledge to know Christ;
and Mahomet thinks himself wise therefore, because he knows not, nor
acknowledges Christ as Paul did. Though a man knew not that every sin casts
another shovel of brimstone upon him in hell; yet if he knew that every
riotous feast cuts off a year, and every wanton night seven years of his
seventy in this world; it were some degree toward perfection in knowledge. He
that purchases a Manor, will think to have an exact survey of the land; but
who thinks of taking so exact survey of his conscience, how that money was got
that purchased that Manor? We call that a man's means which he has; but that
is truly his means what way he came by it; and yet how few are there (when a
state comes to any great proportion) that know that, that know what they have,
what they are worth. We have seen Wills where the Testator thinks he has
bequeathed all, and he has not known half his own worth. When thou know a
wife, a son, a friend, a servant, no better, but that that wife betrays thy
bed, and that son thy estate, and that servant thy credit, and that friend thy
secret, what can thou say thou know? But let us consider this Thesis in
spiritual things, of a more rarefied nature than knowledge in faith, hope, and
charity; and we shall find all these to fall within this position, and that
there is nothing in any of these three, perfect. And first for faith, if you
remember who they were that made that prayer, Domine adauge, and the Apostles
themselves prayed, that their faith might receive an increase, Lord increase
our faith; you must necessarily second that consideration with a confession,
that no man's faith is perfect. There are men that abound in faith, that is in
comparison of the emptiness of other men, or of their own emptiness before they
embraced the Gospel, they abound now, but still it is as God has given the
measure of faith to every one, Romans 12. 3. not as of Manna, a certain measure,
and an equal measure, and a full measure to every man; no man has such a
measure of faith as that he needs no more, or that he may not lose at least
some of that. And as our faith is not perfect so neither our hope, for so
argues the Apostle, Jam. 4. 3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss;
you cannot hope constantly, because you do not pray aright; and to make a
prayer, a right prayer, there goes so many essential circumstances, as that the
best man may justly suspect his best prayer; for since prayer must be of
faith, prayer can be but so perfect as the faith is perfect; and the
imperfections of the best faith we have seen, Christ has given us but a short
prayer, and yet we are weary of that. Some of the old Heretics of the
Primitive Church abridged that Prayer, and some new fangled men of these times
have annihilated, evacuated that prayer, because, say they, the same Spirit
that spoke in Christ, speaks in their extemporal prayers, and they can pray as
well as Christ could teach them.

And again (to leave these) which of us says over that short prayer with a
deliberate understanding of every petition as we pass, or without deviations,
and extravagancies of our thoughts in that half minute of our devotion? I throw
my self down in my chamber, and I call in, and invite God and his Angels
thither, and when they are there, I neglect God and his Angels for the noise of
a fly, for the rattling of a coach, for the whining of a door. I talk on in the
same posture of prayer, eyes lifted up, knees bowed down, as though I prayed to
God; and if God or his Angels should askmee, When I thought last of God in that
prayer, I cannot tell: sometimes I find that I had forgot what I was about,
but when I began to forget it, I cannot tell. A memory of yesterdayes
pleasures, a fear of to morrows dangers, a straw under my knee, a noise in mine
ears, a light in mine eye, an any thing, a nothing, a fancy, a chymera in my
brain, troubles me in my prayer; so certainly is there nothing, nothing in
spiritual things perfect in this world; not in credendis, in things that belong
to faith, not in petendis, in things that belong to hope, nor in agendis in
things that belong to action, to works, to charity, there is nothing perfect
there neither. I would be loath to say that every good word is a sin, that
were to say that every deformed, or disordered man were a beast, or that every
corrupt meat were poison, it is not utterly so, nor so altogether, but it is so
much toward it, as that there is no work of ours so good, as that we can look
for thanks at Gods hand for that work; no work that has not so much ill
mingled with it, as that we need not cry God mercy for that work. There was so
much corruption in the getting, or so much vainglory in the bestowing, as that
no man builds an Hospital, but his soul dies, though not dead, yet lame in the
Hospital; no man mends a Highway, but he is, though not drowned, yet mired in
that way; no man relieves the poor, but he needs relief for that relief, In
all those works of charity, the world that has benefit by them is bound to
confess and acknowledge a goodness, and to call them good works, but the man
that does them, and knows the weakness of them, knows they are not good works.
It is possible to Art to put a peccant humor out of a sick body, but not
possible to raise a dead body to life. God out of my confession, of the
impurity of my best actions, shall vouchlafe to take off his eyes from that
impurity, as though there were none, but no spiritual thing in us, nor faith,
nor hope, nor charity, have any purity, any perfection in themselves.

Nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux, nox est perpetuo una dormienda.

Catullus:
THe Gentiles and their Poets describe the sad state of death so, nox una
dormienda, that it is one everlasting night to them, a night; but to a
Christian, it is dies Mortis, and dies Resurrectionis, the day of Death, and
the day of Resurrection; we dye in the light, in the sight of Gods presence,
and we rise in the light in the sight of his very essence. Nay Gods
corrections and judgments upon us in this life, are still expressed so, dies
Visitationis, still it is a day, though a day of Visitation, and still we may
discern God to be in the action. The Lord of life was the first that named
Death; Morte morieris, says God, Thou shall dye the death. I do the less fear,
or abhor death, because I find it in his mouth; even a Malediction has a
sweetness in his mouth, for there is a blessing wrapped up in it, a mercy in
every correction, a resurrection upon every death. When Jezabels beauty exalted
to that height, which it had by art, or higher than that, to that height which
it had in her own opinion, shall be infinitely multiplied upon every body, and
as God shall know no man from his own son, so as not to see the very
righteousness of his own Son upon that man; so the Angels shall know no man
from Christ, so as not to desire to look upon that man's face, because the most
deformed wretch that is there, shall have the very beauty of Christ himself; So
shall Goliahs Armor, and Dives fullness be doubled, and redoubled upon us, and
every thing that we can call good, shall first be infinitely exalted in the
goodness, and then infinitely multiplied in the proportion, and again
infinitely extended in the duration.

Solus Deus vere festumagat.

Philo Judae.
IT has been disputed by many both of the Gentiles, with whom the Fathers
disputed, and of the Schoolmen, who dispute with one another, ansit gaudium in
Deo de semet; whether God rejoice in himself in contemplation of himself,
whether God be glad that he is God: But it is disputed by them only to
establish it, and to illustrate it; for I do not remember that any one of them
denies it. It is true, that Plato dislikes, and justly, that saluration of
Dionysius the Tyrant, to God, Gaude and servato vitam Tyranni jucundam, that
he should say to God, Live merrily, as merrily as a King, as merrily as I do;
and then you are good enough to imagine such a joy in God as is only a
transitory delight in deceivable things, is an impious conceit. But when as
another Platonique says, Deus est quod ipse semper voluit, God is that which
he would be, if there be something that God would be, and he be that, if
Plato should deny, that God joyed in himself; we must say of Plato as
Lactantius does, Deus potius seminaverat quam cognoverat. Plato had rather
dreamed that there was a God, than understood what that God was, Bonum simplex,
says St. Augustine, to be sincere goodness, goodness it self, Ipsa est
delectatio Dei, this is the joy that God has in himself, of himself; and there
says Philo Judaeus, hoc necessarium Philosophiae sadalibus, this is the tenent
of all Philosophers (and by that title of Philosophers, Philo always means
them that know and study God) solum Deum vere festum agere, that only God can
be truly said to keep holy day, and to rejoice.

This joy we shall see, when we see him who is so in it, as that he is this
joy it self. But here in this world, so far as I can enter into my Masters
sight, I can enter into my Masters joy. I can see God in his creatures, in his
Church, in his Word, and Sacraments, and Ordinances, since I am not without
this sight, I am not without this joy. Here a man may transilire mortalitatom,
says the divine moral man. I cannot put off mortality, but I can look upon
immortality; I cannot depart from this earth, but I can look into Heaven. So I
cannot possess that final, and accomplished joy here, but as my body can lay
down a burden, or a heavy garment, and joy in that case; so my soul can put off
my body so far, as that the concupiscences thereof, and the manifold, and
miserable encumbrances of this World, cannot extinguish this holy Joy.

De fiderium generat satietatem, and satiet as parit desiderium.

Bern.
THere is a spiritual fullness in this life, of which St. Jerome speaks, Ebrietas
foelix, satietas salutaris, a happy excess, and a wholesome surfeit, Quae
quanto copiosius sumitur, majorem donat sobrietatem, in which the more we eat,
the more temperate we are, and the more we drink, the more sober. In which
(as St. Bernard also expresses it in his Mellifluence) Mutua, interminab ili,
inexplicab ili, generatione, by a mutual, and reciprocal, by an undeterminable,
and unexpressible generation of one another, the desire of spiritual graces
begets a satiety, If I would be, I am full of them, and then this satiety
begets a further desire; still we have a new appetite to those spiritual
graces; this is a holy ambition, a sacred covetousness, and a wholesome
dropsy. Napth alies blessing, O Napthali, satisfied with favor, and full with
the blessing of the Lord. St. Stephens blessing, Full of faith, and of the Holy
Ghost; the blessed Virgins blessing, Full of grace; Dorcas blessing, Full of
good works, and of Alms-deeds; the blessing of him, who is blessed above all,
and who blesses all, Christ Jesus, Full of Wisdom, full of the Holy Ghost,
full of Grace and Truth. But so far are all temporal things from giving this
fullness or satisfaction, as that even in spiritual things, there may be, there
is often an error, or mistaking; even in spiritual things, there may be a
fullness, and no satisfaction, and there may be a satisfaction, and no fullness;
I may have as much knowledge as is presently necessary for my salvation, and
yet have a restless and unsatisfied desire, to search into unprofitable
curiosities, unrevealed mysteries, and inextricable perplexities: And on the
other side, a man may be satisfied, and think he knows all, when God knows,
he knows nothing at all; For, I know nothing, if I know not Christ crucified,
and I know not that, if I know not how to apply him to my self; nor do I know
that, if I embrace him not in those means, which he has afforded me in his
Church; in his Word, and Sacraments; if I neglect this means, this place, these
exercises, howsoever I may satisfy my self with an over-valuing mine own
knowledge at home, I am so far from fullness, as that vanity it self, is not
more empty.

Resurrectio a peccato, and cessatio a peccato, non est idem.

Durand.
EVery cessation from sin, is not a resurrection from sin. A man may
discontinue a sin, intermit the practice of a sin, by infirmity of the body, or
by satiety in the sin, or by the absence of that person, with whom he has
used to communicate in that sin. But resurrectio est secunda ejus, quod
interiit, statio. A resurrection is such an abstinence from the practice of the
sin, as is grounded upon a repentance, and a detestation of the sin, and then
it is a settling, and an establishing of the soul in that state, and
disposition; it is not a sudden and transitive remorse, nor only a reparation
of that which was ruined, and demolished, but it is a building up of habits
contrary to former habits, and customs, in actions contrary to that sin, that
we have been accustomed to, else it is but an intermission, not a
resurrection, but a starting, not a waking, but an apparition, not a living
body, but a cessation, not a peace of conscience.

Now this resurrection is begun, and well advanced in baptismate lachrymarum in
the baptism of true, and repentant tears. But to put off this repentance to
the deathbed is a dangerous delay. For is any man sure to have it, or sure to
have a desire to it then? It is never impertinent to repeat St. Augustines
words in this case, Etiam hac animadversione percutitur peccator ut moriens
obliviscatur sui, quidam viveret, oblitus est Dei, God begins a dying man's
condemnation at this, that as he forgot God in his life, so he shall forget
himself at his death.

Compare thy temporal, and thy spiritual state together, and consider how they
may both stand well at that day. If thou have set thy state in order, and made
a Will before, and have nothing to do at last, but to add a Codicil, this is
soon dispatched at last; but if thou leave all till then, it may prove a heavy
business. So if thou have repented before, and settled thy self in a religious
course before, and have nothing to do then, but to wrestle with the power of
the disease, and the agonies of death, God shall fight for thee in that weak
estate, God shall imprint in thee a Cupio dissolvi, St. Paul's not only
contentedness but desire to be dissolved, and God shall give thee a glorious
resurrection, yea an ascension into heaven before thy death, and thou shall see
thy self in possession of his eternal Kingdom, before thy bodily eyes be
shut. When even thy deathbed shall be as Elias Chariot to carry thee to
heaven, and as the bed of the Spouse in the Canticles, which was lectus
floridus, a green and flourishing bed, where thou may find by a faithful
apprehension, that thy sickness has crowned thee with a Crown of thorns, by
participation of the sufferings of thy Savior, and that thy patience has
crowned thee with that Crown of glory, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall
impart to thee that day.

In divinis nihil minimum.

Tertul.
IT is a wanton thing for any Church in spiritual matters to play with small
errors, to tolerate, or wink at small abuses, as though it should be always
in her power to extinguish them when she would. It is Christ's counsel to his
Spouse, that is, the Church, Capite vulpes parvulas, take us the little Foxes,
for they destroy the vine, though they seem but little, and able to do little
harm, yet they grow bigger, and bigger every day; and therefore stop errors
before they become heresies, and erroneous men, before they become heretics.
Capite, says Christ, take them, suffer them not to go on; but then it is
Capite nobis, take us those Foxes, take them for us, the bargain is between
Christ and his Church. For it is not Capite vobis, take them to your selves,
and make your selves judges of such doctrinal matters, as appertain not to your
cognizance; nor it is not Cape tibi, take him to thy self, spy out a recusant,
or a man otherwise, not conformable and take him for thy labor, beg him, and
spoil him, and for his Religion leave him as you found him; neither is it Cape
sibi, take him for his ease, that is, compound with him easily, and continue
him in his estate, and errors; but Cape nobis, take him for us, so detect him,
as he may thereby be reduced to Christ and his Church. Neither only this
counsel of Christ to his Church, but that Commandment of God in Levitious, is
also appliable to this, Non misereberis pauperis in judicio, Thou shall not
countenance a poor man in his cause, thou shall not pity a poor man in
judgment.

Though a new opinion may seem a poor opinion, able to do little harm, though
it may seem a pious, and profitable opinion, and of good use, yet in judicio,
if it stand in judgment, and pretend to be an Article of faith, and of that
holy obligation, matter necessary to salvation; Non misereberis, thou shall not
spare, thou shall not countenance this opinion upon any collateral respect, but
bring it to the only trial of Doctrines, the Scriptures.

Neither does this Counsel of Christ's, Take us these little Foxes, nor this
Commandment of God, Thou shall not pity the poor in judgment, determine it
self in the Church, or in the public only, but extends it self (rather
contracts it self) to every particular soul and conscience, Capite Vulpeculas,
take your little Foxes, watch your first inclination to sins, for if you give
them luck at first, if you feed them with the milk and honey of the mercy of
God, it shall not be in your power to wean them when you would, but they will
draw you from one to another extreme, from a former presumption to a future
desparation in Gods mercy. So also, Non misereberis, Thou shall not pity the
poor in judgment: Now that thou call thy self to judgment, and thy
conscience to an examination, thou shall not pity any sin, because it pretends
to be a poor sin, either prove so, that it cannot much endanger thee, nor much
incumber thee, or poor so, as that it threatens thee with poverty, with penury,
with disability to support thy state, or maintain thy Family, if thou entertain
it not.

Many times I have seen a Suitor that comes in Forma pauperis, more trouble a
Court, and more importune a Judge, than greater causes or greater persons; and
so may such fins as come in Forma pauperis, either way, that they plead
poverty, that they can do little harm, or threaten poverty if they be not
entertained. Those sins are the most dangerous sins, which pretend reason why
they should be entertained; for sins which are done merely out of infirmity,
or out of the surprisal of tentation, are (in comparison of others) done as
sins in our sleep, but in sins upon deliberation, upon counsel, upon pretense
of reason, we do see the wisdom of God, but we set our wisdom above his,
we do see the Law of God, but we insert, and interline, non obstantes of our
own, into Gods Law.

If therefore thou will corruptly, and vitiously, and sinfully love another,
out of pity, because they love thee so; if thou will assist a poor man in a
cause, out of pretense of pity, with thy countenance, and the power of thy
place, that that poor man may have something, and thou the rest that is
recovered in his right, if thou will embrace any particular sin, out of pity,
lest thy wife and children should be left unprovided; if thou have not taken
these little Foxes, that is, resisted these tentations at the beginning, yet
nunc in judicio, now that they appear in judgment, in examination of thy
conscience, non misereberis, thou shall not pity them (as Moses speaks of
false Prophets, and by a fair accommodation of all bewitching sins, with
pleasure or profit) If a Dreamer of dreams have given thee a sign, and that
sign be come to pass; If a sin have told thee, it would make thee rich, and it
have made thee rich; yet if this Dreamer draw thee to another god, if this
profit draw thee to an Idolatrous, that is, to an habitual love of that sin
(Tot habemus recentes Deos, quot vitia, says St. Hierom, Every man has so
many Idols in him, as he has habitual sins) yet though this Dreamer (as God
proceeds there) be thy brother, or thy son, or thy friend, which is as thine
own soul, how near, how dear, how necessary soever this sin be unto thee; non
misereberis, says Moses, Thine eye shall not pity that Dreamer, thou shall not
keep him secret, but thine own hand shall be upon him to kill him: And so of
this pleasurable and profitable sin; non misereberis, thou shall not hide it,
but power it out in confession; non misereberis, thou shall not pardon, no nor
reprieve it, but destroy it, for the practice presently; non misereberis, thou
shall not turn out the mother, and retain the daughter, not leave the sin, and
retain that which was sinfully got, but divest all, root, and body, and fruits,
by confession to God, by contrition in thy self, by restitution to men
damnified; else that will fall upon thee, and thy soul which fell upon the
Church, that because they did not take their little Foxes, they endangered the
whole Vine.

Sicut invisibilibus est Sol, in intelligibilibus est Deus.

Nazian.
When we consider the liberality of our King, the bounty of our God to man in
Christ, it is species ingratitudinis, it is a degree of ingratitude; nay, it is
a degree of forgetfulness, to pretend to remember his benefits so, as to reckon
them, for they are innumerable.

Bonitas Dei ad extra, liberalit as est, it is the expressing of the School,
and of much use, that God is essential goodness, within doors, in himself, but
ad extra, when he comes abroad, when this interior goodness is produced into
action, then all Gods goodness is liberality. Deus est voluntas omnipotens, is
excellently said by St. Bernard, God is all Almightiness, all Power, but he
might be so, and we never the better. Therefore he is voluntas omnipotens, a
power digested into a will, as willing as able to do us all, all good. What
good? Receive some drops of it in St. Bernards own Manna, his own Honey, Creans
mentes ad se participandum, so good, as that he has first given us souls
capable of him, and made us so, partakers of the Divine Nature; Vivificans ad
sentiendum, so good, as that he has quickened those souls, and made them
sensible of having received him; for grace is not grace to me, till it make
me know that I have it, aliciens ad appetendum, so good, as that he has
given that soul an appetite, and an holy hunger, and thirst to take in more of
him; for I have no grace, till I would have more; and then, Dilatans ad
capiendum, so good, as that he has dilated, and enlarged that soul to take
in as much of God as he will.

And lest the soul should lose any of this by unthankfulness, God is kind even
to the unthankful, says God himself which is a degree of goodness, in which
God seldom is; nay, in which God scarce looks to be imitated, to be kind to
the unthankful. But if the whole space to the Firmament were filled with sand,
and we had before us Clavius his number, how many thousands would be; if all
that space were filled with water, and so joined the waters above, with the
waters below the Firmament, and we had the number of all those drops of water;
and then had every single sand, and every single drop multiplied by the whole
number of both, we were still short of numbering the benefits of God, as God;
but then, of God in Christ, infinitely, super-infinitely short.

To have been once nothing, and to be now co-heire with the Son of God, is
such a circle, such a compass, as that no revolutions in this world, to rise
from the lowest to the highest, or to fall from the highest to the lowest, can
be called or thought any segment, any arch, any point, in respect of this
circle; To have once been nothing, and now to be co-heires with the Son of
God, that Son of God, who if there had been but one soul to have been saved,
would have dyed for that; nay, if all souls had been to be saved, but one, and
that that only had sinned, he would not have been contented with all the rest,
but would have dyed for that. And there is the goodness, the liberality of our
King, our God, our Christ, our Jesus.

Ad patriam itur per ipsum mare, sed in ligno.

August.
Which way think you to go home to the Heavenly Jerusalem, you must pass
through seas of difficulties, and therefore by ship, and in a ship, you are not
safe, except other Passengers in the same ship be safe too. Therefore said
Christ to James and John, Non est meum dare vobis, it is not mine to give, to
ser you on my right, and on my left hand; Non vobis, quia singuli separati^ ab
^liis rogatis, not to you, because you consider but your selves, and petition
for your selves, to the prejudice and exclusion of others. Therefore Christ bad
the Samaritan woman call her husband too, when she desired the water of life,
Ne sola gratiam acciperet, says St. Chrysostom, that he might so do good to
her, as that others might have good by it too. The Spouse says, Trahe me post
te, draw me after thee. When it is but a me, in the singular, but one part
considered there is a violence, a difficulty, a drawing, but presently after,
when there is an uniting in a plural, there is an alacrity, a concurrence, a
willingness, Curremus post te, we will run after thee; if we would join in
public considerations, we should run together.

Quantumlibet sis avarus, sufficit tibi Deus.

St. Augustine.
Accustom thy self to find the presence of God inall thy gettings, in all thy
preferments, in all thy studies, and he will be abundantly sufficient to thee
for all. Be as covetous as thou will, be as ambitious as thou can, the
more, the better; God is treasure, God is honor enough for thee. Avaritia
terram quaerit, says the same Father, add, and Coelum, would thou have all
this world? would thou have all the next world too? Plus est, qui fecit
coelum and terram, he that made heaven and earth, is more than all that, and
thou may have all him.

Upon this, St. Cyprians wonder is just, Deum nobis solis contentum esse, nobis
non sufficere Deum, that God should think man enough for him, and man should
not be satisfied with God, that God should be content with Fili da mihicor,
my Son give me thy heart, and man should not be content with, Pater da mihi
spiritum, my God, my Father, Grant, me thy Spirit, but must have temporal
additions too. Non est castum cor, says St. Augustine, Si Deum ad mercedem
colit; as he says in another place, Non est casta uxor quae amat quiae dives,
she is never the honester woman, nor the lovinger wife, that loves her husband
in contemplation of her future jointure, or in fruition of her present
abundancies; so he says here, Non est castum cor, that man has not a chaste,
a sincere heart toward God, that loves him by the measure, end, proportion of
his temporal blessings.

And indeed what profits it a man, if he get all the world, and lose his own
soul; and therefore that opinion that there was no profit at all, no degree
toward blessedness in those temporal things, prevailed so far, as that it is
easy to observe in their Expositions upon the Lords Prayer, that the greatest
part of the Fathers, do ever interpret that Petition, Da nobis hodie, Give us
this day our daily bread, to be intended only of spiritual blessings, and not
of temporal; so St. Hierom says, When we ask that bread, Illum petimus, qui
panis vivus est, and descendit de ^olo, we make our Petition for him who is
the bread of life, and descended from the bosom of the Father, and so he
refers it to Christ, and in him to the whole mystery of our Redemption. And
Athanasius, and St. Augustine too (and not they two alone) refer it to the
Sacramental bread; that in that Petition, we desire such an application of the
bread of life, as we have in the participation of the body and blood of Christ
Josus in that Communion. St. Cyprian insists upon the word Nostrum, our bread;
for says he. Temporal blessings cannot properly be called ours, because they
are common to the Saints, and to the Reprobates; but in a prayer ordained by
Christ for the faithful, the Petition is for such things as are proper and
peculiar to the faithful, and that is for spiritual blessings only. If any man
shall say, Ideo quaerenda quia necessaria, we must pray, and we must labor
for temporal things, because they are necessary for us, we cannot be without
them, Ideo non quaerenda quia necessaria, says St. Chrysostom, so much of
them as is necessary for our best state, God will give us, without this
laborious anxiety, and without eating the bread of sorrow in this life, Non
sperandum de superfluis, non desperandum de necessariis, says the same Father,
It is a suspicious thing to doubt, or distrust God in necessary things, and it
is an unmannerly thing to press him in superfluous things. They are not
necessary before, and they are not ours after; for those things only are ours,
which no body can take from us; and for temporal things, Anferre potest
inimicus homo invito, let the inimicus homo be the Devil, and remember Jobs
case, let the inimicus homo be any envious and powerful man, who has a mind
to that that thou have; and remember Naboths case, and this envious man can
take any temporal thing from thee against thy will. But spiritual blessings
cannot be taken so, ^idem nemo perdidit, nisi qui spreverit, says St.
Augustine, No man ever lost his faith, but he that thought it not worth the
keeping.

Perfect a obedientia est sua imperfecta relinquere.

August.
THis Peter and Andrew declared abundantly when they left their Nets and
followed Christ; yet however in this leaving of their Nets, there is no example
of devesting ones self of all means of defending us from those manifold
necessities, which this life lays upon, upon pretense of following Christ, it
is not an absolute leaving of all worldly cares, but a leaving them out of the
first consideration, primum quaerite regnum Dei, so as our first business be
to seek the Kingdom of God; For, after this leaving of his Nets, for this
time, Peter continued owner of his house, and Christ came to that house of his,
and found his mother in Law sick in that house, and recovered her there. Upon a
like Commandment, upon such a sequere, follow me, Matthow followed Christ
too; but after that following, Christ went with Matthew to his house, and sat
at meat with him at home. And for this very exercise of Fishing, though at that
time when Christ said, Follow we, they left their nets, yet they returned to
that trade, sometimes upon occasions, in all likelihood in Christ's life, and
after Christ's death, clearly they did return to it, for Christ, after his
Resurrection, found them fishing. They did not therefore abandon, and leave all
care, and all government, of their own estate, and dispose themselves to live
after upon the sweat of others, but transported with a holy alacrity, in this
present, and cheerful following of Christ, in respect of that then, they
neglected their nets, and all things else. Not to be too diligent toward the
world, is the diligence that God requires.

St. Augustine does not say, Suae relinquere, but Sua imperfecta relinquere,
that God requires we should leave the world, but that we should leave it to
second considerations, that thou do not forbear, nor defer thy conversion to
God, and thy restitution to man, till thou have purchased such an estate,
bought such an office, married, and provided such, and such children, but
imperfecta relinquere, to leave these worldly things unperfected till thy
repentance have restored thee to God, and established thy reconciliation in
him, and then the world lies open to thy honest endeavors.

Others take up all with their net, and they sacrifice to their Nets, because
by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous. They are confident in
their own learning, their own wisdom, their own practice, and (which is a
strange Idolatry) they sacrifice to themselves, they attribute all to their own
industry.

Christus non quaesivit per oratorem piscatorem, sed de piscatore lucratus est
imperatorem.

August.
CHrist having a greater, a fairer Jerusalem to build than David's was, a
greater Kingdom to establish than Judahs was, a greater Temple to build than
Solomon's was, having a greater work to raise, yet he begun upon a less
ground; He is come from his twelve Tribes, that afforded Armies in swarms, to
twelve persons, twelve Apostles, from his Juda and Levi, the foundations of
State, and Church; to an Andrew, and a Peter, Fishermen, Seamen. He sent not
out Orators, Rhetoricians, strong, or fair-spoken men to work upon these
Fishermen; but by these Fishermen he has reduced all those Kings and
Emperors, and States which have embraced the Christian Religion, these
thousand and six hundred years.

When Samuel was sent with that general Commission to anoint a Son of Ishai
King without any more particular instructions, when he came, and Eliab was
presented unto him, Surely, says Samuel (noting the goodliness of his
personage) this is the Lords anointed. But the Lord said unto Samuel, Look not
on his countenance, nor the height of his stature, for I have refused him; for
(as it follows there from Gods mouth) God sees not as a man sees, man
looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord beholds the heart. And so
David in appearance, less likely, was chosen. But if the Lords Arm be not
shortened, let no man impute weakness to the instrument. For so, when David
himself was appointed by God to pursue the Amalekites, the Amalekites that had
burnt Ziglag, and done such spoil upon Gods people, as that the people began to
speak of stoning David, from whom they looked for defense, when David had no
kind of intelligence, no ground to settle a conjecture upon, which way he must
pursue the Amalekites, and yet pursue them he must, in the way he finds a
poor young fellow, a famished, sick young man, derelicted of his Master, and
left for dead in the march, and by the means, and conduct of this wretch,
David recovers the enemy, recovers the spoil, recovers his honor, and the love
of his people.

If the Lords Arm be not shortened, let no man impute weakness to his
instrument. But yet God will always have so much weakness appear in the
instrument, as that their strength shall not be thought to be their own.

When Peter and John preached in the streets, the people marvelled (says the
Text) why? For they had understood that they were unlearned. But beholding also
the man that was healed standing by, they had nothing to say, says that story.
The insufficiency of the instrument makes a man wonder naturally, but the
accomplishing of some great work, brings them to a necessary acknowledgement of
a greater power working in that weak instrument. For if those Apostles that
preached, had been as learned men, as Simon Magu^, as they did in him (This man
is the great power of God, not that he had, but that he was the power of God)
the people would have rested in the admiration of those persons, and proceeded
no further. It was their working of supernatural things, that convinced the
world; Peter and John's preaching did not half the good then, as the presenting
of one man, which had been recovered by them did.

Twenty of our Sermons edify not so much, as if the Congregation might see one
man converted by us. Any one of you might out-preach us. That one man that
would leave his beloved sin, that one man that would restore ill-gotten goods,
had made a better Sermon than ever I shall, and should gain more souls by his
act, than all our words (as they are ours) can do.

Oportet hominem fieri unum.

Clem. Alex.
MAn must grow in his consideration, till he be but one man, one individual
man. If he consider himself in humanitate, in the whole mankind a glorious
creature, an immortal soul, be shall see this immortal soul, as well in Goats
at the left hand, as in Sheep at the right hand of Christ, at the Resurrection;
men on both sides. If he consider himself in qualitate, in his quality, in his
calling, he shall hear many then plead their Prophetavimus; we have
prophefied, and their ejecimus, we have exercised, and their virtutes fecimus,
we have done wonders, and all in thy Name, and yet receive that answer,
Nunquam cognovi, I do not know you now, I never did know you. Oportet unum
fieri, he must consider himself in individuo, that one man, not that man in
nature, not that man in calling, but that man in actions.

Origin makes this use of those words, as he found them, 1 Samuel chap. 1. Erat
vir unus, there was one man (which was Elkanah) he adds, Nomen ejus possessio
Dei, This one man, says he, was in his name Gods possession, Nam quem damones
possident, non unus sed multi, for he whom the Devil possesses, is not one.
The same sinner is not the same thing, still he clambers in his ambitious
purposes, there he is an Eagle; and yet lies still grovelling, and trodden upon
at any greater man's threshold, there he is a worm. He swells to all that are
under him, there he is a full sea; and his dog that is above him, may wade over
him; there he is a shallow, an empty Riter. In the compass of a few days, he
neighs like a horse in the rage of his lust over all the City, and groans in a
corner of the City, in an Hospital.

A sinner is as many men, as he has vices; he that is Elkanah, possessio
Dei, possessed by God, and in possession of God, he is unus homo, one, and the
same man. And when God calls upon man so particularly, he intends him some
particular good. It is St. Jeroms note, That when God in the Scripture speaks
of diverse things in the singular number, it is ever in things of grace. And it
is St. Augustines note, that when he speaks of any one thing in the plural
number, it is of heavy and sorrowful things; as Jeptha was buried in
Civitatibus Gilead, in the Cities, but he had but one grave, and so that is,
they made Aureos vitulos, Golden Calves, when it was but one Calf.

Multa relinquitis si desideria renunciatis.

Gregor.
WE read Mat. 4. That the Apostles left their nets when they followed Christ.
Their Nets were such things as might hinder them in the service of God: such
nets, even these men the Apostles, so well disposed to follow Christ, had about
them. And therefore let no man say, Imitari vellem, sed quod relinquam, non
habeo; I would gladly do as the Apostles did, leave all to follow Christ, but I
have nothing to leave; alas all things have left me, and I have nothing to
leave. Even that murmuring at poverty, is a net, leave that. Leave thy
superfluous desire of having the riches of this world, though thou may
flatter thy self, that thou desire to have, only that thou might leave it,
that thou might employ it charitably, yet it might prove a net, and stick
too close about thee to part with it. You leave your nets, if you leave your
over-earnest greediness of catching; for when you do so, you do not only fish
with a net, you fish for a net, even that which you get proves a net to you,
and hinders you in the following of Christ, and you are less disposed to follow
him, when you have got your ends, than before. He that has least, has enough
to weigh him down from heaven, by an inordinate love of that little which he
has, or in an inordinate and murmuring desire of more. And he that has most,
has not too much to give for heaven, Tantum valet Regnum Dei, quantum tu
vales, Heaven is always so much worth, as thou art worth. A poor man may have
Heaven for a penny, that has no greater store, and God looks that he to whom
he has given thousands, should lay out thousands upon the purchase of Heaven.
The Market changes as the plenty of money changes; Heaven costs a rich man more
than a poor, because he has more to give. But in this, rich and poor are both
equal, that both must leave themselves without nets, that is, without those
things, which in their own consciences they know, retard the following of
Christ. Whatsoever hinders my present following, that I cannot follow to day',
whatsoever may hinder my constant following, that I cannot follow to morrow,
and all my life is a net, and I am bound to leave that.

Dilige, and dic quod voles.

August.
LEt the Congregation see that thou studiest the good of their souls, and they
will digest any wholesome increpation, any medicinal reprehonsion at thy hands.
We say so first to God, Lord let thy Spirit bear witness with my spirit, that
thou love me, and I can endure all thy Prophets, and all thy vae's, and the
woes that they thunder against me, and my sin: So also the Congregation says
to the Minister, Dilige, and dic quod voles, show thy love to me, in studying
my case, and applying thy knowledge to my conscience; speak so, as God and I
may know thou meanest me, but not the Congregation, lest that bring me to a
confusion of face, and that to a hardness of heart; deal thus with me, love
me thus, and say what thou will; nothing shall offend me. Thus dealt Paul,
Heb. 13. 22. I beseech you brethren, etc. And the strangeness of the case is
exalted in this, that the word there is solatii, I beseech you suffer a word of
comfort; What will you hear willingly, if you do not willingly hear words of
comfort? With what shall we exercise your holy joy, and cheerfulness, if even
words of comfort, must exercise your patience? And yet we must beseech you to
suffer even our words of comfort, for we can propose no true comfort to you,
but such as carries some bitterness with it; we can create no true joy in you
without some exercise of your patience too. We cannot: promise you peace with
God, without a war in your selves, nor reconciliation to him without falling
out with your selves, not eternal joy in the next world, without a solemn
remorse for the sinful abuses of this. We cannot promise you a good to morrow
without sending you back to the consideration of an ill yesterday; for your
hearing to day is not enough, except you repent yesterday. But yet though with
St. Paul we be put to beseech you, that you would suffer instruction, though
we must sometimes exercise your patience, yet it is but a word of instruction,
and counsel; and though instruction be increpation sometimes, yet it may
easily be suffered, because it is but a word; a word, and away: We would not
dwell upon increpations, and chidings, and bitternesses.

Lacrimae sanguis animae;

Aug. Ser. de tempore.
THe repentance and contrition of a sincere Christian for his sins upon his
deathbed is such, that at more pores then his weak body sweats drops of water,
his sad foul weeps blood, and this more for the displeasure of God, than the
stripes of Gods displeasure.

I^^i vere irascitur Deus cui non irascitur; and nihil eo infoelicius, cui
nihil infoelix contigit:
Whom God loves he chasteneth, Heb. 12. 6. Which rule of divine Occonomy, is
so general, and without exception, that even those duties that are promised a
reward here as Almsdeeds, are yet to expect the payment of this reward, with
some mixture of affliction, the hundred fold which some men are promsed to
receive, though they be secular blessings, as houses, lands, etc. yet must
they be with persecutions, Mar. 10. 30.

Licet in modum stagni fusum equor arrideat* magnos hic campus mantes habet;
tranquillitas ista tempestas est.

Hieron.
IT was more safe for Peter to be called Satan by Christ, than for Judas to
be called Friend; such an appellation was a Sarcasme in a complement; as when
God tells his people by his Prophet, Hos. 4. 14. I will not visit, etc. Gods
not visiting here was the greatest plague imaginable, and their highest
affliction was, not at all to be punished.

Triticum non rapit ven^^^ inanes, pal^ae tempest^^^ jactantur,

Cyprian. de simpli^i^at^ Frela.
THe Church is the Barn-floor, the sincere and hypocritical Christian are the
corn, and the chafe in that floor, persecution and heretical doctrine are the
two winnowing winds to discern betwixt both; the corn is solid, and
immovable, and will sooner be ground to powder, than yield either to the
rough blasts of persecution, or those smooth flattering gales of heresy,
whereas the chafe is carried about, and distracted, with every wind either of
persecuting, or pleasing doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14.

N^tu^ and elinguis ne hoc qui them habens ut rogare possit, hoc magis rogat
quod rogare non potest,

Hieron. Tom. 1. Epist.
THe Cripple that cannot stir, works more upon our charity, than the
importunate sturdy beggar that follows the length of a street ^ and the very
dumbness of those impotent persons in the Gospel, was rhetoric equally as
powerful with our Savior, as all those acclamations and Hosanna's of the Jews,
the fear and modesty of that poor woman in the Gospel, that blushed to ask the
cure of her bloody issue, had it by a touch; that very touch was an effectual
prayer, and every finger a several votary to beg the blessing.

Ant ubi mors non est si jugulatis aquoe?
DEath meets us every where, and is procured by every instrument, and enters in
at every door, by violence, and secret influence, by aspect of a star, and the
stink of a mist, by the emissions of a cloud, and the meeting of a vapor, by a
full meal, or an empty stomach, by watching at the wine, or by watching at
prayers, by the Sun or the Moon, by a heat or a cold, by sleeping nights, or
sleeping days, by water frozen into the hardness and sharpness of a dagger, or
water thawed into the floods of a River: by a hair, or a raizor, by violent
motion, or sitting still, by Gods mercy, or Gods anger; by every thing in
providence, and every thing in manners; by every thing in nature, and every
thing in chance. It was a sad arrest of the looseness and wilder feasts of the
French Court, when their King Henry 2. was killed really by the sportive image
of a fight; and many Brides have dyed under the hands of Maidens dressing them,
for uneasy joy, the new and undiscerned chains of marriage.

Anceps forma bonum, mortalibus exigui donum breve temporis.

Senec.
I Have rend of a fair young German Gentleman, who living, often refused to be
pictured, but put off the importunity of his friends desire by giving way, that
after a few days burial, they might send a Painter to his Vault, and if they
saw cause for it, draw the image of his death unto the life, they did so, and
found his face half eaten, and his midrife, and back bone full of serpents, and
so he stands pictured among his armed Ancestors; so does the fairest beauty
change, and it will be as bad with you, and me, and then what servants shall
we have to wait upon us in the grave? what friends to visit us? what officious
people to clean^e away, the moist and unwholesome cloud reflected upon our
faces from the sides of the weeping Vaults, which are the longest weepers for
our Funerals.

Quid fit futurum cras, fuge quaerere.

Horace.
LEt no man extend his thoughts or his hopes toward future and far distant
Events. This day is mine, and yours, but ye know not what shall be on the
morrow, every morning creeps out of a dark cloud, leaving behind it an
ignorance and silence, deep as midnight, and undiscerned as the phantasmes that
make a chrysome child to smile; so that we cannot discern what comes
hereafter, unless we had a light from heaven brighter than the vision of an
Angel, even the Spirit of Prophecy. Without revelation we cannot tell whether
we shall eat to morrow, or whether a squinzy shall choke us. St. James notes
the folly of some, who were so impatient of the event of to morrow, or the
accidents of the next year, that they would consult Astrologers, and Witches,
and Devils, what should befall them the next calends, against this the Apostle
opposes his counsel, that we should not search after forbidden Records; for
whatever is disposed to happen by the order of natural causes, or civil
counsels, may be rescinded by a peculiar decree of providence. When Rithilda
the widow of Albert, Earl of Ebersberg had feasted the Emperor Henry the
third, and petitioned in behalf of her Nephew for some lands formerly possessed
by the Earl her Husband, just as the Emperor held out his hand to signify his
consent, the chamber floor suddenly fell under them, and Richilda falling upon
the edge of a bathing vessel, was bruised to death, and staid not to see he^
Nephew sleep in those lands, which the Emperor was reaching forth unto her, and
placed at the door of restitution.

Quid brevi fortes, iaculemur quo multal ja^^te pr^m^t nox,

Horat.
AS our hopes must be confined, so must our designs, let us not project long
designs; the work of our soul is cut short, facile, sweet and plain, and
fitted to the small portions of our shorter life; and as we must not trouble
our inquiry, so neither must we intricato our labor, with what we shall
never enjoy; this rule does reprove such projects as discompose our present
duty by long and future designs; such which by casting our labors to events at
distance, make us less to remember our death standing at the door. Seneca tells
of G^n^cio Corneliu^, a man crafty in getting, and tenacious in holding a great
estate, and one who was as diligent in the care of his body, as of his money,
that he all day long attended upon his sick and dying friend; but when he
went away, was quickly comforted, supped merrily, went to bed cheerfully, and
on a sudden being surprised by a squinzy, scarce drew his breath until the
morning, but by that time dyed, being snatched from the torrent of his fortune;
and a likely hope, bigger than the necessities of ten men; this accident was
much noted then in Rome, because it happened in so great a fortune, and in the
midst of wealthy designs, and presently it made wise men to consider how
imprudent a person he is, who disposes of ten years to come, when he is not
Lord of tomorrow.

Aetate fruere, mobili cursu fugit.

Sen.
MAke use of this instant; for this instant will never return again, and yet it
may be this instant will secure the fortune of a whole eternity. The old
Greeks and Romans caught us the prudence of this rule, but Christianity teaches
us the Religion of it. They so seized on the present that they would lose
nothing of the days pleasure. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye,
that was their Philosophy at their solemn feasts, they would talk of death to
heighten the present drinkings; I had reason to say that Christianity taught us
to turn this into Religion. For he that by a present and a constant holiness
secures the present, and makes it useful to his noblest purposes, he turns his
condition into his best advantage by making his unavoidable fate become his
necessary Religion.

Non a^cipi^u^ brevem vitam sed f^cimus.

Senec.
We complain the day is long, and the night is long, and we want company,
and seek out arts to drive the time away, and then weep, because it is gone too
soon, And as the revenue of Egypt, and the Eastern Provinces was but a little
sum when they were to support the luxury of Mark Autony, and feed the riot of
Cloopatra, but a thousand Crowns is a vast proportion to feed an Hermit. Just
so is our life, it is 100 short to serve the ambition of an haughty Prince, or
an usurping Rebel, to trample upon the enemies of our just or unjust interest;
but for the obtaining virtue, for the purchase of sobriety, and modesty, for
the actions of Religion, God gave us time sufficient, if we make the
outgoings of the morning and evening, i. e. our infancy and old age to be
taken into the computation of a man.

Omnia creed mihi etiam falicibus ^ubia sunt.

Sen.
EVen the beauteous spring has blasts and sharp frosts, the fruitful teeming
Summer is melted with heat, and burnt with the kisses of the Sun her friend,
and the rich Autumn is full of sickness, and we are weary of that which we
enjoy, because sorrow is its biggest portion; And when we remember that upon
the fairest face, is placed one of the worst sinks of the body, the nose; we
may use it not only as a mortification to the pride of beauty, but as an allay
to the fairest outside of condition, which the sons and daughters of Adam do
possess. For look upon Kings and Conquerors. I will not tell, that many of
them fall into the condition of servants, and their subjects rule over them,
and stand upon the ruins of their Families: But let us suppose them still
Conquerours, and the greatest that ever were, yet whatsoever tempts the pride
and vanity of ambitious persons, is not so big as the smallest star which we
see scattered in disorder, and unregarded upon the pavement and floor of
Heaven: And if we would suppose the Pilmires had but our understandings, they
also would have the method of a man's greatness, and divide their little
Molehills into Provinces and Exarchats: And if they also grew as vicious, and
as miserable, one of their Princes would lead an Army out, and kill his
neighbor Ants, that he might reign over the next handful of a Turf; but then
if we consider at what price, and with what felicity all this is purchased,
the sting of the painted Snake will quickly appear, and the fairest of their
fortunes will properly enter into this account of humane infelicities.

Proper a vivere, and singulos di^s s^ngulas vitas p^^a; nihil interest
i^^^diem and s^culum.

Sense.
He that would dye well, must always look for death, every day knocking at
the gates of the grave, and then the gates of the grave shall never prevail
upon him to do him mischief. This was the advice of all the wise and good men
of the world, who especially in the days and periods of their joy, and
festival egressions, chose to throw some ashes into their chalices, some sober
remembrances of their fatal period. Such was the black shirt of Saladine, the
Tombstone presented to the Emperor of Constantinople on his Coronation day;
the Bishop of Romes two reeds, with flax, and a wax taper; the Egyptian
Skeleton served up at feasts. These in their semblances declare a severe
counsel, and useful meditation; and it is not easy for a man to be drunk with
joy, or wine, pride, or revenge, who considers sadly that he must ere long
dwell in a house of darkness, and his body must be the inheritance of worms,
and his soul must be what he pleases, even as a man makes it here by his
living, good or bad. I have read of a young Hermit, who being passionately in
love with a young Lady, could not by all the Arts of Religion and mortification
suppress the trouble of that fancy, till at last being told that she was dead,
and had been buried about fourteen days, he went secretly to her vault, and
with the skirt of his mantle wiped the moisture from the carcass, and still at
the return of the temptation, laid it before him, saying, Behold this is the
beauty of the Woman thou did so much desire, and so the man thereby overcame
his inordinate passion; and if we make death as present to us, our own death,
dwelling and dressed in all its pomp of fancy, and proper circumstances, if any
thing will quench the heats of lust, or the desires of money; or the greedy
passionate affections of this world, this must do it.

Non expectavit Christ^^^^ Saul (...) in media insa^i^ superavit,

Chryfost.
When Saul, see Act. 9. 4. was yet breathing forth slaughter, then came a
voice saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou meo? Then when he was in the
height of his fury, Christ laid hold upon him. And this for the most part was
Christ's method of curing. Then when the Sea was in a tempestuous rage, when the
waters covered the ship, and the storm shaked even that which could remove
Mountains, the faith of the Disciples, then Christ rebukes the wind, and
commands a calm; then when the Sun was gone out to run his race as a Giant,
then God by the mouth of Joshuah bids the Sun stand still. Then when that
unclean spirit foamed and fumed, and tore, and rent the possessed person, then
Christ commanded them to go out. Let the Fever alone, say our Physicians, till
some fits be passed, and then we shall see farther, and discern better; but
Christ in the Text above, itayes not till Saul being made drunk with blood, was
cast into a slumber; but in the midst of his raging fit he gives him physic,
in the midst of his madness, he reclaims him. Then when his glory was to bring
them bound to Jerusalem, that he might magnify his triumph and greatness in the
eye of the world; then, then says Christ to this tempest, be calm; to this
unclean spirit, come out; to this Sun in his own estimation, go no further.

Non in fine sed in principio conversus latro.

Cyril.
IF thou deferrest thy repentance till the last, because of the Theefs example,
thou deludest thine own soul; the Thief was not converted at last, but at
first, as soon as God afforded him any call, he came; but at how many calls
have thou stopped thine ears, that deferrest thy repentance? Christ said to
him, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. When thou can find such
another day, look for such another mercy; a day that cleft the Grave-stones of
dead men; a day that cleft the Temple its self; a day that the Sun durst not
see; a day that saw the Son of God (may we not say so, since that man was God
too) depart from man. There shall be no more such days, and therefore presume
not of that voice, body, this day thou shall be with me, if thou make thy
last minute that day; though Christ to magnify his mercy, and his glory, and
to take away all occasion of absolute desperation, did here call the Thief unto
him when he was at the last gasp.

Novit Deus vulnerare ad amar^m.

August.
THe Lord, and only the Lord knows how to wound us, out of love; more than
that, how to wound us into love; more than all that, to wound us into love, not
only with him that wounds us, but into love with the wound its self, with the
very affliction that he inflicts upon us. The Lord knows how to strike us so,
as that we shall lay hold upon that hand, that strikes us, and kiss that hand
that wounds us; Ad vitam interficit, ad exaltationem prosternit, says the same
Father, No man kills his enemy because his enemy might have a better life in
Heaven, that is not his end in killing him. It is Gods end, who therefore
brings us to death, that by that gate he might lead us into life everlasting.
Ask of me, says God to Christ, Psalm. 2. 8. and I will give thee the Heathen
for thine inheritance. Now how was Christ to use these Heathen when he had
them? Why thus, Thou shall bruise them with a rod of iron, and break them in
pieces like a Potters vessel. Now God meant well to the Nations in thus
breaking and bruising them: God intended not an annihilation of the Nations,
but a reformation; for Christ asks the Nations for an Inheritance, not for a
Triumph; therefore it is intended of his way of governing them, and his way is
to bruise and beat them: that is, first to cast them down, before he can raise
them up; first to break them, before he can make them into his fashion.

Facies Dei est qua Deus nobis innotescit.

August.
THat is the face of God to us, by which God manifests himself to us, God
manifests himself to us in the word and Sacraments: If we see not them in
their true lines and colors (the word, sincerely and religiously preached and
administered) we do not see them, but masks upon them; and if we do not see
them, we do not see the face of Christ. And I could as well stand under his
nescio vos, which he said to the negligent Virgins, I know you not, or his
nescivi vos, which he said to those that boast of their works, I never knew
you, Matthew. 7. 22. as under this fearful thunder of his mouth, You shall see my
face no more: I will absolutely withdraw, or I will suffer profaneness to
enter into those means of your Salvation, Word, and Sacraments, which I have so
long continued in their sincerity toward you, and you have so long abused.
Blessed God, say not to us yet, Yet let the tree grow another year before thou
cut it down; and as thou have dug about it by bringing judgments upon our
neighbors, so water it with thy former rain, the dew of thy grace, and with
thy latter rain, the tears of our contrition, that we may still see thy face
here, and hereafter; here in thy Kingdom of Grace, hereafter in thy Kingdom
of Glory.

Reperit Deus nocentes,

says Theocritus, who was an Heathen.
IN which saying the natural man has a first, and a second lesson: First, That
since God finds out the Malefactor, he never scapes; and then since God does
find him at last, God sought him all the while: though God strike late, yet
he pursued him long before, and many a man feels the sting in his conscience,
before he feels the blow in his body; that God finds, and therefore seeks,
that God overtakes, and therefore pursues, that God overthrows, and therefore
resist, the wicked is a natural conclusion, as well as a divine. So that for
this Doctrine a man needs not be preached unto, a man needs not be
Catechized; a man needs not read the Father's, nor the Councels, nor the
Schoolmen, nor the Ecclesiastical story, nor Summists, nor Casuists, nor
Canonists, no nor the Bible its self for this Doctrine. For this Doctrine that
God finds out the guilty person, the natural man has as full a Library in his
bosom as the Christian.

Non judicandum de cru^e secundum preoedicamentum quantitatis sed relationis.

Luther.
WE must not judge of a calamity by the predicament of quantity, but by the
predicament of relation; to what God refers that calamity, and what he intends
in it. It was a wise and a pious counsel that Gamaliel gave that state,
Abstinete, Act. 5. 33. forbear a while, give God Sea-room, give him his
latitude, and you may find that you mistook at first; for God has diverse ends
by inflicting calamities, and he that judges hastily, may soon mistake Gods
purpose. It is a notable expression which the Holy Ghost has put into the
mouth of Naomi, Ruth 1. 19. Call not me Naomi, said she there, Naomi is
lovely, and loving, and beloved; but call me Mara, said she, Mara is
bitterness; but why so? For, said she, the Lord has dealt very bitterly with
me; bitterly, and very bitterly; but yet so he has with many that he loves
full well. It is true said Naomi, but there is more in my case than so; The
Almighty has afflicted me, and the Lord has testified against me;
testified, there is my misery; that is, done enough, given evidence enough, for
others to believe, and to ground a judgment upon it, that he has abandoned
me, utterly forsaken me for ever. Yet God meant well to Naomi for all this
testification, and howsoever others might mis-interpret Gods proceeding with
her.

A Deo doctus non solum, divina discit, sed divina patitur.

Dionys. Arcopag.
HE that is thoroughly taught by Christ, does not only believe all that Christ
says, but confirms him to all that Christ did, and is ready to suffer as
Christ suffered. Truly, if it were possible to fear any defect of joy in
heaven, all that could fall into my fear, would be but this, that in heaven I
can no longer express my love by suffering for my God, my Savior, a greater
joy cannot enter into my heart than this, to suffer for him that suffered for
me. It is said. Matthew. 24. 30. That at the day of judgment shall appear in
heaven the sign of the Son of man; this is frequently, ordinarily received of
the Fathers, to be intended of the Cross; that before Christ himself appear,
his sign, the Cross, shall appear in the Clouds. Now though the sign of the Son
of man may be some other thing than the Cross, yet of this sign the Cross,
there may be this good application, that when God affords thee this
manifestation of his Cross in the participation of those crosses and calamities
that he suffered here, then thou have this sign of the Son of man upon thee,
conclude to thy self, that the Son of man, Christ Jesus, is coming toward
thee, and as thou have the sign, thou shall have the substance, as thou have
the cross, thou shall have the glory; For this is that which the Apostle
intends, Phil. 1. 29. Unto you it is given (not laid upon you as a punishment,
but given as a benefit) not only to believe in Christ, but to suffer for
Christ. Where the Apostle seems to make our crosses a kind of assurance, as
well as our faith: For so he argues not only to believe, but to suffer; for
howsoever faith is a full evidence yet our suffering is a new seal even upon
that faith.

Et cum blandinis pater es, and pater es cum coedis.

August.
I Feel the hand of a Father upon me when thou stroakest me; and when thou
strikest me, I see the hand of a Father too. I know thy meaning when thou
stroakest, it is lest I should faint under thy hand; and I know thy meaning
when thou strikest me, it is lest I should not know thine hand: As God saw
that way prosper in the hand of Absalom, 2 Samuel 14. 30. he sent for Joab, and
Joab came not, he came not when he sent a second time, but when the
messengers came to burn up his corn, then he came, and then he complied with
Absalom, and seconded, and accomplished his desires: So God calls us in his own
outward Ordinances, and a second time in his temporal blessings, and we come
not, but we come the sooner, if he burn our corn, if he draw us by afflicting
us.

Contemptu famae contemnuntur and virtutes,

was so well said by Tacitus, that it is pity St. August. said it not.
THey that neglect the good opinion of others, neglect those virtues which
should produce that good opinion; therefore St. Jerome protests to abhor that
paratum de trivio, as he calls it, that vulgar, that street, that dunghill
language, as long as my own conscience reproaches me of nothing, I care not
what all the world says; we must care what the world says, and study that it
may speak well of us. For though it is true, that a fair reputation, a good
opinion of men, is not a foundation to build upon, yet it is a fair stone in
the building, and such a stone as every man is bound to provide himself of:
For, for the most part most men are such, as most men take them to be, neminem
omnes, nemo omnes fefellit, all the world never joined to deceive one man, nor
was ever any one man ever able to deceive the whole world.

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus.

Virgil.
THe Poet here lays the greatest lenity, and change that can be laid to this
kind of people, that is, in contraria, that they change from one extreme to
another; where the Poet does not only mean that the people will be of diverse
opinions from one another; for, for the most part they are not so; for, for the
most part, they think, and wish, and love, and hate together; and they do all
by example, as others do, and upon no other reason, but therefore because
others do. Neither was that Poet ever bound up by his words, that he should
say in contraria, because a more mild word would not stand in his verse; but
he said it, because it is really true, the people will change into sundry
opinions. And whereas an Angel its self cannot pass from East to West, from
extreme to extreme without touching upon the way between; the people will pass
from extreme to extreme, without any middle opinion. Last minutes murderer, is
this minutes God, and in an instant Paul whom they sent to be judged in hell,
is made a judge in heaven, Act. 28. 6. the people will change; therefore as
David could say, I will not be afraid of ten thousand of men, Psalm. 3. 6. So
he should say, I will not confide in ten thousand men, though multiplied by
millions, for they will change. We find in the Roman story many examples
(particularly in Commod us his time, upon Cleander, chief Gentleman of his
chamber) of severe executions upon men that have courted the people, though in
way of charity, and giving them corn in the time of dearth, or upon like
occasions; there is danger in getting them, occasioned by jealousy of others;
there is difficulty in holding them, occasioned by lenity in themselves;
therefore we must say with the Prophet Jer. 17. 5. Cursed be the man that
trusts in man.

Sequamur patres tanquam duces no^ tanquam dominos.

Cajetan.
LEt us follow the Fathers as guides, not as Lords over our understandings; as
Counselors, not as Commanders. It is too much to say of any Father, that which
Nicephorus says of Chrysostom; In illius perinde atque in Dei verbis
acquiesco, I am as safe in Chrysostomes words as in the word of God. It is too
much to say of St. Peter himfelf, that which Chrysologus says, that he is
Immobile fundamentum salutis, the immovable foundation of our salvation; and
Mediator noster ad Deum, the Mediator of man to God. The holy Patriarchs in the
Old Testament were holy men, though they strayed into some sinful actions: The
holy Fathers in the primitive Church, were holy men, though they strayed into
some erroneous opinions; but neither are the holiest men's actions, always
holy, nor the soundest Fathers opinions, always sound.

Molius est mihi non esse quam fine Jesu esse.

Aug.
I Were better have no being, than be without Jesus: I were better have no
life, than any life without him. For as David could find no being without
Jehovah, a Christian finds no life without Jesus. For what Jehovah was to
David, Jesus is to us. Man in general has relation to God as he is Jehovah,
being we have relation unto Christ, as he is Jesus our salvation; salvation
is our being, Jesus is our Jehovah; and therefore as David delights himself
with that name Jehovah, for he repeats it eight or nine times Psalm. 6. a short
Psalm. And though he ask things of a diverse nature at Gods hands, though he
suffer afflictions a diverse nature from Gods hands, yet still he retains that
one name, he speaks to God in no other name in all that Psalm, but in the name
of Jehovah. So in the New Testament, he which may be compared with David,
because he was under great sins, and yet in great favor with God; St. Paul,
he delights himself with that Name of Jesus so much, as that St. Jerome says,
as he loved him excessively, so he named him superabundantly. It is the Name
that cost God most, and therefore he loves it best. It cost him his life to
be a Jesus, a Savior. The Name of Christ which is anointed, he had by
office, he was anointed as King, as Priest, as Prophet; but his name of Jesus
a Savior, he had by purchase, and that purchase cost him his blood. Of a
devout use of this very name do some of the Fathers interpret that Oleum
effusum nomen tuum, that the Name of Jesus should be spread as an ointment,
breathed as a perfume, diffused as a soul over all the petitions of our
prayers, as the Church concludes for the most part all her Collects so, Grant
this, O Lord, for our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake.

Nihil de causa sua deprecatur, qui nihil de condition sua miratur.

Tertul.
IN which the Father describes a patience of steel, and an invincible temper.
He means that the Christians in those times of persecution, did never entreat
the Judge for favor, because it was not strange to them to see themselves,
whose conversation was in Heaven, despised, and condemned upon earth. They
wondered not at their misery, they thought it a part of their profession, a part
of the Christian Religion to suffer, and therefore they never solicited the
Judge for favor; they had learnt by experience of daily tribulation the
Apostles lesson, Think it not strange when tribulations and tentations fall;
that is, make that your daily bread, and you shall never starve, use your
selves to suffering, at least to the expectation of suffering, acquaint your
selves with that, accustom your selves to that before it come, and it will not
be a stranger to you when it corns.

Sanctus in ira Dei emendari non vult, erudiri non vult.

August.
A Saint is loath to fall into Gods hands, loath to come into Gods fingers at
all when he is angry; he would not be disputed with all, nor impleaded, nor
corrected; no, not instructed, not amended by God in his anger. The anger of
God is such a Pedagogy, such a Cat^chi^m, such a way of teaching as the Law
was. The Law is a Schoolmaster, says the Apostle, but the Law is such a
Schoolmaster, as brings not a rod, but a sword. Gods anger should instruct us,
but if we use it not aright, it hardens us. Though Gods anger be one of his
ways, yet it is such a way as you may easily stumble in, and as you would
certainly perish without that way, so you may easily perish in that way. For
when a sinner considers himself to be under the anger of God, naturally, he
conceives such a horror as puts him farther off. As soon as Adam heard the
voice of God, and in an accent of anger, or as he tuned it in his guilty
conscience to an accent of anger, when Adam heard God but walking in the
Garden, but the noise of his going, and approaching toward him, Adam fled from
his presence, and hid himself among the trees. Much more then if the Lord come
in anger, if he speak in anger, if he do but look in anger, a sinner
perishes: He did but look, and he dissolved, he melted the Nations, Hab. 3.
6. David was an obsequious patient to take any physic at Gods hand, if there
were no anger in the cup. He provokes God with all his emphatical words, Judge
me, prove me, try me, examine me, Psalm. 26. 1. bring not only a candle to
search, but even fire to melt me. But upon what confidence is all this? For
thy loving kindness is ever before mine eyes. If Gods anger, and not his loving
kindness had been before his eyes, it had been a fearful apparition, and a
dangerous issue to have gone upon. So also Psalm. 139. 23. Try me, O God, and
know my heart. But how concludes he? And lead me in the right way for ever.
As long as I have God by the hand, and feel his loving care of me, I can admit
any weight of his hand, any furnace of his heating. Let God mould me, and then
melt me again; let God make me, and then break me again; as long as he
establishes, and maintains a rectifed assurance in my soul, that at last he
means to make me a vessel of honor to his glory, howsoever he rebuke, or
chastise me, yet he will not rebuke me in anger.

In scala prima ascensio est ab humo.

Basil.
HE that makes but one step up a stair, though he be not got much nearer to the
top of the house, yet he is got from the ground, and delivered from the
foulness and dampness of that. So in David's first step of prayer, Psalm. 6. 2,
3. O Lord be merciful unto me; Though a man be not established in heaven,
yet he is stepped from the world, and the miserable comforters thereof. There
are certain steps and ascensions of the soul in prayer; and though a sinner may
grow up to this strength of devotion, to supplications, to prayers, to
intercessions, to thanksgivings, yet at first, when he comes first to
deprehend himself in a particular sin, or in a course of fin, he comes
bashfully, shamefully, tremblingly, he knows not what to ask, he dares ask no
particular thing at Gods hand, but though he be not come yet to particular
requests for pardon of past sins, nor for strength against future, not to a
particular consideration of the weight of his sins, nor to a comparison betwixt
his sin, and the mercy of God, yet he comes to a Miserere mei Domine, to a
sudden ejaculation, O Lord be merciful unto me, how dare I do this in the
sight of my God?

And thus likewise in the regeneration of a sinner, though he come not
presently to look God fully in the face, nor conceive nor prefently an
assurance of an established reconciliation, a fullness of pardon, a cancelling
of all former debts in an instant; though he dare not come to touch God, and
lay hold of himself by his body and blood in the Sacrament, yet the Evangelist
calls thee to a contemplation of much comfort to thy soul, in certain
preparatory accesses and approaches. Behold, says he, that is, look up, and
consider thy pattern, behold a woman difeased, etc. Matthew. 9. 20. she knew
there was virtue to come out of his body, and she came as near that as she
durst; she had a desire to speak, but she went no further, but to speak to
her self, she said to her self, says that Gospel, If I may but touch; but
Christ Jesus supplied all, performed all on his part abundantly. Presently he
turned about, says the Text; and this was not a transitory glance, but a full
sight, and exhibiting of himself to the fruition of her eye, that she might
see him: He saw her said St. Matthew here, he did direct himself upon others,
and leave out her; and then he spoke to her to overcome her bashfulness; he
called her daughter, to overcome her diffidence; he bids her be of good
comfort for she had met a more powerful Physician than those upon whom she
had spent her time, and her estate; one that could cure her, one that would,
one that had already, for so he said presently, Thy faith has made thee
whole; From how little a spark, how great a fire; from how little a beginning,
how great a proceeding? She desired but the hem of his garment, and had all
him.

De infirmitate blandimur, and ut liberius peccemus libenter infirmamur.

Bernard.
WE flatter our selves with an opinion of weakness, and we are glad of this
natural and corrupt weakness, that we may impute all our licentiousness, to
our weakness and natural infirmity. But did that excuse Adam, said that Father,
that he took his occasion of sinning from his weaker part, from his wife; that
thou art weak of thy self, is a just motive to induce God to bring thee to
himself, who has surely born all thine infirmities. But to leave him again,
when he has brought thee, to refuse so light and easy a yoke as his is, not
to make use of that strength which he by his grace offers thee; This is not the
affection of the Spouse when the person languishes for the love of Christ, but
it is when the love of Christ languishes in that person. The former weakness is
a good motive for mercy, if in a desire of further strength we come to that of
Lazarus his sisters to Christ, Behold Lord that soul whom thou love, and have
dyed for, is weak and languishes; Christ answered then, This weakness is not
unto death, but that the Son of God might be glorified, Joh. 11. 3. he will
say so to thee too, if thou present thy weakness with a desire of strength from
him, he will say, Why will ye dye of this disease? Gratia mea sufficit, you
may recover for all this, you may repent, you may abstain from this sin, you
may take this spiritual physic, the word, the Sacraments, if you will, only
as God said to Joshua, be valiant, and fight against it, and thou shall find
strength grow in the use thereof.

Acceptus in gratiam, hilariter veni ad postulationes.

Bernard.
When thou art established in favor, thou may make any suit; When thou art
possessed of God by one prayer, thou may offer more; This is a Religious
insinuation, and a circumvention that God loves, when a sinner husbands his
graces so well, as to grow rich under them, and to make his thanks for one
blessing, a reason and an occasion of another; so to gather upon God by a
rolling trench, and by a winding stair, as Abraham gained upon God in the
behalf of Sodom; for this is an act of the wisdom of the Serpent, which our
Savior recommends unto us in such a Serpentine line, as the Artists call it;
to get up to God, and get into God by such degrees, as David does, Psalm. 6. 2.
from a miserere, to a sa^a, from a gracious look, to a perfect recovery; from
the act of the Levite that looked upon the wounded man, to the act of the
Samaritan that undertook his cure; from desiring God to visit him as a friend,
to study him as a Physician.

Medicinae ars a Deo data, ut inde rationem animae curandae disceremus.

Basil.
GOds purpose in giving us the science of bodily health, was not determined in
the body, but his large and gracious purpose, was by that restitution of the
body, to raise us to the consideration of spiritual health. When Christ had
said to him who was sick of the Palsy, Mark. 2. Thy sins are forgiven thee:
And that the Scribes and Pharisees were scandalized with that as though he
being but man, had usurped upon the power of God; Christ proves to them by an
actual restoring of his bodily health, that he could restore his soul too in
the forgiveness of sins. He asks them there Whether it is easi^r to say thy
sins are forgiven thee, or to say, Arise, take up thy bed and walk. Christ did
not determine his doctrine in the declaration of a miraculous power exercised
upon his body, but by that established their belief of his spiritual power, in
doing that which in their opinion was the greater work; pursue therefore his
method of curing; and if God have restored thee in any sickness by such means,
as he of his goodness by natural means has imprinted in natural Herbs and
Simples, think not, that that was done only, or simply, for thy bodies sake,
but that it is as easy for God to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee, as to say,
Take up thy bed and walk: So it is as easy for thee to have spiritual Physic,
as bodily; because that as God has planted all those medicinal Simples in the
open fields for although some do tread them under their feet, so has God
deposited and prepared spiritual helps, for all, though all do not make benefit
of those helps which are offered. Now this is Gods method, as in restoring
bodily health, he said, Surge, toll, ambula, Arise, take up thy bed, and
walk: So to every sick soul, whose cure he undertakes he says so too; our
beds are our natural affections, these he does not bid us cast away, nor burn,
nor destroy: Since Christ invested the nature of man, and became man, we must
not pretend to divest it, and become Angels, or flatter our selves in the merit
of mortifications not enjoyed, or of a retiredness, and departing out of the
world, in the world, by a withdrawing of our selves from the offices of mutual
society, or an extinguishing of natural affections; but Surge, says our
Savior, Arise from this bed, sleep not lazily in an over-indulgency to these
affections, but Ambula, walk sincerely in thy Calling, and thou shall hear thy
Savior say, Non est infirmitas haec ad mortem, these affections, nay these
concupiscencies shall not destroy thee.

Membra etiam animae sunt.

Basil.
THe soul has her limbs, as well as the body. Surdi audite, coeci aspicite,
says God in Isa. 42. If their souls had not ears and eyes, the blind could
not see, the deaf could not hear, and yet God calls upon the deaf, and blind,
to hear and see; as St. Paul says to the Ephesians, The eyes of our
understanding being enlightened; So David says, Thou have broken the teeth,
Psalm. 3. i. e. the pride, and the power, the venom, and malignity of the
wicked. And thus the soul has her bones too in that expression of David's,
Psalm. 6. 2. for David's bones here, were the strongest powers and faculties of
his soul, and the best actions and operations of those faculties, and yet they
were shaken; for this hereditary sickness, original sin, prevails so far upon
us, that upon our good days, we have some grudgings of that fever, eve^ in
our best actions we have some of the leven of that sin; so that if we go
about to comfort our selves with some dispositions to Gods glory, which we
find in our selves, with some sparks of love to his Precepts, and his
Commandments; with some good strength of faith, with some measure of good
works, yea with having something for the name and glory of Christ Jesus; yet if
we consider what humane and corrupt affections have been mingled in all these,
our bones will be troubled, even those that appeared to be strong works, and
likely to hold out, will need a reparation, an exclamation, O Lord healthese
too, or else these are as weak as the worst.

Qui fine ulla intermissione orat honest a quadam impudentia, agit impndentem.

Nazian.
INceffant prayer has the nature of impudency, we threaten God in prayer, as
Nazianzen adventures to express it; he said his Sister in the vehemence of her
prayer would threaten God, she came to a Religious impudency with God, and to
threaten him that she would never depart from his Altar, till she had her
petition granted; and God suffers this impudency and more. Prayer has the
nature of violence. In the public prayers of the Congregation, we besiege
God, and we take God prisoner, and bring God to our conditions, and God is
glad to be straightened by us in that siege. And therefore the Prophet David
executed before, what the Apostle counsels after, pray incessantly. Even in his
singing he prayed, And as St. Basil says, Etiam somnia justorum preces sunt, a
good man's dreams are prayers; he prays, and not sleepily in his sleep, but
with a holy fervent ecstasy and rapture.

Nescit diabolus quanta bona de illo fiu^t, etiqm cum soevit.

August.
LIttle knows the Devil how much good he does us when he tempts us. For by
that we are excited to have our present recourse to that God whom in our
former security we neglected, who gives us the issue with the temptation. I
know what infirmities I have submitted thee to, and what I have laid and
applied to thee, I know thy sickness, and I know thy physic; whatsoever the
disease be, my grace shall be sufficient to cure it. For whether we
understand that de gratra miraculorum, that it is sufficient for any man's
assurance in any temptation or tribulation, to consider Gods miraculous
deliverances of other men in other cases, or whether we understand it
according to the general voice of Interpreters, i. e. be content that there
remain in thy flesh matter and subject for me to produce glory from thy
weakness, and matter and subject for thee to exercise thy faith, and allegiance
to me, still these words will carry an argument against the expedience of
absolute praying against all temptations; For still this gratia mea sufficit,
will import this, amount to this, I have as many Antidotes, as the Devil has
poisons; I have as much mercy, as the Devil has malice* There must be
Scorpions in the world, but the Scorpion shall cure the Scorpion; there must
be temptations, but temptations shall add to mine, and to thy glory. And
therefore is it conduceable to Gods purposes in us (which is the rule of all
our prayers) to pray utterly against all tentations as vehemeutly as against
sins. God should lose by it, and we should lose by it, if we had no
tentations. For God is glorified in those victories which we by his grace gain
over the Devil.

Salvus factus ^s (...) nihilo non de nihilo tamen*

Bernard.
THou bring nothing for thy salvation, yet something to thy salvation,
nothing worth it, but yet something with it. Thy self has a part in those
means which God uses to that purpose, thy self art the instrument, though not
the cause of thine own salvation. Thy new creation by which thou art a new
creature, i. e. thy regeneration is wrought as the first creation was wrought.
God made heaven and earth of nothing, but he produced the other creatures out
of that matter which he had made. Thou had nothing to do in the first work
of thy Regeneration thou could not so much as wish it, but in all the rest
thou art a fellow-worker with God, because before that there are seeds of
former grace shed in thee.

Nulla ^o Deus perinde atque corporis aerumna conciliatur.

Nazian.
A Mo^^ning spirit, and an afflicted body, are great instruments of reconciling
God to a sinner, and they always dwell at the gates of Atonement, and
restitution and Bonaventure in the life of Christ reports, that the holy Virgin
mother said to Elizabeth, that grace does not descend into the soul of a man
but by prayer and affliction. Besides a delicate and prosperous life is hugely
contrary to the hopes of a blessed eternity. And certainly he that sadly
considers the portion of Dives, and remembers that the account which Abraham
gave him for the unavoidableness of his torment was, because he had his good
things in this life, must in all reason with trembling, run from a course of
banquets, and faring deliciously every day, as being a dangerous estate, and a
consignation to an evil greater than all danger, the pains and torment of
unhappy souls. So then he that desires to dye well, and happily, above all
things must be careful that he do not live a soft delicate, and voluptuous
life; but a life severe, holy, and under the Discipline of the Gross. No man
wants cause of tears, and daily sorrow. Let every man consider what he feels,
and acknowledge his misery; let him confess his sin, and chastise it; let him
long and sigh for the joys of heaven; let him tremble and fear because he
has deserved the pains of hell; let him commute his eternal fear, with a
temporal suffering, preventing Gods judgment by passing one of his own; let
him groan for the labors of his pilgrimage, and the dangers of his warfare,
and by that time, he has summed up all these labors, and duties, and
contingencies, all the proper causes, instruments, and acts of sorrow, he will
find, that for a secular joy and wantonness of spirit, there are not left many
void spaces of his life.

Nemo mala morte unquam moriebatur, qui libenter opera charitatis exercuit.

St. Hieron.
THis the Father with all his reading, and experience verifies. I do not
remember to have read that any charitable person ever dyed an evil death; and
although a long experience has observed Gods mercies to descend upon
charitable people, like the dew upon Gideons fleece, when all the world was
dry; yet for this also we have a promise which is not only an argument of a
certain number of years, but a security for eternal ages, Luke 16. 9. Make ye
friends of, etc. When faith fails, and chastity is useless, and temperance
shall be no more, then charity shall bear you upon wings of Cherubims to the
eternal Mountain of the Lord. I have been a lover of mankind, and a friend,
and merciful, and now I expect to communicate in that great kindness, which he
shows that is the great God, and Father of men and mercies, said Cyrus the
Persian on his deathbed. Now I do not mean this should only be a deathbed
charity, any more than a deathbed repentance, but it ought to be the charity
of our life and healthful years, a parting of a portion of our goods, then
when we can keep them, when we cannot then kindle our lights, when we are to
descend into our houses of darkness, or bring a glaring torch suddenly to a
dark room that will amaze the eye, and not delight it, or instruct the body;
but if our rapers have in their constant course descended into their grave,
crowned all the way with light, then let the deathbed charity be doubled, and
the light burn brightest when it is to deck our Hearse.

Prima quae vitam dedit h^ra carpsit.

Seneca.
When Adam fell, then he began to dye; the same day (so said God) and that
must needs he true; and so it must mean that upon that very day he fell into
an evil and dangerous condition, a state of change and affliction; then death
began, i. e. the man began to dye by a natural diminution and ap^ness to
disease and misery; his first state was, and should have been so long as it
lasted a happy duration; his second was a daily and miserable change, and this
was the dying properly: This appears in the great instance of damnation, which
in the style of Scripture is called eternal death, not because it kills of ends
the duration, it has not so much good in it, but because it is a perpetual
infelicity, change or separation of soul and body, is but accidental to death.
Death may be with, or without either; but the formality, the curse and sting
of death, i. e. misery, sorrow, anguish, dishonor, and whatsoever is
miserable, and afflictive in nature, that is death: Death is not an action, but
a whole state and condition, and this was first brought in upon us by the
offense of one man. But now though this death entered first upon us by Adams
fault, yet it came nearer unto us, and increased upon us by the sins of more of
our forefathers. For Adams sin left us in strength enough to contend with
humane calamities, for almost a thousand years together: but the sins of his
children, our forefathers, took off from us half the strength about the time of
the flood; and then fell off from five hundred to two hundred and fifty, and
from thence to an hundred and twenty, and from thence to threescore and ten so
often halfing it, till it is almost come to nothing; so that we have not now
time enough to get the perfection of a single manufacture, but ten or twelve
Generations of the world must go to the making up of one wise man, or one
excellent art; and in that succession of those ages, there happens so many
changes and interruptions, so many wars and violencies* that seven years
fighting, sets a whole Kingdom back in learning and virtue, to which they were
creeping, it may be a whole (...).

Debilem facito manu, debiem pede, lubricos quatedent^^, vita dum superest been
est.

Sen.
THe Gout, the Stone, and the Toothache, the Sciatica, sore eyes, and aching
head, are evils indeed; but such, which rather than dye, most men are willing
to suffer; and Mecaenas added also a wish rather to be crucified than to dye,
and though his wish was low, timorous, and base, yet we find the same desires
in most men dressed up with better circumstances. It was a cruel mercy in
Tamberlane, who commanded all the leprous persons to be put to death, as we
knock some beasts on their head to put them out of pain, and lest they should
live miserably. The poor men would rather have endured another leprosy, and
have more willingly taken two diseases than one death. Never therefore account
that sickness intolerable, in which thou had rather remain than dye; and yet
if thou had rather dye than suffer it, the worst of it that can be said, is
this, that this sickness is worse than death, i. e. it is worfe than that which
is the best of all evils, and the end of all troubles, and then you have said
no harm against it.

Levius fit patientia quicquid corrigere est nefas.

Horat.
ALl impatience howsoever expressed, is perfectly useless to all purposes of
ease, but hugely effective to the multiplying of sorrow, and the impatience and
vexation is another, but the sharper disease of the two; it does mischief by
its self, and mischief by the disease. For men grieve themselves as much as
they please; and when by impatience they put themselves into the reti^ue of
sorrows, they become solemn mourners. Massurius Sabinus tells, that the image
of the goddess Aug^^^^^ was with a muffler upon her mouth, placed upon the
Altar of Volupi^^, to represent that those persons who bear their sicknesses
and sorrows, without murmr, shall certainly pass from sorrow to pleasure, and
the ease and honors of felicity, but they that with spite, and indignation
bite the burning cole, or shake the yoke upon their necks, gall their spirits,
and fret the skin, and hurt nothing but themselves.

Nolo, quod cupio, statim tenere, nec victoria mi plaoet parata.

Petron.
SIckness is in some sense eligible, because it is the opportunity, and the
proper scene of exercising some virtues. It is that agony in which men are
tried for a Crown; and if we remember what glorious things are spoken of the
grace of faith, that it is the life of just men, the restitution of the dead in
tres passes and sins, the justification of a sinner, the support of the weak,
the confidence of the strong, the Magazine of promises, and the title to very
glorious rewards. We may easily imagine that it must have in it a work, and a
difficulty in some proportion answerable to so great effects: And therefore if
you will try the excellency, and feel the work of faith, place the man in a
persecution, let him ride in a storm, let his bones be broken with sorrow, and
his eyelids loosened with sickness, let his bread be dipped in tears, and all
the daughters of Music brought low; let God commence a quarrel against him,
and be bitter in the accent of his anger, or his Discipline, then God tries
your faith. Can you then trust his goodness, and believe him to be a Father
when you groan under his rod. For in our health, and clearer days, it is easy
to talk of putting trust in God. We readily trust him for life when we are in
health; for provisions when we have fair revenues; and for deliverance when
we are newly escaped; But let us come to sit upon the margent of our grave,
and let a Tyrant lean hard upon our fortunes; let the storm arise, and the
keels toss till the cordage crack, or that all our hopes bulge under us, and
descend into the hollowness of sad misfortunes, then can you believe when you
neither hear, nor see, nor feel anything but objections? Faith is then brought
into the Theater, and so exercised, that if it abides but to the end of the
contention, we may see the work of faith which God will highly crown. The same
I say of hope, and of charity, or the love of God, and of patience, which is a
grace produced from the mixtures of all these, they are virtues which are
greedy of danger. And no man was ever honored by any wise, or discerning
person for dining upon Perfian Carpets, nor rewarded with a Crown for being at
ease. It was the Sire that did honor to Mutiu^ Scoevola, poverty made
Fabritius famous, Rutilius was made excellent by banishment, Regulus by
torments, Socrates by a prison, Cato by his death, and God has crowned the
memory of Job with a wreath of glory, because he sat upon his dung-hil wisely
and temperately; and his potsherd, and his groans mingled with praises, and
justifications of God, pleased him like an anthem, sung by Angels in the
morning of the Resurrection.

Marcet virtus fine adversario.

Cicero.
GOd loves to see us struggling with a disease, and resisting the Devil, and
contesting against the weaknesses of nature, and against hope to believe in
hope, resigning our selves to Gods will, praying him to choose for us, and
dying in all things but faith, and its blessed consequents. For so have I known
the boisterous North-winde pass through the yielding air which opened its
bosom, and appeased its violence, by entertaining it with easy compliance in
all the Regions of its reception. But when the same breath of heaven has been
checked with the stifness of a Tower, or the united strength of a wood, it grew
mighty, and dwelt there, and made the highest branches stoop, and make a smooth
path for it on the top of all its glories. So is sickness, and so is the grace
of God. When sickness has made the difficulty, then Gods grace has made a
triumph, and by doubling its power, has created new proportions of a reward,
and then shows its biggest glory, when it has the greatest difficulty to
master, the greatest weaknesses to support, the most busy temptations to
contest with. For so God loves that his strength should be seen in our
weakness, and our danger.

Detestabilis est coecitas, si nemo oculos perdiderit nisi cui eruendi sunt.

Senec.
BLindness were a most accursed thing, if no man were ever blind but he whose
eyes are pulled out with tortures, or burning bafons: And if sickness were
always a testimony of Gods anger, and a violence to a man's whole condition,
then it were a huge calamity; but because God sends it to his servants, to his
children, to little infants, to Apostles, and Saints, with designs of (...) to
preserve their innocence, to over^^ome tentation, to try their virtue, to fit
them for rewards, it is certain that sickness never is an evil, but by our own
faults; and if we will do our duty, we shall be sure to turn it into a
blessing. If the sickness be great, it may end in death, and the greater it
is, the sooner; and if it be very little, it has great intervals of rest; if
it be between both, we may be Masters of it, and by serving the ends of
providence, serve also the perfective end of humane nature, and enter into the
possession of everlasting mercies. However, if all the calamities were true
concerning sickness, with which it is aspersed, yet is it far to be preferred
before the most pleasant fin, and before a great secular business, and a
temporal care; and some men ^wake as much in the foldings of the softest beds,
as others on the cross, and sometimes the very weight of sorrow, and the
weariness of sickness presses the spirit into slumbers, and images of rest,
when the intemperate, or the lustful person rolls upon his uneasy thorns, and
sleep is departed from his eyes.

Solatium est pro honesto dura tolerare, and ad causam patientia respicit.

Senec.
IN all sufferings, the cause of it makes it noble, or ignoble, tolerable, or
intolerable. For when patience is assaulted by a ruder violence, by a blow from
heaven or earth, from a gracious God, or an unjust man, patience looks forth to
the doors which way she may escape: And if innocence, or a cause of Religion
keep the first entrance, then whether she escapes at the gates of life, or
death, there is a good to be received, greater than the evils of a sickness;
but if sin thrust in that sickness, and that hell stands at the door, then
patience turns into fury; and seeing it is impossible to go forth with safety,
rowls up and down with a circular and infinite revolution, making its motion
not from, but upon its own center, it doubles the pain, and increases the
sorrow, till by its weight it breaks the spirit, and bursts into the agonies of
infinite and eternal ages. If we had seen St. Polycarp burning to death, or
St. Lawrence rosting upon his gridiron, or St. Ignatiu^ exposed to Lions, or
St. Sebastian pierced with arrows for the cause of Jesus, for Religion, for
God, for a holy conscience, we should have been in love with flames, and have
thought the gridiron fairer than the marriage bed; and we should have chosen
rather to converse with those beasts, than those men that brought those beasts
forth, and have esteemed Sebastians arrows to be the rays of light, brighter
than the Moon. For so did those holy men account them; they kissed their
stakes, and hugged their deaths, and ran violently to torments, and counted
whippings, and secular disgraces to be the enamel of their persons, and the
ointment of their heads, and the embalming their names, and securing them for
immortality. But to see Seja^us ^orn in pieces by the people, or Nero crying,
and creeping timorously to his death when he was condemned to dye, more
majorum, to see Judas pale and trembling, full of anguish, sorrow, and despair,
to observe the groanings and intolerable agonies of Herod, and Antiochus, will
tell and demonstrate the causes of patience and impatience, to proceed from the
causes of the suffering, and that it is sin only that makes the cup bitter and
deadly.

Non est magnum audiri ad voluntatem non est magnum.

August.
BE not over-joyed when God grants thee thy prayer, the Devil had his prayer
granted when he had leave to enter into the herd of Swine, and so he had when
he obtained power of God against Job. But all this aggravated the Devils
punishment; so may it do thine, to have some prayers granted. And as that must
not over-joy thee if it be, so if thy prayer be not granted, it must not
deject thee. God suffered St. Paul to pray, and pray, and pray, yet after his
thrice praying granted him not that he prayed for. God suffered that if it be
possible, and that let this cup pass, to pass from Christ himself, yet he
granted it not.

Tentemus animas quae deficiunt a fide, naturalibus rationibus adjuvare.

St. Hieron.
LEt us endeavor to assist them who are weak in faith with the strength of
reason, though God has not given the Minister a power to infuse faith into
men, yet has God put it into his power to satisfy the reason of men, and to
chafe that wax to which he himself vouchsafes to set to the great seal of
faith. And truly it is very well worthy of a serious consideration, that
whereas all the Articles of our Creed are the objects of faith, so that we are
bound to receive them de fide, as matters of faith; yet God has left that, out
of which all these Articles are to be deduced, and proved, i. e. the
Scripture, to humane arguments. It is not an Article of the Creed to believe
these and these books to be, or not to be Canonical Scripture, but our
arguments for the Scripture are humane arguments proportioned to the reason of
a natural man. God does not seal in water, in the fluid and tranfitory
imaginations and opinions of men; we never set the seal of faith to them, but
in wax, in the rectified reason of men, that reason that is ductile, and
flexible, and pliant to the impressions that are naturally proportioned unto
it, God sets to his seal of faith; and therefore faith it self by the Prophet
Isaiah is called knowledge, Isa. 53. 11. By his knowledge, etc. says God of
Christ, i,e. by that knowledge that men shall have of him, Insomuch that it is
not enough for you to rest in an imaginary faith, and easiness in believing,
except ye know also what, and why, and how you come to that belief. Implicit
believers, ignorant believers, the adversary may swallow, but the understanding
believer, he must chaw, and pick bones before he come to assimilate him, and
make him like himself. The implicit believer stands in an open field, and the
enemy will ride over him easily: The understanding believer is in a fenced
Town, and he has outworks to lose before the Town be pressed, i. e. reasons
to be answered, before his faith be shaked; and he will sell himself dear,
and lose himself by inches, if he be sold, or lost at last.

Anima spiritualiter cadit and spiritualiter resurge^.

August.
SInce we are sure that there is a spiritual death of the soul, let us make
sure a spiritual resurrection too. Aud^cter dicam, says St. Jerome, I say
confidently however, God can do all things, he cannot restore a Virgin that is
^a^n from it to Virginity again, he cannot do this in the body, but God is a
Spirit, and has reserved more power upon the spirit and soul, than upon the
body: And therefore I may say with the same assurance that St. Jerome does; no
soul has so prostituted her self, so multiplied her fornications, but that God
can make her a Virgin again, and give her even the chastity of Christ himself.
Fulfill therefore what Christ says, Joh. 5. 25. The hour is coming, and now
is, etc. be this that hour, bee-thy first resurrection; bless Gods present
goodness for this now, and attend Gods leisure for the other resurrection
hereafter; and then doubt not but what glory soever thou have had in this
world, glory inherited from noble Ancestors, glory acquired by merit and
service, glory purchased by money, and observation, what glory of beauty, and
proportion; what glory of health, and strength soever thou bast had in this
house of clay; the glory of the latte^ house, as it is Hag. ^. 9. shall be
greater than of the former.

Qui peacat quatenus peccat, sit seip so detetion.

Clem. Alex.
IN every sin a man falls from that degree which himself had before. In every
s^ he is dishonored, he is not so good a man as he was; impoverished, he
has not so great a portion of grace as he had; infatuated, he has not so
much of the true wisdom of the fear of God as he had; dis^armed, he has not
that interest, and confidence in the love of God that he had; and deformed,
he has not so lively a representation of the image of God as before. In every
sin we become prodigals; but in the habit of sin we become bankrupts, afraid
to come to an account. A fall is a fearful thing, that needs a raising, a help;
but sin is a death, and that needs a resurrection; and a re^^rection is as
great a work as the very Creation its self. It is death in semine in the root,
it produces, it brings forth death; it is death in arbore, in the body, in its
self; death is a divorce, and so is sin; and it is death in fructu, in the
fruit thereof; sin plants spiritual death, and this death produces more sin
obduration, impenitence, and the like.

Transeant injuriae plerasque non accipit qui nescit.

Seneca.
He that knows not of an injury, or takes no knowledge of it, for the most
part has no injury. But alas, how many break their sleep in the night about
things that disquiet them in the day too, and trouble themselves in the day
about things that disquiet them all night too. We disquiet our selves too much
in being over tender, over sensible of imaginary injuries. They that are too
inquisitive what other men say of them, they disquiet themselves; for that
which others would but whisper, they publish; and therefore that which he adds
there for moral and civil matters, holds in a good proportion in things of a
more divine nature, in such parts of the Religious worship and service of God,
as are not fundamental, non exp^dit om^^^ vide^e, non omnia audire, we must
not too jealoussy suspect, nor too bitterly condemn, nor too peremptorily
conclude that whatsoever is not done as we would have it done, or as we have
seen it done in former times, is not well done.

Antequam unlneramur monemur.

Origin.
BEfore our enemies hit us, God gives us warning that they mean to do so. When
God himself is so ^ar incensed against us, that he is turned to be our enemy,
and to fight against us (it was come to that Isa. 63. 10.) when he has bent
his bow against us as an enemy (it was come to that in the Prophet Jeremy, Law.
2. 4.) yet still he gives us warning beforehand, and still there comes a
lightning before his thunder. God comes seldom to that dispatch, a word, and a
blow, but to a blow without a word, to an execution without a warning, never.
Cain took offense at his brother Abel, the quarrel was Gods, because he had
accepted Abels sacrifice, therefore God joins himself to Abels party; and so
the party being too strong for Cain to subsist, God would not surprise Cain,
but he tells him his danger, Why is thy countenance cast down? Genesis 4. 10. You
may proceed if you will, but if you will needs, you will lose by it at last.
Saul persecutes Christ in the Christians, Christ meets him upon the way, speaks
to him, strikes him to the ground, tells him vocally, and tells him actually,
that he has undertaken too hard a work, in opposing him: This which God did
to Saul reduces him; that which God did to Cain wrought not upon him, but still
God went his own way in both, to speak before he strikes, to lighten, before
he thunders; to warn, before he wounds. In Dathan and Abi^ams case, God may
seem to proceed apace toward execution, but yet it had all these pauses in
arrest of judgment, and their reprieves before execution, yet when Moses had
information and evidence of their factious proceeding, he falls not upon them,
but he falls upon his face before God, and laments, and deprecates in their
behalf, he calls them to a fair trial and examination the next day, Tomorrow
the Lord will show, Numb. 16. 5, and they said, We will not come, verse. 14.
Then God upon their contumacy, when they would stand mute, and not plead, takes
a resolution to consume them in a moment, and then Moses and Aaron return to
petition for them, verse. 25. And Moses went up to them again, and the Elders of
Israel followed, and all prevailed not, and then Moses comes to pronounce
judgment, These men shall not dye a common death; and after, and yet not
presently after that he gave judgment, execution followed, verse. 31. God
opened his mouth, and Moses his, and Aaron his, and the Elders theirs, before
the earth opened hers. In all which we see that God always leaves a latitude
between his sentence and execution, which interim is sphaera activitatis, the
sphere in which our repentance, and his mercy move, and direct themselves in a
benign aspect toward one another.

Vili vendimus coelum, glauci more Christiani sumus.

Tertul.
HOw poor a clod of earth is a Manor? How poor an inch a Shire? How poor a
span a Kingdom? How poor a pace the whole world, and yet how prodigally we
sell Paradise, Heaven, Souls, Consciences, Immortality, Eternity, for a few
grains of this dust. What had Eve for heaven? so little, as that the Holy Ghost
will not let us know what she had, nor what kind of fruit, yet something Eve
had. What had Adam for heaven? but a satisfaction that he had pleased an ill
wife, as St. Jerome states his fault, that fruit, ne contristaretur delicias
suas, lest he should cast her off whom he loved so much, into an inordinate
dejection; but if he satisfied her and his own uxoriousness, any satisfaction
is nothing. But what had I for heaven Adam sinned, and I suffer, I forfeited
before I had any possession, or could claim any interest; I had a punishment
before I had a being, and God was displeased with me before I was, I was built
up scarce fifty years ago in my mothers womb, and I was cast down almost six
thousand years ago in Adams loins. I was born in the last age of the world, and
dyed in the first. How justly do we cry out against a man that has sold a
Town, or sold an Army, and Adam sold the World, he sold Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the Patriatchs, and all the Prophets; and if Christ had not
provided for himself by miraculous Generation, he had sold him too.

Agnoscere nolumus quod ignorare (...) possumus.

Cypri. de mortal.
THere is no meditation more serious, than upon the vanity of the world, no
consideration more seasonable, than of the brevity and uncertainty of time it
self, no knowledge more wholesome, than of the diseases of the mind; no
contemplation more divine, than of humane misery and frailty. Which though we
read in the inscription of every stone, see in the fall of everyleaf, hear in
the knol of every bell, taste in the garnishing and fancy of every dish, smell
in the stench of every dead corpse, feel in the beating of every pulse; yet we
are not sensible of it, we will not take knowledge of it, though we cannot
be ignorant of it. In which consideration the Wise man, whose words are as
goads and nails, verse. 11. pricks us deep with the remembrance hereof, so deep
that he draws blood, sanguinem animae, the blood of the soul, as St. Austin
terms our tears, Lachryma sanguis animae. For who can read with dry eyes,
that those that look out of the windows shall be darkened; who can hear without
horror, that the keepers of the house shall tremble, or consider without
sorrow, that the daughters of Music shall be brought low, or comment without
deep fetched sighs upon man's going to his long home, and the mourners going
about the streets, to wash them with tears, and sweep them with Rosemary.

Infans nondum loquitur, and tamen prophetat.

August. Sermon. de bono pat.
IT is lamentable to hear the poor infant which cannot speak, yet, to boad his
own misery, and to Prophecy of his future condition, and what are the contents
of his Prophecy, but lamentations, mournings, and woes? Saint Cyprian accords
with Saint Austin in his doleful note, Vitae mortalis anxietates, and dolores
and procellas mundi quas ingreditur inexordio statim suo ploratu, vel gemit^
rudis anima testatur, little children newly born, take in their first breath
with a sigh, and come crying into the world, as soon as they open their eyes
they shed tears to help fill up the vale of tears, into which they were then
brought, and shall be after a short time carried out with a stream of them,
running from the eyes of all their friends. And if the Prologue and Epilogue
be no better, what shall we judge of the Scenes and Acts of the life of man,
they yield so deep springs of tears, and such store of arguments against our
abode in this world, that many reading them in the books of Hegesias the
Platonic, presently brake the prison of their body, and leaped out of the
world into the grave. Others concluded with Silenus, Optimum non nasci,
proximum quam primum mori, That it was simply best never to be born, the next
to it to dye out of hand, and give the world our salve, and take our vale at
once.

Optima quaeque dies miseris mortalibus avi primi fluit.

Horat.
THe prime scope of the book of Ecclesiastes, is to stir up all Religious
minds to set forth toward heaven betimes, in the morning of our days, Chap.
12. verse. 1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth; to enter speedily
into a strict course of holiness, which will bring us to eternal happiness, to
dedicate to God and his service, the prime in both senses, that is the first,
and best part of our time. For as in a glass of distilled water, the purest and
thinnest first runs out, and nothing but lees and mother at the last; so it
is in our time and age, our best days first run, and our worst at the last.
And shall we offer that indignity to the Divine Majesty, as to offer him the
Devils leavings? Florem aetatis diabolo consocrare, faecem Deo reservare, to
consecrate the top to the Devil, and the bottom to God, feed the flesh with
the flower, and the spirit with the bran; serve the world with our strength,
and our Creator with our weakness, give up our lusty and able members as
weapons to sin, and our feeble and weak to righteousness. Will God accept the
blind, and the lame, the lean, and the withered for a sacrifice? How can we
remember our Creator in the days of our age, when our memory, and all other
faculties of the soul are decayed? How shall we bear Christ's yoke, when the
Grasshopper is a burden unto us? when we are not able to bear our selves, but
now under the sole weight of age? What delight can we take in Gods service,
when care, and fear, and sorrow, and pain, and manifold infirmities, and
diseases wholly possess the heart, and dead, all the vital motions, and lively
affections thereof.

Senes in limine mortis, vitae sunt avidissuni.

Aristot. de long. and brevi. avit.
IT was Aristotle's observation, that old men that have their foot on deaths
threshold, would then draw back their leg if they could, and at the very
instant of their dissolution, are most defarous of the continuance of their
life; and seeing the pleasures of fin like the apples of Tantalus running away
from them, they catch at them the more greedily, for want is the whetstone of
desire, and experience offers us many instances of old men, in whom St. Paul's
old man grows young again, who according to the corruption of nature, which St.
Austin bewayleth with tears, Malunt libidinem expleri quam extingui, they are
so far from having no lust or desire of pleasures, as being cloyed therewith,
that they are more insatiable in them than in youth; the flesh in them are like
the Peacocks, Quae cocta recrudescit, which after it is sod, in time will grow
raw again, so in them after mortification by diseases and age it reviveth.
Sophocles the heathen Poet, might pass for a Saint in comparison of them, for
he thanked God, that in his old age he was free from his most imperious
Mistress, lust: These men on the contrary, desire to enthral themselves again
in youthly pleasures, and concupiscence in them is kindled even by the defect
of fuel; it vexes them that their sins forsake them, that through the
impotency of their limbs and faculties, they cannot run into the like excess as
in former times: Their few days before death, are like Shrove-tide before
Lent, they take their fill of flesh, and fleshly desires, because they suppose
that for ever after they must fast from them. Thus they spur on their jadish
flesh, now unable to run her former stages, saying, Let us crown our selves
with Rose-buds, for they will presently wither, let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye.

Respice sepulchra and vide quis servus, quis dominus, quis dives, and quis
pauper, discerue si potes vinctum a rege, fortem a debili, pulchrum a deformi.

Aug. l. de not. and great.
THe hand of a dead man stroaking the part, cures the Tympany; and certainly
the consideration of death, is a present means to cure the swelling of pride in
any form in this life; many things make odds between men and women, as birth,
education, wealth, alliance, and honor; but death makes all even, Respice
sepulchra, says St. Austin, Survey men's graves, and tell me then who is
beautiful, and who is deformed. All there have hollow eyes, flat noses, and
ghastly looks, Nereus and Thirsites cannot be there distinguished. Tell me,
who is rich, and who is poor; all there, wear the same weed, their winding
sheet: Tell me who is noble, and who base and ignoble, the worms claim kindred
of all: Tell me who is well housed, and who is ill; all there are bestowed in
dark and dankish rooms under ground. If this will not satisfy you, take a
sieve and fifth the dust and ashes of all men, and show me which is which. I
grant there is some difference in dust; there is powder of Diamonds, there is
gold dust, and brass-pin dust, and sawdust, and common dust, the powder of
Diamonds resembles the remains of Princes; gold dust, the remains of Noblemen;
pin-dust, the remains of the Tradesmen; saw-dust the remains of the
day-labourer, and common dust, the remains of the vulgar, which have no quality
or profession to distinguish them, yet all is but dust. At a game of Chesse,
we see Kings, and Queens, and Bishops, and Knights upon the board, and they
have their several walks, and contest one with the other in points of state
and honor; but when the game is done, all together with the Pawns are shuffled
in one bag: In like manner, in this life men appear in indifferent garbs, and
take diverse courses, some are Kings, some are Officers, some Bishops, some
Knights, some of other ranks, and orders. But when this life like a game is
done, which is sometimes sooner, sometimes later, all are shufled together with
the many or vulgar sort of people, and lie in darkness and obscurity, till the
last man is born upon the earth, but after that, Erunt ipsis quoque fata
sepulchris. The grave which has swallowed up all the sons of Adam, shall be
swallowed up it self into victory.

Theodoro parum interest huminc an in sublime putrescat.

Erasmus.
ALthough the heathen Philosophers made little account of Burial, as appeared
by the speech of Theodorus to the Tyrant, who threatened to hang him: I little
pass by it whether my carcass putrify above the earth, or on it. And the Poet
seems to be of his mind, whose strong line it was, Coelo teg^tur qui non habet
urnam, which was Pompeys case, and had like to have been Alexanders, and
William the Conquerors; yet all Christians who conceive more divinely on the
soul, deal more humanely with the body, which they acknowledge to be membrum
Christi, and templum Dei, a member of Christ, and temple of God. If charity
commands thee to cover the naked, says St. Ambrose, how much more to bury the
dead? When a friend is taking a long journey, it is civility for his friends to
bring him on part of his way; when our friends are departed, and now going to
their grave, they are taking their last journey, from which they shall never
return till time shall be no more; and can we do less then by accompanying
the corpse to the grave, bring them as it were part on their way, and shed some
few tears for them, whom we shall see no more with mortal eyes. The Prophet
calls the grave Miscabin, a sleeping chamber, or resting place; and when we
read Scriptures to them that are departing, and give them godly instructions to
dye, we light them as it were to their bed; and when we send a deserved
testimony after them, we perfume the room. Indeed if our bodies (which like
garments we cast off at our death) were never to be worn again, we need
little care where they were thrown, or what became of them; but seeing they
must serve us again, their fashion being only altered, it is fit we carefully
lay them up in Deaths Wardrobe, the grave; though a man after he has lost a
Jewel, does less set by the casket, yet he who loves much, and highly
esteems of the soul of his friend, as Alexander did of Homer, cannot but make
some reckoning of the Desk and Cabinet in which it always lay: We have a care
of placing the picture of our friend, and should we not much more of bestowing
his body. If burial were nothing to the dead, God would never have threatened
Coniah that he should have the burial of an Ass, nor the Psalmist so quavered
upon this doleful note, Dederunt cadaver servorum tuorum coeli volucribus, O
God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy holy Temple have they
defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones, the dead bodies of thy servants
have they given to the fowls of heaven.

Mors non est exitus sed transitus and temporali itinere decurs^ ad aeterna
transgressus.

Cyp. de mortal.
Which is verified from Rev. 14. 13. And I heard a voice from heaven etc. From
whence we may learn first, That if all that dye in the Lord are blessed, from
the very moment of their death, and this blessedness is confirmed by a voice
from heaven: Let us give more heed to such a voice than to any whisper of the
flesh or devil. Whatsoever Philosophy argues, or reason objecteth, or sense
excepteth against it: Let us give more heed to God than man, to the Spirit than
to the flesh, to faith than to reason, to heaven than to earth; although they
who suffer for the testimony of the Gospel seem to be most miserable, their
skins being flayed off, their joints racked, their whole body torn in pieces,
or burned to ashes, their good confiscate, their arms defaced, and all manner
of disgraces put upon them: Yet they are most happy in heaven, by the testimony
of heavven it self, the malice of their enemies cannot reach so high as heaven,
it cannot touch them much there, much less awake them out of their sweet sleep
in Jesus.

Secondly, If the dead are blessed in comparison of the living, let us not so
glue our thoughts, and affections to the world, and the comforts thereof, but
that they may easily be severed, for there is no comparison between the state
of the godly in this life, and in the life ^o come, for here they labor for
rest, there they rest from their labor; here they expected; here they hunger,
and thirst for righteousness, there they are satisfied; here they are
continually afflicted, either for their sins, or with their sins, and they have
continual cause to shed tears, either for the calamities of Gods people, or the
strokes they themselves receive from God, or the wounds they give themselves;
there all tears are wiped from their eyes: Here they are always troubled
either with the evils they fear, or the fear of evil; but when they go hence,
death sets a period to all fear, cares, sorrows, and dangers. And therefore
Solon speaks divinely, when he taught Croesus that he ought to suspend his
verdict of any man's happiness till he saw his end.

Lastly, If all that dye in Christ are blessed, as a voice from heaven assures
us, we do wrong to heaven if we account them miserable, we do wrong to
Christ; if we count them as lost, whom he has found, if we shed immoderate
tears for them from whose eyes, he has wiped away all tears, to wear
perpetual blacks for them, upon whom he has put long white Robes. Whatsoever
our loss may be by them, it comes far short of their gain; our cross is
light in comparison of their super-excellent weight of glory, therefore let us
not sorrow for them as those that have no hope. Let us not show our selves
infidels by too much lamenting the death of believers. Weep we may for them,
or rather for our loss by them, but moderately, as knowing that our loss, is
their gain; and if we truly love them, we cannot but exceedingly congratulate
their feasts of joy, their rivers of pleasures, their Psalms of Victory, their
Robes of Majesty, their Crowns of glory. Water therefore your plants at the
departure of your dearest friends, but drown them not; For whatsoever we
complain of here, they are freed from there; and whatsoever we desire here,
they enjoy there; they hunger not, but feast with the Lamb; they sigh not, but
sing with Moses, having safely passed over the glassie Sea; they lie not in
darkness, but possess the inheritance of Saints in light. They have immunity
from sin, freedom from all temptations, and security from danger, they have
rest for their labors here, comfort for their troubles, glory for their
disgrace, joys for their sorrows, life for their death in Christ, and Christ
for all.

Ut Romae mori non potest qui Romae non vixit, ita qui in domino non vixit, in
e^ non moritur.

Cor. Alapide.
AS a man cannot dye at Rome, who never lived at Rome; so none can dye in
Christ, who never lived in him, and none can live in him, who is not in him;
First, then we must labor to be in him, and how may we compass this? Christ
himself teaches us, I am the Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman, every
branch that bears not fruit in me, he takes away, and every branch that
bears fruit be purges, that it may bring forth more fruit; as the branch
cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye,
except ye abide in me. Hence we learn that we cannot bear fruit in Christ,
unless as branches we be ingrafted into him. Now that a graft may be
inoculated, 1 There must be made an incision in the tree. 2 The graft or
Syence must be imped in. 3 After it is put in, it must be joined fast to the
tree. The incision is already made by the wounds given Christ at his death,
many incisions were made in the true Vine; that which puts us in, or
inoculateth us, is a special faith, and that which binds us fast to the tree,
is love, and the grace of perseverance. If then we be ingrafted by faith into
Christ, and bound fast unto him by love, we shall partake of the juice of the
stock, and grow in grace, and bear fruit also more and more, and so living in
the true Vine, we shall dye in him, and so dying in him, we shall re-flourish
with him in everlasting glory.

Nihil melius aterna lex fecit quam quod unum introitum ad vitam nobis dedit,
exitus multos.

Sen. Ep. 10.
WE come but one way into the world, but we go a thousand out of it: As we
see in a Garden pot, the water is poured in but at one place, to wit, the
narrow mouth, but it runs out at a hundred holes. Some dye by fire, as the
Sodomites; by water, as the old world: By the infection of the air, as
threescore and ten thousand in David's time: By the opening of the earth, as
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Amphiraus, and two Cities, Buris, and Helice. Some
meet with death in their Coach, as Antiochus, their chamber as Domitian, their
bed, as John the twelfth, the Theater, as Caligula, the Senate, as Caesar. The
Temple, as Zenacherib. Their table, as Claudius. At the Lords Table, as Pope
Victor, and Henry of Luxenburg. Death wounds and strikes some with a
Penknife, as Soneca a Stilletto, as Henry the fourth. A sword, as Paul. A
Fullers ^e am, as James the Lords brother. A Saw, as Isaiah. A stone, as
Pyrrhus. A Thunderbolt, as Amistatius. What should I speak of Felones de se,
such as have thrown away their souls. Sardanapalus made a great fire, and
leaped into it. Luoretia stabbed her self. Cleopatra put an Aspe to her breast
stung therewith, dyed presently; Saul fell upon his own sword. Judas hanged
himself: Deronius cut his own veins. Heremius bear out his own brains. Licinius
choked himself with a napkin. Dortia dyed by swallowing hot burning coals.
Hannibal sucked poison out of his ring. Demosthenes out of his Pen, etc. What
seems so loose as the soul in the body, which is plucked out with an hair,
driven out with a smell, frayed out with a fancy? Verily that seems to be
but a breath in the nostrils, which is taken away with a scent; a shadow, which
is driven away with a Scarecrow; a dream, which is frayed away with a fancy;
a vapor which is driven away with a pusse; a conceit which goes away with a
passion, a toy that leaves us with a laughter; yet grief killed Homer; laughter
Philemon; a hait in his milk, Fabius; a fly in his throat, Adrian; a smell of
lime in his nostrils, Jovi^^; the snufte of a candle a child in Pliny; a
kernel of a raison Anacreon; and an Icesickle one in Martial, which caused the
Poet to melt into tears, saying, Onbimors non est, si jugulatis aque? What
cannot make an end of us, if a small drop of water congealed can do it? In
these regards we may turn the affirmative in the 1 Cor. 15. 55. into a
negative, and say truly, though not in the Apostles sense, O death where is not
thy sting? For we see it thrust out in out meats, in our drinks, in our
apparel, in our breath, in the Court, in the Country, in the City, in the
Field, in the Land, in the Sea, in the Chamber, in the Church, and in the
Churchyard.

Domiviam potest a^ est ^um utendi (...) abutend^.

Justinian.
GOd may lend thee out even to Satah, suffer thee to be his Bayli^^e, and his
instrument to the vexation of others: So he lent out St. Paul to the Scribes
and Pharisees, to serve them in their persecutions; so God may lend thee out.
God may let thee out for a time to them that shall plough and harrow thee,
fell, and cleave thee, and reserve to himself but a little rent, a little
glory, in thy patience; So he let out Job even to Satan himself; so God may
let thee out, God may mortgage thee to a six months Fever, or to a longer
debilit; so he mortgaged Hezekias. God may lay thee waste, and pull-up thy
fences, and extinguish their power, or withdraw their love, upon whom thou
have established thy dependence; So he laid David waste, when he withdrew
his childrens obedience from him; so God may lay thee waste. God may let out
all his time in thee in this world, and reserve to himself only a last year, a
last day, a last minute, suffer thee in unrepented sins to the last gasp; so
God let out the good, Thief. God is Lord of all that thou have and art; and
then he that is Lord owner, Proprietary, may do with that which is his, what,
he will. But God will not, cannot divest his Domirsion, nor sell thee so, as
not to reserve a power, and a will to redeem thee, if thou would be
redeemed. For howsoever he seem to thee, to have sold thee to sin, to sadness,
to sickness, to superstition, (for these be the Ishmalites, these be the
Midianite Merchants, that buy up our Joseph's, our souls) though he seem to
sell his present estate, he will not sell reversions, his future title to thee
by a future repentance, he will not sell, but whenever thou shall grow due
to him, by a new, land a true repentance, he shall reassume thee into his
bed, and his bosom, no bill of divorce, and reenter thee into his revenue, and
his audit, no bill of sale, shall stand up to thy prejudice, but thy dejected
spirit shall spirit shall be raised from thy consternation to a holy
cheerfulness, and a peaceful alacrity, and no tentation shall offer a reply to
this question, which God makes to establish thy conscience, ubi libellus, Where
is the bill of thy mothers divorcement, etc. Isa. 50. 1.

Unde illi cura cordis cui ne ipsa quidem adhuc ^ris circumspectia.

Bernard.
POu^ Domine custodiam ori meo, was the prayer of David, Set a watch before my
lips. And in the Law of Mases, the vessel that had not the coveting fastened to
it, was unclean; and therefore the inner parts of a fool are resembled to a
broken vessel, which has neither part entire, nor covering. He can keep no
knowledge while he lives, Eccles. 21. 14. Hereupon those more nobly bred
amongst the Romans, learned first to hold their peace, and afterward to speak.
For he is an ill treasurer of his own thoughts, that keeps not the doors of
his lips shut; and that heart is never locked fast upon any secret, where a
profuse tongue lays interest to the key. And therefore nature has provided
well by fortisying this member, more than any part of the body, setting a
garrison of the strong and stout men about it, Eccles. 12. doubly intrenching
it with lips and teeth, not so much to oppose a foreign invasion, as to allay
mutinies within, for the tongue is an unruly member, and sides much with the
perverseness of our will; and therefore reason should keep strict Sentinel upon
it, and as well direct, as guard it. Nature has proportioned us a double ear
and eye to a single tongue, and reason interprets instantly. We should hear,
and see twice, ere we speak once

Natum esse Dee sempiternum est.


TO be born with God, is to be eternal with God, spoken by St. Austin against
the Arrians, and the Father opens himself by his old similitude, Sicut splendour
qui gignitur ab igne, as light which is begotten of fire, and defused, is
coequal with the fire, and would be coeternal too, if fire were eternal; So
the Son with the Father, this being before all time, the other must kiss in the
same everlastingness. The Father thinking his reason built too slenderly does
buttress (as it were) and back it with the authority of an Apostle, such an
Apostle as was sometimes a Persccutor, and therefore his Authority most potent
against a Persecutor where he styles Christ, the Power and Wisdom of God. If
the Son of God be the Power and Wisdom of God; and that God was never without
Power and Wisdom; how can we scant the Son of a Co-eternity with the Father?
For either we must grant that there was always a Son, or that God had
sometimes no wisdom, and impudence, or madness, were never at such a growth of
blasphemy, as to belch the latter. If the reverend allegation of a learned
Prelate, or those more sacred of an Apostle, cannot bring up the mouth of a
malicious Heretic, hear the voice of a Prophet, and a Father warbling upon
that too. Before me there was no other God, and after me there shall be
none, Isa. 43. 10. Quis hoc dicit, pater an filius? (says Ambrose) Who is
here, the speaker; the Father, or the Son (he comes over him with a subtle
Dilemma) if the Son, thus he says, Before me there was no other Cod; if the
Father, After me (says he) these shall be none: For both the Father in the
Son, and the Son in the Father must be known; when thou namest a Father, thou
have also designed a Son, because no man is a Father to himself; when thou
namest a Son, thou confessest also a Father, for no man is son to himself, the
Son therefore can neither subsist without the Father, nor the Father without
the Son, the one being from everlasting, we may not depose the other from the
like Omnipotency.

Vereor ne dum propter te fugis, propter alios sis in pericul^ apud dominum.

Athan. in Epist. ad Drac.
TO avoid all occasions of public service for the Church under a pretense of
humility, or recluseness, speaks (too broadly) the delinquent, refractory; your
Anchorite that digs his grave in speculation merely, and your Moale that is
earthed wholly in an affected solitariness, are not liable so properly to
obscurity, as death, such elaborateness tends not to perfection, but disease;
and we find an Apoplexy, and sleep, no less on their endeavors than in their
name; all knowledge is dusted with them, and it is no more a nursery of
virtues, but a Tomb. And (indeed) such s^lk-worms spin themselves into flies,
disanimate heartlesse flies, fit neither for Church, nor Commonwealth. The
Laurel, and honor of all Secular designs, is the execution, and the happiness
of those sacred ones is not intayled barely to the knowledge of them, but to
that fac and vives, and that not at home only in thy particular intendments,
but abroad also in thy services for the Church; so that he that retreats at
any alarm, or summons of his God, for the common affairs of the Church, to hug,
and enjoy himself in his solitary ends, runs himself on the shelves of a rough
censure, that of the father to his Dracontius. To stand by, and give aim only
whilst others shoot, and thou thy self no mark-man, proclaims thy laziness, if
not thy impotency. What a nothing is thy arm, thy bow, thy shaft? if not
practiced, nor bent, nor drawn up; or if so glorious a mark, the Church, why
not levelled at? either she must be unworthy of thy travel, or thine of her.
If therefore this thy mother implore thy aid (so Augustine counsels his
Indoxi^s) on the one side, have not ambition on the other, lean not to a l^^ie
refusal, weigh not thine own idleness with the necessities and greatness of her
burdens, to which (whiles she is in travel) if no good men will administer
their help, Certe quomodo nasceremini non inveniretis, God must then invent new
ways for our new birth.

Occidar modo imperet.

Tacit. Annals.
AMmbition whither will thou? Nay, whither will thou not? To the pinnacle of the
Temple for the glory of the world, though thou tumble for it to thy eternal
ruin. The Greek Philosopher Eudorus will beg of the gods, that he may behold
the Sun so near, as to comprehend the form, beauty, greatness of it, and
afterward he cares not if he burn, as if there were no such Martyrdom as
what Ambition fites. Let me be killed, so that he may reign, was the
resolution of Agrippina for her Nero. But lo, how the event crowns the
unsatiateness of her desires; he gains the Kingdom, and first dug out
those bowels which had fostered him, and then that heart which was the throne
of such an aspiring thought, Cruelty, shall I call it, or Justice, when the
vainglory of the mother was penanced with the unnatralness of the son. Thus
lofty minds (furnished with a strong hope of the success of their designs)
have embarked themselves into great actions, and proposing humane ends, as
scales to their high thoughts, have been wasted into strange promotions, but
after they have (a while) spangled in that their firmament of honor, they
become falling stars, and so the success proves as in-glorious as the
enterprise was bold and desperate. We have seldom met with any eminency that
was sudden and permanent: Those which in their dawn of fortune break so
gloriously, meet with a storm at noon, or else a cloud at night. The Sun that
rises in a gray and sullen morning, sets clearest: And indeed, Ambion is too
hasty, and is hurried violently to the end it aims at, without cautiousness,
and circumspection to the mean; but humility has a calm, and temperate pace,
and stoops it along in a gentle posture, yet at length attains her mark, but
slowly, as if it went unwilling to honor, and slighted those proffers which
others sue for.

Primatus fugientem desiderat desideratum horret.

Chrisol.
IT is a trick of primacy to fawn where it is not crouched to, but look coy
where it is over-courted; like some Weathercock which in a constant and
churlish wind break fairly toward us, but in a wanton blast-turn tail. Hence
it is that in matters of Authority, and pre-eminence, pride has for the most
part the foil, humility the conquest, that stoops basely to the title, or the
profit, and loses either, this in a modest distance, keeps a loof, till worth
invite it, and at length gains both; fo that it is in ways of promotion, as in
some Waterworks, where one engine raises it to make it fall more violently,
another beats it down that it might mount higher. The advice then of St. Peter
comes seasonably here, Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he
may exalt you in due time, 1 Pet. 5. 6. The words are not without the strength
of emphasis, here is an humiliaini Crowned with an ut exaltet, humble your
selves that he may exalt, as if humility were so necessary a disposition to
preferment, that without it God might not exalt.

Habet hoc vitium omnis ambitio, non respicit.

Seneca.
THe thirst of Eminency is headstrong, and runs with a loose bridle. It is to
see much below satiety, that it still desires, nay it is hungry even in
surfeit, and is sharpened with the fruition of that it coveted, so that the
birth of this child, is but the conception of another, one honor rooms not
the greatness of his thought, and an ambitious desire seldom anchors any
where, but goes on still with a full sall, till it has compassed the Cape it
is bound for. This man makes Government the stall both of his pride and
tyranny, his projects are loftily cruel, so are his actions too, yet still in a
hot scent of promotion, which (if they want a Trumpet for others commendation)
shall borrow one from his own, and so at one applaud his designs, and justify
them. And indeed this titilation, and itch of honor, if it once find in the
bosom of the receiver a fair admittance, does smoothly insinuate, and cheat
upon the powers of reason; but when it is thoroughly seated, and enthroned
there, it is no more a guest, but a tyrant, and leaves the possessor, not a
Master, but a captive; and in this case, I know not whether St. Augustine will
pity his Anrelius, or excuse him, Quod si cuiquam facile sit gloriam non cupere
dum n^gatur difficile est ea non delectari cum offertur, in his 64. Epistle.
However the Father seems there to plead only for the delight in glories
offered, not in the unjust prosecution of those denied.

Si nil attuleris, ibis Homere for as.

Ovid.
IN ways of sufficiency, and worth, it is the si nil attuleris, damps the
preferment; the age can instance, in some languishing and weak in their
intellectuals, men without sap, or kernel, who (having their storehouse well
fraught with that white and red earth) have stumbled on the glories of the
time, as if fortune would make them happy in despite of virtue; when others of
Christ's followers (were truly his Disciples) are sent abroad with their ite and
predicate, bare footed, without bag or scrip, but their Commission large, omni
creaturae, the wide world is their place of residence; no particular roof to
shelter them, or place of rotiredness to lay their head in. Nay some that have
served a triple Apprentiship to Arts and Sciences, and spent in these our
Athens the strength of their time, and patrimony, men thoroughly ballasted for
those high designs, well kerned both in years and judgment, he mouldring for
non-imployment, and dashed for slowness of promotion, when others of cheap, and
thin abilities, men without growth or bud of knowledge, have met with the
honors of advancement, and trample on those dejected book-worms which dissolve
themselves into industry for the service of their Church, yet meet neither with
her pomp, no^ her revenue; nay, some that have wasted their lamp, and burnt
their Taper to an inch of years, have spent those fortunes in the travels of
Divinity, which would largely have accommodated them for more secular courses,
and enforced to retire themselves to the solitariness of some ten pounds cure,
and so spin out the remainder of their age in a discontented contemplation of
their misfortunes: and (I pray God) not in a murmuring against his Church.
Where the fault lies, he that has but slenderly trans^iqued with the
occurrences of the time, may judge. Spiritual promotions are slow of foo^, and
come for the most part halting, or in a by-way. Times more than calamitous,
when the inheritance and patrimony of the Church shall be thus leased to
avarice and folly, when these her honors which she intails upon desert, shall
be heaped upon a golden ignorant, who rudely treads on those sacred
Prerogatives. Strange monument of weakness, he that reels under his own
burden, stoops to be oppressed with the weight of others, and lo how he
tumbles to a mortal sin (the Schoolmen do style it so) directly opposite to a
pair of virtues, Justice, Chastity; unjust, that the revenues due to worth,
should be packed upon bulkless and unable persons, and uncharitable for him to
undertake the guidance and pasturing of a flock who was never trained up in the
conditions of a shepherd. Neither is he an enemy only of a double virtue, but
a companion of two such sins, which seem to brave, and dare the Almighty to
revenge on the prophan^r, Inc^usion, Perjury; first, in rushing on the
profession not legitimately called; then in purchasing her honors.

Pompa mortis magis terret, quam mors ipsa.

Seneca.
Why should this sad toil of mortality dishearten us? Groans and Sighs, and
Convulsions, are the bodies passing-bells, no less customary, than natural, and
more horrid in the circumstance, than the thing, the retinue and complement of
death, speaks more terror, than the act. The Adversary, the Judge, the
Sentence, the Jailer, the Executioner, more daunt the Malefactor, than the very
stroke, and cleft of dissolution. Are we so foolish as to fear that (says the
heathen) which will dash or split us in the whole, no, it is the port which we
ought one day to desire, never to refuse; into which (if any have been cast in
their younger years) they need repine no more than one, which with a short cut
has ended his Navigation. For there are some whom slacker winds mock, and
detain, and weary with the gentle tediousness of a peaceable calm; others
swifter wafted by sudden gusts, whom life has rather ravished thither, than
sent, which had they a time delayed, by some flattering intermissions, yet at
length, must of necessity strike sail to it. Some faint-hearted Adrian will (to
his power) linger it, and fearfully expostulate with a parting soul. Quae nunc
abib is in loca, pallidula, rigida, nudula? As if the divorce from the body
were everlasting, and there should not be (one day) a more glorious contract.

When a confident Hilarian, shall dare all those grisly assaults, Soul get thee
out, thou have seventy years served Christ, and art thou now loath to dye?
Again some spruce Agag, or hemmed Amalakite, would be palsie-struck with an
amara mors, death is bitter, death, mors, death is bitter, death is bitter, 1 Samuel 15. When a Lubentius, and a Maximinus have their breast plate on, with a
Domine parati sumus* We are ready to lay off our garments the flesh: And
indeed, says St. Austin, Boughs fall from trees, and stones out of buildings;
and why should it seem strange that mortals dye; Some have welcomed death, some
met it in the way, some baffeld it in sickness, persecution, torments. I
instance not in that of Basil, to the Arrianated Val^ns (it is too light) that
of Vincentius was more remarkable, who with an unabated constancy thus shuns
the rage of his merciless Executioner, thou shall see the Spirit of God
strength^n the tormented, more than the Devil can the hands of the tormenter.
And that you may know a true Martyrdom, is not dashed either at the
expectation, or the sense of torture; as Barlaam will hold his hand over the
very flame of the Altar, and sport out the horridness of such a death, with
that of the Psalmist, Thou have ^aught my hands to war, and my fingers to
fight. Seeing then we are compalsed with such a cloud of witnesses, what
should scare a true Apostle from his Cupio dissolvi? Let us take his
resolution, and his counsel too, lay aside every weight, and run with patience
the race set before us, Heb. 1^.

Iniquitatem damnare novit Deus, non facere.

August.
GOd knows how to judge, not commit a crime, and to dispose, not mould it, and
is often the Father of the punishment, not the fact. Hence it is that the
dimness of humane apprehension conceives that oftentimes a delinquency in God,
which is a monster of our own frailty, making God not only to foreknow, but
predestinate an evil, when the evil is both by growth and conception ours, and
if ought savor of goodness in us, it is Gods, not ours, yet ours too, as
derivative from God, who is no less the Patron of all goodness, than the
Creator; and it is as truly impossible for him to commit evil, as it was truly
miraculous to make all that he had made good. And therefore Ter^ulli^^ in his
first book, de Tri^^^^^^, makes it a non potest fieri, a matter beyond the list
and reach of possibility that he should be artifex mali operis, the promoter
and ingineer of a depraved act, who chalengeth to himself, the title no less of
an unblemished Father than of a Judge. If any then fall off from goodness, he
is hurried no less with the violence of his own persuasion than concupiscence,
and in those desperate affairs, Gods will is neither an intermedler nor
co-partner; Cujus open scimus multos ne laberentur retentos, nullos ut
laberentur impulsos, says Aug. by whose hand of providence, we know many to
be supported that they might not fall, none impelled that they should: And in
his answer to that fourteenth Article, falsely supposed to be his fieri non
potest, ut per quem a peecatis surgitur per eum ad peecata decidatur, for one
and the self-same goodness to be the life and death of the self-same sin, is
so much beyond improbability that it is impossible; let this then satisfy our
desire of knowledge, Et ab illo esse quod flatur, and non ab illo esse quod
ruitur; That his providence is the staff and crutch on which we so lean, that
we yet stand our corrupt affections, the bruised and broken reed, on which if
we so lean, we fall. If any then go onward in the true rode of Divine graces,
no doubt, but the finger of the Almighty points out his way to true happiness;
but if he wander in the bypath of a vicious and depraved dissoluteness, his
own corrupt affections becken him to ruin. How then can we without sacrilege
and robbing of divine honor, make God the Father of so foul and unwashed a
crime as obduration, perditio tua ex te Israel, If destruction dog thee, thank
thy corrupt affections, not blame thy Maker, for he does but leave thee, and
they harden. To lay then with some depraved Libertines, the weight and burden
of our sins on the shoulder of predestination, and make that the womb of those
foul-enormities, may well pass for an infirmity, not for an excuse. For though
God from eternity knew how to reward every man either by crown or punishment*
yet he never enjoined any man either ^ necessity, or a will to sin.

Compeseat se humana temerit as and id quod non est non qu^rat, ne id quod est,
non inveniat.

August.
MOrtal thoughts should not carry too lofty a sail, but take heed how they cut
the narrow streights and passages of divine Predestination. A busy prying into
this Ark of Gods secrets, as it is accompanied with a full blown insolence, so
with danger; Humility here is the first stair to safety, and a modest knowledge
stands constantly wondering, whilst the proud apprehension staggers, and tumble^
too, Here is a sea unnavigable, and a gulf so scorning fathom, that our
Apostle himself was driven to his (...). O depth, and in a rapture, more of
astonishment, than contemplation, he styles it the Sacrament and mystery of
his will, being so ^ull of unknown turnings and M^^nders, that if a naked
reason hold the clue, we are rather involved, than guided in so strange a
labyrinth. To inquire then the cause of Gods will, were an act of lunacy, not
of judgment. For every efficient cause is greater than the effect. Now there
is nothing greater than the will of God, and therefore no cause thereof. For if
there were, there should something pre-occupate that will, which to conceive
were sinful, to believe blasphemous. If any then suggested by a vainglorious
inquiry, should ask why God did elect this man, and not that, we have not
only to resolve, but to fore-stall so beaten an objection, because he would;
but why would God do it? Here is a question as guilty of reproof as the author,
which:seeks a cause of that, beyond, or without which, there is no cause found;
where the apprehension wheels, and reasonruns giddy in a doubtful gyre. Here a
sorupulous and humane rashness should be hush^d, and not search for that which
is not, lest it find not that which is: Let him that can discry the wonders of
the Lord in this great deep, but let him take heed he sinks not down then with
this aspiring thought, this ambitious desire of hidden knowledge, and make not
curiosity the picklock of Divine secrets, know that such mysteries are doubly
barred up in the coffers of the Almighty, which thou may strive to violate,
not open, and therefore if thou will needs trespass upon the Diety, dig not in
its bosom; a more humble adventure, suits better with the condition of a worm,
scarce a man, or if so exposed to frailty. It is a fit task and employment for
mortality to contemplate his works, not sift his mysteries, and admire his
goodness, not blur his Justice. If any therefore stagger at those unfathomed
mysteries of Gods Election and Predestination, and his reason and apprehension
be struck dead at the contemplation of Gods eternal, but hidden projects; let
him season a little his amazement with adoration, and at last solace his
distempered thoughts with that of Gregory, Qui in fact is Dei, etc. In the
abstruse and dark mysteries of God, he that sees not a reason, if he sees his
own infirmity, he sees a sufficient reason why he should not see. Me thinks
this should cloy the appetite of a greedy inquisition, and satisfy the
distrust of any, but of too querulous a disposition, which with the eye of
curiosity prying too nicely into the closest of Gods secrets, are no less
dazeled than blinded, if not with profanation, heresy. Divine secrets should
rather transport us with wonder, than prompt us to inquiry, and bring us on our
knees to acknowledge the infiniteness both of Gods power and will, than ransack
the bosom of the Almighty, for the revealing of his intents. Is it not
blessedness enough that God has made thee his Steward, though not his
Secretary. Will no Mansion in heaven content thee, but that which is the Throne
and Chair for Omnipotency to sit on? No treasury but that which is the Cabinet
and Storehouse of his own secrets? Worm and no man, take heed how thou
struglest with thy Maker. Expostulation with God, imports no less
peremptoriness, than danger; and if Angels fell for pride of emulation, where
will thou tumble for this pride of inquiry? as in matters therefore of unusual
doubt, where truth has no verdict, probability finds audience. So in those
obstruct and narrow passages of Gods will, where reason cannot inform thee,
belief is thy best intelligencer, and if that want a tongue, make this thy
interpreter; so thou may evade with less distrust, I am sure with more
safety.

Etsi domine ego commisi unde me damnare potes, ^u tamen non aml^sisti unde me
salvare potes.

Anselm.
O Blessed Jesus, though I have committed those transgressions for which thou
may condemn me, yet thou have not lost those compassions by which thou
may save me. And therefore if our souls were insuch a straight that we saw
hell opening her mouth upon us, like the Red Sea, before the Israelites; the
damned and ugly feinds pursuing us behind like the Egyptians; on the right
hand, and on the left, death and sea, ready to ingulf us; yet upon a broken
heart, and undisguised sorrow, would I speak to you in the confidence of Moses,
Stand still, and behold the salvat^on of the Lord. Thou then which art oppressed
with the violence and clamor of thy sin^, and want an Advocate either to
intercede, or pity, hear the voice of the Lamb cry unto th^e, I will hear thee
out of my holy hill. Is any heavily laden with the weight of his offenses, or
groans under the yoke and tyranny of manifold temptations, Come unto me, I
will refresh thee. Does any hunger after righteousness, Behold, I am the bread
of life, take eat, here is my body. Does any thirst after the ways of grace?
Lo I am a living spring, come drink, here is my blood, my blood, that was shed
for many for the remission of sins; for many, not for all. Has sin dominion
over thee, or does it reign in thy mortal heart? Are the wounds of thy
transgressions so deep, that they cannot be searched, or so old, that they
corrupt, and putrify, here is that good Samaritan that will either bind them
up, or pour in oil; but art thou not yet dead in trespasses, are not thy ulcers
past cure? Are there any seeds of true life remaining? is there any motion of
repentance in thy soul^, will thy pulse of remorse beat a little, have thou but
a touch of sorrow, a spark of contrition, a grain of faith? know there is oil
of comfort for him that mourns in Sion, Isa. 61. 3. not a tear drops from thee
in sincerity, which is either unpitied, or unpreserved, God puts it into his
bottle. On the other side, is there a Pharaoh in thee, a heart unmollified, a
stone that will not be bruised, a flint unmalleable? I, both mourn for it, and
leave it. But is this heart of stone taken away? and is there given thee a
heart of flesh, is it soft and tender with remorse, truly sacrificed to sorrow,
then know there is balm of Gilead, for the broken heart, balm that will both
refresh and cure it. T^^^ then which groanest in thy spirit, and art drawn out
as it were into contrition for thy sins, thou which have washed thy hands in
innocence, go cheerfully to the Altar of thy God, and cry with old Anselm, Etsi
domine ego commisi unde me damnare potes, tu tamen non amifisti unde me salvare
potes.

Qui pectus suum tundit and se non corrigit, aggravat peccata, non tollit.

August.
Where there is an outward percussion of the breast, without remorse of the
inward man, there is rather an aggravation of sin, than a release. That subtle
fallacy of the eye, pointing toward heaven; that base hypocrisy of the knee,
kissing the earth; that seeming austerity of thy hand, martyring thy breast;
gains from God neither applause nor blessing, but the curse of the Pharisee,
whose example would have chid thee to such an outside of devotion: Is then thy
repentance disguised? Has it a touch of dissimulation in it? Is not thy old
corruption clean disgorged, but must thou again to thy former vomit? Hypocrite,
thy Altar is without fire, thine Incense without smoke, it shall never touch
the nostrils of the Almighty, thy prayers in his ears sound like brass, and
tinckle like an illtuned cymbal; all this formality of zeal is but a disease of
the lip, Give me thy heart, my son, says God, Prove. 23. I will have that or
nothing, and that clean too, washed both from deceit and guilt. Those
blanchings and guildings, and garnishings of external zeal, are as odious in
the eye of God, as those of body in a true Christian: This gloss, this paint of
demureness, speaks but our whoredoms in Religion, and the integrity of that
man is open, both to censure and suspicion, that is exposed either to the
practice of it, or the approbation. A villain is a villain, howsoever his garb
or habit speak him otherwise, and an hypocrite is no less, though sleeked over
with an external sanctity, and dressed in the affectations of a preciser cut.
Let us be truly that what we seem to be, and not seem what we are not; let
there be doors, and casements in our breasts, that men may see the loyalty
betwixt our heart and tongue, and how our thoughts whisper to our tongue, and
how our tongue speaks them to the world. Away with those meteors, and
falsefires of Religion, which not only bypath us in a blinded zeal, but
mis-leads others in our steps of error. Let us then put off the old man in our
pride, vainglory, envy, malice, hatred, and (that foul disease of the times)
hypocrisy, and let us put on the new man in sincerity, faith, repentance,
sobriety, brotherly-kindness, and (what without it disparages the tongue both
of men and Angels) charity: That so at length we may receive that everlasting
benediction, Come ye children, in herit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world.

Bonum causatur ex integra causa, malum autem ex singularib us defectibus.

Tho. Aquin.
GOd expects perfection, perfection of parts, where man expects acceptance. Now
as unto that which is good, so unto that which is perfect, there must be an
entire concurrence of all requisites. The defect, or want of any one thing
required, may cause an imperfection, but to the constitution of perfection,
there must be a meeting of all things required; It will appear in the cause
specified, Lev. 22, 21. The sacrifices of Beeves, or of Sheep, there mentioned,
must be perfect. Now if the beast had wanted but any one part, an eye, an ear,
an horn, an hoof, any one of these defects had caused an imperfection, and the
sacrifice had been imperfect, and so no acceptance of it. But now to have made
it perfect, to be accepted, it must have all, and every one of the parts,
every member of the body in its number, and proportion. Now the equity holds in
all duties of worship. To what end is our worship, if not accepted; if we will
have it accepted, we must have it perfect, there must be all these things in
it that God requires. Now God requires in worship, not only that we use his
Ordinance, but his Order, as outward, so inward. Now when there is this
perfection that God requires, then may a blessing and acceptance be expected.
But if that Order, that spiritual Order which God calls for, be wanting, if
wanting in any one part of it, there the duty is imperfect, there no acceptance
can be looked for, but rather a breach. We may see it exemplified in the Law
of the Peace Offerings, Levit. 7. First, see the Ordinance of God, verse. 11,
12, 13. There is the substance of the sacrifice prescribed, then the Order is,
that they be eaten in due time, verse. 16. It shall be eaten the same day that
he offers his sacrifice, that the flesh be clean, verse. 19. And the flesh
that touches any unclean thing, shall not be eaten. That the persons that do
eat it must be clean, verse. 19. And as for the flesh, all that be clean shall
eat thereof; that is, all that eat thereof must be clean, as appears by that
which follows, verse. 20. So then as here is the Ordinance prescribed, so the
Order of eating, that they may be eaten purely, that pure things be eaten,
that they be eaten of pure persons; there Peace Offerings thus eaten, were
accepted, because here was perfection from the concurrence, and integrity of
the causes constituring perfection. But now if any one of these things were
missing in point of order, it made them imperfect, and so unacceptable. If not
purely in regard of time, though p^re flesh, and eaten by pure persons; yet no
blessing, no acceptance, but a breach, verse. 18. It shall not be accepted, it
shall be an abomination, and the soul that eats of it, shall bear his
iniquity. If not pure flesh eaten, though by pure persons, yet not only no
acceptance and blessing, but an uncomfortable breach, Even that soul shall be
cut off from his people, verse. 20, 21.

Sacramenta sunt fodinae gratiae, dispositio est vasculum gratiae, promajore
dispositione, and affectu tuo majorem gratiam reportabis.

Eusebius.
FIll the men's sacks with food as much as they can carry, says Joseph to his
Steward, Genesis 44. 1. Look how they came prepared with Sacks and Beasts, so they
were sent back with Corn: The greater, and the more Sacks they had prepared,
the more Corn they carry away: If they had prepared but small Sacks, and a few,
they had carried away the less. A prepared heart is a vessel that shall be
filled at the Sacrament. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81. 10.
Now the more or less the heart is prepared, the greater or lesser is the
vessel. According to the size and capacity of the vessel, shall it be filled.
Fill such men's hearts with spiritual blessings, with virtue from Christ, with
the comforts of the Holy Ghost, says the Lord at the Sacrament, fill them with
spiritual food as full as they can hold, as much as they can carry. What a
sweet comfort is that? Who desires not to carry away from the Sacrament as much
as may be? Then be careful to prepare our hearts, and prepare them to the
purpose, the larger is our preparation, the larger is our vessel, the larger
our vessel, the larger is our largess and dole at the Sacrament. If we carry
not away as much as we would, it is our own fault, that by preparation we did
not furnish our selves with a more capacious vessel. The poor pittances that
many go from the Sacrament withal, make them droop when they are gone. They
may thank themselves; for if Josaphs brethren had brought small Sacks, they
could not have carried away much corn out of Egypt. Let men come with hearts so
prepared as they should, and they shall be laden and filled with as much as
they can carry.

Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis.

Aristotle.
SAcraments work according to that disposition wherein they find such as
receive them. Such as are the receivers, so prove the Sacraments unto them. It
is in this case as it was with the woman under jealousy, and suspicion of
uncleanness, drinking the cursed waters, Numb. 5. 27, 28. And when he has
made her to drink the water, then it shall come to pass, that if she be
defiled, etc. Look then as the woman was, such was the work of the water. If
she were clean, the water did her no hurt; nay, it did her good, she
conceived seed, she became fruitful, but if she were defiled and unclean, it
wrought with a mischief, Her belly did swell, her t^igh did rot, and she
became a curse. It is so in receiving the Sacrament. As men are that receive
it, so is the work and efficacy of it, either for good or hurt, either for bain
or blessing; if a man be prepared with repentance, and so be clean, then the
Sacrament brings a blessing, it makes a man fruitful. But if a man be defiled,
and unclean, as every impenitent sinner is, then it banes and mischiefs him,
he proves a more rotten, and wretched sinner than before. An unwholesome and
diseased stomach that every food it receives, it alters, and rather nourishes
the disease, than the body, and turns wholesome nourishment to matter of grief
and vexation. So an impenitent soul coming to Gods Ordinance in its fins and
defilement, does but turn the wholesome nutriment of the Sacrament to the
feeding of its disease, and the increasing of its own sorrow and mischief; as
the water that made the clean woman fruitful, made the unclean woman swell and
rot. God curses the Sacrament to an impenitent, defiled person, and so makes a
sad breach upon him instead of a blessing.

Pertunte sole, pereunt omnia.

Seneca.
FOr a man to be stupid and senseless under corporal afflictions, argues a
very ill temper of spirit; but for a man to be stupid and senseless under
spiritual afflictions, under such a spiritual affliction, as this, the loss of
the Son, the loss of Christ as a Comforter, argues a very ill temper of spirit
indeed. Strive therefore, O deserted stupid soul, to affect thine heart
thoroughly with thy loss; thou have lost more than Job when he had lost
children, substance, health, honors, and friends; nay, thou have lost more,
than if thou had lost this world; nay, thou have lost more, than if thou
had lost thy life; which is of more worth than the world; thou have lost
Christ, which is richer than the world, and sweeter than thy life.

What an infinite loss were it to this world to lose the Sun? It were at once
to lose all. Pereunte sole, pereunt omnia; for all things serviceable for the
use of man, depend upon the motion and influence of that glorious body. What a
loss then is it to the lesser world, to lose Christ the Son of Righteousness?
It is to lose all good at once, for soul and body. All graces close and wither,
when Christ departs, as all fragrant flowers, when the Sun withdraws his
influence. And when these flowers wither in the soul, a man is a moving
dunghill, that stinks in the nostrils of God and man where ever he comes. A man
that has lost Christ, may truly say, as she when the Ark was lost, That his
glory is departed. As the Sun in the glory of the greater World; So Christ the
Son of Righteousness, is the glory of the lesser world, to wit, man.

Thou have lost that in the world, that is more worth than the world, and which
all the world can never help thee to. Thou have lost that which would make the
worst condition in this life, a Heaven, whereas the best without it, is but a
Hell; thou have lost that which would have been to thy soul a continual feast;
whereas now thy soul is in a continual famine and leanenesse. Thou have lost
thy spirits, and thy soul as in a dead-palsie, so that thou art a living
dead-man, fit for no spiritual service. Thou have lost thy head, thou have lost
thy eyes, thou have lost thy hands, thou have lost thy clothing; nay, thou
have lost thy best Father, thy best Husband, thy best Friend; all, all this,
and much more comfort is Christ to man. Thou have great reason then, O deserted
soul, to lay to heart thy loss.

Ignis focalis immateriale non urit.

Aristoteles.
THe sorrows of Hell are such as principally torture the spirit. The fire which
we make, can only burn, and torture the bodies of men, because this only of
man is material; immaterials, as the souls of men are, our fire cannot fasten
upon, but that strange fire, which God has kindled in Hell for all that
disobey him, burns the souls of men, though immaterial substances. Nay, so
strange is that fire, that it burns these immaterial substances most fiercely,
as being the most sinful part of man; for it is only sin that pitches and
defiles the soul, and makes it combustible; which otherwise would never burn if
all the fiery Artists of Hell did blow the bellows.

Now just such is that fire which conscience kindles upon the breach of
integrity, to wit, a fire that burns inwardly, and consumes the marrow of the
bones, and drinks up the spirits. The Arrows which conscience shuts in upon a
man, upon the breach of sincerity, are such as pierce principally the spirit.
As long as Job was patient under Gods hand, he felt the Arrows of the
Almighty, only without him, as I may say, to wit, in his body, in his
children, and substance; but when he brake out, and cursed his day, he
presently complains that he felt the Arrows of God within him, and that the
poison of them drank up his spirits, Job 6. 4. All that which before he felt
without, was nothing to that which he now felt within upon his spirit. As the
torments which damned wretches shall suffer in their bodies, are nothing to
those which shall continually fly up and down in their souls. So David, after
he had made breaches in his integrity, God filled his loins with loathsome
diseases; but this was nothing to speak of; God made things strike into his
heart, and then he roared, I am feeble, and sore broken, I have roared by
reason of the [disquietness of my heart.] David felt pains gather about his
heart, and then he cries out.

The heart is the mark that God principally aims at, when a Christian has
turned aside from his upright course; other outward parts he may hit, and
deeply wound, but this is but to make holes into the heart, where the seat of
unsoundness that principally offends him, is.

The Fire which Conscience kindles, it may flash forth into the eyes, and
tongue, and hands, and make a man look fearfully, speak desperately, and do
bloodily against the body; but the heat of the fire is principally within, in
the furnace, in the spirit; it is but some sparkles, and flashes only, that
you see come forth at the lower holes of the furnace, which you behold in the
eyes, words, and deeds of such men.

Invidia est vitium permanens.

Aristoteles.
ENvy is a long lived thing, it will live as long as there is any marrow in the
bones; It will hunt a David long, through Ziph, En-gedi, many Wildernesses,
though never so long; it will find a Dart to throw at a David, till it has
killed him, or stabbed it self. Envy fights desperately, and unweariedly, it
will never give over as long as there is breath; it will eat no bread till it
has done its work, killed a Paul, or sterved it self. Envy is all spirit, all
evil spirits move; it is a spirit of the right breed for the Devil, it will
fight, and fight till death; it will work to the utmost vires, as long as
nerves and sinews bind bones together; it is everlasting burning, which
nothing will quench but its own blood.

Ab extremis miseriae, quies.

Seneca.
I Would speak to such from this sentence which are quite undone, which have
lost all money and joy too; which have many sufferings upon them for Christ, but
can make no joy out of them. Surely I can guess your pain, you are blind; you
know not who has stripped you, not when he will return it again. It is
impossible for a man to joy under long suffering, unless a man can look to the
end of it. This makes heavy afflictions light, long afflictions short, to look
where they end. -- Our light afflictions which endure but for a moment, work
about a far more exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory. Long-suffering is
but a moment, when compared with eternity of glory. The great Heaven at a
distance, makes a little heaven at present, a heaven in hell, to that soul
which has it in its eye. As those lower heavens, give a great luster and vigor
at a distance to beholders, and raise much; so does the Heaven of heavens. It
is a heaven to behold heaven afar off, where ever the body be. It was Canaan
to Moses, to see Canaan afar off. The fight of the end shortens the way;
suffering is deadly long when a man can see no end, when a man is in darkness,
and can see no light, it is hard to bring the soul to joy in such darkness. A
man must look upon affliction from one end to the other, that would fetch in
joy to his soul from suffering. At one end of long suffering for truth, is a
father; at the other end, a reward, which if seen well, will make the longest
suffering very short, and very sweet.

Media gratiae, ordinem creationis subeunt.

Aquinas.
THe means of Grace have the order of Creation stamped upon them; Christ, the
great Wheel, that turns all other wheels of our salvation, is made unto us,
what he is, and made of God -- Who of God is made unto us, Wisdom,
Righteousness, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Christ is a full sea indeed, but not a drop
to us, but as made of God. So we are made able Ministers of the New Testament,
not of the letter, but of the spirit. Could such a poor man as I, by speaking a
while to the ear, turn the heart from sin to Christ, did not a creating
blessing sit on my lips? Divine institutions have the formality of a creation
in them, because they have what they have, and do what they do, from supreme
power only, above all cause and reason: Therefore are Institutions and means
of Grace, not so much as mentioned, Col. 1. 11. Giving thanks to the Father
[who has m^^e us meet] to be partakers of that inheritance of the Saints in
light. Only the Father is here mentioned; Means are so beside likelihood and
reason, to so noble an end, as to make and fit souls for heaven, Giving thanks
to the [Father] who has [made] etc. None else worthy to be so much as
mentioned in this noble work.

Alterius perditio sit tua cautio.

Isidor.
FOr the wickedness of them that dwell therein, it is that a fruitful land is
turned into a wilderness, says David, Psalm. 107. And the Heathen Historian
says little less, when he tells us that the ruin and rubbish of Troy, are
set by God before the eyes of men, for an example of that rule, that great
sins, have great punishments. But now say the Learned, not to be warned by
others, is a sure presage of ruin. Scipio beheld, and bewailed the downfall
of Rome, (...) the destruction of Carthage: And when Hannibal was beleagureing
Saguntum in Spain, the Romans were as sensible of it as if he had then been
beating upon the walls of their Capitol. A storm oftentimes begins in one
place, and ends in another. When the Sword rides Circuit (as a Judge) it is in
Commission, Ezekiel. 14. 17. And when I begin, says God, I will make an end, 1 Samuel 3. We cannot but foresee a storm, unless we be like those in St.
Bernard, Qui festueam quaerunt unde oculos sibi er^ant, that seek straws to put
out their eyes withal. If we break not off our sins by repentance (that there
may be a lengthning of our tranquillity) a removal of our Candlestick, may be
as certainly foreseen, and foretold, as if visions and letters were sent to
us from heaven, as once to the Church of Ephesus. God may well say to us; as to
them of old, Have I been a wilderness unto Israel, a land of darkness? or as
Themistocles to his Athenians, are ye weary of receiving so many benefits by
one man? Bona a tergo formosissima, our sins have long since solicited an utter
dissolution and desolation of all, and that we should be made an heap, and an
hissing, a waste, and a wilderness, Quod Deus avertat.

Hoc scio, me nihil scire.

Socrates.
CHrist thought St. John worthy to lay his hand on his holy head in Baptism,
who thinks not himself worthy to lay his hand under-Christs feet. The more fit
any man is for whatsoever vocation, the less he thinks himself, Who am I, said
Moses, when he was to be sent into Egypt, whereas none in all the world was
comparably fit for that Embassage. Not only in innumerable other things am I
utterly unskilful faith St. August, but even in the holy Scriptures themselves,
(my proper profession) the greatest part of my knowledge, is the least part of
mine ignorance. I in my little C^ll, says Jerome, with the rest of the Monks,
my fellow-sinners, dare no^ determine of great matters. This is all I know,
that I know nothing, said Socrates, and Anaxarchus went further, and said, Ne
id quidem scire quod nihil sciret, that he knew not that neither, that it was
nothing that he knew. This is the utmost of my wisdom, said one, that I see
my self to be without wisdom. And Si quando fatuo delectari volo non long
mihi quaerendus est, me video, says Seneca, if I would at any time delight my
self in a fool, I need not seek far, I have my self to turn too. Thus the
heaviest ears of corn stoop most toward the ground: Boughs, the more laden
they are, the more low they hang, and the more direct the Sun is over us, the
less is our shadow; so the more true worth there is in any man, the less
self-conceitedness; and the lower a man is in his own eyes, the higher he is
in Gods. Surely the Baptist lost nothing by his humility and modesty in the
third of St. Matthew, for our Savior extols him to the multitude, Mattb. 11. And
there are that doubt not to affirm (where they have it I know not) that for his
humility on earth, he is dignified with that, that place in heaven, from
whence Lucifer fell. Sure it is, that he that humbles himself shall be
exalted. If men reckon us as we set our selves, God values us according to our
abasements. The Church was black in her own eyes, fair in Christ's.

Ignis congregat homogenea, segregat heterogenea.

Aristoteles.
IT is one and not the least property, of the Holy Ghost to assimilate, and
make men like it self. As fire turns fuel into the same property with its
self; so does the blessed Spirit inform the mind, conform the will, reform the
life, transform the whole man more and more into the likeness of the heavenly
pattern, it spiritualizeth and transubstantiateth us, as it were, into the same
image from glory to glory, as the Sun, the fire of the world, by often beating
with its beams upon the pearl, makes it radiant and orient, bright and
beautiful like it self. And this is the property of the Holy Ghost as well as
of fire, congregat homogenea segregat heterogenea; it unites men to Saints, and
separates them from sinners; For what communion has light with darkness? It
makes division from those of a man's house, if not of his heart, and yet
causes union with Gentile, Barbarian, S^ythian, if truly Christian, Coloss, 3.
11. Oh therefore get this fire from heaven, so shall you glorify God, Matthew.
5. 16. and be able to dwell with devouring fire (which hypocrites cannot do,
Isa. 33.) get warmth of life and comfort to your selves, give light and heat to
others, walk surely as Israel did by the conduct of the pillar of fire, and
safely, as walled with a defense of fire; and if any man shall hurt, such fire
shall proceed out of their mouths to devour them. So that a man had better
anger all the Witches in the world, than one of those that are baptized with
the Holy Ghost, and with fire; especially if they be much mortified
Christians, such as in whom this fiery spirit has done with the body of s^n,
as the King of Moa^ did with the King of Edom, Amos 2. burnt its bones into
lime.

Mali in area nobiscum esse possunt, in horreo non possunt.

Augustinus.
THe wicked may be with us in the Floor, they cannot in the Garner; For there
shall in no wise enter into the City of the Lamb, any thing that defiles, or
that works abomination* Heaven spewed out the Angels in the first act of
their Apostasy and albeit the Devil could s^^ue himself into Paradise* yet no
unclean person shall ever enter into the Kingdom of heaven; without shall be
dogs and evill-doers; no dir^y dog does trample on that golden Pavement, no
dross is with that gold, no chafe with that wheat, but the spirits of just men
made perfect amidst a Paneg^ris of Angels, and that glorious Amphitheatre, Heb.
1^. 22. In the mean while, Dei frumentum ego sum (may every good soul say with
that Father) I am Gods wheat: And although the wheat be as yet but in the ear,
or but in the blade, yet when the fruit is ripe, he will put in the sickle
(because the Harvest is come) and gather his wheat into his Barn, into his
Garner.

Fider famem non formidat.

Bernardus.
IF bread fall, feed on faith, Ps. 37. 3. So Junius reads that Text. Jehosaphat
found it sovereign, when all other helps failed him, 2 Chronicles. 20. 6. and the
captive Jews lived by faith, when they had little else to live upon, and made a
good living of it, Hab. ^. ^. To this text the Jews seem to allude in that
fiction of theirs, that Habbakkuk was carried by the hair of the head by an
Angel into Babylon, to carry a dinner to Daniel in the Den. It was by faith
that he stopped the mouths of Lions; and obtained promises, Heb. 11. and by
faith, that one in Queen Mary's days, answered her Persecutors, If you take
away my meat, I trust that God will take away my stomach. God made the Ravens
feed Elias that were more likely in that Famine to have fed upon his dead
carcass, and another time caused him to go forty days in the strength of one
meal. Faith fears no famine, and although it be but small in substance, and in
show (as the Manna was) yet it is great in virtue and operation. The Rabbis
say, that Manna had all manner of good tastes in it, so has faith, it drinks
to a man in a cup of Nepenthes, and bide him be of good cheer, God will
provide for him, who likes not to be tied to the second ordiniry causes, nor
that in defect of the means, we should doubt of the providence.

It is true, God commonly works by means, when he could do without, that we
may not neglect the means, as being ordained of him. David shall have victory,
but by an ambush, a Sa^^ 5. Men shall be nourished, but by their labor, Psalm.
128. 2. But yet not so as that he does all in all, by those means; he made
Grass, Corn, and Trees, before he made the Sun, Moon, and Stars, by the
influence whereof, they are, and grow; yea to show himself chief, he can, and
does work other-whiles without means, 2 Chronicles. 14. and against means,
suspending the power and operation of the natural causes; as when the fire
burnt not, the water drowned not, the Sun went back ten degrees, the rock gave
water, the iron swam. And then when he works by means, he can make them
produce an effect diverse from their nature, and disposition; or can hinder,
change, or mitigate their proper effect. As when at the prayer of Elias it
rained not for three years and an half, and he prayed again, and the heaven
gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruits.

A man would have thought, that after so long drought, the roots of trees and
herbs, should have been utterly dried up, and the land past recovery; But God
heard the heavens (petitioning to him that they might exercise their influence
for the fructifying of the earth) and the heavens heard the earth, and the
earth heard the corn, the wine, and the oil, and they heard Jezreel, Hof. 2.
21. Let all this keep us as it did our Savior, when he was tempted in the
fourtth of St. Matthew. from diffidence in Gods Providence, and make us possess
our souls in patience.

Hang upon the promise, and account it as good as present pay, though we see
not how it can be effected. God loves to go a way by himself, He knows how to
deliver us, says St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2. and he might speak it by experience, if
ever any man might. The King shall rejoice in God, says David of himself, when
he was a poor exile in the wilderness of Judah, Psalm. 63. 11. but he had Gods
word for the Kingdom, and therefore he was confident, seemed the thing never
so improbable, or impossible. We trust a skilful workman to go his own way to
work, shall we not God? Loose we then any particular means, says one, It is
but the scattering of a Sun beam, the breaking of a bucket, when the Sun
and the fountain is the same. But we for the most part do as Hagar did, when
the bottle was spent, she falls a crying she was undone, she and her child
should dye, till the Lord opened her eyes to see the fountain. It was near her,
but she saw it not, when she saw it, she was well enough. If thou had been
here, said Martha, my brother Lazarus had not dyed; as if Christ could not have
kept him alive, unless he had been present: So if Christ will come and lay his
hands on Jairus his daughter, and Elisha stroke his hand over Naamans leprosy,
they shall be cured. So the Disciples believed that Christ could feed so many
thousands in the wilderness, but then he must have two hundred pennyworth of
bread. But our Savior soon after gave them an ocular demonstration of this
truth, That man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out
of the mouth of God.

Preventus diabolus in accusatione, Ultra nos accusare non poterit.

Origin.
BE sure before thou come to the Sacrament to renew thy repentance in
confession; one sweet advantage shall thou have by it amongst others, and that
is this, our self-accusations in ^ our confessions, will be a prevention, and
a disappointment of Satan's accusations against us: The Devil even at the
Sacrament will be laying in against us; It is good therefore to take a course
to defeat him. He will be pleading against a man, Lord shall this man be
welcome to thy Table? Shall he receive the benefit of thine Ordinance? He
has done thus and thus, I can lay to his charge these and these sins. Thus by
his accusations, will he seek to put in a bar against a blessing upon us. Now
when a man before the Sacrament renews his repentance, and has in his
confessions brought in the accusations against himself, Satan is prevented; for
then we do, as I may say, furnish the Lord with an answer to stop Satan's
mouth; for then will God be ready to answer for us, why Satan thou accusest
this man of nothing whereof he has not already to the full accused himself;
he himself has accused himself of all this already. Thou come too late, all
thine accusations shall be no bar to my blessing. The elder brothers nose
swells at his fathers kindness, and goodness to his prodigal brother, and
therefore Luke 15. 30. he rips up all his courses, and throws the filth of
them in his face, that he was one that had devoured his Fathers living, and
had spent it among Harlots. And this he does now whilst they are at the feast,
at the fatted Calf, and good cheer. Yet all this does the Prodigal no hurt, the
music cease not, the feast is not broken off, nor he thrust out of doors
again. And how comes it about that all this did him no hurt? because the
Prodigal had prevented his brother, he himself had accused himself to the
full in his confessions when he came to his Father, and so by his own
confession, had took out the sting and poison of his brothers malicious
accusation: So that his brother comes too late, now the feast and the merriment
goes on nevertheless. So will the Devil be snarling against, and picking
quarrels against men, even in the Feast time; but he comes too late to do them
hurt, if they themselves have first put in the bills of their own indictments
against themselves in their confessions before their coming to the Sacrament.

Hamine non est solammodo necessarium ut Christum i^ ipsius passione depioret,
sedmagis seipsum in Christo.

Bernard.
BEhold, says the Baptist, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world. Upon the Cross we behold Christ taking away the sins of the world. On
it we see Christ crucified, we see his hands, feet, and side pierced; now
this sight should so affect us, as it should pierce the very hearts of us.
What, the blessed Son of God to strip himself of his glory^ to humble and abase
himself to the ignominious and accursed death of the Cross? the glorious Son of
God thus abused, and abased; the only begotten Son of the Father, to make such
bitter lamentation, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? What may the
cause of all this be? Alas, all this was for our sins. It was not Judas, nor
the Jews, nor Pilate, nor the Soldiers, but they were our sins, thy sins, my
sins, that put the Son of God to all this sorrow. We, we, and none but we,
were the evil beasts that devoured this Joseph. Our sins were so heinous, and
had so provoked the Justice of God, that there was no way to satisfy Gods
Justice, to appease his wrath, and to make our atonement, but by the precious
blood of the Son of God crucified on the Cross. And shall I now see my sins lie
so heavy upon him as to make him sweat blood; shall I see him even squeezed
under the huge weight of my sins; shall I see my sins crown him with thorns,
nail his hands and feet to the Cross, gore his side with a spear, with an
unpierced heart? Oh the deep sorrow that our hearts should be filled withal,
when we see Christ's body bruising and bleeding upon the Cross. It should be
with us then, as it was with them, Zech. 12. 10. They shall look on him whom
they have pierced, And how shall that sight affect them? And they shall mourn,
and be in bitterness for him, as one that mourns for his only Son, as one
that is in bitterness for his first born. How bitterly will such a man mourn?
so bitterly shall they mourn when they look upon Christ whom they have pierced.
And great reason, for is it not a matter of greater sorrow, to pierce the only
Son of God, the first born, the first begotten from the dead, than to lose one
only or first begotten son? So here, when we look upon Christ whom we have
pierced, this sight should fill our hearts with bitterness, should make our
hearts full of sorrow. Not only with an Historical sorrow, or a sorrow of
natural compassion when we hear, or see some sad, or sorrowful event, this is
nothing; but with a practical sorrow, with an unfeigned sorrow of heart, that
we by our personal sins, have had our hands imbrued in the blood of the Son of
God, that our sins envenomed those thorns, those nails that pierced him, and by
their venom made them put him to such bitter torment; have we hearts
conformable to Christ on the cross? Thou beholdest a broken Christ, thou
beholdest a bleeding Christ, behold him therefore with a broken heart, with a
bleeding heart, with a pierced spirit. So behold Christ on the cross, as the
Virgin Mary beheld him there. And how was that? Woman says Christ, behold thy
Son. How did she behold him? Simeon tells her, Luke 2. 35. That a sword should
pass through her soul, then did a sword pierce through her soul, when she
beheld him pierced on the cross, that sight was a sword through the heart of
her. So when we see him pierced, it should be as a dagger in our hearts. Oh
wretch that I am, that my sins have been thorns on his head, nayls in his hands
and feet, a spear in his side. Lord, says David, when he saw the people
slaughtered by the Angels sword, Lo^ I have sinned, and I have done wickedly,
but these she^^ what have they done? So let every one say, Lo I have sinned, I
have done wickedly, but this innocent and immaculate Lamb, what has he done?
It is I that have sinned, and it is thou, O Lord, that have smarted. It is I
that have sinned, and it is thou, O Lord, that have suffered. It is I that have
put thee to all these sorrows, my oaths, my uncleanness, my lusts, my
covetousness my drunkenness, these were the Judass^s that betrayed thee, these
were the Jews that crucified thee. Lord I have eaten the sour grapes, and thy
teeth were set on edge: Lord I played the thief, and thou restoredst the
things the^ tookest not.

Quid tam ad mortem quodnon Christi morte salvetur?

Bernardus.
HE was wounded for our transgres^ions, with his stripes we are heated, Isa.
53. What sweet comfort may faith retch hence? Look upon the wounds of Christ on
the Cross, as on the Cities of Refuge, where the pursued soul by the avenger of
blood, may fly for safety and sanctuary. Indeed I am a grievous sinner, I have
wounded my conscience with my transgressions, but behold my Savior here
wounded for my transgressions: I have cause to be troubled in my conscience
for the wounds my transgressions have made therein; but yet my confcience needs
not sink in a despondency of spirit, whiles I look at these wounds of Christ;
here be wounds for wounds, healing wounds for stabbing wounds; curing wounds,
for killing wounds. He was wounded for our transgressions; what wound so
deadly, that may not, or cannot be healed by his death and wounds. What
comfort is here for faith in the wounds of Christ crucified, They pierced my
hands, and my feet, Psalm. 22. They pierced his side with a spear, and there
came out water and blood; nay, there comes out of these wounds honey and oil
unto faith. By these passages may our faith suck honey and oil out of the rock,
and may taste, and see how good and sweet the Lord is. The nayls, the spear,
the wounds, all preach unto faith a reconciled God, That God is in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself. The Lords bowels are laid open by these
wounds, so as through them we may see the tender bowels of his mercy, and so
as through them, mercy flows from those bowels unto us. Oh my Dove that art in
the clefts or holes of the rock, Cant. 2. 14. Some of the Ancients understood
those clefts of the rock, the wounds of Christ, in which the Dove, the Church
hides and shelters her self. However it may be alluded to, that should be our
work of faith when it sees those clefts of the rock opened, like a Dove, to
betake her self thereunto, for shelter and security against all fears and
distresses that wrath and guilt may put the conscience to. Do any fears of
wrath trouble thine heart? Does any conscience of guilt disquiet thee with the
fears of hell? Why now for thy comfort, behold the holes in the rock where thou
may be sheltered: Dwell now in the Rock, and be like the Dove that makes
her Nest in the side of the holes mouth, Jerem. 48. Nessel thy soul in the
clefts of this Rock. See, and fully believe thy peace to be made with God in
Christ's blood, and look upon him wounded for thy transgressions, with such a
faith, as may fill thy heart with an holy security against all such fears.

Hannibal vel victor, vel victus, nunquam quiescebat.

Augustinus.
THe Devil left not our Savior at the first and second temptation, this
Master-flye Beelzebub, though beaten away once and again, yet returns to the
same place. He solicits and sets upon our Savior again, and again (as
Potiphars wife did upon Joseph for all his many denials) and is not only
importunate, but impudent. Stand we therefore still upon our guard, and look
for no ease here.

The Roman Captains when they had once triumphed, took their ease ever after.
So did not Cato, and is therefore highly commended. So may not we, if ever we
will be approved as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ. Our whole life is a
continual warfare, and we must look for the continual hail-shot of Satanical
assaults and suggestions.

When Xerxes fought against the Greeks, the Sea was full of ships, says the
Orator, the Earth of soldiers, and the Air of arrows. So fares it with the
Saints under Satan's batteries, no truce, but continual conflict. St. Paul
sounds the alarm, Ephesians. 6. Arm, arm, Take the whole Armor of God, and be ever
in your harness: And St. Peter gives the reason, Because your Adversary the
Devil as a roaring Lion, walks and watches, night and day soeking whom he
may devour. For our encouragement, as the Devil is a roaring Lion, so is Christ
the Lion of the Tribe of Juda, that delivers us, and makes us more than
Conquerors, holding the Crown of glory over our heads, as we are fighting,
with this inscription, Vincenti dabo, To him that over-cometh, will I give.
Fight therefore, and faint not, your reward is s^^e, your Armor is of proof.
Get on both these pieces of defense (as the girdle of truth, brestplate of
righteousness, shoes of peace and patience, shield of faith, helmet of hope,
and those also of offense, as the sword of the Spirit, and darts of prayer. It
is said of Sc^va at the siege of Dyrrachium, that he so longresisted Pompeys
Army, that he had two hundred and twenty Darts sticking in his shield, and
lost one of his eyes, and yet gave not over till Caesar came to his rescue. The
like, and somewhat more is reported of Cynegrius the Athenian in the Persian
wars. These did thus for a corruptible Crown, or temporary honor, what should
not we do for an eternal? Hold out, and hold fast that thou have, that no man
take thy Crown from thee. Gods Spirit sets up a standard in the Saints, Isa.
59. 19. And stronger is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. That
old Serpent has his head so bruised, and crushed by Christ, that he cannot now
so easily thrust in his mortal sting, though he assay it never so often,
unless we dally with him, and lay our selves open, unless we tempt Satan to
tempt us by inconsideration, security, or venturing on the occasion. Vitanda
est glacies si nolis cadere; he that tastes of the broth, will have a mind to
the meat. The Nazarites might not, not only drink wine, but forbear to eat of
the grape, whether moist, or dry, Number. 6. 3.

Saturitas ventris seminarium libidinis,

Hieronymus.
A Full belly, and a foul heart scarce go uncoupled; for indeed how should
they? Per membrorum ordinem, says St. Augustine, Ordo vitiorum intelligitur,
as in the Anatomy of our bodies, the parts of gluttony and lust are linked
together, so are the sins themselves. And therefore the Apostle joins them,
Rioting and Drunkenness, Chambring, and Wantonness; first Rioting, and then
Wantonness, that leads on this, and not only this, but a whole troop of
rebellious actions, security, disobedience, idolatry. Thus when the Fools barns
in the Gospel were filled with Corn, there was no thought of God the
Benefactor; all the care was about, Soul take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry. And indeed, this eating quite takes away our stomach from all holy
duties. I need not tell you of Adams surfeit, the Israelites in their Paradise
of Canaan, fell to eating too, and by eating fell, as he did, from their God:
And this the Lord foretold them in the 31. of Deuteronomy, when says God, I
shall have brought Israel into the land that flows with milk and honey i^nud
they shall have eaten, and filled themselves, then will they turn to other
gods, then and not till then; and just so they did. For in the very next
Chapter, at the 15. verse. you have Jeshurun, which is Israel, waxed fat, and
kicking, and then says the Text, He forsook God which made him. Well
therefore did the Church of Christ prescribe fasting to a Religious end, to
bridle and keep in the lust of the flesh, so to prevent sins to come, and
punish our selves for those already past. And this last St. Paul calls an holy
chastising and afflicting himself for that thorn in his flesh, which forced him
to his watchings often, and his fastings often, to his Castiga corpus (...). To
correct the in ward man, and bring his body under the lash. And this was
Christ's reason of fasting before tentation. Now Christ abstained thus not for
himself, for the Devil could not have prevailed had he not fasted: There were
no faulty desires of the flesh to be tamed; no possibility of a freer, and more
easy assent and compliance of the soul with God, who was already perfectly
united to the Deity; but as for us he would suffer death, so for us too, he
would suffer hunger, that first as a Savior, this last as an example, pointing
us that had need, for he had none, the best way to encounter the evil spirit
of concupiscence, which is not cast out, no nor kept out neither, but by
fasting.

In Praedicando Evang elium non merita personarum, sed officia sacerdotum
considerantur.

Ambrosius.
HOliness becomes every man well, but best of all public persous, and that not
only for example of good, but liberty of controling ill. The Snuffers of the
Sanctuary made to purge others, must be of pure gold themselves. Thus Herod
feared John, not cause he was a powerful Teacher, but a just man. This
holiness casts a more dazeling luster than any other accomplishment whatever.
But now suppose the Priest sinful, shall the people notwithstanding follow his
doctrine, his doctrine, whose life is not the use, his voice, whose hand points
a contrary way? Nothing more, for what if the Sacrificer be unclean, is the
offering so? Was the glory of Israel, the Ark, any whit lessened when it came
from the Philistims? Did the breath of the Lord his answers pass by the less
regarded, cause a Saul prophesied. Scripture is Scripture, though the Devil
speak it, no man's sins should bring the service of God into contempt, nor may
good be refused, because the means are accidentally evil. It is a gross dull
capacity that cannot distinguish betwixt the work, and the instrument, the
weakness of the person, and the power of the Function. You know no unclean
Viands were for the table of an Israelite, no birds of prey, fit company for a
Prophet; yea, Sampson made much of his honey, though in a putrified Lion; and
if Ravens are sent to preserve an Eiah, he willingly accepts their courtesy,
and dislikes not the meat, cause the waiters were black. These then of the Law
are less scrupulous, than some of the Gospel, who disdain the graces of God
when not served in the purest vessel, and loath their Mannah, if not out of the
Tabernacles golden Pot.

Utilis est scientia Gentilium, dummodo in usum Christianum convertatur.

Hadrianus Sextus.
Lo a Vision appeared to me, says Ezekiel, a whirlewind, and a fire; to
show, the Prophets of the Lord must have light with them, as well as noise,
understanding, as Tongue. Gods Ministers are Angels, and these called, (...),
from their manifold knowledge. I speak this merely, for that there is a
generation that square out the Divines study by the Scripture-canon only, all
other rules being crooked, and of no use. Would you know the reason, the less
learning, the less stipend* And indeed good Letters have not a little pined
away, since Divinity began to officiate at the Tables end for the Trencher.

Now it is true, Scripture was ever the Levites predominant element; but if you
will make him a perfect mixed body, the Arts are neceslary ingredients. And
therefore though Hadrian the Sixth, in his Tract, de vera Philosophia, cries
down humane learning with a noise of Fathers, yet he concludes utilem esse
scientiam Gentilium dummodo in usum Christianum convertatur, that to shave and
pare the captive woman, and then espouse her, was ever held lawful Matrimony.
Look back upon the two famous patterns of Jewish and Christian Divines, Moses
learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, and St. Paul wise in all the
Learning of the Grecians, a great Artist* and a good Linguist; and no less may
we expect from the rest of the Apostles, to whom it was not said, Follow me,
and straight way be Fishers, but follow, and I will make you Fishers. They
were to learn* ere they were to teach, to be Disciples, before Apostles. No
man is born an Artificer, his soul coming as naked into the world, as his body,
not having so much freedom as to set up in the meanest Trade without serving
an Apprentiship. And for that, Dabitur in illa hora, to speak without coming,
was a promise made to the twelve Apostles when they should be called to the
Bar, not the Pulpit. The which place, however some of late years in my poor
distracted Country, have made it scandalous, requires both learning and
industry. And thus much St. Paul intimated, when he sent for his books,
finding as great want of them, as his cloak in Winter.

Ut hilarem ita celerem datorem diligit Deus.

Bernardus.
IT is said of the unjust steward, Luke 16. that what he did was with
dispatch, he called his Masters debtors and bid them sit down quickly. God
delights in expedition, as well as cheerfulness; Give Alms with a cheerful
heart, and countenance, not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loves a
cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. and therefore give quickly; when the power is in
thine hand, and the need is in thy neighbor, and thy neighbor at the door.
He gives twice, that relieves speedily. The more speed, the more comfort.
Neither the times are in our own disposing, nor our selves. If God had set us a
day, and made our wealth inseparable, there were no danger in delay, but now
our uncertainty, if it quickens not, deceives us. How many have meant well, and
done nothing, losing their Crown with lingering; to whom that they would have
done good, is not so great praise, as it is dishonor that they might have done
it; their death oftentimes preventing their desires, and making their good
intentions the wards of their Executors; who many times prove the Executioners
of their wills and estates. This therefore should be as a word of advice and
caution to all rich men. Let their wracks be our warnings, who are equally
mortal, equally fickle. It is a woeful, and remediless complaint, that the end
of our days should outrun the beginning of our good works, which are commonly
so done, as the poor may thank our deathbeds for them and not us, our disease,
rather than our charity. For he that gives not till he dies, shows that he
would not give then, if he could keep it: And they that give thus, give by
their Testaments, it is true, but I can scarce say they give by their wills;
the good man's praise, Psalm. 112. was, that himself dispersed his goods, and not
left them behind him, and his distribution is seconded by this retribution of
Gods, That his righteousness endured for ever. The Saints of God are like
Dorcas in the Acts, rich in the good works, which she did her self, and not
entrusted others to do them, being her own Executrix. Let us therefore do good
in our life time. Our Savior tells us, Matthew. 5. That our good works are our
lights: Let your lights so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

Now what man will have his candle brought behind him, and not rather carried
before, that he may see which way it goes, and which way himself goes by it?
Let us therefore do good in our life time; Early beneficence has no danger,
many joys, Isa. 58. 8. For first, the conscience of good done. Secondly, The
prayers, and blessings of the relieved. Thirdly, The gratulations of the
Saints, are as so many perpetual Comforters, which will make our lives
pleasant, and our deaths happy: when every one of us may say to his soul with
that rich man in the Gospel, but upon better grounds, S^ul take thine ease, for
thou have treasure laid up not for many years, but for ever.

Dives vere Christianus non amat divitias sed mavult.

Augustinus.
CHristians may entertain the unrighteous Mammon in the Gospel, not only as a
servant, but a friend, but by no means as a Lord. There is great virtue in the
true use of riches, if there be a qualification in our desires. And therefore
St. August. (10. Sermon. de tempore, 5. Sermon. de verbis Apostoli and cap. 10. de
Civit. Dei) disputing of that impossible Analogy between heaven and a rich man,
a Camel, and the eye of a needle; would have a rich man understood there to be
Cupidum rerum temporalium and de talibus superbientem, such an one as joins
avarice to riches, and pride to avarice; not prohibiting a moderate and timely
care of necessary temporals, but their inordinate appetite, not their propriety
and possession, but the difficulty and eagerness of that pursuit. A wise man,
as he will not make riches the object of his pursuit, so neither of his
refusal, Non amat divitias sed mavult, was St. Augustines; he weighes them so
evenly betwixt desire and scorn, that he does neither undervalue, nor
over-prize them: He makes not his mind his chest, but his house, in the which
he does not lock, but lodge them; he loves them not properly but by way of
comparison, not as they are riches, but as they are not poverty: yes too, as
they are riches, they may not only be temperately loved, but desired, but
prayed for, prayed for as our daily bread, not absolutely for our spiritual
improvement but by way of restriction; first, humbly with submission to the
will of God, then conditionally, so they prove advantageous either to our
civil, or moral good. For otherwise if riches are pursued, either with an
unlawful, or an unbridled desire, they lead our reason captive, blindfold our
intellectuals, and so damp and dead all the faculties of the inward man, that
in way of conscience and Religion, we are benumbed merely; Nabal himself not
so stony and churlish, not half so supine and stupid as we. And therefore your
earthly sensualists have this woeful brand set upon them by the spirit of, They
are men of the world, they have their portion in this life only, Psalm. 17.

Quid quaeris brevi immittere vasculo totum mare?

Hieronymus.
TO endeavor to express fully the joys of heaven, were as vain a work as to
endeavor to put the element of waters, or whole sea, into a basin. And this
may appear, from that story of St. August. concerning St. Jer. of whom St.
Augustine says, Quae Hieronymus nescivit, nullus hominum unquam scivit; what
St. Hierom knew not, no man in the world ever knew: yet of the joys of glory,
of heaven, in the fruition of God, St Hierom would adventure to say nothing, no
not then when he was divested of his mortal body dead. For as soon as he died
at Bethleem, he came instantly to Hippo, St. Augustines Bishopric, and though
he told him, Hieronymi anima sum, I am the soul of that Jerome to whom thou
art now writing, about the joys and glory of heaven, yet he said no more of
that, but this, Quid quaeris brevi immittere vasculo totum mare? Can thou
hope to pour the whole sea into a thimble, or take the whole world into thy
hand? and yet that is easier than to comprehend the joy and glory of heaven in
this life. Nor is there any thing that makes this more incomprehensible, than
that semper in 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. That we shall be with God for ever. For this
Eternity, this Everlastingness, is not only incomprehensible to us in this
life, but even in heaven, we can never know it experimentally, no not in
heaven, and all knowledge in heaven is experimental; as all knowledge in the
world is causal (we know a thing, if we know the cause of it) so the
knowledge in heaven is effectual, experimental; we know it because we have
found it to be so. The endowments of the blessed, those which the School
calls, Dotes ^^a^or^m, are ordinarily delivered to be these three, Visio,
Dilectio, Fruitio, the sight of God, the love of God, and the fruition, the
enjoying, the possessing of God.

Now as no man can know what it is to see God in heaven, but by experimental,
and actual seeing of him there; nor what it is to love God there, but by such
an actual and experimental love of him; nor what it is to enjoy and possess
God, but by an actual enjoying, and experimental possessing of him; so can no
man tell what the Eternity and Everlastingness of all these is, till he has
passed through that Eternity, and that Everlastingness; and that he can never
do, for if it could be passed through, then were it not Eternity. How barren a
thing is Arithetick? and yet Arithmetic will tell you how many grains of sand
will fill this hollow vault to the Firmament. How empty a thing is Rhetoric,
and yet Rhetoric will make absent and remote things, present to their
understanding. How weak a thing is Poetry, and yet Poetry is a counterfeit
Creation, and makes things which are not, as though they were; how infirm, how
impotent are all assistances, if they be put to express this Eternity. The best
help in my poor judgment that can be assigned, is to use well, Aeternum
vestrum, our own Eternity, as St. Gregory calls our whole course of this life,
Aequum est ut qui in aterno su^ peccaverit, in aeterno Dei puniatur; it is but
justice, that he that has sinned out his own eternity, should suffer out Gods
Eternity; so if you suffer out your own eternity in submitting your selves to
God in the whole course of your life, and glorifying him in a constant patience
under all tribulations; It is a righteous thing with God to recompense
tribulation unto them which trouble y^^, and to you which are troubled,
everlasting rest, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6.

Magna parvis minime exprimuntur.

Seneca.
SAcred Communication, is to make suitable demonstration of infinite love.
Great love is not suitablely expressed by small things. Springs make Channels,
Streams, Rivers, suitable to their strength, they make their rent without,
suitable to their bubling within, under ground. Heaven is but a suitable
expression of the love of a God: It is but strange, suitable to such a
fountain; but legible writing out of infinite love. Were not heaven made
communicable, infinite love would be but half expressed, it would be far more
in it self, than known to us: It is with Christ here in this world, as it is
with a Christian, a Christians fortune here does not suit his titles, called a
King, and has nothing. Now are we the Sons of God* but it does not appear
what we shall be. Why we shall be but the Sons of God; his meaning is, that
now Title and Revenew do not agree, nothing in possession that speaks out the
Sons of God, the Son of a King; State and Title do not fitly and fully express
one another; So it is with Christ, now his love, and his expression of it, are
short one of another: Many expressions of love are made here, but they all
express it but brokenly. Heaven will speak out an infinite love, it will
demonstrate it to the life, to all senses at once, which is such a
demonstration of a thing, as here man cannot make of any thing. There a man
shall have the advantage of all senses together, to fathom infinite love; He
shall hear it, see it, taste it, etc. he shall see the fountain where, and how
it rises; the Ocean how vast it spreads, and how broad it bears, Christ
demonstrates infinite love fully, fitly, therefore is heaven made communicable
to poor earthen creatures, Partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light,
Col. ^. 12.

Qui Gehennas met ^it, non peccare me^uit, sed ardere. Ille autem peccare
metuit, qui peccatum ipsum sic ut Gehennas odit.

Augustinus.
THe Object of repenting sorrow, is sin. It is sin that specially afflicts and
disquiets a repenting soul, that is the thing that wrings and pinches it. Where
was it that the Prodigals shoe did specially wring him? Luke 15. 21. Father I
have sinned against heaven; that is, against God in heaven: He does not say,
Father, I am in a depth of misery, ready to perish with hunger, in that
pinching distress that I would be glad to eat husks with Hogs. But Father I
have sinned. This is the grief of a repenting soul, that Gods Majesty has been
offended in, and by his sins, this was that which lay heaviest upon, and sat
closest to David's heart. He neither cries out of his discredit, and shame in
the world, nor yet speaks a syllable of wrath or hell, but Psalm. 51. 3:4. My
sinis ever before me, against thee only have I sinned, and have done this
evil in thy sight. My sin is ever before me, not Hell and damnation is ever
before me; Not the fame and reproach of the world, but my sin is ever before
me. It is this, Lord, that pinches and disquiets me, that I have sinned, and
done this evil in thy sight. A good heart fears more the committing of sin,
than the suffering of punishment following it, Prove. 30. 9. Give me not
poverty, lest I be poor, and steal and take the name of my God in vain. He
does not say, lest I be poor and steal, and bring my self under the
Magistrates sword, or thy wrath; but he looks only at the sin, lest* I steal,
and take thy Name in vain. He fears the profaning of Gods Name, more than the
bringing of his name and person in question. And to this purpose is that which
Elihu charges Job withal, Job 36. 21. Regard not iniquity, for this thou have
chosen rather than affliction; that is, thou have rather chosen sin and
iniquity, than poverty and affliction; as if he had said, Inasmuch as thou
have vainly, and rashly expostulated with God, verse. 20. desiring death, rather
than to bear this affliction; thou art guilty of iniquity, and sinnest in this
thy choice. This therefore implies that a good heart would rather choose
affliction than iniquity, to suffer affliction, than to do iniquity. Now as a
good heart is more afraid of sin, than affliction and punishment, so likewise a
repenting heart, is more grieved or sin committed, than for sorrow to be
suffered. We shall find David in great anguish and distress of spirit, Psalm.
25. 17, 18. The troubles of mine heart, are enlarged, Oh bring thou me out of
my distress, wringing, pressing anguishes; look upon my affliction, and my
pain. Here be troubles of heart, distresses of spirit, affliction and pain,
but what is it now that thus wrings, distresses, and pains David? See the last
words, And forgive all my sins, not forgive all my punishments; David's sin, not
his punishment, was his pain. We shall see the like in him, 2 Samuel 24. 10. I
have sinned greatly, I beseech thee to take away the iniquity of thy servant:
He mentions not the taking away of any smart; nay verse. 17. He is willing to
bear it, I have sinned, let thine hand be against me. He begs that the
punishment may be laid upon him, but begs that his iniquity may be taken
away. Let God be pleased to take away his iniquity and he is nothing
solicitous for the punishment. The offense of God troubled him more, than his
personal smart: So that Gods heart were but toward him in the pardon of his
sin, he did not care though Gods hand were against him smiting him with
temporal chastisement. And this will better appear, if we do but compare
Pharaoh with David, Exodus ^. 8. Entreat the Lord, that he may take away the
Frogs from me. The Frogs troubled him more than his sin against God. Take away
the Frogs, but no mention at all of taking away his sin. And when afterward a
confession of sin is extorted from him; yet was it not his sin that disquieted
him. Exodus 9. 27, 28. not take away my sin, but take away the Thunderings, and
Hail; Lord, says David, Take away the iniquity of thy servant: Oh! says
Pharaoh, Take away these filthy Frogs, and this dreadful Thunder.

A repenting heart is more troubled, than a Thunder and Frogs. It seems more
filthiness in sin than in Frogs, or Toads, or ever else can be presented more
ugly to it.

A repenting sinner has his eye upon God, and upon his Law, He sees the
hollness of God, that he is a God of pure eyes, that cannot behold iniquity,
Hab. 1. 13. He sees him a good, gracious, patient Father, and so it cuts him
to the heart, to have offended such a Father, and God. He looks upon the Law,
and sees it to be holy, just, and good; and this galls him to the heart, to
have violated so holy, and so pure a Law.

Now wicked men, they look wholly at the justice and wrath of God, at the curse
of the Law, and so nothing troubles them, but the fear of hell and death. If
these might be avoided, the offending of an holy and good God, the violating
of an holy and good Law, would not a whit afflict, or disquiet them: Nay it is
remarkable in David, that though he had upon Nathans message to him, confessed
his sin, and Nathan upon his confession had pronounced the pardon of it; yet
after this he cries out, My sin is ever before me, against thee only have I
sinned. Mark then, that even pardoned sin, forgiven sin, vexes and disquiets a
repenting heart. It pinches him, and disquiets him, though it be forgiven; it
grieves him that he has so played the fool, and that ever he was such a beast
to offend so gracious a God. When the Prodigals Father sees him coming afar
off, he runs to meet him, shows compassion to him, falls upon him, and kisses
him. That kiss was the seal of his pardon, as if he had said. Behold, I
forgive all thy sin; as when David kissed Absalom, and Esau kissed Jacob, they
both did it in token of full reconciliation. And yet for all this, see how the
Prodigal speaks; he says not, O Father, from the ground of my heart, I
unfainedly thank thee, Oh how great is my Fathers goodness thus to pardon me,
etc. but Father, I have sinned against thee. I, but his Father had kissed him,
and thereby testified that he had freely forgiven him, what need he confess
his pardoned sin? Why is he not rather in the confession of praise, than in
the confession of sin. Oh no, a repenting sinner is so affected and grieved
with the offense of God in his sin, that though God have pardoned and forgiven
it, yet he cannot but mourn for it, and be afflicted with it, that so holy a
Law has been broken by him, that so good a God has been offended by him,
Psalm. 25. 6 7. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, remember not the sins of
my youth. If God remember mercy, he forgets, and forgives sin. If God forget
it, why does David remember the sins of his youth? Yes, so will a true
repenting heart do: It will remember the sin that God forgets, it will mourn
for the sin which God has forgiven.

Nou est poenitens sed irrisor, qui adhuc agit, unde poeniteat.

Bernardus.
REpentance not only confesses, but forsakes the confessed sin, Job 34. 22. If
I have done iniquity, I will do no more. That is the language, and the
resolution of true repentance, Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole, steal no more.
True repentance makes men do as God did, when he repented him, Gen* 6. 6. 7.
And it repented the Lord that he had made man on earth, and it gri^ved him at
his heart: But that was not all: And the Lord said* I will destroy man, whom I
have created, from the face of the earth, both man and beast, etc. for it
repents more that I made them. Nay, repentance in man goes further, one Noah
found grace in the eyes of the Lord, and he was spared from the common
destruction; but hear, not one lust or sin finds grace in the eyes of a man
that truly repents, but all must be drowned in the flood of the tears of
Repentance. It is with a man that has the grief of true Repentance, as it was
with Nehemiah, Neh. 13. 7, 8. I came to Jerusalem, and understood of the evil
that Eliashib, had done for Tobiah, in repairing him a Chamber in the Courts of
the house of the Lord, and it grieved me sore: But he rests not there, but
goes further, therefore I cast forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out of
the Chamber. What should Tobiah do with a Chamber there? Therefore he not only
outs Tobiah, but out goes all his stuffes too. So does repentance, when it
considers all the evil, that Satan and corruption has done, and how they have
taken up Chambers in the heart, that should be the house of God, it is grieved
sore, and thereupon it outs Satan, and all his stuff; neither Satan, nor his
stuff shall be chambered there any longer. So does repentance dispossess
Satan of the soul, as Christ dispossessed his body of him, Mark. 9. 2^. Thou
dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee to come out of him, and enter no more into
him; So repentance cast Satan and filthy abominations out of a man, that they
enter no more, they are cast out for ever. Tears of repentance are not only
wetting, but washing tears, Isa. 1. 16. Wash you, make you clean; David^ tears
wash his couch, Psalm. 6. and so much more wash himself.

Baptism is called the Baptism of repentance, Luke 3. 3. In Baptism there is
a washing away of sin. And how is Baptism the Baptism of repentance? If in
repentance there were not the doing away of sin. If a man could shed a sea of
tears, yet if he do not drowned his sin in that sea, what were he the better?
If a man should weep his eyes out, yet if he weep not his sins out, to what
purpose were it? Wheresoever repentance is, there must necessarily follow this
forsaking and casting off our sins. Try therefore thy repentance by this,
consider what have thy sins, thy beloved sins been; is thy drunkenness, with
loathing and indignation forsaken? are thine oaths, uncleannes, covetousn^s,
curses, etc. with loathing and indignation abandoned? It is a good sign, but
how idly talk they of repentance, who because they have blubbered out a few
tears, think all is well, when yet they still live, and lie in their sins, and
hold them as fast as ever the Mariners when they found out Jonas, yet fain they
would have saved him, wondrous loath to cast him overboard. Many see their
sins, and know them to be dangerous sins, but yet exceeding loath to shake
hands with them, loath to throw them into the sea, but will rather adventure
their own casting away, than cast them overboard. Never deceive thy self
therefore, though thou have sighed, cried, prayed, begged mercy, yet if still
thou live, and go on in thy sinful courses, there is no truth of repentance in
thee.

Dives in Evangelio damnabatur, non quia abstulerat aliena, sed quod non
donaret sua.

Anselmus.
EVery Christian ought to imitate the high pattern of his Creator, whose best
riches is his bounty. He that has all, gives all, reserves nothing. In our
creation he gave us our selves, in our redemption he gave us himself, and in
giving himself for us, gave us our selves again that were lost. Only good use
then commends earthly possessions, and he alone knows the true use of the
unrighteous Mammon, that receives it merely to disburse it. For what
commendation is it to be the keeper of the best earth? that which is the
common coffer of all the rich Mines, the earth, we do but tread upon, and
account vile, because it hides those treasures: whereas the skilful Metallist,
that refines these precious veyns for public use, is rewarded and honored. If
therefore your wealth, and your will be not both good, if your hands be full,
and your hearts empty; you deserve rather pity, than commendation, and may be
said to have riches indeed, but neither goods, nor blessings; your burdens
being greater than your estates, and your selves richer in sorrows than in
metals. And this was the rich Gluttons case in the Gospel, who was damned, not
for taking away any thing from poor Lazarus, but because he relieved not his
wants. It is reported of Warram Archbishop of Canterbury, being on his
deathbed, sent his steward to see what store of corn was in his Treasury, and
when answer was brought, that there was either very little, or none at all, the
good man cried, Nimirum sic oportuit, that it was very fitting it should be
so: For when said he could I dye better, than when I am thus even with the
world.

Vera virtus radices agit.

Seneca.
THings have their specification from their form. Christ in the soul, or truth
in the heart, is the form of a Christian. Hence is that expression, He is a
Jew that is one inwardly, so he is a Christian which has Christ in him, and
he upright whose heart is so; therefore is uprightness annexed in the 94,
Psalm. and the 15. verse, to that which is its proper subject, and without
which, it subsists not, nor can, to wit, the heart; Upright in heart, all the
upright in heart shall follow righteousness. A good man is called a good man as
he can derive goodness from within; Luke 6. 45.
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth that which is
good. Truth treasured up in the heart is the only true treasure, and then out
of this treasure, motion made to this, and to that expense from hence upon God,
upon man; this is a good man, and brings forth that which is good, an upright
heart. A man is noted for an evil man, as evil seiseth the heart. Son of man,
these men have set up Idols in their hearts, should I ^ee inqu^red of at all by
them? Ezekiel. 14. So to set up truth in the heart, as that, and only that which
I love to bow down to, and be governed by; this is an upright heart. It is
said of the Devil, that he abode not in the truth, because no truth is in
him, Joh. 8. 44. whilst he was in heaven, heaven was not in him, but pride,
and that is hell where ever it is. Truth in the heart, and we abide in truth,
that is, we walk in it, and ate ruled by it. Lust in the heart, and let the
creature be where he will, in heaven, or on earth, he abides in this, is led
up and down by this, and not by truth, and so is called according to that which
is in him, and informs him a sinful, deceitful hearted man. There is truth in
the heart, ^or in the midst of the heart, the expression is, I think with
allusion to the natural form of the heart. The heart has a tunicle, and a
ventricle, one to cover it, the other to hold life, blood and spirits, and
these small ventricles are in the midst of the heart and these the life of the
heart; Truth within the tunicle of the heart is not enough, it must be in the
ventricle, in the midst. The expression imports th^s much, that if truth be
not in the soul as the soul of the soul, as the life blood in the heart, giving
life and motion to all, the soul is not healed by it of its unsoundness, and so
consequently no upright heart. The Psalmist speaking of a righteous man, says,
That his mouth speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment: But is
this enough to give the formality of a righteous man. Many can talk very
soundly, and judiciously, and yet very unsound at heart: Observe therefore what
follows, where he centers the formality of integrity, the Law of God is in his
heart, none of his steps shall slide, Psalm. 37. 31. the small lines of truth,
the string of the heart; the Law of God, a Law in and unto the heart; binding
and loosing that which lives as it were a life by it self, continually moving
when all other parts are still; that this organ which makes so many steps to
others, and yet not making one step, but in, and under the Law of Truth and
Christ, this is an upright heart.

Meditatio pascit scientiam, scientia compunctionem, compunctio devotionom.

Augustinus.
MEditation gives a man a sight and knowledge of himself, of his sins, of the
riches of Gods mercy in Christ; and such knowledge is it, which works
compunction of spirit, we are to be taken up in the duties of Thanksgiving
and to be more than ordinarily enlarged therein. There is no such way to
enlarge the heart in that duty, as by meditation to heat, and warm our hearts.
So Psalm. 104. 33. 34. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live, my
meditation of him shall be sweet, I will be glad in the Lord. There is
nothing so feeds spiritual joy, and so maintains and holds up that holy flame
that should be in a man's heart, as does meditation; that is the oil and fuel
that keeps such fire burning; the sweeter our meditation is, the more is the
heart prepared and enlarged to praises, and thanksgivings, and joy in the Lord.
Therefore as in other Religious exercises, so more particularly in the
Sacrament, one special duty to be done, is to take up our hearts with serious
meditation. And for the better raising and feeding this meditation, it is good
when we are come to the Lords Table, to do as Solomon wishes to do in that
case. Prove. 23. 1. When thou fittest to eat with a Ruler, consider diligently
what is before thee. He advises it for a man's better caution, if he be a
man given to his appetite, that he may not be desirous of such dainties as
are set before him. But in this case it is good to consider what is set before
us, to provoke our appetite, and to stir up in us a longing after those
dainties. Consider therefore what is set before thee, what is done before thee.
Consider the Sacramental promises, the Sacramental elements, the Sacramental
actions. Behold then, and meditate what a feast God has prepared for us, and
set before us, such a feast as that, Isa. 25. 6. A feast of fat things, a feast
of wine on the lees, etc. Alas how lean are our souls, what hunger-starved
spirits have we, but here be fat things full of marrow to feed and fat our
lean souls. How dead and dull are our hearts, but here is wine upon the lees,
wine that goes down sweetly, That will cause the lips of those that are asleep
to speak, that will refresh and quicken our spirits. Here we see the bread
broken, the wine powered out. Here we see Christ crucified before our eyes; now
we see him hanging, and bleeding upon the Cross, we now see him pressed and
crushed under the heavy burden of his Fathers wrath. Now we see him in the
Garden in his bloody sweat. Now we may behold him under the bitter conflict
with his Fathers wrath upon the Cross. Behold the man, says Pilate. This is
our duty by meditation, to present unto our selves the bitterness of Christ's
passion, Exodus 24. 8. And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people,
and said, Behold the blood of the Covenant. So here, Behold the Lamb of God
which takes away the sins of the world: And behold the blood of that innocent,
and spotless Lamb; yea behold him now shedding his precious blood to take away
the sins of the world, and look upon him as the Scapegoat, bearing and
carrying our sins upon him. Represent we unto our selves in our meditations, as
lively as we are able, all the sorrows of Christ's passion. This Christ
commands, and makes it one main end of the institution of the Sacrament, Do
this in remembrance of me: Therefore appointed he the Sacrament, that therein
we might in special manner meditate upon his passion, and his love to us
therein. David had a Psalm of remembrance, Psalm. 38. in the title. But for the
death of Christ his love in it, and the benefits by it, we have not only some
Psalms of remembrance, as Psalm. 16. 22. and 69. and others; But besides, the
Lord Christ has to the worlds end appointed a Sacrament of remembrance, that
this great work of Christ's death, and his infinite love and mercy therein,
might above all other works be meditated upon, and had in remembrance.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of such Sentences of the Fathers, and other Ecclesiastical, and
Civil Authors, as are explained, and applied to the use of the Pulpit, and the
practice of Christians, in this Book.
QVam male est extra legem viventibus, quicquid meruerunt semper expectant.
Page 1. Vestium curio sit as deformitatis mentium and morum judicium est. 3
Quicquid propter Deum fit, equaliter fit. 5 Sordet in conspectu Judicis, quod
fulget in conspectu operantis. 6 Bone res neminem scandalizant, nisi malam
mentem 7 Non omne quod licet etiam honestum est 9 Quae per rationem
innotescunt, non sunt articuli fidei, sed praeambula ad articulos 10 Mors
optima est perire dum lachrimant sui p. 12 Nemo me lac hri^ is decoret, nee
funera fletu faxit; cur? volito vivus per ora virum 14 Ne excedat medicin^
modum 15 Si molliora frustra cesserint, medicus ferit venam 17 Sua sponte
cadentem maturius extinguere vulnere inhumanum est 18 Tota funeris pompa
contemnenda est in nobis, non tamen negligenda in nostris 19 In spiritualibus
nihil perfectum 21 Nobis, cum semel occidit brevis lux, nox est perpetua una
dormienda 27 Solus Deus vere fest um agat 29 Desiderium generat satietatem, and
satiet as parit desiderium 32 Resurrectio a peccato, and cessatio a poccato,
non sunt idem 34 In divinis nihil minimum 37 Sicut in visibilibus est sol, in
intelligibilibus est Deus. 43 Ad patriam itur per ipsum mare, sed in ligno 46
Quantumlibet sis avarus, sufficit tibi Deus 47 Perfecta obedientia est sua
imperfecta reli^quere 51 Christus non quaesivit per oratorem piscatorem, sed de
piscatore lucra^us est imperatorem 54 Oportet hominem fieri un^m 58 Multa
relinquitis, si desideria renunciatis 62 Dilige, and dic quod voles 63
Lachrimae sangnis animae 65 Illi vere irascitur Deus, cui non irascitur; and
nihil eo infaelicius, cui nihil infaelix contigit. ibid. Licet in modum stag^i
f^sum aequor arrideat magnos hic campus montes habet; tranquilit as is it a
tempestas est 66 Triticum non rapit ventus, ina^es paleae tempestate jactantur
67 Elinguis ne hoc quidem habens ut rogare possit, hoc magis rogat quod rogare
non potest 67 Vbi mors non est si jugulatis aquae? 68 Anceps forma bonum,
mort^libus exigui donum breve temporis 69 Quid sit futurum cras, fuge quaerere
70 Quid brevi fortes jaculam^r aevo multa? jam te premet nox 72 Aetate fruere,
mobili cursu fugit 74 Non accipimus brevem vitam, sed facimus 75 Omnia creed
mihi etiam faelicibus dubia sunt 76 Propera vivere, and singulos dies singulas
vitas puta, nihil interest inter diem and saeculum 78 Non expectavit Christus
ut Saul fatigatus debacchando mansuesceret, sed in media insanin superavit 80
Non in fine, sed in principio conversus Latro 81 Novit Deus vulnerare ad amorem
82 Facies Dei est, qua Deus nobis innotescit 84 Reperit Deus nocentes 85 Non
judicandum de cruce secundum praedicamentum quantitatis, sed relationis 86 Adeo
doctus, non solum divina discit, sed divina patitur 88 Et cum blandiris pater
es, and pater es cum coedis 90 Contemptu famae contemnuntur and virtutes 91
Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus 92 Sequamur patres tanquam duces,
non tanquam dominos 94 Melius est mihi non esse quam sine Jes^e esse 95 Nihil
de causa sua deprecatur, qui nihil de condition sua miratur 97 Sanctus in ira
Dei emendari non vult, erudiri non vult 98 In scala prima ascensio est ab humo
100 De infirmitate blandimur, and ut liberius peccemus, libenter infirmamur 103
Acceptus in gratiam, hilariter veni ad postulationes 105 Medicinae ars a Deo
data, ut inde rationem animae curandae disceremus 106 Membra etiam animae sunt
109 Qui sine ulla intermissione orat, honest a quadam impudentia agit
impudentem 110 Nescit diabolus quanta bona de illo fiunt etiam cum saevit 112
Salvus factus es pro nihilo, non de nihilo tamen 114 Nullare Deus perinde atque
corporis aerumna conciliatur 115 Nemo mala morte unquam moriebatur, qui
libenter opera chariatatis exercuit 117 Prima quae vita dedit hora carpsit 118
Debilem facito manu, debilem pede, vita dum superest been est 121 Levius fit
patientia quicquid corrigere est nefas 122 Nolo quod cupio statim tenere, nec
victoria mihi placet parata 123 Marcet virtus sine adversario 126 Detestabilis
esset cacit as, si nemo oculos perderet nisi cui eruendi sunt 127 S^latium est
pro honesto dura tolerare, and ad causam patientia respicit 129 Non est magnum
audire ad voluntatem non est magnum 131 Tentemus anim as quae deficiunt a fide,
naturalibus rationibus adjuvare 132 Anima spiritualiter cadit, and
spiritualiter resurget 134 Qui peccat quatenus peccat, fit seipso deterior 136
Transeant injuriae, plerasque non accipit qui nescit 137 Antequam vulneramur,
monemur 138 Vili vendimus coelum, Glauci more Christiani sumus 141 Agnoscere
nolumus, quod ignorare non possumus 143 Infans nodum loquitur, and tamen
prophetat 144 Optima quaeque dies miseris mortalibus avi prima fluit 146 Senes
in limine mortis v ita sunt avidissimi 148 Respice sepulchra, and vide, quis
servus, quis dominus, quis dives, and quis pauper, discern si potes, vinctum a
rege, fortem a debili, pulerum a deformi 150 Theodoro parum interest humine, an
in sublimi putrescat 152 Mors non est exitus sed transitus, and temporali
itinere decurso ad aterna transgressus 155 Ut mori Roma non potest qui Romae
non vixit, ita qui in domino non vixit in ^o non moritur 159 Nihil melius
aeterna lex fecit, quam quod unum introitum ad vitam nobis dedit exitus multos
161 Dominium potestas est tum utendi tum abutendi 164 Vnde illi cura cordis,
cui ne ipsa quidem adhuc or is circumspectio 166 Natum esse Deo sempiternum est
168 Vereor ne dum propter te fugis, propter alios sis in periculo apud dominum
170 Occidar modo imperet 172 Primatus fugientem desiderat, desiderantem horret
174 Habet hoc vitium omnis ambitio non respicit 175 Si nil attuleris ib is
Homere for as 177 Pompa mortis magis terret, quam mors ipsa 180 Iniquitatem
damnare novit Deus, non facere 183 Compescat se humana temeritas, and id quod
non est non quaerat, ne id quod est non inveniat 186 Et si domine ego commisi
unde me damnare potes, tu tamen non amisisti unde me salvare potes 190 Qui
pectus suum tundit, and se non cor^igit, aggravat peccata, non tollit 193 B^num
causatur ex integra causa, ma^um autem ex singularibus defectibus 196
Sacramenta sunt fodinae gratiae, dispofitio est vascul^m gratiae, pro majore
dispositione and affectu tuo majorem gratiam reportabis 199 Quicquid recipitur
recipitur ad modum recipientis 201 Pere^n^e sole pereunt omnia 203 Ignis
focalis immateciale non urit 205 Invidia est vitium permanens. 208 Ab extremis
miseriae quies 209 Media gratiae, ordinem creationis subeunt. 211 Alterius
perditio sit tua cautio 212 Hoc scio, me nihil scire 214 Ignis congregat
homogenea, segregat heterogenea. 216 Mali in area nobiscum esse possunt, in
horreo non possunt. 218 Fides famem non formidat 219 Praeventus diabolus in
accusatione, Ultra nos accusare no poterit 224 Homini non est solummodo
necessarium ut Christum in ipsius passione deploret, sed magis seipsum in
Christo 226 Quid tam ad mortem quod non Christi morte salvetur? 231 Hannibal
vel victor, vel victus, nunquam quiescebat 233 Saturitas ventris, seminarium
libidinis 237 In Praedicando Evang elium non merita personarum, sed officia
sacerdotum considerantur 239 Utilis est scientia Gentilium, dummodo in usum
Christianum convertatur 241 Ut hilarem it a celerem datorem diligit Deus 243
Dives vere Christianus non amat divitias sed mavult 247 Quid quaeris brevi
immittere vasculo totum mare? 249 Magna parvis minime exprimuntur 253 Qui
Gehennas metuit, non peccare metuit, sed ardere. Ille autem peccare metuit, qui
peccatum ipsum sic ut Gehennas odit 255 Non est poenitens sed irrisor, qui
adhuc agit, unde poeniteat 262 Dives in Evangelio damnabatur, non quia
abstulerat altena, sed quod non donaret sua 265 Vera virtus radices agit 267
Meditatio pascit scientiam, scientia compunctionem, compunctio devotionem 270


FINIS.

