RVPES ISRAELIS: THE ROCK OF ISRAEL.

A Little part of its glory laid forth in a Sermon preached at Margarets in
Westminster before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at their monthly Fast, Apr.
24. 1644.

By Fdmund Staunton, D. D. Minister at Kingston upon Thames, in the County of
Surrey, a Member of the Assembly of Divines.

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Meredith, dwelling at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard. 1644.

To the Honorable House of COMMONS now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Renowned Worthies,
WHat the Pulpit sent to some of your ears, the Press now sends to some of
your eyes; the good God send it into every one of your hearts, and through your
hearts, into your hands, and lives; the Argument is worthy of your ears, eyes,
hearts, and hands, for it is of the highest, God and Christ, and of the
sweetest, God in Christ.

Your thoughts have need enough of high and heartning subjects, for the work
that a gracious Providence has engaged you in, is of high concernment, and the
oppositions you meet withal, are high also: The building of a Temple and of a
Jerusalem, is by God and his people put into your hands, Church and State lie
unshap'd, unformed, before you; let me mind you of Tobiahs, Sanballats, Rehums,
and Shimshai's, acting their parts to the life; and be you excited and engaged
thereby to appear still as so many Ezra's, Zerubbabels, and Nehemiahs: see a
coincidency of providence betwixt those times, and ours; Judah's enemies, and
ours in some particulars.

was great joy, Izra. 3.11, 12, 13.
and as great a mourning; and when Sanballat and Tobiah heard that there was
come a man to seek the welfare of the children of Israel, it grieved them
exceedingly, and when they heard that the work went on, Neh. 2.10. Neh. 4.9.
they were very wroth; We have a godly generation among us, that shout for joy,
and praise the Lord, and an ungodly generation that weep with a loud voice, and
complain their gods are gone, their god Episcopacy, their god Liturgy, the
Organ, and the Surplice, the Cross, and the May Pole, the Sabbath-dance, and
the Whitson-Ale; they grieve exceedingly, and are very wroth, and if you ask
any of them, What aileth thee? he may answer, What have I more? And thus the
harmony of times begins, Ezekiel. 4.2, 3.
see how it goes on. The subtle adversaries come to Zerubbabel, and to the
chief of the Fathers, and say, Let us build with you, for we seek your God, as
ye do; but Zerubbabel and Joshua were too wise to trust them, and said unto
them, You have nothing to do with us, to build an house unto our God; the
seeming builder is more dangerous then the professed destroyer. hired
Counselors to frustrate the purpose of the Jews, Ver. 5. Jun. ^^ loc.
all the days of Cyrus, even until the reign of Darius Longimanus, the
fourth from Cyrus; and the Popish, with the Prelaticall faction have hired
Counselors, subtile-headed, false-hearted Statists and Lawyers, to hinder the
Reformation from the days of Edward the sixth, Josiah) until the reign of a
fourth Prince amongst us. Verse 7, 8, 12, 13.
The work now goes on amain, yet Rehum and Shimshai, with their companions
(accusers of the brethren) lay heavy things to the charge of Jerusalem, it is
a rebellious and a bad City; when it is built, will not pay toll, tribute, and
custom, the revenues of the Kings will be much endamaged, and it was not meet
for them to see the Kings dishonor; thus glozing sycophants with specious
pretexts of tendering his Authority, profits, and honor, flatter Artaxerxes,
when their design was to cut the throat of the Jews and of Religion at once.
This in sinuation prevails so far, Verse. 21.
and commands to cause the builders to cease: take up arms, and by force and
power, Verse. 23.
in a way of open hostility make the builders to cease, and our Tobiahs and
Sanballats are carried by the same spirit, or a worse, pillaging and plundering
their very friends, that freely quartered them, acting horrid barbarismes in
Ireland and England, slaying the husband before the wife, or ravishing the wife
before the husband; reviving the cruelty of Phocas to Mauritius, slaying his
wife and children before his face, Melanc. L. C.
and then putting him to death also.

By the view of this parallel, you see right well, how it stands you upon to be
famous Ezra's, Nehemiahs, and Zerubbabels in your generation, and how you need
all helps and supports from without, you may find all in one, in the Rock of
Israel; and indeed glorious things are spoken of, and more glorious things are
done by this Rock of Israel; only that you may have interest in, and get
virtue from this Rock so glorious, each man among you must make it good, that
his name is Israel, Drusius likes not this cry^^, for in sono vecis tantum est.
Psalm. 46.8.
which by the etymon of the word is (as some) Vir videns Deum, a man seeing
God; and the true Israelite among you, sees and considers the works of God,
what desolations he has wrought upon the earth; sees and knows God not as a
Creator only, (so the Gentiles saw him by the dark light of nature) but as a
Redeemer also, and that not through the cloud of legal sacrifices and shadows
(so the Jews of old saw him) but in a perspicuous and clear light, John 1.18.
Matthew. 5.8. (...) compounded of (...) principatu obt. nuit, and (...) Deus. So
the holy Ghost expounds it, Gen 32 28. Hos. 12 4. Legh. Crit. Sac.
in Christ, and in the gospel; yea the glory of heaven consists in a full sight
of God, lies in vision: the man whose name is Israel, is Princeps Dei, a Prince
of God, has power with God, and from God; he that Iacob-like wrastles with God
by strength of faith, by importunity of prayer, and prevails, goes away with
the name Israel; and though he go halting away, (spoiled of his estate,
deprived of friends, etc. in these conflicting times) yet he carries a blessing
with him, comes off with comfort and honor, and having a prevailing power with
God, you need not fear but you shall prevail over Esau's as hairy, as rough,
and rugged as they are; yea, that faith which prevails with God, will subdue
Kingdoms also, Heb. 11.33.
and that faith which subdues Kingdoms, will easily (if put out in the
strength of it) subdue the profane and malignant crew of a Kingdom, Isa 8 9,
10.
who though they associate themselves together, and cry, A confederacy, a
confederacy, yet shall they be broken in pieces, Psalm. 112.7. So Answ. Psalm. 20.
for God is with us. And therefore be not at any time afraid of evil tidings (or
hearsay) but let your hearts be fixed, trusting in the Lord. Trust not in
Such they used to fight to of old.
Charets (called by the Greeks Weem. Chr. Syn. Psalm. 33.17.
(...), because they held two) nor yet in horses, though strong and swift, they
are vain things to save a man, neither shall they deliver any by their great
strength; but remember the name of the Lord your God, trust in that God who
once helped the poor distressed Romans against Rhadagaisus, King of the Goths,
when in oneday above an hundred thousand Goths were slain, Austin. de civ.
Dei, l. 5. c. 23. Ne uno quidem non extincto, sed nec vulnerato Romanorum. Isa
42.8.
the King and his sons taken prisoners, yet not one of the Romans slain, no
nor wounded; trust in that God who has engaged his very Godhead, his I AM,
for Isreal's good; I am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not give
to another, neither my praise to graven Images. Again, let me beseech you for
the Lords sake, to study singleness of heart, and abhor private-selfe
respects in managing the public cause of God, startle at the very thoughts of
hedging in your own ends, or personal advantages, in point of honor, Rem
magnam p. aestas Zoile, si boeus es. Austin. Qui contemnit judicia laudatium,
contemnit suspicantium temeritatem.
gain, or command, either for you or yours; to be squint-eyed, and selfe-aimed
in transacting the great affairs of God and his Church, stands not with a love
of Truth and Peace; move upon pious principles, go on with plain honest
hearts, neglect the judgment of those that praise you, and contemn the
rashness of those that censure you; who would not be faithful in the cause of
God, and in the quarrel of his people, when they see others to be faithful
slaves and vassals to the Pope and Devil? M. Reguli fidetuas inim^c^^ faceret
nos fideles Deo and hominibus.
Who would not be faithful by the light of grace to God, and the Godly his
friends, when Mar. Regulus a Heathen, by the light of nature, was faithful to
his very enemies?

Honored Patriots, I will hold you no longer in the gate or Preface, but
humbly entreat you to hoise up your sails of pious resolutions, or if up
already, do not narrow them, much less take them quite down, for all the
prayers in the world that are worth the having, are yours, and make up a full
gale to carry you on amain; you shall ride over all the waves and billows of
contradictions and oppositions whatsoever; Wherefore be clothed with Christian
fortitude, and magnanimity of spirit, as with armor of proof. Watch ye,
stand fast, 1 Cor. 16.13. (...).
quit your selves like men, be strong; you have to deal with adversaries which
are sly and subtle, therefore watch; which are unwearied, which never have
done, therefore hold out, stand fast; which are stout and hardy, therefore quit
your selves like men; be strong, to break through difficulties and dangers,
though many, 1 Cor. 15.58.
mighty: Be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in this work of the Lord,
(...).
and know your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord; be steadfast, by faith
founded upon Christ, as a house built upon a Rock, (...).
and from thence, be immovable, unshaken by winds or weather, (...). and (...)
by fears or flatteries; be abounding, and always abounding in this work of
the Lord; know you can never do enough for that God, who has done so much for
you, and will do yet more also; let your hearts be always flaming with love
and zeal for God, his cause and glory, let your heads and hands be always
working, and know for your comfort and encouragement, God will abundantly
reward you What though you spend your time, your strength, your estates, God
will recompense it even sevenfold into the bosom of you and yours: your
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. Consider the goodly man-child of
Reformation is come nigh unto the birth, it will be your comfort and honor
unto eternity upon pious principles to midwife it unto a safe delivery; let the
fear of God put you upon the work, Exodus, 1.21. alluded to
and then he shall make you houses, shall multiply your children, enlarge your
estates, make your names and families great from generation to generation; God
is for us, who can be against us? the condition of England and Scotland, is, as
of old, the case of Israel and Judah, we were oppressed together, and all that
took us captives held us fast; Jer. 50 33, 34.
they refused to let us go, but our Redeemer is strong, the Lord of Hosts is
his Name, he shall thoroughly plead our cause, that he may give rest to our
Land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon; so prays, so hopes

Yours to serve you, because you are Christ's and the Publickes, EDMUND STAUNTON.

Die Mercurii 24. April. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Sir Robert
Harley and Sir Robert Pie, do from this House give thanks unto Doctor Staunton
and Master Green, for the great pains they took in the Sermons they preached
this day at Saint Margarets Westminster, at the entreaty of this House (it
being the day of public Humiliation;) and they are desired to Print their
Sermons. And it is Ordered that none shall presume to Print their, or either of
their Sermons, but by the authority of their hands writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I authorize Christopher Meredith to Print my Sermon.

EDMUND STAUNTON.

A SERMON Preached at the LATE FAST, Before the Honorable House of COMMONS.
DEUTERONOMY. 32.31. For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves
being Judges.


THe words are a sweet strain in a Song of Moses, full of faith and triumph,
and suite well enough with a day of mournings, for the Lev. 25.9.
Jubilee trumpet sounded in the day of Atonement; and our lowest humiliations,
are the inlets of our highest exaltations.

We may look upon the text as a Tostat. in Loc.
Caution, laid in to prevent the insulting and blaspheming language of a
sometimes prevailing enemy, who might vaunt, and say, Our Arm has broken
Israel, and, our gods are victorious; No. says Moses, ver. 30. How should one
chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had
sold them, and the Lord had shut them up? to wit, According to the promise made
to Israel. Lev. 26.7.8. See (...). (...). in loc. lun. in loc.
one Israelite could not but chase a thousand enemies, and two could not but
put ten thousand to flight, except their rock had sold them, and the Lord had
shut them up. Or thus, there is an impossibility that one (of the enemies)
should chase a thousand, (Israelites) or two put ten thousand to flight, except
their Rock, etc. And the reason of that impossibility arises from the
sovereignty of God, Isreal's protector, and the vanity of Idols, yea of all the
props and supporters of the enemy: especially Gods sovereignty, and their
vanity being balanced together; For their rock is not as our Rock, even the
enemies themselves being Judges.

For the letter or Grammar of the words, the Original runs thus, (...)
for not like our Rock their rock: The e Septuagint renders it (...).
For their Gods are not as our God: But the rendering of the Hebrew (...) a
Rock, by (...), God, ( So rendered verse 4. and Psalm. 71.3. etc. Leigh Crit.
Sac. in vet. Test.
which is usual in the Septuagint) is rather an Interpretation, then a
translation. Many Latin Bibles follow rather the Septuagint, then the
Original, and have Deuteronomy and dei, God and gods: the Chaldee Paraphrase says
Strength: this to the sense also, though not to the letter. Lay all together,
and you have the whole before you, Their rock is not as our Rock; their gods,
not as our God; their strength, not as our Strength.

Even our enemies themselves being Judges, the Original runs thus, (...)
Even our enemies Judges. The Septuagint renders it, (...).
and our enemies unintelligent fools and witless: And Agelius in boc Cant.
Mos. non inimici nostri consiliarii, or inimici nostri stulti, etc.
Agelius tells us, that some of the Hebrews gave the occasion probably to the
Septuagint for this translation: for they break the words into two negative
Propositions: first, Their rock is not as our Rock; the second, and Our enemies
are not Judges, that is, not men of wisdom, but silly Idiots, fetching the
negative particle of the first proposition into the second, though not
expressed. And this is an usual Hebraisme; take one instance, Ps. 38.1.
O Lord rebuke me not in thy indignation, and chasten me not in thy sore
displeasure: the negative particle in the former clause is not expressed in the
latter, though understood. And this Interpretation of the Text, if possible,
yet not probable: and if any curiously inquire for the reason why the
Septuagint translates (...) Judges by (...) senseless, foolish? I must answer
him, with an ergo quaere, inquire still.

For the Rhetoric of the words, first some think there is an Apostrophe, a
turning of the speech in the whole, by Moses, so Junius; or the people, so
Ainsworth; Iun. Annot. in loc.
by Moses, and the people, probable also. Moses spoke his own mind and the
mind of the people, saying, their rock is not as our rock, etc. Again,
others conceive there are two tropes, a Metaphor in the word rock, for God,
strength, supports, and a Synecdoche generis prospecie, Piscator in loc.
their rock expressing all the props and supports of enemies, when their
Idol-gods their principal supports are especially aimed at.

In stead of the Logic and division of the text, be pleased to take notice of
these five particulars: the three first necessarily employed; the two last
plainly expressed.

Israel has an enemy.

their Rock.

Israel has a Rock also, our Rock.

Israel, their rock is not etc.

our enemies themselves being Judges.

The first observation is, that Israel has an enemy, the Assyrians, Chaldeans,
Romans, but especially the Egyptians here pointed at, as Isreal's most notorious
and professed enemies: and the grand enemy of Gods Israel in our days is Rome
and its adherents typed out by Egypt, Rev. 11.8.
and hence the great City Rome is spiritually called Egypt.

Spiritually, that is, by way of Allegory and resemblance, the Kingdom of
Egypt shadowing out the Kingdom of the beast: the Parallel may run thus.

mad-Idoll worship, having brutish Gods, the Cow, the Ox and the Crocodile,
and Herbal Gods, Herodot. in Enter.
leekes and onyons. You may read at large the grossness of Egypts Idolatry,
in Herodotus and Juvenal Satyr. 15 quis nescit -- qualia demens Aegyptus
pottenta colat.
Juvenall: and yet Rome is more idolatrous. Egypt adored creatures animale of
Gods making; Rome, things inanimate also of man's making, stocks and stones;
Rome has Gods of gold, and silver, of brass, and wood in their painted and
carved Images; has a breaden God in their real presence, makes all the Saints
and Angels Gods, by their invocation or adoration of them, makes every Priest a
God by his power of transubstantiation, and (that they may have Gods enough)
they make every one of themselves, yea every good work they do, a God, by
opinion of merit in it: Mant. Eclog. 9. Fama est Aegyptum etc.
and therefore the Poet Mantuan spoke truth, and Divinity, when he said, that
Rome was more idolatrous then Egypt.

Romes deluded Proselytes are tutored into ignorance of Scriptures, Christ, and
God: Egypts darkness was external, Luther in Act. August. Italia in Aegypti
tenebras palpabiles projecta, adeo ignorant omnes Christum and quae sunt
Christi.
Romes inward, and spiritual; Egypts was involuntary, and lamented darkness,
Romes voluntary and affected; Egypts penal, Romes criminal; Egypts but about
a three days darkness, Romes a lasting, if not an everlasting darkness:
hence Luthers verdict, Italy lies involved in the palpable fogges of Egyptian
darkness, they are all so ignorant of Christ, and of the things of Christ.
Adeo ignorant omnes Christum and quae sunt Christi.

Israel was the great sin of Egypt setting hard taskmasters over them, Exodus
5.7, 8.
exacting the tale of Bricks when straw denied; but Romes cruelty rests not in
the estates of men, squeezing them as Sponges, nor in the bodies of men,
whipping them with penances, and tyring them with pilgrimages, but reaches the
very soul and conscience, the Pope sitting there as Lord and Master, dictating
laws ad libitum: Par. in Apol. ^.11.8.
this soule-bondage is the soarest bondage: the rigor of Egypts cruelty was
but about two hundred twenty five years, but Romes is as long as the reign of
the Beast: the Antichristian Rebels in Ireland braining young infants, ripping
up women with child, their she-butchers with their long cutthroat knives by
their sides, putting to the sword so many thousand Protestants in one Province
in one month, are bloody demonstrations of Romes cruelty.

Exodus 5.1.3.
and to offer Sacrifice to the Lord our God, that is the quarrel of Religion;
they groaned under the heavy iron yoke of bondage, longed to have that taken
off; that is the quarrel of Liberties. Our Religion and Liberties are settled
by the laws of the Land, not so Isreal's in Egypt: and therefore the
Antichristian party in their attempts to wrest them from us, are more unjust
and cruel then of old was Egypt. Had Moses and Aaron quitted their Religion
and Liberties, all the quarrel between Israel and Egypt had been ended: and
would our Lords and Commons now at length, after serious consultation, and
mature deliberation, resolve for themselves and all the Kingdom to embrace any
Religion, and submit to any way of Civil Government, which a Malignant
Jesuited Council (too nigh the Throne) would tender or impose; would the
Protestant party in City and Countries conclude upon it to make all their wills
and to leave no other Legacies to their children and posterity, but Popery and
Slavery: upon these terms we might have peace presently; even our bellies full.

secret subtilties and open hostilities, Come on, say they, let us deal wisely
with them Exodus 1.10.
: there is subtilty, they fell upon them but with all their strength, even all
the Chariots of Egypt; Exodus 14.7.
there is hostility: and surely the Egyptian spirits amongst us are wise in
their generations, and have as many charets as possible they can get for love
or money, want no counsel, or strength, with which men or devils, Rome or
Hell, knows how to furnish them.

hardness of heart, and impenitency; though Moses and Aaron held out a clear
light for conviction, though signs and wonders were wrought before them, and
plagues from heaven heapt upon them, yet hardened they their hearts against God
and his people, and would not let Israel go: Our Presses and Pulpits have held
out a light satisfactory to all, but such as shut their eyes, and will not see,
but such as the God of this world has blinded; our Parliamentary Worthies have
declared, and declared, yea God himself has declared against Egypt, and for
Israel, by his discovery of plots, by the rising of well affected spirits in
this, and the neighbor Nation, and that according to promise, Behold, Numb.
23.24.
the people shall rise up as a great Lion, and lift up himself as a young Lion,
he shall not lie down until he eat of the prey, and drink the blood of the
slain; by wonderful deliverances and victories in the days of battle: yet who
among all the Malignant Pack repents him of his evil ways, saying, What have I
done? Some indeed repent of their facts, who of their faults? some turn up and
down, from side to side, upon carnal, felfish principles, as a door upon the
hinges, but who goes out and weeps bitterly? Rev. 16.10, 11.
When the fifth Angel powered out his vial upon the seat of the beast, and his
kingdom was full of darkness, they gnawed their tongues for pain, and
blasphemed the God of heaven, because of their pains and their sores, and
repented not of their deeds; and it argues that the troublers of Israel are
animated and acted by the spirit of the Beast, because though they fret and
fume, rage and rave, yet they also repent not of their deeds: Among many of
them, scarce appears the honesty of Achan, of Judas, confessing and giving
glory to God?

drowning of them in the Red sea: Exodus 1. last.
their design was to have drowned the male children in the rever, yea all
Israel, by forcing them into the sea; but by a miracle of mercy Israel was
delivered, and by the In quo peccarunt, in eodem plectuntur.
wisdom of divine Justice, the Egyptians were overwhelmed; and then Exodus 15.1
2.
Moses and all Israel sing a song unto the Lord: Even so Rev. 14.8.
Babylon shall fall, and that as a great Rev. 18.21.
millstone cast into the sea, and then all Rev. 15.2, 3.
Israel of God shall stand, upon the sea of glass, to wit, Exodus 14.
trample Antichristian powers (which though many, as a sea of waters, yet are
frail, and brittle as the glass) under their feet, having the Harpes of God
in their hands, and and the song of Moses and of the Lamb in their mouths,
saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God almighty, just and true
are thy ways thou King of Saints, etc. Thus, as in a pair of Indentures, cut
answers cut, and as in the water face answers face, so Rome answers Egypt, our
enemies. Isreal's.

that Isreal's enemies have a Rock, their Rock; yet it is but a creaturerock, an
imaginary rock: Prove. 18.11.
The rich man's wealth is his strong city, and as a high wall in his conceit.

Their creature-rocks are various, for methods sake let me thus rank them.

Rev. 17.15.
make up the many waters whereon the Whore sits, to wit people and multitudes
and nations, and tongues, yea all that are engaged by Antichrist against
Christ; again, because they are witty, the wise Statist, the deep braind
Achitophel, and the spirit in the wheels, is the subtle Jesuit, yet farther,
because they are mighty, mighty Gentry, mighty Nobles, and the mighty shadow of
the empty name of abused Sovereignty. Add hereunto allies, confederates, at
home or abroad, (as Ephraim of old went to the Assyrian, Hosea 5.13.
and sent to King Jareb) take in the Papist, even to the Friar, and the Nun,
(who now sleep not in their cells and cloisters) the Prelate, the Delinquent,
the profane, the formalist, yea the Welsh and Irish, and they all drive on the
same Catholic design, though upon several grounds: some perhaps (I hope I
speak low enough, but some and perhaps) of our broken Nobles and decayed
Gentry, having drunk, or diced, or drabd away their ancient demeanes, hope to
raise their Houses again by spoil and plunder. The Papist is carried by a
blind zeal, and the bloody principles of his Religion; the Prelate by his
pride and avarice; the guilty Delinquent by the fears of Justice; the profane
and formalist, by their impatience of bearing Christ's spiritual yoke in
government and worship; the poor Welsh it may be carried away by hopes of pay
and booties, and the Cannibal-Irish by delights in their trade of blood: thus
are they confederate against thee O Israel, the Ps. 83.5.6.7.
Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, of Moab, and the Hagarens, Gebal and
Ammon, and Amalck, the Philistmes, with the inhabitants of Tire, etc. These are
the Ploughers that plough upon thy back, and make long furrows; the plough of
persecution, that goes; the hands of evil Counselors hold and guide it, the
cords of powers and policies are fastened to it, the horse in the Geeres are
the brutish people made soldiers, these draw the plough though they sweat and
bleed for it, have many a lash in their work and short provender after; the
drivers, with a whip over them, are surious Commanders, and sometimes a
Cavallier Priest comes up with Ghostly counsel, strokes them, claps them on
the back to hearten them; and all the while the owner of the plough the devil,
or the Pope his Bayliffe, walks by to see the work go on; thus the plough
works all the year long: Ps. 129.3, 4.
The righteous Lord cut asunder the cords of these wicked ones.

Again, the enemies stay themselves upon a Rock of Horses, and Horsemen,
because they are strong; though, when all is done, the Egyptians are men, and
not God; Isaiah 31.1.3.
and their horses flesh, and not spirit.

Hosea 14.3.
and say to the works of their hands, Save us.

Psalm. 52.7.
so Doeg the Edomite.

lies and delusions; the Devil was a lying spirit in the mouth of the false
Prophets, Ahab trusted to their lies, 1 King. 22.
engaged himself in an unlawful war, and it was his ruin; Do they not
trust upon plausible Declarations, and lying Protestations, which have
Religion, Laws, and Liberties in the Letter, but not in the Spirit of them?
and upon Propositions, which have Peace in the mouth, but War in the heart?
Nay, they trust to a monstrous lie, such a one as I think our fathers never
heard of, a new upstart Anti-Parliament; this is a strange Sun risen in our
Hemispheare, not to inlighten, but to darken our Horizon; yet wise men
(Beloved) look upon the true Sun, which shines here in its proper Orb, and
upon that as a Meteor, a Parelius, the Apparition of a Sun in a thick watery
cloud, yet such a one is ominous, portends rain and storms naturally, and
foretells clandestine conspiracies for the troubling the peace of Kingdoms
through wars and commotions, by divine ordination, supernaturally. Thus some
Magirus.
Philosophers; but here is the difference between the natural Parelius in the
cloud, and our unnatural Parelius in the State, that what the one portends
only, the other acts; powers down storms of blood, plots against, and
troubles Israel. I might tell you of another lie much trusted to, the lie of a
bloody Peace in Ireland; and all these magic lying wonders are but to blind
the eyes of the people, that Moses and Aaron might be the less regarded by
them; Jugler-like, to raise a dust or a mist to act their feats in, or
Philistim-like, to pull out the eyes of Sampson (for the people are the
Sampson, the strength of a Nation) that so they may make him to grind in any of
their mils; or if you will, high-way-cutter-like, to shoe their horses
backward, that when by the tread of the foot you think they are gone East, the
truth is, they are running full speed clean another way.

oaths and perjuries; oaths do but guild over lies, and perjuries help to
strengthen forgeries.

oppression; this was one of the rocks of Egypt, 1 sal. 62.10.
Keep Israel poor and low enough, and then you may do with them what you
please; and this is Romes Machiavilian policy to this very day.

intoxication of Princes and great men with a cup of fornications, thereby
holding them up in their engagements against Israel: this was the magic
sleight of Egypt, to blow up, and keep alive the flame of Pharaoh's
indignation, though he in himself had many inclinations to let Israel go, he
must chide Moses and Aaron, even when they brought the message of the Lord unto
him; these wily Sorcerers held Pharaoh captive, and by his means, Israel.

Number. 22.
Magic and Witchcraft; Balaam must be hired to curse Israel: and if Witches
and Wizards have any power in their black Art, now is a time for them to drive
a full trade, they may have work enough if they will work, either for love or
money, for fear, hopes, or hatred; but let not this trouble thee O Israel,
for, Numb. 23.23
surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination
against Israel.

Israel has a rock also.

merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
Exodus 34.6, 7. Deus and natura and foedere gratiae ad benefaciendum proclivis.
Jun. in Annot. Matthew. 16.18.
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin,
etc. God in Christ, God in Covenant, Free Grace in God the Father, full merit
in Christ the Son, and powerful operation in God the holy Ghost make up a
rock sure and steadfast for Israel to build upon; against which the gates of
hell shall not prevail; the gates, where the Courts of Guard are kept, and the
warlike strength of a City lies; the gates, where Courts of Justice are kept,
in which wisdom and counsel lies, so that all the powers and policies of hell
are too weak for this rock of Israel.

Genesis 17.8.
is all Isreal's, I will be their God, makes over all that God has to Israel.
God has a heart of mercy to pity Israel, a head of wisdom to advise for
Israel, a hand of power to do any thing for the good of Israel.

Babylon, and the rise of Zions glory, shows yet further strength in this rock
of Israel: behold, and wonder at the gracious condescension of the great God,
laying upon himself voluntary bonds and obligations, Ligatum tenemus Deum.
for the good and comfort of his Israel; the Creator making himself a debtor
to his poor believing creatures.

Israel; that providence which pitied England heathenish, and made it
Christian, which pitied England popish, and reformed it; that providence that
appeared in Eighty eight, and against the Powder Treason, and of late, at
Keinton, Brainford, Gloucester, Newbery, etc. that providence which has brought
us out of Egypt, will bring us into Canaan, if our unbeleeving, murmuring,
ungrateful, or selfe-seeking hearts, make not our carcasses to fall in the
wilderness; Psalm. 22.1.
let us take up David's arguing, Our fathers trusted in thee, and thou did
deliver them; and the reasoning of Mancahs wife, Judges 13.23.
If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a
burnt-offering, and a meat offering at our hands; neither would he have showed
us all these things, etc.

There is no comparison between the enemies rock, and the rock of Israel; their
rock is not as our rock. First, compare the Idols of the enemies with the God
of Israel, and you will find,

Henr. Wol^h^. in. v. 4.

Rupes non art aut industria hominum, s^d suapt^ natura co^sistit.

Qui colit, ille facit.

Idem ibidem. Deum n^c hominum astutia superare potest, nec potentia srangere,
idque a seipso. Ferus declam. in Deuteronomy. Deus noster iniquitatem odit, and
deserentas se de. serit.

Tostat. in locum Our enemies Judges, that is, judicii divini executores. Corn.
a Lapide, Inulta sinunt suorum cultorum peccata. Piscat in loc. non vindicant
fui contemptum, quippe nec possunt.


that our rock has his being from himself, his name is, I AM: Idols are made
by the Art and industry of men, the hewer cuts down a tree, and of one piece
of wood makes a fire, and of another makes a god; the Carver, and the Painter,
and the worshipper, makes the Idol.

Secondly, our rock is solid, immutable in himself, in his Decrees; his power
breaks all powers, his wisdom goes beyond all policies; whereas Idol-gods, you
may break them in pieces, grind them to powder, and make Idolaters to eat and
drink down those gods they have worshipped.

Thirdly, our rock hates iniquity, and does punish it in any; the enemies see
it, for often God makes them to be Judges over Israel, to wit, the executioners
of divine judgments, and some think this is the truth also which the Text
points at. And in this sense the Assyrians, Chaldeans, Romans, were, as enemies
unto, so Judges over Israel *. But Idol-gods neither hate sin, nor punish sin
in any; and the reason is given, Cornel. e Lapid. Imp^tentes sunt ut alicui
benefaciant aut malefaciant.

Rabanus Maurus lib. 4. in Deuteronomy. Idola f^lsa, inutilia.


from the ignorance and impotency of Idols.

Fourthly, our rock is a God of truth and goodness, the Idol rocks are rocks
of lies and vanities, no way beneficial to their deluded worshippers.

creature-rocks whatsoever, with Isreal's Creator-rock; their imaginary rock,
with Isreal's real rock; you will see the transcendent excellency of this rock
of Israel.

foundation-rock to build upon; Mart. 7.24, 25.
the wise man, the believer builds his hopes and happiness upon this rock, and
when the rain descends, the flood comes, and the winds blow, and beat upon his
house, yet it falls not, because it is founded upon a rock; but the fool, the
unbeleever, the formalist, though he seem to raise a goodly frame, a fair
pile of building; yet when the storm comes, the house falls, and great is the
fall of it, Verse 26, 27. Job 39.27, 28. alluded to.
and all because it was not built on the rock, but on the sand. The Eagle-like
Christian gets upon the wing by believing, and sores aloft in heavenly
meditations and affections, and makes his nest on high, he dwells, and abides on
the rock, upon the cragge of therock, and the strong place.

sheltering rock, securing us from any, from all our enemies; Psalm. 94.22.
David hides himself in a rock from Saul, and he cries, the Lord is my
defense, Psalm. 104.18.
and my God is the rock of my refuge: the rocks natural are a refuge for the
Conies; if the Dog or danger appear, they pop into their holes, and so are
safe; Prove. 18.10. Hen. Wolphi. tutum est omnibus qui in eam confugiunt
praesidium quo nec miles ascendere, nec belli tormina trahi pussunt Leigh.
Crit. sac. in vet. Test. Isa. 33.16.
and this spiritual rock is a refuge for believers, when dangers and fears
come, they earth and borough themselves in Christ, and the name of the Lord is
their strong Tower, they run into it, and are safe. God is a strong rock
indeed, no breaking through it; an high rock, no climbing up, or scaling it, no
drawing up of Cannon, or warlike engines against it; he is a sure rock, and some
fancy it that our English word sure is borrowed from the Hebrew word (...) a
rock; thus Israel dwells on high, and his place of defense is the munitions of
the rocks, etc.

shadowing rock, from the scorching heat of divine indignation, and from the
dazzling glory of Gods essential Majesty: so in the prophecy, Isa 32.2. Exodus
33.18.20. alluded to.
A man, to wit, Christ, shall be as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.
Moses says to God, Show me thy glory; God answers, thou can not see my
face, for there shall no man see me, and live; but, behold, says God, I will
put thee in the clefts of the rock, and cover thee with my hand, and thou shall
see my back-parts, etc. God puts believers into Christ, as into the clefts of
the rock, in him they see the Godhead veiled, they behold the back-parts of God
and live.

a watering rock, to cool the fired, to quench the thirsty, to cleanse the
defiled, to revive the fainting soul that comes unto him. Exodus 17. Numb. 20.
We read of Israel wrangling with Moses for water twice; and of Moses smiting
the rock twice; first in Cadesh, in the second month, after Isreal's going out
of Egypt, and the other in Rephidim, in the seventh month; the waters that
flowed upon the first smiting, gave present refreshing, and then vanished, but
the waters which gushed out of the rock in Rephidim, continued and followed the
Camp of Israel in all their march; and Israel, where ever they pitched their
Tents, made pits to receive and hold those waters; Numb. 21.18. Petrae
aquatilem sequelam, as Tertullian. lib. de Patient. 1 Cor. 10.4.
yea, the Princes dug the Well, the Nobles of the people dug it; and
Israel drank of the rock that followed them: And this rock was spiritually a
type of Christ, so the Apostle; he was the rock smitten in his death and
passion, from him the waters of life flowed, and flow after all the Camps of
Israel, in all places, in all ages: we must make pits, and dig Wels also; get
humble hearts, and believing spirits, to hold these waters in. Some ancients
fancy it that Israel took this rock of Rephidim along with them, and as often
as they pleased, fetched water out of it; it is the fiction of some Rabbis and
Schoolmen, that the rock was contracted into a little flint, which Miriam
carried up and down with her in her bosom: all this is but fabulous, yet there
is a truth in this; that every believing Israelite carries the rock Christ in
his breast, and bosom; when he acts faith, he smites the rock, and then the
waters of grace and peace flow upon him in all abundance. Israel was in great
straits, ready to perish for want of waters, and waters were not to be gotten
in all the wilderness; had it not been for the rock, all Israel had perished.
Even such is thy case O man, thou did need a Redeemer, could find no water
in the wilderness, no salvation in thy self, or in the creatures; and had it
not been for the rock Christ, all mankind had perished, and that eternally.

Israel to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock: Verse
13.
honey, that is from the nests of Bees hived in the rock, or else the Lord fed
them with Dates from the Palme-trees, which grew among the rocks, and with such
kind of fruits as sweet as honey; and he fed them with oil from the Olive
trees; thus God fed the believing Israelite, and was willing to feed him to the
full, Psalm. 81. last.
and with honey out of the rock to satisfy him: And how is Israel fed still,
but out of the rock Christ? fed, by the word, the Gospel, which is sweeter then
the honey, or the honeycomb; fed, with the graces of Gods spirit, faith, love,
evangelicall obedience, as oil from the two Olivetrees in Zacharies vision.
Nay, more yet, Zach. 4 12. John 6.55.
Israel is fed with the bread of life, the Lord Christ, whose flesh is meat
indeed, and whose blood is drink indeed.

Trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength;
Isa. 26.4.
or as in the Hebrew, a rock of Ages: all the rocks of enemies are sandy
gravelly rocks, soon washed away, and crumbled into nothing: this rock is
solid, and lasts to eternity; and this crowns all the rest, for this rock is a
foundation-rock to eternity, a sheltering-rock to eternity, a shadowing-rock to
eternity, a watering-rock, a feeding-rock to eternity: eternity makes Heaven,
Heaven; and the rock of Israel to be of transcendent excellency above all other
rocks whatsoever.

even our enemies themselves being Judges. I might make out this truth from
sacred Scriptures, and Ecclesiastical Histories, and tell you how after the
time of primitive persecutions under the Roman Emperors, Pareus in Apoc.
capis. 6. verse 4.
God raised up Constantius, who died at York Anno Dom. 310. and Constantine the
great, heir of his Crown and virtues: Eusebius. Pam. lib. 8. cap. 14.

A^g. de Civit. D^^. A Theodocii partibus in adves^ios vehemens ventus ibat, et
non solum quaecunque in cos jaculabantur concitatissimerapiebat, verum etiam
ipsorum tela in little corpora retorquchat.

Claudian. O nimium dilecte Deo, cui militat ether, Et conjurati ve^iunt ad
classica venti. Numb. 23.19, 20, etc.


I might tell you of the thundering Legion, and of Theodosius, who fighting
with Eugenius, a mighty wind arose, and beat back the darts into the enemies
bosoms, in whom, as in many others, God showed himself a rock for Israel: but
I will content my self with the testimonies, and open acknowledgements of
adversaries, which the Text points me to; we find their testimony arising from
several grounds.

First, from conviction of conscience; hence, what Saul said of David, Thou art
more righteous then I, the enemies are forced to say of the God of David, Thou
art wiser then we, or our Idol-gods, and stronger then we, or all our rocks
whatsoever; thus Balaam, though a covetous, cursed conjurer, God is not a man
that he should lie, nor the Son of man that he should repent; has he said,
and shall he not do it? or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? the
Lord his God is with-him, the shout of a King is among them, he has, as it
were, the strength of an Unicorn, etc.

Egyptians, Exodus 14.25.
when the Lord took off their Chariot wheels, that they drove them heavily,
they cried out, Fugiamus, 1 Samuel 4.6, 7, 8.
fugiamus, let us flee from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them
against the Egyptians. So the Philistines, when they heard that the Ark of the Lord was come into the Camp of Israel, they were afraid; for they said, God is
come into the Camp; And they said, Woe unto us; And again, Woe unto us, who
shall deliver us out of the hands of these mighty Gods? these are the Gods that
smote the Egyptians with all the plagues in the Wilderness.

Ashd^d, 1 Samuel 5.7.
when they saw Dagon fall before the Arc, cried out, The hand of the God of
Israel is sore upon us, and upon Dagon our god. The enemy finds, that the God
of Israel has really, what theirs fictitiously; though woollen feet, yet iron
hands: they feel his blows to be weighty and terrible; and thus, that their
rock is not as out Rock, the enemies themselves are Judges Calvin. Experientia
potius quam affectu judicant.

Junius Annot. H^c testimoniu^ in controversiis bujusmodimaximt esse, ut par
est, solct.

Calvin. in loc. Cornel. a Lap. in loc. Qui poten tiam justitiamque Dei nostri
prae suis Idolis experti sunt, etc.


; not from love, and affection, but from sense, and experience; yet in a
controversy of this nature, the testimony of an adversary is of great
strength and validity, and wrests from an adverse spirit, an acknowledgement of
the power and justice of God, above what they fancy to be in their Idols.
Having thus laid a Doctrinall foundation, let me crave your patience, to sum up
all together in a joint Application.



Isreal's safety arises in evil times; from Isreal's standing on a rock, on a
high rock, above all the winds, and waves of boisterous, and menacing
calamities: the perplexed enemies run as in a storm, from hedge to hedge, from
bush to bush, from friend to friend, from plot to plot, but the tempest beats
through all, and soakes in upon them: but Israel then is in a state of safety,
not only on a rock, (for then possibly they might be beaten off by winds, and
weather) but in a rock, yea, in a strong Tower within a rock, The name of the
Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous run into it, and are safe.

Israel, but not the strong rock of Israel; were their eyes opened, to see the
thousands of fiery Chariots upon the Mountains, they would say, there were
more for Israel, then against it; the Arc is with Israel and where the Arc
goes, ^ Sam cap. 5.
there goes victory; and if the Philistines do, by a permissive providence,
take the Arc and run away with it, the curse of God follows them; they set
it in the house of Dagon, and then down falls Dagon; they carry it from Ashdod,
to Gath, from Gath, to Ekron; but still the plague of Emrods vexes them, and a
very great destructioin falls upon the place where the Arc comes; and the
Philistines are never at quiet, till they have returned the Arc back again to
Israel. Psalm. 137 7. Obad. ver. 3.4.
Edom cries against Jerusalem, Raze it, raze it even to the foundations
thereof: but what says the rock of Israel against Edom? The pride of thine
heart has deceived thee, O thou that dwell in the clefts of the rocks,
whose habitation is high; that say in thy heart, Who shall bring me down to
the ground? though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle, and though thou set thy
nest among the Stars, thence will I bring thee down, says the Lord.

Israel flies, or falls at any time before their enemies; Ferus Declam. in Deuteronomy.
Deus vend^d^t binc quod pau^i saepe multos supereat imo etiam quod Turcae
sup^rarunt Christiani. Deuteronomy. 32.30.
that a few men of Ai rout the thousands of Israel; yea, that the very Turks
overrun Christians; it is, because the rock of Israel forsakes Israel: How
should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their
rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up? the sin of Israel makes
the God of Israel, Junius Alicnis Do^inis subjecit.
to sell off Israel; to part, as it were, with his property in Israel, and to
put them into the hands of enemies, to be seeming owners of them, and Lords
over them: Yea, the Lord is forced to sell his people for a thing of naught,
Psalm. 44.12.
as the Church complains; God is as it were weary of his people, and puts them
off, upon any terms; God is said not to shut up when not deliver his into the
hands of enemies. Psalm 31.8. etc.
the enemy never makes a purchase of Israel, till God sels off Israel; the
enemy may catch, and catch at Israel, but in vain, till God gives up Israel
into their hands; the enemy never captives Israel, till the Lord shuts up, and
imprisons Israel, in the power of the enemies: but why does the rock forsake
Israel? because Israel forsakes his rock. It is but the dizzinesse of our
brains, to think that the rock leaves us, when indeed we leave that. Israel
believes not that God will carry on his work, notwithstanding all the signs
and wonders wrought for Israel. Israel stoopes to a base compliance with Ashur,
Israel murmures for peace, as of old, Numb. 14.
against Caleb and Joshua, when they saw that the sword must decide the
controversy between them and the Canaanites; We have a generation that are mad
upon peace, any peace, rather then fail, the bloody peace of Ireland; and that
upon any terms, though they part with the Gospel of peace, and the God of
peace, to make the purchase. Beloved, should such a degenerous spirit prevail
among those that are entrusted with the great affairs of Church and State,
(which the Lord forbid) then would the generation of the faithful say, with
sad hearts, and weeping eyes, come, let us pack up, and be gone, and farewell
England: and this should be my prophecy, Isa. 17.9, 10.
There shall be great desolation, because thou have forgotten the God of thy
salvation, and have not been mindful of the rock of thy strength. Oh! it is a
sad thing to see the rebellion of a child constrain a loving father, to give
up the child into the bloody hands of an enemy enraged against child and father.

Israel be our rock. And this will be a ground of rejoicing, for property, and
interest is the ground of comfort.

Psalm. 114.8. alluded to.
into constant meltings, and mournings for sin; it turns thy flint into a
fountain of waters: but if all the counsels of the word fall upon thy heart,
as the seed upon the rock; Luke 8.13. Jer. 5.3.
if God smite thee with a rod, and thou be not grieved; yea, consume thee, and
yet thou refusest to receive correction; yea, make thy face harder then a
rock, and refusest to return: if neither Gods speaking to thy rocky heart, in a
word of instruction; nor his smiting of thy rocky heart, with a rod of
correction, does make thee break and yield before him; then have thou for the
present, cause enough to question thy comfortable right unto, or thy saving
interest in this rock of Israel.

Isreal's rock be thy rock, then have thou a high prizing of, a fast cleaving to
this rock of Israel; a prizing of it as the Merchants Pearl, yea as a rock of
Pearl, a cleaving to it as a drowning man hangs upon a rock, sticks to it, and
if he dies, dies there with his arms grasping and hands clinging as it it
were, pulling and haling the rock unto him: a believer looks upon God in Christ
as his richest treasure, which he most prizes; as his safest resuge, Exodus 17.
to which he cleaves. That rock in the Wilderness which the Heathen looked
upon as a bare hard stone of no worth or value, that very rock by Israel was
eyed as a fountain of life to them, and was of great esteem among them: and
that Christ who being in this world as in a Wilderness, was looked upon by the
men of the world, Isa. 53.2.
as without form or comeliness, as if there were no beauty in him why he should
be desired; that very Christ is looked upon by believers as the chief
cornerstone, 1 Pet. 2.6.
elect and precious. All mankind having suffered shipwreck in Adam, Christ
appears as a planck to carry us to shore; nay, as a rock to secure our selves
in: the Gospel is as a finger pointing us unto, or as a hand leading and
carrying us unto, and setting us upon the rock Christ, and then, O what prizing
of Christ, what cleaving to Christ, the voice of David is the voice of every
believing soul, Psalm. 122.2, 3.
The Lord is my rock, in him will I trust, etc.

Matt. 7.24. etc.
he builds wisely, lays Christ the rock for a foundation, and so builds room
after room, story upon story, grace upon grace; justification (as it were) the
first story, Sanctification the second, glorification the highest, even as high
as Heaven, and all this upon and from the rock the Lord Jesus Christ.

Israel murmured, rebelled, the rock only is smitten; mankind sinned, Christ
only suffered: and that God which gave waters out of a rock to rebels for a
corporal, temporal salvation, gives waters of life out of Christ more freely
and abundantly to believers for their salvation spiritual and eternal. God
put Moses into the rock, and laid his hand upon the hole of the rock, kept in
Moses, and he was safe: God puts believers into Christ by election from
eternity, and by a hand of love, of power and providence holds them in Christ
safe to eternity. Solace thy self against the guilt of sin, the horror of
conscience, the curses of the Law, the malice of Satan and all the powers of
Hell, O thou trembling, and yet believing soul, Cant. 2.14.
thou art as the Dove in the clefts of the rock, safe from all these fowls of
prey, that would devour you; the portion of every believing soul is, what
Balaam lays out as the portion of the Kenites, Numb. 24.21. Ainsw. thinks
there is (...) to the Hebr. (...) a nest
Strong is thy dwelling place, and thou put thy nest in a rock: the Kenite
thought himself secure, because he dwelt by Israel; O how great is the safety
of a believer who dwells in the God of Israel.

(...) So Exodus 4.25. Zipporah took a sharp knife or stone.
or stone, so that al opposers of God in his Cause and people, do but run upon
the knives point, upon the edge of Gods sword, which he will sheath and fat in
the bowels, will bath and make drunk in the blood of his enemies. The privative
misery of the ungodly, or enemies, is that this rock will not save them: the
positive misery, that this rock will break them; the murmuring Israelites drank
of the rock in Rephidim as well as the believing, but of the spiritual rock
Christ and of the waters of life flowing from Christ, none drink but believers
only.

Gideon slew Oreb upon the rock Oreb, and God will slay and sacrifice idolaters
upon their Idols; Judges 7.25.
that rock which is a rock of defense to Israel, proves a stone of stumbling, 1
Pet. 2.8.
a rock of offense to the enemy, who stumble at the word, being disobedient,
and that by the design of God the Father, Romans 9. last.
who has laid in Sion this stumbling stone, this rock of offense. Hear and
tremble at that terrible Proclamation of vengeance, Matthew. 21.44.
Whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall be broken, but on whomsoever this
stone shall fall, it shall grind him to powder: whosoever, be he Prince or
Potentate, shall fall upon this stone, shall justle or brush against this
corner stone Christ, shall be scandalized at him, shall oppose and persecute
him in his members, in his ordinances, in his work of Reformation, shall be
broken, it may be in his judgment, be crased in his intellectuals, filled with
errors, broken in his morals, (...) Beza observes out of Arist. that (...)
were such things as being broken fell into small pieces.

(...), Beza ad verbum, ventilabit. i. ita comminuet ut paltae and sordes
minutissimae ventilabr^ excussae.


given up to vile affections, broken in his name, and his state, with dishonor
and penury. There is a dreadful Emphasis in the original against him, he
shall be broken all in pieces, into small shivers and fitters as glass, ice,
or earthen vessels, irreparably, with a bar of iron: but on whomsoever this
stone shall fall, it shall grind him to powder: this word also has a dreadful
emphasis in it, and implies the grinding of him so small, that he may be cast
as dust into the air, and the wind scatter him. The poor man is in a sad case
when a great man his enemy falls upon him with all his power, it beggars him and
his, makes him to fly his country, and become a vagabond: the troublers of
our Israel look upon it as a thing full of terror, to have Parliamentary
justice fall upon them, and therefore stand it out to the death, and choose
rather to be cut off by the sword of war, then that of justice, as deeming it
a lesser stain to their blood and families, to fall by the bullet or the
sword, then to die under the axe or halter; oh then how dreadful and bitter a
thing must it needs be for any to live and die in their naturals, upon whom
Christ this great rock will fall in the day of judgment with the fullness of
his fury? they who now are not hid in the rock, shall not then be hid from the
rock, but the Kings of the earth, and the great men, Revel. 6.15.16.17.
and the rich men, and the chief Captains, etc. shall hide themselves in the
dens and in the rocks of the mountains, and shall say to the mountains, and
the rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the
Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come,
and who shall be able to stand?

Israel.

Jer. 48.28.
let me speak to you as the Prophet to the Moabites, O ye that dwell in Moab,
leave the Cities, and dwell in the Rock, and be like the Dove that makes her
nest in the sides of the holes mouth; this will be your wisdom, this your
safety, 1 Samuel 2.2, 3.
for there is none holy as the Lord, neither is there any Rock like our God, as
Hannah sweetly sings it out in the joy of her spirit.

Israel is,

Israel for all the evils that they are delivered from, and for all the mercies
that they are delivered to: David says in a vein of praises, Psalm. 18.46.
The Lord lives, and blessed be my rock, and let the God of my salvation be
exalted; Scotland may say, the banders prevailed not against the Covenanters,
Reformation is settled by highest Authority in despite of Papist, Prelat, Pope,
or Devil, lies as Gideons Fleece, dry in peace, when England, Ireland, and
other Nations are as the ground round about, wet and soaked in the blood of the
slain inhabitants; and therefore let Scotland say, The Lord lives, and
blessed be my rock, and let the God of my salvation be exalted; yea, England
may say, I enjoy a Parliament, a lasting, a wise and indefatigable Parliament,
wherein as yet the Jacobs have been too hard for the Esau's; I am well eased
of High Commission, Star Chamber, and the iron yoke of Episcopacy; I have the
Lord of Hoasts fighting my battles for me at Keinton, Newbery, etc. I enjoy a
renowned Metropolis no rebellious City, and therefore let England say, The
Lord-liveth, and blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my salvation be
exalted; yea, let both the Nations provoke each other to an height of praises,
and cry each to other, Psalm. 95.1.
O come let us sing unto the Lord, and let us make a joyful noise to the God
of our salvation; our care must be to get the spirit and reality of praises in
the sincerity of obedience, and the engaging our selves, our estates, our
liberties, our lives, our all for God and for his Cause. Hannah having the
mercy of a son, names him Samuel, that is, asked of the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.20.
makes her song of praise, and spiritualizeth her praises, lends or gives her
Samuel unto the Lord; all the mercies, deliverances, victories, parts, gifts,
etc. we enjoy, may be named Samuels, asked of the Lord, or rather, out of
preventing bounty, given of the Lord; our return of praises must be our
lending, our giving all back again unto the Lord; Zach. 14.20.
you have already in a degree fulfilled that prophecy of Zachary, have wrote
upon the bells, or bridles of your horses, Holiness unto the Lord; upon your
pots, your bowls, your plate, Holiness unto the Lord; write on still you wise
Statesmen, write upon your foreheads, upon yor brain-pans, Holiness unto the
Lord. You rich men and wealthy, write upon your bags, and purses, Holiness
unto the Lord; your lending to God in his cause will be upon the best usury,
and when all is done, Publikefaith under Heaven, is the best security. You
valiant Commanders and brave resolute Soldiers, young men and strong, write
upon your arms and thighs, upon your swords and spears, Holiness unto the
Lord; go on in a pious prodigality of your blood and lives: the Cause is good,
look to the grounds and principles you move upon, to the ends you aim at, that
they be good also, and then I will say of you, Cyprian. Occid^poterant, vin^i
non poterant.
as Cyprian said of persecuted Christians, you may be slain, but not overcome:
when you die with the Cause of Christ in your hearts and in your hands; and
when you are engaged in the battle, drink down this cordial Dilemma, If you
live, you will live honored, if you die, you will die martyred.

our affections? why not one against the common adversary? The Sheep, though
they butt and thump one another, yet they will all head together against the
Dog. I hope in God that he will make the Assembly of Diviner a pattern of
agreement to all the friends of truth and peace that behold them; I will wait
for the fulfilling of that promise (if not a Synod promise, yet a promise, as
some conclude, Leighs Treat. of promises.
of the sweet accord of Ministers in the days of the Gospel) Ephraim shall not
envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim, Is^. 11.13, 14.
but they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines, etc. to wit, lay out
their strength against the public enemy of truth and peace. And you the
Worthies, Heb. 12.14.
follow peace (I mean not a base complying peace with the public enemy, for
private ends) but a sweet unanimous peace among your selves, P^sar Lex. (...),
de re dictam sign^fic^ (...) obli^^d.
(...) follow it as the Hue and Cry follows the flying felons, follow it as
the young Gentleman follows his game in chase over hedge and ditch, through
thick and thin, thus follow peace among your selves with greediness and
delight; jarring and divisions here, is the best music and melody that can be
made elsewhere among your enemies at home or abroad. And now could I lift up my
voice like a Trumpet, and speak to all the Counties of the Kingdom, my advice
should be, that they would stick to, and be rocks to the Parliament, which is a
rock to them, to contend earnestly for the faith for Religion, as also for
Laws and Liberties. It is Englands sin and misery, that many parts of the
Kingdom, either poisoned by a rotten Ministry, or misled by a loose Gentry,
have deserted the Parliament, and therein God, his Cause, his people yea, their
own privileges and themselves also; the very same men that not long since
groaned for a Parliament, now (though without cause) groan under it, like the
sickle froward child that cries for this thing and that, and no sooner has it,
but is weary of it, and cries as fast. Away with it, away with it; or like the
giddy Jews, shouting Hosanna, Hosanna, and with the same breath, Crucify him,
Crucify him; or like the fretfull Patient, who drinks down the Potion, but
when he feels it work, does up with it again; or as the hand that lays on
the plaster, because it smarts a little, the same hand tears it off again;
and would the unnatural Parliament, and Kingdome-deserters speak out, their
reason would be the enmity, and the rancour of their spirits against Christ and
his work of Reformation: the profane selfish people would have had man's
carnal yoke taken off from their shoulders, but not Christ's spiritual yoke
laid on; longed to have the walls and houses of Jerusalem built, but not the
Temple, the affairs of the State settled, but not of the Church; this Kingdoms
peace and plenty they greedily desired, but not the glory of Christ's Kingdom;
and though often they patter over their Paternoster, yet they never say in
faith and truth, thy Kingdom come: and the cause (in a word) why these are so
little for the Parliament, is, because the Parliament is so much for God, for
Christ, his cause and people.

Build upon this rock for all good personal and National, for all evil to
the enemies, they shall fall, Deuteronomy 32.35.
build upon it, to God belongs vengeance and recompense, their feet shall
slide in due time, for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things
that come upon them make have; live by faith, that is a building grace, lie low
in humiliation, selfe-judging, sin-abhorring, that is to build also; if thou
say, I cannot believe, cannot get into the rock, yet then entreat the rock
to lead thy soul unto, and to set it upon the rock; so David, Psalm. 61.2.
from the ends of the earth will I cry unto thee when my heart is overwhelmed,
lead me to the rock that is higher then I. If again thou object and say, I
cannot mourn for my own sins, much less for the abominations of the times,
Job 29.6. alluded to. Jer. 23.29.
yet still go to that God who makes the rock to power out rivers of oil, to
that God whose word is a fire to melt thy heart, a hammer to break that rock in
pieces. Again, Psalm. 18.2, 3. Matthew. 7.24.
build in prayer. So David, The Lord is my rock, I will trust in him, I will
call upon the Lord. Yet further, be single hearted in obedience, that is
building also; yea, it concerns those that have power in their hands, to give
out an act of obedience to God in execution of judgment upon his enemies; 1 Samuel 15.22.
there is a time when obedience is better then sacrifice; yea, obedience, in
putting of Agags to the sword, according to Gods command; Thanksgiving for the
victory obtained by the Lord Fairfax at Selby in Yorkshire. Psalm. 106.30.
yester days feasting was good, and this days fasting good, and (let none
think it bloody divinity if I say) execution of judgment is good also Phineas
stood up and executed judgment, and so the Plague was stayed. Joshuah prays,
and prays till the eventide, rents his clothes, puts dust upon his head, etc.
But what says the Lord to Joshuah? Joshua 7.10, 11
Get thee up, wherefore lie thou upon thy face? Israel has sinned, and they
also have transgressed my Covenant which I commanded them, etc. Whereby God
tutored Joshuah to this, that the readiest way to conquer Ai, was to stone
Achan.

I know many sad thoughts concerning this lie in the spirits of believers, and
therefore wonder not though I become your remembrancer herein this day.

Let me beseech you the Worthies of the Nation, in the bowels of Christ to go
on resolutely in the Cause of Christ; true, your oppositions have been, and
probably will be great and many, yet may you for the present, set up a Marble
Monument of praises, and name it Eben-Ezer, 1 Samuel 7.12.
the stone of help; and say with Samuel, Hitherto has the Lord helped us. Me
thinks I see you like Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, 1 Samuel 14.
climbing and clambring up the rocks upon your hands and upon your feet, yet
know your success shall be glorious the Philistines slain and vanquished; it
was a good saying, that the Event of that war cannot be dubions where the
Lord of Hoasts is General. Eraz. Mar. Deo dace non potest esse dubious belli
eventus. Rev. 10.5, 6. etc.
God has sworn the fall of Antichrist and his adherents, and that with such
solemnity (to strengthen Faith, and quicken Prayer) that scarce the like in all
the Scriptures, The Angel that swears is Christ, his swearing gesture or
posture was, he stands upon the Sea and upon the Earth, and lift up his hand to
Heaven; and whom swears he by? by Him that lives for ever and ever, who
created Heaven and the things that therein are, and the Earth, etc. his Oath is
by the Eternal Creator, and what swears he? Par. in loc.
that there should be time no longer, to wit, that Antichrist should be ruined,
his adherents scattered.

Let my closing counsel be in the words of Jehosophat to Judah, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 20.20
Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established; believe his
Prophets, so shall ye prosper. And in his words also, 2 Chronicles. 19.11
to the Priests and Levits, Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the
good, the good God with a good cause and a good people; and when things are at
the lowest, let our faith be then at the highest, triumphing over dangers and
fears, because their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves
being Judges.

FINIS.

