Exceeding Happy Nevvs FROM IRELAND.

DECLARING The proceedings of the Protestant Army in Kildare, against the
Castle of Ithlone, the Castle of Knock and Mores Castle, with the manner of the
fight, and the Victories obtained by these worthy Champions, August 26, namely
The Earl of Ormond, The Earl of Ballamore, The Lord Lisle, Colonel Vavasor,
Colonel Monk, and Noble Captain Ogle.


Expressing the manner of the Rebels meeting the Protestant forces, and the
number of those that were slain on both sides, and taken prisoners.

Sent from Ca^taine Stephens, to his brother William Stephens, living in
Crutcher-Fryars, London, and now published by Authority.

Sept. 9. London, Printed for T. Rider, 1642.

Lo. Gossop,
Our Martial Affairs goes on so slow since the death of Noble Sir Charles
Coote, that there is but little done to participate unto you one Thursday last
was fortnight there went out 4000 Horse and Foot, and six pieces of Ordnance
toward Athlone, of which number 2000 were for the relief of Connoght, and the
rest went for their Convoy, and in their way set on a Castle called the Knock,
which cost them 40 men, besides some that were hurt before it was taken and the
women and men standing on the top of the Castle defied our Army a good while,
and called them traitors and Parliament Rogues, but after 2 days fighting at
the said Castle, our Army gave quarter to all the Gentlewomen, excepting 2 or
3, which the Soldiers laid hold on, and killed all the men, being in number
about 100 only one proper man that stripped himself to his shirt and rushed
out through the Armey and escaped away with some little hurt; and on Saturday
last was sennight, our 2000 came home, but at Manoth the Lord Lisles wagons and
his Landresse coming before, were there surprised by the Rebels and she
hanged, and his carriage taken away. And on the tuesday following their coming
home being tuesday last, Colonel Monk went forth, with 2000 Foot and Horse,
with two great brass battering pieces, to a Castle of one Mores near Monothe,
where there were many Commanders of the Rogues, and good pillage, but the
Rebels had presently notice, and so got away before our Army came, and burnt
the Castle; Then our Army marched further into the County of Kildare to a Castle
called Blackwood, which was a strong place, and there were many women and
children and Commanders besides, besides Soldiers of the Enemies, yet before
our Army came thither, it is reported that Sr John Dungan, who comes and
walks safe and quietly here among us, sent the Rogues notice, whereby the
chiefest men got away before, and those that remained held out stoutly, and the
women from the top of the Castle did much mischief on our side, by casting of
stones down thence and after much shooting on both sides, the great pieces were
made use of, and shot some 50 and odd shot before they yielded, the women
before that time did from the top of the Castle call our Army traitors to the
King, and Parliament Rogues; but these creatures desiring quarter, the
Soldiers told them they should have quarter, and thereupon they came forth:
the Soldiers being enraged against them, because they did the greatest
mischief by flinging of stones, quartered both women and children, excepting
some 5 that are brought to town, and the men desiring quarter, Colonel Monk
gave them quarter, that they should be brought safe to Dublin, and there left
to the Justices pleasure; and so on this Monday our Army came to town and
brought with them the five women and 68 lusty proper men, and before they
yielded, there were lost and hurt of ours about 12 men, and Colonel Monk
escaped well, for a stone scraped his chin alittle, but did but little harm,
God be praised for it. But the more is our sorrow, we are in great want of more
men and money, and the Summer stealing away and nothing to any purpose done,
but these small frats. In August last, the Rogues being at my brother Rams
house, and taking all his fathers books to burn them, there came a swarm of
Bees out of the garden into the house were the Rogues where and did sting them
so bitterly, as that they were forced to flee away, and for that time left
their mischief undone; Honest Tho. Haward is come out of the Rebels hands, but
not without 200 l. Ransom: Thus desiring of God to settle an union between his
Majesty and his people with my kind respects to your self and Bedfellow, I
shall ever continue.

Dublin the 30 of August, 1642. Your assured loving friend and Gossop Steven
Stephens.

Worthie^^ SIR,
YOurs I received of the last of August, wherein I think you were pleased to
give some intelligence of all the maine occurrences of these times, I was very
sorry to hear of the great and grievous distractions wherewith your Kingdom
of England does labor with all, occasioned by the disagreement of his Majesty,
and the high Court of Parliament now assembled* I hope it will suddenly please
Almighty God to bring the causers of these so great distractions to light, that
so the King and Parliament being united, there may be a general reformation
established with you in England, and afterward we may obtain by the same
means a cessation of those bloody times, which yet by reason of an insolent
Enemy are frequent amongst us. Now sir as I stand bound unto your goodness
for many favors of your bounty expressed both to my youth and also to my riper
years, so sir, in respect of this particular favor whereby you were pleased
to let me understand the condition of your times, I durst not be so ungrateful
to commit a crime of so foale a nature, but out of my respects, let you
understand the newest occurrences of our Kingdom. Conflicts we have almost
every day with the Rebels, whom thanks be unto God, we have much abated of
their former insolency and strength, albeit not so subdued, but yet they make
every day some or other new opposition. Upon the fifteenth of this present May,
Sir William Sentleger President of Munster, and the Lord Moore with their
forces, being of strength about thousand Foot and five hundred Horse, marched
from Cork toward Tredarth, having information given unto them, that the Enemy
had a design to molest Tredarth afresh, having now marched on, not above two
days march, a Post presently informed them that the Enemy had left their
design against Tredarth, and that they were now making forward that way, under
the command and Government of Viscount Musgrave of Musgrave, who lately
revolted from his Loyalty and King unto the Rebels side. This news was no
sooner arived unto them, but it was entertained with a joyful expectation of
their coming, they forbear to march any farther for the present, but within
ten miles of Tredarth expected their approach, and provided themselves for the
Encounter. Upon the tenth day the Enemy was espied to approach, Sir William and
the Lord Moore made ready for his welcome which was so fierce and violent, that
I beleev, he never was entertained to so hot a feast in all his life time. For
he lost within the space of five hours fight 700. men, beside there were
maimed very sore in that Skirmish, which notwithstanding their wounds, made a
shift to fly, 80. odd men, the Viscount himself was very hardly brought off.
The Skirmish being ended those two Cavaliers for that season betook themselves
to the next adjoining Town, and there took up their repose, leaving their
force still in the field. The next morning by break of day came with all speed
four soldiers, who pretended themselves to be weary of their Rebellious
confederacy, with Petitions in their hands desired access unto Sir William,
who being weary with his late conflict, was yet in bed taking his repose, and
solacing himself after his redious fight. These fugitives still aiming at
their design did stay until he rose, and left his chamber, and at his
coming forth out of his house to go to take horse they presented him with a
paper, wherein was expressed their desires, as he was perusing the scrole, they
drew each of them out of their pockets a Case of Pistolls ready charged and
ready cockt, which they endeavored to let fly, but by the providence of the
Eternal Goodness, the powder fired in the pan, and would not go off;
whereupon they drew out their weapons, and were resolved, if the success had
favored their intents, to have dispatched him with their swords whom their
Pistolls thought most unjust to wound or injure, but the Company of Servants
who then attended his person, prevented this damnable design, and took the
Actors without any harm unto them, who immediately after their apprehension
were had in Examination, and they confessed that the lately vanquished Viscount
hired them to this attempt, and that they were to receiv of him for the
Execution 500. marks, after this their Confession they were according to their
desert taken, and hanged in the place where they did attempt the fact. These
are the occurrences for the present of most note; with other frivoulous matters
of small observation or consequence, I will not trouble you from your more
serious occasions, but with my best respects to your self, and your virtuous
bed fellow take my leave and rest.

Your most respective friend, ANTHONY HASLEGROVE.

FINIS.

