An Exact RELATION Of the delivering up of READING To his Excellency the Earl
of ESSEX; And how the Kings Forces have quitted Cyrencester and Brill: With the
true Relation of the fight at Caversham. As it was sent in a Letter to the
Speaker of the House of COMMONS, by these worthy Members of the said House: Sir
Philip Stapleton, John Hampden, and Arthur Goodwin, Esquires.

Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith
Printed and published.

Hen: Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the
middle Temple. May. 1. 1643.

An exact Relation of the delivering up of Reading.
Mr. Speaker,
BEing come to a point about the taking in of Reading, we conceived it
convenient to give you a brief account of our short siege:

After ten miles march on Saturday the fifteenth of April, we made our
approaches that night, taking some advantages from hedges and ditches
unslighted by the enemy. On Sunday we sat down before the Town, battered with
our Ordnance, and played it with our small shot all that day, in which the
Governor received a hurt upon the head, which rendered him unfit for further
service: we had very warm work, and hot returns from the Town. On Monday we
advanced our approaches as they could. On Tuesday in the night the King sent in
a relief of men and Ammunition, which we could not prevent by reason of the
situation of the Town, and their advantages of Barges which we could not
command, being wholly engaged on Berkeshire side. On Monday last at night we
sent out a party of Horse and Dragooners as far as Dorchester, which did beat
up the enemies quarters, routed their Horse and Foot, killed and took many
prisoners: On Tuesday morning last the Enemy did beat a Parley, and accordingly
came out to Treat, and in the interim while the business was depending, the
Kings Army appeared for their relief, and fell on with their Artillery foot and
horse, upon our guards on Oxfordshire side, but being roundly received after
above an hours fight, the enemy was routed with the loss of above a hundred
men, and three hundred Arms. The King, Prince Charles, Prince Rupert, Prince
Maurice, and the General being all in the field, that night our Capitulation
was concluded; and now his Excellency being very tender of the Town that they
should not be plundered, and as careful that the soldiers might receive due
encouragement; has appointed twelve shillings per man for an extraordinary,
and so we are advancing to take possession, for the consequence of which
success I doubt not but the wiser and wellminded will see reason to think and
thank God, the business having a blessing in it of a great, and growing
constitution; if a short survey be but taken of the considerable Circumstances,
being rendered with so little loss of blood in so short a time, and the King
resolved to relieve it: Not to mention the ten pieces of Canon they
relinquished, nor the restitution of the VVestern-cloaths taken from our
friends, nor their being forced upon this to quit Cirencester and Brill, so
that had the enemy such a foundation, they would advantagiously relate all
passages to their honors; which we chose rather to point at then insist upon,
leaving the reallity of the service to report it self, being fewer words and
more blows is our business.

We have here a true Narrative of the business since we came before Reading,
and do think fit to add the number of the Enemies Forces and ours, that you
may see the blessing of God upon us at the late encounter at Caversham: The
Enemy had forty five Troops of Horse, and nine Regiments of Foot, besides
Dragooners. We had there to encounter them, Colonel Barclays and the Lord
Roberts Regiments only.

Sir, Your assured friends, and humble Servants, Philip Stapleton. John
Hampden. Arthur Goodwin.

Reading, 27. April, 1643.
FINIS.

