A PRECEPT FOR THE Baptism OF INFANTS Out of the NEW TESTAMENT.

Where the Matter is First proved from three several Scriptures, that there is
such a word of Command.

Secondly it is vindicated, as from the exceptions of the Separation, so in
special from the Cavils of Mr. Robert Everard in a late Treatise of his
entitled Baby-Baptisme routed.

By NATHANIEL STEPHENS Minister of the Gospel at Fennie-Drayton in
Leichestershire.

London Printed by T.R. and E.M. for Edmund Paxton, Nathanaell Webb and William
Grantham; and are to be sold in Paul's Chain near Doctors Commons, and at the
Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1651.

Imprimatur.

Edm. Calamy.
January 13. 1650.
Christian and Conscientious Reader,
THough Presses in the present age are much oppressed, and many fools will be
meddling, that they may be fools in Print; Yet we think this Treatise should
have much wrong, and so should Christian Infants, if it should be concealed
from public veiw. For this we hope may muzzle their mouths, who have long
cried out, give us a Precept for Infant Baptism. If such do not wink, here
they may see it. And if their wits be not quicker to devise shifts, then their
consciences to receive truth, here we conceive is satisfaction sufficient.

For Mr. Everards Pasquill (no nickname for such sheets of Satirical
invectives) how can it but be nauseous to all sober minds? If a truth should be
so disguised, it would look unlovely; how much more his error? Which error of
his is so abundantly refuted by this sober and judicious tract, which makes the
way so clear for little Children to come to Christ's Baptism, as they did to
his arms, and blessing: that unless their adversaries blush to recant and
repent, (as the Emperor Heraclius did, when the Heresy of the Monothelites,
with which he was tainted, was condemned,) they will henceforth wash those
children with tears, which they have craftily and cruelly kept from Baptismal
washing.

To return to this Book, we apprehend that the substance and argumentative
part of it does sincerely and soundly hold forth the truth: and that in the
evidence or power of the spirit of truth. If there be now and then redundance
of words, let it be looked upon as the Authors affection to make the matter
clear to the meanest judgments.

And glad we are that in this reply to Baby-Baptisme routed, the Reverend
Author has followed the Apostles rule, 1 Pet. 3.9. and not rendered railing for
railing. We can be confident that as it savours much of the Spirit of God, so
it will have the more influence upon the spirits of Gods people.

Our own experience has found this in our answering the challenge made us of
disputation in this point four years since by Mr. Knollis and Mr. Kiffin. Which
challenge we received and answered (may we speak it with modesty) with
moderation toward them from whom we received provocation enough. And with what
happy success, we can comfortably refer to those thousands who heard the
dispute, but chiefly to the happy standing fast of our own great people in this
truth of Infant Baptism. Though we confess we daily fear the lot of other
great places, that seducers will creep in amongst us.

We have sometimes heard that our Antagonists at their return gave thanks in
their Congregations for the good success of their long journey. But if
deservedly, as to the point disputed, we wonder then, that we within a month
sending them a copy of the disputations, written by their own scribe Mr.
Coppe, and withal the Press all this while keeping open doors, they have not
committed it to public veiw and vote: nor sent us their hands that we might do
it, according to Articles before the dispute.

What wrong they have done us and the truth by clancular and defective
narratives of the business, as we have cause to fear, so we leave to their own
bosoms to judge. Reader, let not this convenient digression tire thy patience
in the perusal of this Reverend Authors work, whose worth, we already assure
our selves, will with much clearness appear to thee, as it does to us; and we
doubt not will to those of his opposites who (as Synesius Bishop of Cyrene his
expression was) had not rather lose their hearts then their conceits. Now,
together with the book, we are thine in the truth as it is in Jesus.

John Bryan. Ministers of Coventry. Obadiah Grew. Ministers of Coventry.


The Epistle to the READER.
Courteous Reader.
BEfore I come to the discourse it self, it shall not be unprofitable to show
the cause that first moved me to enterprise this business, and the several
steps by which I have been carried on. For the cause (alas is too manifest!)
many people among us, and some of good hope, have been drawn aside to follow
the way of the separation. Things standing thus, I could not but as a private
Christian, by the band of love; but more especially as a Minister of the word,
by relation of office; I could not (I say) but rise, and look after such
neighbors and friends of mine, who (in my aprehension at least) were as sheeep
gone astray. Therefore about the end of January last, I took occasion to go to
Earles-Shilton, a neighboring town in Leichestershire, where the Masters of
Division have played their principal game: My purpose was by conference with
them to know the reasons of their departure from us. When a competent number of
that way were gathered together, some pleaded errors in our Doctrine, others
corruptions in our Ministry, and a third sort faulted our Churches
constitution. But in conclusion of that days discourse, I found that the point
which they did bind very much upon, was this; That there word was no word of
command for the Baptism of Infants in the New Testament. I found that this
principally moved them to renounce the old, and to take up a new Baptism; to
leave the old, and to join themselves to a new Church. Hereupon I told them,
that however others look to the ancient use of the Church in the Baptism of
Infants, I was persuaded that there was a word of institution: and had I time
more fully to study the point, I hoped I should make it appear. They desired me
to take time; and our agreement was that before my next coming I should give
them a weeks warning: which I did accordingly, and appointed the 27th. of March
for the particular day of our conference. I desired that some of their more
solid and principal men would be there, for the trial of truth: and this I
signified by letter a week before. But when I came, I did not find the men I
looked for. Whether they were absent on set purpose, or whether there was a
real cause of their absence, I cannot tell. Therefore I did publicly,
according to that light I had, Preach a Precept for the Baptism of Infants
before the People: and when I had done, I did leave one brief Argument behind
me in writing, for the friends of the separation to consider of. Since that
time I acknowledge that I have received two answers, the one upon the first of
May, and the other upon the fifth of September, And I could wish that the last
Answerer (which was one Mr. Robert Everard) had not been so hasty to put his
Answer in Print: but rather that he and I had gone on in the way we were in, to
try the matter by writing each to other. Sure I am, by this friendly and
private way of enquiry, he and I might have gained very much, at least the one
might have come forth more ripe for the public veiw. What his secret reasons
were, I know not; His way of life being itinerary from place to place, it is a
question whether such a narrow and set disquisition of truth would not have
fixed him too long to one place; Or whether (according to the title of his
book) he did inwardly believe that he had given a total rout to the Baptism
of Infants: Or whether it were to ease his own shoulders of the burden, and to
call in more of the party to his assistance. For my own part, I believe the
matter being now brought into Print, I am not now to deal with this or that
particular man, but with the whole nation of them that are against a Precept
for the Baptism of Infants: And this I take to be no small number. For I
believe the piety of former times (as they then called it) was not greater to
set up high altars, then it is now to divide into new Churches. And therefore
to a man who makes it one of his chief designs to set up a new Church, to
erect a new Ministry, and to cast all into a new mould, what better principle
can he have to begin withal then a new Baptism? I do expect therefore when I
go about to show a Command for the Baptism of Infants, that I shall not want
exceptions against me, both from principles of conscience, and from principles
of interest. However, I am resolved, (being cast upon it) to put the matter now
(by the Lords assistance) unto public trial. One member of the disjunctive
must needs be true; either there is a Precept for the Baptism of Infants, or
there is not. For my part I believe there is; and therefore I shall be the more
willing to show the grounds on which I build. If any one be of opinion that the
world is too full of books in this kind, and that little more can be said then
has been already; I would entreat such a one to look upon the doubts that are
in the Consciences of godly men every where, and to consider the present
necessities and divisions of the Church: And I believe when he has done so, he
will have small reason to complain of too much water, seeing all is on fire.
For that speech of the wise man, The thing that has been, it is that which
shall be, and there is no new thing under the Sun, Eccles. 1.8. I acknowledge
that there is a truth in it, yet not as it is too ordinarily applied. For I can
avouch by experience (and I speak the words of truth and soberness) that in
many hidden Prophesies, and in some subtle controversies, when I have read all
on both sides, the truth has not so clearly appeared unto me as when I came to
canvasse the Scriptures, to dive into the sense of them by meditation, and to
compare Scripture with Scripture. This has some way happened in the present
controversy. It may be then that which has been to mine own, may (by the
blessing of God) be satisfactory to the conscience of another man. Reader, thou
have now the reasons that moved me to this work. Thus desiring the help of thy
prayers, that the thing I labor in, may tend both to the clearing of the
truth, and (as much as may be) in these times of division to the preserving of
the peace of the Church. I rest

Thine in the Lord, NATHANIEL STEPHENS.
Fennie Drayton November. 19. 1650.
The General heads contained in this Treatise.
HOw the Precept is proved from the words of the Commission, Matthew. 28.19.
Teach all Nations, baptizing them: How the Children are comprehended under the
word (them). page 1. How the Precept is proved from Acts 2.38, 39. For the
Promise is to you and to your Children: Whether the Argument be of force, the
word of Promise is to Believers and their Children; therefore the word of
Command is to baptize Father and Child page 13 How the Precept is proved from
John 3.5. Except a man be born of Water and of the Spirit, etc. Where it is
showed how far forth it is necessary for the Children of Believers, which are
borne in Original sin, to receive Baptism the seal of Regeneration. page 18
What the particular Argument was which the Author gave to the party of the
separation to prove a Precept for the Baptism of Children. page 28 What their
first answer was to the argument. ibid. How it was renewed again in both the
parts, and in the whole sense: because the children of Believers have a right
to Baptism by the word of Promise, they must have a right by the word of
Command. ibid. How it was particularly renewed in the first part by showing the
convertibility between the word of Promise and the word of Command in the
Sacramental action. page 29 How it was renewed in the second part, by showing
that the Promise to Believers and their Children is not meant of extraordinary
gifts, but of the Covenant of grace. page 30 What their second answer was to
the argument forealledged. page 31 How the argument is vindicated from the
exceptions of Mr. Everard, the Author of the last answer. page 33 How it is
showed to be truly grounded upon the words of the Text. page 35 How it is
evidenced to be right in the frame of it. page 58 How the Children may be said
to profess in their Parents that do undertake for them; And therefore there is
no danger of tearing the words, be baptized every one of you, Father and Child,
from the words Repent and be baptized. page 36 How Mr. Everard by denial of
Infant Baptism does tear the word of Promise from the word of Command. page 43
Whether Peter's hearers were true Believers, when he exhorted them, be baptized
every one of you; and so consequently whether their Children were capable of
the Seal. page 46 Of the maine Objection of Mr. Everard, viz. Then the whole
nation of the Jews ought to be baptized, because the Promise was made unto
them and to their Children. page 47 What the answer to this Objection is, by
showing that not a right to the Promise in general, but a right that Believers
and their Children have to the Promise in the last exhibition, does bring a
right to baptism. ibid. What are the three exhibitions of the Promise, and how
in each exhibition the Promise does still hold to Father and Child. page 48 The
question is resolved in special, that a true Believer of the heart that may be
saved in his own dispensation, cannot be capable of another Seal till be has
received the Promise in that particular exhibition to which the Seal is
annexed. page 50 The Appendix of Mr. Swayne, in which he shows that the
Brethren of the Separation have neither precept nor example for their Baptism,
for want of a true Administrator. page 63
A PRECEPT for the Baptism of Infants out of the New Testament.
THat this matter may be the more clearly understood, I will first allege
those particular places of Scripture from whence the Precept is proved.
Secondly, I will vindicate the argument which I gave to prove a Precept, from
the exceptions of the Brethren of the Separation, and especially from the late
Treatise of Master Everard. For the places of Scripture, there are three texts
in the New Testament which (as far as I apprehend) being rightly expounded
and cleared, will prove a Precept.

The first is Matthew. 28.19. where our Savior speaks to his Apostles, Go
teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. He would have them now go to al
Nations, that were formerly outcasts of the Covenant, and strangers from the
Commonwealth of Israel, Epbes. 2. verse 11, 17. He would have them go teach,
disciple, and covenant all Nations in the Faith; and when the Nations shall
come to be discipled, taught, covenanted, and brought so far to own the faith
of Christ come in the flesh, then the commission is, baptize the discipled
Nations: to wit the believing parents, and the children, so far forth at
least as they live under that education and tuition. Now contrarily, whereas
many late Writers will have a Disciple able to make actual profession in his
own person, the only subject of Baptism; They are (to my understanding)
greatly deceived in this point. For if the words of the text be literally,
truly, and grammatically read, not Nations only, nor Disciples only, but
discipled Nations are the subject of Baptism. When our Savior says, Teach
all Nations, baptizing them, who are they that he does mean by the word (them)?
does he not mean the Nations, the believing Nations, the parents and their
children? If it had been his mind that his Apostles should baptize such only
as did actually believe and profess in their own persons, and none of their
children, what could have been more easily said then this, Go make Disciples
out of all Nations, and such persons that ye have made Disciples baptize them
only? If this had been his meaning, he could easily have expressed himself, that
persons so and so qualified are the only subjects of Baptism. But seeing he
says Go teach all Nations baptizing them, he does look here to a progeny and
to a posterity of believers; he does here look to the Nations so far forth as
they consist of believing parents, and children under their education. Seeing
in the affirmative a discipled Nation is the subject of Baptism, in the
negative a Nation not discipled is excluded from Baptism.

Now if any man shall say, where have you in the New Testament a Precept for
the baptism of infants? I will say, In the words of the Commission. If he shall
reply, that there is no mention made of children in that text; My answer is,
though they be not expressed in so many letters and syllables, yet they are
contained in the word (them). When our Savior says Teach all nations
baptizing them, his meaning is to baptize them parents that profess, in their
own persons, and their children so far forth as they live under their
Christian education. Both together make a discipled Nation; and both jointly
are the subject of Baptism by the word of the Commission. But that the
children are contained in the word (them), Go teach all Nations baptizing them,
I prove thus; First, laying down the most remarkable circumstances of the
commision. Secondly, by compating it with other places of the New Testament
that have a near relation to it. Thirdly, by showing the absurdities that will
follow in case the infants are not included where the Nation does profess.


For the circumstances, there are three remarkable and special ones that show
the children to be contained in the word of Institution.

First, when our Savior says Go teach all Nations, there all Nations are set
in immediate opposition to one Nation; all Nations in Covenant to the
particular Nation of the Jews in Covenant. And therefore as the particular
Nation of the Jews had the Covenant and the Seal, to admit them and their
Infants into the Church, in the time of their own dispensation: So it is the
mind of Christ in that sense of the Commission, that when the Nations receive
the faith, they should have the Covenant and the Seal for themselves and their
children in the time of the new dispensation. If this be so, that the
opposition is between Nation and Nation, all Nations and that particular
Nation, we may build upon it that in these words go teach all Nations Baptizing
them, the children are comprised in the word Nations, but more particularly in
the word them; and are in the sense of the Commission, together with their
parents, the proper subjects of Baptism. If this be not so, what will become
of the opposition betwixt all Nations in Covenant and that one Nation?
Secondly, by the time when the Commission was given. It was at that instant
when circumcision ceased to be the Seal of admission into the Jewish Church,
after it had stood for two thousand years together; At that very instant the
Lord did appoint Baptism as an initial Seal to come in the place of
Circumcision; to perform the same office in the Churches of the Gentiles as
Circumcision did before in the particular Church of the Jews. So then, if
Circumcision (as all do know) was the door to let in Father and Child into the
Jewish Church, in all the time of that administration, we can judge no other
but that it was the mind of Christ in his Commission, that his Apostles should
teach all Nations: and such of them as should receive the faith, they should by
Baptism be let into the Church, believing Parents and their Children, after
that manner as they were admitted in all the time of the administration going
before. Thirdly, when our Savior gave Commission to his Disciples, Go teach
all Nations, the doctrine that he would have them teach, was no other but the
doctrine of the Gospel delivered unto Abraham in the nature of a Covenant. The
Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through faith,
preached before the Gospel to Abraham, saying, in thy seed shall all the
kindreds of the earth be blessed, Gal. 3.8. being compared with Acts 3.24, 25.
Romans 4.11. Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13. If therefore it was the mind of Christ, that
through the Apostles preaching, the blessing of the particular families of
Abraham should be conveyed to all the believing families of the earth; what
can be more rational to conceive according to the Commission, but that the
Promise and the Seal are to be applied to the believing families of the earth,
to Father and Child, as it was formerly to the particular family of Abraham?
The blessing must needs go from family to family, from the particular family of
Abraham in the times of Circumcision, to all the believing families of the
earth in the times of Baptism.
So then, the chief circumstances of the Commission being laid together; First,
all Nations in Covenant, standing in immediate opposition to one Nation of the
Jews. Secondly, the circumstance of time, that Baptism did precisely begin at
that instant, to be the Seal of admission into the Church gathered out of all
Nations when Circumcision ceased. Thirdly, the substance of the doctrine, by
preaching the Gospel the Apostles were to bring the blessing of the particular
family of Abraham into all the believing families of the earth. All these
circumstances laid together plainly prove, that Baptism is to be applied to
the Church gathered out of all Nations after the same manner (respecting
believing parents and their children) as Circumcision was applied to the
particular Nation of the Jews. And therefore when our Savior says Go teach
all Nations baptizing them, etc. we can conceive no other from the
circumstances of the Commission, but that by positive right, and by the
appointed will, the children in a believing Nation together with their parents
are comprehended in the word (Them) as the true and proper subject of Baptism.
So then we have a word of command cleared from the Commission, from the scope
of the text, and the principal circumstances do agree. Let us now go to
parallel-Scriptures.

Secondly, if we compare parallel Scriptures in the New Testament, we shall
find, by comparing Scripture with Scripture, that the children must needs be
comprised in the word of the Commission. For the particular Scriptures, because
they are so largely handled by the late Writers, Mr. Cotion, Mr. Marshal, Mr.
Blake, and (as I hear) by some others lately come forth, I shall spare my
pains, and refer the judicious Reader to their learned Treatises. Only to
the purpose in hand, I desire to lay down this as a sure rule, that from
whatsoever text in the New Testament the Baptism of Infants may be proved,
whether it be proved directly or indirectly, mediately or immediately,
severally by one place, or jointly by comparing many places together, which was
soever it be proved, the matter will come to this, that if the children have a
right, they must be contained in the general command. And therefore when our
Savior says teach all Nations baptizing them, we must needs suppose, that he
speaks comprehensively, that in the word (them) he does include every person
that has a right to the Seal under the new dispensation. And therefore if in
any of the aforenamed Authors any one text will hold good for the Baptism of
Infants, we may argue that Infants are contained in the head precept. Let us
come to give two or three instances. The Apostle in that famous place speaking
of the children of believers, does use these words, The unbeleeving husband is
sanctified by the wife, and the unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the husband:
else were your children unclean, but now are they holy. 1 Cor 7.14. Here the
Apostle speaks of the natural children of believers that they are holy? I
demand then, in what sense does he say they are holy? It is agreed upon on all
sides that it is not meant of inward holiness, because the children are said
to be holy as being propagated from believing parents. Therefore it must be one
of these two ways, either by Covenant holiness, (as we affirm,) or by
legitimation of issue, as the followers of the Separation. But I say, the text
cannot possibly be understood in the latter sense; for then why may not the
children of Turks and Tartars be said to be holy, seeing many of them are borne
in lawful wedlock? Secondly, if any text of Scripture may be found out where
the children may be said to be holy, because lawfully borne, yet how can such a
sense agree to the present text? Here only is mention made of believing and
unbeleeving parents, of a clean or unclean issue as the parent is either
believing or unbeleeving. Upon these considerations when the Apostle says that
the children are holy, this must needs be meant of federal and covenant
holiness. He speaks of the time [Now] are the children holy to wit, in the
last exhibition of the promise. And therefore, in the sense of the Commission,
when our Savior says, teach all Nations baptizing them, his command was to
baptize the Corinthians children, so far forth as the parents did believe
through grace. In this sense, because the parents did believe, the progeny was
holy, as a part of a discipled Nation; and, according to the meaning of the
Commission, a lawful subject of Baptism. The Corinthians children being
federally holy, must needs be contained in the word them, teach all Nations
baptizing them, etc.

Secondly, from the maine scope of Romans 11. it is plain that the Gentiles have
now the same graffing into the Olive tree that the Jews had before; and that
the present graffing in of the Gentile is answerable to the casting out of the
Jew. So then if when the Jew was graffed in, he was graffed in and his
children, it will follow, the Gentile being ingraffed in his place, he must
needs be graffed in and his children. Again when the Jew was cast out, he was
cast out and his children; and therefore when the Gentile was received in his
room, be must be received and his children. If this be not so, where will be
the analogy between the breaking off of one lineage and the implantation of
another? the breaking off of some branches, and the ingraffing in of others? If
the believing Gentile did not come in with his children in the place of the Jew
cast out, what shall we make of the whole sense of the chapter? what shall
become of the opposition between Nation and Nation? To whom may the Apostle be
said to direct his speech when he speaks (Thou) art cut out of the Olive tree
wild by nature, Thou bear not the root, but the root (thee). He that spared
not the natural brunches, take heed that he spare not [thee.] Behold the
severity of God, but on (thee) goodness. ver 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24. Now
who is this (thou) and (thee) to whom he does so frequently speak? It can be no
other but the believing Gentile and his children, opposed to the Jew, cast out
of covenant and his children. If you apply this to the Commission Go teach all
Nations, baptizing them, what can be more natural to affirm then that the
children with their believing parents make up a discipled nation? and that both
together are the lawful subjects of baptism? In Romans 11. the believing
parents with their children are contained in the words (them) and (thee), and
they are also comprised in the word (them) in the commission: Go teach all
Nations, baptizing (them,) etc.

I might bring more places to prove that the children together with their
parents do make a believing nation. And for such also that shall say that the
children cannot be members in the Gospel Church State, I might alledg the
ensample of the Jews at their call in the last times. For according to the
prophecies it is clear as they have been cast out and their children, so at
their call they shall be received and their children in a glorious manner. But
these few instances may serve to parallel the Commission, and to show that the
children are maintained in the word (them), teach all Nations, baptizing them.
Now I come to instance the absurdities in case the Children be excluded.

Thirdly, If believers children be not contained in the word (them) teach all
Nations, baptizing them, these absurdities will ensue. First, whereas in the
two former dispensations father and child entered into the Church together, in
this last, best, and most large edition of the Covenant the parents shall be
taken in and the children shut ou^* Secondly, If the children be not contained
in the word (them), teach all Nations baptizing them, there will be a change in
the extent of the Covenant as to the particular of infants, and in respect of
the subject the Lord Christ will vary from the usual way of administering the
seal, and yet give no warning of so great a change. Thirdly, If the Children be
not contained in the word (them) teach all Nations, baptizing them, what
difference will there be between the children of such that profess the Christ
come in the flesh, and the Christians of Turks his absolute enemies? For if we
take it as granted, that the children in the last dispensation have no right to
Church privileges, nor to the seal, let any show the difference between the
children of believers, and the Children of outcasts of the Covenant, If they
differ not in inward graces, nor in outward Priveledges, in what then do they
differ? Fourthly, If the children be not contained in the word (them); teach
all Nations, baptizing them, what shall we say in special by those of the
Jewish Nation that were brought to the faith by the preaching of the Apostles?
will it not necessarily follow, that such as did believe and receive the Christ
come in the flesh, by their believing the promise in the last exhibition bring
loss to their Children? Will it not necessarily follow, that the Children
formerly Church members, shall come to be spoiled of Church membership; the
Children formerly Sealed, shall come to be divested of the Seal; the Children
formerly in the Covenant, shall come to be expunged out of the Covenant? And
all these damages will follow upon the Jew his believing the Christ come in
the flesh. Fifthly, If the Children be not contained in the word (them,) teach
all Nations, baptizing them, what will become of the comfort of Believers in
this last dispensation? There is no true Believer in these times, but he does
look upon his Children as borne in Original sin: where is then His comfort?
His comfort is in the Covenant. But what if the Children must not be baptized?
What if they have no right to the Seal of the Covenant? Can he presume that
they have a right to the Covenant it self, and to Salvation by virtue of the
Covenant? Where there is no title to the Seal (especially in such a
dispensation where a Seal is annexed to the Covenant) what title is there to
the Covenant it self? Sixthly, If the Children be not contained in the word
(them) teach all Nations, baptizing them, there will be a change in the heart
of Christ; by his last words he will exclude them from the Seal and
Church Membership, of whom he said in his former exhortations, Suffer little
Children to come to me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 19.14. These and many other absurdities may be alleged in case
Infants be excluded from Baptism.

Now then, if this be so; what will become of those ordinary speeches of the
adverse party? We want a precept, we have no word of Command from Christ, etc.
To them I may reply that they make their case worse then it is; they have a
word of institution to baptize Parents and Children. When our Savior says,
Teach all Nations, baptizing them, the Children living under the Christian
education are inclusively contained in the word (Them). We have proved this:
First, from the remarkable circumstances of the Text: Secondly by comparing the
Commission with other Scriptures: Thirdly by showing the absurdities in case
the Children are not contained collectively with their Parents in the Word
(Them,) Teach all Nations, baptizing them. Now I proceed to answer some
Objections.

Object. 1. If they say that the Word (ethne) Nations, being a newter, cannot
be substantive to (autous) Them, a word of the Masculine gender.

Sol. They that shall so reason, let them peruse the Original in the Old and
New Testament, and they shall every where find this Enallage, or change of
Gender. To let pass all that might be brought, let them consider that one
Scripture concerning the loosing of Satan to seduce the Nations: And he shall
go forth to deceive, (ethne) the Nations, that are in the four quarters of the
Earth, God and Magog, to gather (autous) them together to battle. And they
went up in the breadth of the Earth, and compassed the Camp of the Saints, and
the beloved City, and fire came down from God out of Heaven, and devoured
(autous) them. And the Devil that deceived (autous) them, was cast into the
lake of fire, etc. Rev. 20: verse. 8.9, 10. Now here it is plain that the word
(autous) them, is three times together set in relation to the word (ethne)
nations. From whence I gather in the sense of the Commission that the word
(autous) them, must by the like reason necessarily answer to the word (ethne)
nations: and this is the natural construction of the words.

Object. 2. Secondly, If they shall object that then the Nations as Nations
will be the lawful subject of Baptism.

Sol. Not so neither. It will necessarily follow, that the Nations as
discipled, as taught, as believing, as professing Nations, in this sense will
be the proper subjects of Baptism. All Nations as Nations since the breaking
down of the partition wall, have a general interest in preaching the Gospel;
Mark 16.16. compared with Matthew. 10. verse. 5.6. but this general interest does
not entitle to Baptism. All Nations have a right to the Gospel preached as
Nations, but they have a right only to Baptism, Parents and Children, so far
forth as they are under discipling and teaching, and do yield to discipling and
teaching.

Object. 3. Thirdly, if they allege that the Commission is to be expounded by
that place, Joh. 4.2. Jesus made and baptized more Disciples: therefore a
Disciple actually made, is the only subject of Baptism.

Sol. That such a one is the lawful subject of Baptism, I do willingly
acknowledge; but that he is the only subject of Baptism, to the excluding of
Infants under the Christian education, this I deny. And I know no reason why we
should tie up the sense of the Commission (a law to continue in all ages) to
that particular instance of our Saviors making and baptizing Disciples in
those first times. Give me leave to proceed in the like manner, and see whether
by the rigor of some examples (in appearance at least) I may not be able to
break the force of any general rule. Therefore let us take it as a granted
maxim, that a Disciple outwardly professing, that every such a one is the
lawful subject of Baptism. In such a case as this is, what if a man would be
peevish against Disciple-baptisme, might he not find out many colorable
shows? What if he should say that such as are able to speak with diverse
languages, by the extraordinary gift of the Holy Ghost, such only ought to be
baptized? Will he not have a fair plea from the example of Cornelius and his
company? They were not baptized till the Holy Ghost fell upon them, Act. 10.44,
45, 46, 47. Again, what if he should say, that a Minister at the entrance of
his function, that he is the only subject of Baptism? Was not our Savior
baptized at 30 years of age, at the beginning of his Ministry? Further, what
if he should affirm, that they that have tasted of the spirit of bondage,
ought only to be baptized? Did not Ananias baptize Paul after great horrors?
And were not the body of the people baptized by John in Jordan confessing their
sins? Last of all, what if he should stand upon it, that only a believer of
the heart can be baptized? How plausibly may he reason from the speech of
Philip to the Eunuch? What does hinder me to be Baptized? If thou beleevest
with all thine heart, thou may. Act. 8.36, 37. So then if you take 500
Disciples of the Doctrine in ordinary experience, you will scarce find 50 that
have a true faith in the heart. By the strictness of this Rule not only
Infants, but the greater part of Disciples that make outward profession, must
needs be excluded from Baptism. For of the greater part that make outward
profession, who can rationally or probably, or in the judgment of Charity (at
least by their fruits) conceive that the greater part have a true faith wrought
in the heart. And thus you see how Disciple baptism, (which the Separation
themselves allow,) is torn down by the preciseness and rigor of particular
examples.

I say then, that there lies a truth in all the forenamed examples; there
lies a particular truth, that men so and so qualified, were the lawful
subjects of Baptism: but it does not prove them to be the adequate and full
subjects of Baptism. He that does believe in the heart, with a true faith, may
lawfully be baptized; but we must not say, that a true justifying faith is
necessarily required to the administration of Baptism. So in the present case,
when our Savior first made, and then baptized Disciples in the first
plantation of the faith, there is no doubt but he did lawfully baptize such as
made actual profession. But the Question is in the several successions of the
Church; when Religion is once planted, whether such actual profession is
necessarily required in all them that are baptized? In this case I say, the
Apostles and their successors having the whole of the Nations to bring to the
faith, they must needs carry on the work by degrees, by the joint acts of
teaching and baptizing. In this sense, teaching must needs go before baptizing
when the Gospel is to be planted; and baptizing before teaching after the first
plantation; And so both acts teach baptizing, and baptize teaching, are to
continue together in flux and succession in all Christian Nations to the end
of the World. Therefore when our Savior gave forth the Commission, teach all
Nations, baptizing them; we are not to think that he did look only to the time
being, but to the continuation of a Christian progeny and posterity upon the
Earth. If this be so, a Discipled Nation is the lawful subject of Baptism;
and the believing Father (in the sense of the Commission) is to be baptized
with his Child.

But seeing they that dissent from us are so willing to expound the Commission
by parallel Scriptures, I am content to apply my self to that method. And
therefore when the Prophets all along speak of the call of the Gentiles, and of
the bringing in of the body of the Nations; I would know the time when these
Prophecies did begin to be fulfilled: They that dissent from us must needs say,
at that time when our Savior bid his Disciples go teach all Nations, baptizing
them; they must needs say at that particular time he did begin to put the
forementioned Promises and Prophecies in execution. If this be so, we cannot
imagine when he said teach all Nations baptizing them, that his meaning was to
gather a few Disciples out of all Nations by teaching and baptizing. This might
have been done in two or three of a Nation, only without the bringing in of the
body of the Nations. But the words of the Commission contain a Promise a swell
as a Precept: for our Savior does promise that the body of the Nations, first
or last, should be brought to the faith, and this we find more particularly
declared in the whole book of the Revelation, and verified in our own
experience.

From all that has been said we gather that not only all Disciples, so made by
actual Teaching, but all Nations, so far forth as they are under Discipling
and Teaching, and so far forth as they submit themselves to be discipled and
taught, they and their Children living under the Christian education, are a
Discipled Nation, and in the sense of the Commission the lawful subject of
Baptism.

Object. 4. Fourthly, If it be demanded what certain rule can be given to know
a Discipled Nation?

Sol. There is nothing more easy to know then the public profession of a
Nation. We may easily discern how far forth they do acknowledge the Christ
come in the flesh, how far forth they look to have remission of sin by his
blood, how far forth they are willing to have their Children brought up in the
Faith. These things are in the public veiw of men, and therefore as of old in
one Nation of the Jews, when the Fathers were made proselites by teaching,
there was a command in that dispensation to circumcise Father and Child as
members of a discipled Nation. So in the Church gathered out of all Nations, as
the Parents do now receive the Faith, and do enter into Covenant to profess
the Christ come in the flesh, so far they and theirs must go under the account
of a discipled Nation. And for the evidence of this to the administrator of
Baptism, they may be known to be such by the badg of their outward profession.

But yet nevertheless for a more clear understanding of things and the taking
away of doubts that may arise, let us distinguish between a Nation under
Paganism, and a Nation where Christian Religion is set up in the throne. If
you speak of a Nation under Paganism, we may say that such a Nation is so far
discipled, as any part of it does submit to the Faith. As for example, when
Paul came to Rome to preach the Gospel, by his preaching he did not make the
whole people of Rome a discipled people. But they were so far forth made a
discipled Nation as any particular men in that City did believe, and did engage
themselves to bring up all under their education in the faith of the Christ
come in the flesh: so far they became a discipled Nation, and no further. And
this is the reason wherefore in those first times we read only of the Baptism
of Believers and their households, because then the Christian education was only
in the houses of the Faithful; the Roman Emperor being as yet but a
step-father and an enemy to the Church.

Secondly, If you consider a Nation so far forth as the Christian Faith is set
up as the Religion of the State, in this sense we take a discipled Nation in a
larger extent. For not only the families of those that truly believe, but the
families of others also that are willing to yield to the Christian education,
and to live under the tuition of a godly Magistracy in the Commonwealth, and
the instruction of a powerful Ministry in the Church; so far forth as they
are willing to be guided by the Laws and the Government of the Church of
Christ, and are no worse, so far they must go under the notion of a discipled
Nation: and Parents and Children both be the lawful subject of Baptism. If
this be not so, let any man show a reason why God should tie his grace only to
the Children of those that truly believe, when the Children of others also are
willing to live under the shadow of his Ordinances; and therein to wait for the
in-coming and influence of his grace. In Abraham's family, not only they that
were borne in his house, but they that were bought with his money, were
esteemed to belong to that education, Genesis 17.12, 17. If any shall say, that
this was the time of the Jewish Church state to take in all under that
Government. He that does so reason, let him show the meaning of the Spirit in
the Revelation, when he speaks of the reign of Christ upon the Earth, chapter 20.
and of the Kingdoms of this world, that they became the Kingdoms of our Lord
and of his Christ, chapter 11. ver. 15.17. What is the meaning of this, but that
the Kingdoms of this world being before the Kingdoms of the Beast, and
yielding subjection to his universal Headship, they became the Kingdoms of
Christ, to live in subjection under the Gospel as the Regent Law. By all that
has been spoken, a discipled Nation may be known by their subjection to the
Gospel, at least by their outward profession of the Faith to which they do
submit.

I have stayed the longer upon this point by reason of a Question that was put
to me when I was at Earle-shilton. For being there, and insisting upon the
Baptism of Believers and their Children, and that from the words of Peter,
Act. 2.38, 39. a Question was then put to me in these words; By what right do
you baptize the Children in your Parish, do you take all your Parishioners for
true Believers? My Answer then was, and now is; That I do baptize them as
branches of a discipled Nation. For seeing the Parents do outwardly profess
the Christ come in the flesh, and because they are willing that I should teach
their Children the principles of the Faith, upon this consideration I do
baptize the Children aforesaid. So far as I understand I have a word of command
for it: The Children being contained in the word (them,) teach all Nations
baptizing them.

Now whereas some godly People in these times impute the evils among us to
Infant Baptism, in this they are deceived; it is for want of a Discipline to
hold us unto that which we do profess. Let any man take away a
Coercive-government out of a Commonwealth, a Discipline from an Army, a Rod
out of a School; and then let him see whether he may not count as many
disorders in those ways, as now he does see in Parish-Churches.

To say the truth, we have had never an Excommunication, at least none rightly
used, and this has been a great cause of the evil in the
Parochiall-Church-way, in which now we stand. Therefore if things be out of
order among us, (as indeed they are,) I do willingly confess that this does
arise from the want of a Discipline, to make a separation between the Precious
and the Vile: It does arise from want of diligent Catechizing of Children
according to the strict trusts of their Baptism when they were first admitted:
It does arise from the want of a powerful and spiritual Ministry, as
formerly in greater measure, so now also in too too many places. It does arise
also from the want of Communion of Saints to carry on the work of grace in one
another heart,

These are the causes of disorder, by which all the rest is put out of frame.
They then that impute these mischiefs to Infant Baptism, they do impose upon
us with a Sophisme, they put that for the cause which is not the cause. That
this may appeear, let us take it as granted; That a Disciple able to make
outward profession in his own Person, is the only subject of Baptism. I say
then by their own rule, the Masters of Division cannot deny Baptism to a Child
of eight or ten years old, when he is able to repeat the principles of the
Faith. If they deny it to such a one, they must deny Baptism to a Disciple;
and what is this but to cross their own-principles? Again, if they admit such
a one to outward Baptism, (as admit him they must,) what true difference is
there between such a one and an Infant of three days old, especially such an
Infant whose Parents will faithfully promise and engage for his education? For
my part I am not acute enough to see a difference, at least such a difference,
that men should demolish Parishes, overturne Foundations, tear Churches and
Congregations in pieces, disturb the peace of the Church and the Commonwealth,
and set all on fire (as I apprehend) for bables and trifles. I have done with
the first place, I come now to the most special Scripture to prove the
Baptism of Infants from the promise made to Believers and their Children.

The second Scripture to prove a precept, is from the words of Peter in the
first solemn administration of Baptism, Act. 2.38, 39. Now that this may be
more fully understood, I will take the liberty to open the Text in a plain and
familiar way, by question and answer. And therefore to begin with the first
question.

The Question is, who are the Persons to be baptized, when the Apostle says,
be baptized everyone of you?

Answ. The Persons to be baptized are Believers and their Children.

Question How prove you that Believers Children are to be baptized?

Answ. Believers Children are to be baptized, because the promise is to you and
your children, these words immediately follow the word of Command, and are
added as a reason of the Command.

Quest. How will that appear?

Answ. It will appear in the coherence of the Apostles speech, and particularly
in the word (For), which does join the parts of the Text together. He exhorts
them, be baptized every one of you, and gives this reason, For the promise is
to you and your children. Therefore the promise is here repeated as the ground
of the command.

Quest. So you plead indeed for the Baptism of children by the word of
command: but how do you prove the word of command?

Answ. I prove it thus, seeing there is such a near relation between the word
of promise and the word of command in the Sacrament of Baptism, we may safely
conclude, that if the children of Believers have a right to be Baptized by the
word of promise, in the last exhibition, they have a right to Baptism by the
word of Command. If they have a right to be baptized by the one part, they must
have a right to Baptism by the Counterpane, or the other part of the word of
institution. In this matter we build the word of command upon the word of
promise.

Quest. Yea, but the great doubt lies in this, what the Apostle means, when
he says, for the promise is to you and your children.

Answ. There is no question to be made but he means the grand promise of
Christ, as may appear by his words in the chapter following, ye are the
children of the Prophets and of the Covenant, which God made with Abraham,
saying, in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed, Unto you
first has God raised up his Son Jesus, and has sent him to bless you, in
turning every one of you from his iniquities, Acts 3.24, 25. Therefore when the
Apostle says, For the promise is to you and your children, he means to the
promise of Christ made to Abraham.

Quest. Admit this be granted, what do you gather from thence?

Answ. I gather this, as that promise made to Abraham and his seed was the
ground formerly on which the Lord did build the command to circumcise father
and child in all the time of that administration: So the Apostle does speak to
these Jews who had crucified Christ, that if they would receive him as the
particular Messiah, the same promise should still continue to them and their
children in the new dispensation. And on this does he build the word of command
to baptize father and child.

Quest. But you do here argue from infant-Circumcision unto Infant Baptism: by
this way of reasoning why do you not plead the Baptism of the males only? Why
do you not plead for the particular eight day, and so carry the wholly analogy
together?

Answ. I do not argue from the bare analogy of Circumcision, but herein lies
the force of my reason, because the promise is, one and the same in the last
exhibition to believers and their children as it was in the times of
Circumcision, the same word of promise exhibited in the last times does draw in
the word of command to baptize father and child. And this I stand upon is the
sense of Peter in the words of the Text. For the particular of the Males, the
eight day, and such like circumstances, it does not hold in these, as in that
one particular of infancy. These (as all know) are of a perishing nature, but
for the particular of infancy, because the promise to believers and their
children does hold from age to age, from believers of the Jews to believers of
the Gentiles; from believers in the time of the Circumcision to believers in
the times of Baptism; Because the promise does still hold one and the same in
substance to believers and their children in the last dispensation. Upon this
ground does the Apostle build the word of command, be baptized every one of
you, etc. Therefore the word of promise to the children, now in the last
exhibition, does bring in the word of command, to baptize infants, or to
baptize in infancy.

Quest. Well, let it be admitted that the promise is to believers and their
children, now in the last dispensation, it makes not to the purpose, for the
Apostle says, To as many as the Lordour God shall call, therefore the promise
shall belong to them and to their children at the time of the call only.

Answ. I yield that they that live in Gentilisme or Judaisme must be called
before the promise, and the Seal may he rightly applied to them; but the
question is when they are once called, when they once receive the Christ come
in the flesh, is not the promise to them and their children in the last as well
as in the two former exhibitions? I do affirm that the promise in the last
exhibition does appertain to believers and their children, as long as they are
no worse then such before the time of their call. For First, the natural seed
of believers were called children of the Covenant in all the time of the former
dispensation, and that before calling, Acts 3.24, 25. How then can the promise
in the times of the Gospel appertain to the children only at the time of their
call? Secondly, how can the Apostle avouch that the same promise to believers
and their children, that the same promise in substance, as to the children,
does descend out of the times of Circumcision into the times of Baptism; if
the promise, as to the children, in the times of Baptism shall be limited and
circumscribed to the time of the call only? Thirdly, what encouragement is
this to them he spoke to, that they should leave the Old to come under the New
Administration? This were no encouragement if the promise to the children under
the New Administration should belong to them at the time of the call only?
Fourthly, what peculiar privilege does he promise to the children of Believers
more then to the children of Pagans? since the promise shall be to the children
of Pagans at the time of their calling. The promise, as to the children of
Believers, by this account will be just nothing at all. Fifthly, when he says
as many as the Lord our God shall call, this does relate to the words going
before (to them that are afar off,) to wit, to the Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.11, 12,
13. When it shall please the Lord our God to call them, to wit, the Gentiles
out of paganism, the promise, as exhibited in the last times, shall be to them
and their children, as formerly it was to believers amongst the Jews to them
and their children in their own dispensation. This is the meaning of the text,
that the promise does belong to the children of Believers, whether Jews or
Gentiles, whether in the second or in the third dispensation, the promise does
belong to the children when the parents come to embrace the faith. On this
ground does the Apostle urge the word of command to father and child, be
baptized every one of you, and this I take to be the true meaning of the text.


Quest. So you say, but what sufficient reason can you bring to assure the
conscience?

Answ. That which does much assure me is the Apostles own interpretation in the
chapter following, for there he shows that the blessing in the particular
family of Abraham shall be applied to all the believing families, kindreds, and
nations of the earth, Acts 3.25, 26. with Gal. 3.8. Genesis 12.3. Now what is this
but that the promise shall be one and the same to them that believe among the
Gentiles and their families, as to them that did believe among the Jews and
their families. He does not speak only of Believers in person, but of
Believers and their children; why else does he say concerning Christ, the
promised seed, all the families shall be blessed in him? Why else does he use
this expression, But that the promise now in the last times is still one and
the same to Believers and their families? On this ground does he build the word
of command to the parents that did believe and to their children, Be baptized
every one of you.

Quest. If this be the meaning of the command, why is there no more frequent
mention of the Baptism of children in the New Testament?

Answ. Because the Apostles after the giving forth of the commission had
principally to deal with the Jews, to bring them out of Judaisme, and with the
Gentiles to bring them out of Gentilisme, their work did lie especially in
this, For this cause we read more often of the Baptism of such that did
believe and profess in their own person. Yet nevertheless we find it again
and again repeated in the story of the N. Testament, that such and such a one
believes, and was baptized, he and his house. So far therefore as I can
discern, the ordinary baptizing of households in those days is a plain example
to illustrate the word of command in the Apostles words, to baptize believers
and their children.

Quest. For the baptism of households though we do read this again and again
repeated, yet we are to understand it of such only that did make outward
profession.

Answ. True, The Apostles did baptize such as did profess in their own
persons, yet they did baptize the households, in relation to the fathers
engagement. For the proof of this I do offer these ensuing reasons, First, it
was the general practice of the Church going before when the father did believe
and profess, he was received with his household, Exodus 12.48. Therefore when
the Apostles did baptize in the new Administration, we can conceive no other
but they did follow the common use in receiving the father that did believe
with his children. Secondly, when they did preach the Gospel they did bring the
blessing of Abraham into the believing families of the earth. If they did this,
they must needs in the last dispensation apply the promise and the seal
generally to all believing families of the earth, in the same manner as
formerly it was applied to the particular family of Abraham. Now what is this
but to take in the professing parent with his children? Thirdly, in those times
those that were brought out of Judaisme or Paganism did at the time of their
entrance into the Church make a solemn league and covenant with God to
profess the faith, they and their families, Acts 16.14. 1 Cor. 1.12, 13, 14.
Ephesians. 6.4. Therefore when the Apostles did baptize the households of believers,
we cannot conceive that they did this only in relation to some persons that
made actual profession, but in relation to the fathers engagement that did
undertake for himself and for his children. Fourthly, they that say the
Apostles did baptize the households, and such in the households only as did
actually believe and profess, they that say this let them show a reason why
the household of Lydia was baptized; for we read only of her that the Lord
opened her heart to believe the Christ. If you will say that her family was
baptized in relation to her undertaking, then the reason will lie clear in the
text, Lydia was judged faithful to the Lord, and so was baptized, she and her
household. Acts. 16.14.

All these reasons put together plainly demonstrate the Apostolical practice to
baptize believers households, in relation to their undertaking for themselves
and for their children. If this be so, there must needs be an example to answer
the Apostolical precept; Be baptized every one of you (Father and Child) for
the Promise is to you and to your children. And so from the words of Peter,
compared with the practice of other Apostles, we have both a precept and an
example for the Baptism of Children in the New Testament, and (as I think) our
task is done. I come now to the third Scripture to prove the necessity of
Infant Baptism.

Thirdly, In the conference with Nicodemus, our Savior does insist much upon
the pollution of the Natural birth, and the necessity of Regeneration, both by
Water without, and the Spirit within. Now in this Scripture there is included a
Precept to Believers to apply the outward washing to their Children (born in
Original sin) the Seal of the inward washing. That this may be made
manifest I will First clear the Text from two ordinary mistakes. Secondly, from
the words rightly expounded, I will show how the precept is deduced by
necessary consequence.


For the mistaks, in the first place they do over shoot themselves that plead
from hence an absolute necessity of the Baptism of infants. Indeed there is
an absolute necessity that all that are borne in Original sin, if they be
saved, they must be saved by the Covenant, but there is not a like necessity
of the Seal. In the times of the first dispensation to comfort Believers in
respect of their Children born in Original sin, the promise then was, The
seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head. Genesis 3.15. Yet there was no
Seal of this Promise, no initiall Seal for two thousand years together, from
Adam to Abraham. Further there was not such absolute necessity of the Seal in
the times of Circumcision for those that died before the eight day.

There was then (as now is,) an absolute necessity of Salvation by the Promise
and the Covenant: but the necessity of the Seal was only conditional, so far
forth as it might be well had. Therefore, when the ancient Writers (Fathers and
Schoolmen) speak so much of the necessity of Baptism, and of the Salvation of
Infants, strictly and precisely upon terms of Baptism, to my understanding
they ascribe too much to the outward Ordinance, and so do err in the other
extreme. For the hope of Salvation does not lie so much in the Seal, as in the
Promise to which the Seal is annexed. Indeed the Lord having made a Promise, to
Believers concerning their Children born in Original sin, That he will be
their God and the God of their seed, in this case they must believe his word,
and where he has ordained a Seal for the confirmation of their Faith, they
must take heed how they neglect to apply it, they must not (as more then too
many do in these days) think it a superfluous, or an idle figure. All that we
plead is this, that there is a necessity that lies upon believing Parents to
baptize their Children born in Original sin. But how? the necessity is not
absolute but conditional. In case the Child dye before Baptism, he may be
saved by the Covenant and by the Promise of God; yet I think such a Parent that
does carelessly omit his duty, he will very hardly answer his neglect to God
himself, his Church, and I think at last to his own conscience.

Secondly, To my understanding also they go too far, whosoever they be that do
conclude that Baptism does Regenerate, or that it does confer grace by the
work done. It is a difficult point rightly to divide the matter between two
extremes. If therefore I may deliver my thoughts concerning this matter, I do
believe that as the Word preached, so the Seals administered, according to the
mind of Christ, in this they are the conduit pipes to carry the Spirit into
the souls of men. But how? not always, in all men, and at all times; but only
when it pleases the Lord to work by them. But as to the particular of
Baptism, what that Ordinance does confer we will resolve, in answering these
several Quaeries.

Quaer. 1. What does Baptism confer to the pardon of Original sin in
Infants?

Answ. It is certain all that are born in the ordinary way since the fall of
Adam, are born in the guilt of Original sin, Romans 5.12.13, 14. Now this is
the comfort to Believers, that in Christ the promised Seed there is pardon of
this sin to their natural Seed. Therefore if the Children of Believers dye
before Baptism, there is hope of their Salvation by the Promise: But if they
dye after Baptism, the hope is not only grounded upon the Promise, but it is
also ratifyed by the Seal. Therefore the Infants that dye unbaptized, the hope
of their Salvation is by Promise; but the baptized Infants of believers have
hope of Salvation both by Promise and by Seal. Thus far (as I conceive)
Baptism does confer to the pardon of Original sin in Infants.

Quaer. 2. What does Baptism confer to the pardon of Actual sin in men of
ripe years?

Answ. It is a sure rule, that Baptism does not only Seal the pardon of
Original, but also the pardon of Actual sin, Ananias said to Paul, Why
tarriest thou? arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling upon
the name of the Lord. Act. 22.16. So then, if the person baptized continue
after Baptism in clensing and purging out of sin, in judging and condemning
himself daily for sin, he may be fully assured that the Lord will continue a
daily pardon of sin. As sin is daily confessed, so it shall be daily
pardoned upon true confession. If any doubt should arise in the Conscience
concerning the continuation of pardon by the blood of Christ, whether the Lord
would continue to pardon such sin as is committed after justification, the
Apostle says; If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 1 John 1.7, 8, 9.
Why does he say that he is faithful and just to forgive sin? This does imply
that he has somwhere bound himself by Promise to forgive sin to them that
truly repent. It is true, he has bound himself to the Person baptized, at the
time of Baptism to forgive and to pardon sin, so far forth as sin is
repented of. The Person baptized may say, I am assured of this, I have had it
Sealed to me forty, fifty, sixty years ago, at the time of my Baptism. Where
the Conscience does make a question, whether God will continue to pardon sin;
the washing of Baptism does Seal the assurance thereof.

Quaer. 3. What does Baptism confer to the taking away of the pollution of
Original sin in Infants?

Answ. Though the Pelagians of old, and Mr. Everard, ( page 127.) of late do
strongly dispute, that Children have no natural pollution derived from Adam;
yet in this we cannot yield to them. It is plain from the Scope of Scripture
that as soon as men have a being, they have a polluted and a sinful being. In
case therefore they die in infancy, how is this pollution done away? In this
we leave them to the extraordinary grace of God. He can cleanse them in an
extraordinary way whom he will not suffer to come in the ordinary way to
Salvation. And this is all that we will say of that Question.

Quaer. 4. What does Baptism confer to the taking away of the pollution of
Nature in men of ripe years?

Answ. It is plain by experience that all that are baptized, are not
Regenerate: Therefore we cannot look upon Baptism, but only as on a Seal of
Regeneration. Forasmuch as the Lord for his part does promise to give his
Spirit to the Person baptized that he may be regenerated; The Person baptized
for his part does solemnly engage himself, that he will look for the Spirit
which the Lord has promised to give, that so he may come to the inward
washing. In this (as I conceive) the efficacy and the use of Baptism does
principally stand. It does principally stand in the agreement betwixt God and
the Believer, the Lord for his part, in the first place, under his Seal, does
promise to give inward grace to the clensing away of the pollution of Nature;
and the party baptized does set to his Seal, that he will endeavor to cleanse
and wash, by the power and help of grace received. The reason that moves me so
to think, is this. When the Lord says, Circumcise the foreskin of your hearts,
and be no more stiff-necked. Deuteronomy. 10.16. Here if you go strictly to work, how
could he require the circumcising of the heart, as spiritual and supernatural
duty, how could he require this to be performed by weak and sinful men? To
speak truly, in all the time of that administration he did never require them
to circumcise the foreskin of their hearts by their own natural ability; but
he required them to look to the Promise sealed to them in the outward
Circumcision of the flesh. Because he required them to circumcise the foreskin
of their heart in the word of Command, He does say, I will circumcise thine
heart, and the heart of thy seed in the word of Promise, Deuteronomy. 30.6. And
therefore the Psalmist finding by experience that he was conceived in sin, and
born in iniquity, he did pray to the Lord, that he would create in him a clean
heart, and renew within him a right Spirit, Psalm. 51.5, 10. In this he did but
pray for the inward circumcision of the heart, according to the word of
Promise, to which he had already obliged and bound himself to look after in the
time of his outward circumcision. The like reason may be given of the times of
the New Testament, where the Lord does command us to be renewed in the spirit
of our minds, to wash, to cleanse our selves from all pollution of flesh and
spirit. In this case we are not to take it as though we had an inward power to
wash or cleanse our minds, but we are to consider when the Lord does lay such a
Command upon us, it is in correspondence and relation to the Promise sealed in
the Sacrament of Baptism. Because he has promised to give his Spirit inwardly
to wash and cleanse our Natures when we receive the outward washing, we for our
parts do oblige and bind our selves, inwardly to wash by and through the supply
of his holy Spirit. Therefore, to shut up all, though Baptism does not confer
Regeneration; yet by that Ordinance the Lord does bind himself to give his
Spirit toward that inward Regeneration, so far forth as we do and shall
endeavor to look after his Promise.

And thus far I have gone in clearing the Text from two great mistakes. I do
not plead from the words (except ye be born of Water and of the Spirit) an
absolute necessity of Baptism by the outward Element of Water, but only a
conditional. I do not plead that all who are outwardly baptized, are inwardly
Regenerated: But that the Lord does enter into Covenant with them to give his
regenerating Spirit, so far forth as they look and wait for it in the use of
those means which he has appointed. This is all that I do desire to speak
concerning this matter, and I do it the rather, because I would not give
offense. I hope then that I shall be more willingly heard when I prove a
precept both for the Baptism of Infants, and for the necessity of their
Baptism from this Scripture.

The probation of the Precept does lie in two particulars: First, by Water, is
meant the outward water in Baptism, as it does refer to the inward washing
of the Spirit. Secondly, because children are born in Original sin, there
does lie a necessity upon the Parents to bring them to Baptism, the Seal of
their Regeneration.

That the outward Baptism of Water is here meant, the reasons that move me so
to judge are these: First, the general consent of all antiquity; together with
many late Writers, agree in it, that the external elementarie Baptism is here
intended as a Seal of the inward washing. Secondly, it is more immediate to the
words of the Text to take the washing of water as the outward sign, and the
washing of the Spirit as the inward grace. Thirdly, other places of Scripture
do carry but one and the same sense. The washing of Baptism is called the
washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. And the reason is this, because the inward
washing of the Spirit in Regeneration, is sealed with the outward washing in
Baptism. Now is this all one with the birth by Water and by the Spirit? But if
any man shall stand in it, that these and many other Scriptures cannot be meant
of water-Baptisme, then I would entreat him to show me the reason why the work
of Regeneration in the New Testament is so often called by the title, and by
the name of washing? There is a purging by fire, so mettalls are refined; Mal.
3.3. There is a purging by wind, so the corn is cleansed; Math. 3.12. Why then
is the clensing, and purging, and the inward renewing of the heart so
frequently set forth by the washing of water? I think all will easily agree in
it, because the outward washing is appointed as a Seal of the inward washing of
the new birth. If this be so, the birth by water must needs refer to the water
of Baptism as to the outward sign. Fourtly, that which has moved some late
Writers to depart from this interpretation, for the reason that has moved
them, we can clearly make it appear, that other Scriptures have the like show
of dfficultie of which no question is to be made but they speak of outward
Baptism. If some of them apprehend that the present text, (Except a man be
borne of water and of the spirit) cannot be meant of outward baptism, because
then the baptism of water would be absolutely necessary to salvation. He that
is troubled with this difficulty, let him consider that place, He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mark 16.16. In these words no man
doubts but the Lord Christ does point to the outward baptism by water, and
in a sort he does say that this baptism is necessary to salvation. How then
are the words to be expounded? We must take them in this sense, that faith is
more absolutely necessary to salvation, yet in a sort it is true, that baptism
is necessary as the outward mean; Why else should our Savior say, He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved. We may in the present case give the
same exposition. According to the manifest course of divine dispensation, we
come to salvation by the new birth, and in the ordinary way so far as it may
conveniently be had, the outward washing is a seal of the inward washing of
the Spirit. These and many more reasons might be brought to prove that the
outward Baptism is intended in the words, Except a man be borne of water and
of the Spirit. But in so plain a case these shall suffice. Now we come to
prove the Precept.

First, If it be granted that the outward elementary baptism is here intended,
I think it will easily follow, in the conscience of every believing parent,
that there is a necessity lies upon him to bring his child to baptism. For if
the Lord Christ that gives salvation, does require the outward baptism of
Water, and the inward baptism of the Spirit, both these as the ordinary mean
to salvation in such a case for a parent that is mindful of the salvation of
his infant, it is not for him curiously to dispute, whether an Infant
unbaptized may be saved? But it lies upon him to do that which is required,
and so to avoid the danger. But let us more particularly insist upon the
Baptism of Infants, the word of command must necessarily be applied, because
of the pollution of their natural birth. The scope of the text is chiefly
concerning these three particulars.

First, that all by nature are defiled with Original sin: Secondly, there is a
necessity of the new birth. Thirdly, the outward washing in baptism is a seal
of the inward washing.
This being laid as a ground, that the Infant is borne in Original sin, and
that the outward baptism is a seal of the washing away of the pollution of
sin by the Spirit of Christ; upon such a supposition I think we may not use
many arguments to the believing parent, to bring his Infant to the washing of
baptism. No man can be ignorant, where the disease is, there is a need of the
remedy. And therefore when our Savior does press a necessity of washing both
by Water and the Spirit, he does not urge this so immediately in reference to
actual sin, as in reference to birth-sinne, and to the natural pollution in
which infants are born. The consideration of the guilt, and the pollution of
the birth-sin, does draw in the necessity of Infant Baptism. And therefore in
the former ages of the Church we shall find all along that they that understood
the vileness of the natural pollution, (as Augustine and others) they were
more forward for baptism in infancy. On the other side, those that thought
infants to be free from all Original pollution, as derived from Adam, (for of
this Judgment were the Pelagians of old and Mr. Everard and his followers of
late) they both were and now are most laxe and careless in the performance of
that duty to their own children.

But if this will not convince, let it be considred in the fear of God,
wherefore there was such a strict command given to the Jews to circumcise
their infants in their dispensation. If the like reason does hold that Infants
have now one and the same need of the seal of the new birth, under this last,
as well as they had under their dispensation, why should not parents now make
the same conscience to bring their children to the seal of regeneration or the
new birth now as well as then.

That the Lord did so strictly command circumcision, and that the foreskin
should be cut off, by this the Jewish infant did declare, that the very nature
was defiled which he received by carnal generation from his parents, and which
by generation he was like to traduce and conveigh unto his children. By this
the Jewish infant did signify the pollution of his natural birth, and that he
needed to have Original corruption, or the uncircumcision of the flesh to be
done away by the Spirit of Christ. Now is not the case all one with the
Christian Infants born in Original sin? have not they the same need of the
washing of Regeneration, whereof the washing in Baptism is a Seal? The reason
being the same, I know nothing to the contrary but that a Believer in the last
dispensation, may take these words (Except a man be born of Water and of the
Spirit) as a Precept for Infant Baptism.

Now that Circumcision in the former, and Baptism in the latter dispensation,
do point to one and the same thing, to the clensing away of the pollution of
the natural birth by the Spirit of Christ, we have a clear testimony for this
from Col. 2.11, 12, 13. In the words immediately going before the Apostle did
exhort them, beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy, etc. By
Philosophy we are not to understand the spurious and the bastard kind, but he
does mean the best Ethicall Philosophy in Aristotle or Plato when men put it in
the place of a Christ. The principles of the best Philosophy are these, That a
man new born into the world is like a white sheet of Paper; that he has no
Original pollution; that he has in him the seed of all morality; that he has
liberty of will; that the habit of virtue is attainable by the repetition of
many acts. These are the chief elements of the best moral Philosophy. Now the
Apostle shows that these Rudiments of Philosophy are most destructive to the
faith of Christ. For the prime foundation of the Christian faith, is contrarily
to believe that all are defiled with Original sin by the natural birth,
that there is no other way of clensing but by the regenerating spirit of
Christ. For the consirmation of this he does refer them to the first
Rudiments of Baptism in this last, and of Circumcision in the former
dispensation. For circumcision, he says in effect, that the foreskin of the
flesh was cut off, to signify the putting away of the uncircumcision of the
flesh in the heart. Ye also are circumcised with a Circumcision made without
hands, in putting off the body of the lusts of the flesh by the circumcision of
Christ. And for Baptism he says in effect, that they were doused and washed
in water, to signify the washing and clensing of the natural birth by the
regenerating spirit of Christ. Therefore Circumcision and Baptism do both
agree in this, that Infants are born in their natural pollution, and that this
pollution is only to be done away by the clensing virtue of the holy Spirit.
Therefore if any man demand of us a Precept for the Baptism of Infants; I
cannot see but in a sense it is true that the same necessity does lie upon us
to baptize our Infants born in Original sin, as did upon them to circumcise.
For though we are not to follow the Jew in things peculiar to his own
dispensation; yet those actions that are done by him upon such grounds that are
of moral, perpetual, and common concernment to one person as well as another,
to one Church as well as another, in one age as well as another, none can deny
these actions to be obligatory to all as a standing Rule for after generations.
Therefore seeing the birth in Original sin, and the clensing of nature by
the Spirit of Christ, are of common concernment to the Jewish and to the
Christian Infants, there is a morality in it, that our Infants should be made
partakers of the Seal of Regeneration in Infancy as well as theirs. If the
reason did not hold one and the same, something might be said to the contrary;
But seeing that Infants are now born in Original sin, and Baptism is now
also the Seal of the New Birth, I cannot see but the same necessity in
substance, as upon them to Circumcise, so it does lie upon Believers now to
baptize their infants. The necessity (so far as I apprehend) does lie couched
in these words, Except ye be born of Water and of the Spirit: Therefore
Infants, being involved in their natural pollution, have now a need of the
Seal of the New Birth.

But if all this will not satisfy, I will come to the Original Promise in the
institution of circumcision. The promise is contained in these words, I will be
thy God, and the God of thy seed, Genesis 17.7. Here (I say) how could God be a
God to Abraham and to his natural seed, seeing the seed of Abraham is no better
by nature then the rest of the lost sons of men? seeing the seed of Abraham
must needs be brought forth in Original sin, how could God be a God to such a
polluted seed, that had equally the pollution of the whole corrupted mass? The
answer is plain, that he did never make this promise to Abraham and to his
natural seed, but with a double proviso; the first is, that they should believe
the grand promise of Christ, In thy seed shall all the families of the earth be
blessed. Genesis 12.3 By the intervening or coming between of Christ the promised
seed, Abraham was to look that God would be his God and the God of his natural
seed. Secondly, when the Lord did promise to be his God, and the God of his
seed, it was upon a condition that they would keep his Covenant, that they
would confess their natural pollution, and that by receiving the outward
Circumcision in the flesh, they would bind and engage themselves and their
children to look after the inward circumcision of the heart, Genesis 18.9, 10, 11,
12. with Ezekiel 44.9. Deuteronomy. 10.16, and chap. 30.6. Jer. 4.4. Romans 2.28. Upon
these two considerations did the Lord promise to be a God to Abraham and to his
natural seed. Now if we apply this to the New Testament, the promise is still
one and the same to Believers and their children as it was to Abraham and to
his particular family; how else could this berightly said, In thy seed shall
all the families of the earth be blessed. Therefore God is a God to Believers,
and to their natural children in the last, upon the same terms as he was to
Believers and their children in the former dispensation: and the terms are
these, First, that they believe the general promise of Christ, In thy seed
shall all the families of the earth be blessed, Acts 3.25, 26. By the
intervening of this promise the blessing does hold one and the same to all the
believing families of the earth, as it did before to the particular family of
Abraham. Secondly, the promise to believers and their children does now hold
upon these terms, that the parents by the outward washing in Baptism will
engage themselves and their children to look after the inward washing, that so
they may be cleansed from the pollution of their natural birth. Upon these
terms God is now a God to believers and their natural seed, and upon these
considerations there is now a necessity of precept to baptize believers and
their children. And this I take to be vertually included in that general
expression, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, etc.

Thus I have gone through the three places of Scripture from which I did
undertake to prove a precept for the baptism of infants in the New Testament.
We have seen, first that the children are comprehended inclusively and
collectively in the word (them) teach all Nations, baptizing them, Matthew. 28.
Secondly, we have declared that the children are contained in the word of
command, be baptized every one of you, because they are expressed in the word
of promise, Act. 2, 38, 39. Thirdly, we have proved, because infants are born
in Original sin, they have now the same need of the regenerating seal by
outward washing, Except ye be born of water and of the Spirit. John. 3.5.

All these put together, plainly show that there is a word of Command to
satisfy the Conscience; and though the Children are not named in letters and
syllables, it is all one if they be contained in sense. There be many things
comprehended in a Command that are not literally declared. Take for example the
Command Honor thy father and mother, there is more contained in this Precept
then only to give honor to natural Parents. So take the Command, Thou shall
do no murder; this does reach further then the bare letter of the word. Even so
in the Scriptures forealledged we have proved Infants to be vertually included
in the word of Command, though they are not expressed in the formality of
letters and syllables. But if you will say, the more literally and distinctly
things are set down the more easily, we come to know and believe that these
things are commanded us of God. This I did acknowledge to be true in a sense;
but yet it is as true, that things which the Lord does require us to believe
from the harmony of Scripture, are as binding to the Conscience, as if they
were set down in so many letters. Let us take for instance that Scripture, Act.
9.21. where it is said, that Paul did confound the Jews dwelling at Damascus,
proving out of the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ. Here I demand, how did
he confound the Jews aforesaid? For if he had been put upon it to bring any one
particular Scripture out of the Old Testament, to prove in so many letters that
Jesus was the Christ, he could never have done it. Yet nevertheless he is said
to confound the Jews by the harmony of Scripture, ((...)) by comparing one
Scripture with another. Further, we do assuredly believe, that the Bishop of
Rome from that very time in which he was declared universal Head, from that
very time he began to be the solemn Antichrist spoken of in the Revelation. If
a Papist should ask how this is proved, we cannot prove it by letters and
syllables; for the Bishop of Rome is not once named in so many letters, in the
whole Prophecy; but if you go to the Scope of Scripture, it may be proved that
he is the Beast, that the universal Headship is the name of the Beast, the
profession of the Catholicisme or universal headship is the mark of the Name:
and this we can prove from the harmony of the Prophecy. In a word, they that
will believe nothing but what is expressed in so many letters and syllables,
they will by the same reason raze out of the Bible the use of all typical
Scriptures in a manner. For in them for the most part the matter is expressed
by dark figures, and expounded by Circumlocutions. And to these absurdities
will they be unavoidably deduced that do adhere so strictly to letter and
syllables. Now let us return to the Baptism of Infants, and here we trust we
have made it appear from the harmony of Scripture, but especially from the
places forealledged, that there is a word of Command for the Baptism of
Children. And I would entreat the godly to do as the men of Berca sometimes
did, To examine the Scriptures whether these things be so or no. Having
finished the Positive part I come now to the Polemical, to show what the
argument was which I first gave to the Brethren of the separation; as also to
show their several answers with my respective replies.

For the argument which I left with them in writing at Earle-Shilton from Acts
2.38, 39. It is as follows;

Be baptized every one of you, etc. Here must needs be a Command to baptize
Father and Child, because the Promise is to you and your children. The argument
does thus proceed; If the Children of Believers have a right to be baptized by
the word of Promise, they must have a right to be baptized by the word of
Command; But the Children of Believers have a right to be baptized by the word
of Promise: therefore the Children of Believers have a right to be baptized by
the word of Command. And so consequently there is a word of Command in the New
Testament, to baptize Believers and their Children. The connection is proved
from the convertibility and mutual relation between the word of Promise and
the word of Command; and therefore if the Children of Believers have a right to
be baptized by the one, they must have a right to be baptized by the other. The
consequence is clear: and for the assumption, it is proved by St. Peter's own
words, For the Promise is to you and your children. This is my argument.

To this on the first of May, I received a certain Paper by way of answer, the
substance of which was briefly this; For the convertibility of the word of
Promise, and the word of Command, they said I took it as granted, I had
affirmed it only, but had not proved it; therefore there was no such mutual
relation. And for the assumption, they said that the Children of Believers have
no right to be baptized by the word of Promise, seeing that the Promise is
meant only of extraordinary gifts. verse. 16, 17. Seeing that Infants in these
our days, are not capable of such gifts, they knew no right they had to be
baptized by virtue of that Promise. This was the substance of the Paper which
they sent to me on the first of May. And my return to them on the third of
June, was briefly this;

Whereas they did deny the convertibility between the word of Promise, and the
word of Command, I did endeavor to prove it by these reasons that follow.

First, from particular examples; in the Sacrament of Circumcision, the word of
Promise is, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed; in relation to this
Promise the Lord did command Abraham to circumcise all his Males, Genesis 17.7, 8,
9. In this institution there is a mutual relation and convertibility between
the word of Promise and the word of Command. For as many as had a right to be
circumcised by the word of Promise, had a right to be circumcised by the word
of Command. Again, as many as had a right to be circumcised by the word of
Command, had a right to be circumcised by the word of Promise; there must needs
be then a convertibility between these two in the Sacramental action. Again,
in the Institution of the Passover, the Lord was pleased to make a gaacious
promise to the children of Israel, When I see the blood, I will pass over you,
and the plague shall not be upon you when I smite the land of Egypt, Exodus
12.13. In relation to this Promise the Lotd commanded them to take the blood,
and to strike it upon the two side-posts and upon the upper door-posts of the
houses where they should eat the Lamb. This was a Type of Christ; where his
blood is, there will be deliverance from wrath. Now in this as in the former
institution, there is a Convertibility between the word of Promise and the word
of Command. For as many as had a word of Promise to escape the plaguing Angel,
had a word of command to strike the blood upon the door-posts. And as many as
had a word of Command to strick the blood upon the door-posts, so many had a
word of Promise to escape the plaguing Angel. The convertibility between these
two, might be further proved from such Promises, which it has pleased the Lord
to signify to the sons of men by outward signs and figures. But these are
sufficient. Secondly, This is made manifest by the general nature of Covenants
between men and men. There must needs be a convertibility between these two
parts that do contract, as may appear by the Indentures between them. If this
be so in the general nature of Covenants, it must necessarily hold in the
Sacramental Covenant betwixt God and man. There must needs be between the word
of Promise, which is Gods part, and the word of Command that does contain the
duty of man in the Sacramental action, there must needs be (I say) between
these two a near relation. Thirdly, this is evident from the very definition of
a Sacrament; For the form and being of a Sacrament, by and through which it is
defined, does stand in the analogy, proportion, correspondence, mutual
relation between the outward sign, set forth in the word of Command, and the
inward grace contained in the word of Promise. Now then, if there be no mutual
habitude and relation between these two, we shall take away the very being and
form of a Sacrament. Fourthly, this does appear from the weakness of that
which is usually alleged to the contrary; and therefore though it may be true
(as some say) that a Promise may be without a Seal; Yet when men have once put
their Seal, it is necessary that there must be a correspondence between the
Seal and the Covenant. In like manner it is not absolutely necessary that the
Covenant of grace, or the word of Promise, should be set forth by outward
signs that appear to the senses; yet the Lord having once in the word of
Institution, appointed the outward sign to signify the inward grace, in such a
case as this is, it is necessary that there should be a mutual relation
between the word of Promise and the word of Command. They that deny this (to my
understanding) do not only go against the experience of Believers, but also
against the common sense of men.
Now to gather up all into one sum, it is clear; First from particular
examples; Secondly, from the general nature of Covenants; Thirdly, from the
definition of a Sacrament standing in relation: Fourthly, from the weakness of
that which is usually alleged to the contrary. From all these it is evident
that there is a mutual relation between the word of Promise and the word of
Command. And so I came to confirm the union of the copulative proposition. If
the children of Believers have a right to be baptized by the word of Promise,
they must have a right to be baptized by the word of Command. The consequence
is firm, and there is a necessary union between both parts. And thus I did
endeavor to prove to the Brethren of the Separation, the truth of that which I
did affirm. I came to the assumption.

Secondly, whereas they say, the promise to you and your children, is meant
principally of extraordinary gifts, and Infants in our days are not capable of
these. For the more effectual proof of the point I did endeavor to show that
this Promise could not only or principally be meant of extraordinary gifts, but
in a positive sense it pointed to the Covenant of grace, and was the very
promise made to Abraham. The arguments which I did allege were these.

First, If the promise to you and your children be only and principally meant
of extraordinary gifts, let any man show what kind of comfort this would
minister to men of a troubled spirit, that they should speak with diverse kinds
of languages? What a weak support would this be, if this be all the comfort
contained in the Promise? On the contrary, if you take the Promise for the
Covenant of grace, for the ordinary word of promise concerning free remission
of sin by the blood of Christ, sealed in the Sacrament of Baptism, there is
nothing more proper then to comfort a languishing spirit by such a Promise.
Secondly, if the Promise (to you and your children) be meant of extraordinary
gifts, how will the parts of the Text agree with each other? The Apostle does
exhort them, be baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ
for the remission of sin: And then he gives this reason, for the Promise is
to you and your children. If therefore the Promise be meant only or principally
of extraordinary gifts, then the Command, be baptized every one of you, will
stand in immediate relation to such a Promise. And so the matter will come to
this issue, that all that are baptized, and particularly they that renounce
their old to take up a new Baptism, they will have a promise made to them and
to their children, to speak with diverse kinds of languages. On the other side,
if the Promise be taken for the Promise of Christ, and for remission of sin
by his blood, in this case it will be easy to show the connection of the words.
For what can be more aptly spoken then this, Be baptized every one of you in
the name of the Lord Jesus for the remission of your particular sin; for the
promise of the pardon of sin, by the blood of the Christ, does belong to you
and your children? Thirdly, if the promise to you and your children be only
meant of extraordinary gifts, how can the words of the Apostle be made good
when he says, to all that are afar off, to as many as the Lord our God shall
call? Will any man avouch that to as many as the Lord our God shall call, the
Promise shall be to them and their children to speak with diverse kinds of
tongues? then the Promise will be to all the Saints from the coming of Christ
to the end of the world, that they shall speak with diverse kinds of languages.
On the other side let the Promise be taken for that promise made to Abraham, In
thy seed shall all the families of the Earth be blessed, this Promise (at least
in the general privileges, offers, tenders, and workings,) does pass to all
that do believe and their children, whether they be near, as believers of the
Jews; or whether they be afar off, as believers of the Gentiles: the Promise
does pass to all as long as they are no worse then Believers Children. These
were the reasons that moved me to affirm that the Promise (to you and your
children) could not be meant of extraordinary gifts. First, this Promise alone
could not comfort Peter's hearers in their trouble. Secondly, it could not
answer the word of Command, be baptized every one of you. Thirdly, it could not
be said to extend to as many as the Lord our God shall call. On the other side,
if this be applied to the Covenant of grace, all circumstances will agree that
the Promise is to Believers and their Children: And to this does the Apostle
refer the word of Command to Fathers and Children, be baptized every one of
you.
For the words, (Ye shall receive the holy Ghost) I confess they are meant of
extraordinary gifts, the appendant annexed to the primitive Baptism, which
were peculiar to those times of the Church only. For the Apostles having to do
either with Gentiles, to bring them out of Paganism, or with Jews to bring
them out of Judaisme, these extraordinary gifts were given to men for their
more abundant confirmation in that Faith which they were to receive. Acts
10.44, 45, 46. with Acts 11.15, 16. This I do willingly confess; but when the
Apostle says, for the Promise is to you and your children, he does point here
to the grand fundamental Promise made to Abraham; In thy seed shall all the
families of the Earth be blessed. His meaning, is that if these Jews, which had
crucified Christ, would come in, and take him as the promised Seed, if they
would take him as the Messiah, the Promise should still continue to them and to
their natural seed as well as in the former dispensation. This is his meaning
when he says, for the promise is to you and your Children, and in relation to
this Promise, did he exhort them to be baptized Father and Child. Thus far I
went in the vindication of both propositions, and in restoring of the force of
my argument against the first assault. On the third of Junne I delivered the
substance of this reply into the hands of Mr. Everard; since that time he has
been known to me, and has undertaken the matter. But to say the truth I
received no answer from him till the fifth of September. Then I received a
Paper, full fraught with scornful language; and the next news, (about three
or four weeks after,) was that we had put his answer in print with a title
prefixed, Baby Baptism routed. In this I take my self to have none of the best
usage from him. First, that he should put the matter publicly. In print, when
we were only in a private way of inquiry. Secondly, that he should give his
pamphlet the title of Baby Baptism routed, before we came to the trial.
Thirdly, that he should slight the maine body of my paper, with all the
inforcements, and yet glory of a total conquest, when of many parts he had
scarce brought one to the encounter. For these reasons I think he has not dealt
well with me. Because his Book was lately printed for WILLIAM LEARNER at the
Blackmoor in Bishops-gate street, and because now it is in the hands of all
men, I will forbear to insert it. Only my reply to the chief particulars of his
answer, is as follows.

The Argument of Nathaniel Stephens Minister, for the Baptism of Believers
Children, recruited and vindicated from the exceptions of Mr. Robert Everard in
his book, entitled Baby-Baptisme routed.
GOod Sir, since the arrival of your answer I have taken it into
consideration, and so far as I apprenend, it may be conveniently divided into
three parts.

First, you endeavor to prove that my Argument has no ground from the words
of Peter. Secondly, you would bear me in hand that the structure of it is not
good; and that the premises do not hold due proportion with the conclusion.
Thirdly, you do lay down terms of consent, how far we agree; and terms of
dissent, how far we disagree. And so state the Question in the close of all.
Sir, This is a strange kind of method that has been in part the cause of your
Wild Discourse. Yet nevertheless, as the course of the matter does require, I
will only take the liberty to lay down the state of the Question, as you your
self do express it in your own words. page 14.

Mr. Stephens, That there is a Convertibility in Gods word, whether it be in
Promise or Command, shall never by me be denied; therefore I shall not only
grant it, but maintain it. Because all the words of God are sacred, or holy and
righteous altogether: therefore I hope we differ not concerning the congruity
of Gods Promises and Commands; for doubtless there is an harmony: But here is
the difference, I deny that there is any word of Promise that ever God gave to
baptize Believers Infants, or any word of Command for that purpose. For if
there were a right by Promise or Command, then we should grant that Children
ought to have it. But because there is no right, neither by Promise nor
Command, therefore we deny the Infants of Believers Baptism, etc. And thus
far you have spoken.

From these words of yours I gather, that there is a convertibility between the
word of Promise and the word of Command. You say, that you will not only grant
it,
but also maintain it. Sir. What is this, but in sense to yield the maine
consequence of my Argument? This is the force of my reason, If the children of
Believers have a right to be baptized by the word of Promise, they must have a
right to be baptized by the word of Command. In this case seeing you deny not
the convertibility between the Promise and Command of God, you do in effect
allow the consequence. Therefore all the burden of the proof does lie upon the
assumtion, Whether the children of Believers have a right to be baptized by the
word of Promise? If this can be proved, we shall easily draw in the right of
Baptism by the word of Command, in case the Premises be true; The one by your
own grant, and the other by necessary consequence; I hope then it is reasonable
that I should carry the conclusion. Seeing you speak of the sticking of the
Chariot wheels, that you cannot drive on, nor many thousands to
Infant Baptism: If you stick anywhere, your must stick at the word of Promise.
Sir, Your chief business had been to overthrow the right that Believers
children have to Baptism by the word of Promise in the last exhibition
thereof. If you had done this, you had performed the work in two chief points.

First, You had resolved me in point of conscience; for I will assure you, that
which moves me to believe that these words (be baptized every one of you) are a
Command to baptize Father and Child, is the near relation that they have to the
words that follow; For the promise is to you and your children. Because the
Children are expressed in the word of Promise, they are contained in the word
of Command. And for my part, I dare not (however you falsely accuse me) tear
asunder the Promise from the Command, or the Command from the Promise in Peter's
words. You know that there is a curse that belongs to them that do add to or
take from the word of God. You your self have applied it to them that do clip
and cut, and tear asunder the foregoing words of Peter from those that follow
after. Secondly, Had you spent your force upon this Proposition, to wit, That
the children of believers have a right to Baptism by the word of Promise; Had
you taken this away, you had taken away the word of Command. As long therefore
as this is a firm truth, That the children have a right to be baptized by the
word of Promise, in its last and best exhibition; I will ask you no belief for
the right to Baptism by the word of Command. The right to be baptized by the
word of Command is the truth of the conclusion: Now such a Logician you are to
spend your whole answer in a manner upon the deny all of the Conclusion. You
insist much upon my tearing asunder the Command, be baptized every one of you,
from the words, Repent and -- be baptized. If these words be torn asunder, it
is to hold correspondence with the words that follow; For the promise is to you
and your Children. But Sir (whatsoever you suggest to the contrary) I trust I
shall show that I do not tear these words asunder, if you go to the right
sense.
Further, it is manifest from your own grants and concessions, that the
foregoing answer of your Brethren is of no value at all. They deny a
Convertibility between Gods word of Promise, and his word of Command; you allow
it: They hold the Promise (to you and your children) to be meant of
extraordinary gifts, and you say that one word in their vindication, whether
such a promise is principally intended, yea or no. Thus, you who are so earnest
to deny the Baptism of Infants, and the use of the Church, the world may see
how well you agree among your selves.

But leaving that which may be gathered from your own grants and concessions, I
will now come to the points of difference as they lie in debate between us. To
begin therefore with your reasons, by and through which you endeavor to prove
that my argument is not rightly grounded on Peter's words. If I may be so bold
with your Method, that which you have said, may be reduced to these five heads.

First, You endeavor to show that I tear the words of Peter; the words be
baptized every one of you from the words Repent and --. Secondly, You say that
these words be baptized every one of you, cannot be spoken to Infants, as being
not capable of such a command. Thirdly, You affirm that the Persons to whom
Peter directed his speech, were no Believers. If the Parents themselves were no
Believers, their Children could not be the Children of Believers. Fourthly, You
endeavor to show that seeing the promise to you and your children, did belong
to the whole Jewish nation, why was not the whole nation baptized? Fifthly,
Like a compassionate man, you conclude with advice, that I carry my argument
to some other Text, seeing it can have no releef from Peter's words. This Sir,
(setting aside your jeeres and mocks) is the pith of your answer. I shall
therefore desire to bring the aforementioned particulars into question, and to
go along with you point by point.
To begin therefore with the first particular, viz. my tearing asunder the
words of Peter, I do willingly agree, that whosoever reads the words of the
Apostle, he is not to pluck them out of joint, not to tear out the middle of
the verse where the words have a necessary dependence. I do agree in the
general truth with you, that the foregoing words are not to be torn asunder
from those that follow. But whether this is done by you or by me, let that now
come to the trial. You stand upon it ( page 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.) that I do pluck
asunder the words, be baptized every one of you from the words repent and --
Sir, if you go to words and syllables, and to literal forms of expression, I
have said, and do say, be baptized every one of you, is a word of Command to
believing Parents and their Children; but that I tear these words from the true
sense and meaning of Peter, this I deny. For in a federall or covenant sense,
the children are said to repent in their Parents that do undertake for them.
And therefore if you will have the Text to be read according to Peter's true
meaning, it must run after this tenor; Be baptized every one of you [and
your children,] for the promise is to you and your children. According to this
construction the children may be said to repent, and Covenant with God in their
Parents, and the Parents may be said to Covenant for their Children. If this be
so, you may easily discern, that the words (be baptized every one of you) are
not plucked and torn from Repent and --

Now that the Children may be said to repent, to profess, to Covenant, either
with or in their Parents, I can bring many proofs for the same out of
Scripture. If I can prove this, I hope you will have no such cause to accuse me
of felony, of stealing the words be baptized every one of you, from the words
Repent and. -- You might have spared your pains to come after me with a
printed Hu-an-cry (as you call it) thirteen weeks and three-dayes after the
pretended theft was committed. You do no less when you use these words ( page
5. lin 30.) Mr. Stephens, now I have finished my Hu-an-cry, and it has been so
serviceable, that you are catched with the words which you stole out of the
pocket of that Text, Act. 2.38. Sir, this is a hard charge if you could prove
it. But to clear my self of this imputation, I will prove, that in a federall
sense, Children may be said to repent and Covenant in their Parents.

To begin with the example of the Children mentioned Deuteronomy. 29. because this is
a plain and pregnant place, I will draw it out more at length for your better
information. In these words note first a Covenant; secondly the motives,
thirdly the Covenanters, or the persons that did Covenant.

For the Covenant, it is this, that the people should choose the Lord to be
their God, and that they should not turn from him to serve the gods of the
nations. And the Lord on his part did Covenant to choose the people for his
people, to perform the promise made to Abraham, verse. 9.12, 13, 17, 18. This
was the substance of the Covenant. Secondly, the motives to move them to
Covenant, because the Lord had delivered them out of Egypt with great signs
and temptations, he had led them through the Wilderness forty years, their
clothes waxed not old upon them, nor the shoe waxed old upon their feet.
Besides, he had fed them in an extraordinary manner, he had given them drink
out of the Rock, and had delivered them out of the hands of mighty Kings. These
were the arguments to induce them to Covenant. verse. 2, 3, 4. etc. Thirdly, (to
come to the point we are upon) let us consider the persons who they were that
were Covenanters, and they are expressed in these words: Ye stand all of you
this day before the Lord your God, your Captains of your Tribes, your Elders,
your officers, with all the men of Israel, [your little ones,] and your wives,
and the stranger that is in thy Camp, from the hewer of thy wood to the drawer
of thy water: That thou should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God.
verse. 10.11, 12. From these words you may gather, that Children may Covenant,
and that together with their Parents the Lord may look upon them as
Covenanters. If this be so, pray tell me of what value your argument is, when
you say, (Repent and be baptized every one of you) cannot be spoken to Father
and Child. You bind upon this, that Children cannot repent, because they have
not the first principle of profession, (page 3. lin 32.) Now pray, Mr. Everard,
tell me plainly and sincerely, what do you think of the little ones expressed
in the Text? Were they not Covenanters? Had they not the first principle of
profession? If that be true which you say, that little ones have not that first
principle, that they cannot profess; Why did they then stand before the Lord,
before the Arc of the Testimony, with the most public and representative
persons, with the Elders of the Tribes to enter into Covenant? If you shall
allege, that this is an instance out of the Old Testament, and then was the
Church state of the Jews: I do confess as much; but this does not void the
force of the reason. For when you say that Children cannot Covenant, that they
have not the first principle of profession, you do not reason only against the
particular Children of this or that dispensation, but against the children of
any dispensation. Therefore I say on the contrary, if the children of Believers
in the Jewish Church state may be said to Covenant, there is nothing does
exclude but that Believers children in these last times may be said to
profess, repent, Covenant, and come into the Church together with their
Parents.

Further, let us look into the reason wherefore in that dispensation the Lord
did so strictly and universally call upon all sorts to enter into Covenant. The
reason is expressed in these words, Lest there should be among you any man, or
woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turns this day away from the Lord
our God, to go and serve other gods of these nations: lest there should be
among you a root that bears wormwood or gall. verse. 18. The Lord did so
strictly call upon all, yea upon little ones, to enter into Covenant, they and
their Parents together, that there should not be a branch or a root among them
that might depart from the Lord. Now Sir, do you think that it was to no
purpose to engage the children, because they had not (as you say) the first
principle of profession? Do you think that in process of time these children
might lawfully go after other gods without breach of Covenant, and then plead
what you allege; to wit, that in their minority they could not bind
themselves, they had not the first principle of profession? But to come to our
own times; there are (as you know) many Christian men carried prisoners into
Turkey, and when they are there, they are strongly urged to deny the Faith, and
to turn Mahumetans. In this case they dare not yield for fear of the breach of
Covenant, for fear of violating their promise made to the Lord Christ in their
Baptism. In this exigency, Sir, I do desire to put the question to you,
whether this may be said to be breach of Covenant, yea or no? I do it the
rather, because in the Postscript of your Answer, you jeer at Mr. Angel of
Leicester, for saying, that witches after conviction say that the Devil
persuaded them to deny their first Baptism. Therefore Sir, I do put it upon
you to answer whether this be breach of Covenant, yea or no. If that be true
which you say, that Infants can make no Covenant, they can break no Covenant.
And therefore though it it be evil otherwise to deny Christ, and to turn Turk,
to deny Christ and enter into confederacy with the Devil, with you it can be no
breach of Covenant, in Baptism at least. For where no Covenant was ever made,
no Covenant can be broken. If Infants cannot Covenant or profess in Infancy,
there is no reason to tie them to that, where they wanted ability to engage.

But yet further to let it appear that children may Covenant in their Parents,
or (if you will have it) that father and child may Covenant together, consider
the practice of the Jewish Church in the days of Jehosophat. When the children
of Moab and the children of Ammon came against them to battle, all Judah stood
before the Lord, with their [little ones,] their wives and their children. 2
Chro. 20.13. If any shall ask, why did the little ones stand before the Lord if
it be true as you say, that they had not the first principle of profession? The
reason is clear, the people of the Jews in those times having no strength of
their own to deal against such a multitude, they came to humble themselves and
to pray for help, by virtue of the Covenant and the Promise made to Abraham and
his seed, verse. 7. This is the reason wherefore the Believers in that
dispensation stood before the Lord, they and their little ones. It was to this
end that he might see not only Covenanting Parents, but also children in
Covenant with him: and that both together might implore help by virtue of the
promise made to Abraham and to his seed. These and many other examples might be
brought to prove that children may repent, profess, Covenant in their Parents
that do undertake for them and with them. But least you might plead that these
are extraordinary cases, I will make it appear in all times of the Jewish
Church state, for two thousand years together, from Abraham to Christ, that the
children did usually profess and covenant in their Parents that did undertake
for them. This is true in the natural Jew, but it is more clear in the
Proselyte and his children.

When the Proselyte came in himself, he could not be admitted unless he did
actually repent, and actually profess Faith in the promise, in the time of
that dispensation. Exodus 12.48. 2 Chro. 6.32, 33. Ruth. 1.16. You will say
then, why were the children admitted, seeing they had not (to use your words)
the first principle of profession? It is clear that the children did profess
in the Parents that did undertake for them. Exodus 12.38. If this be true in the
Proselyte and his children, in all times of the Jewish Church, why should not
we judge the like of the children of such as were converted from Gentilisme or
Judaisme, in those first times of the Christian Church? Why Mr. Everard, should
it be a thing incredible with you, when Peter said, Repent and be baptized? why
should it be so strange a thing to say the children did repent and believe in
their parents that did undertake for them or with them?

Now that it may more clearly appear, I will further prove it, that children
may repent and profess in their Parents. I will clear it from the Text it
self: for when Peter exhorted his hearers to repent, the sin they should
repent of was their crucifying the Lord of life. As therefore the nation of the
Jews by crucifying of Christ, and by rejecting of the Gospel, as by this act of
the Parents the children were cast off; So when it shall please the Lord to
open their eyes to see that sin, to mourn over it, then the children shall
come in, and together with their Parents shall repent of that national sin of
crucifying the Messiah. For proof of this let that Text be considered, I will
pouer upon the house of David, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of
grace and supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced. In
that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. And the land shall mourn, every family
apart, etc. Zach. 12.10, 11, 12. This Scripture is to be applied to the call of
the Jews; for the Prophet speaks of the Spirit of grace that shall be poured
upon that people in the latter times, and when the whole nation should look to
him whom they have peirced, and should mourn for it. But the question is, when
that nation shall be called to repent of their sin in the last times, under
the Gospel Church State? Shall not the children be said nationally to repent in
and with their Parents? If you shall deny it, then show me, First how the body
of the nation may be brought to the Faith? Secondly, how will you salve the
words of the Prophet which says plainly, every family shall mourn apart, and
their wives apart? If they shall mourn family by family, the mourning shall be
of fathers that see their sin with their children. Thirdly, If the children
have been cast away many hundred years for their parents sin, and with their
parents, shall we not think at the time of their call, that the children shall
repent of this sin, and come in at the time of the coming in of the whole
nation? If this be true at the general call of the Jews, (as I think you cannot
well deny) then it must be true also in those that did repent at the hearing of
Peter's Sermon. For the three thousand that did then believe, repent, and come
into the Church, were but a pattern of that future call of the Jews that shall
be in the latter times. And therefore if it be true in the general conversion
of that nation, when the parents repent and mourn for their sin of crucifying
the Christ, that the children may be said to repent in their Parents; I do not
see but it may be some way true also in the partial conversion at Peter's
Sermon. When the parents did mourn for their sin of crucifying the Lord of
glory, we can judge no other in a Covenant sense, but that the children did
mourn in them and with them. And therefore for the three thousand that were
added to the Church, the whole company of souls that were baptized, they were
no other but believing parents and their children. But if you shall reply, that
there were no children in that company; because it is said, that they who
gladly received the word were baptized. verse. 41. I answer as before, though
the children could not gladly receive the word in their own persons, yet they
might gladly receive it in the persons of them that did undertake for them. In
a strict sense, little children cannot be said to come to Christ; yet our
Savior does expound it as though they came themselves when they were brought
in the arms of others. Why else should he say, suffer little children (to come
to me) and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven? Mat. 19 13.
There were seventy souls that came with Jacob into Egypt: What did they all
come in person? were there no children in the company? The text is plain, Every
man came with his household. Exodus 1.1. Even so among the three thousand that
did gladly receive the word, there might be many children in the company,
because the Parents (as then the manner was) might embrace the Gospel with
their households. But that there were children in that company, together with
the believing Parents, I am moved so to judge from these reasons.

First, The Apostle speaks so universally, be baptized every one of you; this
(as I understand) in a Covenant sense must needs be spoken, to them and to
their children. Secondly, The motive to receive Baptism, (for the promise is
to you and your children) shows that the promise does hold to believers and
their children in the last as well as in the two former exhibitions: how else
could it be the ground to baptize? Thirdly, It is said of these Believers, that
they did continue in breaking of bread from house to house, verse. 46. I cannot
see how they could well do this, from house to house, how they could sell their
goods and have all things in common; but that the families and houses of
Believers in those days must be accounted as belonging to the Church; and so
consequently the children must be admitted to the Seal. Fourthly, The general
practice of the Church going before, which was, ever when the parent was
admitted, the children had the Seal of admission. Exodus 12.48. And shall we
think in the first solemn administration of Baptism, that Peter did not
follow the common use? Fifthly, The Apostle himself does expound what the
promise is, to believers and their children, In thy seed shall all the families
or kindreds of the earth be blessed. Act. 3.25. If all the families of the
earth shall be blessed in Christ, the promised Seed, he does say in sense, that
the blessing under the last dispensation shall universally be brought into all
the believing families of the earth after that manner as it was formerly to the
paticular family of Abraham. And do you think, that the Apostle himself would
not practice according to his own Principles? Would he not receive believing
parents and their children into Church fellowship in the time of the last
dispensation, after that manner as they were received in the time of the
administration going before? Sixthly, In the small portion of the story of the
Apostles now extant, it is again and again repeated, that such a one received
the promise of the Christ, and was baptized, he and his household. This moves
me to think that the three thousand souls that were baptized and added to the
Church, were believers and their children.
But, Mr. Everard, Let it only stand as probable, whether or no there were
children in that company. This is that which I affirm from Peter's words, that
the children of believers have a right to Baptism, both by the word of
Promise, and the word of Command. And for your objection, that the children
cannot repent, that they have not the first principle of profession, I have
showed many examples that in a Covenant sense they may be said to repent and to
profess in their believing parents. It is my judgment, if believers and their
children be baptized, they must before Baptism make profession of repentance.
But how? The parents in their own persons, and the children vertually and
inclusively in the parents that do undertake for them. Now, Sir, I leave it to
your own conscience, and to all the world beside, to judge what reason you had
so to accuse me of tearing the words of Peter asunder, the words be baptized
every one of you, from the words repent and --. You might have spared your
accusations of felony, your instances of mangling the words of David, The fool
has said in his heart there is no God. Psalm. 14.1. and such like Scriptures.
You might have spared your Rhetorical amplifications; for I do hold that the
children in a Covenant sense did repent and profess in their parents. In
saying, be baptized every one of you, Father and Child, I have not torn the
sentence, neither have I taken the words that come after, from the words going
before, repent and -- etc.

But now, Sir, having freed my self of that false and untrue imputation, I come
to turn that which you have said upon your own head. Seeing you are so apt to
accuse, I would entreat you seriously to consider that which our Savior spoke
sometime to the Pharisees, when they asked him why do thy Disciples transgress
the tradition of the Elders, for they wash not their hands when they eat bread;
His answer was, why do you transgress the Commandment of God through your
traditions? Mat. 15.2, 3, 4, 5. In like manner when you condemn me for tearing
asunder letters and syllables and such like trifles, I may truly reply; why do
you tear asunder the Promise from the Command, and the Command from the Promise
of God; and spoil the Scope, Union, and necessary dependence of Peter's words?
God has said to Believers in the last and best exhibition ot the Covenant, the
promise is to you and your children: And for their greater encouragement he
does exhort them, Parents and Children to be baptized in relation to the same
promise, Now you (to return your own language home again) do clip, cut, and
pluck the children of Believers as it were by the ears out of the word of
Command, when they are plainly and expressly mentioned in the word of Promise:
And so by consequence in matter of Baptism, you make Gods word of Promise and
Command of none effect through your traditions. You are further pleased to
liken me to a theevish Gleaner that draggeth out the corn by the ears, and
loses the band of the sheaf, ( page 4. lin. 17.) Sir, if I have done (as you
say) with the words of Peter, if I have torn the foregoing from the following
words, then let me bear the blame with all pious men. But I hope I have said
enough to purge my self of that crime; and if need shall so require, much more
may be said to the satifaction of any reasonable man. On the contrary, If every
man had his own right, the similitude does more fitly appertain to you, and to
such as you are. For if any man shall put the question to me; How do you prove
out of the words of Peter that believers children ought to he baptized? I will
answer, the children ought to be baptized, because these words for the promise
is to you and your children, do immediately follow the precept be baptized
every one of you, and are annexed as the ground of the precept. If he shall
say, how do you prove that? I will reply, I prove it from the union of the
Apostles words, and especially from the word (For) which as a band does unite
and couple the two parts of the Text together. He exhorts them first, be
baptized every one of you; and then uses this motive, for the promise is to
you and your children. Now on the other side, if your assertion be true, that
the words be baptized every one of you, cannot be spoken to Father and Child;
how will this answer to the motive, For the promise is to you and your
children? And what will become of the word (For), the band or the connexive
particle, that knits the parts of the sentence together? Sir, By this time you
may understand who the man is that may be likned to a theevish Gleaner, that
does dragge out St. Peter's words by the ears, and does spoil the union of the
sentence. I will conclude with your own words, (page 5. lin. 22) Sir, I desire
you to take heed that place do not fall upon your head, Rev. 22.18. for I
testify unto every man that hears the words of the Prophecy of this book, If
any man shall take away from the words of the book of this Prophecy, God shall
take away his part out of the book of Life, and out of the holy City, and from
the things which are written in this book. I come now briefly to your other
particulars.

Secondly, You say that these words, be baptized every one of you, were spoken
to the same You which the Apostle directed his speech unto, and you never read
of any Command given to Infants; but on the contrary, Deuteronomy. 11.2. ( page 6.
lin. 15.) I answer, these words were mediatly, and secondarily spoken to the
children, though they were primarily and immediately directed to the Parents
that did engage for them. In the institution of circumcision, the Lord says,
This is my Covenant which you shall keep betwixt me and you, and thy seed after
thee; every manchild among you shall be circumcised, and ye shall circumcise
the flesh of the foreskin, and it shall be a token of the Covenant betwixt me
and you. And the uncircumcised manchild, whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, he shall be cut off from his people, he has broken my Covenant.
Genesis 17.10, 11, 14. Here in these words the Command is principally and
explicitly given to the Parents; yet so as it is secondarily and inclusively
spoken to the children that do enter into Covenant, either in or with their
Parents. If this be not a truth, how can it be said, the uncircumcised
man-child shall be cut off from his people, he has broken my Covenant? If he
may be cut off from his people for breach of Covenant, he may be supposed to
Covenant, and the Lord may look upon him in the notion of a Covenanter. Whereas
you say, you never read of any Command given to Infants, but on the contrary,
Deuteronomy. 11.2. I pray you let us read the Text, And I know you this day; for I
speak not with your children which have not known, and which have not seen the
chastisement of the Lord your God, his greatness, his mighty hand, and his
stretched out arm, and his miracles, and his acts which he did in the midst of
Egypt, etc. Here I demand, shall we absolutely conclude, that God did not speak
at all to the children of these parents who only were eyewitnesses of his
miracles done in Egypt? Surely then we must conclude, that all the exhortation
in Moses his law, did concern the Parents only that were then alive, and not
the children in after generations. Does not this gloss cross the whole scope
of Scripture? Do we not read everywhere that the Parents were to teach their
children, and that the children were to remember the wonders and miracles which
the Lord had done in Egypt? For the Text, the scope of it is this, Moses does
more specially exhort them that were alive to love the Lord their God, to keep
his charge and his statutes, verse. 1. because their eyes had seen all the great
acts which he had done. verse. 7. Now, Sir, Whereas it is said that the Lord did
not speak to the children, you cannot conclude this absolutely, that he did not
speak to them at all, but only respectively, in that particular sense. Now,
what is this but a fallacy as Logicians term it, a dicto secundum quid ad
dictum simpliciter? But supposing that these words could not be spoken to the
children, you go on and enquire whether they were spoken to the Apostles: when
you say to me ( page 6. lin. 23.) But happily you conceive that in these words
a Commission was given to the Apostles to baptize Father and Child; but (be
baptized every one of you) cannot help you there neither: For if these had been
words spoken to the Apostles, then the Apostles had been commanded to repent
and be baptized. Such a dexterity you have to make difficulties where none be.
Therefore to the clearing of this matter from this mist which you would
purposely cast over it, you are to note, in the administration of Baptism
there is the administrator, and the person baptizing; and there is the subject
and person baptized. Now I say the Command does extend to both, it does extend
to the Administrator to minister Baptism from the Commission of Christ; and it
does appertain to Believers to receive Baptism, they and the children under
their education when they come to profess the Christ come in the flesh. In
case the Parents neglect the bringing of their children to Baptism, they do in
sense omit the public profession of the Faith, a considerable part of which is
to engage themselves and those that live under their education to the Lord
Christ. But now to the third point.

Thirdly, You say it is a great mistake to judge these Jews to whom Peter spoke
to be Believers; they are your own words. If there were no believing Parents,
there could be no Believers Infants. Sir, I do agree with you that the
Consequence is good; but that these men who were exhorted by the Apostle to be
baptized, they and their children, that they were not looked upon by him in the
notion of Believers before Baptism, this I deny. Indeed according to the
usual method of your party (whose chief design is to make the people) you
bring in two or three simple reasons of your own to prove them Believers, and
patch them upon my back as if I were the author of them.

But first, I do not say because the Promise did belong to them, that therefore
they were Believers, for then all the seed of Israel would be Believers of the
last dispensation.

Secondly, Neither do I say, because they were cut to the heart, and had the
spirit of bondage, that therefore they were Believers: for to speak truly, a
Believer does make special application of the general promise; but the spirit
of bondage does arise from the particular assent to the general threats. Yet
nevertheless in the particularity of the sin from whence the spirit of bondage
does arise, I should (for my part) be more wary then absolutely to conclude,
that these men as such were unbeleevers. To me it is a strange thing, that a
man should be (...) to the heart for crucifying the Christ, and yet not ^^leeve
him to be the Christ. There are some other strange passages of yours concerning
the spirit of bondage, and concerning the meaning of Revel. 21.8. which show
you to be very rude and unexpert in the true sense of the Scriptures: When the
spirit says, but the fearful, and the unbeleeving, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, etc. Would any man besides your self expound the
(Fearful) to be meant of all those that lie under the spirit of bondage, that
all such should have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone? By this reason you must needs condemn many tender souls, and put
them under a heavy condition. But, Sir, that you may not be deceived, the word
(Fearful) must be expounded according to the Analogy of the whole Prophecy,
which is concerning the sufferings of the Saints under the Antichristian state.
The word (Fearful) then is to be applied to them that deny Christ in the time
of persecution for fear of man. How crossely then do you apply it to them that
are under the spirit of bondage through fear of the justice of God? But in this
case you do no better with this Scripture, then many others do with the reign
of Christ upon the Earth. They take it, that the glory of his Kingdom does lie
in plucking down of Magistracy and Ministry, and laying all things level;
whereas if they did rightly understand the Scriptures, and the scope of the
Prophecy, they would find that the Lord Christ does begin to reign when a
godly Magistracy is set up in the Commonwealth, and a powerful Ministry
(assigned to preach the Gospel by virtue of office) is seated in the Church;
But this by the way. Now, Sir, that Peter's hearers were true Believers, of the
last dispensation, I am moved to believe it from this double ground.

First, From the tender of the Promise. The Promise was not only offered to
them as it was revealed to Abraham, and believed in all the times of the Jewish
Church, to wit, that the promised Messiah should come; but the promise tendered
to them, was remission of sin by the blood of the particular Jesus already
come, whom they had crucified and slain.

Secondly, I take them to be Believers from the receiving of the Promise: For
as remission of sin was tendered to them by the blood of the particular
Christ: So when they on their part did receive the promise so exhibited, they
were Believers. And in this sense, I say, the word of Command was that they and
the children under their education should be baptized.

Fourthly, ( page 9. lin.) 32. You come to the main point; to wit, that a right
to the Promise does not infer and bring in a right to Baptism. You argue
thus, If Peter had a Commission so large, to baptize all to whom the Promise
did belong, then he must have baptized the whole nation of the Jews, and
particularly the persons to whom he spoke before the word came unto them, or
before their Conscience was awakened by the word. Here, Sir, I do acknowledge
that you speak punctually to the assumption in my argument. Therefore for the
more clear illustration of the words of Peter, and for the more full discovery
of the force of the argument which I have alleged, I will stay the longer upon
this point.

And to begin with the ground of all, I do not say (though you are willing to
mistake my meaning) that a right to the Promise does absolutely infer a right
to Baptism: for then all believers from the beginning of the world would have
had a right to Baptism. But I say this, that the right which Believers and
their children have to the Promise (as exhibited, revealed, and declared in the
last times under the New Testament,) this does infer and bring in a right to
Baptism. And in this does the force of my argument consist.

That this may more evidently be declared, and that you may judge aright, I
would entreat you to distinguish between the Promise it self, and the several
revelations, exhibitions, manifestations, and editions of the same Promise. The
Ocean sea is one and the same, but yet as it beats upon the Spanish coast, it
is called the Spanish sea; as it beats upon the French coast, it is called the
French sea; and upon the English coast, the English sea: So the Promise is one
and the same to Believers and their children; yet according to several
dispensations it is various and manifold.

To begin therefore with the Promise it self. There is but one way of
salvation, by Christ the promised Seed, according to that saying of the
Apostle, Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13.8.
But for the degrees of revelation, there are three remarkable exhibitions and
editions of the Promise.

The first is, for the space of two thousand years, from Adam to Abraham. The
second is, for the space of two thousand years, from Abraham to Christ. The
third is, from Christ to the end of the world.
These several exhibitions of the Promise ought carefully to be distinguished:
for from hence do arise the differences of Faith, the differences of profession
of the Faith, the difference of Church states, the differences of the seals of
admission, the differences of right to the seals of admission. Yea the
differences are so great, that a true believer of the heart under one
dispensation cannot have a right, as such, to the Church state, or the seal of
admission under another dispensation. I say, he cannot not have a right to the
Church state, or the seal of admission, till he has received the Promise as
exhibited and revealed under that particular dispensation. Yet nevertheless,
let there be never such great diversity, this will still prove a firm and an
undoubted truth in all exhibitions and dispensations, that when a man believes
the Promise, and does come in, the right to Church Membership shall belong to
him and to his children. Let us now come to instance.

The first edition of the Promise is for two thousand years from Adam to
Abraham; and here though God did not show the sons of men the Messiah in
person as he does to us, nor of what particular family or nation he should
come, as he did to the people of the Jews; yet in the general he did make so
much of the truth thereof known to them, that the Seed of the woman should
break the Serpents head. Genesis 3.15. He did require them to believe the promise
so generally revealed, and to make public profession thereof: and to such as
did believe and publicly profess, the privilege did belong to them to be
called the people of God; and in those times the promise was to believers and
their natural seed. For proof of this, let us consider that Scripture; The
sons of God saw the daughters of men were fair. Genesis 6.2. By sons of God you
are not to understand them in that sense as they are meant Romans 8.14. There it
is said, If ye be led by the spirit of God, then ye are the sons of God. The
sons of God in the Text of Genesis cannot be taken in this sense that they had
the Spirit of God, and were led by his Spirit; but they are called the sons of
God, because they were the natural posterity of believing Parents, because
they were the children of Seth, and other holy men, who in those times are
mentioned to call upon the name of the Lord, Genesis 4.26. This shows plainly in
the time of the first exhibition of the promise, that Believers children, as
such, had a right to Church Membership with their Parents; and I may say also
to the seal of admission, if any such had been in those first times.

The second edition of the Promise is for two thousand years from Abraham to
Christ. And here though the Lord did not go so far with them as to show the
promised Seed in person, as he has done to us: yet he went further with them
then with the Beleeevers of the first dispensation. He did not only show them
the blessed Seed to come, but the particular family and nation from whence he
should come. And therefore they that did believe under this dispensation, were
not only bound to believe the general promise made to Adam concerning the lost
sons of men; but they were to believe the promise made to Abraham; they were
more particularly bound to join themselves to that family, and to make public
profession of the Promise, as revealed in the time of that exhibition. They
that did this, the promise did belong to them and to their children, and so
consequently the children had a right to be admitted into the Church that then
was, by the initiall seal, or by circumcision the seal of admittance.

Now the third edition of the Promise is from Christ unto the end of the world.
And here the Lord does not only show the general promise made to the lost sons
of men, nor the promised Seed to come of the particular family of Abraham; but
he goes further to show the Messiah individually, and in person, who he is.
Jesus Christ, conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered
under Pontius Pilate, etc. he is the promised Seed. They therefore that believe
under this dispensation, they are not only bound to receive the Promise as
generally made in the two former dispensations; but they are further required
(as may appear by the Apostles Sermons) to believe the Christ come in the
flesh, and that he is the promised Seed. Now they that do receive the Promise
as exhibited in this manner, have a right to Baptism, the seal of admission
into the Church in the times of the New Testament. And not only so, but as to
believers in the two former dispensations, so in this last and best exhibition
of the Covenant, the Promise does hold one and the same in substance to
Believers and their Children. This is the true sense of Peter's words, and this
is the force of my argument.

Having thus laid down the several exhibitions of the Promise, and how in each
exhibition the Promise variously dispensed, is the ground of Faith, Faith the
ground of Profession, Profession the ground from whence Believers in any
dispensation have a right to Church membership, and so consequently to the seal
of admission in each dispensation respectively; Having laid down these grounds,
I come now to answer your objections.

You say (page 9. lin. 32.) If the Commission be so large to baptize all to
Whom the Promise does appertain, why does the Apostle lay such a precise ta^k
upon them to repent before they could be baptized? Seeing the Promise did
belong to the Nation of the Jews, Romans 9. Why did not the Apostle baptize the
whole Nation? Why did he not baptize these particular Jews that had crucified
Christ before they were awakened by the word? Why did not he his endeavor to
baptize them against their wills, and to take them napping while they were
asleep, as you do with your Infants in England? Sir, this is the substance of
your cavils. To all which I answer, those privileges mentioned Romans 9. to wit,
The Covenants, the giving of the Law, the service of God and the promises, all
these privileges dib belong to the Jews, not as they were a Nation, but as
they were a Covenanting Nation.

For you may find by the scope of the Scripture, that these things did not only
belong to the natural Jews, but also to the Proselytes and their children, as
well as to them Exodus 12.48.

Secondly, When you have all done, the natural Jews were but believers, and so
capable of the seal of admission in their own particular dispensation. Nay, for
the most part, these Jews that looked for the promised Messiah, that had the
promise and the seal of the promise in their own dispensation, formerly they
were, and as yet are, the crucifiers of the particular Messiah, and the
greatest enemies of the promise, as exhibited and revealed in the last times.
For this very cause Peter did bring the word so sharply home to the conscience
to awaken them, seeing they could not possibly receive the promise in the last
exhibition, who had been before the crucifiers of the particular Christ.
Whereas you say. That the Apostle might have baptized them against their wills,
and have taken them napping as we do with our Infants in England;

Sir, Your comparison will not hold, for the Infants of this Church, though
they have no actual understanding, yet they are the children of such as do
believe, at least such as profess they do believe the particular Christ. They
do not only believe the promised Messiah, that he should come of the stock of
Abraham, as did the Believers of the Jewish Church; but they believe, at least
they profess they believe the particular Christ, which the Jewish Nation had
crucified and slain. Further they profess that they will bring up their
Infants, at least they are willing that their Infants should be taught by the
public Ministry under which they live by and through it to be brought up in
the Christian Faith, and so to look after the Christ. For this reason Sir, your
comparison will not hold betwixt the Infants of this Nation, and the Jews that
were the crucifiers of the Christ.

Further, you go on and reason ( page 10. lin. 17.) If the promise did belong
to the Jews and their children, why did not the Prophets baptize? this is to
call the Prophets accursed for the neglect of the duty that appertained to
them. To which I answer, I should have called the Prophets accursed if they had
neglected to call upon the people to believe the promise, and to apply the seal
of the promise to themselves and to their children, so far as it did appertain
to their own dispensation. But I think that no sober man will say, it was the
duty of the Prophets to call upon the people to believe the promise, and to
receive the seal of the promise, in such and such a particular dispensation,
before the promise as such came to be revealed to them. But to come a little
more closely to you, though the Prophets were righteous men, and saved by
Christ to come, Heb. 11.39, 40. Yet God never required them to go any further
but to believe the Promise only; and to receive the seal as exhibited and
revealed in their own dispensation. The words of the Apostle are clear and
pregnant to this purpose, Of which salvation (says he) the Prophets have
enquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come
unto you. Unto whom it was revealed, not unto themselves, but unto us they did
minister this grace. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11.

Nay further, to come to the times of the manifestation of Christ in the flesh;
I say then, the true believers of the two former dispensations, who might have
been saved by their faith in their own dispensation; I say, these very
believers themselves could not be baptized till they had received the promise
as set forth in the last times. To come to particular examples; we read when
the Eunuch demanded of Philip, Here is water, what does hinder me to be
baptized? Philip said, if thou beleevest withal thine heart thou may. Act.
8.36, 37. From these words some gather that not a Disciple of the doctrine, but
a Disciple in a more strict sense, a true believer of the heart, is the only
subject of Baptism. Now for the clearing of this point, I ask, did not the
Eunuch believe before the preaching of Philip? If he were not a Proselyte, how
could a man of his employment be said to come from so remote a country to
worship at Jerusalem? Therefore it must needs be presumed, that he was a true
Believer of the second dispensation. But you will say, what does Philip mean
when he uses these words. If thou beleevest thou may? The scope of Philip
was not only to show the promised Messiah, but particularly and individually to
declare the Christ in the last exhibition of the promise: Then Philip opened
his mouth, and began at that Scripture, and preached to him Jesus. verse. 36.
Hereupon the Eunuch believing, not only a Messiah to come, but also that Jesus
was that particular Messiah, and professing to believe this with all his heart,
he was baptized immediately: And if he had twenty children there present, they
had been capable of the seal of Baptism, Father and Child together. To make
this more clear, we will go to the example of Lydia; Of her it is said, that
the Lord opened her heart, Act. 10.14. I ask then, was that the first time of
opening the hear of Lydia? No, she was a worshipper of God before: The words of
the text are plain, Lydia a seller of purple, of the City of Thyatira which
worshipped God, heard us. She could not worship God, but she must some way or
other believe his Promise, either in the first or the second exhibition
thereof. You will say then, what is the meaning of the words, The Lord opened
her heart? The meaning is this, the Lord opened her heart to receive the
promise in the third exhibition, to believe the particular Christ that Paul
preached: And when she had done this, she was baptized immediately. Now that it
may appear to you that the promise does appertain to Believers and their
children in the last, as in the two former dispensations, she and all her
household were baptized together.

Further, what should be the reason, that St. Paul should say to the Jailer
believe in the Lord, and thou shall be saved and thine house, Acts 16.31? Why
does he speak of the salvation of the house upon the terms of the Gaolers
believing; but that the promise does hold to believers and their children in
the last exhibition thereof? But if it be replied, That the Apostle spoke the
word of the Lord to all that were in the Gaolers house; verse. 32. He did so;
but how does this prove that they had true faith wrought in their hearts? They
were all Pagans and Infidels overnight, and the bare preaching of the word
does not make men believers, as we see by experience. Therefore we must
conclude, that the Jailer himself only had an inward work, and by a special
evidence did receive the Christ come in the flesh: hereupon he and all his,
servants and children, as we may expound it, were baptized immediately. verse.
33.

And thus far, Mr. Everard, I have gone in answering your several exceptions.
Now, before I see how you conclude, it shall not be amiss for me to add two
or three parallel Scriptures, for the confirmation of the exposition which I
have given.

If you stand upon the expression (every one of you,) that the children cannot
be intended in the Apostles words, be baptized every one of you, if your doubt
does lie here, you may read such places of Scripture where the command is given
to the Parent as to the head of the household, both for himself and for his
children. Take for example those words in the institution of the passover,
speak unto all the Congregation of Israel, that they take every man a Lamb,
according to the house of their fathers, a Lamb for an house. And if the
household be too little for the Lamb, let him and his neighbor, next to his
house, take it according to the number of souls; every man according to his
eating shall make his account for the Lamb. Exodus 12.3, 4. Here in these words
the Command is that (every man) take a Lamb, that (every man) according to his
eating make his account for the Lamb. By (every man) if you argue strictly, is
only meant every head of an household; for the nation of Israel was divided into
Tribes, the Tribes into Families, and the Families into Households; and every
Head is here commanded to take a Lamb. Now seeing the word of command is only
to all heads of households, will you say that the children and the household are
not included? If you will affirm this, it is plain from the scope of the Text,
though the Command was laid upon the Parent or Head to provide, yet the
household were to eat the provisions of the Passover. So in the like case I
say, though the words (be baptized every one of you) be spoken to the Parents
primarily and chiefly, yet the Children are contained in the Command, and the
word of Command is given in a federal and Covenant sense for themselves and for
their Children. If you peruse the story of the Acts of the Apostles, you shall
find that the truth of this was made good: Such a one did believe and profess,
and was baptized, he and his household.

Secondly, If your doubt lie in this, that the Children are not named in so
many letters and syllables in the word of Command; To my understanding, this
should satisfy, that they are afterward plainly expressed in the word of
promise. It is a usual thing in Scripture to supply the meaning of the words
that go before, by the sense and construction of the words that follow after.
Many instances might be brought to prove such a supply; but I will choose one
rather which is proper to the case of Baptism. And so you will come to have
not only a precept, but also a convenient number of examples in the New
Testament for the Baptism of Infants. The place is this, Crispus the chief
ruler of the Synagogue believed on the Lord withal his house. And many of the
Corinthians hearing believed, and were baptized. Acts 18.8. Now out of these
words Mr. Everard, I do desire to put a double question to your consideration.
The first is this,

Whether in the sense of this Scripture, was not Crispus and his house
baptized, as well as the rest of the Corinthians that did believe?

Here if you go to the strictness of the Letter, the other Corinthians that
did believe were only baptized; As for Crispus and his household they are said
to believe. Crispus the chief ruler of the Synagogue believed on the Lord with
all his house. Here only is mention made of their believing, but not the least
word of their Baptism. What then shall we say, that they were not baptized at
all? He that will affirm this, let him show a reason why the other Corinthians
believing should be baptized, and Crispus a prime Believer, with his household,
should be exempt from Baptism? Secondly, to put all out of doubt, whosoever
they were of the believing Corinthians that were baptized, whosoever the
persons were that did baptize them, it is clear from another place, that
Crispus the chief ruler of the Synagogue was baptized with Paul's own hand. I
thank God I baptized none of you (says Paul speaking to the Corinthians) but
Crispus and Gaius. 1 Cor. 1.14. If this be so, it is manifest that the Text in
the Acts must be read with a supply; the latter part must expound the meaning
of the former. The words must needs go after this tenor. Crispus, the chief
ruler of the Synagogue, believed on the Lord with all his house and was
baptized: and many of the Corinthians believing were baptized. Here that which
is wanting in the former part of the verse must be supplied with the sense of
that part which comes after; or else how shall we reconcile the Scriptures?
Now in the like case, let us have liberty when we read (be baptized every one
of you) to supply the former with the sense of the words that follow after: and
we shall have a plain precept from the Baptism of Believers and their
Children. The words must run thus, Be baptized every one of you and your
children; for the Promise is to you and your children. But now, Mr. Everard,
supposing that Crispus and his household were baptized (as you can suppose no
other if you will prove constant to your own principles of Believers Baptism)
I say then in the second place,

Whether among the Corinthians that did believe through grace, was the household
of Crispus the only household that was baptized?

If we go to the precise Letter of the Text, there is only mention made of the
household of Crispus, and not any word of the household of any other Believer in
the City of Corinth What then shall we say? That no other Believers household
was baptized in that City? This cannot be; for though Crispus was a prime
Believer, yet we may well imagine that other houses of Believers had the same
privilege. To put the matter out of question, whosoever they were that did
administer Baptism to the rest of the Corinthians, it is evident that the
household of Stephanas was baptized with Paul's own hand: For he speaking to the
Corinthians, thus says, I baptized the household of Stephanas, and I know not
whether I baptized any other. 1 Cor. 1.16. Therefore to reconcile one Scripture
with another, we must needs read the forementioned place in the Acts after this
manner: Crispus the chief ruler of the Synagogue believed on the Lord, and was
baptized, he and his household; and many of the Corinthians hearing believed,
and were baptized, they and their households. If this interpretation be true (as
I know not how else to make the Scriptures to agree) then we have not only one,
or two, or three, but many examples in the New Testament for baptizing
Believers with their households.

Further, I may collect also, in those times it was a usual manner among the
Corinthians when the Parent did believe and profess, it was ordinary for him
and his household to be baptized together. And therefore when particular mention
is made of the household of Crispus, we are not to take it in that sense as
though they were the only believing Family in the City of Corinth; but the
meaning is this; As Crispus, a leading and a prime Believer, the Ruler of the
Synagogue, was baptized, he and his household: So the rest of the Corinthians,
(after the pattern of Crispus) believing were baptized, they and their
households. From whence we gather; That a believing household, in the third and
last dispensation, is to be taken in that sense and notion as ever before in
the two former Administrations of the Promise. In the two former
Administrations for two thousand years from Adam to Abraham, and for two
thousand years from Abraham to Christ, a believing household was that where the
Parent did profess himself, and did engage his Family to the profession of
the Faith. And in this sense must we needs take a believing household in the
third dispensation, when Crispus the Ruler of the Synagogue did believe with
all his household, and when many of the Corinthians did believe with all their
households. We are not to take it as though every one did in person believe and
profess; but that they did every one live under the education and instruction
of the Christian Faith. But if any shall urge, that the words of the Text are
for actual profession, and for actual faith before Baptism, because it is
said, Many of the Corinthians hearing, believed and were baptized; If any shall
urge, that the Corinthians only that did hear and believe, were baptized: he
that shall so argue, I would entreat him to show me in what place, or in what
rank he will set the children of these Corinthians that did believe through
grace.

If he will say that the Children in their Families were outcasts of the
Covenant, then let him show the meaning of this Scripture, The unbeleeving
husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbeleeving wife is sanctified by
the husband; else were your children unclean, but now are they holy. 1 Cor.
7.14. There must needs be a sense assigned how the children of the Corinthians
and other Grecians, being profane by nature, may be said to be holy by the
Parents believing. Though much has been written and said to find out this or
that interpretation; yet for my part I cannot possibly find out a sense how the
Children of the Corinthians, as born of one or two believing Parents, may be
said to be holy, if this be not meant of Covenant holiness. In the two former
dispensations, for four thousand years together, the children of believers were
accounted the sons of God, Genesis 6.2, 3. The holy Seed, Ezra. 9.2. The holy
People, Dan. 8.24. The Children of the Kingdom, Matthew. 8.11. The Children of
the Covenant, Act. 3.25. And such like expressions. Therefore when the Apostle
speaks of the Children of the believing Corinthians, that because one or both
Parents did believe and profess, therefore the Children were holy, I cannot
understand this any other way, but of the Birth-priviledge of Believers
Children now in the last, as well as in the two former editions of the Promise.
Therefore when it is said in the Text, that many of the Corinthians believing
were baptized, I cannot see how the words can bear any other sense but this;
Many of the Corinthians believing were baptized, they and their households; as
Crispus the chief ruler of the Synagogue believed, and was baptized, he and his
household. The Analogue does stand between Crispus and other Believers, between
the household of Crispus and the households of other Believers: and this I take
to be the true meaning of the Text. I have stayed the longer upon this point,
to show that we have not only a Precept, but a competent number of examples out
of the New Testament, for the Baptism of Believers and their Children. But now
Sir, lest you should take occasion to cavil at examples, as well as at the
Precept; I will insist upon the former part of the verse, and urge you only
with this question, Whether do you think that Crispus believing on the Lord
with all his house, was baptized with the rest of the Corinthians, yea or no?
If you deny it, how will you prove constant to your own principles of Believers
Baptism? Why should not Crispus, a prime Believer be baptized as well as the
rest of the Corinthians that did believe through grace? But if you affirm it
(as affirm it you must) then it is necessary (seeing his Baptism is not
expressed in so many Letters) that you supply the former part of the Verse with
the sense of the words that follow after. Now let me do the like with Peter's
words, and you shall find an excellent harmony; Then Peter said, repent and be
baptized every one of you (and your children), in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sin; for the Promise belongs to you and your
children. So I believe the words of Peter, and desight to hear their sweet
agreement; I do delight to read the Children in the word of Command, seeing
they are so plainly expressed in the word of Promise. Now, Sir, let us see how
you conclude.

You bid me, as I tender the life of my argument, to have him to some other
place for relief; You tell me ( page 12. lin. 1.) that you have received an
order from Quartermaster General, that the tent of my argument be removed
from the Text, that it may no longer cumber the holy ground, it being appointed
for a piece of service more honorable. Surely, Sir, when you wrote these
things, I cannot otherwise think but that you had some high opinion of your own
performance, Whereas you advise me to have my argument to some other place;
belike you would have me to understand that you had (according to the title of
your book) conquered all before you. But I will assure you Sir, (to deal
plainly with you, and that you may not flatter your self) you are so far from
taking my chief Fort (as you pretend) that you have not at all, or at least in
small degree given an assault thereunto. And then let any Logician in the world
judge what reason you had to glory in your conquest. You stand much upon my
rending and tearing asunder the words, be baptized every one of you, from the
words Repent and -- --. Now this is not so, for in a Covenant sense the
Children do repent or make profession of repentance in the Parents that do
undertake for them. But if this could be proved, what is it to the force of my
Argument which you undertake to answer? The medium, the middle term, or the
reason from the words of the text, is not from the words, be baptized every one
of you, as you would make the reader believe; but from these words, for the
Promise is to you and your Children. Because the Children are plainly expressed
in the word of promise; this is to me a true ground wherefore they are
contained in the word of Command. Now let any man judge that reads
Baby-Baptisme routed, or the taking of the chief Fort, as it is in the title of
your Pamphlet, what you have done in the body of your answer against the
principal medium; against the right that the Children have to Baptism by the
word of Promise. Seeing you did grant the Proposition, it was needful to spend
your force upon the assumption. Again, Mr. Everard, you insist upon this, that
the Jews, the whole Nation of them, because they had a right to the word of
Promise, why had they not a right to Baptism by the word of Command? Here you
make a fair flourish upon the generality of the promise without any
distinction at all. But whosoever he is that will distinguish the several
dispensations of one and the same promise, and the right that Believers and
their Children have to the Seal in each dispensation, he shall find that you
have said just nothing. And you that talked so much of taking the chief Fort,
have stolen away secretly from it, as the enemy did from the seige of
Bergen-ap-Zome, in the smoke of Gunpowder.

Further, suppose there had been some weakness in my Argument, yet there is no
such cause (as you advise) to remove its Tent from the coasts of the Text; for
I will assure you as long as I read these words, For the Promise is to you and
your Children, as long as I read these words in the last exhibition of the
Promise, and a promise answering the word of Command; as long as I read a
convertibility between the word of Command, and the word of Promise, in
Baptism as well as in other Sacraments, I shall be loath to obey the order
which you say you have received from Quartermaster Generll to discharge me of
the Text. But seeing you will needs be so pitiful to a poor Argumeet (in your
apprehension) beaten upon the Ice, I would entreat you that you would not deal
so unkindly with him, as to remove him from the Text. For if I be not greatly
mistaken, this Scripture is not so barren to afford one only Argument, but it
is a wel-spring and Fountain of Arguments for the Baptism of Believers and
their Children. When you come to trial, you will sind always when you take
away one, another will spring up.

But Sir, let the worst fall out that can be, if you should imagine that there
were no footing for my Argument in the Text, and the Text (as you say) ( page
12. lin. 10.) would claim no acquaintance or kindred with it; yet the Argument
may be true in the general, and may be made good from other Texts of Scripture.
For if the Promise to Believers and their Children does hold in the times of
the last exhibition, as well as in the two former, then necessarily the word of
Promise will draw in the word of Command, and the right to the Promise in its
last and best exhibition will enforce a right to the Seal. And so we shall have
a Precept for the Baptism of Believers and their Children proved from the
scope of Scripture, and do you your worst.

Now Sir, in the last place, let me come to the structure and frame of my
Argument. You say ( page 12. lin. 28.) that the premises do not hold due
proportion with the conclusion; you say, either the premises are superfluous,
or the conclusion is wanting. I do willingly yield in every lawful Syllogism,
that the premises must have due correspondence with the conclusion. But how?
The correspondence must not always be in letters and syllables, but in sense
and meaning. But why is there such a disproportion betwixt the premises and the
conclusion? You say, that the Premises speak that the children of Believers
must have a right; the Conclusion is, they have a right. You say that must have
a right, and have a right, are not all one: after a while is not yet. There be
many that are heirs in England, can say they must have, with caution, but they
had rather say they have in possession. ( page 13. lin. 3.) Sir, these are but
cavils at words, as any man may plainly see: For have a right, and must have a
right are all one in the sense of the Argument. Now that I did put in the word
(must) it was to show the union and necessary connection between the two parts
of the conditional proposition. For your instance of an heir in England, we
are not now upon the division of Lands, but upon the union of the parts of a
proposition. But to show that this is a true hypothetical Syllogism, I will
according to the rule of the Logicians, reduce it to a Categorical form, and
put it in the first figure, as follows.

They that have a right to be baptized by the word of Promise, have a right to
be baptized by the word of Command.

But the children of Believers have a right to be baptized by the word of
Promise.

Therefore the children of Believers have a right to be baptized by the word of
Command.

And so consequently there is a word of Command to baptize Believers Children
in the New Testament. Now by the rule of reduction I leave it to your self, and
to any other man to judge, what cause you had to except against the stucture of
my Syllogism.

You go on, and cavil against the Major proposition, and reason thus ( page
13.) If the Children of Believers have a right to be baptized by the word of
Promise, there is no need of a right to be baptized by the word of Command.
Sir, I confess that God is not bound always to add a Seal to the
confirmation of his Promise, we may believe his word without addition of Seals.
But I speak in a Sacramental relation; where he has once appointed a Sacrament
for the use of his Church, they that have a right to the Promise, have a right
to the Seal.

As for example, The body of the faithful have a right to remission of sin by
the blood of Christ, as well as their guides and teachers: And therefore under
that title, they have (let the Papists say what they will) a right also to the
cup of the New Testament in Christ's blood, 1 Cor. 11.25. So in the like case,
seeing the Promise is to Believers and their Children in the last and best
exhibition therefore, do what you can, if the Children of Believers have a
right to the Promise so exhibited, they must have a right to the Seal.

Further, You call the right that Believers children have to baptism by the
word of Promise, a cloudy, saying, ( page 13.) The saying is a clear Scripture
truth, but it may be a cloudy saying to such as will not see what they may see.
It is a cloudy saying at this day to the Jew, that Jesus Christ is the promised
Messiah spoken of in the Prophets; and it is a cloudy saying to the Papist,
that a man is justified by Faith alone: and so it is a cloudy saying to you,
that the Children of Believers have a right to Baptism by the word of Promise,
as revealedin the last times. But you are to consider that the darkness is not
in the sayings, but the clouds are in your own blind minds, that cannot or
will not see the truth.

You go on, and further except against the right that the children of Believers
have to Baptism by the word of Promise: And because you will put some
absurdity upon the saying, you argue thus (page 13.) If there be such a
necessity to baptize the children of Beleeveers, it is either for God to
baptize them, or for his servants to baptize them. To speak briefly and
plainly, there is a necessity of Precept that lies upon all Christian Parents,
that do believe the Christ come in the flesh to profess the Faith, and to
baptize their Children; For herein lies a considerable part of the Christian
profession, not only for the Father to engage himself by Baptism to Christ
come in the flesh, but he is bound also to bring in his children, and those
that live under his education into the same engagement. Therefore, Sir, I do
much question, if either you or any man else shall refuse to oblige your
infants to the Lord Christ, whether you do hold forth the whole confession of
the faith of Christ come in the flesh. I will make no particular application,
but sure I am, St. John says in the general, Every spirit that confesses not
Christ come in the flesh is not of God, and this is the spirit of Antichrist. 1 John 3.3. But now to shut up all, as I began, so I conclude, that there is a
Precept in the New Testament for the Baptism of Infants. My Argument (as it
was formerly) is still the same with some amplification, I argue from Peter's
words after this manner.

They that have a right to Baptism by the word of Promise, as exhibited in the
last times, they have a right to be baptized by the word of Command.

But the children of Believers have a right to Baptism by the word of Promise,
as exhibited in the last times.

Therefore the children of Believers have a right to be baptized by the word of
Command. And fo consequently in the New Testament there is a Precept to baptize
Believers and their Children.

I hope now, Mr. Everard, your chariot wheels will not stick, but you and the
many thousands in this land which you speak of, will now drive on to Infant.
Baptism. You have seen. or at least you may see by all that which I have
spoken, that the Promise does hold to believers and their Children in the last
dispensation.

This is the scope of Peter's words. Now then, if the Promise does hold to the
Children in the last dispensation, this will draw in the word of Command to
baptize Father and Child: And, for want of better friends, you your self have
told us, for the convertibility of Gods word of Promise, and his word of
Command, you will not only grant it, but also maintain it. And this is my
answer to all yours that came to me in Manuscript.

Now a word or two concerning your Postscript that came to me only in Print,
and here you thus admonish me; Is you have any thoughts left that incline you
to sprinkle Infants, declare it as soon as you will, and I shall be ready to
take a veiw of it, and give it entertainment answerable.

Sir, The question between you and me is not concerning sprinkling or dipping,
this is but an (...) as Logicians call it, or a leading away from the point. My
purpose is to follow our business in hand to prove a Precept for the Baptism
of Infants. When this is done, there will be no great matter of difficulty
concerning the manner of the thing. I do yield that dipping is Baptisine, but
whether are they only baptized that are dipped?

Further, you advise me, that I pollute not the Scripture with Infant Baptism,
but confess with the rest of my Brethren of the Clergy that disputed in
Hardwick Steple-house, that there is no command or example from Scripture for
it. For the rest of my Brethren, though I know not some of the men, and for
others that I do know, though I am not well acquainted with the passages
between you and them; yet if I might probably conjecture, you have not dealt
with them by your dealing with me. Their words perhaps being taken in a right
sense, and it may be in their own meaning; they do not stand contradictory to
mine. I do agree with them, that there is a Precept impsicite, and examples
implicit for the Baptism of Intants. I do agree with those, that say Children
may profess in their Parents: and with others also that hold the Baptism of
Infants by tradition; for Lam verily persuaded with Augustine, that there has
been a continued series of the Baptism of Infants from the utmost antiquity,
from the Aposties age to this very day. I do agree with Mr. Angel of Leicester,
that the first Baptism is of great moment; and that a man cannot well make a
compact with the Devil, but he must renounce the Christ to which he has
obliged himself in Infant Baptism,

Thus Sir, I have gone through your whole answer, I have, to the best of my
understanding, left out nothing of moment. I would therefore entreat you in
your next to do with me as I have done with you, that is, to go thorough the
whole body of the Treatise; not to catch at letters and syllables, but to
answer point by point in that which concerns the maine. Before I go off, I
cannot but put you in mind of your scoffing way of writing, in so grave and
serious a matter. What miseries are now in the Land? What troubles are now in
the Consciences of the godly? And what fears are every where by reason of the
breaches of the Church, and yet you must have your mocks and jests at me? If it
were proper in those times of the troubles of the State to set up a Mercurius
Britannicus against a Mercurius Aulicus; I know no reason why in these times of
the division of the Church, it would not be every way as proper to set up a
Mercurius Baptists against a Mercurius Catabaptists. But in this, Sir, you are
like to take your rest for me. Until some Mercurius Baptists does arise, you
may enjoy your vein. It is enough that I have declared my conscience, that
there is a Precept for the Baptism of Infants in the New Testament. And it is
my comfort also that I have delivered it in a manner some way convenient to the
dignity of such a cause. For the rest I leave you to Master Swayne.

The Answer of William Swayne Preacher of the word at Withibrook, near
Coventry, to the late Postscript annexed to Mr. Everards book, entitled
Baby-Baptisme routed; With a discovery of his practice and principles, with
others of his judgment.
HAving met with a printed paper entitled Baby-Baptisme routed, at the close
of which is annexed a Postscript, in which the Author Mr. Everard does advise
Mr. Stephens, not to pollute the Scripture with Infant Baptism, but rather,
with his Brethren, who disputed in Hardwick Steeple-house, confess there is no
example or precept for it in Scripture. For Mr. Stephens his polluting of the
Scriptures with Infant Baptism, that lies to be proved. But sure I am, Mr.
Everard and his party did pollute the Sabbath (and in polluting the Sabbath,
did pollute the Scriptures) in putting his book against Mr. Stephens to sale in
the Congregation at Withibrook on the Lords day: contrary to a late Act of
Parliament. By, and through which they did dishonor God, affront the present
Government, forfeit their goods, and grieve the poor Heathens (for so they call
us) to see them so to profane the Lords day. For the Brethren of the Clergy in
Hardwick Steeple-house (as he pleases to call them) that they should say that
there was neither Precept or Example for the Baptism of Infants in the New
Testament: In this he does them manifest in jurie. For I (as being one that
there was present) do affirm the Contrary. And to use Mr. Everards own words
to Mr. Stephens, he like a theevish Gleaner draggeth out the Ministers words by
the ears from their fellows. For this was the expression, we confess that we
have no express command or example, but we have both implicitly, and sound
argument for it. These words were spoken by Mr. Potter, Minister of Radford,
one of the Ministers that did confer with Mr. Everard. The truth of this the
Notaries, the whole Congregations, and I think his own conscience can witness.
He goes on, in these words; Or as Mr. John Moore, Minister of West-leak and
East-leak, being demanded by what authority he did it? Answered, by Tradition;
resusing to give any Scripture for it. And Mr. Angel of Leicester denying
Tradition, says that Witches after their conviction, say the Devil persuaded
them to deny their first Baptism: Ergo, it was good, otherwise he would not
persuade them from it. Mr. Wilson, Minister of Seagrave differs from them all,
affirming that Repentance is required before Baptism, and being demanded how
Infants could be capable of Baptism; he affirmed, they ought to repent before
they were borne. The like arguments have Mr. Swan and Mr. Bosse. So far Mr.
Everard. Here now if by Mr. Swan he intends me, I am sure, neither he, nor his
party ever heard any such arguments from me for the baptizing of Infants: and
I am sure (if he were put to it) he cannot prove what he affirms. Therefore
(Reader) take notice that Mr. Everard will not stick to Print falsehoods for his
advantage and glory, and the plucking down and dishonouring the party which he
does oppose. That I do him no wrong, observe these passages following. He came
to Withibrook Congregation, with others of his party of Esen-hall, the sixth
of October (the day when they sold their books aforesaid) thither they came to
require satisfaction; for he then said I had aspersed him. At which time I
offered him satisfaction, if he came to deal with me as a Brother. I urged his
breach of our Saviors rule, If thy Brother sin against thee, etc. Mat.
18.15. He said he knew the Text, and further he and others answered, I was no
Brother but an Heathen. They also said, All out of the Order they walked in,
were Heathens.

Against which I thus argue, If all out of their order be Heathens, then
strangers to the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, without God in the world.
So is an Heathen defined, Ephesians. 2.12. And if without God, and without hope, then
without salvation, and then indeed no true Church. But does Mr. Everard and his
friends think that all out of their order are Heathens? or did they not go
against their light when they thus said? If their conscience speak the same
language, that all are Pagans, they must judge them so, either because they are
strangers from the Covenant of Promise, or because they are not baptized after
their manner. If Heathens, because strangers from the Covenant of Promise; then
no hope of salvation, then a necessity of condemnation to all out of their
order. But if Heathens, because not baptized after their manner, then their
Baptism only will make Christians of Heathens: and none can be saved without
their Baptism.

Secondly, If they say, all are Gentiles out of their order, because the
outward court is trodden down by all those out of their order. This will help
nothing, because it will follow upon their own principies, that there was no
outward Court nor Church ministerial, nor Ordinances to be trodden down all
along the times of Antichrists reign. For if all out of their order were and
are Heathens, then there were none but Heathens to be trodden down, and so
Heathens must tread down Heathens; except they will yield a Church visible, and
an outward Court. And in so doing they lose their Cause.

Again, If Heathens, because not baptized after their manner, and consequently
no Church; thea Mr. Everard and those of his judgment, were no Church before
they received this new Baptism; but they were Pagans as well as others. If they
were no true Church, their first Administrator was no true Administrator,
because there was no Church to confer an office upon him. Therefore they must
say, he had his first Commission immediately from heaven, unless they will
affirm that Heathens have a power to make an Administrator of Baptism. Now
this is contrary to the Scripture, which says, they ordained Elders in every
Church, Acts 14.23. Therefore in the ordinary way the Church is before Elders
or Administrators. But if they shall say there was an Admimstrator before a
Church. as John Baptist: and therefore by the like reason they may have such a
one. If they say this, they must prove from the Prophets that the
Gospel-Churches must have two Baptists, be twice planted: which supposes to
Gospel Church in the world before the coming of the second Baptist to plant a
new Church.

Further, also they must say, that there is a second Christ before whom the
second Baptist must come as a forerunner; And so new institutions, and
foundations of Ordinances, Baptists, Apostles, Miracles; and whither will not
this conceit run?

But if they say, that the Commission Matthew. 28.19. was their first
Administrators rule, then he must be a Disciple made by ordinary preaching and
teaching, before he had authority to Minister their new Baptism, whosoever he
was. And was he taught by some Heathen (think they) or by a Disciple? By an
Heathen they cannot say. And if by a preaching Disciple, then Christ had a
Disciple before their new Baptism. Therefore they that want their new
Baptism, cannot be stated Heathens. And how foul then was their assertion at
Withibrook, to call all Heathens out of their order? And yet have neither
command nor example in Scripture for their Baptism, in reference to their
first Ministers Commission or authority.

And does not this their practice come here to be condemned, which continues
judging our Churches, and all out of their order, to be Heathens, for want of
their Baptism? Therefore let all tenderhearted Christians take heed how they
are entangled in such a society and practice, as will be a continual
condemning and judging of all out of their order, though never so godly. But if
Mr. Everard and his friends are still of the same mind, let them with
tenderness consider two things: First, upon what a poor foundation their
Baptism stands, which must necessarily be upon an Heathenish foundation, or
upon extraordinary revelation. The second thing I would entreat them to
consider, is, how they, both in judgment and practice, continue condemning the
generation of the just to hell, at least all living and dead, that are not of
their society. What not one Saint by calling in all England, neither in
Magistracy, Ministry, nor People, that is not of themselves? all strangers to
God and his Christ? Then surely there is no hope that any thing will be done
for the Kingdom of Christ by such a Magistracy or Ministry.

Therefore let me entreat them not to be offended if I put a question to them;
What would they do with such an Heathen Magistracy, Ministry, or (as one
calls them in his late book) officiating Priests, in case the power were
wholly in their hands? For the Ministry it is clear to all the world. And for
the Magistracy, I leave it to his judgment. For my part, I fear it.

I do not intend in these lines the Moderate of those that dissent from me in
point of Baptism, but Mr. Everard and those of his judgment, and the rest that
are so bitter against the godly of the Ministry. From them I shall expect an
answer; in which they may do well to prove that their practice is grounded upon
a Precept, in reference to their first admiministrators authority to baptize:
And when it comes to my hands, I shall consider it.

FINIS.

