A Coppie of a LETTER, Read in the House of COMMONS: SENT From Master SAMPFORD,
High Sheriff of the County of Somerset, and the Committee there, of their
weekly proceedings, in searching the Recusants Houses.

Also the number of such Ammunition as was taken in their Houses, and sent to
the Castle at Taunton

Ordered to be Printed.

Hen. Elsyng, Cler. Farl. D. Com.

August 26. Printed at London for W. Ley. 1642.

A Coppie of a Letter read in the house of Commons, sent from Master Sampford,
high Sheriff of the County of Somerset, and the Committee there, of their
weekly Proceedings, etc.
Honorable Gentlemen,
WE have sent you our Weeks task, and an account of the service we were
commanded by both Houses, viz.

FIR'ST, on Monday, the fifteenth of August, early in the Morning we with the
attendants of the Trained Bands came to Taunton none knowing our intent, (the
Major excepted) after an hours respite, Baronet Portman, Mr. Coals, Mr. Pyne,
and others were sent for by us, who immediately came and assisted us with Horse
and Foot: Then after consultation we searched one Master Brownes house, a
Recusant, and found therein 60. men's Armor, and o^^er Ammunition of Pike and
Musket, in Alder^^^ (...) house twenty men's Armor of Pike and (...) Tuckers
house, the Receiver of the Bishop of Winchester's Rents, and Steward of his
Courts one handered men's Armor for Horse and Foot, also two barrells of
Gunpowder, fifty great Saddles; with shot of all sorts. Then we marched to the
out-parishes, as Badford, Nenea^d, Langford, and Wellington, and in Badford,
searching Captain Collins house, found therein ten men's Armor, and in Master
Easons house of the same parish five men's Armor: at Nyneard, searching Master
Sheeres house, found therein 40 men's Armor of pike and musket: And at
Langford, at Master Prowses house twenty men's Armor; and at Wellington in
Master Strawbridge's house fifty men's Armor.

On Tuesday, the sixteen we marched to Bridgwater, where we were entertained by
the Major and Aldermen, and found therein at some private gentlemen's houses
about sixty men's Armor, and other Ammunition, and left it in charge with the
Major and Aldermen, to be ready at the King and Parliaments command.

On Wednesday the seventeenth we marched to We^^, and coming within a mile of
the Town, we were met by the Major and Aldermen, and accompanied by them into
the Town, and quartered our selves, in searching two in each street, and began
first and searched the Bishops house, but found nothing there. But in Doctor
Westons house we found near upon one hundred men's Armor; in Esquire Roses
house forty men's armor, in Esquire Pollards house forty men's armor, in Master
Iohnsons house twenty men's armourin Master Tomkins house fifty men's armor, and
we gave imediate charge to have them carried to Taunton Castle, which was so
done.

On Thursday the 18, we marched to the City of Bath, accompanied with Mr.
Barret of Cotford, Master Basset Master Harrington, Master Bampfield, and
others, and there searched Sir. George Ives house but found none there, but one
of his servants said he had sent all his Armor to Sir Ralph Hopton's house and
was going thither to sojourne with his wife and family: Then we searched one
Master Ceasars house, near the Earl of Rutlands Castle, and found therein 100
men's armor, five light horses, and sufficient ammunition for twenty horse
more, and about 10000. pound in money: and afterward we went to Sir Edward
Rodneys house, where we concluded that some of us should the next day with a
sufficient Company of Horse and foot, search these Towns here underwritten,
viz. Glast^nbury, Ilchester, Ilminster. Shipton Mallet, Chard, Crewkerne.
South, and North Petherton, etc.


The Sheriff requested that by reason of his age he might be excused of the
said attendance, and that his servants should wait on them where they pleased,
which was granted.

Sir Edward Rodney and Captain Brooks immediately sent warrants for the
Trained Bands about them to give their attendance the day following.

On Friday the 19 two companies of foot came to Sir Edward Rodney's house and
searched the Town of Glastenbury, and found therein forty men's armor, and at
the end of Glastenbury Down in Farmer Twists house 100 men's armor of horse
and foot, and after examination, confessed it was his Landlords armor, Sir
John Stowells, and has had it within this six weeks, nevertheless committed
him to Ilchester Goal for his secrecy.

This day also Mr. Phillips, Mr. Light, Mr. Hodgs, and Mr. Trevillion met at
Ilchester, and a Trained band attended on them and searched one Mr. Vincents,
and Mr. Fortescues houses, and found in each of them 40 men's armor a piece,
and in Kingston parish being the Earl of Barkeshires were found in a barn 10
light horses, 100 Saddles 100 swords and 40 muskets which was immediately sent
to Taunton. In Ilminster and Shipton Mallet, there are diverse other poor
Recusants, but none able to buy or maintain arms.

This day also at Chard there met Mr. Martine, Sr Henry Rosewell, Mr Preston,
and Mr Symes who were accompanyied with the trained Bands, and searched the
Parson of the Parish his house, and found there 50 men's Armor, in Mr Coleman's
house 100 men's Armor, in Sir William Button's Ladies House 150 men's Armor, in
Mr Hill's house 50 men's Armor; All which was likewise sent to Taunton Castle.

The same day Mr. Meredith, Mr. Fowler and others were appointed to search at
Crookehorne and thereabouts, who came to the Lord Paulet's house, but the
Gentry and servants therein would not obey their authority but bid them be
gone otherwise they would let bullets fly amongst them, and would not let any
of the Trained Bands to enter the said house: Hereupon one of the Trained Band
short a bullett against the Port-house door, nevertheless they would not open
it, at length they brake it open and entered perforce and one of the Trained
Band killed, there was above fifty persons therein Gentry and servants, there
was found 10 light horse and 150 men's Armor or thereabouts.

Then we came to North and South Petherton and in Sir John Cary's house found
20 men's Armor; All which number of Arms amounting unto, viz.

Armor 1800 Saddles 150 Light Horse 25 Money 10000. li.
All which we left in the Castle at Taunton under the Custody of the Mayor and
Aldermen of the said Town with a sufficient guard for the safe keeping thereof.

We therefore humbly pray the Honorable Assembly in Parliament, that the
Ammunition taken aforesaid may not be carried out of the County but that it may
be distributed and employed in the defense of the Country. And we shall daily
pray for the happy proceedings of both Houses.

From Bath, August 20. 1642. Your affectionate friends, H. Sampford. I. Stroud.
F. Coals. J. Horner. A. Popham. A. Pyne.


Ordered to be Printed.

Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

