AN ANSWER TO A LETTER Written at OXFORD, And superscribed to Dr. SAMVEL
TVRNER, Concerning the CHURCH, and the Revenues thereof.

Wherein is showed, how impossible it is for the King with a good conscience to
yield to the change of Church Government by Bishops, or to the alienating the
Lands of the Church.

Printed in the Year, MDCXI.VII.

Faults escaped, correct thus.
Page 5. line 30. for Laws read Lands. p. 7. l. 30. r. preserving. p. 9. l. 8.
r. this in the Postscript. p. 12. l. 20. r. visum. p. 17. l. 15. r. and
elsewhere, part. p. 18. l. 27. for then r. that. p. 19. l. 11. for since, r.
sure. p. 19. l. 15. r. aliquid. p. 20. l. 20. for this r. the. p. 21. l. ult.
r. that error. ibid. l. ult. r. that consent. p. 24. l. 8. r. Creet. ibid. l.
27. r. Apostolical. p. 31. l. 14. r. vindicta. p. 35. l. 26. dele not. p. 39.
l. 1 r. must not. p. 44. l. 5. for there, r. other. p. 47. l. ult. r. preserve.
p. 50. l. 3. r. the Commons. p. 51. l. 22. for (...), r. are. p. 52. l. 19.
dele that.

A Letter written to D. SAMUEL TURNER, concerning the Church, and the Revenues
thereof.
Noble Doctor,
I Expected when you had seen the Kings last Messages, your reason would have
prompted you to have looked this way, which caused a delay in sending unto you,
until the difficulty of the passage made me suspect whether this may come safe
to you, and by the preparations and designs here, I fear I shall not have
another opportunity; take this therefore as a farwell-truth, that the moderate
party here, are at their Ne plus ultra, the presbyterians and Independants will
agree, and the Scots and we shall not fall out; and it must now be the wisdom
of your self, and such as have power and interest with the King, to save him,
your selves, and Country from ruin: Your visible strength to hold out, (much
less to prevail) is too well known here, and your hopes from France and
Ireland, will soon vanish, which if successful by a victorious Army (which I
believe you shall never see) would but make you and us slaves to a foreign
Nation, and extirpate that Religion, both sides pretend to maintain.

To be plain, I know no way left you, but to accept such conditions of peace
as may be had; you are too much a soldier, to think a retreat (upon so many
disadvantages) dishonorable to a General, or acceptance of hard conditions by
a starved beleagured Garrison to the Governor.

In short, of evils choose the least; and I must tell you, it is expected from
you, (and the more wise and honest party with you) that they should make use of
their reason, and advise the King to save what is left, wherein it is believed
you may prevail; considering what has already passed in so many free offers
to give satisfaction in the Militia, Ireland, payment of the public Debts,
choice of Judges, Lord Admiral, Officers of State, and others, with an Act of
oblivion and free Pardon, free exercise of Religion, to Presbyterians, and
Independants their own way, and a promise to endeavor in all particulars, that
none shall have cause to complain for want of security: things so far beyond
our former hopes, that I cannot doubt, but the same reason which moved the
offer of these, will obtain to concession of such others, as the Parliament
shall require in order to peace, which (as near as I can guess) will be
either the removal and punishment of evil Counselors, and Ministers, who
have drawn the King into these troubles, or the business of the Church, (all
other material things to my apprehension being already offered.)

For the first of these, I know not how you can with reason gainsay the
bringing offenders to Justice; and if the Parliament Prerogative streine
justice in the trial and punishment (beyond example of better times) it were
wisdom for such as may therein be concerned, to withdraw, Dum furer in cursu,
for if it must come to suffering, Melius unus quam unitas: for the business of
the Church I wish it could be prevented, (there are who can witness the labor
and hazards I have undergone for that end) conceiving no government equal to a
well ordered Episcopal, for the well-being of this Church and State: But when
the necessity of times has proposed this sad question for resolution, whether
consent to alter Episcopal government in the Church, or let both Church and
State ruin together, my reason assents to the former. I believe the doctrine
of the place where you are, would persuade the contrary, and it has been from
thence transmitted hither as an orthodox truth, that the altering that
government, being as they say jure divino, is sinful; and the taking away the
Church Lands, sacrilege, at least unlawful; which if I could believe, would
change my opinion, for I cannot give way for the committing a sin for a good
end, (what ever the Romanist, or Jesuited Puritan pretend in defense of it) but
if I mistake not, (and if I do, I pray reform me) the opinion that the
government by Bishops is jure divino, has but lately been countenanced in
England, and that but by some few of the more Lordly Clergy; for we always
acknowledge the Protestants of Germany, the Low Countries, and elsewhere, part
of the reformed Protestant Catholic Church though they had no Bishops; and I
am certain the King would never have given way for the extirpation of Bishops
in Scotland, had he conceived them to be jure divino; nor to the Presbyterians,
and Independants here to exercise their Religion their own way, (as by his late
Messages) when such a tolleration in the face of such a divine Law, must needs
be sinful: and for the latter opinion against taking away of Church Lands, I
am less satisfied, being so far from conceiving it sacrilege, that I do not
conceive it unlawful, but may be done without breach of any Law, (which must
be the rule for trial of the lawfulnes or unlawfulnes of every action) nay
though there be never so many curses or imprecations added to the donation: nor
do I herein ground my opinion barely upon the frequent practice of former
times, not only by Acts of Parliament, (in the times of Queen Eliz, and King
James, and King Charles, if you have not forgotten the exchange of Durham
house) as well as Henry the eighth) but even by the Bishops themselves, and
Deanes and Chapters, insomuch, that if the wisdom of the State (after Clergy
men were permitted to marry) had not prohibited their alienations, and
restrained their Leases to 21. years, or 3. lives, their Revenues at this day
would not have been subject to envy.

But to deal clearly with you Doctor, I do not yet understand how there can
be any Sacrilege, properly so called, which is not a theft and more: viz. a
theft of something dedicated to holy use, (a Communion-Cup for instance, or the
like) and theft you know must be of things moveable, even by the Civil Law, and
how theft can be of Lands, or sacrilege committed by aliening Church Lands, I
pray ask your friend Holbourne and his fellow Lawyers, for ours here deride us
for the question. As for the main quere, touching the lawfulnes of aliening
Church Lands, (I use the expression for the lands of Bishops, Deanes, and
Chapters,) good Doctor give me your patience to hear my reasons. And first I
lay this as a foundation, that there is no divine command that Ministers under
the Gospel should have any lands, (the hire of a labourer at most, a fitting
maintenance is all to be challenged) nor do we read that the Apostles had any
Lands, (which I mention to avoid the groundless arguments upon the lands and
portions allotted to the Tribe of Levi by Gods appointment, to whom our
Ministers have no succession) and then it will follow, that they enjoy their
lands by the same Law of the State as others do, and must be subject to that
Law which alone gives strength to their title; which being granted, I am sure
it will not be denied, that by the Law of the Nation, he that has an estate in
Lands in Fee-simple, by an employed power, may lawfully alien, though there be
an expression in his Deed of purchase or donation to the contrary: which being
so, makes the alienation of Bishops Lands even without any Act of Parliament,
to be lawful, being done by those who have an estate in Fee simple, (as the
Bishop, with the Deane and Chapter has.)

Then further, I am sure it will be granted, that by the Law of this Nation,
whosoever has Lands or goods, has them with this inseparable employed
condition or limitation, viz. That the Parliament may dispose of them or any
part of them at pleasure. Hence it is they sometimes dispose some part in
Subsidies and other Taxes; enable a Tenant for life, to sell an estate in
Fee-simple, and not at all unlawful, because of that limitation or condition
before mentioned; and who ever will be owner must take them according to this
Law: Now hence comes the mistake, by reason there is not such an express
condition or limitation in the Deed of Donation, (which would silence all
disputes) whereas it is as clear a truth, that where any thing is necessarily
by Law implied, it is as much as if in plain words expressed, of which your
Lawyers (if Reason need a help from them) can easily resolve.

Besides, it were somewhat strange, that the Donor of the Laws should preserve
them in the hands of the Bishops, from the power of the Parliament; which he
could not do in his own, and give them a greater and surer right then he had
himself: Nor do I understand their meaning, who term God the Proprieter of
the Bishops Lands, and the Bishop the Usufructuary. For I know not how (in
propriety of speech) God is more entitled to their Lands then to his whole
Creation; and were Clergymen but Usufructuaries, how come they to change,
dispose or alter the property of any thing, (which an Usufructuary cannot do)
and yet is by them done daily? Ask them by what Divine Law S. Mary's Church in
Oxford, may not be equally employed for temporal uses, as for holding the
Vice-chancellours Court, the University Convocation, or their yearly acts? And
for the Curses (those bug-beare words) I could yet never learn that an
unlawful curse was any prejudice but to the Author, of which sort those curses
must needs be, which restrain the Parliament or any other from exercising a
lawful and undeniable power, which in instances would show very ridiculous, if
any curse should prejudice another lawful right. I am sure such curses have
no warrant from the Law of God or this Nation. If this does not satisfy the
former doubts in your Bishops, (for I know you to be too great a Master of
Reason to be unsatisfied) ask them whether Church Lands may not lawfully (the
Law of the State not prohibiting) be transferred from one Church to another
upon emergent occasions? which I think they will not deny. If so, who knows
that the Parliament will transfer them to Lay-hands? they profess no such
thing, and I hope they will not, but continue them for the maintenance of the
Ministry, (which prevents all disputes upon the last question) but if they
shall hereafter do otherwise, you know my opinion: Only mistake me not in this
free discourse, as if I did countenance or commend the Parliaments proceedings
in their new Reformation, but as a caution to you in the exigencies of times,
what is fittest to be done, when (I take it) Mistress Necessity in all things
indifferent, or not unlawful, must be obeyed, in which cases the most constant
men must be contented to change their resolutions with the alteration of time.
Your party have been resolute enough to preserve the rights of the Church, and
further peradventure then wise men would have done, but at an ultra posse you
and we must give over, especially for an imaginary right. And think seriously
with your self, whether after all other things granted, it will be fit to run
the hazard of the very being of this Church and State, the King and his
posterity, and Monarchy it self, only upon the point of Church Government by
Bishops, or aliening the Church Lands, or rather whether the Kings Council (in
duty) ought not to advise him the contrary, who should be wise as well as
pious, yet herein may be both, (for I do not think Conveniencie or Necessity
will excuse Conscience in a thing in it self unlawful, what ever Statesmen
maintain to the contrary) your interest with the King is not small, and your
power with the Lords (who are guided by reason) very considerable, you cannot
do better then make use of both at this time. If they have a desire to
preserve the Church, it were well their thoughts were fixed upon some course for
settling a Superintendencie in the Presbyteriall Government, (which no way
crosses the National Covenant) and preserve the Revenues in the Church, which
I believe at Uxbridge Treaty would have been granted, what ever it will be now.
I have given you my sense upon the whole business. Si quid novisti rectius,

Candidus imperti, si non his utere.
I give you commission to show this to my Lord Dorset, (who by + and something
else can guess my name) and to as many more as own Reason and Honesty.



An Answer to the foregoing Letter, superscribed to D. Samuel Turner, etc.
Sir,
YOu have put an odd task upon me, in commanding my judgment on a Letter
lately sent to a Doctor in Oxford, with a commission to show it to the Lord of
Dorset, and to as many more as own reason and honesty; for this is the
Postscript, and many the like passages in the Letter, (as that the more wise
and honest party would make use of their reason, and I know you too great a
master of reason, to be unsatisfyed) makes me fear, that if I should perhaps
dissent in opinion from this Epistler, I might be thought, (at least in his
conceit) to incur a sharp censure both in point of reason and honesty:
Which I confess at first somewhat troubled me, until I remembered you were
wont to say, that when vessels do once make such noises as these, it is a very
shrewd sign they are empty.

He who wrote the Letter seems most desirous of Peace, and truly Sir so am I;
besides we agree in this, that we must not commit sin for a good end; so that
if Peace it self cannot be attained without that guilt, we must be content
with a worse estate. But you very well know, with how many several deceipts
our affections can mislead our reason; you remember who it was that said it
unto the very face of a Prophet, I have kept the commandment of the Lord, and
yet his sin remained still a great sin, and much the worse because he excused
it: For his guilt is less that commits a crime, then his that undertakes to
defend it; because this cuts off all repentance, nay, it makes a sin to grow up
into that more wicked height of a scandal, and so it is not only a snare to the
sinner himself, but it warrants many more to be sinful.

Whether this Oxford Londoner, for so I take the Epistler to be, has not
defended or made apologies for sin, and has not in that sense, done evil
that good may come thereof, I am now to make an enquiry, and I shall follow him
in his two generals. 1. The delivering up the Kings friends, whom they above
call evil counselors. And 2. The business of the Church.

1. For the Kings friends. He says, -- I know not how you can with reason
gainsay the bringing offenders to justice: indeed nor I neither, but what if
they be not offenders? What if they must be brought to injustice? I know no man
that will refuse to be judged by a Parliament, whose undoubted Head is the
King, and the King sitting there, with an unquestioned Negative, nay for his
Majesty to refer Delinquents to be judged by the House of Peers, sitting in a
free Parliament, and judging according to the known Laws of the Realm, is
that at least which in my opinion would not be stuck at. But the Parliament
prerogative, which this Letter speaks of, being now so extended, as we have
cause to think it is, I doubt in this case, whether not only in point of
honor, but in point of justice and conscience, the King for his own Peace, can
leave his friends to such men, whom he is clearly bound by so many grand ties
to protect. But this Sir I shall commit to you to determine, and if you return
me a negative, I shall not presume to question your reason or honesty; nor
shall I persuade the Kings friends that they would banish themselves, unless
it were only to do that great favor to the two Houses now at Westminster, as
to keep them from some future foul acts of oppression and blood, because they
shall have none left to act upon.

2. For the business of the Church, which he again divides into two parts,
first that of Episcopacy, and secondly of Sacrilege. And in these Sir I shall
speak with less hesitation, I shall clearly tell you the Epistler is clean
out; and though you very well know me a great honourer of your profession, yet
I cannot hold it fit to decide cases of conscience, or in humane actions to
tell us what is sin or no sin: and I am confident, Sir, you will not take
this ill at my hands.

First for Episcopacy, his words are, if I mistake not, (and if I do, I pray
reform me) The opinion that the government by Bishops is jure divino, has but
lately been countenanced in England, and that by some few of the more Lordly
Clergy. These last words make me suspect some passion in the Writer, as being
in scorn heretofore taken up by men, who for a long time were Schismatiques,
in their hearts, and are now Rebels in their actions: And since the Laws of
this Land makes some Church men Lords, I do the more marvel that the Epistler
looks awry upon it: so that though his profession be, that he has undergone
labors and hazards for the Episcopal Government, yet truly Sir I must think,
that it is then only fit for the Church to give him thanks, when she has done
all her other business.

But grant that Tenet to be but of late countenanced, it thence follows not,
that it is any whit the less true. For in respect of the many hundred years of
abuse, the reformation it self was but of late countenanced here, yet I take
it for an unquestionable truth that the Laity ought to have the cup. And
though I was not desired to reform this Epistlers error, yet in charity I
shall tell him, that he is out, when he affirms that this opinion was but of
late countenanced in this Church, as I could show him out of Archbishop
Whitgift, and Bishop Bilson and others: and since perhaps he may think these
to be but men of the more Lordly Clergy, I shall name one more who may stand
for many, and who wrote forty years since, that most excellent man M. Hooker,
(a person of most incomparable learning, and of as much modesty, who I dare be
bold to say, did not once dream of a Rotchet) he averres in clear terms,
There are at this day in the Church of England, no other then the same degrees
of Ecclesiastical order, namely Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, which had
their beginning from Christ and his blessed Apostles themselves, or as he
expounds himself, Bishops and Presbyters, ordained by Christ himself in the
Apostles and the seventy, and then Deacons by his Apostles; I may add Bucer
too, no man I am sure of the Lordly Clergy, who though he were not English
born, yet he was professor here in King Edwards time, and he wrote and dyed in
this Kingdom, Bishops, says he, are Ex perpetua ecclesiarum ordinatione ab
ipsis jam Apostolis, and more, Usum hoc est spiritui sancto: and sure if
Bishops be from the Apostles and from the holy Spirit himself, they are of
divine institution. Nay what think you if this Tenet be approved by a plain
act of Parliament? I hope then it wants no countenance which England can give
it, and it needs not fly for shelter under the wings of the Lordly Clergy; you
have these words in the book of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, which
is confirmed by Parliament; It is evident to all men reading holy Scriptures,
and ancient Authors, that from the Apostles times there have been these orders
of Ministers in Christ's Church, Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons. And again,
the prayer in the form of consecration of Bishops, Almighty God giver of all
good things, which by thy holy Spirit have appointed diverse orders of Ministers
in thy Church, mercifully behold this thy servant now called to the work and
ministry of a Bishop; and in questions to the person to be consecrated a
Bishop, Are you persuaded that you be truly called to this Ministration,
according to the will of our Lord Jesus? etc. I beseech you Sir consider,
whether these words, or this prayer could fall from any man, not possessed with
this Tenet, that Episcopacy was of divine right: For if the three orders may be
found by reading the holy Scriptures together with ancient Authors: if men are
taught to pray, that God by his Spirit has appointed diverse orders in his
Church, and this made the ground of praying for the present Bishop, if the
person to be consecrated must profess that he conceives he is called according
to the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, either all this must be nothing else but
pure pagentry, and then the Parliament mocked God by their Confirmation, or
else Episcopacy is grounded in Scripture, is appointed by the Spirit of God, is
according to the will of our Lord Jesus, and all this has not been said of
late, nor countenanced only by some few of the more Lordly Clergy. And we have
the less reason to doubt that this Tenet was countenanced in this Church of
ours, because we find it in those parts that have lost Episcopacy, for we are
told by Doctor Carlton, after Bishop of Chichester, and that wrote against the
Arminians, more then twenty five years since, that sitting at Dort, he then
protested in open Synod, That Christ instituted no parity, but made twelve
Apostles, the chief, and under them seventy Disciples: That Bishops succeeded
to the twelve, and to the seventy, Presbyters of an inferior rank; he
affirmed this order had been still maintained in the Church, and then
challenged the judgment of any learnned man, that could speak to the contrary.

Their answer was silence, which was approbation enough, but after, (says he)
discoursing with diverse of the best learned in the Synod, he told them how
necessary Bishops were, to suppress their then risen Schisms; their answer
was, That they did much honor and reverence the good order and Discipline of
the Church of England, and with all their hearts would be glad to have it
established among them; but that could not be hoped for in their State: Their
hope was, that seeing they could not do what they desired, God would be
merciful unto them, if they did but what they could. If they hoped for mercy
that might pardon what they did, sure they must suppose that what they then
did, was sinful: Nay, they thought their necessity it self could not totally
excuse their sin; for then in that particular there had been no need to hope
for Gods mercy: nor could they well think otherwise; since being pressed, they
denied not but that Episcopacy was of Christ's own institution, and yet they
were no Lordly Clergy, nor do I well see how either by charitable or civil men,
they can at all be taxed either for want of reason or honesty.

1. Indeed some seem to startle at this Tenet, that Episcopacy is of Divine
right: as if, because Divine, it might therefore seem to endanger Monarchal
power. But under favor I conceive this fear to be among us very groundless,
for since the Tenants of our Church are in this particular the very self same
with the ancient times: as that the Bishops have no power, but what is merely
directive only; that all power co-active either in them or in others, is
derived merely from the Royal authority; that they cannot legally make use, no
not so much as of this directive power, but only by the Kings leave: So that if
the temporal Laws should forbid them to preach that, which in point of
salvation is necessary to be spoken, yet they cannot preach but upon the
forfeiture of their Heads, and those being demanded by the Kings Laws, they
must submit to a Martyrdom, (though twere sin in them that demand it) so
that in the execution of all ecclesiastical power, the supremacy is in the King
alone; these I say being so much the Tenets of our Church, that I conceive
there is no learned man amongst us, who would not readily subscribe to them, I
cannot see at all where in the opinion we defend, any danger lies to this
Monarchy.

But examine the Presbyterian principles, and you will clearly find, Kings and
they cannot stand together, for either you consider that new government in the
Scottish sense, which allows no appeal to any other power, and then it is
plain, that where men admit this, they admit of a supremacy, which does not
reside in the King; and by consequent, of two several supremacies within the
bounds of the self same Kingdom, which can no more stand with Monarchy, then
it can with Monogamy to be married to two several wives. And though it is said
that this Presbyterian government meddles only with spiritual things, which
concern the good of the soul, and so it cannot hurt Regal power, yet this is
but only said, and no more: for it is well known, that in ordine ad
spiritualia, (and all things may by an ordinary wit be drawn into this rank,
as they have been by the Church of Rome) this government intrudes upon what
things it pleases; and indeed where a supremacy is once acknowledged, no wise
man can think, that it will carry it self otherwise. So that King James his
maxim was undoubtedly most true, upon this same ground we are on, No Bishop,
no King: For that most prudent Prince did soon discern, that if a power were
once set up, which at least in the legal execution of it, did not derive it
self from the King, there was no doubt to be made, but it would ere long
destroy the very King himself.

Or consider Presbyterian government in the English sense, as it is now set up
by the Two Houses at Westminster, which is a government limited by an appeal
to the Parliament, for either by Parliament here they mean the Two Houses
excluding the King, and then it is as plain as before, they set up two
supremacies, his Majesty's and their own: or else by Parliament they mean the
King with both Houses, and then it will follow, that either there must be a
perpetual Parliament, (which sure neither King nor Kingdom can have cause to
like) or else the supremacy will be for the most part in the Presbytery;
because when ever a Parliament sits not, there will be no Judge to appeal to;
or if it be said the Parliament may leave a standing Committee to receive
appeals in such ecclesiastical causes; then either in this Committee the King
has no negative; and in that case it is clear that the ecclesiastical supremacy
will be not at all in the King; or else the King has a negative, but yet is
joined with persons whom he himself chooses not, and so most probably will be
checked and affronted in any sentence he intends to give; and this clearly
overthrowes that which is already declared by Parliament, 25. H. 8. c. 19.
to be a right in the King, as inherent in his Crown, that ecclesiastical
appeals may be made to him alone in Chancery, (for the Statute names no other)
and that his Majesty alone may appoint what Commissioners he please for their
final decision: I say, consider the Presbyterian government in the English
Parliament sense, and in the sense of the English Assembly, for the
Presbyterians there are wholly for the Scottish form, as appears by their
quarrels at what the Houses have already done in their Ordinances; so that
their aim is not only to set up a new Government, but in plain terms, a new
supremacy: And hence, to say truth, he must see very little who discernes not,
that though the Presbyterian party seems to strike at the Bishops, yet their
maine aim is at the King; whose supremacy they endure not, as being a flower
which they intend for their own Garland; and so, though they hypocritically
cry out (that they may abuse the People) against the pride of the Lordly
Bishops, yet in the mean time, the wiser sort must needs see, that they intend
to make themselves no less then indeed Kingly Presbyters.

We acknowledge the Protestants of Germany, the Low countries, and part of the
reformed Catholic Protestant Church, Epist.
though they had no Bishops, etc.

Though we maintain Episcopacy to be of divine right, Ans.
(i. e.) of divine institution, yet hence it does not follow, that Germany are
no Protestant Churces; No, it must be a crime of a most horrid taint, that
makes a Church run into non ecclesiam; For though that of the Jews was bad,
and Idolatrously bad; yet God seriously protests he had not sent her a bill of
divorce. Nay no learned man of judgment durst ever yet affirm that the Roman
Church her self was become no true part of the Church Catholic; and yet she
breaks a flat Precept of Christ, [drinke ye all of this] and shall we be
thought to deny the same right to christians without Bishops, when they break
but Christ's institution? No, Churches they are, true parts of the Catholic
Church: but in point of ordination and of government Apostolical they are not.
Epist*


I am certain the King would never have given way to the extirpation of
Bishops in Scotland, had he conceived them to be jure divino, etc.

Grant it were so, Ans.
yet of all mankind are Kings only bound, that they must not change their
opinions; or if perhaps they have done ill, must they for their repentance be
more liable to reproach, then Subjects are for their crimes?

The King would not have given way to the Presbyterians, Epist.
and Independents, to exercise their Religion here their own way, (as by his
Messages)* when such a tolleration in the face of such a divine Law must needs
be sinful.

There is a great mistake in this Argument; Ans.
for to tolerate, does not at all signify either to approve or commend their
factions, neither of which the King could at all do to those Schismatiques
without sin. But it merely implies not to punish, which Kings may forbear
upon just reason of State, as David forbore to punish the murderers of Joab;
and we our selves in our English State, have no punishment for all sorts of
Liars, and yet their sin is against a flat Law divine.

We affirm then Episcopacy to be of divine right, that is, of divine
institution, and that must needs tacitly imply a divine Precept too; for to
what end are things instituted by God, but that it is presumed, it is our part
to use them? And to what end should some men be appointed to teach, and to
govern, but that its clearly employed, then there are other men too, that ought
both to hear and obey? He that institutes or erects a Bridge over a broad
swelling stream, needs not (you will think) add an express command, that men
should not walk in the water: Thus when our Lord and Savior made his
institution of that great Sacrament of the Eucharist, he gave command indeed
concerning the Bread, Do this in remembrance of me; and concerning the Cup,
Drink ye all of this, But he gave no express command to do both these
together, and yet his institution has been still held to have the nature of a
command; and so for a thousand years the whole Church of Christ did ever
practice it, save only in some few cases, in which men supposed a kind of
necessity: I say then Episcopacy is of divine right, instituted by Christ in
his Apostles, who since they took upon them to ordain and to govern Churches,
you need not doubt they received an authority from their Master to do both; for
since men will not think they would break their own rules: No man takes this
upon him, but he that is called of God, as Aaron was.

Episcopacy then was instituted in the Apostles, who were Bishops et aliud
amplius; and distinguished by Christ himself from the Seventy, who were the
Presbyters. So the most ancient Fathers generally, or if you will take S.
Hierom. opinion, (who was neither a Bishop, nor in his angry mood any great
friend to that Order) they were instituted by the Apostles, who being
themselves Episcopi et amplius, did in their latter days formalize and bound
out that power which still we do call Episcopacy. And so their received opinions
may stand together for Episcopatus, being in Apostolatu tanquam consulatus in
dictatura, as the lesser and subordinate power, is always in the greater: we
may truly say it was instituted by Christ in his Apostles who had Episcopal
Power and more, and then it was formalized and bounded by the Apostles
themselves, in the persons of Timothy and Titus, etc. So that call the
Episcopal order either of Divine right, or Apostolical Institution, and I
shall not at all quarrel at it: For Apostolical will seem Divine enough,
unto Christians; I am sure Salmatius thinks so, (a sharp enemy to the
Episcopal Order) if (says he) it be from the Apostles, it is of Divine right;
thus we find the power of ordination and of jurisdiction to be given to those
men alone; For then that power is properly Episcopal, when one man alone may
execute it, so S. Paul to Timothy, Lay hands suddenly on no man, 1 Timothy 5. 22.
Lay hands in the singular number, thou, and thou alone, without naming any
other: Against an Elder, receive not an accusation, in the singular number too;
thou, receive not, thou alone, but under two or three witnesses; and then the
Text is plain, He and he alone might do it. So to Titus for this cause, and
that thou, and thou alone, should set in order the things that are wanting,
and ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1. 5. where plainly those two powers of
government and ordination are given unto one man; So S. John to the Churches of
Asia, Rev. 2. 3. when he presumes all the governing power to reside in the
Angels of those Churches, and only in them alone, as all Ancients understand
it. And hence it is plain, that though we should yield that the Apostles only
did institute Bishops, yet in this Revel. Christ himself immediately in his
own person, and the holy Spirit withal, did both approve and confirm them:
And the Learned observe, that the Bishops of those Sees, are therefore called
Angels by S. John, who was born a Jew, because in Palestina their chief Priests
were then called their Angels; and so this appellation was taken up by the
Apostle in that place, because the Bishops were those Churches Chiefes: this
truth appears not only from those clear Texts, but from the mutual consent
and pactise for more then 1500. years space of all the Christian Church; So
that neither S. Hierome, nor any other Ancient, did ever hold orders to be
lawfully given, which were not given by a Bishop, nor any Church jurisdiction
to be lawfully administered, which was not either done by their hands, or at
least by their deputation.

I know there are men lately risen up, especially in this last Century, which
have collected and spread abroad far other Conclusions, and that from the
authority of the Text it self: But as it is a Maxim in Humane Laws, Consuetudo
optima Legum Interpres, Custom and Practice is the best Interpreter: So no
rational man but will easily yield, it as well holds in Laws Divine: For I
would gladly ask, What better way can there be for the interpreting of Texts,
then that very same means whereby I know the Text it self to be Text? Sure
the same course whereby I know the Epistles to Timothy and Titus to have been
written by S. Paul, must needs be the best course to understand the sense of
those Epistles; and if I therefore believe them to be written by that Apostle,
because the Universality of the whole Christian Church has brought me to that
belief, (and there is no other rational way of believing it) why do I not
believe the same Christian sense, which the universal consent assures me they
were written in? Shall I believe, and yet disbeleeve that selfsame consent
which is the best ground of my belief? This is as it were in clear terms to
say, that I believe such a tale for the Authors sake who has told it, and yet
I do now hold the selfsame man to be a liar. Men do believe the testimony
of universal consent, in the sense it gives of single terms, and why not in
the sense it gives of sentences or Propositions? without the help of this
Consent, (which is indeed the ground of our Dictionaries) how shall we know
that (...) signifies the Resurrection of the body, which the Socinians at this
day deny? And I know no such way to confute your error, as by the authority of
your consent.

Admit then of that Rule, that consent universal is the best interpretation of
Texts; and then I am sure, it is as clear as true, that Episcopacy is of
Divine or Apostolical Right; yea and that proposition, There can be no
Ordination, without the hands of a Bishop, will clearly appear to be as well
grounded as this; There can be no Baptism without a lawful Minister, which is
good Divinity amongst our new Masters in Scotland: and Antiquity allowed of it,
Extra casum necessitatis: For I ask upon what Text do they ground this Rule?
I suppose they will say upon our Saviors words, to the Eleven, Matthew. 28. Go
teach all Nations, and baptize them: But in the institution of the Eucharist He
spoke those words too; but only to the Twelve, Drink ye all of this, Matthew.
26. I demand then how shall I know that when our Savior spoke those words unto
the Eleven, he spoke them only as to lawful Ministers; but when he spoke the
other, to the Twelve he spoke at large as unto them that did represent all
Christian men? So that though only Ministers may Baptize, yet all Christians
may receive the Cup: Perhaps they will say, that the general practice of
receiving the Cup, is manifest from 1 Cor. 11. and I think so too, where S.
Paul seems to chide the whole Church for their irreverence at that great
Sacrament: But if a quarreler should reply, that he there speaks but of the
Presbyters alone, whereof many were at that time at Corinth: As when in the 5.
Chap. he seems to chide the whole Church for not excommunicating the
incestuous Person: yet it is plain, he means none but the men in government (as
sure all Presbyterians will allow me) I know not what could be said but to make
it appear out of the Fathers, and others, that the whole Christian Church
never took the words in that sense. And if to stop the mouths of wranglers,
we must at length be constrained to quote the Authority of Universal consent,
and the Common practice of Christ's Church, then you will easily see that those
two named Propositions do stand fast on the same bottom, There can be no
Baptism without a lawful Minister, extra casum necessitatis, for so the
consent and practice of the Universal Church has still interpreted that Text:
And again it is true, There can be no Ordination without the Hands of a Bishop,
for so those Texts both out of Timothy and Titus have been understood, and
practiced for 1500. years together by the consent of the whole Church of
Christ. It Is true that this precept, Go ye teach, etc. runs not in exclusive
words, ye Apostles, or ye lawful Ministers, and none but ye; yet extra
casum necessitatis, no man was allowed to baptize but a lawful Minister: so
though these commands, [Lay hands suddenly on no man] and [Do thou ordain
Elders in every City] run not in verbis exclusivis, thou and none but thou,
or men of thine Order only: yet the Church understanding and practicing them in
an exclvsive sense, no man for 1500 years in any settled Church, was held
rightly ordained, without the hands of a Bishop.

Nay that there is something Divine in the Episcopal Order, will appear
clearly by this, that immediately from the times of Christ and his Apostles,
(yea within the reach of those times) it was universally spread throughout the
whole face of the Churches: so that no man can name a Nationthat was once won
unto the Christian Faith, but he shall soon find that there were Bishops: so
that there must needs be an Uunversall Cause, for an Effect that was so
Universal. General Council there was none about it, at which all Christians
might have met, and might have thence obeyed her directions.

Nor can any name a Power to which all Christians should submit (for they were
soon fallen into Factions) but only the authority of Christ or of his
Apostles; from them then must needs flow the Episcopal Order, and at that
Fountain I shall leave it. I say within the reach of the Apostles times, for
before S. John dyed, there are upon good Church Records above 20. Bishops
appointed to the several Sees; as at Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch, and Rome,
and Ephesus, at Creece, at Athens, and Colosse, and diverse others, it being
easy to draw a Catalogue of them out of several Ecclesiastical Writers.

And here it will be plain, that its a foul corruption; nay, how flat a sin
is brought into the Church of Christ, where Episcopacy is thrown down! and so
where Ordination is performed by any hands without theirs, it is as gross, as if
Laymen should be allowed to baptize, when a Presbyter does stand by: nay more,
it is as bad as if the Order of Presbyters should therefore be thrown down,
that Laymen might Baptize: and what is this, but willingly to run into a
Necessity it self, that we might thence create an Apology? It Is a corruption
far worse, then if a Church should audaciously attempt to pull down the Lords
Day; since the observation of that Time is neither built on so clear a Text,
nor on the help of so Universal a Consent, as is the Order of Episcopacy: So
that if men can think it sinful to part with the Lords Day, though the
institution of it be merely Apocryphal, they must needs confess there is at
least so much sin, (nay indeed more) in parting with their Bishops, and then
the Oxford Doctrine which the Epistler gybes at, and talks of, as transmitted
for an orthodox truth, will it seems prove no less in earnest.

Secondly, for the point of Sacrilege; the better to cl^^^e this, I must
premise these Assertions.

1. That God accepts of things given him, and so holds a Propriety as well in
the New, as in the Old Testament. 2. That God gets this Propriety in those
things he holds, as well by an acceptance of what is voluntarily given, as by
a command that such things should be presented to him. 3. That to invade those
things, be they moveable, or immovable, is expressly the sin of Sacrilege.
4. That this sin is not only against Gods positive Law, but plainly against
his Moral Law.
1. Proposition.
God accepts of things given, etc.
For proof of this, first I quote that Text, I hungered and ye gave me meat; I
thirsted and ye gave me drink, etc. Mat. 25. If Christ do not accept of these
things, he may say indeed, ye offered me meat, but he cannot say that ye gave
it: for a Present is then only to be called a Gift, when it is accepted as his
own that takes it. And does he thus accept of Meat and Clothing, and does he
not accept of those kind of endowments, that bring both these to perpetuity?
Will He take Meat and refuse Revenues? Does He like (can you imagine) to be Fed
and Clothed to day, and in danger to be Starved to morrow? The men thus
provided for, He calls no less then His Brethren: In as much as you have done
it unto the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. Whether these
were of those Brethren which he had enjoined to teach others, or of those which
he would have instructed, the Text there does not decide; without doubt it must
be meant of both; for it were a strange thing to affirm that Christ liked it
extreme well to be Fed and to be Clothed, in all those He called His, but only
in His Seventy, and His Apostles* but to put it out of doubt, that what is done
to them, is done to Him too, His own words are very plain, He that receives
you, teaching Disciples, receives me; in the Tenth of that Gospel, where He
sends all forth to preach, and that reception implies all such kind of
provisions, as is apparently plain throughout the whole Tenor of the Chapter.
And again, I quote that so well known passage of Ananias and Saphyra his wife,
Act. 5. his sin was, he kept back part of the price of those Lands he had given
to God, for the public use of the Church, yea, given to God, and it is as
plain that he did accept it; for S. Peter you know thus reprooves him, Why
have thou lied, or why have thou deceived the Holy Ghost? for so (...) does
properly import, why do thou cheat him of what is now his own proper right?
And again, Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God: and is this so strange a
thing? Are not all our lies to be accounted sins before God? yes, all against
God, as a Witness and a Judge; but yet not all against God as a Party: and
therefore it is a more remarkable, a more signal lie, Thou have not lied unto
men; a negative of comparison, not so much to men, as to God: what is done to
them is scarce worth the naming, but thou have lied unto God, as a Witness and
a Judge; yea and a party too. Thou have lied, and robbed God by lying, and so
run thy self into an eminent sin: and that shall appear in Gods
judgment, so the Fathers generally expound that place; both of the Greek and
Latin Church, and affirm his crime was a robbing God of that wealth, which by
Vow or by promise was now become Gods propriety: So the Modern Interpreters,
yea, so Calvin, Sacrum esse Deo profitebatur, He professed that his Land should
be a sacred thing unto God, (says he) on that place; and there Beza too,
Pradium Deo consecrassent; the the man and his wife, they consecrated this Land
to God, And he that will not believe so Universal a consent in the
interpreting a place of Scripture, should do well to consider, whether upon the
same ground (as I told you before) he may not be brought to doubt of his
Dictionary, for that is but Universal consent; he may almost as well doubt
whether (...) signifyes God, and altogether as well, whether (...) signifyes
the Gospel.

The New Testament will afford more places for this purpose; Thou that
abhorrest Idols, committest thou Sacrilege? Romans 2. 22. It Is true, these words
are spoken as to the person of an unconverted Jew, and may be therefore thought
to aim only at those sins, which were descryed in the Law of Moses: but do
but view S. Paul's way of arguing, and you will quickly find they come home to
us Christians too: he there tells the Jew that he taught others those things,
which yet he would not do himself: and he strives to make this good by three
several instances, first, Thou that Preachest a man should not steal, do
thou steal? Secondly, Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do
thou commit adultery? In both these, it is plain, that the Jew he dealt with did
the same things he reprehended: and straightway the third comes, Thou that
abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? So that hence 'twill follow (if
S. Paul's words have Logique in them) that these two sins are of the self
same nature too: And that to commit a sacrilege is a breach of the same Law,
as to commit an Idolatry: so that crime will appear without all doubt a plain
robbery of God; for he that steals from men, yea though a whole community of
men, though bona universitatis, yet he sins but against his Neighbor, it is
but an offense against the second Table of the Law, in these words, Thou shall
not steal: but Sacrilege lays hold on those things which the Latin Laws
call Bona nullius, it strikes downright immediately at God, and in that regard
no Idolatry can out doe-it: as this is, it is a breach of the first Table of the
Law, and both these crimes are equally built upon the self-same contempt of
God; the offenders in both kinds, the Idolater and sacrilegious person both
think him a dull sluggish thing; the first thinks he will patiently look on,
while his honor is shared to an Idol; the other imagines he will be as sottishly
tame, though his goods be stolen to his face.

This was without doubt the sense of all ancient churches; for upon what ground
could they profess they gave gifts to God, but only upon this, that they
presumed God did still accept them? So S. Iraeneus, We offer unto our God our
Goods in token of thankefullnesse. So Origin, By gifts to God we acknowledge
him Lord of all: So the Fathers generally; so Emperors and Kings; so Charles
the Great, To God we offer what we deliver to the Church, in his well known
Capitulars: And our own Kings have still spoken in this good old Christian
language; We have granted to God, for Us and Our Heirs for ever, that the
Church of England shall be free, and have her whole Rights and Liberties
inviolable; they are all the first words of our Magna Chart. Her whole Rights
and Liberties, words of a very large extent, and imply far more then Her
Substance: and yet these, and all these Lands, and Honors, and Jurisdictions;
all these have been given to God; yea, and frequently confirmed by the
public Acts of the Kingdom: and yet if Ananias might thus promise, and yet
rob God, consider I beseech you, whether England may not do so too.

2. Proposition,
God gets this Propriety as well by an acceptance of what is voluntarily
given, as by a command, that such things should be presented to him.
For the second, it is plain in the Text, that God did as much take the Temple
to be his, as he did the Jews Tithes and Offerings. These last indeed were his
by express law and command, but the Temple was the voluntary design of good
David, and the voluntary work of King Solomon. 2 Samuel 7.
Nay God expressly tells David, that he had been so far from commanding that
house, that he had not so much as once asked this service. And therefore in his
Apology Saint Paul tells the Jews, Act. 27. 8.
Neither (says he) against the Law of the Jews, nor against the Temple, have
I offended any thing: For he might in some case offend against the Temple, and
yet not against the Law: Notwithstanding all this, God pleads as much for his
Temple in the Prophet Haggai, Mal. 3. 8.
as he does in Malachi for his tithes, In this his words are, Ye have robbed we
in tithes and offerings; in the other, Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in
sieled houses, and this house lie waste? therefore ye have sown much, and
bring in little, ye eat, but have not enough, so Hag. 1. 4.

And to affirm, that God in the New Testament does accept of meat, and drink,
and clothing, as it is plain, Mat. 25. he does accept of money land was sold
for, as in the case of Ananias, and yet that he does not accept Land it self,
is so contrary to all reason, so contrary to the practice not only of the
Christian, but humane world, so contrary to what God himself has expressed in
the Old Testament, and no where ^^called it in the New, that he* that can quiet
his conscience with such concepts as these, may I doubt not attain to the
discovery of some Quirkes, which in his conceit may either palliate murders
or adulteries: For to think that those possessions are indeed Gods which he
does command, but not those which he does accept, is to use God so as we would
neither use our selves nor our neighbors: for no man doubts but that is as
properly mine which I accept as a gift from others, as what I attain to by
mine own personal acquisition, be it by a just war, by study, by merchandice,
or the like.

3. Proposition.
That to invade those things consecrated, be they moveable or immovable, is
expressly the sin of Sacrilege.
Sacrilege is then committed, say the Schools and the Casuists, (and they
speak in their own profession) quando reverentia rei sacrae debita violatur:
Aquin. 2. 2. qu. 39. Art. 1.
When we violate that reverence due to a thing sacred, by turning it into a
thing profane: so as the violation may be committed either per furtum, by
theft, strictly so taken, by stealing a thing moveable; or per Plagium, which
is the stealing of a man; or per invasionem, which is a spoiling men of lands,
or of things immovable: for as any one of these done against our neighbor is
no doubt in Scripture phrase a theft, a sin against the 8. Commandment, Thou
shall not steal: So done against God, it is no doubt a Sacrilege, and a breach
of the first Table, be it either against the first or the second Commandment,
I stand not now to dispute: for the word used in the New Test. to express this
sin, is (...), from (...), Praeda, or spolium: So that Sacrilege is not to be
defined only by theft strictly taken, but it is a depredation, a spoliation of
things consecrated, and so the word extends it self as properly (if not more)
to Lands, as it does to things moveable. And hence Aquinas is plain, Ibid.
Art. 3.
that Sacrilege reaches out its proper sense ad ea quae deputata sunt ad
sustentationem ministrorum, sive sint mobilia, sive immobilia: For it would be
very strange to affirm, that in the sacking of Jerusalem, Nebuchadnezzar was
sacrilegious, when he transported the holy vessels, but not at all when he
burnt the Temple.

4. Proposition,
That this sin is not only against Gods positive Law, but plainly against
the Moral Law.
For this common reason has taught all, even Pagan nations to hold Sacrilege
a sin: So that Lactantius observes, (and he was well read in humane learning,
which made him to be chose Tutor to a son of Constantine the Great) Inomni
Religione nihil tale sine vindicto: God did still remarkably revenge this
sin, not only in the true, but amongst men of the most false Religions: And
'twere easy to show, that never any Nation did yet adore a God, but they
thought he did accept, and did possess himself of some substance. I omit
those proofs that would be thought far too tedious, it is enough to quote the
Prophets words, Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me, Mal. 3. 8. A man,
any man, though an Ammonite, or a mere Philistine, no Pagan (that must be the
sense) will do it to his God, which you Jews do to me; for the Law written
in his heart (and he can go by no other) that law controlls this offense, and
so plainly tells him, that because his God may be robbed, he may therefore have
a Propriety; And if Sacrilege be a sin against the Law Moral, it will follow,
that what we read in the Old Testament against that sin, must be as moral,
and that whereby we Christians are as much obliged, as by what we read against
theft, or against adultery; save only in those passages which are particularly
proper unto the policy of the Jews, and we may let them go for Judicial.

These Assertions being premised, I return to the Epistler, who conceives it
to be no sacrilege to take away the Church Lands; [Nor do I (says he) herein
ground my opinion barely upon the frequent practice of former times, not only
by acts of Parliament in the times of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and so King
Charles, if you have not forgotten the exchange of Durham house, as well as H.
8. but even by the Bishops themselves, etc.] He will not ground his opinion
upon the practice; and indeed he has little reason for it: For if from a
frequent practice of sin, we might conclude it were no sin, we might take
our leaves of the Decalogue; and as our new Masters do, put it out of our
Directory, because our intent is to sin it down: and therefore I shall say
no more of such Laws of Hen. 8. then I would of David's adultery a that it is no
ground at all to make men bold with their neighbors Wives. Queen Elizabeth
made a Law (so you have told me Sir, for I do speak nothing in this kind but
from you) that Bishops might not alienate their Manors, Castles, etc. but only
to the Crown, but if she sometimes took order that Church, men should not be
Bishops, until they had first made such alienations (as I have heard you say
they did) I know not how to defend it, but must withal tell you, that if
Princes or Subjects resolve to sell the Church preferments, it is great odds but
that in a Clergy consisting of above 16000. Persons, they shall not want
Chapmen for them: For King James, I must highly commend that most Christian
Prince, who (you say) amongst his first Laws, took away that of Queen
Elizabeth: not can I well tell why this Epistler here does quote that King for
his purpose, unless it were only for the alienation of York* House; but I must
inform him that that Act was lawful, because 'twas for the advantage of the
Archiepiscopall See, there being clear Text for it, That the Levits themselves
might change what was theirs by a Divine Law, so they gained by the
permutation; and this answer will serve for what King Charles did about Durham
House.

But he thinks it an Argument, That even by Bishops themselves, Deanes, and
Chapters, etc. such things were done, Alienations made, and long Leases
granted: True Sir, for those Clergymen were but men, and their sins can at
all no more abrogate Gods Law, then can the sins of the Laity: yet I could
name you Churchmen of great note, who totally refused to be preferred by that
Queen to any Bishopric at all, because they would by no means submit their
conscience unto the base acts of such Alienations, and one of them was Bishop
Andrews: I could tell you too that those long Leases he speaks of, might have
one cause more then the Marriage of the Clergy; for when they saw men so
sharply set upon the inheritance of the Church; when they saw a Stool of
wickedness set up, of sacrilegious wickedness, that imagined mischief by a
Law, some, not the worst of men, thought it fit to make those long Leases, that
the estate of the Church might appear the more poor, and so less subject
unto Harpies, and then their hope was, at the length* at least after many
years spent, it might return whole unto their successors.

He goes on, But to deal clearly with you Doctor, I do not understand how
there can be any sacrilege (properly so called) which is not a theft and more,
viz. a theft of some thing dedicated to holy use, (a Co^^munion Cup for
instance or the like) and th^se you know must be of things moveable, (...)
civil Law, and how theft can be of Lands, or (...) by alienating Church Lands;
I pray ask your friend Holborne, and his fellow Lawyers, for ours here deride
us for the question.) It seems Sir they are very merry at London, or at least
this Epistler thinks so; for being winners he might perhaps conceive they make
themselves pleasant at a Feather.

And that this Argument is as light a thing, appears before from my third
Assertion: for can any man think in earnest, that it is Sacrilege, and so a
sin, to take a Cup from the Church, and it is none to take away a Manor? as
if Ahab had been indeed a thief, had he robbed Naboth of his Grapes, but Eliah
was too harsh to that good King, because he only took away his Vineyard:
Indeed there is such a nicety in the Civil Law, that actio furti lies only
against him, (...) verum de Furto. Gel. l. 11. c. ^lt.
who has stolen Rem mobilem: for Justinian it seems in the composition of his
Digests (which he took from the writings of the old Jurisprudentes) thought it
fit to follow Ulpians judgment, and yet Sabinus in his book De Furtis, a man
of note amongst those men, was known to be of another opinion: Non tantum
(says he) rerum moventium, sed fundi quoque, et aedium fieri furtum: a theft
properly so called may be of things immovable: I would gladly know of the
Epistler whether he thinks all men both Divines and others, bound to frame all
the phrases of their speech according to the criticismes of the Civil Law, as
its now put out by Justinian? If not, why may not some use the word furtum in
Sabinus his sense, as well as others may in Ulpians? and then sacrilege may be
properly called a theft, and as properly in immoveables; or if we will needs
speak according to his sense whom Justinian has approved, I do not well see
how men can spoil the Church of her Lands, and at the Civil Law escape an
action of theft: for it lies against him that takes the trees, and the fruits,
and the stones, and I am confident there is no Church-robber, but he intends to
make use of these kinds of movables; otherwise what good will the Church-land
do him? L. verum.
And if he does make this use, a thief he is in the Civil Law phrase, and
then in the very sense of this Epistler himself, he is without doubt a
sacrilegious person: but where I wonder did that Londoner learn, that Furtum
stricte sumptum, was the genus of sacrilege? so that where there is no theft
in the Civil Law sense there is none of this kind of Sin: I am sure it is
neither intimated by the Greek, nor the Latin word: nor I believe delivered by
any learned Authors on the Subject: so that I must set down an assertion, (I
conceive well grounded too) point blanck against this Londoner, and affirm
there may be a sacrilege properly so called, which is not a theft in the
Civil law-sense (which has been grounded in the third Assertion) and then we
need not trouble Sir Robert Holborne (that learned Gentleman may have other
business) nor his fellow Lawyers, for I doubt not there are enough besides, who
will here smile at this passage, and will think that this Epistler has met
with a Civil Law quirke, which he knew not well how to weild: But to say truth
he deals clearly with the Doctor, and tells him that for his particular, he
does not yet understand; which for my part I believe; and do not only wonder,
he would gibe at another man, in a point he could no better Master.

But these Arguments it seems are but only the forlorne-hope, the main Battle
is yet to come. He calls this the main quere, and desires patience from the
Doctor, First (says he) I lay this as a foundation, that there is no divine
command that Ministers under the Gospel should have any Lands. True, the
Clergy under the Gospel hold not their lands by a Divine command, but they do
by a Divine acceptance by Christ's most gracious acceptance of such goods and
possessions which have been given him by good Christians: and this title you
now hear will go as far as a law, and that is we conceive far enough, for
it gives God a propriety in such lands, and so keeps men from a re-assumption.

He goes on, The hire of a Labourer at most, as fitting maintenance, is all
that can be challenged: I but that maintenance must be honorable, or else we
Christians shall use God like no other men; far worse I am sure then do
Pagans: And when such a maintenance has been once given in lands, the
acceptance of Christ will soon make it irrevocable: so that it signifyes
little to say the Apostles had no Lands; for they who had the money for lands
fold, might (no man can well doubt) have still kept the lands had they liked
it: but the Church was straight to be in hot persecution, the Disciples were to
fly, and Lands we know are no movables, and it were very strange if not
ridiculous to affirm that Ananias and his wife sinned in taking back^ that
money which they promised, but if in specie they had given their Lands, they
might have revoked that gift without sacrilege.

He proceeds, Which I mention to avoid the groundless argument upon the Lands
and portions allotted to the tribe of Levi by Gods appointment* to whom our
Ministere have no succession. Our Ministers challenge nothing which belongs to
that Tribe, by Leviticall right: but where things are once given to God for the
use of his Ministers, they there get a moral interest; and what we read of
this kind in the Old Testament, does as much obli^ge Christians, as if it were
found in the Now. [And (...) that they enjoy their (...) by the (...) others
do, and must be subject to that Law which alone gives strength to their title.]
Out into (...): Have Churchmen no title to those possessions they enjoy, but
by the law of this Land alone? Yes, besides these, they have Christ's
acceptance, and so they are become theirs by Law evangelicall: their Lands are
Gods own propriety, and so they hold from him by the Law moral too; and
therefore though by the laws of the land they hold estates in Fee-simple, and
so may alienate without punishment from the law of England: yet they cannot do
it without the guilt of sin, as being a breach of the law evangelicall and
moral: except then only when they better themselves by some gainful, or at
least by some not hurtful permutation. Besides, were the argument good, it
would only follow, that the Clergy by their own act might alienate their
lands, but no man else without their consent. And I conceive it would not now
prove so easy a task to bring Churchmen to such an alienation.

But the Parliament may do it* for (says he) I am sure it will be granted,
that (by the Laws of this Nation) whosoever has Lands or Goods, has them
with this inseparable limitation and condition: viz. that the Parliament may
dispose of them or any part of them at pleasure. This you have often told me Sir
is strange Doctrine; for either the Parliament, (I hope he means the King in
Parliament) does this, as being the supreme power, or as being representative,
and so including the consent of the whole People of England. If as being the
supreme power, it will follow, that any absolute Prince may as lawfully do the
like* and yet this has been ever held tyrannical in the Great Turk, as being
against the rules of justice and humanity.

Indeed Samuel (...) the Israelites, that since they would needs change their
Theocracy, the immediate government of God himself, though it were into
Monarchy, the best of all humane Governments, the King should take their sons
and their daughters, their fields, and their vineyards, etc. and they should
cry, and should find no help: Yet the best Divines think, that this would be
most unjust, most sinful in their King, and expressly against the law of Moses,
who leaves every man his propriety, only the Prophet there averres it should
be not punishable in him, they should have no remedy, since being the supreme
power, 'twas in no Subjects hands to judge him: So if the King in Parliament
should take away Church Lands, there is (I confess) no resistance to be made,
though the act were inhumanely sinful. Or secondly, the Parliament does this
as representing the whole people* and so including their consent (for they who
consent can receive no injury) and then I understand not which way it can at
all touch the Clergy, who are neither to be there by themselves, nor yet (God
knows) by representation: Or if again they were there, I would gladly know
what Burgess, or what Knight of a shire, nay what Clerk, or what Bishop does
represent Christ (whose Lands these are) and by virtue of what deputation? Nor
do I believe that any Subject intends to give that power to him that
represents him in Parliament, as to destroy his whole estate, except then
only, when the known Laws of the Land make him liable to so high a censure.

But grant that this were true in Men's lands, yet sure it will not hold in
God's. For since in Magna Charta (that has received by Parliament at least 30.
Confirmations) the Lands we speak of are now given to God, and promise there
made, That the Church shall hold her whole Rights and Liberties inviolable.
Sure the Kingdom must keep what she has thus promised to God, and must now
think to begin to tell him of employed conditions, or limitations: For it were
a strange scorn put upon God, if men should make this grand promise to their
Maker, and then tell him after so many hundreds of years, that their meaning
was to take it back at their pleasure: I believe there is no good Pagan that
would not blush at this dealing, and conclude, that if Christians may thus use
their God, without doubt he is no God at all.

He goes on, [Hence is it they sometimes dispose some part in Subsidies, and
other Taxes.] The Parliament disposes part of men's estates in Subsidies, and
Taxes, and with their consents, ergo, It may dispose of all the Church Lands,
though Churchmen themselves should in down right terms contradict it: Truly
Sir, this Argument is neither worth an answer nor a smile: For I am sure you
have often told me that the Parliament in justice can destroy no private man's
estate: Or if upon necessity it may need this or that Subjects Land for some
public use, yet that Court is in justice bound to make that private man an
amends. Subsidies you said were supposed to be laid on Salvo contenemento, so
that a Duke might still live like a Duke, and a Gentleman like a Gentleman: Is
it not so with the Clergy too? By their own consent indeed, and not otherwise;
they are often imposed, and they are paid by them; but yet they are burdens
which they may bear Salvo contenemento: and they are paid not out of Gods
propriety, by alienating of his Lands, but out of that usus fructus they
receive from God: and so the maine does still go on to their successors. So
that to infer from any of these usages, that the (...) of Bishops, and
Deanes, and Chapters, may be wholly alienated from the Church, is an inference
that will prevail with none but those, who being led by strong passions that
it should be so, make very little use of their reason to oppose that passion.

He proceeds, [Now hence comes the mistake, by reason there is not such an
express condition or limitation in the Deeds of Donation, (which would silence
all dispute) whereas it is as clear a truth, that where any thing is
necessarily by Law employed, It is as much as in plain terms expressed.] No
marvel if such conditions be not expressed in Benefactors Deeds of Donation,
because it would make pious deeds most impiously ridiculous: For who would not
blush to tell God, that indeed he gives him such Lands, but with a very clear
intent to revoke them; And what Christian will say that such an intent is
tacitly there, which it were impiety to express? Nay it is apparently clear,
in the curses added by such Donors, upon those who shall attempt to make void
their gifts, that their meaning was plain, such lands should remain Gods for
ever: By Magna Charta these gifts are confirmed unto the Church for ever, (She
shall have her whole Rights and Liberties inviolable) and yet is there a tacit
condition in the selfsame Law that they may be violated.

No marvel if with us men cannot trust men, if God himself cannot trust our
laws. And if that Charter, or any else made by succeeding Princes, do indeed
confirm such Donations (as without all doubt they do) sure they must confirm
such Donations in that same sense wherein the Donors made them; for so do all
other confirmations; nay in this case of a total dis-inhaerison, there cannot
be in law any such tacit conditions or limitations as the Epistler speaks of:
For I have showed such to be unjust* and tyrannical in a private Subjects
estate, and therefore in Gods they are much more unjust; because they are sure
he cannot offend; and an unjust and tyrannical meaning must not be called the
meaning of the Law.

The Letter goes on. [Besides, it were somewhat strange, that the Donors of the
Lands should preserve them in the hands of the Bishops from the power of
Parliament, which he could not do in his own, and give them a greater and
surer right then he had himself.] The Lay-Donee might preserve them thus in
his own hands, suppose him but an honest person: for though a Parliament may
Impune disinherit such an innocent man, yet they cannot do it Just; and so in
this regard both the Donor and the Donee are in the same condition. Besides,
it is no such strange thing, for the self-same right (as a right suppose of
Fee-simple) to become more sure in his hands that takes, then it ever was in
his hands that gave it. For though the right it self be still the same right,
(for Nemo dat quod non habet) yet by gift it may now come into a more strong
hand, and by this means that selfsame right may become the stronger. And
sure with us Gods hand should be more strong then man's: Nay hence, as some
think, Lands given to the Church, were said to come in manum mortuam, as it
were into a dead hand, which parts with nothing it has once closed upon. And
why the Epistler should call this a strange thing, I do not yet see the
reason, because it is always so, when any one Benefactor does by virtue of a
Mortmaine convey his Lands to any kind of Corporation.

Again, [Nor do I underst and their meaning, who term God the Proprietor of
the Bishops Lands, and the Bishop the Usufructuary.] I conceive I have made
this plain, because such Lands were first offered to God, and became his own
Property by his own divine acceptance: And if the Dominium directum of these
things do once rest in God, the Dominium utile, the usus fructus alone is the
only thing left to be the patrimony of his Clergy. But he adds a reason,
[For I know not how (in propriety of speech) God is more entitled to their
Lands, then to his whole Creation.] Here the Epistler speaks out: For truly,
Sir, I fear the Lawyer your friend is little better then an Independent. How?
has God no more Title in propriety of speech to one piece of ground then
another? No more to a place where a Church is built, then where men have now
placed a Stable? Our English Homilies, which are confirmed by Law, cry down
this cross piece of Anabaptisme. It Is true, God made all things, and so the
whole world is most justly his by that great right of Creation: But yet the
Psalmists words are as true, The earth has he given to the children of men. So
as that great God is now well content to receive back what men will give him:
And this acceptance of his must needs in all reason make those things his more
peculiarly. Thus Christ calls the Temple his Fathers house: 'Twas God's, and
God's more peculiarly, not only by right of Creation, but by gift. Thus Lands
given unto God are his, and his more peculiarly; His, because he made them, and
his again, because having once given them to the children of men, upon their
gift he did accept them: So that his Priests, and his Poor being sustained by
them, he calls it in a more peculiar manner, His meat, His drink, and His
clothing: And then if in point of acceptance with God, there be great
difference between feeding his Priests, and feeding them that do him no such
service, there must needs be as much difference between Lands set out unto that
sacred use, and Lands of a more common employment.

He gives a second reason, [Were Clergymen but Usufructuaries, how come they
to change, dispose, or alter the property of any thing, (which an Usufructuary
cannot do) and yet is done by you daily?] How come they to change or dispose
any thing? Yes, they may change, or dispose, or alter many kinds of things, for
so without doubt any Usufructuary may do, so he wrong not his Lord by an abuse
done to his Propriety. Thus he may change his Corn into Clothing, or, if he
please, his Wool into Books: Nay he may alter the property of his possessions
too, if he have express leave of his Lord: And God himself did tell Levi, That
he was well content that men should alter some things that belonged to him, so
it were for the Tribes advantage, Levit. 27. 13:

The Letter goes on. [Aske them by what Divine Law S. Mary's Church in Oxford
may not be equally employed for Temporal uses, as for holding the Vice
chancellors Court, the University Convocation, or their yearly acts?] He might
as well have asked, Why not as well for temporal uses, as for temporal uses?
For if those he names be not so, his argument is naught; and if they be so, it is
not well put down. His meaning sure was for other temporal uses, as well as
for those. And truly Sir, to put a Church to any such kind of use, is not to be
defended; and therefore I excuse not the University: especially she having had
(at least for a good time) so many large places for those meetings. Yet
something might be said for the Vice-Chancellours Court, because it is partly
Episcopal, something for the act at least in Comitiis, because it is partly
Divine; but I had rather it should receive an amendment then an excuse. Though
it follow not neither, that because this Church is sometimes for some few
hours abused, therefore it may be always so; as if because sometimes it is made
a profane Church, it is therefore fit 'twere no Church at all.

He proceeds. [And as for their curses (those Bug-beare words) I could never
yet learn that an unlawful curse was any prejudice but to the Author: of
which sort those curses must needs be, which restrain the Parliament, or any
there from exercising a lawful and undeniable power, which in instances would
show very ridiculous, if any curse should prejudice another lawful right. I
am sure such curses have no warrant from the Law of God, or this Nation.] No
warrant from the Word of God? I conceive there is a very clear one: and our
Mother Church commends it to the use of her sons in the express words of her
Commination, Cursed be he that removes away the mark of his neighbors lands:
and all the people shall say, Amen. Deuteronomy. 27. 17. If he be accursed that wrongs
his neighbor in his Lands, what shall he be that injures God? If a curse light
upon him (and a public curse confirmed by an Amen made by all the people) who
removes but the mark whereby his neighbors Lands are distinguished; sure a
private curse may be annexed by a Benefactor unto his Deed of Donation, in case
men should rob the very lands themselves that have been once given to their
mother.

That such curses restrain the Parliament in its lawful undeniable Rights, is
(you have told me) but a great mistake: For though the Parliament may Impune
(which in some sense is called lawfully) take away the Church Lands, (though it
may do it without punishment, because (the King being there) it is the highest
power) yet that Court it self cannot do it Just, cannot do it without sin,
and that a fouler sin then the removing a Land-marke, and then a fouler curse
may follow it. Let the Epistler then take heed of these more then bug-beare
words; For believe it, Sir, in such curses as these there is much more then
Shows and Vizards: And if you will give trust to any Stories at all, many
great Families and Men have felt it.

His last Argument is (for all the rest is but declamation) [Aske your Bishops
whether Church Lands may not lawfully (the Law of the State not prohibiting) be
transferred from one Church to another upon emergent occasions, which I think
they will not deny: if so, who knows that the Parliament will transfer them
to Layhands? they-professe no such thing, and I hope they will not, but
continue them for the maintenance of the Ministry.] I conceive the Bishops
answer would be, that it is no sacrilege to transfer lands from one Church to
another: but yet there may be much rapine and injustice, the Will of the Dead
may be violated, and so sin enough in that Action; many may be injuriously
put from their estates, in which they have as good Title by the laws of the
land, as those same men that put them out. To say then the Church lands may be
totally given up, because the Epistler hopes the Parliament will commit no
sacrilege, is a pretty way of persuasion, and may equally work on him to give
up his own lands, because he may as well hope to be re-estated again, in that
the Parliament will do no injustice.

And now Sir, having thus observed your commands, I should have ceased to
trouble you; yet one thing more I shall adventure to crave your patience in:
and it is to let you know, that if this Epistler had been right in both his
Conclusions, That Episcopacy is not of Divine institution, and that Sacrilege
is no sin; yet if you cast your Eyes upon His Majesty's Coronation Oath,
wherein he is so strictly sworn to defend both the Episcopal Order, and the
Church Lands and possessions, you would easily acknowledge that the King cannot
yield to what this Letter aims at, though he were in danger of no other sin
then that of Perjury* And though I must needs guess that the Epistler knew
well of this juratory tie, yet you will the less blame him for a concealment
of this kind, because he was not retained of the Churches Counsel.

His Majesty's Oath you may read published by himself in an Answer to the
Lords and Commons in Parliament. 26. May, 1642. It runs thus:

Episcopus. Sir, Will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the
People of England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
England, your lawful and religious Predecessors, and namely the Laws,
Customs, and Franchizes granted to the Clergy by the glorious King S. Edward,
your Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true profession of the
Gospel established in this Kingdom, and agreeable to the Prerogative of the
Kings thereof, and the ancient Customs of this Realm?

Rex. I grant and promise to keep them.

Episc. Sir, will you keep Peace and godly agreement entirely (according to
your power) both to God, the holy Church, the Clergy, and the People?


Rex. I will keep it.

Episc. Sir, will you (to your power) cause Law, Justice, and Discretion in
mercy and truth to be executed in all your judgments?


Rex. I will.

Episc. Will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs which
the Commonalty of this your Kingdom have, and will you defend and uphold them,
to the honor of God, so much as in you lies?


Rex. I grant and promise so to do.

Then one of the Bishops reads this Admonition to the King, before the People,
with a loud voice.

Our Lord and King, We beseech you to pardon and grant, and to preserve unto
us, and to the Churches committed to our charge, all Canonical privileges,
and due Law and Justice: and that you would protect and defend us, as every
good King ought to be a Protector and Defender of the Bishops and Churches
under his government.

The King answers,

With a willing and devout heart I promise and grant my part, and that I will
preserve and maintain to you and the Churches committed to your charge, all
Canonical privileges, and due Law and Justice: and that I will be your
Protector and Defender to my power, by the assistance of God, as every good
King in his Kingdom by right ought to protect and defend the Bishops and
Churches under his government.

Then the King arises, and is led to the Communion table, where he makes a
solemn Oath in sight of all the People to observe the promises, and laying his
hand upon the Book, says,

The Oath.

The Things that I have before promised, I shall perform, and keep; So help
me God, and the contents of this Book.

In the First Clause it is plain, he makes a promissory Oath unto the whole
People of England, (a word that includes both Nobility, and Clergy, and
Commons) that he will confirm their Laws and Customs: And in the second
Paragraph thereof he swears peculiarly to the Clergy, that he will keep the
Laws, Customs, and Franchises granted to the Clergy by the glorious King S.
Edward: And more plainly in the fifth clause, he makes like promissory Oath unto
the Bishops alone in the behalf of themselves and their Churches: that he will
reserve and maintain to them all Canonical Privileges, and due Law and
Justice, and that he will be their Protector and Defender. Where first, since
he swears defense unto the Bishops by name, it is plain, he swears to maintain
their order: For he that Swears he will take care the Bishops shall be
protected in such and such Rights, must needs swear to take care that Bishops
must first be: For their Rights must needs suppose their Essence.

And where a King swears defense, what can it imply but defense in a Royal
Kingly way? Tu defend me gladio, and ego defendam te calamo, is the well known
speech of an old Churchman to a Prince: For sure where Kings swear defense to
Bishops, I do not think they swear to write Books in their behalf, or
attempt to make it clear to the People that Episcopacy is jure divino: But a
King, whose propriety it is to bear the Sword, swears to wear it in the
defense of Bishops; for though it is against the very Principles of the Christian
Faith, that Religion should be planted or reformed by blood, yet when Christian
Kings have by Law settled Christian Religion, and sworn to defend those persons
that should preach it, he ought sure to bear his Sword to defend his Laws,
and to keep his soul free from perjury.

And by Canonical privileges that belong to them and their Churches, there
must needs be employed the honor of their several Orders, as that Bishops
should be above Presbyters, etc. together with all their due Rights and
Jurisdictions.

The words, Due Law and Justice, cannot but import that His Majesty binds
himself to see that justice be done to them and the Churches, according to the
Law then in force when he took that Oath. And when the King swears Protection
and Defense, that Clause must needs reach not only to their persons, but to
their rights and estates; for he swears not only to men, but to men in such a
condition, to Bishops and their Churches; and those conditions of men grow
little less then ridiculous, if their estates be brought to ruin; so that
such a protection were neither at all worth the asking, nor the swearing, if
the King should protect a Bishop in his life, and yet suffer him to be made a
beggar, since to see himself in scorn and contempt, might more trouble him
then to dye.

And whereas He swears to be their Protector and Defender to his power by the
assistance of God, these words (to his power) may seem to acquit him of all the
rest, if he fall into a condition wherein all power seems taken from him: But
that Sir will prove a mistake; for one of the greatest Powers of the King of
England is in the Negative in Parliament; So that without him no Law can be
enacted there, since it is only the power-royall that can make a Law to be a Law;
so that if the King should pass a Statute to take away the Church Lands, he
protects it not to his power: since it is plain, that so long as a man lives and
speaks, he has still power to say, No: For it cannot be said that the Church
in this case may be as it were ravished from the King, and that then he may be
no more guilty of that sin then Lucrece was in her rape, for though a chaste
body may suffer ravishment, yet the strength of a Tarquin cannot possibly reach
unto a man's will or his assent.

Now in all promissory Oaths made for the benefit of that Party to whom we
swear; it is a rule with Divines, that they of all others do more strictly bind,
except then alone when remission is made, Consensu illius cui facta est
promissio.

So although the King swear unto the People of England, that he will keep and
confirm their Laws, yet if you their Commons desire these said Laws, be
either abrogated or altered, it is clear that Oath binds no further, because
remission is made by their own consent who desired that promise from him: and
upon this very ground it is true, that the King swears to observe the laws only
in sensu composito, so long as they are Laws.

But should the desire either to alter or abrogate either Law or Privileges,
proceed from any other, but from them alone to whose benefit he was sworn, it is
clearly plain by the rules of all justice, that by such an act or desire his
Oath receives no remission: For the foundation of this promissory Oath is their
interest he was sworn to And it cannot therefore be remitted but by them alone
for whose sake the Oath was taken. So that when (in the second Paragraph of the
first clause, and more plainly in the fifth) he swears a benefit to the Bishops
alone, in the behalf of them and their Churches, it is apparent that this Oath
must perpetually bind, except a remission can be obtained from the Bishops
themselves, and their Churches he was sworn to.

This then must be confessed to be the sense of the oath, that when the King
has first sworn in general to grant, keep and confirm the Laws and
Customs of the people of England, he farther yet particularly swears unto the
Clergy, to preserve their Laws and Privileges, and Customs; because since
they are not able to make a negative in Parliament, so that the Clergy may
easily be swallowed up by the People and the Lords: Therefore in a more
particular manner they have obtained an oath to be made unto them by the King,
which being for their particular benefit, it cannot be remitted without their
express consent, so that although an Act of Parliament being once passed by
the Votes of the King and both Houses, it does Sir (as you have told me) bind
the whole People of England: yea the whole People as it includes the Clergy
too; yet it concerns the King by virtue of his Oath to give his Vote unto no
such Act as shall prejudice what he has formerly sworn unto them, except he
can first obtain their express consent, that he may be thereby freed from his
juratory obligation.

It may be said perhaps that in the consent given by both Houses of Parliament,
the consent of the Clergy is tacitly employed, and so it is, (say our Lawyers
as you have told me Sir) in respect of the power obligatory, which an Act so
passed obtaines upon them, for they affirm that it shall as strongly bind the
Clergy, as if they themselves had in express terms consented to it. Although
Bishops being men barred from their Votes in Parliament, And neither they nor
their inferior Clergy having made choice of any to represent them in that
great Council, their consents can in no fair sense be said to be involved in
such Acts as are done as well without their representative presence, as they
once without their personal.

But the Question is, whether a tacit consent, (though it be indeed against
their express wills) can have a power remissory to absolve the King from his
Oath; he that affirms it has, must resolve to meet with this great absurdity,
that although (besides his General Oath unto the whole People of England) His
Majesty be in particular sworn unto the Rights. of the Clergy, yet they
obtain no more benefit by this, then if he had sworn only in general; which
is as much as to say, that in this little draught Oaths are multiplied without
necessity, nay without signification at all, and that the greater part of the
first, and the whole fourth clause, are nothing else but a mere painful
draught of superfluous tautologies.

For his yielding to the two first lines swears him to keep and confirm the
Laws and customs of the whole people of England; which word (People) includes
those of the Clergy too, and therefore in general their Laws and Customs are
confirmed no doubt in those words, and so confirmed that they cannot be shaken
but at least by their tacit consent in a Parliamentary way. But since the King
condescends to afford to their Rights, a more particular juratory tie, there is
no doubt but it binds in a way too, that is more particular; so that His
Majesty cannot expect a remission of this oath, without their consents clearly
expressed: For as when the King swears to keep the Laws of the People in
general, he cannot be acquitted but by the express consent of the people, or
by a body that represents the People, quatenus the people* so that when in
particular he swears unto the Laws and Customs of the Clergy, this Oath must
needs bind until it be remitted in an express form, either by the whole
Clergy, themselves, or by some Body of men at least, that represents the
Clergy, quatenus the Clergy, and not only as they are involved in the great
body of the People, so that he that shall presume to persuade His Majesty to
pass an Act in prejudice of this ecclesiastical Body (to whom he is thus
sworn) without their express consent first obtained, councels him to that
which is both grossly injurious unto his fellow Subjects, nay which is indeed a
most damnable wickedness against the very soul of the King.

Sir, as I conceive it is now plain enough, that if the Parliament should
destroy the Episcopal Order, and take away the Lands of the Church; the Houses
in that Act would run themselves into two sins, and His Majesty into three;
and upon this supposition the Epistler and I are agreed: [I do not think
(says he) Convenience or Necessity will excuse Conscience in a thing in it
self unlawfull] and before that, he calls the contrary the Tenet of the
Romanist, or Jesuited Puritan: Only I would beseech him for his own souls
sake to consider how great a scandal he has given to mankind, in defense of
such sins as these. For I conceive that Durand offended more in holding
Fornication was no sin against the Law natural, then Shechem did (who was
only under that Law) in his Lust upon old Jacobs Daughter, Fraudem legi
facere, (says the Civilian) is worse then Legem violare, it argues a more
un-Subject-like disposition for a man to put tricks and quirks upon his Prince
his Laws, then to run himself into a downright violation: And God we know
is King, I am a great King (says the Lord of Hosts) and a King in whose hand
is vengeance, Malach. 1. 14. It Is true Sir, we are thus put into a very sad
condition, when the only Option that seems left us now, is either to choose
sin or ruin; but yet (if well used) it is a condition glorious; a condition
wherein all that noble Army of Martyrs stood, before they could come at
Martyrdom, and if in preparation of mind we thus lay our lives down at the
feet of Christ, I am undoubtedly persuaded it is our only way to preserve them.

FINIS.

