PANTALOGIA. THE SAINTS ABUNDANCE OPENED.

BY THOMAS STERRY Preacher of the GOSPEL.

Published at the earnest entreaty of some Friends.

Imprimatur JOHN DOWNAME.

LONDON, Printed by F: Neile for William Wenborn, at the Sign of the Rose at
the Bridge-foot. 1646.

TO THE TRULY VIRTUOUS MY HIGHLY HONORED FRIEND, The Lady H. Wife to the RIGHT
WORSHIPLVLL, Sir H. H. KNIGHT.
THe Scriptures frequently tell of a wealth, a plenty, a fullness, which
believers only have right to, and enjoy. The best endeavors of your humble
Servant has been (both in the Pulpit, and the Press) to set this before you:
that in all Your relations, in all Your enjoyments on earth Your Soul might be
carried forth after this abundance which in the Scriptures language is not
only true, durable, riches; but honors too.

Ever Honored, pardon me if I humbly move to be heard in this: viz. remember,
O! remember in all Your uses of this worlds plenty principally to use this
abundance: for by this alone can You be made for ever rich, for ever Honorable.

And I bow my knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, that in all Your
uses of this abundance, You may use it as Your own. That Solomon's Proverb may
for ever be Your impresso, with me are riches and honors. Thus he daily prays,
who is,

Madam, Your Ladyships lowest Servant in Christ Jesus. Thomas Sterry.
November. 23. 1645.
To the READER.
Reader,
BEcause in things of public view, it is a custom, give me leave also, to
make (my) particular addresses. Be it known, I have done (in the publishing of
this) no more than what many, daily, powerful, persuasions have drawn me to.
Loath (indeed) I was, but being overcome, my Motives turned to a Command, and
how great an insufficiency soever I found in my self for it, I must do it. Now
as I am able, I have done it: not with an intent (if in me there were that Art)
to work upon you with the enticing words of man's wisdom; but humbly to declare
as a weak dim-sighted man (as I have received) the things of an immortal God,
yea, the deep things on which hangs the eternal comfort of my own Soul.
Heartily (I beseech you) then embrace what so I present, remembering always
that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
If any man think of, or expect from, these rural lines otherwise; on such I
have spent my pain, my time, for naught; with them my labors has been in
vain, yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my Labors with my God.

T. S.

PANTALOGIA. THE SAINTS ABUNDANCE OPENED.
ROMANS 8.32. -- How shall be not with him also freely give us all things?


I Will briefly acquaint you, with one part of the Spirits aim in this Text,
from the Context. It is (from the confideration of a firm consolation) to
cheer, to bear-up the spirits of such who are, already under, or, apt to droop
at, the sad predictions of a holy life. Which are, If any man will come after
me, -- let him take up his cross, etc. Luke 9.23. Yea, and all that will live
godly shall suffer persecution. 2 Timothy 3.12. In the 17. ver. of this 8th.
Chapter these are called -- suffering with him-. Now, for a revivall of their
drooping hearts he presents this consolation: viz.

Sufferings are inferior to glory. A Saints Cross is below his Crown. If the
earliest glimmerings of our Lord Jesus upon a Soul, shroud so much joy, so much
strength of spirit within their own beams: as overpower'th the cross, and
smileth at the shame; what will his meridian rays of glory when they shall be
revealed?

With the least of these the whole body of a Saints sufferings is not worth the
comparison. Through infirmity, some have, others may oppose it to glory; but
by lifting up your eye to the 18. ver: view its worthless opposition. -- The
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed in us. The inward sense of this difference (Present
sufferings, future glory,) together with the disproportion (of These to That)
which makes them not worthy to be compared) I can conveigh into none: this is
all I can say to every Soul, that in respect of worth, the basest metal with
gold may be as well compared, as sufferings with glory.

To this he adds: Sufferings are no perpetual impediment to glory. A Saints
cross hinders not his crown any more than a dark night the rising of the Sun
the next Morn. Persecution by men may, fleshly warrings against the mind shall,
troubles of all sorts for the night of this life, endure; but -- glory shall be
revealed. v. 18 ult. part.

This appears by four things. By the Creatures expectation. Saints
qualification. Spirits work. Fathers love.


The first is the Creatures expectation. There is a hidden strong defire of
glory in every creature. It appears by this their earnest expectation. There is
also a full discovery yet to be made of this glory. It is evident by their
Waiting for its manifestation. Of both these you read in the 19. ver: -- The
earnest expectation of the creature waits for the manifestation of the sons of
God. This manifestation, etc. is spoken in reference to glory, and in the 21.
ver: is called the glorious liberty of the sons of God.

With one force these verses with the 22.23. prove by all our fellow creatures
(notwithstanding great opposition) a future glory of the Saints.

The second is, the Saints qualification. This the Spirit notes in two
expressions: Hope, Patience. Of their Hope you read in the 24. ver. -- We are
saved by hope -- in ver. 25. for that which we see not, -- of their Patience in
the same verse: -- then (or therefore) do we with patience wait for it. To me
these expressions seem to concur in this fignification; The certain
manifestation of invisible glory to the Saints. But with this distinction.

First, as the ground of their hope. From future certainty springs hope
infallible. This hope is the true, present union of the Soul with that
certainty; the true real appearance of that to the soul. Glory invisible
(without all question) shall be revealed. This leads the soul to hope for its
discovery. Which act of the soul is its sweet close, its secret conjunction
with that glory invisible: that glorie's true, present appearance to it. Good
Abraham thus saw (though then it was a far off) the brightness of the Fathers
glory. Thas Saints now see (that which shall be revealed) the excellent glory
of that glory. This is the appearance, the manifestation of glory to the Saints
in this life. This is their salvation by hope.

Secondly, as the Crown of their patience. These words -- Then do we with
patience wait for it; implies as much. Saints are men singular in the world;
they discover more by hope than by sense: and recover more by patience then by
pains. That shall be finished, gloriously crowned, with the full accomplishment
of its expectation. The Saints therefore wait, otherwise, they wait in vain.
But for what? for a rising Sun, a superexcellent glory to be revealed in them,
in their souls after this life, in their bodies after this world. This is the
highest, fullest, greatest manifestation of that glory which shall in that day
sweetly, fully, certainly satisfy all patient desires that have been exercised
in the expectation of it. This is the glory the Saints wait for.

The third is, the Spirits work. Of this, what more can be said? what more can
be thought, than is summ'd-up in the 26. verse? Likewise the Spirit helps our
infirmities, etc. This has two parts. A Person. and His work.


First, a Person. The Spirit of glory. It appears, he is engaged in a Saints
sufferings: by those conjunctive particles: Likewise: also. But how? Not
simply, but in reference to his work.

Secondly, His work. To help our infirmities. Piscat.
Divines say, to help our infirmities: is Auxiliari nobis infirmis, quum prae
infirmitate non sufficimus oneri crucis portando. The Spirit strengthening weak
men to hear the burden of the Cross. The Spirit bearing (as it were) the
burden that man faint not. So that sufferings may, load a Saint: not hinder
his glory.

The fourth is, the Fathers love. A royal attribute, which has its floods in
persecutions hottest climate.

It is seen In the Fathers heart. By the Fathers hand.


First, in his heart. Have you ever observed in the relation, or action, of
private, of public differences; how the auditors, the spectators, have
inclined, or sided, (as affection led them) to the one party, or with the
other? So sides (yea far more) this person of glory with all his Saints. He
sees, he hears, their sorrows, their cries, his heart earns, and he takes their
parts. ver. 31. If (or Ponitur autem si pro quia. etc. Pisc. --
because) God be with us (Beza renders it on our side) who can be against us?
The glory prepared (therefore) shall in them be revealed. All sufferings cannot
hinder; (in all) the Father of glory sides with them, is for them, is with them.

Secondly, By his hand. A loving heart is open handed. Can any thing be thought
too much, too dear, to express a heart fully indeared to one? The Scriptures
tell us; This Person so entirely loved -- that he gave his Son, his only
begotten. Joh. 3.16. He gave him as his, rich, rare, love-token to the Saints.

A gift implies propriety, and possession; and this the greatest, the sweetest.

What hindrance then can sufferings be to Saints? Christ the brightness of the
Fathers glory, and all things are theirs: theirs as a Right, a right Peculiar
to them, a right enjoyed by them, after the sweetest the fullest way. -- How
shall he not with him also freely give us all things? v. 32.

This Text by some is read; How does he not, etc? referring (as it were) to the
particular moment of each Soul's conversion, wherein the Father, in the act of
giving his Son, does instate them in the inheritance of all things in him.

By others, How Has he not, etc? (as it were) pointing at the Saints present
enjoyment of that inheritance. This seems most harmonious in the literal
sound: the word, Has, being expressed (in every Translation either silently or
visibly) twice before.

But the Greek word ((...)) most properly signifies: How shall he not: etc.
This thwarts not the other two, but (according to the manner of expression, a
question carrying it is answer in it: which is, He shall with him freely give us
all things) renders the text as a gracious promise of continuing the Fathers
bounty to the Saints, begun in them at their hour of conversion.

Now with out any longer stay; the parts of this Teat are two. viz. A free
giver. His great gift.


First, a free giver. -- How shall He not freely give? Who this is appears by
the demonstrative particle, He. A person easily known by his paternall
relation. It Is He (in the beginning of the verse) Who spared not bis Son, etc.
and freely to bestow this gift is His proper act.

Secondly, His great gift. But who? or what is this great gift? It is marked
with a double character: A Person, All things. -- How shall he not WITH HIM
give us ALL THINGS?

First, a Person, a Divine, a Distinct person in the Trinity, Jesus Christ. He
is spoken of, as of a Person; Him: as of a Divine person; Him; in reference to
Son: as of a Distirct person in the Trinity; Him; as Another besides this He;
the Father.

Secondly, All things. Some say such only are these All things which are
necessary to salvation. Others, These; and Created things too. It is true, All
things, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cophas, or the world, or life, or death,
things present, or to come, are the Saints. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. But I will not
here anticipate my purpose. My Doctrine from the text is this.

Doctr.
Such as have received Jesus Christ (Saints by calling) enjoy by his Fathers
liber all hand, all things with him.

By comparing two places I will at once prove, and explain it.

Romans 8.32. wherein Paul speaks as a Saint to Saints; when he says, -- Shall
be not give us all things? with 1 Corinthians. 2.12. we -- know the things that are
freely given us of God. These places have this sense, with this Difference. The
Father freely upon his Saints bestows all things. This all things he bestows
with it is distinction. By things therefore he explains All things; both which
in sense are terms equivalent. A Saints All things then are but all some
things, but such as in themselves are truly All things. Of things the
Scriptures thus distinguish, (...), and (...): Things whose depths are fathomed
only by the Spirit; of God, things, Divine. Things, apparent to the sencitive,
to the rational soul; things Huntaine. 1 Cor. 2.11. For what knows the THINGS
OF A MAN save the spirit of man which it in him: even so the THINGS OF GOD
knows no man, but the Spirit of God.

If the latter (Things humain) be here meant, then a Saints All things are
those which St. Paul calls the world, this life, things visible, and temporal:
1 Cor. 3.22. David, the portion of the wicked: Psalm. 17.14. And Solemon, Things
equally common to good and bad. Eccl. 9.2.

In such gifts, in such enjoyments, what comfort peculiar, to believers? what
difference essential, can there be, between the righteous, and ungodly?

Their All things therefore must be Peculiar, Dinisive, Constitutive. Things
only theirs, distinguishing them, constituting them. Such as the natural man
has no part in. Such as differenceth them from him. Such as makes them to be
what they are: men effectually called. Such as these are only the deep things
of God. These are the Fathers gift, and these from St. Paul's mouth are called
All things. 1 Cor. 2.10. But God has revealed (which is his hidden free way of
giving) them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searches All things, yea,
the Deep things of God.

Take now (that your souls may suck at the breasts of Consolation) two
questions of worth from this Doctrine.

Quest. 1.
Wherein does the ABVNDANCE of a believing soul (which is these, Deep things of
God, ALL THINGS given) fully consist? or what more particularly these deep
things, these all things?

Answ.
The holy Trinity one God (blessed for ever) bestowing himself upon a creature
in those sweet relations mentioned in his Word, is these deep, these All
things: in whose inward enjoyment (after this way which is a mystery hid to
the world) consists (as theirs) the Saints abundance.

From this Answer take three notes.

The first is: the Father is All things, the Son is All things, the holy Ghost
is All things: yet, not three divided, but one All things: so that the
believers abundance is to be conceived not only to lie, in the unity of the
Godhead; but also, in the distinction of persons.

The second is; the relations of the Father, of the Son, of the holy Ghost
downward to the creature, are equally common to each of them as one God; but
distinctly peculiar as three persons: The Father bestowing, therefore, of these
All things upon the creature is not only the free manifestation of community
in relation in the unity of the Godhead; but also, of peculiarity, in the
trinity of persons.

The third is, a believers propriety in this gift (so as he can sencibly say,
My abundance) is by an inward relative sense of this Unity in Trinity.

Thus God is All things, thus he is Given, thus as the abundance to the Saints.

Here Is wine and marrow, a misterious piece of heaven displaid in each person
in the Godhead, which, not many wise, not many mighty can perceive; but, is
freely revealed to tender babes.

First, God the Father is All things, abundance. Ephesians. 3.19. -- That ye might
be filled with all the fullness of God. These words, for their conexion, their
explication, refer you to verse. 14. viz. For this cause I how my knees to the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus: that is, he prays to God the Father: and
for what? (besides other things) for this (as one) that the believing Ephesians
might be filled with his own fullness: which may sound thus, That they might
have abundantly of him, even all things that might make them perfect before him.

This person (therefore) freely bestows himself upon such as he bestows his Son;
that together with him, they might have this abundance, this all things.

A man's gift (says Solomon) makes room for him. -- Prove. 18.16. Jesus Christ
is the gift of this person: and wheresoever he is, there is his Father too. He
is there (by deed of gift) after the same way as Jesus Christ is. So that a
believer may lay claim to him, yea, as truly to him as to Jesus Christ. He may
challenge him, for his own, and all that he has as freely, truly, really, as
any thing that he injoyes in the world. For the right that he has in himself
is not more firm, proper, unquestionable, than that which a believer has in
him: it being a way of undeniable propiety (which is the deed of gift) in which
he has past himself over to his creature.

By this act and deed he makes himself over in a double relation. As a Father,
to them. God in Covenant, with them.


First, as a Father. It is that which he speaks of himself. 2 Cor. 6. ult. -- I
will be a Father to you: -- Here (as to behold both) let your eye equally fall
(but with a distinct look) upon the person (I) and the relation; (Father:) for
this latter only serves as a respective accident under which the first is
referred and made over to the creature justified. Which is done by (deed of
gift) freely giving himself over to them. -- I will be -- to you: -- thus this
person of glory becomes a Father.

But what is it for him to be thus related? or what, to give over himself as a
Father? A sublime mystery (swelling with sweetness) thus opened. The reference
of himself to them according to a mutual, objective, coexistent, dependence.

Here vulgar thoughts, of Dependancie are apt (but suffer them not) to grow
over rank: This persons is only paternall, such as is an inseparable
conjunction of a Father and his child in their relative Existencies, in their
Diffinitions. The one (which of them soever it be) cannot be so, nor so called;
but by this dependence. Ask: what is a Father? how comes he to be so? Do we not
answer? One that has a child: and because he has a child. Transpose the
terms: what is a child? how comes it to be so? One that has, and because it
has, a Father. Thus he depends, thus mutually.

Objectively, as directly pointing each to other: (the Father to his child, and
the contrary) in a distinction from all things subjectively depending on their
substance in which they inhere. Contemporarie are they too: neither thus
existing before or after each other, but both together. The Father, indeed, as
a man, the agent begetting is (said to be) the cause, and so is in Nature
before the begotten: but a father the one is not, till the other is a child;
and so he depends coexistently.

Of this person and a believer, as thus allied according to adoption, is all
this affirmed. Inseparately are they for ever conjoined: yea so, as abstract
the one from the other, and neither can be, what thus they are; neither can be
thus called. (pass by our Saviors sonship of eternal generation) Come to a
beleever's by free adoption; and he is their Father; he comes to be so, as they
are his children adopted; and because they are so. His paternity, their
sonship, have for their basis a mutual dependence. Between these (to hinder
the object of each others eye) flies no gloomy cloud: but both, like the eye of
day darting its beams upon the centure of the Creation, are still looking upon,
still pointing, each, to other. One thought of either excludes, darkens,
neither; but takes in both. For, touching a believers sonship, what mind can
pass a thought, and in the same not include this persons paternity? They are
children: as he is, and because he is, their Father. And, which is more, both
relations in priority claim an equal privilege. His paternity (to them)
precedes not their sonship, neither is first, or last, they co-exist. He is not
to them a Father, till they are children, by adoption, to him.

Secondly, as, a God in Covenant. Of this way too of giving himself; himself
speaks: Hebr. 8.10. -- I will be their God: -- one article (and that on Gods
part, are these words) of a Contract, a Covenant everlasting, new, between God
and man. For matter, it is himself, God: for manner, ^deed of gift, -- I will
be theirs: In the first unbound your thoughts, and in some particulars enclose
not him, who has (in one word, God:) given over himself without limits. He
will be their God: not in some one attribute only; or in more; but he in All
gives himself to be a Saints: their God. Theirs what his own, that is, God.

The certainty of this by entering Covenant he has put out of all question:
freely binding himself over to perform, -- I will be, etc. -- I (a particle of
equal worth, and value with, God.) I, who am very God, will see that I be your
God. Yours, as bound to you: yours, as (on my one part) the substance of the
Covenant.

But secondly, in himself too has God the Son abundance, yea, all things. He
is a plenty without an end, his measure (if it may be so called) is fullness;
fullness in the largest extent, all: and for ever inseparable from his person,
it Dwelt in him. Col. 1.19. -- It pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell.

Now this Son to every believer is the Fathers gift, Isa. 9.6. -- To us a Son
is given -- as their abundance. Joh. 1.16. -- Of his fullness have we (Saints
by calling) all received, -- as firm, then, as undeniable is the believers
title (of propriety and possession) to Him and his fullness, as to God the
Father. In the world there is nothing (either fully, truly, or clearly) can be
more their own.

He is given to them, clearly, without condition, truly, without deceit, fully,
without division: his Person, his Benefits are both theirs. He (this way) is
all theirs, and for them.

His Person now in heaven is theirs, as there for them. The Father gives him to
them to stand in their stead: representing them continually spotless and
unblameable in his sight. Thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee.
Cant. 4.7.

All theirs are his Benefits too. The Father never gives one alone, but both
together. Let loose your thoughts among the fruitful benefits of his person,
and try, if there can be found one, upon which the believers propriety is not
deeply engraven in these characters, THEIRS. Free justification from sin's
damning guilt, sweet reconciliation to God his Father, complete adoption to
glory and liberty; is their justification, their reconciliation, their
adoption, as Jesus Christ given to them.

Now Christ, as thus theirs, is, so in four respects. As their Husband.
Brether. Friend. Advocate.


First, as their Husband. Revel. 21.9. -- I will show you, the Bride, the Lambs
wife: that is, the Church, believers standing to Jesus Christ, related, as to
their Husband. For, Jer. 3.14. -- I (says he) am married to you: -- to which
add this conjugall effect, The wife has not power of her own body, but her
husband; and likewise the husband has not power over his own body, but the
wife. 1 Cor. 7.4. They who before, wore no yoke but their own, retaining a
prerogative in self propriety; have mutually exchanged, and solely become each
others after the celebration of nuptial rites. This, Ephesians. 5.32. is (according
to the flesh) a great mystery; but I speak concerning Christ and the Saints: to
whom (being married, and thereby fully given over to them) he has not that
power now remaining in him as to deny himself, or his sanctifying, saving uses.
He is married to them, and so he is theirs. My beloved is mine, etc. -- Cant.
2.16.

Secondly, as their Brother. Joh. 20.17. -- Go (says he to Mary) to my
brethren, (the disciples, personating all believers) and say unto them, I (that
is Jesus their Brother) ascend -- Fraternity (for its kind) is the nearest,
native, personal relation: giving an actual propriety to both, in each other;
a joint one (while they live) in their Fathers possessions; and a total
sometimes to the survivour in his deceased brothers. All which is freely given
to a believer with Jesus their Brother. His next of kin: are such; for (with
their difference, 1 John 3.9.) they are born of God as well as he. Whereby he
in their persons, and they in his, have, at once and for ever, this nearest,
this native, propriety.

Moreover, this their Brother was dead, but is alive: Rev. 1.18. By virtue of
whose brotherhood, as he now lives for ever; believers have a share with him
as joynt-heirs in (life and immortality) God their Father's eternal
possession. Romans 8.17. If children, then heirs, heirs of God, and coheirs with
Christ, etc. --

And still by virtue of the same relation, (as he was once dead) believers
retain a full interest in all his benefits. The first person of glory (when
upon them he bestowed this Jesus) dealing with them as a loving Father after
the funeral solemnity of his eldest Son: gave ALL to them (as the next of
kin) that was in the possession of their elder Brother. His obedience, his
satisfaction, his righ^eousnesse, was transacted upon them, and now is theirs.
Thus he that was dead, and is alive; is theirs, as Jesus their Brother. This
partly is that giving of Christ to a Soul, as Christ dying, and as risen again.

Thirdly, as, their Friend. Equality, which other relations has not, appears
in this. A Husband, a Brother, are titles of dignity, therefore terms of
distance: but Friends are equal. And he into whose thoughts it never entered as
robbery to be equal with God: Phil. 2.6. thinks it no disgrace thus to be
equal with a Saint. Ye are my friends, etc. -- Joh. 15.14.

If relations infold any rights reciprocal, friendship then may hold parallel
with most. For men thereby have in each other a true, constant interest: such
as, the sum whereof the ancient Heathen have long since cast up; and, in
their grave Orations, their best passionate Songs, left it upon record; That
true friends have divided bodies, for each other, upon occasion, ready to die:
and but one heart, one mind, one possession, common to both.

In aftertimes, The multitude of them that believed were of me heart, and of
one soul, neither any of them said that any thing of that which he had was his
own, but they had all things common. Act. 4.32. And some there has been (yet
but few such) who cheerfully for each other have adventured to walk through the
worst of dangers: among whom, matchless in all is this couple; a true
believer, and his friend Jesus.

To speak only on his part: Joh. 10.17. -- I lay down my life, etc. -- v. 18.
No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; -- 1 Pet. 2.24. -- His
own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, -- 1 Cor. 15.3. -- Christ
died for our sins, -- Romans 4.25. -- and was raised again for our justification.
And, Joh. 17.19. for their sakes I sanctify my self that (as the Margin reads
it) they also might be truly sanctified.

The ancient Greeks therefore called him (...), such another. Plut.
A Friend is his friend's, as he is another own self. In all these, this Friend
Jesus is theirs, as thus to them. Observe the burden of the last quoted
Scriptures, in every one it is, Christ for them. He, with All that he did, in,
dying, rising, justifying, sanctifying, was in their steads, and for them. As
their persons then, as their performances this friend, and his, is theirs.

A peculiar interest too (to complete their community in him) they have in his
tender heart and soul. Thou have ravished (or taken away) my heart, etc. --
Cant. 4.9. Of this friend's especially, it is true, the heart is not so much
where it lives, as where it loves. By distinction of persons Christ and a Saint
are two: by union in affection he is theirs. This (as one branch) is that
unity, which is the (believers band of comfort.

Fourthly, as, their Advocate. The expression is political, a sublime title of
office, implying a Subject employed (after this way) for another: and as thus
spoken of Jesus Christ we read it: 1 John 2.1. -- We have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ, -- who (as it is his office) makes intercession for us.
Romans 8.34. that is, continues the mournful act of his sacrifice after this
manner. The same body (which in believers steads) with strong cries and tears
was upon the cross once offered; now virtually in the heavens with as strong
prayers he still so offers up for them to the Father. So that in this act of
oblation for them, his person is, as an Advocate, theirs.

And now lastly, God the Spirit is abundance, yea theirs, as the Father's gift,
with Jesus Christ, to them. In one breath you may read all three. Tit. 3.5. --
And renewing of the holy Ghost, v. 6. (...) as relating to (...), not to (...).
Which (holy Ghost) he (the Father, in a distinction from his Son, and Spirit)
she^n us abundantly by Jesus Christ. Abundantly on us is here joined with the
Father's effusion of his Spirit: declaring thereby it is signification to be an
abundance, and that theirs by the Father's gift.

To this Spirit also has a believer then as true a title as to the Father, and
the Son. To them the promise -- the Father -- shall give you another Comforter,
the Spirit of truth. -- Joh. 14.16, 17. is fulfilled. Upon them the Father has
poured him forth. They have him (actually in possession, peculiarly in title)
he is theirs.

Now as the other two persons had their distinct relations in which they were
made over, this has his proper work in which he is theirs: viz. This Spirit is
their only light by which they see all things (necessary for them to see) of
the Father and Jesus Christ. God has made sense and reason lights (in their
own spears) to this world of nature: but in the deep things of himself these
are darkness to a Saint. As it is written, eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither has entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared
-- 1 Cor. 2.9. But (mark what follows) God has revealed them unto us by his
Spirit, for he searches all things, yea the deep things of God, v. 10. And in
v. 12. We have received the Spirit -- which is of God, that we might know the
things, etc. -- It Is the proper work of this Spirit to sound these depths, for
from eternity he lived in the bosom of the Godhead, and was privy to all in
God and Jesus Christ.

It Is his only too, to make them known. As an inhabitant therefore (he is
said) to dwell in believers, 2 Timothy 1.14. Into whose minds, to whose souls he
continually bring them. Here shines the Saints light in a mystery, they know
these things (not theoretically, but feelingly) as this Spirit reveals them.

Thus (as well as I am able) little of much have I set before you; the
relations of these persons of glory, in which God freely makes himself over to
his creature: and not all, but some: yet by these few imperfect lineaments the
spiritual sense of that Christiano-Platonicall thesis ( one was all, and all
one) may be in some sort conjectured. For this Trinity (indeed) is but One, and
that one a believers ALL.

This is the close of the first Question.

Quest. 2.
What comfort has a believer more by having this ALL FREELY GIVEN him, than by
enjoying it any other way?

Ans.
A great deal. In the enjoyment it is unspeakable, full of glory.

Consider this All but simply as a gift; so it was neither bought, nor
borrowed. Deeds of Sale, and Loan have each their trouble: viz. Laerge expense,
short enjoyment. And were this all made over by either of these, the creature
must pay for it, and at last part with it. If the first (their Stock not
amounting to the ten thousandth part of the price) they must then either go
without it, or be undone in the purchase.

Or if not so, should God but lend Himself, his Son, his Spirit; a time would
come, when but justly he would look for his own again. Would not this then be
as bad as the former? The Creature would be undone in the surrender.

But now the Father has burdened them with neither of these. What they have,
they have by gift. Herein then lies (that which is better felt then spoke) one
piece of their comfort: viz. With a price they are not troubled; of a parting
with they are not afraid. This all (though in respect of Christ (it is true)
the Saints are bought with a price) costs them nothing, and is theirs to
eternity.

Consider it again as a free gift. And here if you would rightly understand the
Answer of the Question, have recourse in every particular (as the sound passes
by your ear) to the cheerful workings of your own soul. Are the Saints
entitled to? are they possessed of, All freely? All then is theirs without
reluctancie. Jer. 30.18. The Father the (proper giver) waits to be gracious. In
his eye a cheerful giver is of great esteem: 2 Cor. 9.7. for he himself
delights to give cheerfully. All such acts toward his own go not to, but from
his heart.

All is theirs without any motive external. Among men, the glory of a gift's
freeness consists in the voluntarinesse of the spirit: we use not therefore to
call that free to which a man is outwardly provoked. Were God thus moved to
give Himself, Son, and Spirit to a Saint, a gift it might be; but not free.
That, therefore which he does by deed of gift, comes from a principle within
him (his love: Joh. 3.16.) that his gift might appear plainly to be free.

All is theirs without Condition. The Father gives it not according to the Law,
but the tenor of the Gospel. He binds not his Creature, in the act of
donation, to the performance of Articles for their interest in his gift: but
bestows (where he pleases) without these: Conditions (it is true) may
perchance sometimes stand with a gift, but they are always limits to the
freeness of it: that then which is bounded cannot be free. This great gift
therefore is unconditionate.

Thus I have done with the Doctrinall part.

Uses.
Now to close all, give me leave (my dear friends) to speak thrice to you.

1.
First, an Information. Are believers thus possessed of All things in the
enjoyment of Jesus Christ? They are (then) the only rich men. Rich absolutely,
rich incomparably, none so rich, nor truly so, as they. Histories give us the
name of one, who was (from some few earthly possessions) reported to be the
richest of all the Romans: and had we not the Scriptures, we might suppose our
days yields not this man his fellow. But as he among them, so (and far more)
are all the Saints among the sons and daughters of men.

Behold, Paul sounds with a full blast in our ears -- All is theirs. 1 Cor.
3.22. Can your thoughts of their wealth now choose but fill? yea, to their
largest extension? mine cannot: this all (to me) represents more, than can be
discovered by any relation. Solomon of old under the name of Wisdom sung thus
of Jesus Christ, With me are riches and honors. -- Prove. 8.18. Believers under
the relations of the Trinity to them, may sing thus of themselves, With us are
riches and treasures; we have durable incomparable riches: Jesus Christ, his
Father, and Spirit.

And are these enjoyed by a deed of free-gift? No qualifications (then) may
pre-exist to make the creature either more worthy, or capeable of them. If the
contrary shall still persuade, let me ask you, How then is it a gift?
much-lesse, how is it free?

Pardon me, if I close this branch with it is vindication. I humbly conceive no
liberty to licentiousness can be here grounded. Falsely it is pretended to
frustrate performances, which God forbid. They indeed, have their excellent
uses, although not these. But observe where you will men of all sorts, and who
shall you see more devout? more constant in such things, than they who humbly
wait for, who diligently wait upon this free gift?

If any there be, who, that grace may abound, take liberty to sin; an evil
spirit (we say) has deluded such: and shall a reproach, for their sakes, be
rudely cast, or lie upon the truth? Moreover, ignorance has heretofore been a
pregnant mother of scurrulous reproaches. For who more forward indeed, to load
truth with such, than they that feelingly understand it not. The Father of our
Lord Jesus grant, that this mother with her foul brood lodge not still in the
minds, and dwell between the lips of men.

Some of great worth for all other learning have been so ingenuously civil in
their thoughts, in their speeches of Plato's Ideahs, that in both they have
born a moderate respect to them: because (as they have often said) they know
not what they may mean in better understandings. Who lends me now a sigh, to
help in the lamentation of a great evil that is under the Sun? O! that men's
words and thoughts were but thus civillis'd toward the things of God, the high
things of God. O! that they were but convinced of this, that there may be a
divine power demonstrating them in humble panting souls which they yet know
not. How sweetly should we all live if this were so?

2.
A Consolation. Is it a gift, and so not borrowed? If any of you have received
it, you may sit down with bosoms filled with this comfort: What thou have is
thy own for ever. In thee then, (whosoever thou art) and in all such,
groundless are all sad thoughts of dissertion: yea, for ever groundless are
all such fears. Weakness may sometimes cloud thy soul; not really rob it of
it is own. This gift especial is stamped with this impresso: The good part
which shall never be taken from thee.

3.
An Exhortation. Is this gift all things? Expect, look for, no inward fullness
without this gift. Fire (some say) came first from heaven, and therefore
restlesly works it self through combustibles, endeavoring to aspire thither
again. Every rational soul is Heavens free born flame, raked up here in embers
of flesh, restless and unsatisfied in all its courses. It Is his labor lost
who endeavors the contrary with with things inferior to it. It can never be,
till inwardly united with this Father, this Son, this Spirit.

But with any of you, is it not yet so? Wait diligently for them till they be
given. Or is it already so? Wait still continually on them, humbly increase
your acquaintance with them. They are all fullness, they will be so to you.

Wait diligently upon this Father. He Will give you (with a daily increase) his
Son, his Spirit.

Wait upon this Son, this Jesus. It is he that can reveal all things of the
Father. If you are acquainted with him, ask him of the Father, in the discovery
of him (if you observe) you shall find this Jesus to be to you a Husband, a
Brother, a Friend, a Counselor.

Wait upon this Spirit too. Learn every day more and more the knowledge of him.
It is he that can, that must bring you acquainted with Jesus Christ. If you
already know him, why do you not ask him of your Savior? In this inquiry he
would be in you a glorious light. He would show you your Savior even as he is.

But do any of you not know him? Sure I am, you have all heard of him: Search
the Scriptures, for they speak (of all three) and of this Spirit, as they do of
your Savior.

FINIS.

