A FULL RELATION Of the late VICTORY OBTAINED (Through GODS Providence) By the
Forces under the command of General Lesley, the Lord Fairfax, and the Earl of
Manchester; Being about Twenty seven thousand Horse and Foot.

Against His Majesty's Forces under the command of Prince RUPERT and the Earl
of NEWCASTLE, Being much about the same number.

Fought on MARSTAM-MOOR, within 5. miles of YORK, on the Second of July, 1644.

With a Relation of Prince Ruperts march toward Lancashire, and of the Forces
sent in pursuit after him; as also of the E of Newcastle and Gen: Kings taking
Ship for Holland.

With the weak condition that York is now in, having quit their great Fort,
there not being 500. Soldiers in the Town besides Citizens.

Together with a LIST of the Cornets and Ensigns, with their several Motto's.

Sent by the three GENERALS to the Parliament, By Captain STEWART.

Published by Authority.

London: Printed by J. F. for Z. Blaiklock, July 11. 1644.

SIR;
MY earnest desire to satisfy your expectation, and the fear which I have,
least our affairs here should not be truly represented unto you, has moved me
to give you this short account of the late Fight:

Upon Monday last, understanding that Prince Rupert, with about Twenty thousand
Foot and Horse, did march toward us, our whole Army arose from the Siege, and
marched toward Longmarston Moore, about four or five miles from York, where we
quartered that night: But the Prince having notice of our march, passed with
his Army by the way of Burronbridge; so that by reason of the interposing
River, we could not hinder his passage into York: Whereupon we marched to
Todcaster, to prevent his going southward; but before our Van was advanced,
within a mile of Todcaster, we were advertised that the Prince was upon our
Rear, and was come the length of Longmarston, where he drew up his Army in a
place of great advantage, having the addition of the Earl of Newcastles
Forces, reported to be about 6000. with as great expedition as could be, our
Army was called back.

In the mean while the Enemy perceiving that our Cavalry had possessed
themselves of a corn hill, and having discovered near unto that hill a place of
great advantage, where they might have both Sun and Wind of us, advanced
thither with a Regiment of Red Coats, and a party of Horse; but we
understanding well their Intentions, and how prejudicial it would be unto us,
if they should keep that ground, we sent out a party which beat them off, and
planted there our left wing of Horse; having gained this place, General Lesley
gave order for drawing up of the Battle: The right wing of Horse was entrusted
to Sir Thomas Fairfax, a man of known Valor and Resolution, it did consist of
his whole Cavalry, and three Regiments of the Scottish Horse, commanded by the
Earl of Dalhousie, Earl of Eglington, and Lord Balgony; next unto them was
drawn up the right wing of the Foot, consisting of the Lord Fairfax his Foo^,
and two Brigades of the Scottish Foot for a Reserve. In the main Battle was
the Regiments of the Earl of Lindsey, Lord Mairland, Earl of Cassilis, and
Kelheads, and two Brigades of the Earl of Manchesters; In the Reserve was the
Earl of Backleign his Regiment, the Earl of Lowdons, Earl of Dumferlings, Lord
Coupers, General Hamiltons, General of the Artillery, Edinburgh Regiment had
a Brigade of Manchesters Upon the left Wing of Horse, was the Earl of
Manchesters whole Cavalry, under Command of Lieut. General Cromwell, and three
Regiments of the Scottish Horse, Commanded by General Major Lesly, and upon
their left hand near a cross ditch, where the enemy had a Regiment of Foot,
was placed the Scottish Dragoones, under the Command of Colonel Frizell: Orders
being given to advance, the Battle was led on by General Hammilton,
Lieutenant General Baylie, and Major General Crawford; the Reserve being
committed to the trust of General Major Lumsdaine: There was a great Ditch
between the Enemy and us, which ran along the front of the Battle, only
between the Earl of Manchesters foot and the enemy there was a plain; in this
Ditch the enemy had placed four Brigades of their best Foot, which upon the
advance of our Battle were forced to give ground, being gallantly assaulted by
the E. of Lindsies regiment, the Lord Maitlands Cassilis, and Kelheads,
General Mayor Crawford having overwinged the enemy set upon their flank, and
did very good execution upon the enemy, which gave occasion to the Scottish
Foot to advance and pass the Ditch. The right wing of our Foot had several
misfortunes, for betwixt them and the enemy there was no passage but at a
narrow Lane, where they could not march above 3. or 4. in front, upon the one
side of the Lane was a Ditch, and on the other an Hedge, both whereof were
lined with Musketeers, notwithstanding sir Thomas Fairfax charged gallantly,
but the enemy keeping themselves in a body, and receiving them by threes and
foures as they marched out of the Lane, and (by what mistake I know not) sir
Thomas Fairfax his new leavied regiments being in the Van they wheeled about*
and being hotly pursued by the enemy come back upon the L. Fairfax Foot, and
the reserve of the Scottish Foot, broke them wholly, and trod the most part of
them under foot.

Sir Thomas Fairfax, Colonel Lambert, and sir Thomas his brother with five or
six Troops charged through the enemy and went to the left wing of Horse, the
two Squadrons of Balgomes regiment being divided by the enemy each from the
other, one of them being Lanciers charged a regiment of the enemies foot, and
put them wholly to the rout, and after joined with the left wing of Horse, the
other by another way went also to the left wing; The Earl of Eglingtons
regiment maintained their ground (most of the enemies going on in the pursuit
of the Horse and Foot that fled) but with the loss of four Lieutenants, the
Lieut. Colonel, the Mayor, and Eglingtons Son being deadly wounded, Sir
Charles Lucas, and General Mayor Porter having thus divided all our Horse on
that wing, assaulted the Scottish Foot upon their Flanks, so that they had the
Foot upon their front, and the whole Cavalry of the enemies left wing to fight
with, whom they encountered with so much courage and resolution, that having
enterlined their Musketeers with Pikemen they made the enemies Horse
notwithstanding for all the assistance they had of their foot at two several
assaults to give ground; and in this hot dispute with both, they continued
almost an hour, still maintaining their ground; Lieut. General Baily, and
General Mayor Lumsdain (who both, gave good evidence of their courage and
skill) perceiving the greatest weight of the battle to lie sore upon the Earl
of Linsies, and Lord Maiklands regiment, sent up a reserve for their
assistance, after which the enemies Horse having made a third assault upon
them, had almost put them in some disorder; but that the E. of Lindsey, and
Lieut. Colonel Pitscotti, Lieut. Col. to the Lord Maitlands Regiment behaved
themselves so gallantly, that they quickly made the enemies Horse to retreat,
killed sir Charles Lucas his Horse, took him Prisoner, and gained ground upon
the foot.

The Scottish Dragoons that were placed upon the left wing, by the good
managing of Colonel Frizell acted their part so well, that at the first
assault they beat the enemy from the ditch, and shortly after killed a great
many, and put the rest to the rout. L. General Cromwell charged Prince Ruperts
horse with exceeding great resolution, and maintained his charge with no less
valor. Generall-major Lesley charged the Earl of Newcastles brigade of
White-coats, and cut them wholly off, some few excepted who were taken
prisoners, and after them charged a brigade of Green-coats, whereof they cut
off a great number, and put the rest to the rout, which service being performed
he charged the enemies horse, (with whom L. General Cromwell was engaged) upon
the flank, and in a very short space the enemies whole Cavalry was routed, on
whom our fore-troopes did execution to the very walls of York; but our body of
Horse kept their ground. Lieut. General Cromwell and Major-generall Lesley
being joined, and receiving advertisment that our Foot were engaged with the
enemies Horse and Foot, marched to their assistance, and met with the enemies
Horse (being retreated upon the repulse they had from the Scottish Foot) at the
same place of disadvantage where they had routed our Horse formerly; and indeed
their success was answerable, if not much worse, for we routed them wholly,
killed and took their chief Officers, and most part of their Standards. After
which we set upon the rear of their Foot, and with the assistance of our maine
battle, which all this time stood firm, we put them wholly to the rout,
killed many, and took their Officers and Colors; and by this time we had no
enemy in the Field. We took all their Ordnance being in number 25. near 130
barrels of Powder, besides what was blown up by the common Soldiers, above an
hundred Colors, and ten thousand Arms besides two Wagons of Carbines and
Pistols of spare Arms. There were killed upon the place 3000. whereof, upon a
judicious view of the dead bodies, two parts appeared to be Gentlemen and
Officers. There were 1500 prisoners taken, whereof Sir Charles Lucas
Lieutenant-generall of the Earl of Newcastles Horse, Major-generall Porter, and
Major-generall Tillier, besides diverse Colonels, Lieutenant-colonells, and
Majors. The loss upon our part, blessed be God, is not great, being only of
one Lieutenant-colonell, some few Captains, and not 300 common Soldiers. Upon
Wednesday, the day after the fight, P. Ruperts Sumpter-horse was found in the
Wood, with some of their provisions; upon Thursday morning the Soldiers being
drawn to their Arms upon a false Alarm, occasion was taken to march toward
York to our old Leaguer; about seven of the clock the Town was summoned to
render upon mercy, whereunto answer was returned under Sir Thomas Glenhams, and
the Major of the Towns hands, that they could not give it up upon such terms;
and if they shall continue in their obstinate refusals, we are resolved by Gods
assistance to storm it once this week following, for our Scaling-ladders and
all other necessaries for a storm are in readiness, there not being 500
fighting men in the Town, besides the Citizens; especially, the enemy having
quitted their great Fort for want of men to maintain it.

We hear that there have been some differences between the Prince and the
Earl of Newcastle, which appear to be more real, that they have parted
since; the Earl of New Castle, General King, and the Lord Widrington are gone
to Scarsborough, and as we understand since are shipped for Holland, and
Prince Rupert toward the North; his Rendezvous was twelve miles on the North
side of York, where appeared about fifteen or sixteen hundred horse, and
eight hundred foot. Upon Thursday at night he was at Richmond, so that it is
yet doubtful whether he intends for the Bishopric of Durham or Lancashire; if
he shall go to Durham and those parts, we hope Calender (who for certain is
before New Castle) will entertain him; however, we have sent after him all the
Scottish Cavalry, all the Lord Manchesters, 1000 of the Lord Fairefax's, and
one thousand Dragoones, in all seven thousand. While I was about to close my
Letter we received information, that the Lord Clavering with about 2000 foot
and horse are joined with the Prince, and that he is gone to Lancashire,
whereupon Sir John Meldrum with the Lancashire and Scottish foot that were
there formerly, and Sir William Brereton with 1500 horse are returned the
nearest way to Lancashire to stop the Prince his passage into the the South,
till our Horse be able to overtake him. The three Generals have sent the
bearer hereof Captain William Stewart (a Scottish officer that did good
service in the late fight) to the Parliament with the Earl of New-Castles
commission for being General, and his Commission for making of Knights, which
were taken at the sight together with some Letters of Sir John Hothams, whereby
it is clearly made known that he intended to betray Hull to the Enemy; There
are likewise sent by him all the Coronets, and colors which could be got from
the Soldiers, who esteem it a great glory to divide them in pieces and wear
them; And before Proclamation was made for delivery of them had disposed of the
most part of them. I have sent you here enclosed a list of such as were
preserved and now sent, with their several Motto's, and so for the present I
take my leave and rest,

At the leaguer near York, July 6, at ten at night. Yours, etc.

A List of the enemies Coronets and Colors, sent by Cap. William Stewart.
1. A White Coronet of Dragoones with a blew and white fringe, in the midst
whereof is painted a round beads face, and on its top the letter P. (which is
conceived to signify a Puritan) with a Sword in a hand reached from a Cloud,
with this motto, fiat Iustitia. 2. A Black Coronet with a black and yellow
fringe and a Sword reached from a Cloud, with this motto, Terribilis ut acies
ordinata. 3. A Blew, and on it a Crown toward the top, with a Myter beneath
the Crown, with the Parliament painted on the side and this motto, Nolite
tangere Christos meos, to wit, the Crown and Myter. 4. A Black with a black
fringe, and in the middle three Crowns gilded, with this motto, Quarta
perennis erit. 5. A Blew with a silver fringe. 6. A Willow Green, with the
pourtraiture of a man, holding in one hand a Sword, and in the other a Knot,
with this motto, This shall untie it. 7. A Yellow, and in the middle a stooping
Lion, at whose breech lies snatching a mastife Dog, with this word as it were
proceeding from his mouth, Kimbolton, and at his feet little beagles, and
before their mouths, Pym, Pym, Pym, with these words proceeding from his
mouth, Quousque candem abutere patientia nostra? that is, how long will you
abuse our patience? 8. A Blew, with a motto that cannot be read. 9. Another
colored, with a Face and this motto, aut mors, aut vita decora. 10. A White
with a blew and white fringe, and a red cross in the middle. 11. A Red with
White Cross, and this motto, pro Rege and Regno. 12. A Black, with a black
and yellow fringe, and a red and white cross in the middle, and a yellow
streamer sloping down from the cross. 13. A Red with a red fringe. 14. A Red
with a silver fringe. 15. A Blew with a blew fringe. 16. Another of the same.
17. A Red with a Red and gold fringe. 18. A white with a red and white fringe.
19. A Red with a black fringe. 20. A Black with a black and white fringe.
21. A flesh colored Coronet. Some torn.
Ensigns.
Prince Ruperts Standard with the Ensigns of the Palatine, near five yards
long and broad, with a red cross in the middle. Three Green Ensigns whereof
two with a red cross upon white, and four or five little white crosses sloping
downward. Six Yellow Ensigns with red crosses, and one with a red cross, and
three black roses, The rest only Yellow. Four white with red crosses, whereof
one with five black streamers. Eleven Red with white crosses. A Blew with a
red and white cross.
FINIS.

