TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY THE Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND, His
Excellency the LORD GENERAL CROMWELL, And his Council of OFFICERS: THE HUMBLE
REMONSTRANCE OF Sir JOHN STAWELL,

Setting forth The Reason of his first engaging on the late KINGS Part, and his
deportment therein. His desisting from further action upon the Articles of
Exeter. The Benefit which he claims by virtue of the said Articles. The means
by which that Benefit has been retarded. His several Trials, both by
Indictment at Common Law and in the High Court of Justice, for high Treason,
Murder, and other Felonies in relation to actions committed in the late unhappy
War; And his almost seven years Imprisonment. The Sequestration of his
Estate, and sale of the greatest part thereof. The Proceedings and Judgment of
the Honorable Court of Articles thereupon: And his present State and Condition.


LONDON, Printed by T.R. for Henry Twysord, Anno Dom. 1653.

The humble REMONSTRANCE of Sir JOHN STAWELL.
IT was but of late that by the blessing of Almighty God, and your exceeding
great Justice and favor, I was freed from some of those many afflictions and
calamities which attend a sad condition, into which the practice,
misinformations, and ill-grounded apprehensions of some men, had thrown me;
And that I began to look back upon my miseries already past, with that
contentment and security, which men enjoy in viewing Rocks, and raging Seas,
when they themselves are safe in Harbor, desiring nothing more then to spend
the residue of my days (which by natures proscription cannot be many) in such
peaceable obedience to this Commonwealth, as by your Faith and Honor made good
unto me, I hold my self obliged unto: But now finding, that the restless
proceedings of such as hate me without a cause, do tend to nothing less, then
to reduce me to my former miserable condition, and consequently to ruin both
me and my posterity; I have presumed in all humility, and I hope free from
offense, To declare and remonstrate this my Case, to the end, That as my duty
to heaven binds me, I may evidence unto the world, Gods most remarkable
mercies toward me, vindicate your Honor and Justice, and undeceive the whole
Natition, whose Faith likewise is most highly concerned in these my sufferings:
And in so doing I will fix my self upon that truth which shall be avowed upon
the faith of a Christian, and honor of a Gentleman. And because my undertaking
under the late King have had the ill luck to be stained and aspersed with too
much forwardness, as acting beyond the moderate and sober limitations of a
contrariant; and as if my nature had prompted me to the delight of cruelty in
those employments: I shall beg your patience in suffering truth to be fetched
from its Fountain, and hence to derive it to my present state and condition.

In the year 1640. by virtue of the late Kings writ of summons, I was chosen
by the County of Somerset one of the Knights to sit in Parliament, and did
accordingly attend that service for the space of eighteen months or
thereabouts, at which time some unhappy differences arising betwixt the late
King and the two Houses, I did receive signification of his pleasure by a
Letter (unexpected) from Beverley, and sealed with his privy Signet, which
follows in these words.

CHARLES REX.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well.
Whereas we have issued forth our Commission of Array for the County of
Somerset under our great Seal of England unto our right trusty and right
entirely beloved cousin and councellor, the Marquis Hertford, And with him have
named you a Commissioner, In the execution whereof (and such other public
services as we have and shall entrust unto you, your presence, care, and utmost
circumspection is most necessary. We do therefore hereby require you with all
convenient speed to repair unto the said County, and to attend that service,
wherein we doubt not you will so demean your self as may be suitable to the
good opinion we have of you, and as may most promote the due execution of this
Commission. Which at this time is of so high a consequence, not only to the
security of our said County, but to the peace of this Kingdom in general. And
because this Commission (by such who declare all things illegal which suit not
with their desires or designs) is declared to be contrary to the Laws, and
thereupon you may be summoned by one or both Houses of Parliament as a
Delinquent, for the execution thereof. We require you upon your allegiance not
to intermit or in any sort to neglect our said service upon any such summons,
by going on removing to London or any other place, save to us, or where it is
fit for you to be in the prosecution of our said service, and such further
command as you shall receive under our own hand. And we do hereby require and
command all Sheriffs, Majors, Justices, Officers, Ministers, and loving
Subjects whatsoever, not only to be assisting and ayding unto you in case of
need in your free passage from place to place. But also that they presume not
to attach your person, or serve you with any warrant, Order, or summons
whereunto we have not consented, nor deteine or seize any of your goods or
servants, or any thing to you belonging without our special license first
obtained, as they and every of them will answer the contrary at their utmost
perils. For which this shall be to you and them sufficient warrant and
authority.

Given at our Court at Beverley the eleaventh day of July, in the eighteenth
year of our Reign.
To our trusty and welbeloved Sir John Stawell, Knight of the Bath.

This Command caused me within few days after to repair to my house in the
Country, where I received another Letter directed unto me from the Lord Marquis
Hertford dated at Bath, who was then Lord Lieutenant of that County, and
recommended to the late King by the House of Commons as a fit person for that
command, and was as follows.

SIR,
I Am come by command from his Majesty, with Commission to muster the Forces of
this County, of which Commission you are one: I intend to be on Wednesday next
at Wells, where I shall desire your presence, that I may impart the Commission
unto you, and advise further about the execution thereof. In the moan time I
rest,

Your assured friend and Servant: HERTFORD.
Bath July 24. 1642.

Upon this Summons I waited upon my Lord Marquis at Wells, together with two of
my Sons, and some servants: And my Lord showing me his Commission, in which I
found my self together with diverse other persons of honor and quality named
Commissioners, (which Commission was produced and read in the high Court of
Justice upon my Trial) And in few days after, and before my removal from
Wells, his Lordship had notice that some parts of that Country had put
themselves in Arms, and were marching toward him, without his order, or any
knowledge of their design, whereupon it was concluded, that some of the
Commissioners, namely, the now Lord Paulet, Mr. John Digby, Sir Francis Hauley,
Mr. Windham and my self, who were best acquainted with the Country, should
with some horse move toward them, upon which we went from Wells, and not far
from thence, we had intelligence that some of the Trained Bands of the Country
were in a body under the command of Captain Preston, coming toward a place
called Marshalls Elm; whereupon we went toward them, and when we came within
view of them, after some consultation amongst our selves, we thought it fit to
deal friendly and civilly with our Neighbors and Countrymen, and that our
good inclination to preserve the peace of the Country might the better appear,
we sent a Gentleman unto them to pray a capitulation and Parley; lest that upon
dislikes grounded upon misapprehensions, we might unhappily come to blows:
Hereupon four of the Commissioners, of whom I was one, met with Mr. Pine, Mr.
Sandys, Captain Preston, as I remember, and one more, in an indifferent place
betwixt the Forces on both sides, and it was the pleasure of the Gentlemen then
with me, that I should speak to Mr. Pyne and the rest to this purpose: That
the Lord Marquess Hertford the Kings Lieutenant, did much wonder, that his
coming into that Country should be understood to be rather in the nature of an
Enemy, then a Friend: That he was come with the Kings Commission to command the
Militia of that County, and to settle the peace thereof: And forasmuch as he
hears, that you have put your selves into Arms, and are coming toward him,
for which he understands not well the occasion; He has commanded us to let you
know, that if you think fit to send some Gentlemen unto him, and in the mean
time to retreat to Somerton; and there to attend the return of such as you
shall so send: We do promise you, as we are Gentlemen, those whom you shall
think fit so to employ, shall have free liberty both to come and return at
their pleasures, and a friendly reception while they are there. And that we
would join with them in the promoting of any thing which might stand with his
Lordships honor, and trust to grant, and might be for the peace and welfare of
the Country: Mr. Pine replied, That he would make the Gentlemen acquainted with
what I had delivered, and that we should receive an answer, which accordingly
was sent unto us by Mr. Emanuell Sandys, to this effect; That they with their
companies as they made their appearance, did resolve that night to march to
Glasenbury. And accordingly they began to match up the Hill, which was an
advance toward us being directly in their way, and made many shots first at
us, and did wound a Gentleman, and killed his horse under him, which we
perceiving, in our own defense, put our selves into such a posture as might
secure us; and upon that, began the unhappy engagement, in which there was one
Osborne killed, some others were hurt, and some taken prisoners, amongst which
was Captain Preston and Mr. Sandys, to whose certificate hereafter mentioned,
I crave leave to refer you. In this skirmish one Nicholas Ward a Drummer had
many wounds by some of the Troopers, who made pursuance after him and some
others who had fled into the Corn to save themselves; at which time I my
self, and some of the Kings Commanders then present were doing our utmost
endeavors to stop our horse from further prosecution of Mr. Pyne and others of
that party, who were fled: Yet this employment of mine, at some distance of
place from that where it seems the Drummer was hurt, has not been sufficient
enough to clear me from the loud and false aspersions of some, who unc^ssantly
made it their business against me, that I with my own bloody hands, and in
cold blood, did carbonade (as they call it) that Drummer Whereas I do protest
before the Almighty God, that I did not cut or draw blood on any man that day,
but made it my care to preserve any of that party, and to rescue as many as I
saw any violence offered unto, and to such Gentlemen as were taken prisoners,
and had suffered by the Soldiery, I showed all the civillity that possibly lay
in my power, of which some of them have made very honorable testimonies and
acknowledgements, as by the said Certificate under the said Mr. Sandys his
hand, to do me Justice, directed to the Honorable Commissioners for Articles,
together with the Depositions of the Lord Paulet and some others hereafter
mentioned may appear. But Ward the Drummer having once sworn, and obtained a
Judgment at Law for the damages of a hundred pounds and upwards against me,
finds himself now bound to make good this shameless untruth, being obliged
to secure one mischief by acting of another. And therefore being made a
Defendant to my Petition exhibited to the Honorable Court of Articles, in
regard of his Judgment so obtained, he did upon his appearance together with
one Cady prefer a most scandalous and false Petition against me to that Court
which follows in these words.

To the Right Honorable the Commissioners appointed by Act of Parliament to
give relief to persons upon Articles made in time of War.
The Humble Petition of William Cady of Taunton, and Nicholas Ward of Chard in
the County of Somerset, together with their answers to so much of the Petition
of Sir John Stawell, exhibited to your Honors as concerns them.
Shows,
THat they have faithfully served the Parliament from the first beginning of
the troubles against the public enemy, with the expense of their blood and
estates, and particularly opposed Sir John Stawell and his bloody adherents:
Wherein your Petitioners (besides the loss and plunder of their estates by
that party) have received wounds and Mayhemes in their bodies, whereby they are
utterly disabled to work at their Trades; your Petitioner Cady having lost
three sons in the Parliaments service who were the staff of his age, and
himself fourteen months imprisoned in a loathsome Goal, where he was laid in
Irons by the immediate command of Sir John Stawell for no other cause but his
faithfulness to the Parliament. And your Petitioner Ward for the same cause
had his nose, and one of his fingers cut off, and one of his eyes was cut out,
by Sir John Stawells own cruel hand, and that in cold blood, your said
Petitioner Ward being unarmed, and all without any provocation on the
Petitioners part, whereby they are both of them utterly undone with their wives
and children.

That they heretofore brought their several Actions against Sir John Stawell,
wherein they have Judgments against him: namely your Petitioner Cady has a
Judgment against Sir John Stawell for 212 l. And your Petitioner Ward has a
Judgment against him for 107. l. 10. s. which Judgments are so far from
proving a benefit to them, that they are an addition to their misery; for they
have spent as much money by their Judgments and attendance, and otherwise, as
those Judgments amount unto in seeking after the fruits of them, and can
receive none at all, and are reduced to very great want and misery. And being
now summoned to appear before your Honors in this Court, upon Sir John
Stawells Petition, They are come out of their country, being seven score miles
from London in obedience to your command, and have attended for three weeks
last past, their poor wives and children being like to starve at home, and
themselves no longer able to subsist.

They therefore humbly beg this honorable Court to take their lamentable
estate into your pious and tender consideration, so that they may be dismissed
with their costs and charges (which they have been unjustly put unto by the
said Sir John Stawell) and put to no further attendance.

And that in regard of their extreme sufferings, even to their utter undoing,
by the said Sir John Stawells means as aforesaid, your Honors will be pleased
to recommend their sad estate to the Parliament, to the end they may have some
relief; For they having nothing left them whereby to live, and must undoubtedly
perish with their distressed Families, unless the Lord shall move the heart of
the Parliament and your Honors to pity their sad estate, and to provide some
present help for them.

William Cady. Nicholas Ward.


Now in respect the truth of this Petition did never come to any proof, and
rests as a grievance upon me, I have thought it fit to remove it at this time,
and upon this occasion, by the testimony of such persons as were there present,
and of the other party, who as friends to Truth, do upon their Oaths and
Certificates say as follows.

To the Honorable Commissioners of the Court of Articles.
Emanuel Sandys of Borough in the County of Somerset, Gent. does hereby
declare and certify, that he will upon his Oath say and depose, that
heretofore he being with Mr. Pyne and Captain Preston, and others, desired, in
behalf and for the good of the Country, to march to Glastonbury and so to
Wells, where the Marquess of Hertford and others then lay, as they went from
Somerton toward Glastonbury, going up the hill toward Marshfills-Elm, they
discovered a company of armed men and horse at the top of the hill, whereupon
they made a stand, and shortly after Sr Joh. Paulet, now Lord Paulet, with Sr
Joh. Stawell Knight, and some others, came down the hill toward us, and sent a
messenger to us, desiring to speak with some of us; whereupon the company
desired me Emanuel Sandys to go and speak with them, with I did accordingly;
when it was demanded, wherefore so many men came armed, and whither they meant
to go; to which demand Sandys answered, they hearing that the Marquess of
Hertford and others were at Wells, and intended to set up the Commission of
Array in the County of Somerset, they with many others had agreed that night to
meet at Glastonbury, and the next day to go to Wells to speak with the said
Marquess Hertford: When the said Sir John Stawell and others desired that the
company should go back to Somerton, and appoint some men to go and speak with
the Marquess, and they would promise that whosoever would come to them, and go
with them to the Marquess, they should come, go, and return freely and quietly,
and in the mean time they at Somerton should rest there in safety; wherewith
Sandys acquainted Mr. Pyne, Captain Preston, and others then there, who then
sent again Sandys with Mr. Sanders, to tell Sir John Stawell and their company,
that they intended not to return, but to go on to Glastonbury that night; when
they replied, we should do what we pleased; and thereupon Sir John Stawell and
the rest of that company rode up the hill to their company, and Sandys and
Sanders returned to their company, and afterward Captain Preston and the
company offering to march up the hill in two bodies, the company on the hill
shot at us several times, and we at them; and thereupon some of the company and
Mr. Pyne flod, and a Troop of Soldiers coming down the hill, took Captain
Preston and Sandys, and hurt Sandys; and took from them their moneys, horses
and weapons, and presently after came the now Lord Paulet and Sir John Stawell,
and took from the Soldiers Preston and Sandys, who else had been killed, and
the same night carried them to Wells, where they had fair quarter, and for that
the Soldiers had taken their money from them, Sir John Stawell Gentleman-like
delivered to Sandys forty shillings, which Sandys took for a civil respect, and
shortly after his enlargement paid him again, and thanked him for his favor and
kind usage, and does verily believe that many lives and much blood was that
time saved, by the only means of the said Sir John Stawell, who then and at
other times ever behaved himself as a lover of his Country.

Your Lordships, etc. most humble Servant, Emmanuel Sandys.


The Examination of John Lord Paulet of Hinton St. George in the County of
Somerset, of the age of seven and thirty years or thereabouts, produced on the
behalf of Sir John Stawell this twentieth day of June, 1653. by virtue of the
Order of the Commissioners for Articles, and upon his Oath taken the fifteenth
of the said Month.
TO the 21. Interrogatory he says and deposes, L. Paulet.
that he was at Marshals-Elm, in the Interrogatory mentioned in the year 1642.
which, as near as he can remember, was on the fourth day of August in that
year, where the late Kings forces, under the command of the Marquess of
Hertford, and the Forces of the Parliament, under the conduct of John Pyne,
Esquire; and Captain Preston, did engage: And says, that Sir John Stawell in the
Interrogatory mentioned, was in the said engagement on the behalf of the King,
and did continue very near this Deponent during all the time of that Action and
Engagement, and for a great part of that day; And that he does remember that
the said Sir John did not in all that service and fight, either discharge his
pistol, or hurt or strike at any man, but does very well remember, that after
the first charge made, and the flight of the Forces for the Parliament down the
hill there into a lane at the foot thereof, he the said Sir John Stawell,
together with this Deponent, and diverse other Gentlemen, did make a stand at
the entering into the the said lane, and did there stop the further pursuit of
the Horse then charging on the behalf of the King, and stayed there for almost
half an hour before he and they retreated to the top of the hill: And says,
that he did not see the said Sir John Stawell at any time of the day leave the
way, or go out of the same, to search the Corn on either hand for such who were
hid there after the charge of the Horse, as aforesaid: And says, that the
aforesaid Captain Preston, and one Mr. Sandys, was that day and upon that
charge taken prisoners, and as this Deponent conceives, and to the best of his
remembrance, the said prisoners were by the advice, and at the desire of the
said Sir John Stawell, and other the Gentlemen in that Action, released and set
at liberty by the said Marquess of Hertford, in a short time after their being
taken prisoners as aforesaid, and had their Horses and Arms, and what ever they
could claim as belonging unto them, and could be found, delivered unto them;
and further says, that during their restraint they were used with very fair
respect and civility.

To the 22. Interrogatory this Deponent says and deposes, that he does not
know the Drummer in the Interrogatory mentioned, neither did he see him during
the fight in the precedent Interrogatory mentioned; but says, that he has
since heard, that the said Drummer was hurt and wounded by one Crocker, a
Trooper in the service of the King in that fight: And says, that he does
believe in his conscience that the said Drummer was not hurt by the said Sir
John Stawell, which he does with the more confidence depose, for that the said
Sir John and this Deponent kept together all the time of that Action, and did
never stir out of the highway, there being a Ditch or a small fence on each
side thereof, and Cornfieldsd, into which many did fly for shelter; and further
to this Interrogatory cannot depose.

The Examination of Robert Knight of Hill-Bishop in the County of Somerset,
Gent. of the age of thirty years, or thereabouts, produced on the behalf of Sir
John Stawell, according to the Order of the Commissioners for Relief upon
Articles of War, upon his Oath before the said Commissioners the 21 of this
instant June, took the 27 of the said Month.
TO the 21 Interrogatory he says and deposes, Robert Knight.
that he was at Marshals-Elm in the Interrogatory mentioned, and as near as he
can remember about the time therein set forth; And says, that he was there in
the Troop of Sir Francis Hawley, who was ^^ere in command, together with Sir
John Stawell and the now Lord Paulet; and upon his Oath says, that he does
very well remember when the said Sir John Stawell, with the rest, first came to
the top of the Hill near Marshals-Elm, they discovered some Forces at the
bottom of the Hill, and that after some message between them, there was a
direction given to fall on, which being done, the Parliaments party immediately
fled, and some of them were taken prisoners; but by whom any were killed or
taken prisoners, he cannot expressly set forth; but says, that he believes in
his conscience that the said Sir John Stawell did not that day hurt or wound
any man, for that he this Deponent does very well remember, that the said Sir
John Stawell, with the now Lord Paulet, then Sir John Paulet, did stop the
Soldiers in the entrance of the lane, into which the said Forces fled, from
pursuing of them; And is very confident, that the said Sir John did not stir
out of the highway into the Corn on either side of the way all that day; which
he knows the better to depose, for that he kept still very near him: And
says, that such who did not retreat into the said lane, did hide themselves in
the Corn in the side of the way: And further to this Interrogatory he cannot
depose.

The Examination of William Stucky of Chillington in the County of Somerset,
yeoman, of the age of three and thirty years, or thereabouts, produced on the
behalf of Sir John Stawell, and taken the 27 of June, 1653. by virtue of the
Order of the Commissioners for Relief upon Articles of War, of the 16 of
February last past, and upon his Oath taken the 24 of June last past.
TO the 21 and 22 Interrogatories this Deponent says and deposes, that he, in
the beginning of the late Wars, William Stucky.
was a Trooper under the command of Sir Francis Hawley, and marched with him in
his Troop from Wells to Marshals-Elm in the Interrogatories mentioned; And
says, that being come thither, they were ordered to charge some forces of the
Country, which were there under the command of Captain Preston; and that the
said Sir John Stawell was in the first Rank of the said Troop: And he this
Examinant upon his Oath says, that upon the first charge the said Forces fled,
being routed, and some fled into the Cornfields in the side of the highway;
And that so soon as the said Forces were so routed, and fled, the Troop was
commanded by the said Sir Francis Hawley and Sir John Stawell to stop in their
pursuit, and rally again, and march back up the Hill, which was accordingly
done, Sir John Stawell being then in the head of the Troop, having with him
Captain Preston and one Mr Sandys, prisoners that day taken; And says, that as
the said Troop marched back, as aforesaid, he this Examinate, with some of the
Troop then in the Rear, rode into the Cornfieldsd by the way side, to search
after such as were thought might be hid in the Corn; And that there was one
Thomas Crocker of the same Troop amongst us, who found in the corn one Nicholas
Ward a Drummer of Chard, and with his sword gave him diverse wounds and cuts,
and as this Deponent believes would have killed him, if he had not begged for
his life: And this Examinate faith, that he saw the said Crocker so wound the
said Ward; and that before the said wounds so given, as aforesaid, this
Deponent did not perceive any hurt or wounds the said Drummer had, he having
left his Drum in the highway, and was hid in the corn as aforesaid: And he
this Deponent lastly says, that he did not at all that day see the said Sir
John Stawell either discharge his Pistol, or hurt any man with his sword, or go
out of the road-way upon the charge or Retreat; but when he returned out of the
cornfieldsd as aforesaid, he found the said Sir John with the said Troop on the
top of the Hill, ready to march back to Wells; and further deposes not.

Robert Vax of Westham in the County of Essex being deposed, makes Oath, and
says.
THat this Deponent, being formerly a servant unto Mr. Emanuel Sandys of
Petherton in the County of Somerset, was with his said Master in the party
commanded by Captain Preston of the said County, and marching, as this Deponent
verily believes, toward Glastonbury, they descryed a party of Horse on the
top of an Hill called Marshals-Elm, the which party was under the command (as
this Deponent has been since informed) of the Marquess of Hertford, in which
party was Sir John Stawell, and diverse other Gentlemen, which this Deponent did
then see. And further this Deponent makes Oath, and says, that before the
Engagement he both saw Sir John Stawell come down the Hill, and also heard him
call unto and demand of Capt. Preston, with the Officers of our party, whither
they were marching; unto whom Captain Preston replied, that he intended to
march to Glastonbury that night: whereupon the said Stawell desired him to
march back with his company to Somerton, promising him that if he would send
any person or persons of his company to Glastonbury, Wells, or to the Marquess
of Hertford, that they should be permitted to pass without any molestation: to
which the said Captain Preston replied, that he resolved to march that night to
Glastonbury aforesaid; and as he was marching up the Hill, called Marshals-Elm,
heard one of the party under the command of the Marquess to say, that if they
advanced any further they would fire on them: And further this Deponent faith,
that at the time of the Engagement he was then present when the said Sandys was
taken prisoner, and that he heard the said Sir John Stawell to call and say
unto some of that party then about the said prisoner, desiring them to hold
their hands, in that he knew him to be an honest Gentleman; further saying,
that it was Mr Sandys of Petherton: And this Deponent further says, that
immediately after the taking of the said Sandys Prisoner, he this Deponent did
see Sir John Stawell ride down to the foot of the Hill, and did then and there,
in the view of this Deponent, fall about and endevor to prevent the pursuit,
causing many of that party to return back from pursuing the said party then
with Captain Preston: And this Deponent makes Oath and says, that being
encompassed and amongst the Enemy, and endeavoring to make his escape as he
thought toward Somerton, and riding through a corn-field, he saw Nicholas
Ward, then Drummer to Captain Preston, encompassed by two Soldiers on
horseback, and that this Deponent did see one of the said Soldiers to give him
the said Ward several blows with his sword: And further this Deponent says,
that Sir John Stawell was not the party, nor then present when the said Ward
was wounded, for as much as the said Sir John Stawell was at that instant time
standing at the foot of the Hill: And this Deponent says, that one of the
Soldiers, then present at the wounding of Ward, was named Crocker, which
formerly was a Retainer to the Lord Paulet: And further this Deponent makes
Oath and says, that as he was making his escape, was overtaken by three
Horsemen within half a mile of Somerton, who gave him several wounds, leaving
him in the highway; but that any or either of the aforesaid wounds were given
him by the said Sir John Stawell, this Deponent says not: And further this
Deponent says, that being wounded, he was brought to Somerton; and not being
able, by reason of his wounds, to march with his company, was with diverse
others maimed and wounded men left behind in the said Town: And this Deponent
says, that within three days after this Deponent's being there, the said Sir
John Stawell, with several others of that party, came into the said Town to
quarter; and that the said Sir John Stawell, with diverse others of that party,
did give several sums of Money unto many of the wounded and maimed Soldiers so
left behind, whereof this Deponent received a part (to the value, as near as
he this Deponent can remember, of about four pounds:) And further this Deponent
says not.

September. 28. 1653. Sworn ROBERT VAY. THO. BENET.


And as concerning the charge of Cady that he was kept a prisoner for the space
of fourteen months, and laid in Irons by my immediate command, the truth is, I
found him a prisoner in the Castle of Taunton when I first took that command
upon me, and did by my Mitimus to the Keeper of Ivelchester only remove him
from Taunton thither as I did one England, who was likewise sent by the same
Mitimus, and after that some others for the ease of the Castle of Taunton,
where they were improperly kept, England a little after upon his request unto
me was discharged, but Cady could not have the like favor, for that he was a
prisoner at Law upon an Action of Debt laid upon him at his first coming
thither. And this will be testified by Mr. Brown the Keeper of the Goal, who
did then receive him. As also that I never gave him (who has been the Keeper
of that prison many years) either as touching Cady or any prisoner else, sent
unto him directions for the putting him or any other in Irons, neither does the
Mitimus by which he was so sent give any such directions, only I required the
safe keeping of them till their Deliverance according to Law. All which I
humbly submit to your judgments and these proofs considered, whether it is
possible for me to be guilty of so much blood and cruelty as is mentioned in
the Petition.

After which about the beginning of June, in the year of our Lord 1643.
waiting upon the Marquess of Hertford by the late Kings command from Oxford
into the West, with such Forces as then were under his Lordships command, we
marched toward the Town of Taunton, and coming with considerable Forces near
the Town, whereby they in the Town and Castle deliberating their own safety
and welfare, and finding by the result of their consultation (as it seems that
they were not of any equivalent strength to stand out, they sent two of the
Townsmen, viz. Mr. Chapline (as I remember their then Major) and one Mr. Powell
an Apothecary, to my Lord Marquess to make their conditions, but as the truth
did after appear, it was for no other end but that in that space of time the
Soldiers and Forces might quit the Town, and save themselves and what they
had there by flight, which the Lord Marquess and his party perceiving, did
presently enter the Town without any concession at all. Whereupon it was my
humble request to the Marquess and Prince Maurice then his Lieutenant
General, that in regard there had been an overture by the Townsmen of a Fine
to be paid to preserve their Town from plunder, and their persons from
violence, that they would be pleased that a reasonable Fine might be imposed,
and the Town kept free from any such violence or hostile molestation (as they
had just reason to fear, as the case then stood with them) at which request of
mine my Lord Marquess was pleased to make a public Proclamation throughout
his Army to prohibit all the Soldiery of what degree soever, that they should
not offer any violence to their persons or take their goods or in any manner
do them damage upon pain of death. The Fine which was afterward agreed upon
betwixt my Lord Marquess, his Council of War, and the Town, was 8000. l.
as I have heard, which they promised should faithfully be satisfied without
delay, upon which the business being thus settled, the Marquess and the Prince
his Lieutenant General, and the rest of his Council consulted about the
deputing a Governor, such a one as should answer the expectation of the
Marquess, and with all should be well pleasing to the Town and Country
adjacent; during which deliberation the Townsmen of Taunton conceiving
themselves concerned, in the conclusion thought fit to prefer their Petition
to have such a Governor as was of birth and honor, of their own Country,
from whom as it seems they supposed they might have ease and favor; which
Petition as it was exhibited by the then chiefest Inhabitants, is in very words
thus:

To his Highness Prince Maurice, and to his Excellency the Lord Marquess and
Earl of Hertford, General of his Majesty's Forces in the West.
The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the Town of Taunton.
BEing very sensible of the great oppressions we have suffered, and the
miseries to which we are reduced under that government, and by reason of those
Governors, to whom necessity has of late times enforced our subjection, and
yet with some comfort resenting those happy times wherein the Laws and Justice
of this Kingdom were by the hands of the noble Gentry of these parts so
dispensed amongst us that every man enjoyed his own, his liberty, his
property, and lived a most happy people under a most gracious Sovereign, and
being desirous to be again brought as near as may be to the same happy
condition, do in all humillity beseech your Highness and Excellency will
vouchsafe to assign some Gentleman of birth and honor near adjoining to us,
to be our Governor, (who to your Highness and your Excellency shall seem
fit, and under whose protection we may enjoy the almost forgot felioities of
former times, our liberties and safeties. And we shall account our selves most
happy, and will ever thankefully acknowledge your graces and favors to us, and
pray for your Highness and Excellencies prosperities with increase of
happiness and honor.

After which Petition preferred, the Townsmen did become earnest suitors to the
Marquess, that he would be pleased to assign me in particular and by name
their Governor, (notwithstanding they had left it indefinitely to the
Marquess his discretion to appoint any of the Gentlemen of that Country so
qualified as they expressed in their Petition, whereupon the Marquess willing
to give them such satisfaction as might oblige them, did desire me to take the
government up on me. But I very well apprehending the nature of the people, and
how that Town had dealt with me for my good will toward them (who had never
in all my life been wanting in any thing wherein I might in all neighbourly
manner befriend them.) In the third year of the late King, at which time they
preferred Articles grounded upon scandalous and false suggestions against me
unto the Parliament. The danger of any one of which in case they could have
made them good against me might have cost me my life.

Nor was their violent prosecution of the said Articles (by moving for a
Sergeant at Arms by whom I was commanded to attend the House at that time) to
be forgotten, although they were not able in the least manner to fasten any
thing upon me that might justly demerit so much as the rebuke of the house or
committee to whom it was referred.

All which or to the like effect, I urged unto the Marquess, humbly and
heartily desiring his Lordship that he would be pleased to excuse me, their
former practices administering good reason for my refusal; Insomuch as the
Marquess holding himself satisfied did place the government upon a person of
honor and quality of the county, who had the deputation for some time, during
which the Town continued very Incessantly to importune his Lordship that I
might be the man who should have the command over them, and thinking it then a
considerable part of their interest, did make use of very many Gentlemen and
persons of quality to mediate for them, and to persuade me to entertain it,
and in their own persons did often solicit me to accept of a commission to
that purpose: Yet these their endeavors notwithstanding I did refuse.

But his Lordships importunity growing to that height that I could not with
good manners withstand him, I did humbly pray his Lordship, that he would lay
aside his request unto me, as importing a latitude or scope to my denial, and
to command me to it, and I should obey him as my General, upon which my Lord
replied, if you will excuse the term, I do command you: And thus I accepted
my commission, the chiefest of the Town being then present and importuning the
same, the commission follows in these words:

WIlliam, Marquess and Earl of Hertford, Viscount Beauchampt Lord Seymor, one
of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, and Lieutenant General of his
Majesty's Forces in the West: To Sir John Stawell, Knight of the honorable
order of the Bath greeting. By virtue of the authority and power given from our
Sovereign Lord King Charles, under the great Seal of England, as Lieutenant
General as aforesaid, I do hereby constitute and appoint you the said Sir
John Stawell to be Governor of the Town and Castle of Taunton, and the Parish
of St. James thereunto adjoining, situate in the County of Somerset, and the
Garrison therein, and Forces thereof, and do give unto you full power and
authority in his Majesty's name and for his service, the said ga^rison and
Forces as Governor to command, arm, discipline, train, and order in warlike
manner, and with them to fortify the said Town, Castle, and Parish, and
defend and preserve the same against all his Majesty's enemies whatsoever to
the utmost of your abilities, and further exercise Marshall Law within the said
Town, castle, and parish upon all offenders deserving the same, and to do,
perform, and execute all such act and acts, thing and things, as to the Office
of a Governor of a Town, castle, and Parish does of right appeartaine and
belong, willing and commanding all Officers and Soldiers of the said Garrisen,
together with the Inhabitants of the said Town, castle, and Parish to obey you
as their said Governor according to this your commission, as also all such
Officers as you shall appoint under your hand and seal for the furtherance and
advancement of his Majesty's service: And you your self to observe and follow
all such orders and directions as you shall from time to time receive from his
Majesty, my self, or my Lieutenant General according to the occasion and
discipline of War.

Given under my hand and seal at Taunton this eighth day of June in the 19.
year of his Majesty's Reign. HERTFORD.

Together with this Commission I had two other Commissions, the one for the
raising of a Regiment of Horse and Dragoones, the other for the raising of a
Regiment of 1500. Foot, which I forbear to insert for brevities sake.

That very morning I received my Commission my Lord Marquess marched out of
the Town, leaving me to the ordering of my Garrison, upon which I thought fit
to take a view of the Castle, to the end I might dispose and regulate matters
as might answer my charge and trust, where when I came, I found to the number
of 60. prisoners or thereabout, whose imprisonment in that place I did not
think convenient: And therefore did pray the assistance of Sir William Portman
and Mr. John Symes, two of the Deputy Lieutenants of the County and Justices of
the peace, and were neighbors, to advise about the disposing of them, who did
at my request come unto me to the Castle, where we called all the prisoners
before us, and examined the reasons of their several commitments, and for so
many as we found committed by Mittimus, and their offense of such a nature as
that they could not be delivered without a due course of Law, those were
detained, amongst which was Mr. Chaplain, Mr. Powell the Apothecary, and the
aforenamed Cady, for which they and some others have brought their several
Actions against me, and recovered great sums of money; And for so many as we
found, who were not committed by Mittimus, or for slight offenses, or by
persons of no sufficient authority for that purpose (who were as I remember the
greater part) we discharged, and the rest were sent to Ivelchester and other
places.

The prisoners being thus disposed of, I began to consider of such things as
might best conduce to the maintenance of the Garrison, for the payment of those
Soldiers which the Lord Marquess left me for making good the Garrison until
I had levied Soldiers of my own: And having no contribution at that time
assigned me, I was enforced to call upon the Town to proportion a rate for the
collecting of the Fine aforementioned and agreed upon for a composition with
the Marquess upon his entry, and for the receipt of which he gave me order
upon his departure, which is as follows:

Ordered at Taunton the ninth day of June, Anno Dom. 1643.
IT is ordered that Sir John Stawell shall receive of the Inhabitants of this
Town of Taunton and the Parish of St. Somerset.
James, the sum of eight thousand pounds, being the sum set down and imposed
upon them by his Highness, his Excellency, and the council of War: And if
it shall appear unto him that any person or persons shall be overcharged with
the said Tax or payment in respect of their estates or quality, the said Sir
John Stawell has power by this to Assesse any other man who is omitted and not
already rated, for the ease of such parties as shall have just cause to have
relief.

HERTFORD.

Upon which I called upon the Town for no make payment of the same, in regard
the necessity of my occasions did so require. But they having, as I found by
their notes and Acquittances which they produced, paid my Lord Marquess the
sum of 500 l. or near thereabouts, did excuse themselves as not able to raise
any more at present, so that I was constrained to take such payment as they
would make, and I did receive of them in all at several times the sum of 500.
l. more or thereabout as I remember, which was to rest upon account; yet before
I could receive any I was constrained to commit some of them, for which they
likewise have brought their Actions.

Yet it is true, that when the late King was come to the City of Bristoll
shortly after his Forces had taken it, he being acquainted with the sum of
8000. l. imposed upon Taunton, did send unto me for to require 2000. l. of it,
and send it, unto him with all speed, whereupon I acquainted the Town with it,
and they excusing themselves with the loss of Trade which was that they lived
by, did seem very unwilling to raise any more above the 1000. l. already paid,
Insomuch that I according to my then duty to the late Kings commands, did
acquaint them, that if they did not procure the money he sent for, I must take
some course with them of compulsion, upon which they departed, and did by the
next morning collect the sum of 850. l. which was all that I could get or
receive from them, and this being short of what the late King was pleased to
command, I did borrow of one Mr. Porter a Scrivener, upon my own account, the
sum of 100. l. for which I gave Bond, and of Doctor Byham I had 50. l. more to
make up the sum collected 1000. but in respect it did not answer the late Kings
command, I did my self in person carry that sum unto Bristoll, and did
acquaint the late King with the difficulty that I had in raising of that sum,
and with the present condition of the Town, and made that an excuse for the
rest, insomuch as when the late King was satisfied from me of their inability,
he was pleased to leave the remainder of the 8000. l. to my discretion, so as
to give such an abatement as I should think fit.

After which I continued in my command, as I remember, by the space of six
months; and although I had power and authority sufficient to have required the
rest, yet I was so friendly unto them, that they paying their contribution in
proportion with the rest of the Country, I never pretended any occasion for the
enforcement of the rest; so that of the whole sum of 8000. l. imposed, by my
mediation to the King for his favor, and my Kindness and good will to that
Town, I saved unto them the sum of 6000. l. or thereabouts, besides the 150.
l. lent them of my own, which is to this day unpaid, for which they have made
me since a very ill requital: for after that I had raised part of my Regiment,
which I was to raise by my Lord Marquess his commission, and had sent to the
Army the 500. Foot which my Lord Marquess had left me at my first taking the
command of the Town upon me, and had supplied that want with part of my own
Regiment raised, I received orders from the late King to send unto the Lord
Paulet, who then lay before Lime, 100. of my Garrison Soldiers for his
assistance, and hereupon I gave order to Captain Robert Clarke with his
Officers and company to march accordingly: but the Captain not liking his
march, took occasion to go to his own house not far from the Town, so that
by reason of his absence some of his Officers grew likewise out of temper,
which dangerous infection did at length spread through the whole company, so
that there was not a man but was tainted, unless it was the Captains brother,
who was his Lieutenant and a stout Gentleman, who in his Captains absence
willingly took the command upon him, and received orders accordingly; but (as I
remember) the morning that they were to begin their march the whole company did
mutiny for want of a fortnights pay that was then behind; And in regard that
such demands were unseasonably made at such a time as they were to perform
their duty, I did commit some of the Officers and Soldiers who were most
faulty, amongst whom was one Christopher Viccary, and had an intent to have
proceeded against him as the principal mutineer at a Court of War.

The first day being spent in this disorder, many of them who were committed
did that night make suit to me for their releasement, promising that they would
readily march with the rest of their company the next morning, and be
thenceforth obedient to command: thereupon for their better encouragement, I
gave their Lieutenant then Captain 50 l. in the head of his company, and did
remit both imprisonment and the offense committed the day before: But as they
marched through the Town they took occasion to complain that their Arms
were not fixed, and in the middle of the Street, I following them in the Rear
to see them out of Town, before my face they threw down all their Arms and
would not march unless they might have such Arms as might secure their lives
by doing service, and Viccary who was pardoned as I have said before, and
released of his imprisonment, when I told him I would see him hanged for this
mutiny, he cried out one and all, and after him the whole company did the like.

Hereupon I commanded Viccary the second time to prison, and had a full purpose
(as by Laws military I might well justify) to have made him an example. But
that night also the whole company did sue to me for his release and pardon,
promising that the next morning they would all march most willingly, upon which
I was contented once more to enlarge him and remit his offense. And to take
away all causes which might countenance such disorder, I did on the next
morning before their march deliver ten or twelve muskets, out of the Magazine
for so many as I found in any kind defective, and being thus satisfied (as I
supposed) I marched with them again to the utmost Gate of the Town, but after
I had left them, and before I was returned to my Quarters, I understood by the
Lieutenant that they had thrown down their Arms within half a mile of the
Town in the Highway, and resolved to march no further; and stealing back into
the Town that night few of them could be found, but on the next morning
perceiving the mutiney to be grown to a very great height, I commanded strict
guardes to be kept upon the gates and out-lets of the Town, and Ensign
Atherton having command of one of the Gates, and seeing Viccary, and knowing
him to be the ringleader in the several mutinies, did as he offered to go
through the Gate with twenty more of the Soldiers or thereabout, whom he had
seduced accuse him for the mutiny in refusing to march being thereunto
commanded, to whom the said Viccary made answer in these words (by god I will
not go) stirring up diverse of his fellow Soldiers to the like mutiny;
whereupon the Ensign going about to lay hands on him, he presented his Musket
at him, but being prevented by the Soldiers upon the Guard, he was brought to
the Castle and there secured.

But because the proceedings against him might be with the better advice, I
prayed Captain Dyer to request Sir. William Portman and Mr. Syms, two of the
Deputy Lieutenants of the County to be present and assistant, who came
accordingly, and did sir in the Court of war, which I called for that
purpose, consisting of fifteen or sixteen Officers, at which time the Articles
for mu^^^y and refusing to go upon command according to the late Kings
military orders were read against the said Viccary, and was upon the oath of
the Ensign and others made good against him, whereupon he had sentence of
death passed upon him by a general consent, and was shortly after executed
accordingly.

For this long relation I must humbly crave your pardon for presuming upon your
patience, which I have done the rather for that I may remonstrate my
proceedings concerning the said Viccary, which the Town of Taunton has so
much pressed against me to the hazard of my life, notwithstanding my
kindness sundry ways showed toward them: and that during all the time that
I was their Governor, which was fully a year, I never received for my own use
any one farthing of them, either in money or in any other acknowledgements, but
did make it my whole endeavor to protect them and all that was theirs from any
violence. And it is also true, that I had as friendly a respect unto the
Country, and having the sequestration of Mr. Alexander Pophams Estate at
Wellington, Colonel Ceelyes Estate near Taunton, and Colonel Wens Estate in
the Parish of Laurence Liddiard, assigned me by way of Sequestration toward
the maintenance of my Garrison, and before any contribution of the Country were
allotted unto me, I do aver, that for the space of a whole year that these
several Estates were in my possession, there was not taken by my command (more
then seven or eight Loades of Hay in a time of great necessity (which was on
Colonel Ceelyes Estate) and the rateable contributions with the rest of the
County) the value of six pence but did protect their Tenants and servants by
them appointed for the management thereof for their use and best advantage.

Yet this fair usage notwithstanding Mr. Ceely has commenced and prosecuted
an Action against me, and obtained a Judgment for 157. l. damages, whereas
intruth I did upon his wives request in his absence suffer her to enjoy the
whole benefit, except the Hay above mentioned without any substraction save the
ratable contribution.

Two other particulars I shall presume to relate to wipe off the calumny that
is thrown upon me, and to leave it to your judgment, the first was this,
Prince Maurice succeeding my Lord the Marquess of Hertford in the command of
the Western Forces, there came unto his hands (by what means I know not) a
Bond for the payment of 200. l. which of right did belong unto one who he was
pleased to call a Delinquent, and was due from Mr. Chaplain of Taunton, which
Bond he sent in a Letter enclosed unto me, and gave me order either to receive
the money for the late Kings service, or to commit him to prison until he
should satisfy the same: I made Mr. Chaplain herewith acquainted, and showed
him the Princes Letter, together with the Bond, he acknowledged the Debt, but
made many protestations to me touching the weakness of his estate at that
time, insomuch that he could not possibly pay the money, and did leave it unto
me as touching his Imprisonment. I did very much pity the old man, and did
bethink my self how I might in the best manner befriend him. I told him the
Prince would expect to have his orders obeyed, and if I could not give him
satisfaction as to the money or to the imprisonment, happily he might be sent
for and put into the custody of the Marshall of the Army, and so his days by
hard usage might be shortened; wherefore I wished him that he would give me
leave to imprison him (for without his consent I would not do it) which the
old man thought well of as his case stood, and gave me his thanks, and I
forthwith wrote my Letter unto the Prince, that Mr. Chaplain having no money,
had submitted himself unto his Imprisonment. That he was a very aged man, and
could not brook his imprisonment long, and that as I was the Governor of the
place, it was my duty to protect every man in his property as far as I could,
and since it was contrary to right to enforce that from him (who was admitted
to his composition with the rest of that Town upon the Marquess his entry)
which he was liable to repay unto his Creditors, I besought him to be
favorable unto him; whereupon the Prince did return me this answer (as I do
remember) That he was a stranger here, and did not know the Laws of the
Country, and therefore did wholly refer the matter to my discretion; which
express I did no sooner receive but I went immediately in person to him, and
set him at liberty. And for this imprisonment, which was but during the space
of a night or two at the most, until my messenger returned, and was so
successful unto him as to save his 200. l. he has brought hsi Action and
recovered 313. l. in damages against me.

The other is this: The Prince having by some intelligence understood that one
Mrs. Treagle of Taunton had some Plate of Sir Samuel Rolls in her custody, he
sent Sir Samuel Caswarth a Comish Gentleman for it, with an express to me,
that I should cause it to be delivered unto him, whereupon I sent for Mrs.
Treagle (whose husband was at that time in the Parliaments Quarters) The
Gentlewoman at first would willingly have concealed the Plate, but Sir Sa.
Casworth urging much to have the Princes order observed, I praid her to fetch
me the Plate, otherwise I would send for it my self: hereupon she brought it
unto me in a basket, and as I did then judge it was worth about 100 l. which
being set before Sir Sa. Caswarth upon the Table, I prayed him to present my
very humble service to the Prince, and this request; that he would command my
service in such things as might be agreeable to my trust and command, and that
I might not be made instrumental in a service of that nature, and I willed the
woman to take back the Plate again and secure it according to her trust. Mrs.
Treagles Testimony follows.

I Frances Treagle, wife of George Treagle of Taunton, do testify that when
Sir. John Stawell was Governor of Taunton, about the year of your Lord 1645.
there came a Gentleman unto me, whose name I did afterward understand was Sir
Samuel Caswarth, who told me, that he came by authority from Prince Maurice to
demand such Plate and Jewels, as Sir Samuel Roll his Lady had left with me,
whereupon I did use means to acquaint Sir John Stawell therewith, who willed me
to keep the plate which I had in my custody, for he saw no cause why the same
should be delivered away, and thereupon the Gentleman was dismissed, and the
plate preserved, which I did afterward send to London, to Sir Samuel Roll by
one Mr. Budd of this Town. And this I am ready to testify upon my oath, and
have hereunto subscribed my name the third day of October 1653.

FRANCES TREAGLE.

I will not say that the Prince was herewith displeased, but it was not long
after that I did receive this order of discharge, as follows:

For Sir John Stawell, Governor of Taunton:
ALthough I cannot be satisfied that the Castle is tenable dgainst a strong
siege, yet I would have it manned, and in order to that I would have you draw
out of your Garrison, a good Captain, Lieutenant, and Ensign, with fourscore
men, to maintain the same, and to victual it for three months, and the rest
of your Garrison to be sent to Bridgewater. You are to reserve four pieces only
of Canou, and to send the rest with bullet to Bridgwater. And in respect (as I
am informed) you have great store of provisions already in the Castle, I would
have you after the victualling of the Castle for the said fourscore men for
three months, to send the rest of your store to Bridgwater. I am Sir,

Your loving friend, MAURICE.
Upon the march toward Honington, June 15. eleven a clock. POSTSCRIPT.
I hold not the command of the fourscore men fit for you.



I do conceive it a very great vanity for any man to boast of his own good
works, and should, with reflection upon my self soon have reprehended what is
now written, did not a necessity enforce me to say something of the
forementioned particulars; and as I have been governed through the whole course
of my life by that divine rule and principle in humanity, Do as you would be
done unto; this being a law unto me, when no obligation or promise did rest
upon me, to serve such who did in those days differ in judgment with me; so let
me beseech you to favor me in like manner, and the rather for that the highest
security the whole world affords is engaged for my Indemnity, of which I shall
make no manner of doubt, when these shall have the happiness rightly to inform
you.

After the discharge sent me by the Prince, for the security of my person, I
lived in the City of Bristol, and such other Garrisons and places of strength as
were then in the late Kings hands: at length about June 1645, I came unto the
City and Garrison of Exeter, where I did abide, until such time as the
Parliaments Army, under the conduct of Sir Thomas Fairfax, then General, came
and laid siege unto it; And his Excellency summoning the Town, the Governor and
his Council of War did resolve upon a Parley, and did bethink themselves of
such terms and conditions as might be safe and honorable. Upon which
Commissioners were assigned to treat with the Officers and Gentlemen
commissionate for that purpose by the General; the conclusion of which Treaty
was the several Concessions, Articles, and Conditions, which were by Order of
Parliment printed and published, commonly known by the name of the Articles of
Exeter, which were concluded and agreed upon the eighth of April, 1646. and
were read and approved by the then House of Commons the sixth of May, 1646. and
afterward by both the Houses of Lords and Commons the fourth of November,
1647. in these words.

THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do approve of the Articles of
Exeter, and order this Approbation be published, to the end all people
concerned may take notice thereof; And that the Committees, Judges, Officers,
and other persons concerned therein, do take notice thereof and observe the
same, any Orders or Ordinances to the contrary notwithstanding. By the 12 of
the said Articles it is agreed, That no Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Clergymen,
Chaplains, (excepting those who are by name excepted by Parliament from Pardon
and Composition) Officers, Citizens, and Soldiers, and all other persons
comprised in these Articles, shall be questioned or accountable for any act
passed by them done (or by any other done by their procurement) relating unto
the unhappy Differences betwixt his Majesty and the Parliament; they submitting
themselves to reasonable and moderate Composition for their Estates, which the
General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall really endevor with the Parliament, that it
shall not exceed two years value of any man's real estate respectively; and for
personal, according to the ordinary rules, not exceeding the proportion
aforesaid: Which Composition being made, they shall have Indemnity for their
persons, and enjoy their Estates and all other Immunities, without payment of
any fifth or twentieth part, or any other Taxes or Impositions, except what
shall be hereafter charged upon them in common with other Subjects of this
Kingdom, by authority of Parliament.

By the 21 of the said Articles it is agreed, That no Oath, Covenant,
Protestation, or Subscription relating thereunto, shall be imposed upon any
person whatsoever comprised within these Articles, but only such as shall
bind all persons aforesaid, not to bear Arms against the Parliament of England
now sitting at Westminster, nor wilfully to do any act prejudicial to their
affairs, whilst they remain in their Quarters; except the persons aforesaid
shall first render themselves unto the Parliament, who shall cause them to be
secured if they think fit.

The 14 of April, 1646. the said Lord General Fairfax gave a Certificate under
his Hand and Seal, signifying that I was in the said City at the surrender, and
was to have the benefit of the Articles then agreed upon, which Certificate is
in these words.

SVffer the Bearer hereof Sir John Stawell, Knight of the Bath, who was in the
City of Exeter, and is to have the benefit of the Articles agreed unto by me at
the time of the surrendering thereof, with his Servants, Horse, Arms, and
Goods, to pass quietly unto their several homes, and other parts in the
Parliaments quarters, and from thence to London, and to enjoy and dispose of
all his and their Goods, Debts and Movables (allowed by the Articles) during
the space of four Months next after the ninth of this instant April, without
any interruption or molestation: And if he shall not make any Composition with
the Parliament during that time, and shall be resolved to depart the Kingdom
within the said four Months, to go into any part beyond the Seas.

Given under my hand and seal at Excester, the 14 day of April, 1646. FAIRFAX.

To all Officers and Soldiers under my command, and all others whom it may
concern.
The 15 of July, 1646. I came to London, and according to an Order of
Parliament, of the second of July, 1646. and within the time therein limited
came before the Committee for the Militia, and there undertook, by a
subscription under my hand, not to bear Arms against the Parliament, according
to the meaning of the said 21 Article, and the said Order of Parliament; which
Order, and the subscription thereupon, follow in these words.

THat all persons, of what degree or quality soever, comprised within the
Articles of Oxon, Exon, and all other Garrisons, that are already come to the
Cities of London and Westminster, and places within the Lines of Communication,
shall before Thursday next, being the ninth day of this instant Month of July,
repair to Guildhall, London, and shall there, in presence of any three of the
Committee of the Militia of the City of London, produce their Passes, and shall
according to the Articles engage themselves by promise, not to bear Arms
against the Parliament, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to their affairs,
so long as they remain in their quarters. And that all persons, of what degree
or quality soever, comprised within any of the said Articles, as shall
hereafter come within the said City and Lines of Communication, shall within
four days after their coming repair to Guildhall, London, and shall there
likewise produce their Passes, and make the like engagement. And the Committee
of the Militia, or any three of them, are hereby authorized to receive the said
engagement, and take the respective subscriptions of the persons; and for this
purpose are to sit constantly three days in the week; viz. Mundays, Wednesdays,
and Fridays, between the hour of three and seven in the afternoon. And lastly
it is ordered, That such of the persons, comprised within any of the said
Articles, as shall neglect or refuse to observe this Order, or do any thing
contrary to the said Articles, shall forfeit the benefit of the said Articles:
And this to be printed, and published by sound of Trumpet and beat of Drum; and
the Committee of the Militia of London is desired to take care that this be so
published accordingly.

HEN. SCOBELL, Cleric. Parliamenti.

The Subscription is thus certified.
I Am commanded by the Committee of the Militia of London, to certify, That
Sir John Stawell, Knight of the Bath, did promise before the said Committee,
that he would not bear Arms against the Parliament, nor wilfully do any act
prejudicial to their affairs, whiles he remains in their Quarters; and
thereunto subscribed his name, according to the Order of Parliament in that
behalf.

Dated at Guildhall, London, the 18 of July, 1646. ADAM BANCKES, Clerk to the
said Committee.

Mr Ash having the next day after my coming to London given me a friendly visit
(as I then understood it) I did a day or two before I presented my Petition to
the Committee at Goldsmithshall, where he was Chairman, wait upon him at his
Brothers House in Fanchurch-street, and did acquaint him with my purpose to
petition, and prayed his furtherance therein: He did then make me acquainted
with the day that the Committee sat, at which time he would not fail to be
there himself, and would in all friendly manner further my business: upon my
return from him that night I drew up my Petition; and I had the favor of Mr
Duke Stonehouse, my Kinsman, who was then with me, and writes a better hand
then my self, to write it for me, which Petition follows in these words.

For the Honorable the Committee for Compositions sitting at Goldsmiths-Hall:
The Humble Petition of Sir John Stawell;
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners Estate has been for a long time sequestered, and himself
reduced to very great wants, which being supplied by the help of his Friends,
has added much to his former Debts and Engagements.

He humbly prays, That ye will be pleased to admit him to his Composition,
according to the Articles of Exeter, and Sir Thomas Fairfax his Certiflcate,
which renders him capable of that Agreement.

And your Petitioner shall etc.

The next day, being the 24 of July, Mr Stonehouse did me the favor to
accompany me to Goldsmiths-Hall; and when I came to the door where the
Committee sat, I desired the Doorkeeper to acquaint Mr Ash that I was without,
and had a Petition to deliver; who brought me this Answer, That as soon as Sir
Henry Berkleyes business was over, I should be the next: about half an hour
after I was called for, and none admitted who were without to come along with
me: When I came in, I tendered my Petition to the Committee, and put it into Mr
Ash his hands, who when he had read it, threw it down upon the Table, and said
that it was a Remonstrance, and not a Petition; and put it from him with his
hand toward me, as far as he could reach, for me to receive it again:
whereupon I told him that I had brought that for him, and for my self I had a
copy, and so left it there upon the Table. He told me that I must confess my
Delinquency before I could be admitted to Composition: I told him that I came
thither to compound for my Estate, and not to confess Delinquency, for that my
Articles did require no such thing, and that by them my Delinquency was
remitted. I did withal tell him, that I had born Arms for the King, and that I
did so by his command; and I said [by his command] not that I stood upon my
justification, but to entitle me to the Articles of Exeter, which do excuse me
for acts done, relating unto the unhappy Differences. Then he asked me, if I
had taken the Negative Oath and Covenant; I told him, no; whereupon he told me,
that before I could be admitted to Composition, I must take them both: I
replied, that by my Articles I was freed from taking of any Oaths; and, I well
remember, that pressing upon me to take those Oaths, and to acknowledge in my
Petition my Delinquency, I made him at last this Answer; Mr Ash, I have known
you long, and my good Friend, and do desire to preserve you so; and for these
Gentlemen that are of the Parliament (for I did not know then but that they had
been so) there was very great reason that my judgment and opinion should
subscribe unto theirs: but as for my Estate, it was my servant, and I had a
power to command it; but my Conscience was my master, and had power to command
me, and to it I must yield obedience: and since those Oaths, which you offer
me, are contrary to my Articles, and repugnant to those which formerly I have
taken, I desire you will excuse me, if I refuse them. Whereupon Mr Ash willed
me to withdraw; And being called for again, Mr Ash told me that I was but
lately come to Town, and it might be that I had not taken notice of the
Negative Oath and Covenant, and therefore they would afford me some time to
consider of it; but my Answer was, that I did not desire any time to consider
of what was a Right which did belong unto me by my Articles, and of which if I
should accept, and make them the same Answer now I do, they would say, that by
the acceptance of time I had abused their expectations, which I was unwilling
to do. Hereupon I was willed to withdraw, and did again attend without the
door, until the Committee rose, not knowing whether they might have any thing
more to say unto me; but at that time heard nothing more from them, nor at any
time after, until April 12. following, at which time I received a Ticket from a
messenger sent unto me, which was to appear the next day at Goldsmiths-Hall, at
two of the clock in the afternoon: I did then appear, and I well remember that
when I came into the room where the Committee sat, Mr Ash had left the Chair
unto Mr John Stephens, and then told Mr Stephens that I had been formerly
before them, and had prefered a Petition, desiring to be admitted unto my
Composition; but that I had refused both to confess my Delinquency by my
Petition, and to take the Negative Oath and Covenant; and that the Committee
had given me time till then to consider of it: Whereupon Mr Stephens asked me,
what I did say to it; I made him this Answer, That there was nothing in what Mr
Ash had delivered which had the nature of a question to me, but was spoken to
inform him, who was not there the day before: whereunto Mr Stephens replied,
Say you so? Then Sir, by your leave I will put you a short question; Will you
take the Negative Oath and Covenant or no? To which I answered, that usually
Sir, to a short question I do return a short answer; but Sir, I shall not do so
unto you, but make you the same Answer which I made unto the Committee the last
time I was here; That I have the benefit of the Articles of Exeter, which do
exempt me from taking of Oaths; and in regard they are not agreeable to such
Oaths as I have formerly taken, I desire to be excused: And this was all that
did at that time pass betwixt us. And hereupon they willed me to withdraw, and
about half an hour after two of their messengers came to me as I was sitting
without the door, and showed me a Mittimus, directed to the Sergeant at Arms,
which follows in these words.

By the Committee for compounding with Delinquents, etc. 13 Aug: 1646.
WHereas Sir John Stawell Knight of the Bath, was summoned to appear before
this Committee, and there demanded whether he would take the Covenant, and
Negative Oath, and he absolutely refused to take either of them: These are
therefore by virtue of the Ordinances of Parliament, of the fifth of April,
1645. and of the first of November, 1645. to require you to take into your
custody the person of the said Sir John Stawell for his said refusal, and him
safely to keep till he conform himself thereunto, and for so doing this shall
be your Warrant.

To the Sergeant of the House of Commons, or his Deputy.
AFter I had seen and read the Mittimus, and found my self a prisoner, I
desired to speak again with the Committee, and one of the Messengers signifying
so much unto them, I was admitted and spoke unto them, to this effect.

Gentlemen, I find by your Mittimus that you have made me a prisoner: I had
very little before left me but my liberty, my real Estate having been under
sequestration for a long time, and my personal little more then what you see.
As long as I had my liberty I did communicate my wants unto my friends, and I
have been helped and relieved by them: But now that you have taken my liberty
from me, I desire you to consider of some maintenance that may be necessary for
me. Unto which Mr. Stephens made answer, that my request was very just and
reasonable, and that there should be consideration had of it; and Mr. Ash told
me, that though Mr. Stephens should forget it, he would not; and so with my
thanks unto them for that promise, I left them: In all which several times
both of my first and second coming before them, my behavior was no otherwise
then might become a modest man, and persons of their place and quality, as is
testified hereafter by the testimony of Gentlemen of honor and worth of the
same Committee, and the rest: Notwithstanding the Committee made this order. At
the Committee for compouning, 13 of Aug: 1646: Goldsmiths Hall.
SIr John Stawell appeared, and refused to take the Negative Oath, and Covenant.

Ordered that Mr. Stephens report his carriage to the House, and that he be
committed to the Sergeant at Arms, and Mr. Stephens to report his desire for
an allowance of maintenance.

John Leech:

Mr. Stephens within few days after makes his report, and it may easily be
gathered from a testimony under Mr. Ash his hand, what it was, and from whom he
received his instructions, being not present himself the first time that I
appeared before the Committee, as he does confess by his Deposition taken in
the high Court of Justice; which testimony of Mr. Ash follows in these words.

THat I do not remember the precise day of the month when Sir John Stawell
first appeared before the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall; But this I well
remember, that it was about four days before the four months limited by the
Articles of Exeter were expired.

That I do not remember the precise words contained in that paper, which Sir
John Stawell then presented to the Committee for his Petition; but I do
remember that the Committee did reject the said paper, telling Sir John
Stawell, that it was a Remonstrance, not a Petition, wherein he rejected the
Parliaments mercy offered him in the Articles, and did put a contempt upon the
Authority of the Parliament.

That I do not remember the very words contained in the said paper, and which
Sir John Stawell then spoke at the delivery thereof unto the Committee; yet I
do remember that the sense and substance of both was to this effect; viz.

THat the Parliament had seized and sequestered his Estate, or had taken it away
by force, for doing his duty to the King, as by the Law, and several Oaths
which he had taken, he was bound to do; and that he could not have his Estate
again, unless he gave that Committee money to redeem it. That he was a person
in debt, and his debts were much increased since his Estate was taken from him
by the Parliament, by which means he was disabled to pay the Committee much
money. Notwithstanding, if they could accept of what he could procure, he would
then compound with them for the redemption of his Estate.

That the Committee did then advise Sir John Stawell to submit unto the
Authority of Parliament, and to petition for his composition as others had
done, and not to expose his person and his estate to the will and pleasure of
the Parliament, and not to reject their mercy contained in the Articles of
Exeter, to which he had a right, in case he did submit thereunto; and thereupon
the Committee advised Sir John Stawel to take further time of consideration,
hoping that at his next appearance he would be better advised, and yield
submission to the Authority of Parliament, and conform to the rules of that
Committee.

That when Sir John Stawell next appeared before the Committee, which was about
three days after the four months limited by the Exeter Articles were
expired, instead of submitting to the Committee as was expected, he was higher
in his expressions then at the first; upon which the Committee, upon his
refusal of taking the Negative Oath, committed him to the custody of the
Sergeant at Arms, until the whole matter and manner of Sir John Stawells
behavior should be reported to the Parliament.

That in short time afterward Mr. John Stephens, a Member of that Committee,
did report the same unto the House of Commons, and in that report informed the
house that the opinion of that Committee was, that Sir John Stawell had
slighted and contemned the Authority of the present Parliament, and forfeited
their mercy contained in the Articles of Exeter.

That the Parliament, upon this report made by Mr. Stephens, ordered Sir John
Stawell to be brought to the Bar, to hear and receive this charge, and the
sense of the House thereupon.

That when Sir John Stawel came into the House, being brought in by the
Sergeant at Arms, he was told by the Speaker, that he was a Traitor, or a
Delinquent, and therefore was required to kneel at the Bar; Sir John Stawell
made him some cross grumbling answer, what the words were I do not remember;
but refused: But the Speaker having three times required him to kneel, and Sir
John Stawell still refusing, the Sergeant at Arms was required to take him
away, which he did accordingly, and thereupon the Speaker did not then give him
his charge.

That Sir John Stawell having contemned the Authority of Parliament, the House
committed him to Newgate as a Traitor, and in shorttime after, ordered that he
should be proceeded against as a Traitor.

John Ash.
This is a true Copy.

Tracy Pauncefote, Register



THese Contents were signed by Mr. Ash, and sent to the high Court of Justice
as evidence against me, and are now remaining in the Court of Articles in the
same individual paper which he subscribed. So that from hence it may easily be
inferred, that all my wrongs and sufferings have flowen from Mr. Ash his
construction of my Petition to be a Remonstrance, and that therein I had
refused the Parliaments mercy, and put a contempt upon the Authority of
Parliament: and from Mr. Stephens his report, the substance of which he took
upon credit, that it was the sense of that Committee, that I had slighted and
contemned the Authority of the present Parliament, and forfeited their mercy
contained in the Articles of Exeter, Upon this no man but will say, that the
Parliament had good cause to send for me to their Bar, and to question me for
my former Engagements, since they were told that I was in contempt of their
Authority, and had forfeited their mercy contained in the Articles, which were
my only security: And being brought unto the Lobby about nine of the clock in
the morning, I was put into a little dark corner upon the left hand of the
entering in of the outermost door, my two Keepers attending without the door,
and suffering none to come in unto me, but Mr. Ash; who during the time of my
being there, which was betwixt nine and three in the afternoon, was with me
four or five several times, and seeming in all his discourse very much to
condole the sadness of my condition. I very well remember that the last time
that he was with me, he spoke to me in these words.

Master, you told me the other day when I was with you, that your Composition
would go hard with you for that Deans and Chapters lands are exposed unto sale,
at tenyeers value, you having not money in your purse to pay your composition,
must sell your Fee-simple lands according to that rate. If it please you for to
take 4000 l. for Aubury, I will help you to a Chapman that shall give you the
money.

Whereupon I told him, that he did not offer me half that it cost me; he told
me that he did, for that I had told him that the purchase did stand me but in
8000 l. I told him that it stood me upon the point of 9000 l. ready money: But
now I understand from whence all my troubles do arise, and of those
commandments which God had made, he that did break the least did break them
all; and therefore in coveting what did belong to another, he was a very great
sinner. But I told him that herein I would befriend him, that however he might
covet Aubury, yet I would promise him he should never have it; whereupon Mr.
Ash replied, nay, you were best to say that I spoke to you for Aubury; if you
do, I protest I will deny it: unto which I replied, Sir, be assured that if I
shall think fit at any time to charge you with it, I will aver it with so much
considence and truth, that you shall not dare to deny it; then he said unto me,
Sir, I perceive you grow angry, and it is time to leave you, and so went, as I
suppose into the house: and within a quarter of an hour after I was called to
the Bar, which was upon the 18th day of August, 1646. And being commanded to
kneel, I prayed, that before I received any mark of their displeasure, I might
know my offense; and was thereupon committed to Newgate, and prosecution was
ordered to be made against me at the next Assizes in Somersetshire, in the
years 1647. and 1648. and afterward at the Upper Bench, as by these following
Resolves, and the Order for my Commitment, appears.

Die Martis 18. Augusti 1646.
Sir John Stawell being brought by the Sergeant to the Bar, and by Master
Speaker commanded to kneel, refused, desiring first to be informed what was his
offense. He was thereupon commanded presently to withdraw.

Resolved,

THat Sir John Stawell be forthwith committed prisoner to Newgate for High
Treason for levying War against the Parliament. Ordered that the Sheriffs of
London and Middlesex be required to take special care, That Sir John Stawell
committed by warrant of this House Prisoner to Newgate for high Treason for
levying war against the Parliament, be kept in sure and safe custody.

Upon which Order a Mittimus was drawn up under the Speakers hand, which
follows in these words.

BY Virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, These are to require you to
receive from the Sergeant at Arms, or his Deputy, the Body of Sir John Stawell
Knight of the Bath into the Prison of Newgate in London, and him there to
deteine in safe Custody as your Prisoner, until the pleasure of the House be
signified to you to the contrary; He being committed for High Treason for
levying War against the Parliament: And for so doing this shall be your warrant,

dated 18. Augusti 1646. William Lenthall Speaker.

To the Keeper of the Prison of Newgate in London.
Ordered,

THat Master Palmer, Master Walker, Master Harrington, Master Serle, Sir Thomas
Wroth, Master Blague, and Colonel Popham, or any two of them, do take care
that there be a Prosecution and an Indictment prepared against Sir John Stawell
at the next Assizes to be holden for the County of Somerset for High Treason,
for his levying War against the King, Parliament, and Kingdom of England.

Die Lunae, 28 Feb. 1947.
Ordered,

THat Master Maynard, and Master Hill do take care of the Indictment against
Sir John Stawell at the next Assizes for Somerset.

Die Mercurii 14. Martii 1648.
REsolved by the Parliament, That Sir John Stawell Knight be proceeded against
for life in the Upper Bench.

Hen. Scobell Cler. Parliamenti.

And now having nothing left me to save either life or estate, but by way of
Petition to make my cause known unto the Parliament, and having told Master
Ash when I came out from the Bar, that I hoped that in regard they did not
admit me to speak, they would not be displeased at my address by petition: Upon
this hint of my purpose, Master Ash came unto me three or four days (as I
remember) after my commitment to Newgate: And after that he had expressed
seemingly a great deal of sorrow and trouble that his good Master (for so he
called me) was in so sad a condition, he offered me his service to do what
possibly lay in his power; and sithence there was nothing more seasonable for
me then good advice, he did earnestly desire me to apply my self very humbly
to the Parliament by Petition. I told him that his advice and my own
resolutions did very well agree, and that I did intend to do so. Whereupon he
told me that he had a very earnest request unto me, and prayed me that I would
not deny it, which was, that he might have the honor to prefer my Petition for
me; And if it were so that I would trust him with it, if he did not give me a
very speedy account thereof, and that he did not use his utmost endeavors to
accomplish so much as I should therein desire, he would give me leave
wheresoever I saw him, or spoke of him, to say, My servant Ash was an arrant
knave. I told him, that although I did intend to deliver a Petition, yet it was
not my purpose to have troubled him with it; but since he had so friendly
invited me thereunto, he should have it. He prayed me speedily to draw it. I
told him that I would. He told me then he would come the next morning to me for
it, and accordingly he did so; but not liking the Petition, for that I had
expressed therein, That I had the benefit of the Articles of Exeter; and that I
had accordingly submitted unto my composition; and that I was refused only for
denying to take the Negative Oath and Covenant, and thereof re did pray that I
might be referred unto my Composition, and restored to my Liberty. He told me
that this Petition did too much expostulate with the Parliament (for so he
termed it) that was highly displeased with me; and that I should not petition
in that way, but draw up an humble Petition, that should show that I was very
sorry that I had incurred their displeasures in refusing to kneel when they
commanded me, and to excuse that offense in the best manner that I could, and
to beg their pardon for the same. And this he told me would be sufficient to
take off the Prosecution of my Indictment, which was the first thing in order
to be done, the Assizes being so near at hand in the Country. Whereupon I sent
another Petition to him, which by his Letter written to me he seemed very well
to approve of; but yet although I did very often solicit him by my Wife and
Friends, to put him in mind to prefer the same, he never delivered it to this
day, nor did ever come near me after that time: which Petition follows in
these words.

To the Right Honorable the Commons assembled in Parliament.
The Humble Petition of Sir John Stawell, Prisoner in Newgate.
WHereas your Petitioner by Command lately attended this Honorable House, and
being brought to the Bar, was enjoined to kneel, which your Petitioner forbore
to do, not of any will to lessen the great Respect and Reverence due to that
Honorable Assembly, but conceiving he might first have spoken.

But now finding he has committed an Error, for which he holds himself obliged
to make an humble acknowledgement, and by this Petition to crave a favorable
interpretation of his offense:

Your Petitioner humbly begs your pardon, being very sorry that he has given
you so just cause of displeasure, And shall account it, (in these his sad
misfortunes) a very great happiness to be restored to a capacity of your
favors, And that you would not look back upon what he prays may be forgotten,
but be pleased in the midst of judgment to remember mercy.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. John Stawell.

But Master Ash not willing to make me happy in the fruit of this Petition,
insomuch as the Parliaments former displeasure according to the said several
Orders for my Indictment and Arraignment for High Treason was put in execution
upon me: And I was Indicted first at Taunton Assizes, where the Bill of high
Treason was found; next at the Sessions at Bridgewater, where there was an
Ignoramus; and lastly at Chard, where three Indictments, as I have heard, were
found, one for High Treason, and two for Murder, for the killing of Osborne at
Marshals Elm, and the other for the Execution of Viccary, when I was Governor
of Taunton, many of the Grand Jury being the Inhabitants of Taunton, and such
who had recovered judgments for great sums of money against me, and have since
purchased a good part of my Estate, which Indictments were afterward removed
by Certiorart into the then Kings Bench, where the 12. and 13. of May 1649. I
was Arraigned upon the indictment of High Treason, in levying war against the
King upon the Statute of 25 E. 3. And upon my moving to plead specially, the
Court ordered accordingly that I should bring in my special pleading the first
day of the next Term, and did assign me Counsel for that purpose. But I was
never brought to plead further to that Indictment.

The 18. of June 1649. An Act was printed and published, Entitled, An Act for
releif of all such persons as have been, or shall be sued, molested, or any way
dampnified, contrary to Articles or Conditions granted in time of War; In which
Act Commissioners were nominated hear and determine Cases concerning Articles
according to the powers of the said Act.

Whereupon I did address my self to that Court by Petition, which was read the
10th. of July 1649. And was in these words.

To the Right Honorable, the Lords, and others the Commissioners appointed by
an Act of Parliament for relief of such as have been, are, or shall be sued,
molested, or any ways dampnified, contrary to Articles or Conditions granted
in time of War.
The Humble Petition of Sir John Stawell, Prisoner in Newgate,
Shows,
THat the Articles made upon the Surrender of Exeter, dated 8. Aprilis 1646,
and a Pass from the Lord General Fairfax, dated the 14th. of the same month
(declaring according to truth, that your Petitioner was comprised in those
Articles) he repaired to London to make his Composition, and according to an
Order of Parliament of the 2d. of July 1646. repaired to the Committee of the
Militia of London, within the time limited by that Order, and there undertook
by a subscription under his hand not to bear Arms against the Parliament, as
by that Order, and the Intention of his Articles was required.

That the 24th. of the same Month of July, he preferred a Petition in person
to the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall for compounding with Delinquents, desiring
to be admitted to his composition, according to the said Articles, but was not
admitted thereto, in regard he refused to take the Covenant and Negative Oath.
And the 13th. of August 1646. was by Order of the said Committee sent Prisoner
to Ely-House for such his refusal.

That the 18th. of the same August he was sent for as a Delinquent to the Bar
of the House of Commons, and was from thence committed to the Prison of
Newgate, during the pleasure of that House, for High Treason, in levying War
against the Parl. All which will appear by true Copies annexed of the Lord
Fairfax his Pass, The Order of the second of July 1646. The Certificate of the
Clerk of the Committee of the Militia of London, The Petition to the Committee
of Goldsmiths Hall, and the several Warrants to the Sergeant at Arms, and
Keeper of the Prison of Newgate.

That during his imprisonment in Newgate, which has been near three years, he
has been indicted several times for Treason, and other crimes, and two
several mornings arraigned for his life. And many Actions have been prosecuted
against him, and Judgments had upon diverse of the same, to the value of 6380 l.
10 s. A Schedule of which Actions is also hereunto annexed, and is threatened
with many more. And all these for Acts done by him, relating unto the unhappy
differences betwixt his late Majesty and the Parliament, before the date of the
said Articles, and his Estate continued all this time under Sequestration;
whereby, and by waste and spoil of his Woods and Timber, and taking away by
the Committees in the County of Somerset, all that little of his goods which
the Fate of War had left him, (and the Articles preserved unto him) he has
suffered near the loss of 20000 l. in his Estate, beside the hazards of his
life by the aforesaid Indictments, and what he has suffered in his Liberty and
Good name, which with good men is precious and unvaluable.

That he has not since the Articles granted unto him taken up Arms, or
otherwise been engaged in any new Hostility against the Parliament, or by his
own default forfeited or lost the benefit of the said Articles or Conditions
thereby granted unto him, but has in all things within his power conformed to
the said Articles, by submitting to a reasonable and moderate Composition, and
a timely Petition to that purpose, and a Subscription and Engagement not to
bear Arms, or Act against the Parliament.

That by the 21. and 22. of the said Articles, No Oath, Covenant, Protestation,
or Subscription relating thereunto, was to be imposed upon him, but only such
as should bind him not to bear Arms against the Parliament, and not wilfully
do any act prejudicial to their Affairs whilst he remained in their
Quarters, which your Petitioner has punctually performed by his aforesaid
Subscription before the Committee of the Militia of London, and has really
observed that Engagement.

That by the 12th. of those Articles your Petitioner was not to be questioned
or accountable for any Act past by him done, or by any other by his procurement
relating unto the unhappy differences betwixt the late King and the Parliament;
He submitting to a reasonable and moderate Composition for his Estate, which
the General undertook to endeavor really with the Parliament, that it should
not exceed two years value of any man's real Estate; and for personal,
according to the ordinary rules, not exceeding the proportion aforesaid: which
Composition being made, he was to have Indemnity of his Person, and enjoy his
Estate and all other Immunities without payment of the fifth or twentieth part,
or any other Taxes or Impositions, except what should be hereafter charged upon
him in Common with other Subjects of this Kingdom by Authority of Parliament,
as by a Copy of the said Articles hereto annexed may fully appear.

That he humbly conceives that the pressing of the Covenant and Negative Oath
upon him in manner before expressed, and stop of his Composition for refusal
of the same, and imprisonment for that cause, and all the aforesaid proceedings
against him are contrary to the said Articles, and the Conditions and
Engagements of the Army made unto him: And he does not conceive how the Orders
of Parliament of the fifth of April, and the first of November 1645. mentioned
in the Warrant of the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall, for their Authority, does
give them any power against your Petitioner, who came in by Articles upon the
faith of the Army, and the Generals Pass declaring so much, and those Articles
approved and confirmed by the Commons assembled in Parliament, 6. May 1646.
being in time after the said Orders of the fifth of April, and first of
November 1645. were made.

That according to the said Act, he humbly prays you will be pleased to
appoint a speedy time for the hearing of the Petitioners complaint, and that
the Keeper of the Prison of Newgate may by your Order bring your Petitioner
then before you, and such causes as are against him for his Commitment and
deteiner in that Prison.

That your Petitioner by your Order may be freed of his aforesaid imprisonment,
and from all Votes, Indictments, Charges, Judgments, and Executions against
him, for the matters before mentioned, and that satisfaction may be
acknowledged upon the said Judgments.

That he may be restored to the present possession of all his Estate, without
taking of Oaths or Covenant, and be freed from Sequestration, in regard the
profits of his Lands, the benefit made of his Woods and Timber, besides his
other losses, have been received and employed to the use of the Parliament near
three years since his Petition for Composition was preferred, which far
exceeds two years value of his Estate (which was the utmost penalty the said
Articles charged upon him for a Composition.

That all such Goods as have been taken from him by the aforesaid Committee,
Sequestrators, and others, contrary to the Articles granted unto him, and since
the Date of them, may be restored either in Specie, or in value, according to
the equity of the said Act.

That by your Order a stop may be given to all proceedings, hereafter to be had
or prosecuted against him for any act by him done, or any other by his
procurement relating unto the unhappy differences betwixt the late King and the
Parliament; And that for the prosecution of his Complaint, he may (as in Cases
of like nature, have liberty upon Bail to attend and follow his business from
time to time whilst it depends before you. By all which, the Faith of the Army
will be preserved and vindicated, and your Honors and Justice will appear to a
languishing Prisoner.

John Stawell.

Upon this Petition no proceedings were made by that Court, whose Authority
determining by the said Act, The 10th. day of June, 1650. the same was renewed
by Act of Parliament for six months, and then ended by expiration only.

The 20th day of March, 1650. the high Court of Justice was established, and
the 9th. day of July following, there was published a special Act for trial
of me, amongst others, for my life before the high Court; It being therein
declared, that I was a person not admitted to composition.

The 20. of July 1650. I was by order of the said high Court removed from
Newgate to the Tower of London, in order to my trial.

Tuesday the 17th. of December, 1650. I was brought to the Bar of the high
Court of Justice, and a charge of high Treason exhibited against me, which
follows in these words:

A Charge of high Treason, Murder, Felony, and other high Crimes and Offenses
exhibited to the high Court of Justice, by Edmund Prideaux, Esquire, Attorney
General of the Commonwealth of England, for and on the behalf of the Keepers
of the liberty of England by Authority of Parliament, against Sir John Stawell,
alias Stowell, late of Higham in the County of Somerset, Knight of the Bath, by
him perpetrated and committed; that is to say.
THat he the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell, out of a traiterous and
wicked design to destroy the Parliament and people of England, and to subvert
the fundamental laws and government of this Nation, has several times in
several years of our Lord, one thousand six hundred forty two, one thousand
six hundred forty three, one thousand six hundred forty four, one thousand six
hundred forty five, and one thousand six hundred forty six, in diverse and
sundry places traitorously and maliciously levied and prosecuted a cruel and
bloody war in this Land, on the behalf of Charles Stuart, late King of
England, against the Parliament and the Forces raised by authority of the same;
and has been voluntarily aiding and assisting to the said late King and his
party in the late wars against the Parliament and people of England, and the
forces raised by authority of Parliament: And particularly he the said Sir John
Stawell, alias Stowell, on the first day of March, in the year of our Lord one
thousand six hundred forty and two, did in an hostile manner at, or near a
place called Marshalli Elm in the said County of Somerset, with many armed men
horse and foot, rebelliously and traitorously levy actual war against the
Parliament of England, and did with the said warlike Forces commit diverse and
sundry Murders, Outrages, Cruelties, Burnings, and Destructions, upon the
persons, goods, houses, and estates of diverse of the people of England; and he
the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell, at the time and place last before
mentioned, and diverse other times and places did with the said warlike Forces
traitorously levy war, fight, and join battle against the Forces of the
Parliament and people of England; In which said fight, or fights, battle, or
battles, he the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell, with the said warlike
Forces did traitorously and maliciously kill, slay, and murder many of the
people of England; and particularly on the said first day of March, in the said
year of our Lord one thousand six hundred forty two, at Marshals Elm
aforesaid, did traitorously, feloniously, and of his malice forethought, kill,
slay, and murder one Robert Oseborne, late of Taunton in the said County of
Somerset Gentleman, and diverse others: And further, that he the said Sir John
Stawell, alias Stowell, the last day of April, in the year of our Lord one
thousand six hundred forty and four, at, or near the Town of Taunton in the
said County of Somerset, feloniously and of his malice forethought, did kill
and murder one Christopher Viccary, late of Taunton aforesaid, in the said
County of Somerset, Yeoman. All which Treasons, Murders, Felonies, Crimes, and
Offenses of him the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell, were and are against
the public peace, the Parliament and people of England. And the said Attorney
General by protestation saving to himself, on the behalf of the said Keepers
of the liberty of England, Liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter any
other charge against the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell: And also of
replying to the answers which he the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell shall
make to the premises, or any of them, or to any other charge that shall be so
exhibited, does for the said Treasons, Murders, Felonies, Crimes, and
Offenses, on the behalf of the said Keepers of the liberty of England, impeach
the said Sir John Stawell, alias Stowell, as a Traitor, Murderer, Felon, and
public enemy to the Parliament and people of England; and prays that he may
be put to answer all and singular the premises, that such Examinations,
Trials, Sentence, and Judgment may be thereupon had, as shall be agreeable to
Justice:

Edmund Prideauxs.

To which I pleaded,

1. That I was not liable to that Charge read against me by the said Act
directing my trial; being a person admitted to Composition.

2. That by the Articles of Exeter confirmed by Parliament, I ought not to be
questioned for the offenses laid to my charge.

Hereupon the said high Court gave me leave to plead the said special matter;
and if that should have fallen out against me, They likewise gave me liberty to
plead the general Issue: and after many days solemn hearing and debate
thereupon, the said high Court did not think fit to proceed to Sentence, but to
certify my case to the Parliament, which Certificate was in these words.

Tuesday the 6th of May, 1651.
To the supreme Authority the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
IN obedience to an Act of this present Parliament, 9 July, 1650. This Court
has proceeded in the trial of Sir John Stawell for Treason and other
offenses, and upon hearing all the evidences and witnesses produced on the
behalf of the Commonwealth, and of the Prisoner; It was agreed by the whole
Court that he was guilty of the Treason and other high Crimes and Offenses
charged on him.

But upon his special pleading of right to the Articles of Exeter (confirmed
by Parliament) by which no person therein comprised, and submitting to
reasonable composition for their Estates, should be questioned, or accountable
for any Act passed by them done, relating to the unhappy differences.

The Court finds that the said Sir John Stawell was comprised within the said
Articles, and that in pursuance thereof he did subscribe before a Committee for
the Militia of London, according to an order in Parliament of the second of
July, 1646. And did also personally appear within four months after the said
Articles, and present a Petition to the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall for
composition in relation to the said Articles of Exeter.

And this Court conceives, and has so resolved and declared upon several
debates, that his tender of that Petition (in the manner proved before this
Court) was a submission to composition, according to the said Articles of
Exeter.

But because we find some Resolves of Parliament, that (after the said
Articles and his submission as aforesaid) do order that he should be tried for
Treason; And the said Act of Parliament for his present trial does declare him
not admitted to composition: We therefore do not proceed to Sentence, but do
thus humbly certify his case to this honorable Parliament.

At the high Court of Justice in the Painted Chamber, the 29th. of April,
1651. Richard Keeble, Francis Thorpe, John Green, William Row, William Steel,
John Sadler, John Harrison, William Underwood, Thomas Cook, Samuel Sheffeild,
John Hurst. Georg Manley, John Blackwell, John Parker, Thomas Airs, Owen Row,
Cornelius Cook, John Berners, Samuel Moyer, William Weston, John Stone, Georg
Langham, Nathaniel Whetham.



This Certificate was enclosed in a Letter to Mr. Speaker, dated the 29th. of
April, 1651.

Tuesday 6th. of May, 1651
For the right honorable the Speaker of the Parliament of England.
SIR,
THe high Court of Justice at their meeting upon the business of Sir John
Stawell, who stands referred to them by the Parliament to be tried, which have
held several debates which have produced the Result contained in the paper
enclosed; And it is our desire it may be by you humbly presented to the
Parliament.

Painted Chamber, 6th. Maii, 1651. Sir, Your most humble Servants.


And the said Certificate was read in Parliament the 10th. of June, 1651.

The 16th. of July, 1651. my Estate was adjudged by Act of Parliament to be
sold, and my name accordingly inserted in that Act for sale, entitled an Act
for sale of Lands and Estates forfeited to the Commonwealth for Treason.

In February after the passing of this Act I did address my self unto the
Parliament by Petition, for my relief, which I put into Mr. Garlands hands,
and follows in these words.

To the Supreme Authority the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
The humble Petition of Sir John Stawell, Prisoner in the Tower.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner was comprised within the Articles of Exeter, and was to
enjoy those benefits which were agreed on at the rendition thereof.

That he has really performed all things within his power, which were by the
said Articles required on his part. Notwithstanding he has for the space of
almost six years lain under the weight of your displeasures, not only by the
sequestration of his Estate, and a long and sad Imprisonment, but by the
prosecution of his life upon several Indictments; and lastly, by a trial
before the high Court of Justice.

Your Petitioner humbly prays that you will be pleased to cast your eye upon
the annexed Certificate of that high Court directed unto you, and that as by
the blessing of God, the Justice of that honorable Court, and the benefit of
the said Articles his life has been hitherto preserved, so the liberty of his
person and the possession of his Estate may be granted unto him by the
mediation of your favors, discharged of such Judgments, Sales, or
Encumbrances, as are contrary to the intent and true meaning of the said
Articles, in regard that the profits of his Lands, the benefit made of his
Woods and Timber, besides his other losses, have been received and employed to
the use of the Commonwealth, near six years since his Petition for Composition
was preferred, which far exceeds two years value of his Estate, which was the
utmost penalty the said Articles charged on him for a Composition.

Lastly, though principally intended, he humbly prays that himself, together
with his two Sons, John Stawell, and Edward Stawell, may be restored to your
favors and good opinions, having not acted any thing to your disservice since
the date of the said Articles. And however though some unhappy mistakings when
he first preferred his Petition for Composition, have been the occasion of all
his sufferings, yet he hopes the effects of them will not be permitted in your
wisdom and Justice absolutely to ruin him.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. John Stawell.

THe 29th. of September, 1652. an Act was printed and published, entitled an
Act for renewing of a former Act for relief of persons upon Articles, and
Commissioners nominated therein for that purpose.

At the time of the passing of this Act, there were tendered two Provisoes, the
one of the 28th. of September, 1652. the other the day following, which were in
these words.

Tuesday the 28th. September, 1652.
An Act for reviving a former Act for relief of persons upon Articles, was
this day read the third time.
A Proviso was tendered to this Act in these words; viz. Provided that this Act,
or any thing therein contained, shall not extend, nor be construed to extend to
prejudice, alter, or make void any resolution, votes, or judgments given in the
Parliament touching any the Articles aforesaid, or any persons claiming
thereby. Which Proviso was read the first and second time, and the Question
being put that this Proviso be part of this Act, it passed in the Negative:
Resolved that the Proviso be rejected.

Vera Copia.

Henry Scobell Clerk of the Parliament.



Wednesday the 29th. of September, 1652:
The house resumed the debate upon the Bill for reviving the former Act for
relief of persons upon Articles.
ANother Proviso was tendered to this Bill in these words. Provided always and
be it hereby enacted and declared, that no real or personal Estate which has
been settled, conveyed, or assured to any person, or persons, by virtue of any
Act, Ordinance, or Order of this present Parliament shall be made null,
vacated, or otherwise determined or disposed of by the Commissioners named in
this Act, or by their Authority, but that if they shall see cause of
restitution by virtue of Articles subject unto their Cognizance, they make a
Ward not in Specie against the particular person or persons upon whom such
Estate or Estates be settled, conveyed, or assured, but in value to be satisfied
by such other Lands or Revenew, as the Parliament shall direct any, thing in
this Act, or the former which is hereby revived, to the contrary
notwithstanding. And the Question being put, that the Proviso be read a second
time, It passed with the Negative.

Vera Copia.

Henry Scobell Clerk of the Parliament.



BUt these Provisoes, tending to the limitation of that benefit which the house
was most honorably pleased to grant and allow to such persons as should claim
relief by Articles, were both rejected: And it was resolved upon the Question
in the Negative; which I humbly pray may be specially observed.

The 14th. of October following, I exhibited my Petition to the said Court,
which follows in these words.

To the Honorable the Commissioners for relief upon Articles of War.
The humble Petition of Sir John Stawell, Prisoner in the Tower,
Shows,
THat he was in the Garrison of the City of Exeter, and was comprised in the
Articles made the 8th. of April 1646. and afterward confirmed by the
Parliament for the surrender of the same.

That by the 12th. of the said Articles it was agreed, that no person comprised
in the said Articles, excepting those who were by name excepted by Parliament
from pardon and composition (under which exception he was not) shall be
questioned or accomptable for any Act passed by them done, or any other done by
their procurement, relating unto the unhappy differences betwixt the late King
and the Parliament, they submitting themselves to reasonable and moderate
Composition for their estates, which the then General Sir Thomas Fairfax was
really to endeavor with the Parliament that it should not exceed two years
value of any man's real estate respectively; and for personal, according to the
ordinary rules, not exceeding the proportion aforesaid; which Composition being
made, they should have indemnity for their persons, and enjoy their estates
and all other immunities without payment of 5th. or 20th. part, or any other
Taxes or Impositions, except what should hereafter be charged upon them in
common with other Subjects by authority of Parliament.

That by the 21th. Article it was further agreed, That no Oath, Covenant,
Protestation, or Subscription relating thereunto, shall be imposed upon any
person whatsoever comprised within the said Articles, but only such as shall
bind all persons aforesaid not to bear Arms, or Act against the Parliament
of England sitting at Westminster, or wilfully do any Act prejudicial to
their affairs whilst they remain in their Quarters.

That he had a Certificate under the hand and scale of the then General, dated
the 14th. day of April 1646. signifying that he was in the said City at the
time of the surrendering thereof, and was to have the benefit of those Articles.

That upon the 15th. day of July 1646. he came to the City of London, to make
his Composition, and according to an Order of Parliament of the 2d. of July
1646. repaired to the Committee of the Militia of London within the time
limited by the said Order, and before them undertook by a subscription under
his hand not to bear Arms or act against the Parliament, as by that Order and
the intention of the said 21th. Article was required.

That upon the 24th. of the same month of July he preferred his Petition in
person to the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall for compounding with Delinquents,
desiring to be admitted to his Composition according to the said Articles; But
was not admitted thereunto in regard he refused to take the Covenant and
Negative Oath; And on the 13th. day of August 1646. was by Order of the said
Committee, for such his refusal only, committed to the custody of the Sergeant
at Arms, and kept prisoner in Ely House; And on the 18th. day of the same
August being sent for as a Delinquent before the House of Commons, was from
thence committed to the prison of Newgate during the pleasure of the House for
high Treason, and levying of war against the Parliament, where he continued
prisoner almost for the space of four years before his removal to the Tower.

That during his Imprisonment in Newgate he has been indicted several times
for Treason and other crimes, and two several mornings arraigned for his life
at the then Kings Bench Bar; And many Actions have been prosecuted against
him, and Judgments had upon diverse of them, to the value of near 7000 l. in
damages; And all these for Acts done by him relating to the late unhappy
differences betwixt the late king and the Parliament, and before the date of
the said Articles.

That in July 1650. he was by Order of the High Court of Justice removed from
Newgate to the Tower of London, and there kept in close custody for some
months; And on the 17th. day of December 1650. and diverse days after brought
before the said High Court, and tried for his life, and after many days trial,
the examination of several Witnesses, and a very strict search and enquiry into
all actions, and the performance of the Articles on his part, the said High
Court did not think fit to proceed to sentence, but to certify the Parliament
of their proceedings, as by the Copy of the said Certificate hereunto annexed
may appear.

That ever since the said Trial he has continued prisoner in the Tower, and
from the time of granting the said Articles (being almost seven years since)
his estate has been kept under Sequestration, whereby, and by the increase of
his Debts, the waste and felling of his Woods and Timber, and spoiling his
Houses, and the taking away of all that little that the War had left him, and
which was by the said Articles preserved unto him, He has suffered the loss
of near 30000 l. in his estate, out of which he has not been allowed any
thing toward his subsistence, besides what he has suffered by a sad and
tedious Imprisonment, and hazard of his life by the aforesaid Indictments and
Prosecutions.

That by an Act of Parliament passed on the 16th. of July 1651. his Estate
amongst diverse others was declared and adjudged to be forfeited by him for
Treason against the Parliament, and the same has been since sold accordingly.

That he has not (neither any of his sons or Servants have) since the
granting of the said Articles, taken up Arms, or otherwise been engaged in any
Act of hostility against the Parliament, neither has he by any default of his
forfeited or lost the benefit of the said Articles, or Conditions granted unto
him, but has in all things within his power conformed to the said Articles, by
submitting to Composition in due time, and by a subscription and Engagement not
to bear Arms, or Act against the Parliament.

Wherefore your Petitioner humbly prays, that you will be pleased to cast your
eves upon the annexed Certificate of the High Court of Justice, attested under
Master Scobells hand: And that, as by the blessing of God, the Justice of that
Honorable Court, the benefit of the said Articles, his life has been hither
unto preserved, so the Liberty of his person, and the possession of his estate
may be granted unto him, discharged of such Judgments, Sales, Executions, or
Encumbrances, as are contrary to the intent and true meaning of the said
Articles; And also that by the mediation of your favors, he may enjoy his
Estate free from Composition, in regard that the profits of his Lands, the
benefit made of his Wood and Timber, and much of his other Losses, have been
received and employed to the use of the Commonwealth almost seven years since
his Petition for Composition was preferred, which far exceeds two years value
of his Estate (which was the utmost penalty the said Articles charged on him
for a Composition;) And if this his humble request shall not find favor in
your sight, Then he further prays, that he may receive from this Honorable
Committee such justice and right as shall be agreeable to his Articles, and the
several Acts of Parliament established for his relief.

And your Petitioner shall, etc.

To this Petition the Counsel for the Commonwealth attending the said Court,
and the Counsel for the Trustees for Sale of Delinquents Lands, put in their
several Demurrers, which follow in these words.

The Plea and Demurrer of Edmund Prideaux, Esquire, Attorney General for the
Commonwealth of England, to the Petition of Sir John Stawell.
THe said Attorney General (not confessing any the matters in the said
Petition contained to be true, in such manner and form as the same are therein
set forth; The whole Scope of the said Petition of the said Sir John Stawell
being to seek releife upon the Articles made the eighth of April 1646. upon the
Surrender of Exeter; (within which Articles, as by the said Petition is
supposed, he the said Sir John Stawell was and is comprised) as to the Liberty
of his Person, and Possession of his Estate) for Plea thereunto says, That
inasmuch as in and by the said Petition it does appear that he the said Sir
John Stawell was committed by the House of Commons (thereby meaning) as is
conceived) the Commons of England assembled in Parlia.) to the Prison of
Newgate, during the pleasure of the House (thereby again meaning) as is also
conceived) the said Commons of England assembled in Parliament) for High
Treason in levying war against the Parliament: And for that it also appears
in and by the said Petition, That by an Act of Parliament passed the sixteenth
day of July 1651. The Estate of the said Sir John Stawell (amongst diverse
others) was declared and adjudged to be by him forfeited for High Treason
against the Parliament; And the said Estate so adjudged forfeited, has been
since sold and disposed of, in pursuance, and by virtue and authority of the
said Act of Parliament: Thereupon the said Attorney General does demurre in
Law upon the said Petition, and does demand the judgment of this Court, if
this Court has Jurisdiction, or may or ought to hold Plea, or take conusance
of the said matters in the said Petition contained; And the rather for that it
does not appear in or by the said Petition, that the said Commons of England
assembled in Parliament have declared their pleasure as touching the
imprisonment of the said Sir John Stawell for the Treason aforesaid; And the
Parliament of England having by the aforesaid Act (in which all the people of
England, and their consents thereunto, are involved and included) adjudged the
said Sir John Stawell to have forfeited his Estate for High Treason, and for
that the same is forfeited as aforesaid; And the said Judgment being now fully
executed, and the Estate of the said Sir John Stawell in fact sold and disposed
of by, and according to the said Act of Parliament; The said Attorney General
further says, That no Subordinate, or Delegated Court or Authority whatsoever,
has power to examine the cause of the aforesaid Judgment; Nor is the said
Judgment to be reversed or annulled, but by immediate power and authority of
Parliament, and is not, nor can be transmitted to any other Judicature
whatsoever; Nor can, nor ought it to be supposed that the aforesaid Judgment
is or has been given in breach or violation of any Articles confirmed by
Parliament, in the observation, or violation of which Articles, the Faith of
the Army, and Honor and Justice of the Nation of England is so highly
concerned; Neither ought this Court (as the Attorney General humbly offers)
to admit the aforesaid Act of Parliament, and the proceedings thereupon had, to
be drawn into examination; for that were to sit in Judgment upon the
Parliament, and to judge their Actions; For all which Causes, and other
apparent insufficiencies and imperfections in the said Petition contained, the
said Attorney General does likewise demur in Law, and does demand judgment of
the Cou^^, if any further proceedings shall be had upon the said Petition, as
to the imprisonment of the said Sir John Stawell, and the restitution unto him
of his Estate so forfeited by him, and sold and disposed of as aforesaid, or
any part thereof.

Delivered into the Court by Mr. Hurst the 10th. of Novem. 1652. Edmund
Prideaux, Tho: Widdrington, John Green, Barth. Hall, John Hurst.

A true Copy

Tracy Pauncefote Registr.



To the Honorable the Commissioners for Releife upon Articles in time of War.
WHereas by your Orders of the sixth and tenth of Novem. instant, the Trustees
appointed by Act of parliament of the sixteenth of July 1651. for Sale of
Estates forfeited to the Commonwealth for Treason, were to show cause in
writing why all further proceedings touching the Sale of Sir John Stowells
Estate (if any thing remain to be done concerning the same) should not be
stayed till further order and direction from you.

In answer whereunto by their Counsel, they return this for cause, That by the
aforesaid Act of Parliament, the Estate of Sir John Stowell amongst others is
declared and adjudged to be justly forfeited by him for his Treason against the
Parliament and People of England, and is thereby vested and settled in the said
Trustees and their heirs in order to be sold for the benefit of the
Commonwealth: That accordingly and in pursuance of their trust they have sold
all Sir John Stowells estate; some part to the tennants themselves (who thereby
have drowned their estates) other parts to others upon doubling their Public
faith Bills, and most of the Purchasers are in possession. That this being done
by Act and Authority of Parliament, ought not (as they humbly conceive) to be
questioned or reverst by any derivative Authority whatsoever. And therefore the
said Trustees do demurre in Law, and pray the Judgment of this Court, if this
Court has Jurisdiction, or may hold Plea of this cause: For Plea they say,
that by the last proviso in your Act, power is given you to stay sale of
estates of such persons as have not Articles confirmed by Parliament, whereas
the Articles which Sir John Stowell claims benefit of, are confirmed, as in
his Petition is alleged.

They further say, for that it appears that the first Act authorizing this
Court to give relief upon Articles, did determine the twentieth of June One
thousand six hundred and fifty, and that the Parliament of England, by an Act
passed the ninth of July following, did direct the trial of Sir John Stowell
by the High Court of Justice for Treason: And also by the aforesaid Act of the
16th. of July 1651. did adjudge his estate to be sold, which Judgment is fully
executed by the sale thereof, according to the said Act. Therefore it shall be
presumed, the Parliament did the same upon most just grounds, and the cause of
their Judgment is not to be examined; Nor is their said Judgment to be
reversed or annulled but by immediate power and authority of Parliament; for
all which causes the said Trustees by their Counsel do demurre in Law, and
demand Judgment of the Court, if any further proceedings shall be had therein

Delivered by Master Graves, 24to. Nov. 1652. J.W. Rich. Graves, Counsel for
the said Trustees.
A true Copy.

Tracy Pauncefote Registr.



These Demurrers were solemnly argued before the said Court and overruled, as
appears by this following Order; at the making whereof 26. Commissioners were
present.

Exchequer Chamber, Westminster. Friday the 31th. of December, 1652.
By the Commissioners appointed for Relief upon Articles granted in time of
War.
UPon large and deliberate debate of the Petition of Sir John Stawell, prisoner
in the Tower, wherein he claims the benefit of the Articles made upon the
surrender of Exeter, and confirmed by Parliam. contrary to which Articles (as
he alleges) he has not only suffered a long Imprisonment, and undergone
several trials for his life, but Judgments are obtained against him to a great
value, for things done in time of, and in relation to the late War, and before
the date of the said Articles; And his Estate since sold by the Trustees for
sale of Lands forfeited for Treason: Whereupon he prays relief, having no way
(as he says) lost or forfeited the benefit of the said Articles; unto which
Petition several Pleas and Demurrers have been put in by the Counsel for the
Commonwealth, and for the said Trustees, the effect whereof is; It appearing
that the Parliament has interposed in the case of the Petitioner, both in
respect of his Imprisonment, and in appointing trials for his life, and the
selling of his Estate, as by them judged to be confiscated for Treason:
Therefore to his Imprisonment and possession of his Estate, it is pleaded, that
this Court could not take Cognizance of the Complaint, or examine or give any
relief thereupon; which Pleas and Demurrers remaining upon record in this
Court, with the debates had thereupon: The Court having taken into their
serious consideration, and the power and trust committed to them by the
Parliament, in and by their several Acts for doing Justice in cases of this,
and the like nature, after mature deliberation had and taken of the premises,
are of opinion, that the said Pleas and Demurrers which for present admit the
state of the Fact to be such as in the Petition is declared, do not contain in
themselves sufficient matter to preclude this Court from proceeding in this
cause, and do therefore resolve and adjudge that the said Pleas and Demurrers
be overruled and set aside. And it is further ordered, that Mr. Nuttley, the
Solicitor attending this Court, do acquaint the Council for the
Commonwealth, and the said Trustees with this resolution; to the end they may
set forth such other cause as they have to allege (if there be any on the
States behalf) by way of Plea or answer to the said Petition, which the Court
holds fit to be done, and delivered into Court by, or before Friday, being the
fourteenth day of this instant January, that such further proceedings may be
had in the said cause, as shall appertain to Justice.

Tracy Pauncesote, Register.

IN pursuance of this order the Council for the Commonwealth and for the
Trustees put in their several answers, and also diverse of the Purchasors; and
Replications put in by me thereunto: the answers of the Commonwealth, the
Trustees, and the several purchasors were in these words.

The Answer of Edmund Prideaux Esquire, Attorney General for the Commonwealth
of England, to the Petition of Sir John Stawell.
THe said Attorney General saving and reserving to himself now and at all
times, hereafter all and all manner of advantage by way of exception, or
otherwise to the uncertainties, untruths, and insufficiencies in the said
Petition contained, For answer thereunto, says, that he the said Attorney
General knows not that the said Sir John Stawell was comprised within the
Articles in and by his said Petition mentioned and alleged, to have been made
upon the surrender of the City of Exeter, the eighth day of April, in the year
of our Lord one thousand six hundred forty and six, as in the Petition is set
forth. Nor that he the said Sir John Stawell was in the said City of Exeter at
the time of such surrender thereof, or that he was an Inhabitant within the
said City seven months before the date of the said Articles; and the said
Attorney General further says, that if in truth he the said Sir John Stawell
was so comprised within the said Articles, as in and by the said Petition is
alleged; yet the said Attorney General knows not that he the said Sir John
Stawell did submit unto, or make composition for his Estate, according to the
purport and true intent and meaning of the said Articles, and as he ought to
have done: with this also, that here the said Sir John Stawell has not well
and truly performed such of the said Articles as on his part and behalf were
and ought to have been performed, according to the tenor, purport, and true
intent and meaning of the said Articles, but has wilfully broken and infringed
the same, whereby he has through his own default forfeited and lost the
benefit of the said Articles. And further, that since the time of the said
Articles so granted as aforesaid, he the said Sir John Stawell has been
engaged in secret Counsels against the Parliament of England, and has done and
committed other Acts subsequent to the date of the said Articles, whereby he
has also lost and forfeited the benefit of the said Articles through his own
default, in case he was so comprised within them, as in and by the said
Petition is alleged. And the said Attorney General further says, that by the
said Sir John Stawels own showing in and by his said Petition it does appear,
and the truth so is, that he the said Sir Io: Stawell after the making of the
said Articles was committed by the Commons of England assembled in Parliament
to the Prison of Newgate during their pleasure, for high Treason in levying war
against the Parliament. And the said Attorney General further says (which
also appears by the said Sir John Stawels own showing in and by his said
Petition; that by an Act of this present Parliament, passed on the sixteenth
day of July, 1651. the Estate of the said Sir John Stawell by the name of Sir
John Stawell late of Cudderston in the County of Somerset Knight of the Bath,
amongst diverse others was and is declared and adjudged to be by him and them
forfeited for his and their Treasons against the Parliament and people of
England, as by the said Act, relation being thereunto had, appears. And the
said Attorney General further says, that the said Estate of the said Sir John
Stawell so adjudged forfeited, has been since sold and disposed of in
pursuance, and by virtue and Authority of the said Act of Parliament. And the
said Attorney General further says, that the Parliament of England have not
hitherto declared their pleasure as touching the Imprisonment of the said Sir
John Stawell for the Treason aforesaid: And the said Parliament having by the
aforesaid Act, in which all the people of England and their consents thereunto
are involued and concluded, adjudged the said Sir John Stawell to have
forfeited his Estate for high Treason as aforesaid; and for that the same is
forfeited, and the said Judgment of Parliament now fully executed; And the said
Estate of the said Sir John Stawell in fact sold and disposed of, by virtue of,
and according to the said Act of Parliament as aforesaid. The said Attorney
General further says, that it neither can, nor ought to be supposed, that
the aforesaid Judgment is, or has been given in breach or violation of any
Articles confirmed by Parliament, in the observation or violation of which
Articles, the faith of the Army, and the honor and justice of the English
Nation are so highly concerned, as by the Petition is set forth. Neither has
the Parliament declared what the said Treason was, nor when committed, for
which they have adjudged him the said Sir John Stawell guilty, and his Estate
to be forfeited as aforesaid. And the said Attorney General neither can, or
ought to undertake to ascertain the same: Neither can this Court be informed
of the same without consulting the Parliament, or until their sense and
pleasure be known therein; without that, that any other matter or thing in the
said petition contained, material or effectual in the Law, to be answered
unto, and not therein sufficiently answered unto, confessed, and avoided,
traversed, or denied is true; all which matters and things the said Attorney
General is, and will be ready to aver, justify, maintain, and prove, as this
honorable Court shall award. And therefore humbly prays, that the said
Petition may be dismissed, etc.

Delivered by Master Nutley January 28. 1652. Th. Widdrington. Edm. Prideaux.
Barth. Hall. John Green.


The Answer of the Trustees appointed by Act of Parliament for sale of
Delinquents Estates, to the Petition of Sir John Stawell.
THe said Trustees (saving and reserving to themselves now and at all times
hereafter all and all manner of Advantages by way of Exception or otherwise, to
the uncertainties and Insufficiences in the said Petition contained, for a
clear and full Answer to the said Petition) say, that by Act of Parliament of
the sixteenth of July One thousand six hundred fifty one, The Estate of the
said Sir John Stawell (amongst others) is therein mentioned to have been, and
is thereby declared and adjudged to be justly forfeited by him for his Treason
against the Parliament and People of England. That by the said Act of
Parliament his Estate is vested and settled in the said Trustees, their Heirs
and Assigns, upon trust and confidence to sell and convey the same, as in and
by the said Act is directed, limited, and appointed. That upon the security of
the said Sir John Stawells Lands (and other the Traitors Lands by the said Act
appointed to be sold) The said Act does direct, that the sum of two hundred
and fifty thousand pounds should be borrowed for the necessary carrying on the
service of this Commonwealth. That for the encouragement of such persons who
should be the Purchasors of the said Lands or any part thereof, It is further
enacted, that they, their Heirs and Assigns, shall have and enjoy the Lands
which shall by them be so purchased, discharged of all Trusts and accounts
whereunto the said Trustees are or may be liable by the said Act, and all other
claims and demands whatsoever. That in pursuance of the said Act, and
according to the Trust thereby reposed in the said Trustees, They have sold to
several persons all Sir John Stawells Estate: And they are confident, and do
verily believe, a great part of the purchase money is paid, according to the
said Act of Parliament to the Treasurers thereby appointed to receive the same,
and that the said moneys have been since paid out by the said Treasurors, as
the Parliament and others authorized by them have Ordered the same. And
therefore the said Trustees further say, That they claim not any manner of
Interest in the said Sir John Stawells Estate, otherwise then as persons
entrusted by the said Act of Parliament, as before is declared; Nor do they
know, nor does it concern them to know why the Parliament did enact his Estate
to be sold (as aforesaid.) Wherefore they humbly pray hence to be dismissed.

Richard Graves, Counsel with the said Trustees.

IN humble obedience to an order of the honorable Commissioners appointed by
Act of Parliament, for relief of persons upon Articles granted in time of War,
which Order is dated the seven and twentieth of November, 1652. and served
about six days since, whereby Matthew Coker of Lincolnes Inn Gent: is
required within 7. days after service, to make answer in writing to the matter
of complaint exhibited against him, touching breach of Articles by Sir John
Stawell, whose petition as is informed is now depending before the
Commissioners aforesaid, according to which the said Sir John Stawell desires
to be releived against him concerning a Message in Everchreech and Presley in
the County of Somerset. I therefore the said Matthew Coker do for answer say,
that whereas the Trustees at Drury house, according to the power given them,
had given notice of their resolutions to make sale of Sir John Stawells Estate,
and amongst the rest of the Manor of Presley, part of which Manor being
bought by the Town of Taunton, and the remaining part which was and is
Tennanted by my Brother-in-Law William Smith of Presly Gent. being also about
to be sold; I therefore at the instance and request of my own Brother, and
other kindred and friends, and by virtue of an Assignment of Tenant-Right from
my said Brother-in-Law William Smith, became a Purchasor of all that Right and
Estate that had been in Sir John Stawell upon the Land Tenanted by the said
William Smith, some great inducement to which Purchase, amongst the rest was
chiefly the natural affection I bear to my Sister and her Children, who as I
had reason to suspect might have very much suffered, if a stranger had bought
over their heads; whereupon I confess without the least intimation of Sir John
Stawell, or any Agent from or under him, I did with the said Trustees contract
for, and buy the same; notwithstanding the Articles of Exeter, which I thought
would not have concerned me being a private person to look into or judge of;
and I the rather did the less heed them, having then as I still have an
assured confidence in the Justice of the Parliament, that if at any time they
being rightly convinced that the said Sir John Stawell should have the benefit
of the Articles of Exeter, and accordingly admitted him, that care would be
taken for giving reasonable satisfaction for my purchase-money, and other
charges I have been at; and now for that I have made my first payment, and have
a conveyance from the said Trustees of the premises sealed and enrolled,
therefore though it shall never so much appear that Sir John Stawell is
comprised in, and ought to have benefit of the said Articles, and be admitted
into a capacity of enjoying the same; yet for that I have paid money, and am
invested as aforesaid, I think it altogether consistent with the justice of the
Parliament and the honorable Commissioners aforesaid, first to put me in a
sure condition or way of having that relief as is proper and necessary in a
case of this nature, before I surrender back to the State, or part with any
Interest I have in the premises: But when I shall be assured of satisfaction
as aforesaid, I shall, being lawfully required, be always ready in obedience to
any Parliamentary power to part with my Interest as aforesaid, which I confess
I should have been the more unwilling to have done; but that I have by much
experience found, that by reason of the doubtfulnesse whether Sir John Stawell
should have benefit by the said Articles or no, does make for the disadvantage
of the Purchasor in several respects, and therefore I hope the honorable
Commissioners aforesaid will be graciously pleased speedily to decide and put
some certain period to the business one way or other.

Wrote and signed with my own hand. Matthew Coker.


To the Right Honorable the Committee for Articles.
The humble Answer of John War, and John Borradale, Gentlemen, to the
Information and Complaint of Sir John Stawell.
THat we did jointly Contract with the Trustees appointed by Act of Parliament
for sale of several Lands and Estates forfeited to the Commonwealth for
Treason of the Demesnes of Bewly, in the County of Somerset, being late parcel
of the Estate of the said Sir John Stawell, appointed to be sold by the said
Act.

That we were encouraged to the said Contract by the said Act of Parliament; by
virtue and authority whereof, we hope and expect to be protected, and to enjoy
our said Purchase.

That how far the said Sir John Stawell is concerned in the pretended breach
of the Articles of Exon, concerns not us to look at, The Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England having (as we humbly conceive) sufficiently weighed
and determined the Interest of the said Sir John Stawell in the said Articles,
before they exposed his Land to sale.

John War. John Borradale.



To the Right Honorable the Commissioners for relief of persons upon Articles
of War.
The Answer of John Farewell to the Complaint of Sir John Stawell, Knight.
THat he was altogether ignorant of any Articles Sir John Stawell had; but he
Contracted for the Lands mentioned in a Subscription of Sir John to your
Honors Order of Summons of the eighth of December last, with those who (as he
conceived) had authority to do the same; And shall freely submit to what
Authority shall do therein:

By the direction of the said John Farewell. Delivered 23. of February 1652.
Nicholas Batteley.


The said Nicholas Batteley Answers in the same words.

Edward Bushel Answers likewise in the same words.

Both delivered 23. of February 1652.

To the Honorable the Commissioners for releife upon Articles of War.
The Answer of John Gorges Esquier to the Complaint of Sir John Stawell Knight.
THat he was altogether ignorant of any Articles Sir John Stawell had. But he
contracted for the Lands mentioned in a Subscription of Sir John to your
Honors Order of Summons of the eighth of December last, with those who as he
conceived had authority to do the same, and shall freely submit to the like
Order for himself, as shall be made in the Case of other the Purchasers on
Friday next come seavenight.

John Gorges.
I do authorize Thomas Sherwood Gent. to deliver this as my Answer.

John Gorges.




The replication of Sir John Stawell Knight, unto the answer of Edmond
Prideaux, Attorney General.
HE the said Sir John Stawell averreth and says all as in his Petition is
alleged and said, and that he was and is a person comprised within the
Articles in his Petition set forth, and at the making of the said Articles and
surrender of the City of Exon in the said City, and submitted unto his
composition, and did all other things that are requisite to enable him to the
benefit of the said Articles, nor has broken or infringed the same, nor
engaged himself since the said Articles in any counsels or Actions against the
Parliament, nor done other act to forfeit or make him lose the benefit of the
said Articles without that that any other matters or things alleged in the
said answer of validity to debar this Petitioner is true, all which he
averreth, and prays as in his Petition he has already prayed.

JOHN STAWELL.


The Replications made unto the several answers of the persons abovesaid, are
the same as is before expressed to Mr. Attorney Generals answer, and are
omitted for brevities sake.

The cause being thus at perfect issue, witnesses were appointed to be examined.

The 24th of February 1652. these following Resolves were made in Parliament.

Thursday, Febr. 24. 1652.
REsolved by the Parliament, That all such persons as have purchased of the
Trustees at Drury-house the Lands of any Delinquent clayming, or who shall
claim the benefit of Articles, shall hold and enjoy the lands and estates so
by them purchased, according to the rules, limitations, and directions
contained in the respective Acts for sale, notwithstanding any such Articles.

Resolved by the Parliament, That the case of Sir John Stawell, upon his
pretense of Title to Articles be resumed to the consideration and determination
of the Parliament. And that the Commissioners for giving relief to persons
upon Articles do forbear to proceed any further therein until the Parliament
take further Order.

Hen. Scobell, Cler. Parliament.

The late Parliament being dissolved: The 18 of May 1653. I exhibited a
Petition to the Commissioners for Articles, in these words:

To the Honorable the Commissioners for relief of persons upon Articles of
War.
The humble Petition of Sir John Stawell, Prisoner in the Tower.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner is advertized (as by the annexed Letter may appear) of
waste intended to be made upon his estate, which if not timely prevented, will
very much increase those losses he has already received by the breach of his
Articles.

That of late he has discovered the disposure of part of his Estate, viz. The
Prebend and Rectory of Wilscombe, and the impropriate Parsonage of Halse, which
are now in the hands of the Committee for plundered Ministers. And Mr. Nicholas
Bond, who has purchased the Gleab lands thereunto belonging, to whom none of
your former Orders have been directed for want of such information and helps as
might have guided him in this particular.

That by the Interpretation he makes of your late Orders, He humbly conceives
leave is given to him to solicit this Honorable Court for his relief, and
that an especial favor is granted unto him for that purpose, of which he is
not yet made a partaker.

Wherefore your Petitioner humbly prays, that your Order or Injunction may be
granted for the stopping of waste, till his cause now depending before you
receive a determination. That such like Orders may be granted unto the
Committee for plundered Ministers, and to Mr. Nicholas Bond, as have been
directed to the Trustees at Drury-house, and others in the like case. And
lastly, that by your favor and leave he may proceed to the examination of
Witnesses, and to the proof of his petition.

And your petitioner shall ever pray, etc. JOHN STAWELL.

Upon which Petition, the Commissioners having heard the Council for the
Commonwealth, and for the Petitioner, this following Order was made.

Star Chamber Wistminster. Wednesday, June 9. 1653.
By the Commissioners for relief upon Articles of War.
Upon consideration had of the petition of Sir John Stawell, exhibited unto
this Court the 18 day of May last past, praying thereby amongst other things,
that he may have leave to proceed to examination of witnesses, and proof of
his petition; and upon reading the Order of this Court of the first of this
instant Jane, whereby it was ordered in the presence, and at the desire of the
Council for the Commonwealth, that Council on both sides should be heard unto
that point this present day, Now upon the hearing of Mr. Maynard, Mr. Latch,
and Mr. Harrison, on the behalf of the said Sir John Stawell: and of Mr.
Attorney General, and the Attorney of the Duchy, for the Commonwealth: And
upon consideration of what has been offered by either party, and mature
deliberation had thereupon, Are of opinion, and do find it just to order,
that the said Sir John Stawell have liberty to proceed in the examination of
such witnesses as have been produced, and are already sworn in the cause,
according to the Order of this Court of the sixteenth day of February last
past, and to bring on his cause in due course to hearing, and do order the same
accordingly.

tracy Pauncefote, Register.

Hereupon Witnesses were examined by me, to prove my complaint, upon
Intergatories, and in their several depositions did clearly testify the
matters in issue which did arise out of my said Petition which are too long
here to be inserted yet in respect that some mis-representations have been made
concerning my deportment and carriage at Goldsmiths Hall at the time of the
tendering of my Petition for compounding, I shall make bold for my
justification against those aspersions to insert the testimony of Sir Anthony
Erby, and Sir David Watkins, two worthy persons and members of that Committee,
and then present when I delivered the said Petition, which though it be but a
Letter from Sir Anthony Erby, yet it relating to his Oath which he had
formerly taken in the Court of Articles to speak his conscience, and he being
a person of honor, and free from all exception, I presume it will gain that
credit which I hope in your judgments will very much clear me, which follows
in these words.

To my much respected friend Tracy Pauncefote Esquire. at his house in the little
Amory, Westminster.
Sir,
YOu may remember that some time since I was summoned in by Sir John Stawell to
the commissioners for Articles, sitting in the inner Exchequer chamber as a
witness, and was then sworn but as yet not examined, I have been by several
Letters from Sir John Stawell requested to come up to London to be now
examined, but the truth is my business is such here, having been absent from
my estate now above twelve years, I cannot come up as he desires, upon which
he desires me to certify in writing what I can say in his business, which I
am willing to do, and have directed this Letter to you, that if there be any
thing wherein I may do him Justice, you may make use of it at his hearing; I
being upon my oath shall set nothing under my hand but what is truth, which I
dare not otherwise do if I were not sworn. To the first I know he delivered
in a Petition into Goldsmiths Hall, desiring to compound for his Estate,
coming in as I remember upon the Articles of Exeter, and I know he delivered
his Petition within the time according to the Articles. Some of the Committee
that were then present gave me and the rest a character of him that he was one
of the violentest enemies the Parliament then had, That he was one of the very
first that raised Forces against the Parliament, and some other such speeches
of the disposition and nature of the man; upon which we were resolved to show
him no favor, but found fault that in the first place in his Potition he had
not acknowledged himself a Delinquent, to which as I remember he answered, he
came to compound according to his Articles; and desired the benefit of them.
Then we asked him if he had taken the oath and covenant, or if he had not, we
asked him if he would take it; he replied that by his Articles he was to take
no oath; we told him we were commanded that all such as compounded before us
should take the oath and covenant, and take the Negative Oath, which he refused
to do: we gave him time for eight or ten days, or a fortnight; I do not
certainly remember, but it was to my certain remembrance, that by that time his
time given him by his Articles would be out that we might deal with him the
better. For his deportment to us at that time, and the other that he was before
us, for my part I took no offense at it, neither do I think justly there could
be any. He is of himself of a blunt carriage, but for uncivility I saw none at
the times he was before us, either in gesture or language. For my part, I would
have had him admitted to composition, knowing money would have done the
Parliament service; besides, by his Articles we ought: but I was but one,
others were not of my mind, but heightened his offense high, took exceptions at
his carriage and language, and would have it reported to the House; for my
part, then I thought there was more in it then was outwardly expressed: but the
truth was, by the order of the House we were bound up from admitting him to
compound, unless he took the covenant, except the House would dispense with
it, which they did when they approved of those Articles. But since (I must
confess) I have heard from some of the then Members of Parliament, that one of
our Society would have bought a Manor of Sir John Stawell, which lay near
him, but I knew nothing of it then, but took notice of some tartness in the
party, which being neighbors and Countrymen, I something wondered at, thinking
that Sir John Stawell might have exasperated him by some action in the time of
war. Sir, if J might know to what the commissioners would have me examined, and
send me the interrogatories, I shall give them as full an answer, as if I were
present. I am confident M. Leech must say the same as J do about the delivery
of the Petition, and the reasons why we then respited him, and went not on to
his composition. Sir J am

1 July 1653. Your assured friend and servant, ANTHO. IRBY.


THese are to certify whom it may concern, That I, Sir David Watkins, being in
the year 1646 one of the Committee for compounding with delinquents, then
sitting at Goldsmiths-hall, do well remember that Sir John Stawell Knight of
the Bath came to the said Committee with a fair and civil respect, and
presented his petition to them within the time limited by the Articles of
Exeter, Thereby desiring that he might compound for his Estate according to the
said Articles granted to him and others of the Kings party.

He had omitted to acknowledge Delinquency in his said Petition, neither had he
taken the Negative Oath and Covenant, as others in his condition had done
before their admittance to composition; nor was he willing to submit to either,
affirming the same to be contrary to the said Articles, and against his
conscience, to take the Negative oath and covenant. Therefore his Petition was
laid aside, and not received. In witness whereof, I have hereunto, at the
request of the said Sir John Stawell, subscribed my name, this third day of
October in the year of our Lord God 1653.

David Watkins.


The Court of Articles were likewise pleased (the Council of the Commonwealth
consenting thereunto) to give leave that the whole evidence taken before the
High court of Justice should be made use of at the hearing by either party.

The Commissioners for compounding with Delinquents also returned their answer
to an Order of Court, which follows in these words.

By the Commissioners for compounding, etc.
11 August. 1653. Haberdashers-Hall, London.
IN answer to an Order from the Commissioners for relief of persons upon
Articles granted in time of war, bearing date the tenth instant in the case
of Sir John Stdwell, who claims the Benefit of Exeter Articles. We do hereby
signify unto the said Court, that upon search made by our Register, he finds
not that there are any papers in his custody which concerns Sir John Stawell,
save only an Order of the High Court of Justice of the 26 of Novrmber 1650,
requiring Mr. Leech our late Register to certify unto that Court the
proceedings had in relation to the said Sir John's composition; and we are
informed that his petition to compound, with such other papers as concerned him
were there left before the said High court of Justice, and not sithence
delivered back to our Register, so that we know no further matter against the
said Sir John Stawell, then what has been already signified to the said High
court upon the said Sir John Stawels Trial. Here remains with our Register
several petitions of the Lady Stawell, which we conceive not pertinent to the
case of the said Sir John, and therefore think not fit to trouble the court of
Articles therewith.

Sam, Moyer. Edw. Carry. Rich. Williams. Ric. Moors. T. Bailey.



The 15 of August 1653. the cause came regularly to be heard, and Council as
well on behalf of the Commonwealth and Trustees, and of me the petitioner,
having been fully heard, and averring they had nothing further to say; and in
regard none of the Defendants who had answered did attend, nor any for them,
although Oath was made that they were summoned to that purpose, the Court took
time to advise upon the whole matter.

But in the interim, whilst the Court was deliberating, and advising upon their
judgment, the Trustees of Drury-house, and the petitioners, to impede the
judgment of the Court, perceiving that I had fully proved the several
assertions of my petition, whereupon I prayed their relief, they preferred two
several petitions to the Committee constituted for the receiving of petitions,
which follow in these words:

To the Honorable the Committee for Petitions. The humble Petition and
Representation of the Trustees for sale of lands forfeited for Treason.
Shows,
THat by Act of Parliament, bearing date the sixteenth of July 1651. Sir John
Stawell, and other Delinquents therein mentioned were adjudged and declared
Traitors, and their Estates forfeited by them for their several Treasons
against the Parliament and people of England; and the said Estates were by the
said Act vested and settled in us as Trustees for the sale thereof to the use
and benefit of the Commonwealth.

And whereas we have according to the trust reposed in us, made sales of the
said Estates, and thereby raised very considerable sums of money, which have
been and are daily disposed of for the Navy and other public uses.

And whereas diverse of the said purchasers do come daily unto us with
complaints, that they are interrupted by Sir John Stawell his Agents, in the
quiet enjoyment of their Estates so by them purchased, according to the Law.

And whereas the late Parliament, upon a petition made unto them by diverse of
the said purchasers (a copy whereof is hereunto annexed) did upon the 24 of
February last make an Order and a Resolve in the case, a copy whereof is
hereunto annexed. And notwithstanding which Order and Resolve, we are certainly
informed that the Commissioners appointed to give relief upon Articles of
War have since proceeded in the case of Sir John Stawell, and are ready to
give judgment against the Commonwealth.

We therefore humbly pray your Honors to review the annexed petition and vote
of Parliament, and that the same may he forthwith presented to the
consideration of the Parliament, together with your opinions therein, to do as
shall seem meet to their grave judgments and wisdoms, and so the honor and
credit of Acts of Parliament may be preserved, and the purchasers settled in
their undoubted rights; and your petitioners encouraged in the execution of
their trust,

And your petitioners shall pray, etc. Arthur Samuel. Samuel Goodkin. William
Robinson. William Skinner. William Lisle. Houry Sealy. Mat. Valentine.


To the supreme Authority of this Nation, the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.
The humble petition of several Purchasers of the late Estate of Sir John
Stawell, on the behalf of themselves and other purchasers of the same Estate.
Shows,
THat your petitioners esteeming Acts of Parliament the highest Law, and
greatest security to rely upon, did purchase several parcels of Sir John
Stawels Estate, not imagining any derivative power from you would or could
question why you exposed it to sale. Notwithstanding which, your petitioners
are daily summoned up to show cause why Sir John should not have his lands,
according to Articles of war. And although the Council for the Commonwealth
on their behalfes have demurred in law, yet is the same overruled, and your
petitioners left in a strange uncertain undone condition, unless relieved by
your justice.

That your petitioners have incurred great Debts for their respective
purchases, and some of them being Tenants have drowned their mean estates by
purchasing the Fee; and through their constant adhearing to the Parliament,
have exposed themselves to the mercy of an inveterate implacable enemy.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray your speedy consideration of the
premises, and the engagement of your own honor and justice therein, that so
your petitioners may peaceably enjoy their Estates according to their several
purchases.

And they shall pray, etc.

Upon which the Committee ordered that Colonel Rous should report the said
petitions to the house; which Order is thus:

Tuesday, the 2 of August. 1653. At the Committee for receiving Petitions.
Upon reading the petition of several purchasers of the late Estate of Sir
John Stawell, on the behalf of themselves and others the purchasers of the
same Estate. Together with the petition and Representation of the Trustees for
sale of Lands forfeited for Treason; and upon serious debate and consideration
had thereupon, It is ordered that Colonel Rous, who had the chair of this
Committee, do with all convenient speed report the said petition to the
Parliament, and withal offer it as the sense of this Committee, That the
purchasers ought to have and enjoy their several purchases, according to their
several contracts. And in case that Sir John Stawell shall be found within and
ought to have the benefit of Articles of war, the Parliament may be pleased to
give him satisfaction, which they humbly submit to the consideration of the
House.

This Report being made, it pleased the Parliament to make these Resolves.

Monday, the 8 of August. 1653.
COlonel Rous reports from the Committee for petitions the humble petition of
several purchasers of the late Estate of Sir John Stawell, on the behalf of
themselves and other purchasers of the same Estate, and the several Votes of
Parliament of the 24 of February 1652. which were now read.

Resolved by the Parliament, That this business be taken into consideration on
Friday next.

Ordered by the Parliament, That it be referred to the Committee for petitions
to take care that there be good Council for the Commonwealth, to attend the
commissioners for Articles.

Hen. Scobell, Cler. Parliament.

After which Resolve, viz. the 22 of August 1653. abovementioned, the Court of
Articles did solemnly give their judgment, as follows.

Monday the 15 of August, 1653. By the Commissioners constituted by Act of
Parliament for Relief of persons upon Articles, Conditions and Engagements made
in time of War, sitting in the Exchequer-chamber, Westminster.
WHereas Sir John Stawell has exhibited his Petition into this Court, thereby
(amongst other things) setting forth, That he is comprised in the Articles made
upon the surrender of the City and Garrison of Exeter, bearing date the eighth
of April, 1646. and afterward confirmed by Parliament: By the the twelfth of
which said Articles it was agreed, That no person therein comprised should be
questioned or accountable for any act past by them done, or any other done by
their procurement, relating unto the un happy Differences betwixt the late King
and the Parliament, they submitting themselves to reasonable and moderate
Composition for their Estates, which the then General Sir Thomas Fairfax was
really to endevor with the Parliament, that it should not exceed two years
value of any man's real Estate respectively, and for personal according to the
ordinary Rules, not exceeding the proportion aforesaid: Which Composition being
made, they should have Indemnity for their persons, and enjoy their Estates
and all other Immunities, without payment of fifth or twentieth part, or any
other Taxes or Impositions, except what should hereafter be charged upon them
in common with other Subjects, by authority of Parliament. And by the 21
Article it was further agreed, That no Oath, Covenant, Protestation, or
Subscription relating thereunto, shall be imposed upon any person whatsoever
comprised within the said Articles, but only such as should bind all persons
aforesaid, not to bear Arms against the Parliament of England sitting at
Westminster, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to their affairs, whilst they
remain in their Quarters. That he had a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of
the then General, dated the 14 of April, 1646. signifying, that he was to have
the benefit of the said Articles. That the 15 of July, 1646. he came to London
to make his Composition, and according to an Order of Parliament of the second
of July, 1646. and within the time thereby limited undertook by a subscription
under his hand, not to bear Arms against the Parliament, according to the
intention of the said Order and 21 Article. And upon the 24 of the same July,
1646. he preferred his Petition in person to the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall
for compounding with Delinquents, desiring to compound according to the said
Articles; But was not admited, because he refused to take the Negative Oath and
Covenant: And was the 13 of August, 1646. for such his refusal only, committed
first to Ely-House, afterward by Order of the then House of Commons to
Newgate, for High Treason, in levying War against the Parliament, where he
continued almost four years, and in that time was several times indicted for
Treason, and twice arraigned for his life at the then Kings Bench Bar: And that
Judgments are obtained against him in personal Actions for seven thousand
pounds in Damages; And all this for acts relating to the Differences between
the late King and the Parliament, and before the Date of the said Articles.
That in July, 1650. he was by Order of the High Court of Justice removed from
Newgate to the Tower, and there kept in close custody: and the seventeenth of
December, 1650. and diverse days after, tried for his life before the said High
Court, who after many days trial, examination of witnesses, and strict enquiry
into his actions, and the performance of the Articles on his part, did not
proceed to sentence, but certified their proceedings to the Parliament: A copy
of which Certificate was annexed to this Petition: That ever since the said
Trial he was a prisoner, and from the Date of the said Articles his Estate
sequestered, by which, together with his Debts, and felling his Woods and
Timber, he has lost near thirty thousand pounds in his Estate, besides his
imprisonment, and hazard of his life. That his Estate, by an Act of the 16 of
July, 1651. is (amongst others) declared forfeited for Treason, and has been
since sold accordingly. That neither he, nor his sons, or servants, have
engaged against the Parliament in any act of hostility since the said Articles,
nor has he lost the benefit thereof, by any default of his; and therefore
prays, That the said Certificate of the High Court of Justice may be
considered, and the liberty of his person, and the possession of his Estate,
may be granted to him, discharged of such Judgments, Executions, Sales and
encumbrances as are contrary to the meaning of the said Articles, and free from
Composition, in regard the profits of his Estate for seven years have been
received to the use of the Commonwealth. Unto which Petition several Pleas and
Demurrers were put in by Mr Attorney General on the behalf of the Commonwealth
of England, and by the Council for the Trustees for sale of Estates forfeited
for Treason, on the behalf of the same Trustees; the effect whereof was, It
appearing that the Parliament had interposed in the case of the Petitioner,
both in respect of his imprisonment, and in appointing Trials for his life, and
the selling of his Estate, as by them adjudged to be confiscated for Treason;
Therefore that as to his imprisonment, and possession of his Estate, the Court
could not take cognizance of the complaint, or examine or give any relief
thereupon, as by the said Pleas and Demurrers, reference thereto being had, may
more at large appear: Which Petition, Pleas, and Demurrers coming regularly to
hearing before this Court, after long debate and mature deliberation had of and
upon the same; this Court, upon the 31 of December last past, declared their
opinion. That the said Pleas and Demurrers (which for the present admitted the
state of the Fact to be such as is set forth in the said Petition) did not
contain in themselves sufficient matter to preclude this Court from proceeding
upon the said Petition; and did therefore resolve and adjudge the same to be
overruled and set aside: and appointed the Solicitor for the State, attending
the Court, to acquaint the Council for the Commonwealth, and the said Trustees
with this Resolution, to the end they might set forth such other cause as they
had to allege (if there were any) on the States behalf, by way of Plea or
Answer to the said Petition: And the Court also, at the prayer of the
Petitioner, issued forth summons to such persons as were by the Petitioner
named Defendants, and certified by the Trustees aforesaid to have been
Purchasers of the Lands and Estate of the Petitioner, to plead or answer to the
Complaint of the said Petitioner. Hereupon the Council for the Commonwealth put
in an Answer, wherein they say, they know not that the Petitioner was comprised
in Articles, nor that he was in the City of Exeter at the surrender, nor an
Inhabitant there seven Months before the said Articles: and that if he were
comprised, he knew not that the said Petitioner did submit unto, or make
Composition for his Estate, according to the true meaning of the said Articles,
and as he ought to have done: and avers, that the Petitioner had not performed
such of the said Articles as on his part were to be performed, but had wilfully
broken and infringed the same. That he has been engaged in secret counsels
since the said Articles, against the Parliament, and committed other acts since
the Articles, whereby he has forfeited the benefit of the same Articles
through his own default: And by way of Answer, further also sets forth the same
matters of Law formerly insisted upon in his said Plea and Demurrer, whereupon
this Court had formerly delivered their Judgments as aforesaid. The said
Trustees also put in their Answer, and say, That by the said Act of the 16 of
July, 1651. the Petitioners Estate was settled in them upon Trust, to convey the
same as the said Act directed: and that in pursuance thereof they have sold to
several persons all the said Estate, and do believe that a great part of the
purchase Money is paid; and claim no other interest in the said Estate, then as
persons entrusted as aforesaid; neither know, nor are concerned, why the
Parliament have enacted the Petitioners Estate to be sold. Several persons,
named Defendants by the said Petitioner, did also appear, and put in Answers to
the said Petition: In particular Matthew Coker of Lincolns Inn, Gent. says.
That he has purchased from the said Trustees part of the Manor of Priestley,
being parcel of the Lands of the said Petitioner, and hopes to have back his
money and charges before he surrender: and then he says he shall be always ready
to do the same. John War and John Borradale say, That they have jointly
contracted with the said Trustees for the Demeasnes of Bewley in the County of
Somerset, part of the Estate of the said Petitioner. That how far the
Petitioner is concerned in the pretended breach of the Articles of Exon,
concerns not them to look at; the Parliament having, as they conceive,
sufficiently weighed and determined the interest of the said Petitioner in the
said Articles before they exposed his Lands to sale. Nicholas Batteley, John
Farewell, Edward Bushel, and John Gorges, by their several Answers severally
say, That they have contracted for the Lands respectively mentioned in the
subscription of the Petitioner to the Order of this Court of summons of the
eighth of December last, with those who they conceive had authority to do the
same; and each of them freely offers to submit to what authority shall do
therein. Unto which Answers of the Council for the Commonwealth, and the said
Trustees, and of the said other Defendants, the Petitioner Sir John Stawell
replied, averring the truth of his said Petition: and the cause being at
perfect issue, witnesses were examined, and their Depositions published, and by
the consent both of Mr Attorney General, and of the Council for the Petitioner,
the whole evidence taken before the late High Court of Justice, upon the Trial
of the said Petitioner before them, was agreed to be made use of by either
party at the hearing of the cause. The Court having also received the Answer of
the present Commissioners for compounding, etc. sitting at Habberdashers-Hall,
London, certifying, That they have no further matter against the Petitioner,
then what has been already signified to the said High Court upon his Trial, by
virtue of their Order in that behalf; did appoint this day for the hearing of
the whole cause. Now upon full hearing of Mr Latch, Mr Harrisen, and Mr
Amhurst, on the behalf of the said Petitioner, and of Mr Attorney General, Mr
Attorney Hall, and Mr Hurst, on behalf of the Commonwealth, together with Mr
Graves on the behalf of the said Trustees; and upon reading of the said Answers
of the said other Defendants, purchasers of part of the Petitioners said
Estate, they, nor any of them appearing, nor any for them, although due notice
had been given unto each of them of the time appointed for the hearing of this
cause (whereof Oath is made) the Court proceeded therein: and upon the hearing
of the evidences and witnesses, produced on the behalf of the said Petitioner
and of the Commonwealth, and consideration had of what stands admitted and
proved before this Court; they do find, and are clearly of opinion, That Sir
John Stawell is within the Articles of Exeter confirmed by Parliament; by which
no persons therein comprised, and submitting to reasonable Composition for
their Estates, are to be accountable or questioned for any act past by them
done, relating unto the unhappy Differences between the late King and the
Parliament. That the Petitioner personally appeared before the Committee of the
Militia of London, and subscribed according to an Order in Parliament of the
second of July, 1646. not to bear Arms against the Parliament, nor wilfully do
any act prejudicial to their affairs, whilst he remained in their Quarters:
which we find to be agreeable to the 21 of the said Articles. That he also
personally appeared the 24 of July, 1646. being within four months after the
said Articles, and presented a Petition to the Committee of Goldsmiths-Hall for
Compositions, mentioning therein his Estate to be sequestered, and humbly
praying they would please to admit him to Composition, according to the said
Articles, and the then Generals Certificate, rendering him capable of that
agreement; but his said Petition was rejected. That Sir John Stawell's tender
of that Petition in the manner proved before this Court, was a submission to
Composition according to the said Articles of Exeter. That he was afterward by
Warrant of the said Committee of the 13 of August, 1646. committed to Ely.
House, for refusing to take the Negative Oath and Covenant, enjoined by the
Ordinances of Parliament of the fifth of April, 1645. and first of November,
1645. That since that commitment he has been continued prisoner in several
Goals, and during that restraint has been several times indicted and brought
in question for his life, for acts relating to the unhappy Differences,
supposed by him to be done before the granting of the said Articles. That it
appears not to this Court, that he has by any act or default of his lost or
forfeited the benefit of his said Articles, which we find to be approved by
the then House of Commons the sixth of May, 1646. and by both Houses of
Parliament the fourth of November, 1647. who ordered that Approbation of theirs
to be published, and all Committees, Judges, Officers, and other persons
concerned, to take notice thereof, and observe the same, any Orders or
Ordinances to the contrary notwithstanding. That since his said submitting to
compound, the profits received forth of his Estate being ever since until the
late sale under Sequestration, and the Damages thereby by him sustained appear
to amount to above 25000 l. That by the Trustees Answer in this case, it
appears they have sold all his Estate, by reason of the Act for sale, wherein
he is included: And the Defendants, Matthew Coker, John War, John Borradale,
Edward Bushel, John Farewell, Nicholas Batteley, and John Gorges, acknowledge
they have bought of them the said Trustees several parcels of the said Estate.
That the said Petitioner Sir John Stawel, being tried for his life before the
late High Court of Justice sitting in the years 1650, and 1651. that Court
finding him within the said Articles, and that he had submitted to Composition,
thought not fit to proceed to sentence, but to certify his Case to the
Parliament: Upon which Articles this Court finds not any Judgment to be since
given; but discern themselves empowered, authorized, and required by
Parliament, to give relief to persons wronged through breach of Articles, in
such sort as is expressed by the Acts made in that behalf. All which this Court
having taken into their serious consideration, and how far the Faith of the
Army, and Honor and Justice of the Parliament and Nation are concerned in this,
and the like cases, That right be done, and no violation of Articles permitted,
after many debates and mature deliberation had thereupon; and being satisfied
in their judgments and consciences, that the Petitioner Sir John Stawell is
fully capable of the Relief intended to persons within Articles, by the Acts
directing and authorizing the same, and constituting this Court; Do in order
thereto, and in pursuance of the power and trust to them committed in that
behalf, Resolve, Declare, and Adjudge, That the Petitioner Sir John Stawell
has good right, and by his said Articles ought to be admitted to compound for
his whole Estate, real and personal, according to the tenor of the same
Articles, notwithstanding any the Settlements, Sales, or Contracts
beforementioned, at such rates, and in such manner, as others comprised within
the said Articles have done: and the Commissioners for compounding with
Delinquents, are hereby enabled, authorized, and required, to permit the said
Sir John Stawell to compound for his whole Estate, as aforesaid: And in respect
of those great Losses and extreme Damages which the said Petitioner has
sustained by the Sequestration and Detention of his Estate, and the profits
received out of the same for above seven years last past, and by the felling of
his Woods and Timber, and otherwise, for want of being admitted to a timely
Composition; This Court does order and direct, That the said Commissioners for
compounding do cause an exact account to be made of the Rents, Issues, and
profits, received for, or out of the Petitioners Estate, since he first
submitted to Composition, and was not admitted thereunto: and do recommend to
their consideration the proofs thereof already taken in this cause, Copies
whereof, attested by the Register of this Court, are for that purpose to be
presented to them: And if the said Commissioners shall find the same to amount
unto, or exceed the Fine or Composition which the said Petitioner ought to pay,
according to the rates prescribed, and allowed by the said Articles of Exeter,
That then the same be allowed, accepted, and taken in lieu and full
satisfaction of such Fine or Composition so imposed upon, or to be satisfied by
the said Petitioner Sir John Stawell, according to his Articles; otherwise the
defect (if any happen to be) is to be supplied by him the said Petitioner: and
if any surplusage or overplus remain, the said Commissioners for compounding
are hereby ordered and desired to certify the same unto this Court. And upon
such computation, and satisfaction made as aforesaid, the said Commissioners
are hereby directed and authorized to give their Order for such acceptance of
the Petitioners Fine and Composition, and to give the Petitioner a Discharge
accordingly: and they are desired to give him all fitting expedition in the
premises. And it is further ordered, adjudged, and declared by this Court,
That after the making of the said Composition as aforesaid, the said Petitioner
Sir John Stawell shall have the Liberty and Indemnity of his person free from
any further restraint or imprisonment, according to the true meaning of his
said Articles: and that all Bayl, or other security, entered into by the said
Petitioner, or any other persons with or for him, touching his true
Imprisonment, be thereupon delivered up to the said Petitioner, and vacated and
discharged: and that he be in the mean time permitted, upon the Bayl already by
him given, to prosecute and attend the perfecting of his said Composition
without let or molestation. And that the said Petitioner Sir John Stawell, from
and after such Composition as aforesaid, shall have the possession of his
Estate, freed and discharged from all Sequestrations and Seizures whatsoever,
and shall enjoy the same without any claim, demand, impediment or molestation
of the said Trustees, or of the Survivors and Survivor of them, their or any of
their heirs. And this Court does further award, order, and judge, That the
Trustees for Sale of Lands and Estates forfeited to the Commonwealth for
Treason, do upon sight of this Order and Award, stay and forbear all further
proceedings in the Sale or Disposal of any the Land and Estate of the said
Petitioner Sir John Stawell, remaining unsold (if any such be:) and if any part
of the Moneys remain unpayd, for any Lands belonging to the Petitioner already
contracted for and sold, that they likewise forbear to demand or receive the
same, or to make any further proceedings touching the same, or intermeddle any
further therewith. And it appearing unto this Court, by the Answers of the said
several Defendants, Matthew Coker, John War, John Borradale, Nicholas
Batteley, John Farewell, Edward Bushel, and John Gorges, that they have
contracted for, and purchased some parts and parcels of the Petitioners Lands
and Estate, mentioned and referred to, in and by the Answers before mentioned,
the detention whereof is to the prejudice, and tending to the disherison of the
said Petitioner, and contrary to his said Articles; This Court do order and
adjudge, That from and after the perfecting of the Composition aforesaid, and
notice given thereof, and of this Order and Judgment, the said Matthew. Coker,
John War, John Borradale, Nicholas Batteley, John Farewell, Edward Bushel, and
John Gorges, do forthwith restore unto the said Petitioner Sir John Stawell,
and his heirs, the full and peaceable possession of all and every the premises
by them purchased, as aforesaid: And that after the making of the said
Composition, the said Petitioner, and his heirs, shall and may peaceably and
quietly hold and enjoy the same Hereditaments, with their and every of their
members and appurtenances, freed and discharged of and from all claims,
charges, and encumbrances, in any wise occasioned by or under them the said
Defendants, purchasers respectively. And the said Trustees, and the Survivors
or Survivor of them, or any of them, their, or any of their heirs, or any
person or persons, claiming by, from, or under them, or any of them, in as free
and ample manner, as if the said last mentioned premises had not been
sequestered, or vested, or settled in the said Trustees and Purchasers, or any of
them; and as if no such Settlements, Contracts, or Sales, had been had or made.
And the said Trustees at Drury-House, and also the said Matthew Coker, John
War, John Borradale, Nicholas Batteley, John Farewell, Edward Bushel, and John
Gorges, and every of them, and all others, who are or may be any way herein
concerned, are upon notice hereof, to give their observance hereunto
accordingly. And it is lastly Ordered and Declared, That the Petitioners
bringing the present Cause to hearing against the aforenamed Defendants, shall
be no bar to him to proceed further upon his said Petition against other
Defendants already named, or who shall be hereafter made Defendants to the said
Petition; but that he may prosecute such persons upon the ground of his said
Complaint, so far as he shall see occasion, and be advised: And upon the same
Petition, if cause be, bring those causes also to Issue and Judgment, in order
to his just Relief; The now Award and Judgment given in this Cause, or any
other matter or thing herein contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Jo. Bradshaw Edw. Whalley Edward Cook William Bosvile Anth. Samwell Owen Row
John Hayes Clem. Oxenbridge.


This Judgment being given and declared by the honorable Court of Articles,
after they had ten months most judiciously ordered and directed the
proceedings in the cause, to the end that there might be left no scruple in any
Interest unsatisfied, Mr. Attorney General and the rest of the Counsel for
the Commonwealth, and the Counsel for the Trustees being heard at large, I did
not conceive but that all such who were concerned would have rested in it. But
after all this I find the endeavors of the Trustees and several Purchasers
of my Estate do tend directly to render my proceedings for the gaining of my
right unsuccesfull; for upon the 29th. of August seven days after this
Judgment, the Parliament resumed the debate of the Purchasors Petition and
Representation of the Trustees, and did resolve as follows.

Monday the 29th. August, 1653.
THe house took up the former debate upon the Petition of the Purchasers of the
Estate of Sir John Stawell.

The humble Petition and Representation of the Trustees, for sale of Lands and
Estates forfeited to the Commonwealth for Treason was this day read.

Resolved

B^ the Parliament, that this Petition of the Purchasers of Sir John Stawells
Estate be referred back to the same Committee, to consider what is fit to be
done for the relief of the Petitioners, and report to the house withal speed.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.

Hereupon Mr. Pauncefote the Register of the Court of Articles was commanded to
attend the said Committee with the Judgment of that Court, together with the
several Acts of Parliament constituting that Court, and all the pleadings and
proceedings which had passed in my Cause.

UPon which reference of the House to the Committee, to consider what was fit
to be done for the relief of the Purchasers, it seems they have thought fit
to report, that the Purchasers of my Estate ought to enjoy it; And upon that
report you have been pleased to make this Resolve.

Tuesday the 15th. of September, 1653.
Resolved,

THat this House does agree with this Report of the Committee, that the
Purchasers of Sir John Stawells Estate shall quietly possess and enjoy the
same, according to their several Contracts made with the Trustees.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.

From this it may appear that the Committee for receiving of Petitions not
pursuing (as I humbly conceive) the intention of the order of Reference which
did refer to their considerations, (after I had the Judgment of the Court of
Articles for part of my Estate) what was fit to be done for the relief of the
Petitioners, they did resume the matter which formerly they had offered, and
instead of proposing a way how the Purchasers should be relieved, it was
reported as a thing agreeable to their Judgments, that their Estates should be
confirmed; upon report of which as their sense and opinion, it has pleased the
Parliament to make the last mentioned Resolve. This being shortly my case, and
surely my ruin, if by your favor not prevented, I beseech you in the next
place to consider what power you have reserved unto your selves, by the
express words of the Act of sale of the sixteenth of July, 1651. fol. 1373.
and how the Trustees stand limited in the execution of their Trust; the words
are these. Nevertheless upon trust and confidence that the said William Skinner
and others the persons above named, or any five or more of them shall have,
hold, and enjoy, all and singular the Premises, and every of them (meaning the
Lands and Estates of the persons in the Act named of which I am one) subject
unto such trusts and uses as by this Act, or in and by Authority of Parliament
shall be hereafter further directed and appointed, and shall dispose of the
same accordingly.

The reason of this Clause and Limitation, I humbly conceive to be, for that
the Parliament having confirmed and ratified diverse Articles and Conditions
granted in time of war, to the making good of which, their Honor and Justice
as well as the faith of the Army and Nation was eminently concerned, and for
that at the time when this Act did pass they neither did nor could possibly
take notice of such as had right or claim to the same, they reserved unto
themselves this power, and did provide that the Trustees should order and
dispose of the same accordingly.

And by their Act of the 29th. of September, 1652. for reviving of the Act of
the 18th. of June, 1649. which upon just and honorable grounds gave relief to
all such persons who are or shall be arrested, sued, impleaded, imprisoned, or
sequestered, contrary to any Articles given or granted, etc. a Court for that
purpose being constituted to do right in all the particulars of both the said
Acts, according to the tenor and meaning of Articles, any Law, Order or
Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding: By which Act and Declaration the
Parliament does make use of their former power, expressly reserved unto them.
And if any man's estate or part thereof be sold contrary to the Right of
Articles, it is no wrong unto the Purchasers, if it be by Judgment restored to
the right Owner; for the Decree or Judgment that shall so restore it, is given
by Authority of Parliament, and is in order to the Power in the Act of sale
reserved unto the Parliament so to do.

And the Purchasers have no cause to complain (so as recompense be assigned
unto them) for that their bargains and contracts made with them could not be
absolute and direct, in regard the said clause of Limitation had debarred the
Trustees themselves, from whom they claim in the case of Articles, from any
such absolute estate: And therefore it seems, that some of them taking notice
of this reserved power, upon passing the Act of Revivour, preferred the two
Provisoes aforementioned to the Parliament. That that Act which was then to
pass, should not extend, or be construed to extend to prejudice, alter, or
make void any Resolution, Vote or Judgment given in Parliament touching any
the Articles aforesaid, or any person claiming thereby. As also that no Real
or Personal Estate, which has been settled, conveyed, or assured to any
person or persons by virtue of any Act, Order or Ordinance of the then
Parliament, should be made null, vacated, or otherwise determined or disposed
of by the Commissioners named in that Act, or by their Authority, etc. But the
Parliament, reflecting upon their Honor in the case of Articles, upon the
question rejected both the Provisoes. And whereas if they had been approved, I
had been ruined and undone; so by the same reason, being rejected, I may with
the help of your favor and justice, be preserved and restored to what is
properly and of right belonging unto me.

Thus in all humbleness I have Remonstrated and faithfully declared unto you to
the best of my remembrance by what means I came to take up Arms in the behalf
of the late KING in those most unhappy distractions (my Judgment at that time
being satisfied of the KINGS real intentions and unfeigned constancy
thereunto, for the sure establishment of Religion, and the Laws, the safety
and welfare of the People, as also to declare how, and in what manner I
proceeded during all the time of my service and employment, And upon what
Terms, Articles, and Concessions I ceased from further action on the KINGS
Part, and that by those Articles I was to have had my person freed and
unmolested, and my Estate restored upon a moderate Composition, which now at
length by your Judgment (as is aforesaid) and Decrees grounded upon your Laws
and Acts of Parliament are awarded unto me. And I am very confident that had
it not been for the ill Offices of some particular persons begot by a designed
prejudicie, and nursed by the heat of their passions against me, I should long
ago have been set at liberty from a tedious Imprisonment, and have been in the
actual possession of my Estate by the Justice of the late Parliament, to whom
I cannot impute any Injustice, or report any thing that is dishonorable. But
since they were but men, and by the necessity of their humanity they were
enforced to take reports from others of such matters as were Acted at a
distance from them, and perhaps by such (though altogether unknown to them) as
might so present things as their private interest might lead them, by which
means my Right has been much retarded; so in like manner I make it no
question, that when you who are their Honorable Successors shall be truly
informed of the state of my condition, having cast your cies upon this
Narrative, where you may perceive upon the whole deduction, that
notwithstanding the utmost diligence and disquisition that either the malice or
interest of my Adversaries could promote and project against me for my ruin
and destruction, I have had the Judgment and resolution of two great and
honorable Courts; the one for the safety of my life, and the other for the
restitution of my estate; which Judgments, considering the ability and
integrity of the persons, and gravity and equanimity of their proceedings in
their pleadings, debates, and consultations, I hope are fully satisfactory; And
the rather because the result of them is but the affording of me that Justice
which is so eminently grounded upon that indisputable law of Nature, without
which the foundation of no government whatsoever can be sure or lasting, the
law of Contracts being reciprocally the obligation of protection from the
supreme Power and subjection in the People who ought to obey, and that as well
in military as civil Order; which the noble Army taking into their serious
consideration, have made it by public Petition to the late Parliament of Aug.
12.1652. one of the weighty Clauses of their requests, viz. That the Articles
of War made unto the Enemy may be made good, according to the intent of them.

Which Petition by Order of the Council of War was presented by six
honorable Officers of the Army, and had a very favorable and gracious Answer.

Now forasmuch as there does not appear by any proof against me (though no
stone has been left unturned under which any thing might be found for that
purpose) that I am in the least guilty of any Act tending to the
nonperformance of all such things as on my part I was bound unto by the said
Articles, either at the time of the rendition of the said city of Exeter, nor
that I have acted any thing since contrary to my subscription made at
Guild Hall; I do make it my humble suit, that the Justice and Honor of the
Parliament and Nation, and the Faith of the Army may be made good unto me in
restoring of me to the benefit of my Articles, the aforementioned Judgment,
and such further right and Justice, as is extended unto me by the several Acts
of Parliament established for my relief.

And as it is my humble and frequent prayer to that great God, who has for
many years miraculously fed me, to bestow upon me my daily bread; so let it
not I beseech you be a thing displeasing unto you, if I pray (in a time when
neither Estate or Credit is left me) for so timely a consideration hereof as
may stand with the rest of your weighty affairs.

John Stawell.

FINIS.

