The Kings Majesty's LETTER INTERCEPTED By the Commissioners attending his
MAJESTY. (A copy whereof was sent to the PARLIAMENT.) AND Mr. MUNGO MURREY
apprehended, who was appointed by the KING to deliver it to Montrel, the French
Ambassador, Who is going over to the QVEEN to FRANCE.

And a List of the Jests of all the several places where his Majesty has
lain, and is to lie every day between Newcastle and Holmby house.

Also the manner of the Scots marching home into Scotland, with other news from
the Court, and Newcastle.

PErused, and (being examined) is appointed to be Printed and Published,
according to Order of Parliament, Feb. 9. 1646.

LONDON: Printed by A. COE, near Cripplegate, 1647.

The Kings Majesty's Letter intercepted, By the Commissioners attending his
Majesty.
A Copy whereof was sent to the PARLIAMENT.
WORTHY SIR,
YOURS by the Post I have received, for which I thank you, and in demonstration
of it, give you this return. Sir, I suppose you cannot want intelligence how
things are managed here, and my labor might be spared; howsoever, I cannot but
assure you, the Scots are all departed; and had I not seen them march, I could
never have believed, either their number to have been in the Kingdom, nor their
sad behavior upon their departing: yet I impute it not to the Nation, nor the
Army, but to particular persons thereof, though some Officers co^^^ive to (...),
I dare affirm, that of all the Horse I ever saw in this Kingdom, since the
first marching from Keinton, I never saw so many b^ave Horse together, at least
six thousand. The Officers all marched w^^h naked swords, but their Horses were
not b^e; for they were all ^ded and clothed to purpose. But they have been so
real in the main, that I will go backward and hide their nakedness.

The V^ce Admi^als Ship is still in Lies Road in Sco^land, stopping (...), nor
does the wind serve for her to come away as ^et.

The Holland man of War at Tinmouth, longs as much to be gone, as we to have
him, but is windbound. The Vice Adm^rall waits on her in the Constant Warwick,
and has two more with him.

Yesterday we heard of the Fellowship without the Bar, but a storm came up
about three a clock, and put her off to Sea.

There dined aboard the Vice Admiral Ship, Adjutant General Deate, of the
Army, the Judge Advocate, Commissioner Potter, Major Smith, and Captain
Skippon. Major Smith received Tinmouth Castle, and is there at present. Who
shall be governor of Tinmouth Castle, I shall advert^se you in my next.

On Saturday last the English Commissioners took ^ssession of his Majesty, and
settled Families: His Majesty took it very ill to have his old Servants taken
^^om him. That (and some other things which I forbear at present) put his
Majesty into an humor that he would not hear Major Ke^e preach on the Lords
day, although two days before he caused a note to be sent to him to preach,
but be applied himself to the Commissioners, and acquainted them that he would
take no notice of it without their Summons.

Then Ma^or Keme was appointed to preach, who accordingly came hither to
Newcastle on saturday night; and being come, he sent the same night to Mr.
Marshal, to know which time of the day he pleased: who spoke with Mr. Keme, and
told him, that both he and Mr. C^^ll had had some p^ivate discourse with the
King about it, but that His Majesty was resolved to hear none of them.

And accordingly on that Lords day his Majesty was as good as his word, his
Majesty never came, although much imp^^tuned by the Earl of Pembroke, the
Earl of Denbigh, etc.

His Majesty has now other manner of Table and attendance then formerly, a
great many honest godly Courtiers, and good Soldiers, Mr. Harbert, Sir Fnlke
Grivill, Captain Mildmay Carver, Mr. Harrington of the Bedchamber, Mr. Douser,
Captain Titus Querrey, etc.

The King yesterday took his journey from hence, I have sent you here enclosed
a list of the several places appointed for his quarters every night from hence
(...) by House.

The Lord move his Majesty's he art to consider what is past, and take his
journey Heavenward, to act for his glory for the future.

On Monday last one Mr. Mungo Mur^ey, who has been a servant to the King,
desired leave of the Commissioners to take his leave of the King, and so to go
into Scotland: which was granted to him.

The said Mr. Mungo Murrey, having thus obtained leave, came to his Majesty,
and his Majesty gave him his hand to kiss, which he did.

But withal something was perceived (by one of the Commissioners) to be put in
Mr. Mungo Murries hand, by the King; who being followed, and by the
Commissioners examined, and searched, it was found to be aletter, which he was
to deliver to Montrel the French Agent.

It was all in Ciphers, so that nothing could be read of it, but the
Commissioners have sent it to the Parliament to see if they have keys to
unlock those Ciphers, the particulars whereof will be with you first, if opened.

Some suppose it to be a letter to Montrell, to give him directions in some
things which he should do; others guess it to be a letter which should have
been sent to the Queen to France, whither (it is supposed) Montrell is
immediately to go, from Scotland.

But, the letter is all in figures, and Ciphers, both within, and without, the
very Superscription.

This Mr. Mungo Murrey was apprehended, and in Custody for two days, and then
sufficient security was given for his forthcoming within 4. days, in case that
he should be demanded, so he had his liberty. And the Commissioners have sent
up to the Parliament to know their pleasure therein.

His Majesty set out from hence yesterdaynight in great Pomp, with attendance
more befitting and suitable to a King, than some years past. God grant all maybe
for the best, so prays

Newcastle the 4. of February 1646. Your humble Servant L. SAMMEL.

A list of the Jests, and several places appointed for His Majesty's quarters
each day betwixt Newcastle, and Holmby House.
Wednesday Feb. 3. his Majesty went from Newcastle to Durham.

Thursday Feb. 4. his Majesty passed to Bishop Aukland.

Friday Feb. 5. his Maj. was to pass to Richmond.

Saturday Feb. 6. his Maj. was to pass to Repton.

Sunday Feb. 7. his Majesty was to stay at Repton all that day.

Monday Feb. 8. his Maj. was to pass to Leeds.

Tuesday Feb. 9. his Maj. was to pass to Wake field.

Wednesday Feb. 10. his Maj. is to pass to Rothram.

Thursday Feb. 11. his Majesty is to pass to Masfield.

Friday Feb. 12. his Majesty is to pass to Nottingham.

Saturday Feb. 13. his Maj. is to pass to Leicester.

Sunday Feb. 14. his Majesty is to stay all that day at Leicester.

Monday Feb. 15. his Majesty is to go to Holmby House.

FINIS.

