The state of the Case upon a Decree against the Lord Chancellor of Ireland by
the Lord Deputy and Council there: as also of the Commitment of the Lord
Chancellor, and taking from him the Seal of that Kingdom.
THAT about Anno 1620. There was a proposition made for a marriage to be had
between Sir Robert Loftus the Lord Chancellors eldest Son, and Elinor one of
the daughters of Sir Francis Rushy. That the person employed herein between
the Fathers, was only Sir William Cooley, who married the daughter of the Lady
Rushy by Mr. Gifford her former husband. That the Marriage took effect Anno
1620. 1750 li. portion given. And Sir Robert and his Lady, and family lived in
the Lord Chancellors house, and at his charge in a plentiful manner, without
any complaint, until about anno 1636. That there was not any complaint by Sir
Francis Rushy, who lived diverse years, nor by his Lady, since by Bill or
Petition against the Lord Chancellor either for present maintenance of the
young couple, jointure or settlement of estate. That by the death of Thomas
Rushy son of Sir Francis Rushy, a fair inheritance befell to the young Lady
Loftus, and two other sisters whereof Sir George Wentworth the Lord Deputies
brother, about four years since married the one. This thus resting for many
years, The Lord Chancellors estate he had at the time of his sons marriage
much improved, and a fair addition since by purchase. A fair inheritance
settled upon Sir Robert his eldest son. A jointure upon his Lady A dignity
and honor upon his second son, he married and having issue, and the Lord
Chancellor bound in Justice and Honor to perform an agreement made upon his
second sons marriage. A daughter mariagable and unpreferred. Himself, Lady and
family to be supported according to the place and honor he bears. Debts to be
provided for. And servants of good deserving in some sort agreeing to honor
recompensed. About Michaelmas Anno 1636. a Petition is here preferred to his
Majesty in the name of Sir John Gifford, a half brother to Sir Robert Loftus
his Lady. Thereby is informed that the Lord Chancellor in consideration of the
said marriage and 1750 li. portion did agree to settle upon Sir Robert 1500 li.
per an. with hope of further increase. For present maintenance 200 li. per
annum. For jointure 300 li. per annum. That he excused to set his agreement in
writing, but protested the performance. That the portion was paid. The
performance long expected. That no allowance has been for present
maintenance. No settling of estate. No jointure made. That the Lord Chancellor
was become disaffected to Sir Robert his eldest son, and inclined to Sir
Edward a second son, who had no issue male, and in failer of issue male by
him, to the issue male of a daughter, rather then to the heirs general of his
eldest son whereby is prayed. That this agreement being properly relievable
in equity where the Lord Chancellor is both Judge and Party, that the same
might be referred, heard and determined per Lord Deputy and Counsel, where
witnesses might be examined, the cause heard, all conveiances produced of Lands
whereof the Lord Chancellor was possessed of at the time of the marriage. A
discovery of what estate by him made to Sir Edward his younger son, and a
restraint of any farther estate to be made. Agreeable to this prayer, there is
procured from his Majesty a letter 9. Feb. 1636. to the Lord Deputy, with a
special intimation of his Majesty, of a care of a settlement to be had for
support of the honor. Hereupon 7. Martii, 1636. in the name of Sir John
Gifford is preferred to the Lord Deputy and Counsel there, a Petition in the
nature of a Bill. This differs from the former Petition to the King.

Differences between the Petition to the King, and that to the Lord Deputy.

This informing the 1500. li. per annum pretended by the former petition, was
agreed to be (...) upon Sir Robert Loftus, Should be 1500. li. per annum of the
then present value, and to be settled upon Sir Robert, and upon the heirs of
his body, and in particular mentions the Manor of Mounstreven. That to the
King pretending the agreement was the Lord Chancellor would settle 1500. li.
per annum, with hope of a further increase. This charge him to have agreed to
settle all he had and should have, and provide for Sir Edward his second son
only an annuity of 200. li. per annum. Whereas that to the King charge 200.
li. per annum to be given for present maintenance of the young couple. This
charge farther, it was agreed Sir Robert, his Lady and family should live in
house of the Lord Chancellor at his charge, or have allowance for it, and also
200. li. per annum. Upon these complaints that are thus different in maine
points. That are stirred up by the petition of a stranger, and not upon the
complaint of his son, or his Lady, nor moved by Sir Francis Rushy nor his
Lady. Not stirred until Sir George Wentworth had married a sister and coheire
of Sir Robert Loftus Lady grounded upon a pretended verbal agreement of 16.
years old, which no Court of justice admits. Proved but by the single
testimony of Sir William Cooley, which no Court of justice grounds a Decree
upon, and is no more then that the Lord Chancellor said unto him as a message
to deliver Sir Francis Rushy, I will leave unto my son Sir Robert Loftus my
house and lands of Mounstreven, and other lands to the value of 1200. li. in
Ireland and England, and if it please God to spare me life and health, I hope I
shall be able to leave him more, and said he would make a Ioynture better then
the portion, and would give them so long as they lived with him 200. li. per
annum for maintenance, and if they lived from him 200. li. and Dronmaugh to
live on. Yet does the Decree complained of adjudge the Lord Chancellor. 1. To
pay from the time of the marriage the 200. li. per annum adjudged to be wholly
unpaid, and interest for it, but at 10. li. per centum. To estate upon Sir
Robert Dronmaugh, and 200. li. per annum, and put him in possession of the
same. That 2000. li. lately paid per Lo: Chancellor for Sir Roberts debts shall
not be allowed as any part of the arreeres of 200. li. per annum decreed
against him. That for other sums proved paid per Lo: Chancellor to Sir
Robert (in regard strictness is not to be used between father and son) the
Auditor directed to collect them, and then farther consideration to be had of
the allowance of them. That for as much as the Lord Chancellor had said upon
the treaty, the Ioynture should exceed in proportion, the 1750. li. portion
given, the same decreed to be 300. li. per annum of lands, as the value stood
at Michaelmas next after the marriage, which are more by improvement above 800.
li. per annum. That the Lord Chancellor shall settle likewise upon Sir Robert,
and the heirs of his body begotten on the body of Ellenor, lands of the value
of 1200. li. as the same were at Michaelmas next after the marriage, the value
to be settled per Commissioners, chargeable only with the thirds of the Lo:
Chancellors Lady the jointure of Sir Robert the sons Lady and 200. li. per
annum annuity to Sir Edward Loftus during his life. And that for settling the
same that the Lord Chancellor and Sir Edward procure their Ladies to join in a
fine and farther assurance, as the Council and that Board should think fit.
And that the lands called Criew Eustace being a purchase after the marriage,
and taken by the Lord Chancellor in the name of Sir Robert Loftus his son in
trust, and granted by the Lo: Chancellor to Sir Edward his second son for 1000.
years, should (if otherwise there were sufficient to supply the 1200. li. per
annum) be settled likewise with Sir Robert in manner aforesaid, otherwise to be
cast into the value of 1200. li. per annum.

This thus decreed 1. Febr. 1637.

Several references with Commissions are awarded to settle the sum of the
arrerage, of the 200. li. per annum with interest, decreed for Sir Roberts
maintenance, and to inquire and certify the value of the Lord Chancellors
lands which he had at the time of the marriage, or purchased since, with
reference to the time of the marriage. These references being on foot, the Lord
Chancellor (no cause being intimated in the Order) or warrant of the 20. of
April 1638. is commanded upon his allegiance to bring and deliver the great
Seal. The Lo: Chancellor coming the next day without it is committed, and the
Seal taken from him. And under that commitment is continued prisoner for 15.
months; in which time his Chaplains access to him, petitioned for, is
denied. The 17. of July 1638. the arrerage of the 200. li. per annum
maintenance for Sir Robert with the interest is estated to be 3179. li. 6. s.
5. d. and ordered to be paid. 18. Ianuar. 1639. his whole revenue,
entertainment, fees and pensions, sequestered. A Statute of 4000 li. that my
Lord Loftus should not interrupt the payment of the rents and profits to Sir
Paul Davis Clarke of the Council, who was appointed to receive them. That in
execution of this decree the whole estate was conveied unto Robert Lord Dillon,
Sir Adam Loftus, Sir Philip Mannering in trust. The 3179 li. 6 s. 5 d. levied
and paid into Sir Paul Davis, and so by him acknowledged by his answer in this
House, and by his counsel at the bar, but alleged the same was by him paid
over to Sir George Wentworth by order of the Board, and a copy of his
aquittance proved. The causes of reversall are,

1. It appears to be a suit begun not by the party concerned although no
defect of nonage or other appeared in him. 2. It appears it was without bis
assent, and contrary to his will. 3. All the colorable grounds to proceed in
it, at the Council Table; was a Petition presented here to His Majesty and
transmitted in a letter. 4. The proceedings there had is upon another Petition
differing in the maine points from that transmitted. 5. It is a decree of an
estate of inheritance at the Council Table. 6. It is a decree grounded upon a
verbal agreement 16. years old 7. It is built upon the single testimony of
Sir William Coolie, and that in the books very uncertain and various. 8.
Whereas the support of the honor in the heir Male was principally desired,
and settlement accordingly recommended by His Majesty, this contrary to the
said direction and petition decrees and has enforced the conveiances, whereby
the heir Male is disinherited, the honor exposed to contempt, for want of
support by the estate, and the lands come to a daughter, for whom the Deputy
had before the decree made a contract for his Son. 9. It charge the father
with the whole arreares for maintenance with Interest where the father
maintained bis son and family to his great charge without complaint. 10. It
exacteth of the father notwithstanding lands settled of 3000. pound per annum
where the pretense is but of 1500. pound per annum, to be debtor, and to
purchase 55. pound per an. to supply the values, when his whole estate was
taken away, and this upon a mere conceit that the father was to settle lands
of the value pretended as they were at the time of the Marriage. 11. It
reduces the now heir Male to 200. pound per annum for life, which was not
pretended to be any part of the agreement, in the Petition to His Majesty, and
his son upon whom the honor is to descend to have nothing.

It is humbly prayed,

1. That the decree and all proceedings had, and acts done in pursuance thereof
may be declared void, and the same reversed. 2. That reconveiances may be made
by the Feoffees to the Lord Loftus and his heirs, and all the evidences
redelivered which are in any of their hands, or in the hands of the Clarke of
the Council. 3. The mean profits taken by virtue of the sequestration, may by
Sir Paul Davis, or Sir George Wentworth be repaid with damages. 4. That the
4000 li. statute may be vacated. 5. And lastly, that the Petitioner for his
commitment, unjust removal from the place he did bear, as also for his costs
and damages, may according to the transmission of the House of Commons be
repaired.


