The State of the Case depending between some of the Inhabitants of Thames
Street and Josiah Child, touching Lion-Key, viz.
THe said Persons in the Name of the City of London, (but for their own private
advantage only) have Indicted the Defendant for stopping up the Stairs at
Lion-Key aforesaid, and a passage formerly leading down to them; and for
planking over eight foot into the River of Thames, and for erecting a Crane
upon the said Key, which they say are public Nusances.

The Desendant pleads the general Issue; and for proof says, That the City of
London, nor any other person, has any thing to do with the said Key, but the
same is his proper Inheritance in Fee-simple, which he can make appear by Legal
Conveyances ever since the Reign of King Henry the Eighth: An Abstract of the
Title whereof, is hereunto annexed.

This the Prosecutors deny not; but they say, That Lion-Key has always been a
noted and common place for landing and taking water.

To this the Defendant Replies, and will prove by hundreds of Witnesses, That
Wharfige was always paid for every thing shipped or landed at Lion-Key, though
it were but a small Basket that a man carried in his hand, and as much Wharfige
as was ever paid at any private Key or Stairs in London.

2. That the Passage leading down to Lion-Key, was always locked up at nights,
and upon Sundays and Holydays, and as often as any PRIVATE KEY, or Wharf, or
Stairs, between the Tower of London, and London Bridge, was locked; and that
before the New Gates were crected, which was about fourteen years past, there
were other Ancient Gates to the said Key and Passage, which by computation were
above one hundred years standing.

And if the locking up the Passage at such times, and the constant taking of
Whatfige do not demonstrate the Reservation of the Propriety and the
Incommunity of the said Passage and Stairs, then there is no private or proper
Key, or Wharf, or Stairs between the Tower and London Bridge: For that it was
never known in the memory of any man living, that ever any Wharfinger hindered
any Person from Landing or Taking water at his Key or Wharf, it being the
common courtesy of every Wharfinger in London, to suffer all Persons that
will, to Land or Take water at their Wharfs gratis, and so they may yet do at
Lion-Key when they please, though the Defendant has his liberty whether to
make Stairs or not upon his own ground, and where to make them: But all
Wharfingers of private Keys receive from all persons Wharfige for what Goods
they Ship or Land at their Keys. And if this shall be construed to prejudice
the propriety of the Owners, the consequence is, that the City may with as much
Justice challenge for common Passages all the Wharfs in London; even those
themselves have let Leases of, to the value of some thousand pounds peranum,
and Indict the Proprietors for altering or lessening their own Stairs or Crains
for their own conveniences: And also all the ways through Vintner's Houses,
who for the benefit of their Trades do make Passages through their Taverns;
such as is now Mr. Wadlows, at the Sun in Bishops-gate-street, and Mr. Sawyers
at the Pope's Head in St. Eliens, and such as was formerly Mr. Browns at the
White-Horse, in (...) street, and many more before as well as since the Fire,
which, notwithstanding were not, nor ever could be, pretended COMMON PASSAGES,
because they were locked up at nights by the Owners, being private Persons:
Which the Kings Highways are not. Nor is the Custom about Ways in all
respects the same in London as it is in the Country:

3. All the COMMON-STAIRS are upon the Cities own ground; as Owners of the
Soil, and not only so, but they are, and ever were, erected and repaired at the
Cities charge; whereas these were always erected and repaired at the charge of
the Proprietor or Leffee; and for their own proper use and benefit.

4. The Defendant has a large Record to produce out of one of the Courts of
Equity, at Westminster, in the eighth Year of King James, wherein a Suit was
Comenced by Information of Sir John Brograve Knight, the Kings Attorney
General: Edward Jeffery being Relator to the said Sir John, wherein, the City
was put upon it, to bring in their Claims and Proofs, what COMMON and OPEN
PASSAGES, or Stairs, the Freemen of London had a Right to make use of between
the Tower of London, and the Temple. And to this Interrogatory, diverse
witnesses then of great age, some above fourscore years, were sworn and
examined on behalf of the Citizens. All or most of whom in their Depositions,
do in the Enumeration of the said FREE PASSAGES and Stairs, begin with Tower
Dock, and so proceed Westward as far as Little Sumers-Key, and then skip to
the other side of London Bridge to Churchyard Alley Stairs; and not any one of
the witnesses do so much as mention Lion-Key or Stairs, (which never had any
other name) though they omit not any other Stairs or Place between the Tower
and the Temple-Stairs, that the City or Freemen of London ever did, or now do
pretend to, except Lion-Key only, which the Prosecutors by crouding their
private Interests under the Honorable name of the City, it seems would now
screw from the Defendant by right or wrong.

5. There are several other Records exemplified now in the possession of
private Citizens of London, which do recite all the COMMON STAIRS, and Passages
which the Citizens and Freemen of London have anciently claimed a right unto,
and not one of them does so much as mention Lion-Key, or Stairs.

6. The City of London, who in all ages, has been deservedly Famous for
keeping exact Registers and Records of their Concern's in all respects, have no
memory or account whatsoever to produce, to show that they ever had or did
pretend to any right of Passage, or Stairs, at Lion-Key, although they have of
all others which they pretend to, and certainly would have had of this, had
they had any right at all thereunto.

7. The Defendants Deeds of Purchase, and those by which it was formerly bought
and sold, do all mention Wharfige to be sold and conveyed with Lion-Key.

The second Indictment is; for planking over the River of Thames eight foot,
and erecting a Crain thereupon.

The Defendant pleads the general Issue, and for evidence is ready to prove hy
diverse credible Witnesses,

1. That in the manner it is done, it is no prejudice to the River being upon
upright Posts, so that the water has always a free course under the said
planking.

2. That he has not gone beyond the ancient bounds* of his former Wharfe or
Campshiot, but several posts of his ancient bounds of the former Campshiot, or
under Wharf, are yet standing, and were never removed, which are now the
outermost posts or stakes of the said work into the River.

3. That moreover he had the consent of the late Lord Mayor for what he did,
who was pro illud Vice, under his Majesty, Conservator of the River of Thames.

4. That for further certainty the Defendant petitioned the Kings most
Excellent Majesty for his permission, who was pleased to Refer the
consideration of the Defendants Petition to three of his Majesty's own
Surveyors, and the two City Surveyors, or any three of them, who were the
proper Officers by Act of Parliament, for Regulating and Staking out all
Buildings within London: Which said Surveyors made the following Certificate to
his Majesty, upon sight of which Certificate, the said late Lord Mayor
consented to the Defendants going forward with his Work, though he had before
forbidden him.

To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty.
May it please Your Majesty:
IN Obedience to Your Majesty's Command, (intimated unto us by Sir William
Morris, upon Josiah Child 's Petition) we have viewed the Petitioners Keys, and
do humbly certify Your Majesty that we are of Opinion that the said Petioners
Request for carrying out of Lion-Key with Plank, in the manner it is already
done at Fresh-Wharf, is very reasonable, and will, as is alleged in the
Petition, make the said Keys range even to the River of Thames, and the Houses
behind them; which we humbly conceive will be most uniform and decent.

Christopher Wren, Peter Mills, Rob. Hook.


By what has been alleged on the Defendants part, and will be fully proved
by very many Witnesses of great Age and Quality, as well eminent Citizens of
London, as others, it appears the Defendant has not only done what Lawfully
he might have done upon his own Inheritance, but has proceeded with Caution,
and all due Respect and Humility toward the Honorable City of London.

But that which is further manifest is, That what the Defendant has done, he
could not omit to do, without the apparent breach of an Act of Parliament, and
the express Command of His Majesty Enrolled in the Exchequer.

For by Act of Parliament made in the Fourteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign,
among other things, it is Enacted, That the Kings Majesty may by Commission
under His Majesty's Seal of the Exchequer appoint such Persons as His Majesty
shall think fit, for the Assigning and Appointing of all such and so many Open
places to be Keys and Wharfs, as shall be meet for the Shipping and Landing of
Goods; and settling all those Places by sufficient Meets, Limits, and Bounds.
Which Commission, grounded on the aforesaid Act of Parliament, His Majesty did
issue forth unto several Noble Men, Officers of the Customs, Gentlemen,
Citizens, and Merchants, bearing date the 29th of March last past, and the said
Commissioners did perfect the Return and Certificate of their proceedings on
the 24th of May last, which said Certificate upon the 30 of August last, was
commanded by his Majesty to be Enrolled in the Roll of Remembrances of the
Nineteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign, to the intent that the same might
remain as a Law binding upon all persons concerned. And in the said Return and
Certificate, the said Commissioners do declare in the fifth page of the Printed
Copy thereof, That Lion-Key containing from East to West thirty six foot nine
inches, and from the River of Thames Northward forty foot, be a FREE KEY for
the Landing of Merchants Goods, but no Stairs as formerly to be erected
thereupon or thereunto. And in the eighth page of the said printed Copy, That
Lion-Key being in length as aforesaid, be enlarged into the Thames eight foot
in breadth, to make it equal to the utmost (...) of ^^^^olph-Wharf, and that
from thenceforth the general Wharf of forty foot to be left next the Thames, be
reduced accordingly.

For further certainty wherein, the said Commissioners did with the approbation
of the late Lord Mayor of the City of London, employ several Artificers and
Surveyors to stake out the Lines for building at the aforesaid distance of
forty Foot from the River, for direction of all persons in laying their
Foundations, and carrying on their work of Building; and did likewise prescribe
the Order and Form for Cranes. In exact conformity whereunto, the Defendant
has proceeded to the erection of one double Crain, and diverse large
Warehouses on Lion-Key aforesaid, which cost him upwards of Two thousand
Pounds, and in the same manner likewise, and in obedience to the same
Authority, have all other Owners of Wharfs between London Bridge, and
Billings-gate already carried forth their Wharfs, with Planks, viz.
Fresh-Wharf, Gaunt^-Key, and Summers-Key, and are now building their
Warehouses at the aforesaid distance, and according to the Lines staked
(...)intment of his Majesty's Commissioners aforesaid.

Another Argument which the Prosecutors make use of (...) own ends; is, ab
incomodo, they say it is very inconvenient to the City, that the Stairs at
Lion-Key should be taken away; though in truth the inconvenience be only to
twelve or fourteen of themselves, whose Shops are near, or do adjoyn to the
entrance thereof.

This Argument, if there were any thing in it of truth, avails nothing in Law
or Equity, to divest the Defendant of his propriety. But it is so far from
truth in respect to the City in general, that there is in reality, nothing in
it but noise and clamor: For about fifteen Paces below the said Lion-Key, viz.
at Little Summers-Key are a free pair of Stairs, which are the Cities own
Stairs, and two pair more just below them at Billings-gate, besides which, the
Lay-Stall at Billings-gate, being now removed, there is a most convenient place
for erecting of a decent useful pair of Stairs above twice as large as those
formerly at Lion-Key; But then indeed, part of the Retail Trade of the
Watermen will by reason of the said new erected Stairs, remove eight or ten
Shops more Eastward in Thames Street; the fear whereof, is in truth the only
cause of all this bustle, whatever else is pretended.

From all which, it evidently appears, that by this alteration the City of
London will receive no Diminution of Trade or Conveniences: For that little
Retail Trade which may be lost in one part, will be fully regained in another
part of the same Street; Besides the greater advantage which will and does
already accrue to Merchants, in the Loading and Landing of Goods, by reason of
that rational, useful, uniforme, and comely Order, in which all the Keys and
Wharfs of London, are now most prudently established, by his Majesty's
Commissioners aforesaid.

An Abstract of the Title of LION-KEY, and the Ground and Premises there.
THe Premises were formerly in the time of King Henry the Eighth, King Edward
the Sixth, and Queen Mary, belonging to Sir Thomas Miles, and after his Decease
descended on six Daughters and Coheirs.

1. Dame Katharine, first Wife of Sir Thomas Finch, and afterward of Nicholas
St. Ledger. Husbands of the other five of the said Daughters. 2. Thomas Kemp. 3.
William Bury. 4. John Bury. 5. Johanna Lowen. 6. Thomas Reynolds.

Jan. 28. 5 Eliz. William Bury, and John Bury, and Johanna Lowen, and their
Wives, by Deed indented and enrolled in the Hustings in London, bargain and
sell their parts of the Premises to Edmomd Wiseman and his Heirs. Feb. 15 ^6
Eliz. Nicholas St. Ledger and Dame Katharine his Wife, and Thomas Kemp and his
Wife, by Deed indented sell their parts of the said Premises to Edmond Wiseman
and his Heirs, and a Fine there upon Levied, Edmond Wiseman Querent, and
Nicholas St. Ledger and Katharine his Wife Deforceants. Feb. 13. 36 Eliz. Thomas
Reynolds and his Wife by Deed indented and enrolled in Chancery, bargain and
sell his part of the said Premises to Edmond Wiseman and his Heirs, another
Deed of Covenants of the same date. June 3. 1603. Edmond Wiseman by Will in
writing, devises all the Premises unto his Son Sir Charles Wiseman, and his
Heirs. April 13. 1647. Edmond Wiseman, Son and Heir of the said Sir Charles
Wiseman, by Deed indented and enrolled in Chancery, bargains and sells the said
Premises unto Ambrose Brumskel and his Heirs. Apr. 15. 23 Car. 1 Edmond Wiseman
and Dulcibella his Wife, by Indenture do Covenant to levy a Fine of the
Premises to the use of the said Ambrose Brumskell and his Heirs, and in Trinity
Term following the said Fine was levied accordingly. Nov. 9. 18 Car. 2. Ambrose
Brumskell by Indenture of Bargain and Sale enrolled in Chancery, and other
sufficient Assurances, conveys the Premises to Josiah Child, and his Heirs.


